

Property LIFE
COUNTRY RETREAT
GUIDE PRICE £725,000.
Dunsely Hall near Whitby is a ‘magnificent country house in elevated position with spectacular views over National Park land and to the sea’.
The property was completed in 1990 for the Pyman family of shipbuilders.
Via Jackson-Stops & Staff.
THATCHER'S DELIGHT
GUIDE PRICE, £350,000.
Beck Isle Cottage, Thornton Dale is a grade II listed thatched and stone built 16th century house overlooking the village beck.
The house retains much fine original timber work.
Via Jackson Stops & Staff.
CITY STYLE
OFFERS AROUND £350,000.
Westmount York was extensively remodelled by Walter Brierley who was known as ‘the Lutyens of the North’.
The fireplaces, panelling and architectural details are typical of his work.
Via Carter Jonas.
THINK NEW
THERE ARE LOTS OF ADVANTAGES TO BUYING A BRAND NEW HOME
Central heating that works, freedom from rising damp, falling gutters, and dry rot: there's a lot to be said to buying a new house.
Just as important with a new house and garden you can place your own individual imprint on your home right from day one.
You are also likely to get ,double glazing to keep out the cold and noise, bathrooms and kitchens fitted to your own tastes and a garage built for today's generation of motor cars.
Among interesting developments are Dalesman homes by Hogg the Builder at Riccall and Haxby and Barratt developments at Fixby, Acaster Malbis and Catterick.
Our list here isn't  comprehensive, but simply aims to spotlight some of the new homes on the market.
THE LATEST TECHNOLOGY
Prices from £190,000, Cowen Homes at The Copse, Copmanthorpe, York offer four and five bedroom houses ‘incorporating the very latest technology’ intruder alarm system, Italian designed space saving radiators, with thermostatic control valves, and double glazed conservatory with radiators and wall lights.
EXCLUSIVE VILLAGE SETTING
GUIDE PRICE £235,000.
Portland House Waplington Park, Allenthorpe, East Yorkshire is described  as ‘an exceptional new country house in an unrivalled setting’.
It includes master bedroom with ensuite shower room, three further bedrooms, second bathroom, gas central heating, double garage.
HIGH LIFE
PRICE GUIDE £175,000.
At Stocks Hill Huggate is an individually designed and superbly appointed detached country house of spacious proportions situated on an elevated plot of some one third of an acre.
Five/six bedrooms, via Halifax New Homes Service.
COURSES for HORSES
The Toyota Bramham International Three Day event will be one of the last outings for Britain's top riders before the Olympic Games.
Photographs: Kit Houghton.
Virginia Leng on Welton Chit Chat
Sporting Life
All the thrills and spills of one of the most demanding events in the international calendar
BRITAIN'S TOP international riders will be competing in Yorkshire in one of their last outings before the Barcelona Olympics.
The ‘International Three Day Event’ takes place in the magnificent setting of Bramham Park, home of the organisers Mr and Mrs George Lane Fox.
It is one of the most prestigious events in the equestrian calendar and once again will be sponsored by Toyota (GB) Ltd.
The event runs from June 4th to June 7th.
It begins with the dressage phase on the Thursday and Friday, followed by speed, endurance and cross country on Saturday and climaxing with show jumping in the amphitheatre on the Sunday.
There are a host of other activities taking place during the four days.
They include aerobatic displays, rural crafts, trade stands, and a motor safari which make the event of interest, not just to equestrian enthusiasts.
On the Sunday there will be the Pedigree Chum Yorkshire County Fair.
Included in the programme of entertainments will be gun dog displays, terrier racing, lurcher racing, greyhounds and dog agility competitions.
The event has further Olympic connections.
Michael Tucker the cross country course designer for the Bramham three day event is also technical delegate for the three day event in the Olympic Games in July.
Michael has already spent considerable time in Barcelona, but despite those commitments the all important cross country course at Bramham Park is well on the way to completion thanks to the endeavours of George Podmore and his team.
The line of the course which provided excellent viewing for spectators last year, remains the same, but the degree of difficulty has been stiffened.
‘Several subtle changes will require more skills from the riders, and with the addition of a new complex called the ‘Bull Pens’ it is thought that the optimum time will be harder to achieve,’says Michael Tucker.
Last year saw the one of the biggest international fields ever at the Bramham Three Day Event with the overseas challenge being repelled by Virginia Leng on Welton Chit Chat.
One hundred entries from 14 nations were in competition with 30,000 spectators visiting the event.
Last year also for the first time it was televised by Yorkshire Television.
‘Another large foreign entry can be expected again as it will be one of the last competitions before the Barcelona Olympics,’ explained Michael Tucker.
‘Last year saw the first Pro-am pairs competition which proved so popular with the riders.
It will continue on a bigger scale, with this year more background knowledge of the riders being provided to give spectators and television more of an insight into the competitors.
‘Top class show jumping will again be a feature in the lovely Bramham amphitheatre together with many of the annual attractions which include the country fair and another well presented shopping arcade’.
Attractions include over 100 trade stands, refreshment tents and licensed bars, caravan site and craft fair.
In conjunction with the three day event there will be The British Young Riders' National Championships, and a   Hunter Show — with five qualifying classes and a Working Hunter Class attracting the cream of the country's show horses.
Oops
A huge crowd of 30,000 spectators last year watched 200 entries from 14 nations
Lucinda Green
The Bramham Three Day Event took place for the first time in 1974.
It has progressed over the years to international status attracting many of the top riders from around the world.
They have included World Champions Ginny Leng, and Bruce Davidson and Olympic riders Ian Stark, Lucinda Green and Karen Straker.
The setting at Bramham Park, near Wetherby is among some of the county's historic parkland.
Bramham Park has been in the Lane Fox family for eight generations, since Robert Benson and the first Lord Bingley built the House and laid out the grounds in the manner of Versailles in 1698 and George Fox married his daughter.
The area has been associated with cavalry exercises from the beginning of the 15th century.
Thus it is appropriate that horse trials known as ‘The Military Competition’ on the continent, should  be held in the park.
According to Michael Tucker, members facilities at the event ‘are some of the best that can be found anywhere and what is more the hospitality units not only provide superb views of the Yorkshire countryside, but brings the action to you while you wine and dine.’
Another large international entry is anticipated for this year's event
Perfect coordination
YORKSHIRE Relish
‘ONE DAY LAD, ALL THIS COULD BE YOURS’
THERE IS a remarkable spirit of generosity afoot at the Yorkshire County Cricket Club, which we mention elsewhere in this issue.
But we couldn't resist quoting captain Martyn Moxon at length in a piece he has penned for the club.
‘When I was at school I had no idea that one day I'd be captain of Yorkshire.
You too probably feel that there's no way you could every play for Yorkshire.
But there are ways to get to Headingley.’
To encourage the next generation Mr Moxon pens his route from Barnsley to Headingley.
‘I played for my junior school in Barnsley then progressed through the various Yorkshire representative teams.
I eventually made it into the Yorkshire second XI and ultimately the first team.
Since then I have also been fortunate enough to have played in ten Test Matches for England.’
His appeal to the next generation continues.
‘If you have commitment and talent there's nothing to stop you pursuing a career in cricket.’
In Yorkshire cricket they believe in planning for the future.
SUMMER COURSES
ASKHAM BRYAN College is pleased to announce a series of Summer courses, including watercolour painting, creative flower arranging, furniture restoration, researching your family tree, flowers in the continental style and stencilling and painting effects.
WATCH THIS SPACE
B W SIZER Ltd, privately owned jewellers of Huntress Row, Scarborough become Rolex Dealers from May 1st.
Martyn Moxon
TURPIN MEETS MARILYN
OLD YORK met New York when Dick Turpin welcomed Marilyn Monroe to York Castle Museum to mark the launch of a free draw to win a short break in New York, courtesy of York Castle Museum and American Airlines.
The draw is open to all visitors to York Castle Museum until September 30th.
And the prize is three nights in a luxurious hotel in the big apple.
‘York Castle Museum has a great appeal to visitors from both sides of the Atlantic,’ said Dr Andy Hodges , director of the York Castle Museum.
‘This year we have adopted a more aggressive approach.
We launched this draw not only to encourage more people to enjoy ‘old York’, but also to give them the opportunity to experience the excitement of New York.’
Dick Turpin alias Paul Fox and Marilyn Monroe, alias Pauline Bailey
BY GEORGE
PROPRIETORS of the Olive Tree Greek restaurant in Leeds George Psarias and his wife Vasoulla were the stars of the BBC's Food and Drink programme.
The programme revolves around the Greek Easter and the food associated with the 40 days fasting preceding the festival.
‘We had a lot of fun making it,’ said George.
The producers approached the Psarias family to film family celebrations at the Olive Tree, scenes from Sunday celebrations in the Greek Orthodox Church, and cooking with some of the Greek women.
The producers liked the idea so much that they decided to make a two part series full of dancing, celebrations, cookery and food.
George Psarias and his wife Vasoulla
LONG ARM OF THE LAW
A FASCINATING fact turned up during research into the life and times of playwright Richard Brinsley Sheridan for Yorkshire law firm Hammond Suddards , who sponsored the West Yorkshire Playhouse production of Sheridan's The Rivals .
The firm has produced a comparison between the lawyer's role today with that of his 18th century counterpart.
They learned that lawyers in Leeds and Selby were kept busy defending 18th century rioters, who burned down toll houses in protest against plans by landowners to charge tolls on their road.
Two hundred years later the same law firm has been instrumental in the removal of tolls from Selby, one of  Yorkshire's most infamous toll bridges.
Alan Bottomley of Hammond Suddards and a figure from those riots 200 years ago
ILKLEY GETS A TWIN
THE EC single market has already made an impact on Ilkley's Alternative Medicine Consultancy Centre which is now going international thanks to the town's twinning with Coutances in France ,
Consultant Greta Baldwin has received a request for a consultation from an inhabitant of Coutances.
Apparently she receives the Ilkley newspaper regularly and read in it details of the Alternative Medicine Centre.
She wrote from France saying: ‘I know that Ilkley is an attractive city, that is why it would be a good occasion to visit the town taking advantage of your therapy.’
Greta Baldwin
THE VERY ROYAL QUEEN'S
HER ROYAL HIGHNESS,Princess Margaret honoured the Queen's Hotel in Leeds, by choosing to stay at the hotel, when a patron of the Northern Ballet, she came to see a performance of Swan Lake at Leeds Grand Theatre.
Princess Margaret is photographed being welcomed to the Queen's by general manager Mr Jim Stephenson .
Princess Margaret visits Leeds
A BOOK FOR BEVERLEY
A NEW BOOK called The Building in Cross Street , written by John Markham , celebrating the story of 100 years of the County Hall in Beverley, was launched before a full council meeting by Councillor Susannah Salingar , chair of Humberside County Council.
Author John Markham with Councillor Susannah Salingar
CHANGING TIMES
AFTER eight years as The Times man in the north of England,Peter Davenport has left ‘The Thunderer’ to become a partner in the expanding Harrogate public relations, design and contract publishing company Paul Sowerby Associates.
PSA was founded in 1987 by Paul Sowerby a deputy editor with IPC magazines in London and has specialised in the food packaging and pharmaceutical sectors, becoming England's biggest in its field.
Peter Davenport
A ROSE BY ANOTHER NAME
IN THE MARCH issue of Yorkshire Relish we made reference to the White House School of Beauty in Huddersfield.
It is in fact the White Rose School of Beauty in Huddersfield.
Society
BANKING ON BARCELONA
THE BARCELONA BALL was the highspot of the social agenda for the 324 guests who attended the function held at the Old Swan Hotel Harrogate, and organised by the National Westminster Bank Leeds and Harrogate areas.
They raised £30,000 for the British Olympic Appeal.
Ronnie Massarella, Chef d'Equip of the British Equestrian team spoke of the hard realities facing competitors, and Richard Whiteley of Yorkshire TV generously agreed to act as MC for the event.
Our pictures are courtesy Tenant Brown Photography.
CHARITY ACROSS THE CONTINENT
A TWO YEAR OLD Rumanian girl was both guest of honour and raison d'etre for a ball and charity evening held at the Black Horse Hotel, Skipton, writes J A F Sheard.
Ana-Maria Nicolae, discovered in Bucharest by British relief workers after the Iron Curtain came tumbling down, suffers from a rare bone disease, athro-gryposis.
She was brought to England and ‘adopted’ by Mr and Mrs Joseph Topley of Settle, who aided by the staff at the Craven Herald newspaper, set up a fund to finance a series of operations.
The fund has already raised £13,000 and Ana-Maria was an early guest at the Skipton Ball, which raised some £3,000.
Guests included Mr David Beard the surgeon who is caring for Ana-Maria ant Airdale Hospital.
Photographs by Stephen Garnett.
Antiques
HOW A GARDEN PASSED THROUGH LIVERPOOL
A LATE 19th century American garden almost entire passed quietly through Liverpool the other week on its way to Sotheby's, West Sussex.
For some undisclosed reason the Massachusetts owner had decided to dismantle his richly ornamented acres and sell the lot for the best price he could obtain.
And in his opinion that meant sending it all the way to Sotheby's whose rural saleroom in a stately home in Billingshurst, West Sussex, has made a speciality in recent years of sales of garden furniture, fittings and statuary.
The garden featured, among other things, a Palladian-style carved stone jetty  from the lake, a sweeping stone balustraded staircase, a massive Italian marble fountain, huge wrought-iron entrance gates and their carved stone supporting pillars and several figures and elaborately carved urns.
The total weight was 400 tonnes with the fountain alone weighing 14 tonnes.
The journey  from Boston via Liverpool to West Sussex was not without its hiccups.
When the first container was loaded on to a truck it was so heavy all four tyres promptly exploded.
When the shipment arrived at Liverpool the colossal weight meant the containers had to be transported south rail and then off-loaded into a fleet of vehicles for the rest of the journey.
On arrival at Sotheby's a 30-ton crane had to be hired to unload them.
The single most expensive item is the late 19th century Italian travertine marble fountain which has three graduated bowls supported by hippocampi.
The white marble pool surround is 40 feet in diameter.
It is expected to sell for between £150,000–£250,000.
The stone jetty and landing-stage with staircase is expected to bring bids of £50,000–£100,000 and a second carved stone staircase with balustrade is estimated at £20,000–£40,000.
Other items of stonework and white marble figures are expected to bring five-figure sums and a total of £50,000 or more is hoped for when they go under the hammer on the 27th and 28th of this month.
From the gorblimey to the sublime.
Spencer's, Retford, report the recent sale of an unusual one inch high, late 18th century, silver eye-bath.
Engraved with a crest and supported on a cylindrical stem, the eye-bath was made in London in 1818 and had been discovered in the collection of a West Yorkshire couple.
The item was keenly competed for by two telephone bidders but it was finally knocked down for £790 to a bidder in the saleroom.
In the same sale the top price of £11,700 was given for a twelve-piece Ring's Pattern set of table cutlery in an oak canteen which was made in Sheffield in 1931 and £950 for a George IV coffee pot of panelled baluster form decorated with acanthus leaf motifs made in London in 1825, probably by Joseph Angell.
First auction in the air
THOSE of you who saw the last of the recent Antiques roadshows from Rochdale will recall seeing a tinplate toy of a vintage open car with the driver holding a horn to his lips.
Had it been working properly the horn would have generated a series of honk-honks — or, as the German makers, Lechmann, would have it: tut-tuts.
Dating from around 1903 it had clearly been well played with as it was scratched and chipped and lacked a front wheel.
It popped up in a recent Capes, Dunn sale of toys, teddy bears, model railways et al and made £190.
A Steiff gold plush Teddy Bear, circa 1910, only 8½″ high, named Marmaduke, brought £1,200 and wooden Noah's Ark 29″ long x 18″ high with 16 carved wooden animals and 7 birds went for £1,000.
An early hand-painted clockwork tinplate toy of a clown on a Grasshopper and another of a Toff on a Rocking Goat, both possibly by Gunterman, each made £750.
And so to the How-Daft-Can You Get department.
Sotheby's Amsterdam, recently announced with pride that they had got themselves into The Guinness Book of Records .
How?
By conducting the world's first airborne auction sale.
In a KLM Airbus circling over Switzerland and Germany at 41,000 feet bidders enjoyed caviar and champagne with 40 modern Russian paintings and 40 designs by Dutch jewellers and silversmiths came under the hammer.
The redeeming feature was that it was all in aid of charity and two children's hospitals outside Moscow benefited.
ALAN BRACK 
SALES DIARY
Phillips, Leeds —6: Books.
13: Ceramics.
20: Antique & Victorian furniture, objects & clocks.
Morphets, Harrogate —14: 18th–19th Century furniture, silver, ceramics & pictures.
Henry Spencer, Retford —6, 20, 27: Victorian and later furniture, ornamental items.
11: Fine furniture, mirrors.
13: European & Oriental works of art, metalwares, decorative arts, caddies & boxes, textiles, rugs.
18: Pictures, maps, books.
Sales dates can sometimes change and should be checked with the respective auction houses nearer the date .
Yorkshire Focus
INDIVIDUALITY PERSONIFIED
Horbury and Ossett preserve a healthy independence which gives each town its own special character Photographs: Simon Warner
HORBURY AND OSSETT are towns with much pride in their own individuality.
They both have an interesting past, and an optimistic future.
In this part of Yorkshire independence is an important part of the character and both places have character and independence aplenty.
Ossett today demonstrates that sturdy individuality in an increasing variety of businesses and services as well as their new centre of Wellgate.
In their excellently produced guide to the area the Ossett Chamber of Trade proudly point out: ‘there are over one hundred clubs and societies which cater for a wide range of interests as well as a golf club, cricket club and two football clubs.’
The town is also particularly proud of its gala which takes place, fittingly on July 4th, when according to Chamber of Trade secretary Mrs Barbara Barlow ‘all the charities take a stall’ and there will be street entertainers on the precinct.
Horbury's annual Street Fayre is held in June in the town centre and attracts over 60 arts and crafts stalls.
With ‘Fayre Organ,’ clog dancing and children's entertainment the aim, as in Ossett's gala, is to ‘make a memorable day out for the family.’
This is a part of Yorkshire where history runs deep.
Ossett is mentioned in the Domesday Survey as Osleset, and the town guide explains: ‘The name has Saxon origin, but a settlement may have existed here when the Romans were using the Via Vicinalis or Accommodation Road which ran between Agbrigg and Dewsbury’.
Communications remain important though the talk now is more likely to be of the high speed 1990s and the proposed link between the M1 and M62 or the rail freight link from ‘Port Wakefield,’ via the Channel Tunnel to the continent.
Horbury has much architectural  heritage ‘as befits the birthplace of the famous architect John Carr, who was responsible for the design of Harewood House.
He designed Horbury's elegant Parish Church of St Peter and St Leonard, with its distinctive six-stage tower and had it built at a cost to himself of £8,000 in 1790–1794.’
About that time Ossett was beginning to grow with the expansion of the woollen industry, but it was the discovery of ‘shoddy’ and ‘mungo’which revolutionised industry in the town.
A century later in 1890 Ossett was granted its Borough Charter.
Now after a further century of development Ossett can boast of wide range of businesses including a gallery, photography studio, florist, fashion  shops, health food and the expanded Dimple Well Lodge Hotel, where the proprietor Mr Sandy Gillan looks to the future with confidence.
‘We get visitors from all over the country and Europe,’ he explained.
He added that the Wellgate Shopping precinct had brought of ‘new concept to the centre of town.’
This is a part of Yorkshire where the tradition of personal service thrives
But like other citizens of Ossett, Mr Gillan was firm in defending the individuality of his town.
It is a view which no doubt would be defended with equal firmness at Horbury which lays particular stress on the personal touch.
‘Many of the shops are run by their owners and personal, friendly service are important in Horbury.’
Horbury boasts its own concert society, the Horbury Band, and the Horbury Pageant Players.
The Horbury Chrysanthemum Society keeps the place floral with early and late shows.
Horbury's motto ‘Pro Bono Oppido’(for the good of the town) lives on, as does the slogan of the Ossett Chamber of Trade: ‘Come to Ossett where the shopping is on the level.’
They're different and proud of it.
Queen Street, Horbury
Wishing Well.
Wellgate Precinct, Ossett
Ossett Town Hall
Fashionable, Horbury
Ossett, where the shopping is ‘on the level’
York Life
YES MINISTER
For town crier and tourist York remains the place to visit Words: Tony Skinner Photographs: Bill Wilkinson
The York Festival promises ‘something for everyone,’ including theatre, dance, music, circus, visual arts, talks, street theatre, cabaret and children's events
YORK is a city which seems built for tourism and its very prosperity is now inextricably linked to it.
York is not a place that resents visitors, nor can it afford to do so.
Without them sizable part of its economy would be in danger of collapse.
There would certainly be less shops, restaurants and cafes.
The city hopes to attract around 3.5 million visitors annually, but last year's figures were little short of disastrous.
A combination of the Gulf War, recession and the weather conspired to reduce numbers by 20 per cent or 700,000.
This year the omens are better and tourist officials will be disappointed if the figure is not back to its former glory by the end of it.
‘It can't be worse than 1991,’ said Paul Wells, chief executive of the York Visitor and Conference Bureau.
‘In fact this year looks like being a lot better.’
Mr. Wells dismisses suggestions that the people of York are becoming weary of tourists, particularly when they are continually stopped in the street and asked directions to the minster and other attractions.
‘A recent survey showed that attitudes towards tourism were rather more positive than negative, he said.
‘York residents are aware of the benefits tourism brings.
At the height of the season at least 6,500 jobs probably depend on it and people realise tourism has created more shops, more restaurants and more facilities for locals.
York is a vigorous, exciting city famous throughout the world but it would be much more low key without the visitors.
‘I think the general feeling is that tourism is preserving the city rather than destroying it.
We welcome visitors and we ant them to enjoy it here.’
York town crier John Redpath, who gained national notoriety earlier this year when he appeared on TV in a Liberal Democrat party political broadcast, is certainly glad of the tourists because otherwise he would be out of a job.
John is quite a character and loves his role which includes shouting out the news four times a day.
‘It is real news too’ he says.
‘I get it from the radio.
The trouble is, when it is bad, people don't like it.
This is particularly true of job losses at local companies.
Sometimes I seem to know before those working there do.’
John is convinced visitors bring nothing but good to York.
‘Tourists are big business here.
We all like them because we depend on them.’
York Minster
The annual raft race on the River Ouse
PREPARE FOR A BIG SURPRISE
At Stonegate's collection of teddy bears
If you go down to York today you're sure of a big surprise.
For the ancient city is home to one of Britain's finest collections of teddy bears.
Moreover, they are regarded as valuable collectors' items, not toys.
Nearly all of them are bought by adults for themselves.
Stonegate Teddy Bears stocks hundreds of different models, ranging in price from a few pounds to around £300.
Many are reproductions of classic German and British bears from the early part of the century, including the fabulously expensive Steiff range.
One Steiff teddy fetched £55,000 at auction a few years ago, although Stonegate's reproduction of it is somewhat more sensible priced at £175.
Yorkshire had a considerable hand in the birth of teddy bears as Yorkshire cloth or mohair was used as the main material.
Teddies were first developed in Germany in the early 1900s and named in tribute to former American president Teddy Roosevelt who refused to shoot a defenceless small bear while out on a hunting trip.
The owner of Stonegate Teddy Bears Kevin Scott said: ‘They are an early 20th century phenomenon which has stood the test of time and which are now as popular as ever.’
Most of his bears are made by a company situated between Otley and  Ilkley and have all the attributes of classic teddies.
They are made from Yorkshire cloth, have five moving parts on the body, a little hump on the back and are hand crafted.
The shop, as its name suggests, is situated in Stonegate which is 2,000 years old and the oldest flagged street in Europe.
Fittingly, some of Stonegate's collection of bears celebrate York's historic links.
The Coppergate bear commemorates the city's Viking connection which stretch back 1,000 years and the Guy Fawkes bear, complete with its own poem, is a reminder that the man who tried to blow up the Houses of Parliament was born only a few doors from the shop.
There is a Titanic bear based on a teddy which survived that disaster in 1912 and a Mister Whoppit bear which was the only object to re-surface when Donald Campbell's boat disintegrated while he was trying to break the world water speed record on Lake Coniston in 1967.
One of the most popular is The City of York bear, which comes with a certificate signed by the Lord Mayor and whose charity receives a donation for every one sold.
A 13 inch bear costs £39.95 and 15 inch costs £55.
Foreign visitors, particularly Americans, are frequent visitors to the shop and Dame Judi Dench who was born in York was among customers last year.
Mr Scott said: ‘Many serious collectors come to us.
There is an endless fascination with teddy bears which have a charm of all of their own.
They are also a good investment because their value is still appreciating.’
THE PRETTY, EXPENSIVE CITY
York is undeniably pretty and can be pretty expensive too if you are not careful.
A family ticket for York Castle Museum, which styles itself as England's most popular museum of everyday  life, costs £9.40.
The National Railway Museum will set the family purse back by a similar sum.
At the Jorvik Viking Centre a family of two adults and three children have to pay £11.55.
Mr Paul Wells, chief executive of the York Visitor and Conference Bureau admits York ‘can cost a fortune if you visit every attraction’ but says that it need not be an expensive day out.
‘There are an awful lot of free activities such as walking along the walls and sampling the atmosphere in the streets.’
He might have added the Minster and the York City Art Gallery, which boasts paintings spanning 700 years, to his list of free attractions.
The shambles with Minster in the background
Jorvik Viking Centre
Racing CERTAINTIES
York Races are a major attraction with millions in prize money
York is of course home to one of Britain's oldest and best racecourses and this year there is more than £2 million prize money at stake during the various meetings.
The May festival has become a major social event in the racing calendar and includes a classic trial for the Derby.
The highlight of the three days from May 12th to 14th is The William Hill Dante Stakes which is Britain's richest Derby trial and an excellent guide to the form of the three year old colts who will challenge for the Epson title a month later.
Previous winners of the Dante Stakes, including Shirley Heights and Reference Point set a Derby record in 1987.
Racing is held at York during six meetings from May to October with the biggest gathering during the three days august event.
The winning owner of The Juddmonte International Stakes on August 18th will pocket £200,000 and there is £120,000 and £100,000 to be won in two other races.
There has been racing at York since roman times when horses were matched against each other about a mile to the north of the city.
For centuries racing took place on Clifton Ings with the House book of the York Corporation recording that it took place there as long ago as 1530.
The first detailed record of a race meeting dates from 1709 when the course was levelled and improved.
Racing also took place on the frozen River Ouse in 1607 and Charles I witnessed a race on Acomb Manor during a visit in 1633.
Racing was transferred to the present site in Knavesmire in 1731 with prize money of £155 for a five day meeting.
As its name suggests, the course was a mire with a stream running through it but after considerable levelling and draining it was established in the shape of a horseshoe.
The first grandstand was erected in 1754 and financed by 250 people contributing £5 each.
Facilities have greatly improved since those days and in 1965 the magnificent five tier grandstand was opened.
This is now one of the features of the racecourse and the home of a racing museum.
Last year around 220,000 race-goers visited the course, which is now acknowledged to have some of the finest facilities in racing.
Racing is held at York during six meetings from May to October with the biggest gathering during August
SHOP IN YORK
MONET
YORK is in a class of its own.
That's the unanimous verdict of shoppers who are impressed by the elegant surroundings, high quality shops and first rate service.
Whether you're searching for an unusual birthday gift, designer suit, engagement ring, leather luggage or simply to eat, York is the place to go.
Quality and style exude from every corner.
Everyone from tiny tots to teenagers, from businessmen to working mothers is catered for.
It's all there — ladies shoes at PELLINI , elegant furniture at MACDONALDS , oriental rugs at HUNTER AND SMALLPAGE , kitchens and bathrooms from SMITH BROTHERS , fashion for gentlemen at ANDERSON & SONS , fashion for the larger ladies at SUNDIAL , you can even take your pet something home from HARGREAVES PET SHOP .
Whatever you're looking for you can find it in York.
A visit to York can also be an education as it boasts two of the best schools in the county:Queen Ethelburga's College and Terrington Hall school are both well worth of consideration for the best in your children's education.
As the past meets the future in these stylish shopping lanes, there's a continental feel in the air.
Shopping in York is a pleasure — the atmosphere is relaxed and friendly, and you are guaranteed service with a smile.
Sporting Life
CRICKET lovely CRICKET
There has never been a better time for supporting the white rose
She wasn't born in Yorkshire.
If ever a sentence summed up the gale of change that is blasting through Yorkshire cricket this season it is that one.
It marks an end to the male chauvinism and Xenophobia that made the county of the white rose among the last bastions of prejudice.
She is Dorothy Betts, born in South Shields.
She cut her sporting teeth in the marketing department at Sheffield Wednesday.
She is now marketing executive for the new look Yorkshire Country Cricket Club.
Although much has been made of the fact that Australian fast bowler Craig McDermott didn't become the first overseas player to represent the county, Indian batsman Sachin Tedulkar confirms a long term policy: overseas players are now welcome in Yorkshire cricket.
With an illustrious past stretching back over more than a century and with no fewer than 30 Championships behind them the challenge for Yorkshire cricket in 1992 is to find a team that can live up to the tradition.
Off the field problems which have bedevilled the club in recent times have been buried.
Said a spokesman: ‘There is a  positive wind of change now blowing through the club.’
A productive relationship has been established with sponsors Joshua Tetley, who in return enjoy benefits to suit their own promotional needs.
The club's member's publication,The White Rose Magazine , which is issued quarterly reaches 9,000 readers.
And Headingley can now offer a number of prestigious executive boxes situated ‘directly behind the bowler's arm.’
These well appointed boxes provide an excellent vantage point to follow the progress of the Nat West Trophy, and the Roses match.
but of course the main event of the year at Headingley is the Test Match, and say Yorkshire Cricket Club: ‘You really couldn't have a better view than from the comfort of an executive box.’
And the club is also firmly committed to the next generation.
membership of the Junior Tykes Club for the under 14's is just £9 and includes free entry to all home Sunday League matches.
As the slogan on the front of the club's glossy new brochure proclaims: ‘There's never been a better time to be involved with Yorkshire Cricket.’
We wouldn't disagree with that.
Junior Tykes gets free entry to all Sunday League matches in Yorkshire Headingley, Mecca of Yorkshire cricket
The team
Special Report
HERE COMES SUMMER
In Richmond they are poised for a splendid season of festivities
IT'S going to be a great summer for Richmond, the Swaledale town famous for its wonderful Norman castle and its tiny Georgian theatre.
Not only is the Swaledale Festival being held from May 22nd to June 7th, but throughout the season the Richmond Meet (which I understand began as an association of cyclists) is celebrating its centenary with maypole dancing, a triathlon, a dinner, golfing events and all manner of other attractions.
Under its first lady president Joan Church the ‘Meet’ will include a parade of 30 floats.
In June in this town of many military associations, the RAF Regiment will hold a 50th anniversary parade and receive the Freedom of Richmond.
Another military attraction will draw   the crowds on August 1st (Yorkshire Day), when the massed bands of the RAF Regiment, the Royal Corps of Signals and the Green Howards, known as the ‘family regiment’ of the North Riding, will beat retreat in the grounds of the magnificent Norman caste.
In June the RAF Regiment will hold a 50th anniversary parade and receive the ‘Freedom of Richmond’
Yorkshire Day comes to Richmond in August when the town is the focus of a county wide celebration
‘And mayors from all over Yorkshire will process to Richmond Church for a service on Yorkshire day,’ added Ella Devlin, Richmond's mayor.
Even without these events, Richmond would not be short of visitors.
The town predates Richmond in Surrey, whatever the latter may say, and has an  unshakeable claim to be the home of the ‘sweet lass of Richmond Hill’, Frances I'Anson.
Sweet Frances may have been the lass ‘more bright than May-day morn’ when the song was written, but she was also tragically short lived.
She died before she was 30, having lived long enough, however, to attend the opening in 1783 of Richmond's Georgian Theatre with her brother than Mayor of the town.
The mere existence of the theatre, which somehow got itself ‘lost’ for decades but was found virtually intact amid much excitement in about 1940, suggests that Richmond, in Swaledale, has been a fashionable, elegant and artistic centre for very  many years.
The sort of place, you might think, to play a large role in the events like the Swaledale Festival.
Naturally, some of the festival events, including a performance of The Great Mr Handel (in honour of the 250th anniversary of Handel's Messiah), will take place at the theatre.
Other events there will be A Night Out with Goldsmith, Johnson and Burney at the Georgian Theatre and a performance by Fritz Spiegel and the Spiegelers.
Trevor Woolston, who spends most of his time either at York or Grinton in Swaledale, is the director of the Swaledale Festival, which is in its twelfth year.
Describing himself as ‘a retired fiddler’, he was reluctant to say which of the many festival events would be highlights for him, but could hardly deny, that one will certainly be a performance by his former pupil, Claire Roff, now 18, who began playing the violin when she was only four.
She was a semi-finalist in the BBC's Young Musician of the Year competition.
Was there anything different about this year's festival?
‘It's always different’, Trevor declared.
‘We try to combine old favourites with something new.
This year we have an Andean folk group from Peru, as well as singers form Opera North.
We built the festival up from the old village concerts, which are still always packed out’.
This year's Swaledale Festival has an Andean folk group from Peru, as well as singers from Opera North
A certain draw will be the presence of village bands from Reeth, Muker and Hawes along with the Band of the Year, Grimethorpe Colliery, whose soloist is himself a Dales lad, from Arkengarthdale.
There will be original music by Phil Wilby, a lecturer at Leeds University.
Trevor, who enjoys joining in with Northumbrian folk fiddlers such as Alistair Anderson, believes the Swaledale Festival has done much to revive Dales music-making — by choirs as well as instrumentalists.
But this festival casts its net beyond the musical world.
For instance, this year there will be a film marking the centenary of Leo Walmsley, the novelist who lived for many years at Robin Hood's Bay.
Richmond, you might say, is in festive mood, and the whole country can benefit from that.
MAURICE COLBECK.
Ella Devlin, Mayor of Richmond with her family, left to right 
Right: The RAF Regiment on manoeuvres
Richmond: photograph courtesy Richmond District Council
Richmond, by Ernest Marsh, at Inspiration
Dining Out
YORKSHIRE LIFE RESTAURANT OF THE MONTH
KINGS HEAD HOTEL RICHMOND
The prime position of the Kings Head Hotel on the market place of Richmond makes their restaurant an ideal place for visitor and local alike to dine.
Widely acclaimed as the focal point of most of the social and cultural events in the town, the Kings Head successfully combines luxurious comfort with culinary excellence whether you are looking for morning coffee, afternoon tea, lunch or dinner.
Over aperitifs in the lounge we learned, not surprisingly, that in common with the town itself, the Kings Head is steeped in history.
Built as a family house around 1718 by a wealthy lead mine owner, Charles Bathhurst, the building was subsequently leased, the ballroom added, and it was turned into an impressive coaching inn.
The Kings Head has welcomed its share of celebrities over the year, including Turner, whilst working on his painting of Easby Abbey, Franz Liszt, who arrive late to play in the ballroom, and, more recently, Val Doonican.
Harry Secombe stayed whilst working on Highway from Swaledale, and Helen and James of All Creatures Great and Small ‘dine here on special occasions’.
Upstairs in the elegant dining room we noticed again the superb position of the hotel, as our table overlooked the marketplace below.
We began our meal with, for me, a Fan of Melon with a Fruit Coulis, beautifully presented and very high, and for my partner, Slices of Avocado with a Yoghurt and Mint Dressing.
A refreshing and tangy Mango Sorbet followed as a second course for both.
I had chosen Escallop of Veal sauteed in Butter and finished with Onion, Mushrooms and Marsala.
I was more than pleased with my choice, and again, the presentation was faultless.
My partner's Pipettes of Lemon Sole filled with succulent Prawns and coated with a light Indian Sauce came with the cutest garnish — little swans made from slices of lemon, while the helpings put me in mind of ‘Nouvelle Cuisine meets Yorkshire portions’.
As a rule I have generally found that ‘hotel restaurant’ food invariably falls just short of ‘restaurant’food.
Not so here, where the meal was certainly of a particularly high standard.
the vegetables, where so many restaurants lose points in m y reckoning, were exceptional, comprising of broccoli, carrots, new and Dauphinoise potatoes.
A bottle of house red lived up to the expectations predicted by the standard of the food — rich and fruity and not recommended for those driving home.
The chef that evening, Nigel Alexander, originally from Stockton, has returned to the north after four years as a chef in London and is given a free rein with the menu.
He let me into one of his secrets when he told me that he tries to avoid cream sauces and prefers to use stock and wine reductions.
Technical talk, but certainly interesting, particularly perhaps for those unable to eat dairy foods and whose choice must often be severely limited when dining out.
He explains that most specialist dies are, of course, catered for, including vegetarian dishes, which, I noticed, were unusual enough to tempt even the staunchest of meat-eaters like myself.
He went on to explain that the hotel has a policy of using local Dales suppliers wherever possible, much of the produce coming from Middleton Tyas, Yorkshire Dales Ice Cream from Cononley and Wensleydale cheese.
Once a month the restaurant have a speciality menu with a wide range of dishes to choose from — May is expected to be Greek.
In November, it will be French, complete with accordion player for ambience.
The clock room, furnished entirely by the antique-spotting owners, Philip and Lesley Davies, is open all day to nonresidents for tea, coffee and naughty-but-nice goodies, served with mints and carnations for the ladies.
The clocks themselves are an amazing collection including an American kipper box and a regulator with a triple action mercury pendulum  which operates by the expansion by the expansion of mercury.
They all work accurately, and are maintained by Bill Munro of Bellerby.
Over coffee we heard another interesting anecdote about The Kings Head which brought it to the forefront of media attention last year.
Bill Morrison was posted here during the war and amazed everyone by contacting the hotel in 1991 to return one of their beer glasses which he had had since waiting at the bar one night during the way only to have them run out of beer.
The Kings Head arranged for Bill, now in his 80's to be brought down, from the North of Inverness, to have his pint at last.
By the end of the evening I certainly wished the Kings Head was my local hotel restaurant, and I'm looking forward to dining again at the Kings Head next time I have cause to visit Richmond.
We dined from the table d'hote at £14.95 per head, which we felt was phenomenally good value.
Fashion
A NAUTICAL STRIPE Helps you to cut a crisp figure on holiday
Louis Feraud
IN THE FRAME Looking good with glasses that have a touch of class
WE ARE SAILING Jane Fickling sets sail in the world of summer fashion
Danwear
Totes glasses
WANTED ON VOYAGE WHETHER YOU'RE SAILING, STROLLING OR JUST SOAKING UP THE RAYS, SUMMER'S ESSENTIAL DRESSING STARTS HERE
YOU ARE going on holiday.
You will need:
A big hat: with a brim large enough to protect you from the sun and the eyes of the curious, thus allowing you to look enigmatic when you're merely asleep.
Preferably swathed in a scarf which can double as a belt, a bikini top — or even as a scarf.
A big shirt: a more practical cover-up than the ubiquitous pareo, less likely to billow into your neighbour's ice-cream and more appropriate when popping into smart restaurants or sensitive tourist spots such as church.
In light silk or voile and the brightest block print you can stand.
A biggish blazer: not too loose but certainly not fitted, in linen/cotton/silk and nice crisp navy/scarlet/yellow.
Serves the same purpose as the above shirt but is both smarter and warmer and will set off your
White jeans: you don't need me to tell you about those.
A small dress: in a big print or at least a big colour.
Nothing fancy — remember the 60s shift?
That's the one.
A small body: I wish.
But actually I mean the stretch all-in-one which has metamorphosed from underwear into the essential t-shirt.
In stripes, spots, flowers, plains, whatever.
A nautical stripe: black/navy and white stripes continue to cut a crisp figure alongside all the day-glo tropical brights this summer.
You'll want them on a long-line sweater or jacket, or else on a kind of Jolly Roger jumpsuit.
Passport, tickets, money, toothbrush, sun cream, sun glasses — for which, see elsewhere in this issue.
JANE FICKLING 
Far left: The essential big shirt from Louis Feraud Pret a Porter.
Lime Green three piece suit includes silk shirt, viscose/linen shorts and cotton/elastane top.
£489.
Right: The essential blazer from Liz Claiborne.
Linen/cotton mix jacket £66, cotton jersey t-shirt £26 and bleached white jeans £52.
Left: The essential shift from Cache d'Or.
Cotton/Lycra dress in small/medium/large sizes £45.50
frame WORKS
FOR FAR too long, glasses have been a matter of seeing well rather than looking good.
The idea of using this matter-of-fact item as a matter of fashion has been slow to catch on in this country.
Rather like watches, they were practical, part of the furniture and so we wore the same one for all occasions.
Which meant that the one we wore, in an attempt to suit every style, suited none of them.
Either it was neutral — all purposes — and a guaranteed damper on a special outfit; or it was fun — zany — and over-the-top for everyday.
Well, as with watches, it's time for a change.
You wouldn't wear the same jewellery with a jog suit as with a city suit, would you?
(If you would, read no further…
) So why the same specs?
When you face the world, your eyes are up-front — the first thing people notice, their clue to you and your cue to them.
Whatever the time, the weather, the occasion or the mod, your eyes are in the frame.
So make sure it's the right one.
JANE FICKLING 
Glasses are a girl's best friend — particularly when they're hung with mock rocks like thee.
Crystal-studded specs with gold-plated frames from Gianfranco Ferre, approx £200.
Well it's a curious place to keep your glasses but Silhouette's latest sunspecs are guaranteed to keep harmful ultra-violet rays off your knickers…in a variety of colours, approx £114.
Flower power from Kenzo.
Trademark flowers pattern the metal arms of these tortoiseshell coloured frames with flattering oval lenses.
Approx. £130.
Look back to the Fifties in filmstar-style frames from Christian Dior.
Tortoiseshell patterned frames with broad side pieces, also available in gold or black, approx £130.
Men DO make passes at girls who wear glasses — which is probably why Cartier have named their new gold-plated frames ‘Romance’ and designed an invisible ‘C’stamp on the lens which shows up only when breathed on…approx £310.
Advertisement Feature
TV STAR FIGHTS THE COWBOYS
JUDITH CHALMERS, well-known TV personality and presenter of TV's ‘Wish You Were Here’ holiday programme, is one of the people behind a new consumer protection scheme designed to protect the public from the disasters created by cowboy home improvement firms.
According to the Office of Fair Trading, around 4,000 complaints a month are made by the public concerning home repairs and improvement companies.
In addition, a further 1,500 complaints a month are received concerning double glazing companies.
The new scheme, Safe-Buy UK, was started two years ago in the north of England and only reputable home improvement companies, who are able to meet a series of straight standards, are eligible for membership.
‘The Safe-Buy concept has been so successful that the scheme is now spreading all over the UK,’ says Judith Chalmers.
‘This is because, from the public's point of view, if a company they are thinking of employing by Safe-Buy UK, they know they can proceed with a home improvement with extra reassurance and avoid things going badly or expensively wrong.
‘To a company, the Safe-Buy seal-of-approval means they have a start over the cowboys.’
Another consumer rights champion behind Safe-Buy is Lord Michael Winstanley who was for 18 years the presenter of Granada TV's  long-running ‘This is Your Right’ programme.
He and the staff of Safe-Buy are responsible for checking the credentials of every firm applying for membership.
In order to be accepted as a Safe-Buy approved supplier, firms must prove through their accounting system that they are financially sound; they must prove they hold proper current insurances; they must supply a list of recent customers, at lest 12 of whom are contacted by the Safe-Buy team and asked about their satisfaction with their recent home improvement; finally, further checks are made on the company through the relevant consumer protection associations to ensure that the applicants reputation is untarnished.
Only if the applicant can meet all these standards are then they admitted as a member.
‘There are plenty of excellent companies in the home improvement industry,’ says Michael Winstanley.
‘Unfortunately, there are also a lot of get-rich-quick merchants who are happy to take advantage of the unsuspecting householder.
Safe-Buy benefits both the consumer and the reputable home improvement firm.’
If you are thinking of making some improvements to your home and would like some more information on members in your area, write to:
Home Life
SEE THE LIGHT
A conservatory doesn't necessarily have to face south.
We look forward to summer under glass
IT'S ONE of the ancient myths of conservatories that they must necessarily trap the maximum amount of sunlight.
For homeowners who do not have a south facing  garden, there are other equally favourable aspects for the siting of conservatories.
Apparently it all depends on how homeowners are going to use their new garden room.
A south facing conservatory often receives so much sun and heat in the summer that it is not necessarily suitable for daytime entertaining, unless adequately ventilated and fitted with blinds.
Often this type of environment is idea for a person with green fingers who enjoys growing exotic, subtropical flowering plants.
Contrary to popular belief, a conservatory can be placed on any wall, including north facing walls.
A north facing conservatory will be cooler on summer days but offers a perfect growing environment for lush ferns, alms and other foliage that requires less daylight and less maintenance.
To enjoy long afternoons and a dipping sunset, a southwest facing addition would be ideal.
For families who gather for breakfast and for those ‘morning people’, a conservatory built on a southeast wall of the house would provide a bright way to start the day.
Also, conservatories need not necessarily be built to accommodate an existing door of the house.
They can be placed in just about any position subject to the layout of the house, land available and, where appropriate, planning permission.
Just be sure to consider the structural condition, wiring and plumbing and check that the person who prepares the base and erects the conservatory has been suitably trained, says Peter Moon, Conservatory Association secretary.
House owners should realise that a conservatory can be added almost anywhere as long as the foundation laid is adequate.
The Conservatory Association publishes three brochures free to the general public entitled ‘Choosing A Conservatory’, ‘Your Conservatory and Condensation’ and ‘A Touch of Glass.’
DECISIONS DECISIONS
NOW that you have made the decision to build a conservatory, do you opt for wood, PVC or an aluminium frame?
Each material has its advantages and conservatory manufacturers between them, offer all options that any potential buyer may want to make the right decision.
Hardwoods are often chosen for their aesthetic appeal.
Wood lends a feeling of natural warmth to the conservatory, and you can choose it without a conscience if the timber used comes from managed forests.
A wood conservatory blends nicely with older homes, but requires the most maintenance.
Wood needs to be stained or painted but with new microporous paints and preservatives, the finish will last much longer.
PVCs has low maintenance requirements and usually will last beyond the life of the house itself.
This ‘material of the future’ comes in white and brown and simply needs a quick wash when dirt collects.
PVCu works especially well for coastal properties as it is impervious to moisture.
It will not rot, and with today's improved manufacturing techniques, will not warp or fade.
Aluminium's attraction is that it is stronger so the supporting sections are generally more narrow, allowing more light into the conservatory and offering a less obstructed view.
Coated aluminium frames are available in a wide choice of colours.
The frame should have thermal breaks built to help with energy conservation and heat retention.
Whatever fame you choose make sure the glass is safety glass to BE 6206 class A. This is a minimum requirement if you buy from  a Conservatory Association member.
Do consider how the new conservatory will best blend with the property and whether to use single glazing which is less expensive or double glazing which allows the conservatory to be used more comfortably the year around.
The choice of materials for your conservatory ranges from the glowing warmth of wood to the airy lightness of aluminium
Interiors
GOING with the GRAIN
Nothing improves your home more than fine new furniture
Your bedroom reflects your personality as much as your lounge
TIME WAS when you judged people by how they dress.
The high powered executive suit or the laid back track suit and trainers instantly identified their owner as a man of a certain calibre.
But in the 1980s styles changed.
The executive might turn up in trainers and the double glazing salesman in a suit.
So you judged them by their cars, or their holidays, their taste in music, television or the theatre.
But you could rarely be absolutely certain.
As any woman could tell you a change of clothes or hairstyle can instantly change the way people think about you.
The same now applies to furniture.
Gone are the days when a couple furnished their house from top to bottom in a style that fitted in with the tastes of friends, neighbours, colleagues at work, or cronies down at the pub or tennis club.
With the variety now available you can change the image of your home, simply by changing your furniture.
Of course many will still opt for the country cottage look which remains as fresh and comforting as flowers in May.
Others can go continental with a style which is as chic and avant garde as a French bistro.
And you don't have to stop with your lounge or dining room.
The world of new furnishings works just as well in the bedroom as in the lounge, dining room or kitchen.
With design in Germany racing forward, some of their ideas for coordinating fabrics in the bedroom with colours in your wardrobes can create an image which is as cool as a stroll in the Black Forest.
Whichever room you choose, you can make it feel as fresh as a coat of fresh paint — with a coat of paint.
One major York designer Rosie Dean will serve as one example to represent all.
She has worked as a freelance fabric designer in New York, specialising in the production of hand painted silks.
She was involved in various design projects with special emphasis on the importance of paint.
‘Over recent years I have combined my knowledge and skills into the area of fine hand painted furniture,’ she explained.
‘Continuing contact with interior designers and clients helps to ensure that each item is exactly produced to requirements.’
Rosie lists the services available:
A range of pine furniture ready for me to paint according to your needs.
Antique items of furniture ready to be painted to your specifications.
Cabinet makers who will construct an item of furniture designed to requirements.
I can also paint your own piece of furniture.
Rosie Dean is just one example among many of the specialists that make buying furniture in Yorkshire a rewarding experience.
Rosie Dean, hand painted furniture
Derwent Upholstery
Bistro Dining Range, Terranova Designs
Interlubke bedroom, from ‘designworkshop’.
Travel
Enchanting nights in Paradise Regained by Julian Allitt, Travel Editor
The car number plates proclaim it to be ‘the American Paradise’.
It is only a mild exaggeration.
This was St John, in the US Virgin Islands.
To a tourist weary of the overcrowded and faded resorts of the Mediterranean, Antigua and the Virgin Islands were indeed like Milton's Paradise regained.
The tourist brochures show gleaming white sand.
It does.
If the photographs are to be believed, the water is azure blue and clear to the sea bottom.
It is.
If this reaction seems overstated, it is simply the effect of holidays spent and expectations dulled at  some of Europe's best resorts.
This small corner of the Caribbean is an unqualified and unexpected delight.
Sky TV newsreaders Chris Mann and Stephanie Callister chose Antigua's Blue Waters Hotel for the second leg of their three week Caribbean honeymoon.
The hotel is classy but relaxed.
Mick Jagger and Jerry Hall are frequent visitors and the previous week's guests had included Pauline Collins (Shirley Valentine) and husband John Alderton (Please Sir or Fireman Sam, depending on your age).
Chris liked the fishing and the water sport, provided free by the hotel.
He found the service ‘exceptionally good’, but added: ‘You have to expect that when the cricket is on you don't quite get the service you'd normally expect because they've all got a radio stuck in their pocket and the ear-piece stuck in their ear.’
As one does on honeymoon, Stephanie's thoughts were on food.
‘The local specialities are all sea food,’ she said.
‘All the restaurants are very good and one of the specialities is tail of lobster which they do in various ways, with garlic butter or tarragon butter.’
Yorkshireman Martin Sterne, from Ripon, had come for a week's golfing holiday with three friends, bringing their own golf professional with them from England.
They needed no professional help with the evening's drinking but arose magically clear-headed and eagle-eyed for each subsequent day's golf.
And so to Paradise.
From Antigua, we transferred by local aircraft and passenger launch to Caneel Bay, St John, in the US Virgin Islands.
Any resort is a blend of place and people.
The place is striking and beautifully laid out.
The people are beautiful and strikingly laid back.
The food is fresh, plentiful and excellent, with a choice of foods and environments.
One restaurants is by the shore, another on top of a hill in an old sugar mill.
The Vice-President and General Manager is Martin P Nicholson, an Irishman who has paused only in an immaculate career to kiss his native blarney stone.
His conversation is cultured — when last did your holiday host quote W.B. Yeats and Bishop Berkeley?
But behind the scenes there has to be an American fastidiousness and attention to detail.
How else could it be so relaxed?
A day's yacht charter took us threading through the islands — the most beautiful of all named, in a moment of sheer inspiration, ‘Mosquito Island’ to keep unwanted visitors away.
More obvious is ‘Throwaway Wife Bay’ for those burdened with a troublesome spouse.
But most enchanting of all at Caneel Bay was the night time, in one's bed in the bungalow-style accommodation, set among palms, by the beach.
There is no air-conditioning.
Instead, shutters on the walls can be turned to horizontal, with only a fine insect mesh between you and the cooling Caribbean breezes blowing through your room.
it is a cross between camping and a five-star hotel, close to nature and all amenities.
Martin Nicholson said: ‘The Caribbean and particularly the Virgin Islands — and most importantly Caneel Bay — still offer that unique island experience.
It is very difficult to find anywhere else in the world.
So many of the islands in other parts of the world have turned into major real estate developments — take Hawaii, for instance.’
At Little Dix Bay, on the island of Virgin Gorda in the British Virgin Islands, nobody locks their doors.
This is why, by mistake one evening, I stumbled into the wrong accommodation and upon a honeymoon couple.
They were too tired to notice as I crept out again.
The beach here is spectacular, curving gently round the bay under a towering, wild headland.
Your accommodation is perhaps 10 yards from the beach, set among cultivated gardens, ablaze with Jacaranda.
It is an ideal place for a honeymoon but life afterwards must seem all downhill, at least in terms of location.
As with Caneel Bay, the food is first class with a choice of stylish restaurants.
There is also an Englishness about the place which some guests — including the Americans — find particularly appealing.
This derives to a degree from the presence of Englishman E. David Brewer, Vice-President and Managing Director.
Courteous and concerned, he is the exact opposite of a British policeman, there when you want him but otherwise wholly unobtrusive.
Here and at Caneel Bay, you are offered a style of holiday unusual by European, although not by American standards.
Everything you might want to do, whether playing golf, tennis or sailing, is catered for.
You can spend the day on an uncrowded and clean beach and swim in clear waters.
You can eat good food in a variety of fascinating and often historic settings.
Off the resorts, my favourite spot was De Goose Bar, opposite the Yatch Harbour on Virgin Gorda.
But just one word of advice: if you offer someone a drink and they reply, ‘No problem’, it actually means ‘Yes, please’.
Julian Allitt travelled with Caribbean Connection, the UK's leading Caribbean tour operator.
Flights are with British Airways and prices for one week at the Blue Waters Hotel, Antigua, start from £856.00 per person inclusive.
One week at Little Dix Bay in the Virgin Isles starts from £1164.00 per person and one week's ‘Stay and Sail’ at Caneel Bay, featuring four nights at the hotel and three nights on board the yacht, starts from £1316.00.
Caribbean Connection can tailor-make any itinerary and has a good range of special offers throughout the summer.
For a brochure or reservations, call 0244 341131.
note names of people in photographs omitted
Motoring
Our new motoring correspondent — Jonathan Crouch
He tests ‘one of the world's great driving experiences’— the Porsche 911
and the new Fiat Panda
Road Test
MAZDA makes its marque By Jonathan Crouch
The Japanese don't give up easily.
Following in the footsteps of Nissan, Toyota, Mitsubishi and Subaru, Hiroshima-based makers Mazda are attempting to hit BMW and Mercedes where it hurts them most.
In the prestigious market for compact executive saloons.
Well aware that no Japanese maker has yet succeeded in making a serious impression here.
Mazda are taking no chances, launching not one contender but two within months of each other.
The futuristic-looking Xedos-6 range won't arrive in Britain until the Summer.
Already you might be surprised to learn that the car in question is the flagship of the company's revised new 626 medium range line-up.
It's a carefully targeted contender, completed with a £17,300 price tag and a 2.5-litre 24-valve quadcam V6 engine developing a healthy 165bhp.
That makes it significantly faster than, say a BMW 520i 24v, which offers less equipment.
Other competitors include Audi's new 80 2.8E V6 and the forthcoming new Volkswagen Passat VR6, likely to sell at a similar price.
It probably won't have escaped your attention that all these rivals are German — and it hasn't escaped Mazda's either.
Hence the rounded ‘Euro-styling’, the enhanced build quality and the larger body to distance it from its old Sierra/Cavalier class origins.
Dealers will be delighted to find that these upmarket pretentions have rubbed off on to some of the more mainstream models in the range.
These come with 1.8-litre engines (priced from £12,210) or 2.0-litre four cylinder power (from £14,133) and all feature fuel injected sixteen valve technology and three-way catalytic converters.
As you'd expect from a Japanese maker like Mazda, there's a wide range of choice — where you want it.
You don't get the ‘choice’ of an up-market stereo, an electric sunroof or alloy wheels.
On their upper-range models at least, Mazda assume that you'd like those things.
The four cylinder models do however, offer a choice between a four door saloon or a five-door hatchback bodyshell at £14,614; expect an estate version in the future too.
There's also the option of automatic transmission at £15,383 or air conditioning (£1,000 on the V6-engined GT).
In styling terms, there's no mistaking the new 626 for anything other than a Japanese car.
There's a lot of glass making the cabin a light, airy place to be — and not a right angle in sight in the smooth, curvaceous bodywork.
The result is a slippery profile of  0.. 29 for the hatchback, better even than Mazda's new MX-6 sportscar.
That means impressive refinement on the move, complementing an excellent ride, said over poor surfaces to be as composed as a Mercedes 230E.
That bias towards comfort has meant compromises as far as sporting handling is concerned; so you don't have to put up with a jittery ride over poorly made up roads.
On the other hand, neither do you get the taut, instant reactions that are part of the pleasure of controlling any of the top German sports saloons.
Take a seat behind the wheel and there isn't much to get the pulses racing either.
Instead, the emphasis is on efficiency rather than excitement, with a colour scheme dominated by a variety of blacks and greys.
Still, equipment levels are high and all the controls work with a quality ‘click’.
The seats are comfortable and supportive too and the driving position is excellent.
Add to that a smooth ‘knife through butter’ gearchange and responsive brakes (with anti-lock from the 2.0-litre engine size upwards) and you've a recipe for smooth, undemanding driving.
Your choice between the three engine sizes will of course depend on your performance priorities.
It is worth pointing out however that there isn't really much difference in speed (or for that matter in fuel consumption) between the 1.8 and the 2.0-litre.
Both manage around 120mph flat out and reach sixty from rest in around eleven seconds.
In other words, unless you really need the extra equipment supplied with the larger-engined model, you're probably better off saving your money.
If this car doesn't shake the German establishment, then it can only be a matter of time.
A test drive should convince you that Mazda are going places.
FACTS AT A GLANCE
Car: new MAZDA 626 range
Prices:
Performance:
Fuel Consumption:
Will it fit in your garage?:
Who to see:
Mazda MX-6
CHIC and cheerful by Jonathan Crouch
THERE'S a new Fiat Panda for 1992 — but you wouldn't know it.
Either Fiat have resisted the temptation to change it's body styling or the bean counters in Turin have decreed against it.
Whatever the case, you'd have to look hard to notice any differences.
Nevertheless, differences there are, at no extra price — which should be welcome news for anyone who ran one of the old Panda models.
The front seats have been redesigned.
So has the interior, with better quality fabrics, trim and carpeting.
Under the skin, you'll find wider tyres and recalibrated springs with more progressive dampers to improve the ride and handling.
Most importantly perhaps, there's now also the option of an automatic version featuring Fiat's ingenious ‘Selecta’ transmission system.
It's a metal belt-drive layout, without the resulting weight penalties of poor performance and fuel consumption that afflict most other clutchless cars.
This isn't the first Selecta Fiat, the concept has been used on Unos for some  years and Fiat assures me that these automatics are dramatically improved from the older designs still used by other manufacturers.
If that's the case, then the Panda Selecta ought to be a popular choice for many town buyers, given that it's less than £6,000.
Which makes it one of Britain's least expensive automatic cards.
In its recently revised form, Fiat's entry-level supermini is still as affordable as ever, with prices running from £4,509 to £5,764 — the pricier 4x4 models coming soon.
Across the range, the car is now a far quieter place than it issued to be, with better sound-proofing, new carpeting and a smarter roof lining.
Engine choice runs from a 770cc engine through the popular 1000cc ‘FIRE’ unit to a new 1.1-litre powerplant.
It's this that is likely to power the revised Panda Sisley 4x4 with remarkable off road abilities.
It isn't difficult to see why the Panda is so popular.
At the kind of prices Fiat are asking, it does represent a more appealing alternative in the market sector otherwise occupied by eccentrics from the Far East and Commie cast-offs.
You can't buy a Fiesta for this kind of money, or a Metro or a Nova and even if you could, you wouldn't have half as much fun.
Hustle the Panda along your average back road and you'll find none of the woolliness that might be expected from a car of this price range.
The steering is direct and precise, enabling you to hustle along briskly without effort, qualities which help to disguise the lack of power at your disposal in cut and thrust traffic.
And economy, as you would expect, is excellent, the factory quoting 45.2mpg on the urban cycle and 60.6mpg at a steady 56mph.
If you need something a little larger, then you might also want to consider something out of the Uno range.
This car has rewritten the rules that underline the supermini concept, since it won European Car of the Year in 1983 (Peugeot 205 was second) and it has won just about every award possible.
Since it was launched, five million have been sold, often being the best selling car in Europe.
Drive the car and you'll gain an impression of solidity.
No longer does the facia shudder over bumpy lanes; no longer is this accompanied by an orchestral melody of twitters from the rear parcel shelf.
On the road, the car feels taut and easy to drive, mainly due to it's light steering and excellent visibility.
It's a perky companion on the open road too, although not as enjoyable a driving companion as would a Peugeot 205 or a Citroen AX.
Eleven different models are now available,(including diesels) ranging in price from £6,165 to £10.845 for the exhilarating Uno Turbo.
There's now also a special budget priced Uno ‘Spark’ model, featuring over £500 worth of extra equipment, and it is some £300 less than its standard model.
The 1.0-litre engine which powers this model, although not the sweetest sounding in the marketplace, does have it's own fair share of Italian ‘brio’.
Top speed is a reasonable enough 87mph, while the sprint from rest to sixty occupies some 17 seconds.
Of more interest to potential buyers however, is likely to be its fuel economy, rated at around 45mgp on unleaded fuel.
This is a figure you're likely to achieve quite often if liberal use is made of the fifth gear which comes as standard.
The Uno definitely lives up to Fiat's claim that it's the Independent Car for Independent women.
FACTS AT A GLANCE
Car: new Fiat Panda range/Fiat Uno range
Prices:
Insurance Group:
Performance:
Fuel Consumption:
Will it fit in your garage?:
Who to see:
PURIST Perfection by Jonathan Crouch
Porsche 911 Carrera RS
THE ONLY automobile that you could use to compete in the East African Safari or at Le Mans, drive to the theatre or thread through New York city traffic’.
The theory, by Ferry Porsche.
The fact: driving Porsche's twenty six year old 911 is still one of the world's greatest driving experiences.
And driving ‘experiences’ are pretty thin on the ground these days.
Ferry himself would probably tell you that in it's search for perfection, the motor industry has taken from the driver and given to the machine.
Certainly, the majority of today's cars need far less skill to drive quickly than did their predecessors of the sixties and early seventies.
Those were the days when you could still bang doors at Brands Hatch and drive home afterwards.
True, there were few creature comforts behind the wheel and few concessions from the car itself once you were on the move.
Still, that feeling of spots car purity made the hardship worthwhile.
Heightened the pleasure in fact.
It's these enthusiasts that Porsche must reach with the latest sporting 911, the Carrera RS.
If it doesn't, then it's hard to imagine the hundred-strong UK allocation racing ready buyers for on paper, it's difficult to escape the conclusion that you're paying more and getting less.
Check the facts; the RS Carrera costs £61,100, £15,000 more than a stock 911 Carrera 2.
What you get in return is a stripped-out car with 4% more power, bigger brakes, 911 Turbo wheels and not much in terms of interior comfort.
Once you've done that, forget the facts and concentrate on the car.
This is the first 911 to bear the ‘RS’ insignia since the acclaimed 2.7-litre racers of the early seventies.
Like those cars, it's available in numbers exclusive enough to virtually guarantee future classic status.
Like those cars, it's been designed primarily for the track.
A whole range of tracks in fact.
Last year, Porsche's Carrera Cup series attracted a gridful of drivers eager to pit their £60,000 status symbols against each other over circuits right across Europe.
And it says much that you could make a racer out of the RS road car with a few hours notice.
This being the case, it's hardly surprising that the bucket seats grip you like a pair of pliers, that the suspension shakes your spine on potholed surfaces and that the engine noise makes a stereo unnecessary, even if one was provided.
It isn't of course.
Nor are electric windows, central locking or even door handles (you pull a body-coloured strap to release the catch).
In an effort to discard further weight, the side window glass is thinner, there's an aluminium bonnet, a smaller wiring harness, no rear wiper and little PVC underbody protection (though the steel is galvanised).
If you think all that is carrying the search for sportscar perfection too far, then Porsche will offer you a ‘Touring’ version for the same price, which brings back the stereo, sound proofing, door pockets and electric seats.
Equipped like that however, the RS weighs only 4% less than an ordinary 911 Carrera 2, which seems to defeat the object of the exercise.
If you can find a Porsche centre able to demonstrate an RS to you, put some time aside and insist on an experienced specialist.
From the moment you bruise your thighs clambering into the bucket seats and flick the engine into life, it's clear that compromises are out.
You want refinement?
Buy Porsche's 928.
You want a car that easily forgives if you apply a little too much throttle a little too early on a wet road?
Buy a 944 — or wait for the forthcoming 968.
You won't have to live with the car that draws attention to itself with a banshee wail every time you floor it in 2nd.
You won't be irritated by a steering wheel which writhes slightly between your hands as you accelerate.
If, on the other hand, you want to be where the action is.
If you enjoy the sensation of being an integral part of the driving experience, with all that that entails, then this 911 is one of the few road cars which still has what it takes to excite you.
It's performance is shattering, as for the money you would be entitled to expect.
Get the change from 1st to 2nd right and you can cover the sprint to sixty in a fraction under five seconds.
A much more important statistic however, is the ability to travel from 50 to 70mph in 3rd in just 3.4 seconds.
And top speed?
Just over 160mph should fit the bill.
Only the blistering 911 Turbo is quicker.
More impressive even than the RS's sheer power are it's handling characteristics.
Porsche's engineers reckon that although the car can corner safely at about 85% of gravitational acceleration, most owners will only need about half of that ability for normal, but still very fast motoring.
One 911 owner once remarked to me that he hadn't been terribly impressed by his car until he took it on a racetrack.
It was only then that he realised that he simply hadn't been driving it fast enough.
Which sums the situation up.
Unless you happen to have a racetrack in your back gardens, I would have thought that the sheer frustration of never really being able to stretch a car like this is one of the main drawbacks to owning one.
If you're buying the car as an investment and a weekend source of inspiration, then that probably won't matter.
there is no purer sporting alternative.
FACTS AT A GLANCE
Car: Porsche 911 Carrera RS
Prices:
Insurance Group:
Performance:
Fuel Consumption:
Will it fit in your garage?:
Who to see:
Reader Offer
Gourmet journey of a lifetime
WHEN American wine merchant Bill Sokalin recently bumped into a wine waiter at the famous Four Seasons Restaurant in New York it cost Tim Littler £125,000!
The wine waiter happened to be carrying a very rare bottle indeed.
the 1787 vintage chateau Margaux that was broken in the collision belonged to Whitwhams of Altrincham, Cheshire, world famous shippers of exotic and exceedingly rare wines.
The incident also offered us a glimpse of the  glamorous , sometimes expensive, globe trotting lifestyle of a successful wine merchant.
Hong Kong one week, Tokyo the next, from San Francisco to St. Moritz on the International wine merchant circuit.
August 1992 sees Tim setting off on a journey much nearer home and this time he's inviting the wine-loving gourmets of Britain to join him.
A mere £1,250.00, fully inclusive, will secure your Pullman seat on the  glamorous Orient Express for the journey of a lifetime.
This elegant steam train will sweep you from Cherbourg to Bayeux to view the beautiful 11th century tapestry and thence to Paris with lunch on board.
A evening spent cruising the Seine with dinner and fine wines followed by a visit to the top Parisian nightspot — The Lido.
After a good night's sleep in a top class hotel it is back on board on Sunday morning.
Off to Champagne where you will have the choice of two great hotels for your overnight stay.
Both hotels are, by any standards, super-deluxe with Michelin starred restaurants.
For a small supplement your home for the day could be Chef Boyers' Les Crayeres, widely regarded as Frances' greatest hotel where Chef/Patron Gerard Boyer, three star Michelin giant, has just been awarded, by Gault illau, the accolade of France's top chef for 1992.
There's nothing better than the best!
Alternatively, down the road at Chateau de la Muire where I am told by friendly Champagne producers you will find one of the  region, s most creative cooks — Jean-Pierre Lallement.
Here at l'Assiette Champenoise Jean-Pierre and his wife Colette run an extraordinary establishment.
To combine informality and friendliness whilst maintaining the highest standards of service and food is a rare achievement but Jean-Pierre has mastered this difficult art.
Of course, there's more to Reims, the Champagne capital, than great food and world-class hotels, the City is founded on bubbles — Champagne bubbles!
It's to one of the greatest of Champagne Houses that guests on board the Orient Express will be escorted on Sunday morning.
Here, deep beneath the ancient City, 35 million bottles of Champagne Veuve Cliquot are slowly maturing.
Lunch and oceans of bubbly will be served here in the vaulted chalk cellars.
An afternoon to yourself to discover the treasures of this revered Cathedral City then a little nap, perhaps and later refreshed and invigorated off to a gala evening with a menu fit for a king.
Tim Littler has seen to it that guests will sample some of the great wines of the world with their dinner.
These will include 1953 Chateau late late, 1906 Chateaux Margaux, 1961 Chateau Gilette and 1896 Cockburn's vintage port.
At L'Assiette Champenoise the wines may be younger but are still exciting.
In truth no expense will be spared to royally entertain the guests on board the Champagne Orient Express.
Monday will see everyone take their seats for the return journey via Amiens and thence to Calais and a very special lunch on board before the voyage home to England.
Before you even read this article I am told by the organisers that bookings have already been made in advance of advertising, so if you are a food wine and train lover and you'd like to recapture the mystery and elegance of the world of Agatha Christie or you've something very special to celebrate — make sure you're on board this august for a journey of a lifetime.
John Cocks and I have been on ahead to check things out.
Read on…
PETER WILLIAMS
For details of the Champagne Express telephone or write to:
The Orient Express experience
April in Paris
Paris remains for me the most exciting City in Europe.
It has so much to offer and it never fails to excite.
When I took my first weekend break in Paris in the early 70's I booked with Cresta Holidays who were then the leading Manchester/Paris weekend break specialists.
Many years and many visits later I was invited by Tim Littler to become the official wheel tapper for his exotic Orient Express voyages to Champagne being launched in August this year.
I automatically asked Cresta to make the arrangements, they are still the leading specialists.
They were, as usual, supremely efficient.
You may find when shopping around the travel agents that most of them lay off their bets through Cresta who seem to have the inside curve.
With only two days to see Paris no-one wants to waste time in car and boat.
In my case the airport is on my doorstep so flying British Airways is usually ‘de rigeur’.
Although I'm not nervous of flying there is something very re-assuring about British Airways and Rolls Royce on an aircraft's livery, feeling safe is important to many.
then, of course, they have the most polite and efficient cabin crew in the business.
With four flights a day from Manchester to Paris you could literally fly out for lunch and be back in time for ‘Match of the Day ’.
For me, living just two minutes from Manchester International Airport means just two hours from home to hotel courtesy of British Airways.
Incredible as it sounds a weekend package with Cresta can cost you less than a flight to Paris in the normal way.
With accommodation for two nights in a good hotel starting at £192 and just £22 supplement for an extra night.
Or for the total luxury of the Hotel Golden Tulip St. Honore, three nights including flights at an unbelievable £292.
With a normal rate for rooms booked privately at £175 per couple per night the cost of the flight on top.
you don't need imagination or a calculator to work out that Cresta are still the top Paris specialists.
The prices quoted are for May and June 1992.
Our hotel in Paris was the Golden Tulip St. Honore just off the Champs Elysees on one of the beautiful wide streets of this great City what a superb location.
Dutch-owned, it is part of an exciting new concept in hotel accommodation.
Our suite included a separate kitchen area beautifully appointed with microwave, dishwasher and a patio window leading onto a small terrace.
It's own private, luxurious sitting room complete with dining room table and chairs, immaculate marble-lined bathroom and dressing room and a supremely comfortable king size bed.
Televisions and telephones were in each room.
The hotel boasts comprehensive business centres and conference rooms.
The most impressive features were the extremely friendly and helpful staff in all departments and, almost uniquely for a Paris hotel, a first class restaurant — the Relais Vermeer — with exciting food at reasonable prices.
For about £40 a head the dishes we enjoyed were ‘foie gras de canard confit en terrine’(terrine of duck liver), a most unusual dish; ‘terrine d'anguille fumé tiede’(smoked eel rillette) which I found delicious and very different.
The speciality of the house was fillet of reindeer with wild mushrooms, the Scandinavian equivalent of our venison but we settled for Chateaubriand, cooked to perfection and served at the table by the charming Italian head waiter, Paolo whose efficient and attentive service enhanced the evening.
The coffee was a revelation — it's so easy to forget how bad coffee is in British restaurants until you go to France or Italy.
Paolo personally made tiny cups of rich, dark, aromatic coffee ‘a la Italia’, almost worth a trip in itself!
The next morning, an early start, window shopping in the streets of Paris and half of an hour with our heads buried in the Michelin and Gault Millau guides while taking in the air and the haute couture from the vantage point of our pavement cafe.
More by luck than design we chose a ‘classic’ parisian bistro for lunch, neither restaurant guides gave much of a clue what to expect, the smart business-like exterior didn't either.
Led by the head waiter around a crowded bar we emerged into a restaurant with a breathtaking interior.
With John Cocks cursing the fact that he had not brought his tripod and frustrated by the lack of lighting equipment we had to content ourselves with lunch sans photography.
The interior at Fermette Marboeuf is one of the finest examples of a Belle Epoque conservatory I have ever seen.
Discovered by accident behind partitioning this magnificent interior has been restored and re-erected a tile at a time and now must surely be one of the most exciting in Paris and a monument to the glory of La Belle Epoque.
Lunch did not disappoint either.
When I write my diary for the year my starter course at the Fermette Marboeuf will be at the top of my list of outstanding dishes.
Simple, inexpensive, exquisite, a symphony of pure, unspoilt flavours — gently set mousse flavoured with spiky, fresh horseradish root enveloping layers  of astringent cucumber alongside a little puddle of tomato concasse again spiked with horseradish.
It left taste buds tingling and a palate crying for the next course — a veritable masterpiece!
After a very competent dish of riz de veau (pan friend veal sweetbreads) accompanied by an excellent bottle of Pouilly Fuisse crisp, bags of ripe gooseberries — we skipped dessert and settled for another good coffee.
Cost of lunch in this magnificent setting was £25 a head.
I must write to the Michelin and ask them to look again at the Fermette Marboeuf!
It deserves a star for its interior alone and maybe even a second for the brilliant horseradish mousse.
We awoke to a bright, sunny Sunday morning, clear blue skies and the prospect of a leisurely run, by auto route, to Reims, the Champagne Capital, less than two hours from Paris by road.
Tim and Lynne Littler caught up with us at this point and with little resistance from our party, insisted that we couldn't leave Paris without a light lunch.
By this stage we were beginning to realise the formula is two days in Paris, six days in a health farm.
A short waddle down and across the Champs Elysees found us sitting, once again, around a restaurant table.
many Parisian restaurants are closed on Sunday.
We along with the rest of Paris, found one that was open.
The guides describe the cooking as Cuisine Bourgeois.
If that translates into amazing, then they were right.
Packed to the doors, service was of the wham bang variety but so honest and so good.
A salad of chicory tossed in a roquefort sauce made herculean efforts to revive our jaded appetites and who could resist turbotine (baby turbot) grilled on the bone and served whole with pommes alumettes — chips to you mate!
‘No puddings, thank you’, we all cried.
‘Ah, but you must’, the waitress insisted, ‘our millefeuille de vanille is famous’.
So we shared one between six and it was both wonderful and sufficient.
Coffee and a stroll up to the nearest AVIS and we were off to our next destination.
A scant two hours from Paris and we were comfortably settled into our lovely rooms at the Chateau de la Muire.
Indoor swimming pool, Michelin starred restaurant, family run and two minutes from Reims and the Cathedral — what more could you wish for?
Without even tossing a coin into the fountain we were about to experience the fairytale hospitality of the champenoise.
Greeted that evening by our charming host Eduard de Nazelle, Sales Director of Champagne Veuve Cliquot, it soon became clear that a special night lay ahead.
There was clearly a close relationship between Eduard and his friend Chef/Patron Jean Pierre Lallement and we began to feel that we were being entertained in someone's home rather than in a hotel.
Eduard's gentle insistence that we try a few gems from the cellars of Veuve Cliquot roughly translated into six bottles which rapidly topped up our reservoirs of ‘entente cordiale.’
Dinner proved to be a splendid recital in the vocabulary of great French cooking.
Dishes of dainty ‘amuse gueule’ teased us into our first course of whole baby Brittany lobster, seascented and sat upon a diminutive salad of oil-tossed green leaves — simple you might think — splendid simplicity in fact.
Washed down with a bottle of Riesling Schonenbourg — Tim's choice from the Orient Express menu.
Then onto a triumphant ‘croustade de St. Jacques’— a little pouch-like purse of filo crammed with scallops in a masterpiece of saucing.
The wine was Beaune Clos de Mouche 1982, in magnum.
If there's anything better, I would like to know about it.
The genius of balancing a menu meant that even yet we were ready for the next course.
A refreshing interlude came by way of sorbet, something I've never been a lover of, but this was quite, quite different.
Scented by infusion with wild tarragon, like no other sorbet I have ever tasted, a mere thimbleful did the trick.
Now everyone knows Welsh lamb is best but if anything is likely to cause us to wobble over this judgement the next dish was ‘filet d'agneau aux truffes’— Normandy salt marsh lamb, mouth-melting, succulent, on a bed of truffles with an intense, shiny, Madeira — sauce, the whole dish testimony to Lallement's creativity.
Of course lamb and fine burgundy were born for each other and the Chateau Grancey 1982 was memorable.
An ‘assiette de fromage’ and classic Chateau Palmer 1978 lifted us gently towards the dessert.
From a seduction-packed dessert trolley we were led by the chef towards his ‘tarte aux peches avec un coulis de framboises’.
It happened to be my birthday — I've never had or am likely to have a better birthday dinner, I don't mind being a year older every year for this!
Next morning found us deep in subterranean Rims.
Here in the vaulted chalk cellars of Champagne Veuve Cliquot we were to discover that Champagne reaches the parts that other breakfasts beverages don't reach.
I have a vague impression of John Cocks tottering atop a wobbling step ladder, Champagne in one hand, camera in the other I now know what he means when he says ‘tight schedule’!
We banged off the last roll of film recording our epic journey of discovery before setting off in the direction of Charles de Gaulle Airport.
Arriving late to find all moving stairways were out of order a panicky half mile sprint was needed to catch our plane.
We were circling Stockport before I got my breath back!
Our cask-conditioned party could all agree on one thing, we'd love to be on board the Champagne Express when it sets fullsteam-ahead for Reims this August.
PETER WILLIAMS 
Far left top: The Relais Vermeer Restaurant of the super Golden Tulips St Honore.
Far left bottom: In the Veuve Cliquot cellars.
Above: Eduard de Nazelle, Tim Littler and chef Jean-Pierre Lallement.
Left: One of the most exciting interiors in Paris.
Wine Awards
TOWN & COUNTY MAGAZINES TOP WINE AWARDS 1992
Elegy to bursting bubble
What was it like?’ you grandchildren may ask in the future, for the late eighties in Britain might well become known as the second ‘Belle Epoque’.
Just as in the swinging twenties Champagne was a totem of the decade.
It's hard to imagine the heady days of John Buttery at the Portland in Manchester — the Champagne Hotel of the north — when even the window cleaner developed a taste for Drug!
Today the deafening sound of lowering sights replaces that of popping corks.
Most of us clinging to our recently lost life style can be excused for hunting an acceptable substitute for the ‘real McCoy’.
So, what tastes, smells, looks and sparkles like Champagne?
The answer is nothing — great Champagne is without equal and you can't reproduce the unique climate and soil conditions of its birthplace anywhere else in the world.
Thank goodness wine makers worldwide accept this fact and cheap, poor imitations are becoming a thing of the past.
Instead good oenologists everywhere are concentrating their skills and producing wonderful wines using all the ancient secrets of Champagne with all the latest scientific advancements and the resulting wines are true themselves and are a reflection of their origins.
Of course, many of the bench marks by which sparkling wines are judged are those of the traditional Champenoise The French, true to form, have managed to ban all the use of the term ‘Methode Champenoise’ and wine makers are currently scratching their heads for an alternative.
Methode Traditionelle, Methode Artisanale, Cava or plain Double Fermented are likely to be expressions found on labels in the near future.
We must all learn to judge a bottle by its content not by its wrapping and if we are able to approach the hundreds of alternative sparkling wines being offered in place of Champagne with open minds we will reap pleasure and reward.
this months tasting features the exciting sparkling wines being produced by double fermentation or what used to be called Methode Champenoise.
Wine produced by this method is generally accepted as superior to sparklers produced by other less expensive means which are usually known as vin Mousseaux.
For our third tasting we received many  exciting samples from both Europe and the New World.
Again it came as no surprise that the winners were in all the higher price bracket.
We chose as the venue, where else but, the Champagne Hotel of the north where Ian Corner, David Chell and their staff are bravely grasping the nettle of recession whilst continuing to perform as you would expect from Manchester's top City Centre Hotel.
Ian Corner is no stranger to New world wines, as a former resident of the Seychelles and South Africa, he is one step ahead of us.
David Chell and chef Peter Marshall have weaved wonders with wine list and menu and our post-potation luncheon was testimony to their skills.
Over sixty wines were tasted — no mean feat in sparkling wine terms — and the standards were exceptionally high with only two rogue wines in the whole tasting.
The panel were both surprised and impressed with the range, quality and value for money of the sample selection that we tasted.
The final round tasting stimulated vigorous discussion and argument.
Our panel this month included Paul Boutinot of Paul Boutinot Wines the north's leading shipper, who trotted out some wines form his own stable of Champagne look-alikes; Bill Towers who must be unique in Britain because as a sheep farmer in the Lake District he runs a very successful wine merchants out of one of the barns on his farm.
He is a consummate wine taster; John McGlasshan, a top lawyer from Warrington, who maintains his profession's historical affection for fine wine and does so with great enthusiasm and elan: Aksel Nielsen, what a name, who has the considerable task of keeping Manchester Airport's millions of travellers from drying out; David Chell, the Portland's Food and Beverage Manager and myself.
THE VERDICT
The next time that you have something to celebrate — a new baby, a new wife or even a new government — try a bottle of one of this month's winning wines, you won't be disappointed.
PETER WILLIAMS 
Double fermentation sparklers tasted at the Portland Thistle Hotel, Manchester
What's New
From Down Under with a difference
Three new wines from Western Australia of unusual appeal reach the shelves of Liquorsave, within Kwik Save.
They are the Brockman River 1990 Sauvignon Blanc and Cabernet Sauvignon and the 1991 Chardonnay, products of the Chittering Estate Winemaker Steve Scapera learned his art in California and last year built up exports to the American market to 41 million.
Now, through Liquorsave, he is setting out to conquer the UK market.
The wines are attractively presented, making a good impression, and at tasting by this magazine's group editor, Brian Hargreaves, and food and wine consultant Peter Williams, made an instant impact of being decidedly different, due partly in the case of the whites to a variation of the French sur le lie process, most familiar in Muscadet.
In the order we tasted them:
Sauvignon Blanc: Bags of fruit with an almost overwhelming bouquet more agreeable than that of the typical French sauvignon.
This is one for drinking with fish or as an appetiser.
Price: £2.97.
Chardonnay: Not your traditional Australian style.
The oak was not assertive and there was a fresh, almost bubbling petillance on the tongue.
This is the one for those summer barbecues.
Price: £3.75.
Cabernet Sauvignon: A massive jammy concentration of fruit.
In fact, a fruits of the forest flavour.
A big wine which will stand up to dishes like casseroles with a strong flavour.
Price: £2.87.
HOTEL
A GOLFING PARADISE ALDWARK MANOR HOTEL ALDWARK, YORK
ALDWARK MANOR is a splendid 19th Century country house hotel set in 190 acres of Yorkshire parkland.
The magnificent residence has aristocratic connections.
It was commissioned in 1865 by Lord Walsingham as a wedding present for his eldest daughter and took the finest craftsmen five years to complete.
It remains a place of much historical interest.
In the early 1900s possession passed from the Walsingham family to the Gunters who used it as a country home.
Requisitioned by the Home Office at the start of the Second World War the Manor provided accommodation for the Canadian Air Force who flew from the nearby air base of RAF Linton.
But it is also a hotel which actively looks forward to the future.
The beautiful grounds at Aldwark Manor are open to all hotel guests.
The golf course is open to hotel guests  and members of the public.
When the golf course is developed into an 18 hole course in June the Manor is ‘looking for new members.’
Aldwark Manor is the home of the British and International Golf Greenkeepers' Association (BIGGA).
It makes a perfect base and not just for enthusiastic golfers and golf societies looking for an ideal location.
Activities including fishing, walking, company conferences, product launches or just a memorable break away from it all: they are all catered for at Aldwark Manor.
There are 20 centrally heated bedrooms, each of which has been individually designed.
Several of them feature four poster beds and all have en-suite facilities, colour television, radio, hospitality trays, direct dial telephone, hair dryer and trouser press.
In the splendid Rendlesham Restaurant the guest can enjoy top quality table d'hote or a la carte lunches and dinners.
In the adjacent Golf Bar golfers will soon be able to find a welcoming watering hole looking over the green.
The Walsingham Suite which can accommodate up to 90 guests, provides the setting for entertainment on the grand scale, which makes it ideal for banquets, wedding breakfasts, dinner dances and formal meetings.
Adjoining is the York Suite which accommodates up to 30 guests.
And for that pre dinner aperitif or night cap after dinner guests can relax by the open fire in the Hall or in the Lounge Bar.
Aldwark Manor also boasts ‘a growing treasure trove of objects d'art and decor, including a specially commissioned galleried tromp-l'oeil Italian courtyard by local artists Rupert Forbes-Adam and Jenny Blincow’ which creates an area specially designed where guests can feel soothed and relaxed.
Situated in Aldwark village on the banks of the River Ure, Aldwark Manor is just 15 miles from York and ideally situated for touring the Yorkshire Dales and moors.
Within easy driving distances are Newby Hall, Castle Howard, made famous by the television series Brideshead Revisited , and the fashionable spa town of Harrogate.
For racegoers there are no less than six racecourses within easy reach.
And as any Yorkshireman will tell you, the historic city of York with its Minister, Jorvik Viking Centre, shops and museums is a jewel amongst tourist resorts.
YORKSHIRE ARTS AND LEISURE DIARY A selective guide to events in and around the county
THEATRE
MUSIC
EXHIBITIONS
FESTIVAL
MISCELLANEOUS
YORKSHIRE RACING DIARY
Although every effort is made to ensure that all details are correct at time of going to press, times and dates of events can vary.
If you are travelling please check with venue .
Her Majesty the queen 1988 Doncaster Museum and Art Gallery
The Worst Witch comes to Hull
THE ASSOCIATION OF MASTER UPHOLSTERERS
The Association of Master Upholsterers has recently changed its Logo and added the words ‘and Soft Furnishers’.
The main reason for this change is to clarify to the general public what the word ‘Upholstery’ means.
‘Upholsterer’ is derived from the ancient word ‘upholder’.
Today we have close ties with the City Livery Company, the Worshipful Company of Upholders.
Our Logo bears the single Sparva taken from the Upholders triple Sparva.
In 1947 when the Association of Master Upholsterers was formed, the word upholstery covered all aspects of the trade, upholstering furniture, curtain making, carpet and lino laying, car trimming, loose-covers, fitting rails and rods, even lining coffins.
Most upholsters were apprenticed to a Master Craftsman and the apprenticeship lasted seven years.
Gradually, the training time has diminished and the sections of the trade have fragmented.
We now have fewer ‘all round’ Upholsterers, but find ‘specialists’in one aspect of the trade only.
Re-covering, is the major part of an upholsterers work which means removing all the old covering and replacing it with new, this can be hand stitched or ‘capped-on’ according to the style.
Soft Furnishers, can be split into several groups, some specialise in loose covers, curtains, quilting, and  lampshade making, while others may specialise in curtains, pelmets, bedcovers, fitting rails and rods.
If you choose a member with our Logo, you will find that they will have been vetted for work in their own specialist field of Upholstery, Soft Furnishing or both.
We work closely with local Trading Standards Officers, to ensure that only bona fide members are allowed to use the Logo.
We are an Association that wishes to benefit both member and consumer, you will find, that if your Upholsterer/Soft Furnisher does not undertake the particular type of work you require, he/she will be able to recommend another member in the area.
All members are skilled craftsmen and women, who have the back up of old established Association with a reputation for having members who do goo work at a fair price.
Our Journal which is available  at a yearly subscription of £35.00, which gives a great deal of information to the members and consumers.
We keep up standards by running training awards for Upholstery and Soft Furnishing trainees, these trainees are our future craftsmen and women and we are doing all we can to ‘uphold’ the same standards we had in the past and maintain them into the future.
Weddings