

Let's hear from you!
FOR ALTON CARNIVAL
THE ALton Carnival is expected to be lion size this year, with villages involved too.
Carnival co-ordinator Malcolm Vincent and his team are keen to encourage support from the villages that come within the Alton Lions' service area.
They'd like to hear from any rural organisation who would like to take part.
The Spring Bank Holiday event will start, as usual, on the Saturday, May 23rd afternoon, with a giant car boot sale at Anstey Park to coincide with the opening of the fair.
This will be followed by an evening barn dance.
Next day there could be a grand concert, details of which will be released later.
The procession
The Monday's carnival procession will leave the Butts Green as usual and proceed  through the town to Anstey Park, where the entertainment is expected to be bigger and better than ever.
So much so that consideration is being given to a second arena…
There will be the normal trade stands and side shows and, new this year, a possible   display of vintage and kit cars.
If anyone is a builder of such a vehicle or the owner of a vintage model, Malcolm Vincent would be delighted to hear from them, on Alton 85245.
Fence vandalised
A SIX-FOOT high chain link fence between Alton Convent and Anstey Park was vandalised by being cut into strips some time during the weekend.
Twice the limit drink driver fined, banned
AN Alton man, who was caught driving while more than two and a half times over the legal alcohol limit, has been banned from the roads for 22 months.
Forty-four-year-old Graham Bowden, an engineering supervisor, who lives at Lord Mayor Treloar Hospital, appeared before the town's magistrates on Friday.
He pleaded  guilty to the drink-drive offence which happened on December 22nd.
Police had seen Bowden driving in Drayman's Way shortly before 11 p.m.
They noticed the car run wide as the defendant made a left turn and the officers decided to stop the vehicle.
They requested Bowden to give a road-side breath test and it proved positive.
He was arrested and taken to Alton police station.
Bowden gave a blood sample — because the breathalyser machine was defective — which showed he had 203 milligrammes of alcohol in 100  millilitres of blood.
The legal limit is 80.
He told the court that he had been under ‘emotional stress’ at the time of the offence and that it was very much out of character for him to drink and then drive.
In addition to the 22-month ban, magistrates fined Bowden £320, endorsed four penalty points on his licence, and ordered him to pay £15 towards prosecution costs.
Bag theft from car
A BROWN leather bag, together with its contents, valued at £220, was stolen from a Toyota Corolla parked at Alton Sports Centre on Friday.
Car parts stolen
AN electrically-heated wing mirror was ripped from a Ford Sierra car parked in a layby next to its owner's home in Church Street, Alton on Saturday night.
And outside Alton Library on Monday night a thief broke into a Metro car by prising the top half of the door away from the bodywork.
The steering column cowl was stolen.
Thieves also stole the canvas soft-top from a Suzuki vehicle parked on the forecourt of Holybourne Garage overnight on Tuesday.
Trailer theft
A WARWICK trailer, valued at £1,500, was stolen from a farm at Old Oldham Road in Alton on Tuesday.
The twin wheeled trailer, which has the serial number 92MAR14, was taken some time between 11.15 a.m. and 1 p.m.
The thieves also made off with a Stihl chainsaw valued at £150.
Intruder disturbed
SOMEONE broke into a garden shed in Wooteys Way, Alton on Monday night, removed a lawn-mower and left it in the middle of the lawn.
It is thought that the intruder was disturbed by a barking dog.
THE NIGHT AN ABUSIVE PUB PAIR TOOK ON THE POLICE
TWO Bentley men, who frightened the landlady at a local pub with their threatening behaviour, were later involved in a struggle with police.
Nineteen-year-old Alan Parratt and his friend Paul Wilkins, 23, has spent the evening drinking at the Bull Inn at Bentley without incident.
But as closing time  approached , staff became unhappy with the two  defendants' use of foul language.
When they were asked to leave, Parratt and Wilkins became aggressive.
It was claimed that they poured their drinks over the counter and then smashed their beer glasses.
Then as Parratt left the pub he punched his fist through a pane of glass in the door.
The defendants were spotted walking back home by police a short while later.
Wilkins began struggling with a constable and pushed him into a bush.
The officer suffered grazing on his nose and face.
Meanwhile Parratt  had to be restrained on the ground.
On Monday Wilkins, who lives in Alton Road, and Parratt, of Babsfield, both appeared before Alton magistrates.
They both pleaded guilty to using threatening words and behaviour in the incident which happened on March 2nd.
Wilkins also pleaded guilty to assaulting a police officer in the execution of his duty, and Parratt to obstructing the police.
The defendants admitted that they had both been drinking heavily on the night of the offences.
But they denied throwing and smashing their beer glasses at the pub.
Wilkins also told magistrates that he hadn't deliberately tipped his drink over the bar but that it had been an accident.
And when they were later approached by the police they claimed that they were unaware they were being arrested.
Wilkins said that he and the police constable had hold of one another and the officer had fallen to the ground.
Magistrates fined both defendants £100 for threatening behaviour.
Wilkins was fined a further £75 for the assault charge and ordered to pay the officer £20 compensation.
Parratt was fined £75 for obstructing the police.
Both men were each ordered to pay £37.50 in compensation to the Bull Inn and £30 towards prosecution costs.
‘We've had enough of those bikers’— SAY VILLAGERS
CHAWTON villages are about to wage war on motorbike noise at Brick Kiln Farm.
But farmer Ken Sawkins says that he will lose his livelihood if the biking is stopped.
Mr Sawkins opened up his land to grasstrack riders 16 years ago and a quarter of his 100-acres farm is used by young motorcyclists.
‘A single motorcycle using this track can be clearly heard for literally miles around,’ said Col. David Whitaker.
Neighbouring farmer Graham Rankin  believes the problem has ‘got a lot worse’ since Brick Kiln received planning permission two years ago.
‘The whole thing seems to be mushrooming,’ said Mr Rankin who feels that riders are exceeding the spirit of the planning permission, if not the letter of it.’
Mr Rankin said villagers were writing to the environmental health authority to try and sort the matter out, ‘At evenings and weekends, the continuous drumming of the bikes sounds like a chainsaw.’
‘Brick Kiln Farm can't be the right place for an operation like this,’ he said.
‘It would be better sited beside a motorway, where the noise wouldn't give extra harm.’
The last thing Ken Sawkins wants is to upset people but he feels strongly that he is doing the area a good turn.
‘The police are very much in favour of biking at Brick Kiln because it takes a lot of lads off the streets.’
Diversify to survive
The sport, he added, gives an enormous amount of pleasure to a lot of people, ‘We are now seeing the second generation enjoying our facilities — youngsters whose parents used to ride around our tracks.’
‘Nobody has ever complained before.
I believe the tracks are an asset to the community.’
Mr Sawkins combines cattle and arable farming with the bikes racing enterprise.
‘Farmers are going through a hard time, especially those on small acreage.
We are having to diversify to earn a living,’ he said.
Col. Whitaker would not be quite so anti the motorbikes if they were ‘properly controlled and made to use silencers.
Then no one would have minded,’ he said.
But he questions the sense in encouraging recreations which cause ‘atmosphere pollution and could produce the next generation of fast and pushy drivers on our roads.’
Should we not, he asks, ‘try to persuade the gang  who use the Brick Kiln Farm circuit to have some thought for others?’
CELEBRATIONS GO ON WITH VERY FINE EGGARS CONCERT
ALTON'S Eggars School continued to celebrate their 350th year last week, this time with a special anniversary concert.
One hundred musicians, most of the  Eggar's pupils, a semiprofessional orchestra formed by advanced students, and staff and friends of the school, performed in front of a full house.
The first half of the programme was a performance of the Liberty Tree by local composer Michael Hurd, who also narrated the piece.
The work was chosen by Mark Banks, director of music at Eggars because it deals with events of the English Civil War in 1642 — the year the school was founded.
In the second half the school choir performed Vivaldi's Gloria.
Assistant teacher of music at the school, Mair Clark, was particularly impressed with the soloists Victoria Haycocks, Donna Clark, Natalie Andrew, Susannah Bailey, Katherine Price in Gloria and Lyndsey Terry, Catherine Eckles, Amy Croucher and Sarah Swales in The Liberty Tree.
Despite the enormous praise for the concert there is no time for rest for the performers — rehearsals for the Eggars summer concert are already underway.
Special day…
The bright young faces belong to girls of the 2nd Alton brownie pack, who delivered Mother's day posies to elderly residents on the Mary Rose ward at Lord Mayor Treloar Hospital.
Here, receiving the gifts, are Gertrude Atkinson (left) and Katherine Lewis.
PUBLIC OUT IN FORCE FOR PARTY PLATFORM
GOOD QUESTIONS…
AND GOOD HUMOUR
ANY suggestion that the population is bored stiff with the general election campaign was firmly refuted on Wednesday evening, by the amount of interest shown in the meeting of all four Winchester constituency candidates on the same platform in Alton.
People packed St. Lawrence Church Hall to hear their questions answered, and although all four's answers ran on fairly predictable lines, intense interest was maintained throughout the nearly two-hour event.
Written questions
The meeting, a lively and largely good-humoured affair, was organised by the local Council of Churches and chaired by the Rev. Ian Bowley.
Written questions had been invited, and 40 were received on a wide variety of subjects, which meant there was no time for extras from the floor, although the audience did contribute some penetrating comment.
Candidates had been asked to limit their replies to three  or four minutes, and only rebel Tory John Browne needed reminding.
An hour and a half into the debate all four for the first time gave succinct answers in agreement to one question and were rewarded with a cheer from the floor!
The subject was whether they would support an initiative to tighten up laws on pornography, and all were in favour.
The presence of two Conservative candidates — the party's official choice Gerald Malone and Mr. Browne — led to a certain amount of confusion when Mr. Bowley wanted to seek supplementary information on current government thinking.
The question tended to be addressed to Mr. Malone, but a body of the audience insisted that Mr. Browne as the town's current MP should answer.
Pride in industry
First asked for ideas for alternative employment to replace the arms industry, Mr. Browne suggested that it was the job of business not governments to provide employment, but he hoped some of the technologies currently used in defence could be deployed for civilian use.
‘Only then will we rival the Japanese,’ he said.
Liberal Democrat Tony Barron felt it was the job of government to create a climate and incentives for education and training, and Labour's Peter Jenks spoke of the need to restore pride to British Industry.
Mr. Malone referred to the work the government was doing with the Ministry of Defence to support the declining armaments industry.
Some members of the largely Christian audience were disappointed to find no-one advocating a reduction of Britain's nuclear deterrent — although Mr. Jenks felt the need of four Trident boats as exaggerated, and Mr. Barron said the number of warheads should be limited.
Mr. Malone pointed to the number of countries likely to gain nuclear arms in the next ten years, and reminded the audience that there were still 27,000 nuclear warheads distributed around the remnants of the Soviet Union.
Mr. Browne took up this point: ‘Where one huge bogeyman has gone, a lot of little bogeymen lurk,’ he said.
Housing was the next topic — Mr. Jenks called for the unfreezing of money from council house sales, while Mr. Malone spoke of the government's record of investment in housing associations.
Mr. Browne did not think it was the job of councils to provide housing, but Mr. Barron was quick to counter that point.
There were plenty of examples of schemes and estates in the area ‘put into place by caring councils’, he said also calling for the freeing of sale money.
The health service and its level of  funding was an inevitable issue.
Mr. Barron described it as ‘an inevitable financial black hole’, but reiterated his party's plans to raise investment to ensure that all services were free.
Mr. Jenks pledged to abolish health service trusts and make health authorities ‘accountable to the people’.
Mr. Malone claimed that to be ‘precisely what the government is doing — getting it patient and doctor led’, with reforms seeing ‘services being delivered at recognised costs’.
In a later reply, he cited the USA as an example of why a Conservative government ‘would never put in place an insurance led scheme’.
The related thorny question of abortion was another topic, and Mr. Jenks was cheered when, referring to his work in hospitals, he said: ‘I have  never seen a woman who wanted an abortion, but plenty who felt they had no alternative’, citing education to stop unwanted pregnancies as the real solution.
All the candidates agreed that the issue was an extremely complex one and that ultimately, within limits, policy had to  be based on a woman's right to choose.
Sunday trading
On Sunday trading, again they all in various ways expressed a wish for freedom to prevail, with adequate protection for the workforce.
‘I applaud this rare instance of Tories supporting the rights of the worker!’
Mr. Jenks quipped.
‘Mr. Barron suggested a stage-by-stage introduction of total freedom.
Whether the world could continue to support its present ‘uncontrolled economic growth’ in the face of diminishing resources and pollution was a question on which all the candidates latched on to the latter issue.
Mr. Barron reminded the gathering that his party had advocated recycling and emission control long before it was fashionable and Mr. Browne and Mr. Jenks both said that the only way forward was by international agreement.
Mr. Browne referred to the trend in the developed world to make the polluter pay, but Mr. Malone stressed that the west could not deny developing countries who couldn't afford the cost of cleaning up the growth which they had enjoyed.
‘Which is why we will be taking the lead in the world conference in Brazil this summer.’
Foxhunting — another emotive issue — was raised briefly in extra time.
Mr. Barron and Mr. Jenks were both strongly against, with both Conservatives in favour, although Mr. Browne felt that certain cruel practices needed investigation.
The meeting was closed, as it had opened, with a prayer led by Capt. Patrick March of the Salvation Army.
Chainsaw stolen
AN 18in. red chainsaw, valued at £70, was stolen from a garage in Upper Soldridge Road at Medstead some time on Thursday last week.
The burglar also tried unsuccessfully to break into the house and smashed a double glazed window.
Bomb team are called in
AN ARMY bomb disposal team were called to farmland at Medstead last week to investigate a suspect device.
Malcolm Searle, of Lower Soldridge Farm, uncovered what he believed may have been a mortar shell in one of his field.
‘I was chain harrowing the field,’ said Mr. Searle, ‘when I looked behind and saw this object rattling its way across the chains.’
He called in the Army who arrived on Thursday afternoon and dealt with the object — a spent two inch ‘smokey’ designed to screen troops as they made their advance.
It would have been used in training by Canadian soldiers at Medstead during the second world war.
New betting shop in High St.
A FORMER music and video shop in Alton High Street is to become a modern betting office.
Permission was given to Coral Estates Ltd. by planners at East Hampshire District Council last week.
Not only will there be a change of use at 57 High Street, but also a new timber-look shopfront.
A district officer said: ‘The existing unattractive shopfront would be replaced by a traditional timber shopfront.
‘The loss of retail space is regrettable, but the proposal complies with the Local Plan Shopping Policy and it is proposed to use the ‘shop windows’ to sell sporting prints.’
Reprieve for town's pigeons
PLANS to institute a pigeon cull in both Petersfield and Alton town centres have been thrown out this week.
District council officers' request for authority to tackle the perceived pigeon menace met with little favour from environment committee councillors on Wednesday.
The proposed cull followed complaints from Petersfield Town Council and from two businesses in each of the towns concerning the problems associated with roosting feral pigeons — and specifically pigeon droppings.
It is known that feral pigeons may convey diseases which are transmissible to man and so large congregations of birds may cause public harm.
District councillors were told that back in 1981 a resolution was approved to conduct a series of pigeon culls in Alton and Petersfield.
‘This was not without a significant public response from animal welfare groups and pigeon fanciers' organisations in the area.
Fortunately, at that time it was possible to combat complaints with the argument that it was necessary to control noise and nuisance.
Many other authorities do not sanction this work due to the adverse publicity it can create.’
The report went on: ‘Should a pigeon cull be conducted in Alton and Petersfield, there is likely to be a significant public response in opposition to the plan.
In addition, total success cannot be guaranteed and the pigeon population may only be reduced by some 20 per cent .’
But this week councillors took the view that the time and expense of a culling operation was ‘over the top’ given the mere handful of complaints.
Concern was voiced over the council's public image if they approved the cull.
And doubts were expressed as to its value given the conceded fact that only a small dent was likely to be made in the pigeon population.
One of the few voices crying in the wilderness was that of Farringdon member Gordon Wilson.
He said: ‘Feral or wood pigeons as they are more commonly called really are a pest in an urban environment.
‘I trust this council will not be deterred from its duty by single interest minority groups.
Animal welfare is an irrelevancy in this case as we are talking about public health.’
Methods of control under consideration on Wednesday were shooting, the use of narcotics or trapping.
In the first method, sharpshooters would have used air rifles at night while the birds are roosting.
The report admitted: ‘There are problems associated with this since it is difficult to ensure that feral pigeons only are taken since some birds may be ringed and belong to pigeon fanciers.
Trapping problems
‘Also accuracy is of paramount importance to avoid injury.
This cannot be guaranteed and injured birds may escape with consequences for our animal welfare image.
Only a small percentage of birds can be taken by this method in any one time since eventually they are disturbed and roost elsewhere.’
Use can also be made of the narcotic drug alpha chloralose.
This treatment involves regular pre-baiting of pigeons in a carefully selected area for several weeks in order to establish regular feeding patterns.
‘This must take place in the early hours of the morning in order that the narcotic is delivered at a time when there is little public activity.
If the birds are disturbed during the process, there could be large numbers of stupefied birds fluttering amongst the traffic as the morning progresses with public complaints resulting,’ the report stated.
Trapping is a method which meets with limited success and involves feeding within a specialised wire cage for a period of time.
When the birds are familiar with this method of feeding, a trap door is sprung and the occupants of the cage are disposed of humanely.
This is labour intensive and a suitable flat roof site has to be found.
The problem of feral pigeons in Petersfield and Alton is associated mainly with cold winter conditions when birds migrate to towns for warmth and food.
This problem reduces significantly when birds return to the country with the onset of spring and summer.
DID YOU SEE PUB ASSAULT?
POLICE are appealing for witnesses to a fight in Alton on Saturday night.
The victim, 21-year-old local man Paul Sanders, suffered cuts and severe bruising to his head and was taken to Basingstoke District Hospital.
Police say that he was kicked and punched by four people and struck about the head with a wooden object.
The attack happened some time between 10.50 p.m. and 11.15 p.m. inside the entrance of the Crown Hotel in Alton High Street, say police.
They are anxious to hear from anyone who may have witnessed the incident.
Anyone with information is asked to contact Alton police station on 0420 82244.
The Herald Junior Club
Colour in Mr. Men and win tickets for their show
YOUR favourite Mr. Men characters now appear in a new show, Mr. Men in Happyland.
An old magic lamp is hidden somewhere in Happyland.
Will Farmer Fields and his daughter Primrose find the lamp for Mr. Men before the wizard gets his hands on it?
The musical show is on at Guildford Civil Hall on Thursday, April 23rd at 2 p.m. and you could win yourself two free seats by colouring in the Mr. Men picture, filling in the form and sending it to The Junior Editor Club, The Herald, 114–115 West Street, Farnham, GU9 7HL, to arrive by Friday of next week.
The three best in the judges' opinion will receive two free tickets each to see the show.
Did you make a Mother's Day card?
HERE'S a chance to get a bit of extra life out of all those Mother's Day cards.
The Training Trust are inviting mums and children to submit their homemade cards — and a £1 charity donation — to a competition which will eventually yield a national winner.
The winning entry will be produced for sale next year, but in the meantime, all the money raised will go to help Romanian orphans.
The Training Trust are running a five-year staff training programme in Romanian orphanages, and see this competition as giving everyone an opportunity to develop their artistic talents, and to raise funds for needy youngsters.
Send your cards to The Herald at 114/115 West Street, Farnham, Surrey GU9 7HL, by April 14th.
We will select a winner, publish the card in the paper, and send it on to the national finals.
If you want your card returned, please send a SAE.
JOIN THE JUNIOR CLUB
To join the Herald Junior Club, you need to be aged up to 12 years.
Write a birthday greeting on the form below, complete the other details and send it to the Herald Junior Club, 114–115 West Street, Farnham, Surrey GU9 7HL no later than 12 noon on a Monday for publication the following Friday.
Members will be sent a membership certificate and club badge, and the free greeting will appear in the issue of the Herald nearest to the birthday; repeat mentions of the birthday will appear each year until the member is 12.
If members have done something interesting or have a fascinating or unusual hobby and want to tell us about it perhaps letting us borrow a photograph of the member?) they are welcome to write — quoting membership number please.
— Club Editor.
They're doing fine
Dominic sees double
SHEEP farmer Dominic O'Kelly was surprised when one of his ewes gave birth to quads last week.
Two days later another ewe managed exactly the same!
In 20 years of running the flock — now numbering 150 sheep — at Broadview Farm, Blacknest, he had not delivered one set of quads, let alone two in one week.
Yet he's found that several other farmers have been experiencing the fecund year.
It could be due to the mild weather that occurred in the autumn when the lambs were conceived, he said.
The O'Kelly family have built up their flock over the years, largely by breeding from their own stock.
The mother of the white quads is a Texel cross, while the black quartet come from Suffolk and Texel breeding.
Neither of the ewes will be able to rear all four offspring themselves, but will be left with one or two while the others are fostered…
Kiosk plan approved
A KIOSK for a car park attendant is to be erected in Alton's Lady Place car park.
The planning application, submitted by East Hampshire District Council, was agreed by the local planners last week.
Violence charges: five men for trial
FIVE men have been committed for trial to Portsmouth Crown Court on charges relating to an alleged incident involving violence at The Queen, Greatham, on New Year's Eve.
Darren Collins (24) of Windermere Road, Bordon; Mervyn Craig Thomas 25, of Southhurst, Whitehill; Trevor Alan Thomas, 27, of Grasmere Close, Bordon; Richard John Thorn, 25, of Petersfield Road, Whitehill, and Terry John Thurgood, 23, of Kingfisher Close, Bordon, appeared before Petersfield magistrates.
Speed petition in village
Campaign to curb speeding traffic
HOLYBOURNE residents are being urged to support a campaign to slow down the traffic through their village.
A petition calling for action to improve the safety of the London Road was launched this week.
Alexis and Paul Gilmour are behind the campaign and they are after as many signatures as possible.
On Wednesday Mrs. Gilmour arranged for a copy of petition to be left at the Holybourne Post Office and Stores.
Within a few hours more than 40 people had signed it.
‘I'm hoping to be able to get around to every house in the village with the petition,’ said Mrs. Gilmour.
‘Unfortunately time is against us because we only have until next Wednesday.
This is because Mrs. Gilmour will be taking the petition along to the district council offices the following day.
It will be handed to the working party of East Hampshire Road Safety Council who have to investigate, and report back to the matter to their main committee by April 15th.
Herald article
Mr. and Mrs. Gilmour's campaign was prompted by a story on the front page of last week's Alton Herald.
‘When we first moved in over a year ago I wrote to the police in the traffic section at Winchester about the situation in Holybourne,’ said Mrs. Gilmour.
‘They said there was little they could do about it, although they have been excellent and have stepped up their patrols.
But it wasn't until I read the piece in the paper last week that I decided to have another try.’
Local people have expressed fears about the speed motorists travel through the village.
They would like to see traffic calming ramps or even just more signs reminding drivers of the speed limit.
Alexis and Paul Gilmour are keen that everyone in Holybourne who wishes to sign the petition can do so.
Villagers can phone them to make arrangements on 0420 84272.
They are also encouraging residents to write individually to the secretary of the local Road Safety Council, Paul Polden, at East Hampshire District Council, Penns Place, Petersfield GU31 4EX.
Letters must be sent before April 9th.
Alton Easter fun
ALTON Community Centre will be offering a range of holiday activities over Easter.
On both Tuesday mornings there will be activities sessions for three to five-year-olds.
On the second Tuesday there will be a drama workshop when preparations will be under way for a drama production later in the year.
Dawn Groves had hoped to put together a production of Joseph and His Amazing  Technicoloured Dreamcoat but the amateur rights have been withdrawn.
Rather than disappoint the young actors plans are in hand to perform The Wizard of Oz instead.
All children over the age of five are invited to take part.
On the Thursday morning, there will be an arts and crafts session for five to eleven-year-olds, and in the afternoon all ages can enjoy a puppet show, Goldilocks! by Martin the Puppet Man.
The puppets and stories are created by Martin Bridle and his wife, Su Eaton.
His puppets have been shown in venues around Europe and tickets are on sale now at Community Centre reception for all activities.
Service station robbed
THIEVES forced their way into the Parkwood Service Station at Greatham on Tuesday night and got away with cigarettes and cash to the value of £2,000.
Cooking for charity
British Gas home service advisors, Helen Black (left) and Amanda Blake prepared a range of dishes during an Easter demonstration last week which raised £850 for Action Research.
During the evening, the packed Assembly Rooms audience also enjoyed a talk on food and wine by Sainsbury home economist Barbara Logan (right), who added that the Alton store should open in the autumn.
Tasting the food is Alton branch chairman for Action Research, Sally Studley (second left).
FULL MARKS FOR FOUR MARKS
A touch of clairvoyance from Claire Robinson — telling teacher Heather Geere's fortune.
‘You will have no more children,’ mother-of-three Mrs. Geere was pleased to hear.
‘You'll never be rich…though you're going to be happy.’
THE CARING COMMUNITY
FOUR Marks Primary School have raised over £1,200 for charity in this financial year — a fact of which headteacher Barrie Patten speaks with pride.
On Friday they added over £220 to that healthy total, by holding a sale to raise funds to be divided between the Baicoi orphanage in Romania and research into cot death syndrome.
Guest of honour was Pat Moody, a member of a local team of people who took aid to the orphanage and helped to refurbish it in May last year and have been charting progress  there ever since.
The event, in which children sold handicrafts, secondhand toys and other items, as well as organising games and other stalls, was combined with a mufti day with a difference.
While the children each paid 25p to come to school in clothes of their own choice, the staff dressed up St. Trinians style in uniform.
Romania charity organiser Pat Moody buys goodies from the cake stall.
Ian Poulter (left) and Matthew Lucas had made all the cakes themselves — with a bit of help from their mums and Ian's sister, Ann.
Lianne Dwyer and Brooke Harley (left) ran a flower stall together.
Lianne had made flowers from tissue paper, while Brooke brought in daffodils to sell.
SPRING CLEAN STARTS HERE…
A NATIONAL Spring Clean starts today (Friday) at Alton's Mill Lane Industrial Estate.
United Carriers Ltd. are sponsoring the event and are the sole distributors of the spring clean kits.
‘Our Alton depot will get the ball rolling for the National Spring Clean,’ said United Carriers manager Michael Howe.
‘OUr UK distribution network have ensured that everyone has their ‘kit’ on time and are ready to go out into their local parks and streets to clean up.’
From today through to April 12th the Tidy Britain Group will be encouraging everybody to ‘Get a Grip on Litter’ to combat one of the nation's ‘most environmentally damaging problems’.
Drugs find in police search
POLICE discovered used syringes in the bedroom of an Alton man as they carried out a search of his home.
And when the needles, which had been kept in a plastic container, were sent away for analysis traces of amphetamine were detected.
On Monday 24-year-old Carl James, of Orchard Lane, appeared before Alton magistrates and pleaded guilty to the possession of a class A drug.
He admitted that he had injected himself with speed two days before the police acted on the search warrant on January 20th.
James told magistrates that he had been using speed for about five years and injected himself three or four times a month.
The defendant, who paid £10 per deal, said that the amphetamine put him on a high for an hour and that he used to escape pressures and worries.
He told the court that he had not used drugs since his arrest and had voluntarily sought help and advice.
Magistrates fined James £100 and ordered him to pay £20 towards prosecution costs.
Torture!
And all for a good cause
Limbering up for the big event — Lord Mayor Treloar College assistant bursar Derek Graham (left) and teacher John Etherington.
LORD Mayor Treloar College students and staff are training for a Marathon Day on May 4th designed to raise money for the Queen Elizabeth II Silver Jubilee Activities Centre at Bursledon.
And they are looking for local sponsorship.
Activity being very much the name of the game, students will be taking part in all sorts of sponsored events from running, wheeling and walking, to cycling, chess, swimming, badminton, singing and even knitting.
Not to be outdone, the staff are also fielding a strong team.
Teacher John Etherington and assistant bursar Derek Graham are to undertake a strenuous quadrathon involving a 1.25 mile swim, followed by a 56 mile cycle ride, four miles self-propelled in a wheelchair and a run of 13 miles.
They, in particular, will be approaching the local business community for sponsorship.
The aim of the whole May Day event will be to raise at least £1,800 for the Queen Elizabeth Centre which, as part of the Upper Hamble Country Park, provides outdoor activity holidays for children with special needs.
Visitors can take part in canoeing, sailing, climbing and horse riding and the Treloar students would like to provide the centre with three new stables and a store room, to double the size of the existing stable block.
This will enable the centre to keep six horses and provide work for another part-time riding instructor.
Accommodation at the centre is provided in five self-contained Scandinavian-style log cabins, especially constructed for disabled youngsters.
•Anyone able to help with the marathon day sponsorship should contact Ken McGowan at Lord Mayor Treloar College on Alton 83508.
Wheel-clamp woman takes on BR
AND GETS A REFUND
BRITISH Rail have ‘failed to get there’ for at least one irate Alton commuter.
Last week long-term season ticket holder Jan Buttigieg was incensed to discover that she couldn't get home.
On a cold rainy night she returned from London to find a wheel-clamp on her ‘legitimately’ parked car.
Mrs Buttigieg had to pay out almost £60 before she was able to drive to her house at Roe Downs Road in Medstead.
She was so upset by the incident — and the ‘inconvenience and aggravation’ it caused — that she wrote to BR demanding an explanation.
She claimed that their action had been ill-considered and ironic coming so soon after the launch of their customer service charter.
Her letter also asked them to reimburse the clamping fee, postage costs and compensation for her ‘time and distress’.
And this week, after enquiries made by the Herald, BR's clamping company have agreed to send Mrs. Buttigieg a refund.
The confusion arose because of sewage drainage works at the station car park.
BR say that there were notices telling people not to park in certain areas.
However, Mrs. Buttigieg claimed that there had been no prior warnings to indicate that changes would take place over the weekend.
Handwritten Notice
And only after the incident did she find out that a handwritten notice had been displayed in the booking office.
‘As I hold a season ticket I had no occasion to call in at the booking office.
‘I have been a car park season ticket holder for the last five years, during which the cost has risen from about 20 pence to £150 per day.’
In her letter to BR Mrs. Buttigieg asked why the registration number of her car was not checked out against the season ticket holders' records.
She has also questioned the advice given to her to display her season ticket on her car dashboard as it amounts to an ‘invitation to theft’.
The letter continues: ‘As the barrier to the central portion of the car park has now been removed, what guarantee do I have that a parking space will be available?
‘In the past, a season ticket effectively reserved a space in the central portion of the car park, in return for paying the fee in advance.
‘This current system,’ added Mrs. Buttigieg, ‘would appear to work on a first come first served basis, regardless of whether or not one is a regular customer’.
A BR spokesman pointed out that their car clamping company had only been carrying out their duty.
However they accepted that Mrs. Buttigieg is a regular and long-time customer and that she hadn't seen their notice.
Cycle taken bit by bit
A SADDLE was stolen from a Raleigh mountain bike parked in the cycle rack at Alton College last week.
Four days later, after the saddle had been replaced, the front wheel of the same bike was stolen.
Stolen from car park
A VAUXHALL Belmont SRi, valued at £4,000, was stolen from a car park in Alton High Street on Wednesday last week.
The metallic blue car, and £130 worth of tools, was taken some time between 8 a.m. and 3.30 p.m.
The registration number of the vehicle is E139 HEG.
‘Splendid effort’ for charities
YOUNGSTERS at Amery Hill School, Alton, can give themselves a pat on the back.
Last term's fund-raising efforts have now raised £1,048 for the Leukaemia Research Fund — and two sacks of old postage stamps have been sent off to the Blue Peter Appeal in aid of Romanian children.
Head of religious studies and charity co-ordinator Margaret Highton, is delighted with the result.
‘All are to be congratulated on this splendid effort,’ she said.
Money for the leukaemia fund was raised through a number of activities including a non-uniform day, a Christmas concert, a carol service collection, together with individual and parental contributions.
The stamps for the Blue Peter Romanian Appeal were collected in a box placed in the entrance hall of the school by fourth-year student Lucy Robinson.
Lucy was also delighted with the response.
Margaret Highton will be on study leave from school at the end of this term.
She will be visiting Israel on a field trip, as part of a post-graduate course leading to a masters degree.
Welcome from the Mayor
ALTON town mayor Jacqueline Martin, welcomes 30 girls from the Lycée-Collège Notre Dame de la Victoire in Dinan, Brittany, who have been staying with students from Alton Convent for a week.
The youngsters, accompanied by three members of staff, were taking the opportunity to experience an English way of life, visiting Oxford, London and local sights, including Jane Austen's house at Chawton.
A return visit will be made by Convent pupils during the Easter holidays when they will spend their time in the French school and exploring the attractive medieval town of Dinan.
Also pictured are Convent headmaster, Frank Martin (left of the mayor), and Madame Netrope of the Lycée-Collège.
Walk-in thefts alarm
POLICE are warning Alton office workers and shop employees to be vigilant following a spate of ‘walk-in’ thefts.
A wallet containing cash and credit cards, together valued at £87, was stolen on Thursday last week.
A thief just walked into the first floor office at Newman Lane industrial estate and then made off.
On Wednesday a purse was snatched from the counter of a shop in Alton High Street.
It happened sometime between 1 p.m. and 4 p.m. when the owner was otherwise distracted.
The purse and its contents is valued at about £70.
That same day a thief walked into premises at Mill Lane and took a wallet from a jacket.
The wallet, worth about £20, was stolen sometime between 8 a.m. and 4.45 p.m.
Again on Wednesday a purse, valued at £38, was taken from an office at Alton Infants School sometime between 12.45 p.m. and 1.10 p.m.
Also last week a handbag was taken from a classroom at Andrew's Endowed School in Holybourne.
The bag and its contents, together valued at £35, were stolen sometime during a 25 minute period from 2.55 p.m.
‘Get in there and get mucky’
SUE Bellamy, of the Hampshire Wildlife Trust, was the guest speaker at Ropley's annual parish meeting.
She spoke of her role as an officer for the Parish Environment Initiative, set up 18 months ago to help parish councils and interested groups to take care of their ‘local patch’.
Miss Bellamy gave examples of projects supported by the initiative team such as improvements to grassland areas which could be turned into wildlife areas if managed correctly leaving uncut grass around recreation areas will encourage wild flowers, which will attract insects, birds and small mammals.
‘Just minor changes in the way you look after an area can have a great effect.’
The restoration and management of both acid ponds, attractive to dragon and damsel flies, and traditional village ponds was receiving a lot of attention across the district.
Work at Liss pond, for instance, was going on at the moment to cut back overhanging trees which were starving the water of oxygen.
Miss Bellamy said that she encouraged local people ‘to get in there and get mucky!’
Bushy growth
She said that the traditional methods of maintaining hedgerows was another area in which she was involved.
Coppicing and laying rather than flailing provided a better stock-proof boundary which would also benefit wildlife.
In flailing the growth comes from the top and bottom becomes gappy but in coppicing the hedge is cut from the bottom which encourages growth.
She described the ‘living churchyard’ project which aims to introduce ‘sympathetic management’into the county's graveyards.
If the traditional methods of scything and grazing by sheep were re-introduced, management committees would save on cutting costs and encourage the growth of wild flowers.
But she warned, ‘conservation management is not the same as neglect.
You should not just abandon the site to nature, these areas have very specific needs.’
At Ropley, village tree warden, Lyn Fomison is planning an organised walk around the churchyard, where an area is set aside for cowslips.
The walk, one of a series in the area to promote the project, will take place in June.
Another way to enhance your village is with a parish map, suggested Miss Bellamy.
It need not be an accurate representation but more of an expression of local features and history.
Froyle, she said, were going to produce such a map out of clay tiles, using local pottery to make a mural.
Parish nature trails were also mentioned and Miss Bellamy said that it was possible to obtain grants towards producing leaflets.
Twice speed limit racer banned
DRIVING at more than double the speed limit cost a young Newton Valence woman her driving licence.
Sarah Louise Harris, aged 20, was banned from the roads for three weeks when she appeared before Alton magistrates on Friday.
Harris, who lives and works on a farm, pleaded guilty to speeding at 62 mph in a 30 mph zone.
The offence happened at Alton's Whitedown Lane on December 12th last year.
Harris, who was driving a Peugeot 309, was caught by police using a radar gun.
She told magistrates that she had been into town and was late getting the car back home to her parents who needed it for an important appointment.
Harris, who also picked up a speeding conviction last year, was disqualified from driving for 21 days and fined £100.
She also had three penalty points endorsed on her licence and was ordered to pay £15 towards prosecution costs.
Daylight break-in
A DAYTIME burglar struck a home in Four Marks on Tuesday and stole a quantity of jewellery.
The thief forced his way into the rear of the house at The Shrave some time between 8.30 a.m. and 4.15 p.m.
An untidy search was made of the kitchen and bedroom and jewellery taken.
Computer pack taken
A £500 Omega computer pack was stolen from a display at a software company in Alton's Market Street this week.
Driver: ‘Not to blame’
FOLLOWING our report of an accident in which a young girl was injured in a road accident, the driver concerned, Patrick White, who lives in Jenner Way, Alton, has asked us to make clear  that he defends his manner of driving and ‘was not to blame’.
Rare pleasure for camera club judge
THE final slide competition of the current season was held at Alton Camera Club on Friday, judged by Bryan Powell, ARPS of Farnborough.
Beginning with monochrome slides, Mr. Powell expressed his pleasure at being asked to judge this type of work which is now very rare in photographic circles.
He considered that several of the entries were very effective in black and white.
The full ten marks were awarded to Peter Talbot's The First Ironbridge’, a fine view of the bridge with good lighting picking out the structural detail.
Technical quality and the use of the right exposure coupled with careful composition were all considered in the beginners' and intermediate sections of the colour slides.
In some cases Mr. Powell felt that the reversal of the slide would make it more satisfying to ‘read’ from left to right.
Two slides in the beginners' section were awarded full marks.
‘Before Sunrise’ by Alf Churcher and ‘Teasel’by Gerry Walters.
‘Bevna Vista’ by Angela Algar received nine and a half marks.
Eighteen slides were entered in the intermediate section and full marks were awarded to ‘Wreck off the Cornish Coast’ by Elaine Dicker and ‘Skylight’by Ray Algar.
‘Kykko Bell's’ by Mike Powell was awarded nine and a half marks.
Parents have a go!
PARENTS got down to their children's level at an open evening held at Alton County Infants School last week.
They were invited into the classrooms to take part in some of the activities the pupils had been engaged in during the past term.
The whole school have been absorbed by a prospect on islands, with different classes creating different kinds — a tropical island, a desert island and magical, polar, treasure and volcanic varieties.
Parents sampled the linguistic, mathematical, scientific and creative work which the children had done on the theme — and many discovered that activities which often look to be just fun can in fact be quite hard work.
‘I think it has taught the parents a lot about how much science and technology is studied in an infants' school,’ head teacher Judy Nicholls told the Herald.
New playground for school
BENTWORTH Aided School are to get a new play area which will also double up as an occasional overflow car park for the village hall.
The planning application was given the go-ahead by local planners at East Hampshire District Council last week.
Still lots of on offer for summer classes
ALTON Community Centre's summer term of adult education classes starts on Monday, April 27th and new students are welcomed on all of them, subject to space availability.
Handouts are available on request at Community Centre reception for most of these.
Among the host of popular classes that have been running for several years — upholstery, art, body conditioning, keep fit, body talk, jazz dance, electronic organ, and two levels of French — there are also the more recent additions of appreciation of poetry, yoga for beginners and dressmaking.
There are two new classes being run in the summer term: To prepare for those summer holidays, there is an Italian for beginners on Monday mornings and a five week course on Tuesday evenings set aside for couples and individuals who would like to explore ‘communication within the family’ with Jo Jordan, an experienced counselling therapist.
She will be talking about better ways of communicating and improving one's lifestyle through reduced stress.
The first week is a free introductory evening.
Both of these courses will be developed further in the autumn, as will all the above.
Well-known figure Norman Collar dies at 83
THE death occurred on Thursday last week of Four Marks personality Norman Collar, while working for Community Care.
At the age of 83, Mr. Collar had just taken some ladies to the village hall for an over-60s afternoon when he collapsed in the car park.
It was typical of the man who had spent so much time in Four Marks working for the community.
A Londoner, Norman Collar began his working life in local government at County Hall, Westminster.
During the war he joined the Police force and then worked at Telfers Pie Factory before opening his own business — the Wimbledon Health Food Stores, with his wife, Joan.
They were married at Chiseldon, Wiltshire, and recently celebrated their diamond wedding.
They began life together at Cheam and moved to Wimbledon in the 50s with their children, Terry, who now lives in Nevada with her husband and four girls and son, Richard, who is based at Toddington near Luton.
On retiring from the business, Mr. Collar turned to local government at  Soutwark before moving to Four Marks in the early 70s.
The Collars had bought Jayswood Cottage two years earlier and had  spent all their spare week-ends working in the one acre garden.
Jayswood soon became the talk of the neighbourhood — an inspiration to fellow garden club members.
But the size of the garden became too much for them and in 1980 they moved to Timbercroft, in the centre of the village.
Norman Collar was determined they should not slow down and he and Joan took an active part in delivering meals on wheels and ran a Red Cross hospital trolley service.
They were keen members of the Four Marks Community Care group, driving elderly residents to luncheon clubs and to medical appointments.
A keen cricketer, until last year Mr. Collar could be seen regularly umpiring for Medstead.
He was also an active member of the Alton Sports Centre Health and Fun Club.
He was a regular attender of craft exhibitions, helping Joan with her jewelled Bonsai trees.
For several years he sat on Four Marks Parish Council, later reporting on the meetings as village correspondent for the Alton Herald.
Norman Collar was well known in Four Marks, Medstead and Ropley for his coverage of local events and will be remembered as a faithful colleague, a gentleman and a friend who will be sadly missed.
More cash for hard pressed CAB
THE on-going recession means to respite for the hard pressed Citizens Advice Bureau.
Staff at the Bordon and Alton offices are coming under increasing pressure with an ever growing number of enquiries as the hard times continue to bite.
With more and more families plunged into debt, the growing number of redundancies and mortgage foreclosures, the CAB are being stretched to breaking point.
Recognising the problem, district councillors have come up with a much needed cash injection to ease the crisis.
The council's community and leisure services committee have given an extra £3,100 to Bordon CAB and £3,700 to the Alton office in the financial year starting on April 1st.
Those increases will bring the council's total contributions to the two offices up to £20,650 and £21,500 respectively.
Both offices have been hit by a combination of an increasingly complex type of enquiry and by greater demands on volunteers and salaried staff.
And both offices have identified the need to pay volunteers something for their work, or lose them altogether.
Otherwise the key areas of debt counselling and clerical support cannot continue adequately.
District councillors are under no illusion that the extra cash they are providing is enough to solve the problem entirely.
And they are urging the various parish councils in the Alton and Bordon catchment areas to see whether they can give more financial support.
Community and leisure services committee chairman, John Palmer commented: ‘It's a case of great concern that the excellent work the CAB do is putting great strain on staff.
‘I wish the parishes across the district felt more able to put more money in.’
The committee also decided in future to pay the CAB quarterly grants in advance, rather than in arrears which has been causing some cash flow problems.
David switches caring work
DAVID Brown, who used to run the DIAL office in Kingsley Centre, is now the Arthritis Care home visitor for an area which covers East Hampshire, into Hart and Rushmoor, and parts of South West Surrey.
Mr. Brown, who lives in Kingsley, is currently building up a network of people to be visited and anyone needing help, advice, comfort or encouragement can reach him at 16 School Fields.
The visiting service is especially for the housebound, lonely or depressed.
Arthritis Care is a non-medical welfare organisation.
Following his appointment to the voluntary post on February 1st, Mr. Brown, who has had rheumatoid arthritis since 1984, already visits four people regularly.
Former driver
A former bus driver, illness forced him to give up the DIAL office at Kingsley which he ran successfully for two years.
Now the nearest DIAL office is at Portsmouth.
Mr.  Brown is treasurer of the Alton area of the Social Services User Group for Disabled People and on the council of the Hampshire Coalition of Disabled People.
He is involved with the Hampshire Centre for Independent Living and the Options Trust.
He is also on the council on the  fund raising committee of Assistance Dogs for Disabled People, and he is disability advisor to Chain Reactions at the Kingsley Centre.
He is looking forward to the new challenge of visiting arthritis sufferers in their own homes.
His wife, Barbara, is his carer and very much involved in all his work.
She is also well known locally for the soft toys she makes for various charities.
BE A GOOD NEIGHBOUR
DESPITE only five villagers turning up to last week's meeting, Kingsley residents are continuing to look into the possibility of a local neighbourhood help scheme.
They're going to try and interest people from Oakhanger and the Worldhams as well.
Sue Telfer, adviser to the neighbourhood schemes, told those present at the Kingsley Centre on Thursday evening that community care set out to meet the needs of an area which were not already being covered by other organisations.
She cited things like exercising the dog, shopping for the housebound and getting an unmanageable garden under control.
Those helped were not only the elderly and unwell but could include people like young mothers with toddlers.
Centre warden Damian Duggan felt perhaps the greatest need in Kingsley would be transport and Mrs. Telfer pointed out community care provided not just a taxi service but a friend as well.
It was agreed that, besides enabling residents to visit hospitals, neighbourhood scheme would also be invaluable during events like the bad storms of previous winters.
Mr. Duggan said a lot of people needed an informal and friendly support at various times.
This was already happening but he felt neighbourhood help scheme could build on this current goodwill.
Mrs. Telfer, who is joint-funded by Hampshire County Council and the Winchester Diocese, explained that there was usually a team of coordinators running a scheme from the end of a telephone.
It was felt they'd need about 15 people from a basic group.
Anyone interested in being a volunteer should get in touch with Damian on Bordon (0420) 472884.
Rail history with a French flavour
CLIFF Burgess of Portchester is best known to Mid-Hants Railway members through his association with the Working Omnibus Museum Project which is creating a vintage bus collection in the former coal yard of Medstead and Four Marks Station.
Another interest is the light railways of France and for the past six years his holidays have been spent exploring them.
An added incentive to tracking down the railways is that they are invariably in rural France, away from the speeding motorway traffic.
Showing his slides to the Alton regional group of the Mid-Hants Railway Preservation Society at their March meeting, Mr. Burgess took his listeners on a visual trip across France.
He started in the north, moved to Chinon, then the French-Spanish border and finally to the Swiss border, in the winter Olympics country.
Both the latter railways climbed the mountains in spectacular fashion with breathtaking views at 3,000 feet.
Methods of traction varied, including rail cars, diesel, electric and occasionally steam.
Some of the narrow gauge tracks were short in distance, but the longest was 20 miles.
Often they had been laid for commercial purposes, including coal mining, but were becoming disused.
Some, however, were part of the national railway system (SNCF) and besides being useful transport for villagers, were a tourist attraction.
Mr. Burgess, who was attending a conference in the Midlands, and had driven from Nottingham, was thanked by group chairman Gerald Davies.
Drugs man is fined £250
AN unemployed fish cook from Liss Forest who admitted possessing cannabis and heroin five days before Christmas told police it was his own personal stash for the holiday period.
Richard Kedie, of Forest Road, had claimed there were no drugs in his house but police later found two quantities of cannabis amounting to 41 grams.
During the search Kedie asked ‘What's the problem?, everyone does it, you can never stop it’.
Small amounts of heroin, which Kedie said he had been given by a friend, were also found.
The 29-year-old father of two said he was a casual smoker and did not use drugs regularly.
He declined to give the police information about who supplied the drugs concerned.
Richard Baylis, defending, said his client admitted smoking heroin in the past but had told him he would not be going near it again.
Kedie was initially arrested on suspicion of supplying drugs when police discovered £2,000 in cash in his house.
But this charge was later dropped when Kedie's brother confirmed it was a loan to pay for outstanding bills and to help set up a fish and chip shop in Eastbourne.
Last Thursday Petersfield Magistrates court fined Kedie £250 for possession of heroin and imposed a two year conditional discharge for possession of cannabis.
Bad parking led to extra fines
A MOTORIST, who needed a stick to help him walk, left his car parked in a dangerous position at Alton High Street.
The vehicle was parked on a yellow line and so close to the Market Street junction that vehicles emerging from that road had to swing out onto the wrong side of the High Street.
And when a police officer went to examine the Nissan Cherry he discovered that it had two bald tyres.
The driver, 54-year-old Colin Stafford-Hayden of Farquar Road, London, was summonsed at Alton magistrates court last week.
He pleaded guilty to dangerous parking and using the vehicle with defective tyres on December 4th.
Mr. Stafford-Hayden admitted that he had ‘parked selfishly near to the bank to reduce his walking distance’.
Magistrates fined him £50 for each tyre offence and £25 for leaving the car in a dangerous position.
He was given three penalty points and ordered to pay £15 towards prosecution costs.
The Nissan Cherry did in fact belong to Capital Fire Protection at Blacknest Industrial Estate.
A company partner, 33-year-old Anthony Edwards, appeared before the court and pleaded guilty to keeping the vehicle with defective tyres and without an MoT certificate.
He said that the company had admitted liability for the car but pointed out that all their drivers have immediate access to facilities to correct any vehicle defects.
Mr. Edwards, as a company partner, was fined £100 for each of the two tyre offences and £50 for no MoT.
He too had three penalty points put on his licence and was ordered to pay £15 towards the prosecution costs.
Capturing the beauty of Kenya
A VISIT to Kenya was the theme of Mary Munday's illustrated talk to the Froxfield and Privett Over Sixties on Thursday of last week.
She described the extraordinary tameness of the animals in the wild game parks and conveyed to her audience the beauty of the scenery.
A fund-raising cake stall for the Over 60s was announced, to be held at the Petersfield Pop-In Club Coffee Room on Saturday, April 11th, between 9.30 a.m. and 11.30 a.m.
Gifts of cakes and produce for sale, or raffle prizes, will be gratefully received on the day at the Pop-In Club.
Shock reaction!
SOUTHERN Electricity usually strongly advise young people to avoid electric shocks.
Recently, however, they have been down to Lord Mayor Treloar College where they are helping to buy TNS's, a battery powered device which produces small low powered electric shock — something like pins and needles — designed to ease muscle pain for people with disabilities such as spina bifida and muscular dystrophy.
Replacing the need for pain killers, the TNS allows the individual to remain in control.
Divisional Manager, Brian Walker (pictured left) said: ‘Southern Electric are delighted to be able to help young people, who are striving to overcome disabilities and to gain their independence.
With him are physiotherapist Julie Leslie, Stephanie O'Connell with her TNS machine on the desk top and Debbie Thompson.
Leisure Herald
The Delta Jazz Band from Buenos Aires are just one of a fine line-up of musicians for the Farnham Maltings Jazz Festival on May 10th.
The twelve hour bash also features Otis B. Driftwood, Marilyn Middleton Pollock from Chicago and the Real Ale and Thunder Band.
Success for Tongham artist
TONGHAM artist Clare Hackney is among the 20 finalists in a national art competition for young watercolour painters sponsored by Winsor & Newton.
Clare, who is 30 and an art tutor, attended the presentation ceremony at The Mall Galleries, London last week.
‘Art has always played a major part in my life — both my parents are painters.
I've been working in watercolours for the last seven years, but this particular picture is quite experimental for me.
‘Watercolour offers so many exciting opportunities — I want to develop my ideas and stretch the limits of the medium.
Not having entered art competitions before, I'm delighted to have reached the finals.
It's whetted my appetite to enter other awards, now,’ she said.
The Winsor & Newton Young Artists' Award has prizes to the value of £2,500, and offers the 20 finalists the opportunity to have their work exhibited in The Mall Galleries, during the Royal Institute of Painters in Watercolours Annual Exhibition which runs until April 20th.
Young trooper Carl takes the limelight
CARL Ferguson, the confident young 13-year-old who plays Charlie Chaplin as a child in the Horseshoe Theatre Company's world première of Little Tramp at Basingstoke, owes much of his success to a hole in the ground!
Carl and his mother went to see a performance of Les Miserables in London, and he told her afterwards that he wanted to play the part of Gavroche, the young Parisian urchin.
An open audition was advertised a few weeks later and Carl beat over 900 other young hopefuls singing Hole in the Ground, a song popularised by Bernard Cribbins.
His unusual choice and his talent brought a second audition, and then the coveted part in the West End.
This success followed some ten years after his first stage appearance at the age of 19 months when he was pushed on stage by an enthusiastic aunt to dance.
This was an even earlier start than Charlie Chaplin, who was thrust on stage to sing in place of his mother at the age of five.
Carl's talents aren't restricted to the stage.
He is opening bat in his school's cricket team and is Bedfordshire Schools' table tennis champion.
Carl recently played another Charlie — Charlie Bates in the National Youth Theatre's Oliver and is in the BBC play Kevin's Cousin.
He likes Basingstoke and as the youngest member of the cast of 16, he is enjoying himself immensely as Young Charlie in Little Tramp — he reckons it is the best show he's been in.
Little Tramp runs until April 25th at the Haymarket Theatre, Basingstoke.
DJH 
Why the perfect crime is a dead certainty
THEY'VE been making room for murder at the Yvonne Arnaud Theatre, Guildford this week, and proved that given the right stage, crime certainly does pay.
Edward Taylor's urgent new opus has all the hallmarks of a hit, especially as it eschews the long, lingering shadows of some of the genre's earlier efforts.
Murder by Misadventure is sprinkled with the classic thriller ingredients — mystery, mistrust and a pinch of intrigue — but the real keys to its appeal are the innovative means of detection and the offenders' attempts at anonymity.
It avoids the pitfall of trying to be too clever, and thanks to its ice-sharp ingenuity offers entertainment of the highest quality.
A play with plenty of a body and a cast who are too cool to corpse, Murder By Misadventure fizzes with pace and precision.
And in cold-blooded crimewriters Gerald Harper (Harold Kent) and William Gaunt (Paul Riggs), it has two actors with the depth to extract doubt from the gravest situation.
Bizarre and brave
It's at once surreal and introspective, bizarre and brave, but never loses the sense of suspicion which holds it together so chillingly.
The cast's work is deceptively effortless, slowly accentuating the suspension and narrowing the focus of culpability.
Plotting the perfect crime has kept the  nefarious mind active since Herod had the hots for infanticide, but few malcontents have successfully mastered the art.
It's much easier to write about it; to unravel how it might be done, rather than how it will be done.
Then, of course, the trick is to get away with it…
OK, so it eventually becomes an obsession, and someone has to kill to get the key, but it keeps the audience alert, particularly when there's a late night knock at the door.
Cold terror?
There ought to be a law against it.
Making fools of the fools who make fools of the police is a funny business, but Murder By Misadventure is much more than a hackneyed trawl through the dogma of yesterday's psycho-dramas.
It has a brittle originality, a capacity to surprise, and that godsend for all front of house staff — the magnetism to prevent punters protracting the interval.
The denouement just won't be delayed.
Distinctive style
Edward Taylor has the subtlety to realise that comparisons with Christie and Conan Doyle are inevitable, so he's steered a course that dips into the best of both camps, while creating a distinctive style of his own.
Miss Marple and dear old Sherlock have given way to something more insistently cerebral — it's a world where letting the brain do all the legwork makes far more sense.
Directed by Val May, this archly absorbing escapade also features Deborah Watling (Emma Kent), and Rowland Davies as the police inspector with an eye for apprehension.
Be under no illusion, Murder By Misadventure deserves to make a killing.
The production continues at the Arnaud until tomorrow (Saturday), but returns for a further week from April 20th.
Ken Gore 
Gerald Harper and William Gaunt in Murder by Misadventure
‘Nick Nick’ comedian Jim Davidson will be on stage at Portsmouth Guildhall on Saturday, April 18th as part of a nationwide tour.
Live theatre for the deaf
BRITAIN'S foremost theatre of the deaf, Show of Hands, perform at Farnham Maltings on Friday, April 24th.
‘Wilde Tales’ is a powerful spoken and signed adaptation of three Oscar Wilde fairy tales.
Waverley's arts and museums officer, Carol Sacha, said: ‘People should not lose out because they are deaf or blind.
Tactile exhibitions help blind people enjoy the magic of sculpture, and theatres like Show of Hands encourage those who are deaf to enjoy live theatre like everyone else.
‘We are anxious that everyone who wants to come has the chance.
If anyone has a problem with transport, then the Farnham Voluntary Services Council will be glad to help.
They will be running a minibus service on that evening.
People should contact them direct on 0252 725961.’
Artistic director Michael Dray said: ‘This is not theatre for the deaf but theatre of the deaf.
Both deaf and hearing actors play to a deaf and hearing audience.
The play integrates the language and culture of the spoken word and signing to create an magical dual language environment.’
Show of Hands Theatre was founded in 1989 by Michael Dray.
His previous productions include Hiawatha at the Young Vic, The Ancient Mariner, Twelfth Night and The Arabian Nights.
He spent two years with the Link-Up community theatre group and has directed for the Compass Theatre.
On a fellowship from the Winston Churchill Memorial Trust, he trained in the USA with David Hays, founder of the American National Theatre of the Deaf.
Julia Finlay and Rupert Farnfield in Wilde tales, from the Show of Hands Theatre Company.
Animated playing from RAE Symphony
THE RAE Symphony Orchestra's all Russian programme drew a somewhat disappointing audience in the RAE Assembly Hall.
They began with Rimsky-Korsakov's Russian Easter Festival Overture, an atmospheric work where disjointed themes and ideas work to create the mysteries of the Easter vigil leading to the full splendour of the risen Christ on Easter Day.
Apart from some initial instability of woodwind tuning, the orchestra, under its conductor John Forster, worked hard to achieve the necessary space in the opening and at the same time that important sense of continuity.
They were not helped, however, by the unflattering acoustics of the hall, nor by the late arrivals.
However, the orchestra gave a vigorous account of the work with a truly thrilling end.
Young pianist Andrew Massey was the soloist in Shostakovich's 2nd Piano Concerto.
This incisive and glittering playing of the boisterous outer movements was fully matched by the orchestra, showing no signs of uneasiness with the demanding and energetic rhythms.
If the first movement, with its ‘what shall we do with the drunken sailor’ main theme borders on the frivolous, the 2nd movement provided moving and haunting music.
The final movement was again given with great drive and brilliance.
The chief distinction of the Symphonic Dances by Rachmaninov lies in the orchestration, which with the addition of the piano, saxophone and a large percussion department allows for superb orchestral effects.
In much of the work  Rachmaninov used a ‘concerto for orchestra’ style scoring and this allowed for some fine solo playing.
I was especially impressed by the bright, forthright sound of the flautist.
Apart from occasional problems of ensemble caused by the complex rhythms of the outer movements, the orchestra gave an animated and committed reading of the work; the excitement generated in the coda had the audience on the edge of their seats.
The final concert of the season, celebrating the 70th anniversary, has Leland Chen joining the orchestra for Elgar's Violin Concerto, and Schumann's Rhenish Symphony will also be performed at the RAE Assembly Hall, on May 16th.
A.N.
Off the Record
ALTON is fast becoming a hive of musical activity and Overspill are the latest band to emerge from the town.
Influenced by such acts as My Bloody Valentine and Ride, the group have lined up some impressive gigs for the spring, including Hammersmith Palais and the University of Surrey.
But getting dates locally is a problem: ‘It's a struggle to find any venues in the area to pay at,’ says group spokesman Magnus Wilson-Webb.
The band have just released a new EP, Firefly, and it's available at Ben's Collectors Records in Farnham and Collectors Record Centre in Guildford.
Do you have live music at your pub or club?
If so get in touch with Steve Hack on Farnham 725224 every Monday and we'll give you some free publicity.
BLUE Velvet have been forced to cancel some of their gigs because of a lack of new material.
Among the local gigs to be cut are ones in Farnborough and Aldershot.
Watch the Gig Guide for details of future dates.
The Boogiemen are the latest band to record a demo tape of cover versions, bringing together several soul and blues classics and recording them in a mellow style.
Right Next Door, Not The Hurting Kind and Looking Out The Window all show the band at their best but when they move up-tempo, the problems start.
She Caught The Katy meanders along while Messin' With The Kid and Texas Flood are too bluesy and should have been left off the tape.
IT'S a good week for our Local Artists' Chart with Petersfield's Pridenjoy re-entering at number one with the year's biggest selling chart topper.
Overspill are also doing well — their EP enters at number two, having sold over 100 copies.
Sinfonietta return to Princes Hall
THE Bournemouth Sinfonietta make a return visit to Aldershot's Princes Hall on Thursday with a programme of works by Mozart, Beethoven and Schubert.
Clarinet soloist will be Michael Collins, a winner of the BBC TV Young Musician of the Year award.
He has since performed throughout the world.
A multi-textural tale of espionage
OBJECTIVE reality is not for double agents —‘we are more light beams of light’— dispersed like atomic particles by the act of observation.
The parallel of espionage with particle physics is just one of several fascinating themes, which runs through the highly entertaining spy thriller, Hapgood, which runs at the Theatre Royal.
Winchester until tomorrow (Saturday).
‘A double agent can be tripled’— or, presumably by the same token, quadrupled or  quintupled — since he doesn't necessarily know where one stage ends and the next begins, particularly in the case of a Russian who has left the pre-Glasnost USSR not for reasons of ideology, but for the chance to work out his physical theories on an up-to-date computer.
And there is the question of the relevance of the trading of information in the first place.
When you're dealing with the smallest cogs in a ‘million pound train-set’ which in any case will not be operational for decades, how can you think to exchange these with a human life?
Lightning pace
Century Theatre's production plays out the twists and turns of these conundrums at lightning pace and essential split-second timing, carried on wave after wave of Stoppard's ever-inventive language.
From the opening session of elaborate boxing and coxing by agents and briefcases in, out and around swimming pool changing cubicles with almost balletic precision, the pace hardly drops.
A strong cast is led by Hilary Drake, in the marathon title role as the spymaster with the demanding double role of combining Whitehall duties with those of the over-competitive mother on the rugby touchline.
Given the character's added rebellious nature — playing chess on the Ottawa security link and receiving calls from her small boy on the Downing Street red line (‘I can't give him my office number, that's a state secret’)— she fully exploits the rich comic potential of the role while not missing the pathos of the woman striving to hold her lover, albeit more idealistically than emotionally.
Chris Bramwell presents a sympathetic Russian, exhorting his enthusiasm for particle physics as an artform with an appealing simplicity of one who would write a spy story without surprises.
Between these two mercurial characters, Robert Tunstall's Blair provides the perfect foil as the Oxbridge graduate firmly rooted in objective reality.
A fourth major strand in the intrigue is provided by Cliff Burnett's hard-nosed Ridley, while Bob Wisdom revels in the part of Wates, the inevitable American agent, overloaded with gadgetry and confusion at British social customs.
So topical
A dark, claustrophobic set exploits beams of light and, in particular, brooding shadows, to excellent effect.
The play, which was first presented in the West End in 1988, may have been overtaken by events but in no way seems dated by this factor.
Rather, as the programme reminds you, it has assumed a fresh topicality by the appointment of Stella Rimington as the first female head of MI5.
It is unlikely that Mrs. Rimington will find herself, as Hapgood confesses, ‘running the only network in the western world subject to seasonal fluctuations’— i.e., the school holidays.
She might, however, reach the conclusion which Hapgood finds it hard to take on board— that espionage is a game best understood and appreciated by small boys.
Jacky Billington 
Hilary Drake as Hapgood and Cliff Burnett as Ridley, in the Century Touring Theatre's production of Hapgood, directed by Graham Callan.
Anglo-French concert
THE Southern Orchestral Concert Society open their new season of concerts by welcoming L'Ensemble Instrumental de Basse-Normandie to the Petersfield Festival Hall.
Jointly sponsored by Hampshire County Council, the concert is on Saturday, April 25th.
The ensemble who are based in Caen, are the regional chamber orchestra of Lower Normandy.
Under their musical director Dominique Debart they will present a programme of French music which includes  Honegger's 2nd Symphony, written in Paris in 1941, and Milhaud's ‘Le Boeuf sur le Toit’.
Tickets for this concert are on sale from Monday, from Picketts & Pursers,(china and glass dept.), 30 High Street, Petersfield.
Tel. 64244.
Maltings summertime entertainment
THE concert of ‘minimal’ music by the Balanescu Quartet, due to open the Farnham Maltings summer season tonight (Friday) has been postponed.
But the visit from the outstanding puppeteer, Christopher Leith, on May 8th promises live music and three foot high sculpted marionettes.
The company will perform ‘The Way to St. Bernard’.
There is a Waverley Abbey connection here; the piece was created in response to a commission from the Abbey of  Cîteaux in France, the very first of the Cistercian monasteries, in order to celebrate the 900th anniversary of the birth of this remarkable man.
A dance event completes the spring programme with the return of Union Dance on Friday, May 22nd.
The company's new show emphasises their versatility and diversity of styles in dance and music, with five different pieces supported by a range of jazz scores.
The rocking rodents return to the Farnham Maltings.
They are (from the left) the Rev. Otis Elevator, Miss Zsa Zsa Poltergeist and Snails Pace Slim — better known as The Hamsters.
Rodent rockers hit the big time
‘IF people like to rock and roll and they want an enjoyable energetic night out — we're definitely a good bet.’
Sound advice from Snails Pace Slim, frontman of the popular blues-rock band The Hamsters — who play the Farnham Maltings tomorrow (Saturday).
Described as ‘blue wave’, The Hamsters have carved a niche in the music business not only for making the most appearances in gig guides everywhere, but also for the quality of their music.
The trio, who first played the Maltings three years ago, came together in Southend in April 1989.
With their line-up completed by the Rev. Otis Elevator on drums and Miss Zsa Zsa Poltergeist on bass — it was obvious that fun was to become a key word in their philosophy.
From one or two gigs a week The Hamsters snowballed and now they play over 270 gigs a year.
They are due to play their 1,000th performance in mid-April.
All professional musicians, the band have received rave reviews in the music press — not least for their cover versions of Jimi Hendrix numbers which have earned Slim comparisons with the master guitar guru.
‘We had been playing a lot of country and blues songs before we started to play a couple of Hendrix numbers in the set and it just caught on so we added more,’ said Slim.
Currently the band have a repertoire of about 20 Hendrix tunes, with Slim occasionally going the whole hog playing guitar behind his head and often performing a full Woodstock style Star Spangled Banner, much to the delight of the crowd.
Audiences are as diverse as the music itself, with all ages represented.
‘We get dads coming along who might have been into Cream and they bring their son who's wearing a Megadeth T-shirt — the common link is Hendrix.’
But the popularity of The Hamsters with the younger generation is undeniable, Slim said: ‘I'm finding that teenagers are creating a resurgence of interest in music played by human beings rather than the dance music made by guys playing keyboards with one finger.
‘Technology can help people who are non-musicians to express themselves, but it annoys me when these people say it's more valid than the musicians who can actually play their instruments.’
The outstanding guitar technique belies the fact that Slim didn't start playing until the age of 20.
But although he's played with Albert Collins, Eric Clapton, Alexis Korner and Robert Cray — he says there's still a lot to learn.
The band have little spare time on their hands, they've just completed a 50 date tour and have recorded a session for the Bob Harris Radio One show which goes out from Monday April 13th–16th, one song each night.
They are also finalising plans for a European tour later this year — which is going to mean fewer dates back home — including Farnham.
‘The Maltings is certainly one of our favourite venues — it's a good crowd.
We like our audience to be involved — to sing some of the songs and play air guitar.
‘Above all, we're a punters' band — we want people to come and enjoy themselves — it's all about having fun,’ said Slim.
For tickets for their gig tomorrow (Saturday), phone the Hamster hotline on Frensham 025 125 3430.
Andrew Hartley 
Film and video
PAUL MERRILL REPORTS
VIDEO: DROP DEAD FRED (15)
IF you're old enough to read this then you're probably too old to appreciate Drop Dead Fred.
Rik Mayall, confirming that he is only capable of playing one character, is Phoebe Cates' imaginary childhood friend who comes back to pester her when insecurity afflicts her in adulthood.
She has to put her life back in order to rid her of Fred whose antics are only adding to her problems.
This was Mayall's first Hollywood film and he shouldn't hold his breath waiting for a second chance.
It has its moments but the joke wears thin after about ten minutes and the final hour is boring and pathetic.
Also out and worth watching are: The Rocketeer, Meeting Venus, A Rage in Harlem, City Slickers, and Alice.
FILM: BUGSY (18)
BARRY Levinson's stylised version of the life of Benny Siegel recreates the glamour of 1940s Hollywood and is an old fashioned big bucks production.
Indeed, with the exception of the language, it has the feel of a 1940s gangster movie with  plenty of caricatured mobsters, seedy nightclubs and Mafia style killings among the glitz and panache.
Warren Beatty, as stilted as ever, manages to carry the film from start to finish without ever threatening to manipulate his chiselled features into more than one expression.
How he managed an Oscar nomination is beyond me.
It was rightly  trounced by The Silence of the Lambs at this week's awards and never really rises much above the ordinary throughout.
The dialogue is flat and the characters, with the exception of Annette Bening, are two dimensional and uninteresting.
The story of how Siegel founded Las Vegas is compelling but its treatment is half-hearted and at times dull.
Not by any means a bad film, but overrated.
Peeps into the Past
Proudly into self help, the men of West Surrey General Benefit Society pose in front of their picturesque banner.
Mutual benefit societies were in many ways the forerunners of building societies.
Does anyone know what happened to this one?
Thanks to David Barker of Weybridge for the loan of the picture.
Keeping up morale in the Falklands
AS Britain prepared to enter the Falklands war against Argentina, ten years ago this week, a Farnham family received a message from islander Jack Abbott that he was safe and well.
Mr. Abbott, aged 78, had lived in the Farnham area for 25 years before leaving to live in the Falklands in 1974.
His wife had been an islander by birth and after she died he decided to live there where they had spent many happy holidays.
His son, Michael, who lived in Hindhead, cabled him after news of the Argentine invasion came through.
‘My father was due to leave the islands next week for his two-yearly visit but I don't think he'll come now.
I'm sure he wouldn't want to seem to be walking out on his friends in a nasty situation.’
Mr. Abbott was no longer able to continue his custom of running a Union Jack up at his timber home which overlooked Port Stanley.
Previously he had been elected chairman of the Falkland Islands Committee because his determination to keep the Falklands British was such a boost to the morale of the islanders.
During his years as a farmer in Frensham, Mr. Abbott had been vice-chairman of the parish council and was closely involved in the sports clubs.
Farnham's East Street School football team of 1947–48.
The photograph was lent by Mrs. Murray of Middlefield, Farnham whose brother, Brian Lawrence, is in the back row, second on the right.
He now lives in Spain.
Also in the back row, from the left: A. Fuller, B. Sticklen, S. Fryer, J. Wake, unknown, and J. Mills; front row, D. Harris, R. McQuilken, H. Brinley, B. Draper and S. Wills.
60 YEARS AGO
LATEST CAR…
Swain and Jones of Farnham advertised the latest Austin 7 Tourer for the price of £118.
SHOWING TONIGHT…
Entertainment offered at local cinemas included Janet Gaynor and Warner Baxter in ‘Daddy Long-Legs’ at the Palace, Farnham, and Ralph Lynn and Winifred Shotter in ‘The Chance of a Night-time’at the Regal in Haslemere.
40 YEARS AGO
SCHOOL DANCE…
Parents of Bordon County School pupils were invited to join their children and school staff at a dance at the Brownlow Hall, Bordon.
Two hundred turned up.
The children were encouraged to take ballroom and folk dancing as part of their physical training curriculum.
TOP DOG…
The award for the best dog in the Alton and District Canine Society's show at the Drill Hall went to an Old English sheepdog, Bleakdown Major, shown by Mr. T. Cass of Shalden.
VILLAGE HALL PLANS…
Plans to improve Elstead Village Hall and turn it into a community centre were outlined to a gathering of about 50 people at the annual general meeting in the hall.
SHOP FIRE…
Customers at the Broadway Restaurant in Haslemere High Street raised the alarm when they noticed smoke pouring from the back of the neighbouring grocery store.
The fire, which caused £100 worth of damage, had started at the rear of Burgess's Stores.
30 YEARS AGO
STOPPED IN THEIR TRACKS…
A determined protest squad went into action in Thursley this week, 30 years ago, to stop a car rally which would have meant no sleep for them until the early hours of the morning.
Wrapped up in warm clothes and armed with torches, residents from Stock Farm Lane hurriedly left their homes after receiving ‘operation rally protest’ calls from neighbours.
Soon after 9 p.m. rally drivers came upon an unexpected road hazard as they steered into the narrow twisting lane — a barricade of wooden benches and almost a dozen seated householders!
DEATH OF A PATRIARCH…
The death of James Munday — a well-loved East Worldham resident — was reported in the Herald.
Mr. Munday was notable for his large family of 130 descendants, made up of two sons, nine daughters, 38 grandchildren, 76 great-grandchildren and five great-great-grandchildren.
NEW BREWERY…
As work continued on building the new Harp Lager Brewery in Alton, the managing director of the company told why the site had been chosen.
Mr. R. A. McNeile said that the availability of water in the town to supply 10,000 people had been one of the reasons for attracting the company.
The estimated £2.5 million development covered an area of over seven acres.
20 YEARS AGO
GOLDEN TOUCH…
A Tutankhamen window display in the window of Grayshott Bookshop caused a stir in the village.
The exhibit showed a fabulous gold coloured bust of the king which was to coincide with the best-selling book about his life.
Working men take a break
Refreshment time for members of Beacon Hill Working Men's Club and two little boys.
Mrs. E. Moore of Lion Lane, Haslemere was prompted to send in this photo when she saw the picture of the club's novelty dress cricket team (Peeps March 13th) which was possibly taken around the same time.
The man in the apron is identified as Bill Gibson, club steward.
Does anyone recognise any of the others?
Closer parish ties but funds stretched
PARISHIONERS and clergy looked back at the past year on Sunday when Headley's annual vestry and parish meetings were held at the Church Centre.
After 18 months in office, the rector, the Rev. Dick Woodger, expressed his thanks for the help he and his wife had received during the move into the new rectory and at the recent birth of their latest daughter.
He was delighted that the clergy team, strengthened by the arrival of Bruce Nicole, were all getting on so well together.
Before the meeting they celebrated the 70th birthday of churchwarden Rosemary Paxton and to mark the occasion and her many years of service to the church presented her with a basket of flowers.
Although retiring from office this year, warden Frank Wood will be carrying on responsibility for the general overseeing of the buildings and the Church Centre.
Mr. Wood's place as churchwarden is to be taken by Kathleen Presnail.
Closer ties
Organisations within the parish have continued to flourish and Caroline Arnott's new children's page had provided a fillip for the parish magazine.
Note was made of the new house group initiated by Bruce Nicole which aim to foster Christian friendship, deepen understanding of the faith and provide the basis for evangelism.
The choir reported a busy year and thanks to Jonathan Gainey-Brown now had a regular leader for weekly practices.
The Wives' Group and the Mothers' Union had enjoyed varied programmes and both welcome new members at their monthly meetings.
While few in number, children attending the Sunday Adventurers had enjoyed various activities, joining their parents for parts of the parish communion service.
Stewards, chalice bearers and coffee helpers all played important roles and more recruits would be welcomed.
In a year which saw a deficit of £4,433 in the church's general fund, the contribution of the Hassle group was recognised.
This year's combined social and fund-raising activities provided over £500 towards church expenses.
From St. Mark's Bordon, the Rev. Steve Goodwin reported new signs of ecumenical goodwill and co-operation.
He was pleased with the support received for the practice of joint confirmation and particularly, welcomed the first ever united service for Christian Unity week.
At St. Francis, Headley Down, Bruce Nicole noted the start of the weekly newsletter and announced the re-introduction of praise and prayer services each month.
In response to petty vandalism, it is planned to erect ‘modest railings’ around the church.
Expensive repairs
Frank Wood reported on the general running costs of buildings and land.
The PCC were currently getting estimates for repairs to the stonework of the tower and work on the plinth and porch.
Prices for re-tiling the roof would also be sought in due course.
During the year the heating system had been improved, the church clock repaired and a floodlight installed to light the path to the gate.
A report is awaited on the entire electrical circuit and plans to improve sound amplification are in hand.
At the Church Centre external painting was completed and a major rainwater leak cured.
When the county council were given permission to station the mobile library on the car park, they met the cost of re-surfacing.
Some users continue to violate the conditions of hiring and discussions will take place on the desirability of restricting Saturday night hirings to known, ‘reliable’ customers only.
With planning consent now received for an improved access for the physically handicapped and an extension to provide a parish office and toilet for the disabled, tenders will shortly be invited for the building works.
The churchyard continues to be ‘a constant drain on church finances’.
Repairs to gravestones have been carried out following last year's vandalism and other petty acts.
Fouling of the churchyard by dogs has got worse and the PCC are considering erecting notices asking owners to control their pets.
While the increase in Headley Parish Council's contribution towards the upkeep of the churchyard is welcomed, it was pointed out that the church still has to find £2,412 from general funds to cover the deficit.
Ten percent of last year's income had again been designated for outward giving, the sum of £1,754 going to such national charities as the Emily Fund for abused children and the Church Housing Trust, and £844 for Kurdish and Romanian victims and other overseas causes.
A drive is now to raise the sums given by regular churchgoers and plans are being directed towards the launch of a £100,000 restoration fund appeal.
Carrying on the good work
HEATHERLANDS' new administrator at the Community House, Chris Keech, is settling into the job after spending a week alongside his predecessor, Mary Riley.
Married with two small children, 38-year-old Mr. Keech spent three years as an education welfare officer in the late 1970s, before turning to teaching including a spell as deputy headteacher.
He said that he will be continuing with Mary's work of dealing with residents' worries and complaints —‘pointing them in the direction of the right person to help them’— and assisting them with official forms, etc.
He is keen to form links in the community with people from as many varied backgrounds as possible.
He feels that his own experience in education will be particularly valuable.
‘It gave me something that I am sure I can put back into the local community,’ he said.
Mr. Keech aims to be in the community house each weekday morning but, during the rest of his 20 hours of employment each week, he will be out and about on the estate.
He particularly looks forward to the new community centre being built and, with a personal interest in sport, is keen that while still remaining a play area, the football field is developed and used for more formal games.
‘I would like to think that eventually there will be a game there each Sunday morning,’ he told the Herald this week.
Chris Keech
Consent for new house
PERMISSION has been given for the erection of a replacement dwelling at 65 Ashurst Cottage, Fairview Road, Headley Down.
District planners agreed the application at their meeting last week.
Technology whizz kids
Hampshire Technology winners Mark Brewster, Alan Coombes and James Blake from Grayshott School with their winning Postman Pat van and trailer.
They won first prize at the Hampshire Technology Fair in the ten to eleven year group.
With a motor and tyres made from plumber's tubing, their entry had to be able to travel three metres and to carry a weight — and they proved to the judges that it could and it completed the distance in a time of 8.5 secs.
The class teacher is Margaret Betsworth.
…and in the youngest group, these three 5-year-olds in Wendy Smith's class at Grayshott — Rory Puddicombe, Victoria Redmond and Siobhan O'Neill — won a Hampshire Technology Fair third prize with a splendid Postman Pat van which had doors and mirrors, opening doors and even an exhaust pipe.
Surrounded by flowers, Claire Turner, Malcolm Hutchings, Ruth Harris and Tracy Terry — winners of the Mother's day card competition at Grayshott School.
They visited Flower Vogue where Janice Bayer, who chose the winning cards with the help of her assistant Bo Pullen, is ready to prepare their prizes, a bouquet each for Mothering Sunday.
The first honorary Companion
MARY McKenzie, first honorary member of Grayshott Good Companions, is seen here with some of her oldest friends at the club — Edith Taylor, Dorothy Osland, Jo Johnson, Dot Theobald and Rose Hicks.
A framed certificate was presented to her at the Good Companions' meeting last week by chairman Janet Gill.
Mrs. McKenzie, whose mother was also a member of Grayshott Good Companions, will be very sorry to leave the Thursday afternoon friends she has known for so long — but she will not be sitting at home alone as she is going to Grayshott's weekly day centre.
At last week's meeting members took a trip down memory lane with Ron Beach, who had many fascinating stories to tell about the village — and he also prompted a few reminiscences from others who had tales to tell.
Novel Cinders is a hit
GRAYSHOTT parents and teachers were a hit at the village hall when they staged Cinderella, a pantomime with a difference!
With Buttons and the Mice cheering Cinders with Rock Around the Clock, the Ugly Sisters appearing to the strains of Walk Like a Man, the Prince as a look-alike of pop star Prince, a decorated Reebok glass slipper and a Thunderbird 4 coach, the script-writing team Foxanpelico Ltd., had a few novel ideas to entertain young and old.
With lots of help from around the village and many professional backstage touches as well as performances, the three performances were a sell-out success.
School staff made an additional contribution with a timely sketch of various PTA events.
Gardens galore
FOR the last lecture of the season Headley Horticultural Society members enjoyed pictures of Surrey and Hampshire gardens open under the National Gardens Scheme.
The tour was led by Daphne Foulsham, the assistant county organiser.
Over 60 members heard the history of the scheme which now includes 400 gardens.
It was originally set up to help Queen Alexandra's district nurses but now also supports the Macmillan Nurses, cancer charities and the Gardeners' Benevolent Society.
Mrs. Foulsham's slides included Vann at Chiddingfold, the planned venue for a summer visit, together with attractive views of her own garden at Albury, Brook Lodge Farm Cottage near Godalming, and High Meadows, Churt.
Especially interesting was the garden of Upton Grey where the new owners are bringing Gertrude Jekyll's original design back to its former glory.
The society will be staging their spring show at the village hall on April 11th, with a plant show on May 9th.
Extension refused
A PROPOSAL for a first floor extension at 2 Crossways Road in Grayshott has been refused by district planners.
House appeal again refused
A SECOND appeal against East Hampshire District Council's refusal to allow permission for a house on land at Old School House, Crabtree Lane, Headley has been turned down by a government inspector.
Although the applicants had previously held a valid planning consent on the site, they lost an earlier appeal to have it renewed.
In the present case, Mr. and Mrs. M. Deighan maintained that the district council should have considered the application as a submission of details reserved under the original outline planning consent.
In his judgement, the inspector pointed out that the development would extend into the wooded part of the site requiring the removal of some trees.
The house itself would be visible from the High Street across the open grassland.
Its size, together with the loss of trees, led him to consider the scale, bulk and siting would be harmful to the character and appearance of the area.
He also felt it to be out of keeping with the scale of neighbouring dwellings, particularly the Old School House.
Provisions stolen
WINE, whisky, meat and fish, valued at £250, were stolen from a bungalow in Headley Down's Seymour Road between March 13th and Friday while the owners were away.
Trim thefts
A VISITOR to the area was having a drink in Headley's Holly Bush public house on Friday evening when someone stole all the plastic wheel trims from his Vauxhall Cavalier parked in the pub car park.
The value of the trims is £60.
Window smashed
POLICE would like to hear from anyone in the Birch Road area of Headley Down at 9.45 p.m. on Saturday when a brick was thrown through the ground floor kitchen window of a house causing £30 worth of damage.
Dogs have their day to help the centre
Winners of the pedigree puppy class are: 1.
Petrocella with owner Ken Pinner, 2.
Taizou with Lyn Lane, and 3.
Banyan with Sheryl Morey.
SUNDAY'S exemption dog show at the Horseshoe Centre, Headley netted £306 for disabled riding.
Large numbers of owners and dogs gathered inside the building which serves as an indoor school for the handicapped children who ride at the centre.
In addition to the afternoon's official programme, there were several extra events, all raising funds to improve facilities at the centre.
Dogs attempted an obstacle course created by Daniella Toomey and Kate Harbon, regular helpers manned a cake stall and Irish wolfhound Boru was inviting visitors to guess his weight.
For the main events rosettes had been donated by Swain and Jones of Farnham and prizes by BOCM Silcock.
In the pedigree classes, judged by Mrs. S. Spooner, members of Headley Ringcraft swept the board.
Best puppy award went to Petrocella, a Newfoundland bitch owned by Ken Pinner of Lindford, Lyn Lane of Headley's Zeeta, a rare Shibu Inu breed, won the non-sporting title, and Gable, a spaniel belonging to Mrs. Wright of Kingsley, was victor of the open class.
In addition to the best sporting title, Dory, another spaniel owned by Mrs. Wright, was also judged Best in Show.
With many competitors for the 16 novelty events, judge Mr. M. Spooner had a hard task.
The best crossbreed was Max, belonging to Beryl Greenslade of Hindhead, who also took the best mover award.
Pepe, the best veteran, owned by Carol Stone of Rowledge, joined Kate Harbon and Bessie to carry off the best pair prize.
Kelly Turner's Roxy delighted the crowds with a prizewinning trick — performing a ‘dolphin flip’ before retrieving darts from a board.
Winner of the agility and the egg and spoon race, Mrs. Moore's Penny made it a treble when, kitted out as a home help, she won the fancy dress title.
Eleven-year-old Tildey Lockyer from Liphook proved her superior skills when handling golden retriever Toby, and in the gundog class, Chris Melling beat his father, who had entered the same class with the same dog!
Mrs. Hilson's Gemma had the waggiest tail and Mr. Spooner declared he would ‘most like to take home’ Katy belonging to T. Hatcher of Alton.
Georgina Grove's retriever won the chocolate eating contest and the jumping awards went to Daphne Brown's Tally and Melvyn Riddles' Patch.
Joined by Glen, Patch also won the pairs title.
Bordon's Red Cross Monday Club celebrated their sixth anniversary with a surprise barbecue cooked by party chairman Peter Cobbold, seen here with member Peggy Knight cutting the birthday cake.
The cake was made by Chris Wain and decorated by Mrs. Knight.
Ken Neil won the competition on ‘how many ways to use an egg’ and, after a few games of bingo, the 50 members enjoyed browsing around the Thrift Shop which had been opened specially because many cannot get there on a Wednesday morning.
LETTERS
‘My son was unmotivated’ says an anxious parent
Sir,— I have read with great interest the recent reports and subsequent letters concerning the running of Liphook Junior School.
My opinion of the school seems to reflect that of the majority of the parents.
My son spent a year at Liphook Junior School, during which time my husband and I made frequent visits to discuss our concerns regarding this apparent lack of progress.
Having been highly successful at his previous school, we were shocked to discover that, after half a term, our son appeared to be apathetic and unmotivated and was achieving very little.
It also transpired that he had done virtually no mathematics.
When we asked how this had been allowed to happen, we discovered that the children were expected to work their way through a maths text book ‘at their own pace’ with no specific instruction from the teacher.
Since our son found maths difficult he had, quite understandably, decided that it was easier to do none at all— and had got away with it for over six weeks.
It is a rare child, surely, who will have the self-discipline to choose to tackle a difficult task when easier and more enjoyable ones are available.
Plodding through a text book virtually unaided is boring with a capital ‘B’.
We were not surprised that our son just could not be bothered.
In all our dealings with the head teacher we found that he consistently refused to accept that the methods of teaching at the school were failing our son.
There was a great unwillingness to change any of the methods in order to accommodate our child's own particular needs.
In fact we were, rather condescendingly, informed that teaching methods had changed since the 1960s and we could not expect our child to be educated in the same manner as we ourselves had been.
Teachers, we were told, no longer teach ‘didactically’.
Having looked up this jargonistic word in our dictionary, we found it to mean ‘Instruction: The art of science of teaching’.
In other words, according to the philosophy of the head teacher, the teachers are not there to teach at all, but merely to supervise the children as they try to learn by themselves.
We felt entirely unhappy with the whole situation.
It seemed that our genuine concerns and grievances were largely ignored and we were dismissed as being out of date and out of touch.
Although our son had only one more year to spend at Liphook Junior School, we decided that it would be in his best interests to send him to another state school in Haslemere.
I am happy to say that the change brought immediate results.
Our son's achievement level soared and at the end of the school year he received a glowing report from his teachers.
His first term at Bohunt has proved to be equally as successful.
Having no wish to repeat the experience we had had with our son at Liphook Junior School, our daughter, having left Liphook Infants School last summer, now goes to a state school in Haslemere.
Our daughter's school also has a ‘modern’ philosophy and is by no means old fashioned in its methods.
It is worlds apart from school as I knew it in the 1960s.
How it differs from Liphook, however, is that the head teacher is wise enough to understand that all children are individuals and what works for one may not work so well for another.
There is flexibility in the system and, rather than a dogmatic attitude and a refusal to change, there is co-operation between parents and the school.
It was once suggested to me that rather than remove my children from Liphook Junior School, I should try to fight the system from the inside and endeavour to change the school.
I am glad to see that at last many parents now appear to be doing this.
For my own part, I did not feel prepared to jeopardise my children's education while in pursuit of that cause.
I know of several other parents who have made the same decision.
J. Avare Oak Tree Cottage, Passfield
Swift judgement vital
Sir,— I read with great sympathy the letter from a Liphook mother printed on your front page last week.
I am sure she speaks for many people in the village who are alarmed and distressed at the school conflict, of which they have probably been aware only since the parents' petition.
She quite understandably declares that many people do not want to be ‘involved in this unpleasantness’.
Surely no-one in his right mind does!
So who is to blame?
While declaring that she is ‘on neither one side or the other’, your correspondent clearly feels that the blame for the conflict and the consequent damage to the school reputation lies firmly with the campaigning parents.
But this same lady makes it clear that she does not know which side is right.
Clearly, only one side in this conflict has integrity.
Only one side has the children's interests at heart.
It is a clear, if very uncomfortable, choice.
If the headteacher is in the right, then all those taking a stand against him are mischievous troublemakers, unjustifiably damaging the village community and endangering the future of the school.
If the campaigning parents are in the right, then the headteacher is not fit to continue in post and they are actually doing the community a great service in their courageous attempts to expose the truth.
While Liphook awaits the judgement of the inspectorate, hoping it will clearly vindicate one side or the other, it is not possible — unless people have inside information — to blame either the headteacher or the parents for the damage being done.
Let us hope the judgement is sound and swift and the school can be restored to something approaching normality as soon as possible.
Perhaps I ought to point out, in closing, that I was not instrumental in organising the petition (in fact, I was not even asked to sign it).
I was not involved at all until the open meeting, which I attended and where I was pleased to have this opportunity to give my own personal views.
Linda Clist 6 Willow Gardens, Liphook.
‘School parents coerced, possibly intimidated!’
Sir,— Last week a Liphook Junior School parent claimed to be on neither ‘one side or the other’ in the current debate over education standards.
But the language your correspondent then goes on to use in her letter belies her true position — that of a supporter of the status quo and of the present head teacher.
The liberal use of words such as‘ugliness’, ‘bulldozed’, vitriolic’ and ‘opinionated’in the letter implies that the present situation has been orchestrated by a tiny minority of parents.
All those who attended the meeting of March 12th know differently.
Indeed, it is only through the dedicated actions of many parents that the meeting took place.
The governing body had refused to consider holding an open meeting, despite repeated requests from parents and some governors.
They were finally prepared to concede the meeting only when strongly advised to do so by the local education authority.
The petition your correspondent mentioned (while conveniently omitting to mention that it contained the signatures of 179 concerned parents) was crucial to that meeting taking place.
At all times, parents approached for their support, whether at home or in the school environs, were placed under no pressure and were perfectly free to refuse.
In fact many parents were so anxious to sign that they actively sought out the petition holders.
It is wholly inappropriate and a slur on parents' intelligence to imply, as your correspondent does, that coercion and possibly intimidation have played a part in achieving the present levels of support for change.
Such actions have played absolutely no part in the proceedings to date.
We wholeheartedly agree that the situation we currently face is regrettable and undesirable for the running of a happy, successful school to the benefit of the children, teachers and village.
However, events have only moved to the present position as a result of the intransigence of the school's management, and the reluctance to listen and respond to the concerns of a large number of parents.
We fully recognise that individual parents will have their own views on what is the best way of educating their child.
What we seek is school management which more fully reflects this diversity of opinion, rather than what is widely seen as the inflexible dogma of the current approach.
It is imperative that the present divisive situation is resolved as speedily as possible, to allow everyone involved with the school to start working together as a team once more.
In the meantime, we would remind all parents, whatever their position in the present debate, to please try and attend the governing body report back meeting of April 6th to make sure their views are known.
The letter is signed by Ian Beirne of 1 Forest Lane Close, Liphook;David Clarke of 28 Avenue Close, Liphook; and Gilles Fauvet of 28 Longmoor Road, Liphook.
A child's face reassures…
Sir,— May I congratulate the photographer who took the picture in last week's edition showing a young boy looking up at the Queen with wonderment and awe.
In a changing world it is reassuring that some things never change.
Philip Barratt 7 Chilcroft Road, Haslemere.
Thank you.
The photographer was a staff man, Keith Hawkins — Editor.
Sterilisation the answer to famine and poverty misery
Sir,— It is heartbreaking to observe the starving children of undeveloped countries dying unnecessarily.
Logically most of us would agree that it must be better had these unfortunate beings not been born, than to suffer and die so needlessly.
How does one educate these people into birth control, a vasectomy or sterilisation?
Perhaps money could be offered to any man or woman who volunteers to be sterilised?
If the millions of pounds raised annually in this country for these people via television, telethon, etc. are spent in such a manner, this would surely see the start of a reversal of the present path on the dead-end road we seem to be following.
Name and address supplied
When bad news is somebody's good news
Sir,— I believe the following extract from the Sunday Times could do only good if the facts were fully appreciated by the general public:
Pessimism has become the fashion.
Every piece of bad news is seized upon and trumpeted, all good news is turned upside down to have its dark potential minutely examined.
America is in a similar trough and the economies of Germany and Japan are both slowing down.
This is bad but, for all the anxiety, it does not bear comparison with the jolts of the mid-1970s and the early 1980s, let alone with 1929–31 when the value of British exports almost halved.
Peter Brewer Pendik, 49 Ridgway Road, Farnham.
‘Let's do more for our wheelchair disabled’
Sir,— On Tuesday, February 11th, some of my fellow pupils and I from the Royal Naval School carried out a survey of Haslemere from the point of view of a wheelchair bound person.
We investigated the town with a wheelchair, taking turns to sit in it.
We were pleasantly surprised by what we found in most parts of the town, and were particularly impressed by the ease of access to the towns two supermarkets.
The majority of the pavements were wide enough to pass pedestrians easily in a wheelchair and relatively few problems were encountered.
There were a few points, however, that really should be addressed, and I list these below:
1.
The bank machines were situated too high in the wall, so are not easily operated from a wheelchair (many of the instructions were not visible).
2.
The public telephones are built on very thick stone slabs, causing difficulty in getting into the box.
If a disabled person does get into a phone box he or she still cannot reach the telephone.
This leaves only one public telephone in Haslemere accessible for wheelchairs and that is inside one of the supermarkets.
3.
Crossing the road to Woolworths is very difficult for pedestrians, let alone for a disabled person.
Maybe a zebra crossing could be placed here?
4.
There are several disabled parking spaces in Haslemere; most of these are quite close to the main town centre.
5.
The public toilets are up a very steep slope, causing difficulties for wheelchairs.
6.
The pavements were generally very good, but in place there were cobbles making it very uncomfortable for people in wheelchairs.
7.
As Haslemere has already begun to make the town accessible for wheelchair-bound people, wouldn't it be nice if the town could become totally accessible for both able bodied and disabled people.
Alexandra Legeat and Amy Rider Royal Naval School, Haslemere.
Ambulance service record a fine one
Sir,— I have been most concerned to read the recent press coverage regarding the Surrey Ambulance Service and as general manager, I must put the record straight.
Surrey ambulance staff have always been justifiably proud of their quality of delivery to the community.
The current figures show that yet again we are performing in excess of national requirements.
In the Patient's Charter, the national agreed standards are as follows:
In response to 50 percent of all emergency calls, an ambulance will reach the patient within eight minutes.
In response to 95 percent of all emergency calls, an ambulance will reach the patient within 14 minutes in an urban area.
In March, Surrey ambulance response times are as follows:
In 53 percent of cases the ambulance reached the patient within eight minutes.
In 95 percent of cases the ambulance reached the patient within 14 minutes.
These figures are typical and it is therefore evident that the service is not only meeting, but exceeding national standards.
South West Surrey Community Health Council, a body responsible for monitoring standards of patient care, also recently confirmed their satisfaction with the service and commented on the professionalism.
This is not to suggest that we are complacent.
We constantly seek to improve the service through staff development and training programmes, introduction of new technology, and most importantly, creating a climate where the talent and commitment of staff at all levels can be utilised for the benefit of the community.
The management of the ambulance service is also making every effort to reassure both staff and the public to the essential soundness of the organisation and to take account of and act on their concerns.
Above all, I think the professionalism of Surrey Ambulance staff is best demonstrated by their ability to rise above the allegations and continue to deliver the best possible patient care.
Mike Foy General Manager, Surrey Ambulance Service, Bolters Lane, Banstead.
Fighting blindness
Sir,— Do you have problems seeing at night, or when the sun is bright and low, or is your field of vision limited, or do you know someone with these problems?
These are all symptoms of a hereditary sight condition known as Retinitis Pigmentosa (RP), for which no treatment is yet available.
As you can imagine, people suffering from this condition usually experience many difficulties, and these become more significant as the condition cause sight to deteriorate.
Support for these people and their families is very important, especially for those who are young are newly-diagnosed.
The British Retinitis Pigmentosa Society (BRPS) have a Hampshire branch who meet annually in Winchester.
Anyone interested is welcome to contact me on 0703 476894, or secretary Kate Rogers on 0962 760316, or just turn up at our meeting on May 9th at the Holy Trinity Church Hall in Winchester, starting at 10.30 a.m.
We aim to provide and extend a welfare service and raise many thousands of pounds annually to sponsor medical research.
Steve Harris 35 Swincombe Rise, West End, Southampton.
Wildlife Trust have ‘shopwindow’ in May
Sir,— With reference to your report on the Bell Hill Common ‘facelift’— I should like to correct the impression given that Petersfield has no branch of the Hampshire Wildlife Trust.
Since the Trust was founded in 1960 Alton and Petersfield have been organised as one area (the Trust have seven areas and the IoW).
Alton has been put first by alphabetical chance, not for preference.
Petersfield and surrounding villages have a large proportion of our members in the area.
We organise regular talks, walks and money-raising activities and also conservation work on the reserves and voluntary wardening.
Our membership secretary, Mrs. K. Vardy, lives in Petersfield (0730 69191) and has Trust application forms, and can advise on membership.
Our next major event will be Hampshire Wildlife Day — Sunday, May 31st at Selborne Village Hall from 11 a.m.
There will be walks and displays of the Trust's work.
Everyone is always welcome at our activities, members or non-members, so do please come along.
Patience Heasman (Area Chairman, Alton and Petersfield Area Hampshire Wildlife Trust), Garden Cottage, South Hay, Kingsley.
‘Animal tested products' caution
Sir,— In this letter of March 27th, Dr. J. H. Bolting says the general public should regard statements from antivivisection organisations with caution.
I suggest that the general public also regard statements about animal tested products with caution, as it is well known that many of these products have had extremely adverse effects on human beings.
I would also like to point out that antivivisection organisations, do not hatch up their facts or repeat facts out of the air; they come from individuals as knowledgeable as any vivisectionist.
Indeed many of these individuals know vivisection in great depth, and realise the inadequacies of this line of science, to say nothing of the almost unbelievable cruelty.
Miss L. M. Chandler Bottlefield, Station Road, Bentley.
Towards quantified clinical need
Sir,— I am delighted that Alan Blackburn agrees with some of my views, but remain puzzled by his opposition to GPs becoming fundholders.
Clinical need is as yet unquantifiable, but in time, by dint of hard thought, hard work and, maybe, with the help of computer Expert Systems it can surely be made measurable.
A doctor in the north of England has done pioneering work on the measurement of clinical need.
If GP fundholders can get consultants to their surgeries, this is to the clear advantage of patients, who have less far to travel.
Advantage to patients is what the NHS reforms are about.
As I understand it, GPs refer patients to individual consultants, usually to the older, more experienced man who may be slowing down, rather than to the younger, inexperienced newcomer who is right up to date with the latest hi-tech mod. con., but is afforded scant opportunity to increase his experience.
Surely, in any specialisation, each consultant who is widely experienced, but a bit out of date, should form a team with one or two younger, more vigorous, more up to date‘apprentice’ consultants so that their strengths complement each other .
That way waiting lists could be reduced still further, and second (in some cases third) opinions would be instantly available.
Peter Cowan 28 Broomleaf Road, Farnham.
Shrewd, wise team never more vital
Sir,— The world seethes with trouble.
Civil war in Somalia; military dictatorship in Burma; China listing Hong Kong residents to be arrested in 1997, and repressing Tibet; the former USSR in turmoil; ex-Warsaw Pact countries, such as Poland, struggling desperately to install market economies; Israel planting Jewish settlers in the west bank of Jordan; Gadaffi determined that the two Lockerbie bombing suspects remain in Libya; Iran upholding the Ayatollah's fatwah against  Salman Rushdie; Saddam  Hussein using every device to prevent UN inspectors from even seeing, let alone supervising, the destruction of the Iraqi capability to make nuclear weapons.
Maybe Desert Storm should have gone on at least to Basrah, if not indeed to Baghdad.
The list of trouble spots is endless.
At least there is good news from South Africa, where apartheid has finally been scotched by President de Klerk's courage — but watch out for trouble fomented by Terreblanche and his neo-Nazis.
We must conclude that we need wise, shrewd, firm but imaginative diplomacy backed by lean but resolute, well equipped, versatile and flexible armed forces, led by the strongest team we can muster of prime minister, foreign secretary and defence secretary.
Which party can field such a team?
We should think hard.
Peter Cowan 28 Broomleaf Road, Farnham.
Law too soft on the drug addicts
Sir,— Rather than‘streamline’ the police, it might be better to consider the possible causes of rising crime.
Apart from the recession, drugs are often at the root of many offences.
Drug addicts hate work, and prefer to find other ways to finance their habit and, of course, many crimes are committed under the influence of drugs.
Current policy seems to be to ‘go soft’ on the addicts and concentrate on catching the dealers, yet without customers the dealers would go out of business.
Drug addicts do not deserve sympathy.
There cannot be a man, woman or child in the country who is not aware of the risks of drug-taking.
The only side effects worth considering are the consequences for the rest of society, in particular those of us who have had our cars or homes broken into, or have had our hard-earned leisure time wrecked by noise, rubbish and other anti-social behaviour such as illegal ‘festivals’ and acid parties.
It is our interests, rather than those of a degenerate and selfish minority, that the police should protect; and if the law at present does not allow them to do so then the law must be changed.
Name and address supplied
Fox fury
Sir,— How dare Virginia Bottomley mislead the public by displaying a photograph of herself and a fox on her general election special ‘News’ sheet.
Where was she when the Wildlife Mammals (Protection) Bill was read in the House of Commons?
Sylvia Durant Secretary, Surrey Wildlife Protection Group, The Retreat, Green Dene, East Horsley
Alton and the strike of 1926
Sir,— I am a student at the University of York currently studying Economics with Economic and Social History.
As part of my degree course I am required to make a study of the impact of the General Strike of 1926 on Alton and the surrounding area.
May I appeal to anybody who might have information, or might know of where I can find information, on Alton in this period.
I am particularly interested in the effects the strike had on the breweries, local farms, hospitals and the railway stations as well as other industries in the area.
I would be most happy to meet anybody with information.
Any help would be most gratefully received.
Barry Trubridge 95 Basingstoke Road, Alton.
‘One day you may be thankful’
Sir,— What is the world coming to when Joyce Church states that she feels ‘nothing but admiration for the dedicated compassionate people’ who are members of the Animal Liberation Front (ALF).
Is it really that long ago since ALF carried out a bombing campaign during which one of the injured was a child in his pushchair, almost killed by flying shrapnel?
Please, Ms Church, read Dr. Botting's letter very carefully.
I do so hope that you never fall prey to any of the crippling diseases within our society because maybe then you will come to appreciate the need for these experiments.
Susan Orgill 33 Castle Street, Farnham.
Minibus appeal comments anger
Sir,— Your report of the Whitehill Town Council's comments on our — Oak Lodge and Chestnut Court — minibus appeal came as a great shock to our residents, and a reply must be made.
As treasurer of our appeal, may I say that it was very disappointing that, first of all, the council members and the town clerk did not accept our invitation to the opening of our appeal, on March 11th.
County and district councillors came along and after searching questions, agreed with our plan wholeheartedly and gave us very good advice.
Secondly, if they had attended they would have learned that the proposed £7,000 was the minimum amount we would attempt to collect.
Our resident warden, Jean Moss, has had previous knowledge of such appeals and is guiding us very capably indeed.
It should not be thought that because we are elderly and in a warden controlled complex, we have ‘lost our marbles’.
On the contrary, the appeal was well planned and all methods of transport for our residents considered before even starting our appeal.
We fully realise the problems that can arise from buying a secondhand vehicle but a new minibus with facilities for helping the disabled would cost £16,000.
We also realise that payment for use of the minibus will continue after purchase to cover expenses.
We have taken advice from very knowledgeable people in the trade and also from the community transport co-ordinator.
If, as reported on Page One, the funds of the town council are as much as John Bennett states, perhaps they would advance the money for us to buy a new minibus, on suitable terms of course.
M. J. Moore (Mrs.)8 Oak Lodge, Hendon Road, Bordon.
That ‘private gipsy site’ decision
Sir,— We write in reply to an article detailing East Hampshire District Council's comments following our successful appeal against a decision to refuse planning permission for a private gipsy site for one family in Passfield.
We wish to voice our dismay at the one-sided approach the article took, and note that our comments have never been requested.
East Hampshire District Council have described our home as a disgrace but, in fact, to our knowledge neither Mr. Clarke nor any other member of the council has visited our land.
We consider this comment to be without foundation and should point out that as a condition of the land being used as a permanent site for our mobile home, we have had to plant over 100 conifers, together with shrubs and rose bushes.
The land has also been laid to lawn.
Any member of the council who wishes to inspect our land is welcome to do so and we would be happy to show them the improvements we have made and are continuing to make.
We note that the council are happy to grant planning permission on conservation land adjacent to ours for five industrial units and 77 cars.
Their outrage at our use of land therefore smacks of double standards.
The council are aware that various complaints have been made to them concerning land opposite ours where tipping has taken place, including the disposal of asbestos.
Despite this fact being drawn to the attention of the East Hampshire District Council last year, the rubbish remains on the site and in our view this represents a health hazard to the occupiers of the neighbouring lands.
Surely it is this sort of ‘disgrace’ that the council should be paying attention to.
Finally we would like to thank all our neighbours who have consistently supported us in our bid to settle permanently in Passfield.
They do not consider us a ‘disgrace’ and in fact many were happy to send a letter of support on our behalf to the recent appeal hearing.
We now just wish to be left in peace to live our own lives and be afforded the same respect as any other family in Passfield.
The constant attention we are given by East Hampshire District council is totally unacceptable.
Could it be that they are discriminating unfairly against a gipsy family?
We hope this is not the case.
Peter and Jennifer Wenman Riverside Road, Passfield.
‘And good riddance!’
Sir,— I would like to make known my support for the devolution of Scotland.
My one proviso is that at the same time, Hadrian's Wall should be repaired, extended fully, and provided with one single opening through which all  scots at present in the south should be shepherded to the north, whereupon the opening should be smartly bricked up before they have the chance to get back.
J. N. Simkin Silver Birches, Buffbeards Lane, Haslemere.
Voting secrecy: a reassurance please
Sir,— I noticed last time I voted that the numbered counterfoil of my voting slip was also marked with my electoral role number by the officer at the polling station.
The counterfoil is a record of me casting my vote and forms part of the calculation of the number of votes cast.
My voting slip (the other half) is part of the number of votes cast for a particular candidate.
I understand that all the counterfoils and voting slips cast are kept securely for a period after an election until they are eventually destroyed.
Both the counterfoil and the voting slip have identical numbers printed on them similar to a cloakroom or raffle tickets.
With my electoral role number marked on the counterfoil, through a sorting process my vote and anyone else's vote could be traced to who voted for who.
Is the practice of marking each voting counterfoil with the electors electoral role number to continue in the forthcoming election?
I would like my vote to be 100 percent secret between me and the ballot box.
M. E. Gilbert Old Barn Farm, Hewshott Lane, Liphook.
This letter has also gone to the district council in East Hampshire — Editor.
Whoever wins, we must see change!
Sir,— In one more week, the incessant electioneering and the profusion of promises, policies, plans and phone-ins, to my relief will be over.
I hope that, in the first session of the next parliament, there will be less of the constant bickering and exchange of insults which marred the last sessions of the previous House of Commons.
I also hope all parties will work together in a determined and responsible manner to solve the main problem facing this nation.
This problem, which we all know is to change the balance of the nations trade from deficit to surplus to export more than we import, and to take this trade balance out of the red.
This is going to be very tough, we face growing competition from the strong industrial manufacturing powers of the countries of the Pacific.
These will increase in efficiency, and with strong belief in hard work and more education, and with the organisation and money provided by Japan, and helped by cheaper labour, will be more and more a threat to all Western economies.
I believe that we must manufacture the type of goods the rest of the world want, and at a price they can afford.
We must also strive to make high quality products, like West Germany whose exports are known throughout the world, because of this high quality.
There is an  urgent need to improve the training of our young people to make them among the best trained in Europe, in the skills needed for industry, for the present and for the future.
The vocational training in engineering and technological skills which young people receive in West Germany is more thorough, better organised and of a higher standard, the young people receive in this country.
This must be changed.
My concern is for the future, not just for ourselves, but for the children in our schools and colleges, and in all centres of education.
We do not want them to inherit all our problems when it is their responsibility to create the wealth and care for the increased number of elderly and aged people in this country.
D. Roberts Little Croft, Grove Road, Beacon Hill.
Prime Minister's Slanging Time
Sir,— In the  past few months we have heard much regarding possible reforms in the working of parliament.
The one area where much valuable time appears to be wasted on a regular basis, is Prime Minister's Question Time.
As this institution has now become purely a slanging  match (unfortunately the only time guaranteed to attract a full complement of Members), how can it possibly be taken as a serious part of governing the country.
Perhaps this is a question all potential Members should ask is whether their party intend to replace this farce with  a more constructive alternative.
L. Emmence Prosit, Roedowns Road, Medstead.
Abused young children are dying every week…
Sir — If anyone is looking for a good cause to support — perhaps as a competitor in the ADT London Marathon, or in some other activity — please remember the NSPCC.
A thousand or more children are being abused or neglected every week — and three or four die every week.
We have the commitment and the skills to prevent many other tragedies, and to help casualties find love and happiness again.
What we lack is enough money.
As more misery comes to light — often inspired by publicity or the knowledge of a helpline for children — the NSPCC professionals step in.
Most funding is raised by voluntary giving but we were £2.2m underfunded last year.
It cannot be allowed to go on, and with your help perhaps it won't.
Thank you for what you may be able to do.
Suzanne Cansfield Hon Sec.
Surrey and Hampshire Border Branch NSPCC, Woodmice, Medstead Road, Beech, Alton.
But what will actually be done about traffic
Sir — Once again the traffic issue hits the headlines.
This time its Holybourne; last year Anstey Lane made the front page.
I was told it would take a year for anything to happen — but so far nothing has, apart from the issue being worse, plus minor accidents being a weekly event.
By the way, next time a driver blocks an entrance to a property, preventing the people who live there from being able either to get in or out perhaps the driver would like to ask him or herself how they would like it.
Pauline Fell 49 Anstey Lane, Alton.
‘Disturbed’ by animal cruelty?
Sir,— One of your three pro-hunting correspondents who do not fancy having their names or addresses disclosed, objects to the showing of photographs of foxes dismembered by hounds, a sight that seriously disturbed her little daughter of six years old.
I feel sorry for the little girl and I suggest to the writer that she consoles her daughter by telling her that the vile custom of killing wild animals for fun is on the way out, that  almost all  british people feel as she does, and are determined to end such cruelty, and that she can help to bring about its end by supporting the League Against Cruel Sports and talking about the work they do to her schoolfriends.
Another identity-shy correspondent states that ‘the correct arena for changing the law in respect of hunting is to go through parliament.’
That's right, but first  you have to elect a party to power for which bloodsport, and particularly hunting, is not sacrosanct and which represents more truly than at present the wishes of the people it governs.
Reform is so urgently needed in so many matters of ethics.
Gwendolen Barter 193 Millmead Road, Northdown, Margate.
That's it — the final delivery
Ivor Williams and his wife, Edna (with bouquet), are pictured with the chairman of the district council environment committee Kay Dell (left), director of Plastopan Peter Ridley (centre) and principal engineer for East Hampshire District Council Albert Winterbottom.
EVERY household in East Hampshire now has a green wheelie bin.
The final delivery came when Peter Ridley, director of manufacturers Plastopan, presented a gold coloured bin to Ivor Williams, the district councillor for Medstead.
Council officers were delighted — their task was to see that every home was provided with a wheeled bin, as part of a programme to improve the area's refuse collection service.
The wheelie bin programme started late in 1989 and has, according to the district council, ‘been an outstanding success with customers’.
Complaints, they say, have ‘dramatically reduced as the service had become cleaner and more effective’.
The programme has also run exactly to schedule and within the £1.3 million budget.
East Hampshire District Council are now turning their attention towards the extension of recycling facilities.
NFU officials whistle stop tour
NFU vice-president Tony Pexton (centre) with Tim Butler chats with Janet Hunt, owner of Cinders caterers, part of the mini-business park at Hartley Park Farm.
NEWLY elected National Farmers' Union vice-president Tony Pexton visited Selborne on Thursday last week during a two-day tour of farms in Hampshire and Sussex.
Mr. Pexton stopped off at Hartley Park Farm — the site of a successful mini-business park.
Run by farm owner Tim Butler, the business park was set up three years ago and there are currently 11 tenants.
There is a diverse range of talents based at the Selborne farm — from confectioners to builders — and the NFU vice-chairman was given a brief tour before having to rush off to his next appointment.
Beforehand he met a number of local farmers and discussed with them the problems that CAP, GATT and subsidies pose for agriculture in this country.
Afterwards Tim Butler said it had been a very interesting meeting giving the local farming community the opportunity to put their points across to a senior union official.
‘We had a fairly useful discussion and exchange of views and I think Mr. Pexton was interested to hear opinions from grassroots farmers,’ he said.
Mr. Pexton farms 1,200 acres in East Yorkshire, where he grows wheat, barley and oilseed rape and has beef cattle, sows and ewes.
A member of the NFU since he started farming, Mr. Pexton was first elected to council in 1981.
He has been chairman of the cereals committee since 1985 and is a member of the Yorkshire (East Riding) branch.
In 1987 the new vice-president won a travel award from the US Department of Agriculture to the USA which enabled him to spend a month studying cereal production, the uses of cereals and the way in which arable farming is supported.
The diary
LEARN ABOUT LOCAL WRITERS
WRITERS on our Doorstep is the theme of a lecture to be given on Friday to the Petersfield and District Literary Society.
Visitors are welcome.
The meeting begins at 7.30 p.m. at Winton House, High Street, Petersfield.
PLEASE — CAN YOU HELP MEALS RUN?
THE Horndean Meals on Wheels has been run magnificently by Jean Pinsent for the last seven years — and in expressing their appreciation, Petersfield WRVS tell us that she is retiring.
‘We have been unsuccessful in finding a replacement so we will have to try to run the round ‘long distance’ from the Petersfield office.
This will be very unsatisfactory, so is there anyone nearer to Horndean who would consider taking on the task?’
District organiser Barbara Noakes adds: ‘We also need some more drivers and helpers to assist with this round.
Anyone with a couple of hours to spare, say, once or twice a month will be greatly welcomed.’
Phone Petersfield (0730) 63749, or call at the Town Hall office in Heath Road if you can help in any way.
MEDAL PRESENTATION
ROBERT Powell Thomas of Barham Road, Petersfield has received the Imperial Service Medal.
The presentation was made by Brigadier Besgrove, Commandant of SEME.
SPRING SHOW AT SHEET
SHEET Horticultural Society's Spring Show at Sheet Village Hall is on Tuesday.
Preparation will begin at 6 p.m., judging will then follow at 7 p.m.
Following the prize-giving Peter Harden will present a talk on Narcissi and Bulbs.
POPULAR PLAY OPENS
THE Winton Players' spring production is Arsenic and Old Lace by Joseph Kesselring.
Performances are on Thursday, Friday and Saturday evening, starting at 7.30 p.m. at the Petersfield Festival Hall.
Tickets are available from the Tourist Information Office and Petersfield Library.
NEW FACES WITH HEALTH TEAM
THREE highly experienced people have been appointed to help Wessex Regional Health Authority shape future health care developments.
A new non-executive member, Paddy Waring, has been appointed to the authority from April 1st and two senior health service managers have also been appointed.
They are Geoff Meads, who becomes director of primary and community care, and Jacqueline Kelly, director of purchasing and performance management.
They take up their posts in June.
EDWARD THOMAS ANNIVERSARY RAMBLE
A CHANCE to get away from election fever on Thursday is an invitation to join ramblers on a special walk to mark the 75th anniversary of Selborne poet Edward Thomas's death.
On April 9th, 1917 Thomas was killed at the Battle of Arras.
Much of his poetry was inspired by the East Hampshire countryside and many of his poems were written in his cottage, within sight of The Hangers.
The anniversary walk, organised by the Selborne Circle of Rural Writers, will leave Steep Church near Petersfield at 11 a.m.
For more details contact Robin Truscott or Gillian Davies at East Hampshire District Council (Petersfield 66551, extension 321) or Anne Mallinson on Selborne 307.
A wreath will also be laid at Thomas's grave in France at the same time as the walk leaves Steep.
MORE TIME FOR CHARITY
BORDON'S successful new Charities Shop in the Elizabeth Dibben Centre will be launching their spring and summer collection from Monday, along with the chance to buy a special knitted Easter duckling.
Then, from April 23rd, the shop will be increasing their weekday 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. opening hours with a special weekly Thursday evening session from 5.30 p.m. to 7.30 p.m.
The Bordon Charities Shop, run entirely by volunteers, would welcome others to join their rota.
OUR BEAUTIFUL WORLD…
READER Patrick Stubbs is a Green supporter and he has written this week about policies on key issues.
But he insists that for him, ‘green’ is a gut reaction that ‘transcends policies’…
Mr. Stubbs, who lives at Corry Road, Hindhead refers to the great environmental writers and adds, ‘I salute these noble men and women and hope that people will read their work and learn not only what we have lost but also what can still be saved in our beautiful world.’
TESSA ASKS…
GO FOR GOLD
ST.
IVEL, who manufacture low-fat spreads, are helping Save the Children with a ‘token’ scheme.
Collect so many tokens and you can apply for a special mug.
When you do so, St. Ivel send 50p to SCF to help them in their work with disadvantaged children in Britain.
Tessa Sanderson, the great Olympic medallist, is associated with the ‘Go for Gold’ scheme…and your association with it will help push the appeal towards its target of £100,000.
MODEL RAILWAYS AT THE CENTRE
AS a fund-raiser for the Watercress Line, the Mid-Hants Railway Preservation Society have sponsored a two-day model railway exhibition at the Alton Community Centre this Saturday and Sunday.
The organiser is an Alton member of the society's board of directors, Peter Precious, and he has had help from Alton regional group members.
Lay-outs and stands will cover the hall area of the centre, many of the displays being new to Alton.
For train travellers there is a free vintage bus link from the station to the centre.
Admission is £1 adults and 50p children, and the exhibition is open from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. each day.
THREE-WAY QUIZ BATTLE
ALTON Young Farmers took part in a three-way quiz with Binsted Growmore and the Alton National Farmers' Union at St. Mary's Hall, Alton last week.
After several difficult rounds, the Growmore team won the battle with 74 points.
Alton NFU were in second place with 57.5 points and the Young Farmers, who won the shield last year, were third with 50 points.
TECHNICAL MAN'S SERVICES WANTED
PLENTY of people are ready to record the news — taken from the Herald — for the local Talking Newspaper for the Blind.
But urgently needed is a BBC radio engineer, maybe one who has recently retired.
Or a technician with tape recorders and tape copying equipment experience.
The Farnham and Alton Talking Newspaper's technical director and co-ordinator is Reg Thompson, who welcomes enquiries at 11 Aveley Lane, Farnham (0252) 721121.
‘Hey, look who's over there…’
MEET Rab C. Nesbitt, Nora Batty, Dame Edna Everidge and the Leader of the Gang, Gary Glitter.
Friday was national Trading Places Day and housing staff at East Hampshire District Council were quick to take up the challenge.
Colleagues threw down the gauntlet only the night before but it was time enough for Andy Crowe, Margaret Newbegin, Phil Pretty and Graeme Stanley to make up their minds.
Andy alias GG, Margaret-Nora, Phil-Dame Edna and Graeme-Rab raised over £400 for research into breast cancer by turning up at work the following day in disguise.
‘It was excellent — great fun,’ said Andy, adding they also managed to give their boss, housing manager Mike Thomas, a scare into the bargain.
Mike had the day off so Rab C. Nesbitt went and ‘crashed out’ in the doorway of his home.
‘He ran for cover when he saw this scruff on the doorstep,’ said Andy.
Council staff trading places…
Dame Edna Everidge (Phil Pretty), Nora Batty (Margaret Newbigin), Gary Glitter (Andy Crowe) and Rab C. Nesbitt (Graeme Stanley).
Turned on to tap!
DON'T be surprised if you catch sight of these girls tapping their feet down the supermarket aisles, or across Alton's Market Square.
They're members of Wendy Jeffery's tap dancing class, and they just can't kick the habit.
The 17-strong group, whose ages start at about 18 but are well-balanced on the 40-plus side, have been tapping the boards at Anstey Junior School on Tuesdays since September.
That was when the subject was first introduced to Alton's further education curriculum for adults, and it's really taken off.
Wendy, who is also a keep fit specialist, is overwhelmed by her new pupils' enthusiasm and thrilled at the progress they have made in a short time.
So devastated were they when she announced that the term was due to end last week for a long Easter break that they begged her to let them continue.
And Wendy secured an extra couple of sessions.
Five of the ladies have already given a public display, at a keep fit rally in Drayton, and Wendy anticipates that they'll put their skills behind the association's new fund-raising campaign to buy a Sunshine Coach for use in Hampshire.
Newcomers are welcome to the group next term — but only if they've had some experience of tap dancing.
For those who would like to start, there'll be a new class for beginners starting in September.
Winter skin with a rash
The doctor
‘WILLIAM'S got a rash on his face!’ exclaimed his worried mother.
I looked at the rosy-cheeked little fellow (all of four years) in front of me.
He appeared a picture of health.
Then I realised she was concerned about his cheeks; one was definitely redder than the other.
‘Been out to play a lot?’
‘Oh yes,’ she replied.
‘He loves being outside.’
I looked more closely at his cheeks, and saw that they looked as if they had been rubbed to get them red.
The skin was also dry and flaking.
That was the clue: the wind whipping round the cheeks in The Great Outdoors was the culprit.
Winter winds wipe away the natural oils of the exposed skin, to leave a red, raw and chapped appearance.
The same can occur in the hot, dry winds of summer, especially on the beach where sea breezes are active.
In all these cases the treatment is simple: put back the skin fats by the liberal use of moisturising creams.
Don't use soap, which dries up skin on the face.
Use plain water or special wash creams such as E45 wash.
The best thing you can do for your skin, throughout the year, is keep it moist with creams.
Keep away from modern detergents in washing-up water, and bubble baths which degrease any bit of skin they are in contact with.
The legs are another part of your anatomy vulnerable to drying out.
Legs, especially ladies' legs, whether stockinged or not, can easily become dried out indoors.
Elderly ladies tend to cook themselves in front of an electric or gas fire for hours on end in an effort to keep warm.
The localised heat draws oils from the skin and blood to the surface; over the years permanently dilated blood vessels appear and brown pigmentation due to leaks from those vessels appear in a reticular pattern on the shins of old people.
Dry, centrally heated homes with their low-humidity atmosphere just make matters worse.
This type of skin damage is called erythema abigne by dermatologists.
Chilblains can occur at any age and are more common in women than men.
Treatment is unsatisfactory.
Some of my patients are helped by paints or tablets which cause vasodilation.
The real answer is to cover hands and feet warmly, using woollen stockings and gloves.
In modern, centrally heated homes, chilblains occur less and less.
Spasm of the arteries in one or more fingers makes them go white for a varying length of time.
This is called Reynaud's Phenomenon, after the French doctor who first described it in the thesis for his medical degree in 1862.
After a time, the white fingers become purple when the blood starts flowing sluggishly again: the fingers are then very painful.
Cold is the most important precipitating cause.
For instance, I get white fingers if I swim in cold seas.
Keeping the hands warm keeps the condition at bay.
When it happens, rub the fingers vigorously or plunge the hands into warm water.
Heated gloves are helpful, too.
Some drugs, such as nifedipine, can prevent hand arteries from going into spasm.
Less common than Reynaud's disease, are painless purple fingers or feet.
This is again due to arterial spasm and deoxygenated (blue blood) pooling in the veins and making them take on this abnormal hue.
This is acrocyanosis.
It sometimes makes hands sore, but is more of a nuisance than anything and, of course, the afflicted hands and feet look awful.
I hope this will help you to avoid or alleviate the pitfalls of cold and winter skin.
SOS FROM CROATIA
SOS Croatia desperately need a minibus, clothes, food and blankets in order to help the Croatian Red Cross in Yugoslavia.
Thirty volunteers will be travelling to Croatia over the next few weeks, taking three operating theatres from St. Mary's Hospital, Portsmouth with them.
Medical materials or medicines, blankets, quilts and bedding, warm clothing, tinned or packet food, dried milk, baby care products and first aid kits are all urgently needed.
If you can supply any of these items, please contact Jacqueline Russell on 0483 767541, Nicholas Jovic on 0483 487354 or Catherine Walsh on 0483 723625.
May Ball will aid Age Concern
TICKETS are now available for the May Ball which is organised by the chairman of East Hampshire District Council Elsa Bulmer, in aid of Age Concern.
This coincides with Age Concern's Golden Years Appeal for day centres for the frail and needy and seven days, crisis centres for the elderly.
All the proceeds will go to Age Concern, Hampshire.
The Ball, on May 1st, will be held in a marquee adjacent to Petersfield Rugby Club at Penns Place.
The rugby club are helping with the organisation.
There will be a ‘bucks fizz welcome’, three course meal, and a varied programme of entertainment, dancing, live big band and disco.
Tables are available for groups of six, eight or ten.
Tickets at £21 each (£15 for the under 25s) from Julia Fry at East Hampshire District Council (0730 66551 extension 275) or Mrs. Bulmer 0730 62123.
What a weekend for diamond couple!
IT WAS a ‘double’ diamond wedding anniversary last weekend for Leslie and Helena Dunford (pictured).
The couple, from Whitedown Lane, Alton, celebrated the event twice — once on the big day, Saturday, and again the next day!
The first party was a family event — and there was a telegram from the Queen.
Then came a ‘surprise’ do at the Masonic Lodge with over 70 friends and relatives.
One further celebration was when, on Monday, Leslie celebrated his 84th birthday, it was made special by the present from granddaughter Deborah Cuff, who organised a chat on gardening with television celebrity Alan Titchmarsh!
Leslie and Helena are originally from Liss.
‘We have known each other all our lives,’ said Helena.
They went to school together and married at St. Mary's Church on Easter Monday, 1932.
Leslie started work with the Home and Colonial Store in Chapel Street, Petersfield in 1926, delivering groceries.
Eventually he became manager at the Alton branch until the store closed in 1965.
He next moved to work for Courage and then on to Kerridges, where he was employed in the accounts department.
The Dunfords moved from Petersfield to Alton in 1940.
‘At that time Whitedown Road was known as the posh end of town,’ chuckled Leslie.
‘I had never seen such a clean town.
At that time the couple's home was surrounded by fields.
‘There were football pitches on the Bolle Road site and Courage's sports ground behind.’
Leslie can also remember the local farmer driving his cattle along the road in front of the house.
During the war Leslie enrolled in the Home Guard, entering as a battalion machine gun officer.
Those were hectic days — he can remember coming home so tired after watch duty that he fell into bed, still  dressed in over-coat, tin hat and boots.
Now the pace of life is a little slower for Leslie and Helena although having raised three children, two girls and a boy, they now have six grandchildren and five great grandchildren to keep them on their toes.
CZECH STUDENTS HERE ON EXCHANGE
CZECH students were welcomed by Hampshire County Council on Wednesday.
They spent the day at the Castle, Winchester, learning more about the work of the county council.
CHURCH SERVICES
Friday Focus
Your duty in the trivia
IN A week's time the suspense will be over, and we'll known the colour of the next government.
A quick look at the broadcasting page of any daily newspaper shows that you could spend all day (and night) catching up on the latest election news (should you feel so inclined!).
The way we vote is being influenced by editorial interpretations of what John Major said to Norma over breakfast; by magazine articles telling us what the Kinnocks enjoy for breakfast; and by TV coverage (live, no doubt) of Paddy Ashdown telling us why he chooses toast and Marmite every time.
All right— I know I'm exaggerating, but frankly it seems so trivial that it's almost become a political version of the World Cup.
That's unfortunate, because all of us have a duty as citizens to exercise our vote responsibly.
I hope I'll do so, but I must confess that I tend to go and make a pot of tea whenever election coverage starts on the TV.
Perhaps you think that's what the clergy should do — keep away from politics and concentrate on preaching.
However, it's no part of our Christian duty to be quietest.
The Old Testament prophets were devastatingly political and frequently found themselves in trouble for it.
Jesus may not have supported a particular party line, but His criticism of the political-religious leaders of His day led to His crucifixion on a Roman gibbet.
Since then, many of His followers have been martyred for refusing to keep quiet and toe the ‘official’ line.
The good news is that the death of Jesus on the Cross defeated sin and evil for ever.
He came to bring God's rule to our world, a rule of justice and righteousness.
Those who claim to follow His ways must share His concerns and standards.
They can't stand aside when confronted with evil and injustice.
As some have found, that's a costly way, but it cost Jesus His life to win new life for us.
However bored I am with the election, my calling is to shine the light of the good news on areas of darkness, whether or not that makes me unpopular, no matter what colour No. 10 becomes!
The Reb.
Stuart Thomas St. John the Evangelist, Churt 
More rumblings in The Hollow
BRAMSHOTT and Liphook parish councillors are continuing their fight in the long running battle to get something done about the notorious RUPP 45, known also as The Hollow.
For several years there have been complaints from Bramshott residents about flooding, erosion of banks and the neglected state of the path.
Many fear that unless something is done, gardens, sheds and property will be in danger.
There have been many conflicting ideas and suggestions about what should be done.
Residents and parish councillors have held site meetings with district and county councillors and officials who have said The Hollow has a low priority and must wait.
Last year an attempt was made to improve the drainage to stop flooding and reduce erosion.
Hampshire County Council engineers laid a concrete pipe part of the way along the path but this, say residents, did nothing to solve the problems.
Parish councillors thought that if the steep banks could be planted with shrubs and low growing trees this would hold the steep banks either side of the path.
But tree warden Christine Darter felt nothing was likely to grow on the banks because they were heavily shaded by overhanging trees.
The latest attempt to get something done comes from open spaces committee chairman Adrian Bird, who received parish council agreement for ratification and approval for a report on necessary remedial tree work on the path, with the parish initially bearing the report's cost.
It was hoped, he said, that funds might be made available by the county council this autumn so that work could begin but county would need a detailed report.
If the parish council already had a report to submit, work could be carried out as soon as possible.
Then plans for a final surface solution could be made together with a grant application to the Shell Better Britain Fund for financial assistance.
On your bike for LIDBA
IT looks as though the people of Liphook will have plenty of local entertainment this summer.
This week we give details of the LIDBA Cycle Day on June 14th and next week the preliminary plans for Liphook Bypass Celebration Day on July 19th are announced.
With the help of local people, Liphook and District Businessmen raise thousands of pounds each year for local charities and this year they hope to raise more than ever.
LIDBA, the businessmen's association, are determined that June 14th will not only be a day of entertainment and fun for all the family, it will be remembered as the day pedal power came into its own.
After last year's inaugural event was such a success, raising £4,000, the association decided it should become an annual event.
Preparations are now well advanced for this year's ride, which promises to be bigger and better.
The route has been planned for a 25 mile ride through the East Hampshire countryside starting and finishing at the Bohunt Centre, with plenty of refreshment stops on the way.
There is also a junior circuit within the grounds of Bohunt School for those with more modest ambitions.
For the less active there will be stalls and attractions in the school grounds which include a car boot sale, balloon rides and displays.
A grand draw with mountain bikes as the main prizes is also planned.
Funds are raised through sponsorship of the riders taking part as individuals, part of a team representing any organisation, club, pub, society or company.
Local charities and causes will benefit from their hard work and the target is to beat last year's total.
Further details, entry and sponsorship forms can be obtained from W. S. Coyte and Son, Keats Hilder, The General Wine Company, DS Cycles in Haslemere, The Sensible Bicycle Company, Liss, Bordon Cycles and the Bohunt Centre.
Cedar on the move
A 40-FOOT Blue Cedar tree in Liss is enjoying a change of scenery after it was moved to save it from being felled to make way for a new garage.
The tree, which began its life growing at Forest Lodge, near Pine Walk, was moved last week by three men and a JCB to another part of the site.
Organised by Stewart Garside, East Hampshire District council's landscape officer, it took a day to ‘plant’ the tree in its new position.
Mr. Stewart said: ‘If the tree takes to its new location the effort will have been well worth it and I am very grateful for the co-operation of the builders.
Extension appeal upheld
AN appeal against a decision by East Hampshire District Council to refuse planning permission for the erection of a two-storey side extension at Harcourts, Hill Brow Road, Liss, has been allowed by the Department of the Environment.
In his report the inspector, Mr. M. G. Burry stated that his decision ‘turns on whether or not the proposed extension, by reason of its size and location, would seriously harm the character of this part of the area of outstanding natural beauty.’
He added: I do not consider the house would appear too big for the plot or that the feeling of spaciousness would be lost.
The site is screened by trees and hedges on its northern, eastern and western boundaries and there are trees in the garden at the back of the house,’ and that, ‘the character of this part of the AONB would be preserved.’
Tips for top cakes
THE president of Liss WI, Heather Gold, welcomed members to the recent meeting and announced that Jean Pay has volunteered to serve on the committee.
Cakes for the stall in aid of the Petersfield Hospital may be left either with the treasurer at 14 Syers Road or with the president at 6 Forest Rise on Friday, April 17th in readiness for the sale on Easter Saturday at 8.30 a.m.
There will be an outing to Weymouth on Thursday, September 3rd, names to be given to the secretary, and an outing is to be organised in June to Harvey's of Bristol or to the Royal Mews and Queen's Gallery.
The group meeting will be at Headley Church Centre on April 9th at 8 p.m.
The guest speaker was Mrs. J. Atkinson who demonstrated decorating Easter cakes and gave a variety of tips in the use of soft icing.
The winner of the competition for Easter biscuits was Hilda Searle.
The next meeting will be on Tuesday, April 14th, when Miss D. Gil will give a talk on pressed flower pictures.
The competition is for a buttonhole made from a fresh flower.
Bus changes but the Liphook shuttle stays
MAJOR changes in Liphook bus services are due to come into operation from April 27th.
Hampshire County Council have just finished putting their County Bus services out to tender and most contracts on a three year basis have now been issued.
The county council say their changes will be for the better for most passengers and will provide improvements in services in the Alton area.
Some of the changes affecting Liphook were announced by county councillor David Clark at the recent annual parish meeting and others have since been confirmed by HCC transport officials.
It was announced that AMK, the Passfield based company, have retained the contract for the 250 Service known as the Liphook Shuttle and will continue to operate the current timetable.
They will also continue the Wednesday Dial-a-Bus 252 services.
Peak service
Alder Valley's contract to provide the peak time 213 service to and from Alton for school and college journeys will be provided by Oakley Coaches.
The 233 Liphook–Alton college and the 237 Bramshott–Liphook–Bordon–Alton College routes will be operated by Altonian Coaches.
These services are available for use by the general public.
Bus passes held by students will still be valid for travel on Alder Valley service at other times of day.
Students will be advised of the changes in a newsletter being sent to Alton college and details will be sent to Amery Hill, Perin's and Eggar Schools.
AMK held contracts for 212 services starting from Whitehill, they choose to operate these as commercial services from Liphook.
These have now been awarded to Alder Valley and as from April 27th Liphook will not be included in this route.
Hospital stop?
A decision is still awaited on the Liphook to Haslemere section of the 213 service.
Alder Valley, who used to operate a Monday to Saturday Alton–Whitehill–Liphook–Haslemere route, are not retaining the latter section.
The county council are negotiating with operators on the provision of this service.
They hope to persuade the new operator to including a stop near the Haslemere Hospital in this route.
Aware that the new contracts begin on April 27th, the first day of the schools' summer term, the county will be publishing a new booklet timetable —‘Bordon, Whitehill and Liphook Connections’— giving information on bus services and linking train timetables due to be introduced on May 11th.
The booklet should also give information about bus connections from Alton to local hospitals in that area.
Copies will be distributed to each household on or about April 24th.
Pond sediment a danger
THE future of the pond at the Newman Collard Recreation Ground in Liss looks brighter thanks to a working party who have set about restoring and repairing it.
Led by parish councillor Jan Dyer who has spent two ‘very successful days’ working with fellow councillors and other people from the village at the pond site, the working party are now waiting until the pond is dredged before carrying out further work.
A full survey by Southern Science has revealed that there is a lot of damage to the pond lining and a dangerously deep sediment in the centre which contained a few dead fish and some frog spawn, although there is very little oxygen left in the pond.
Mrs. Dyer told parish councillors: ‘The recommendation is that the area is dredged and the lining is repaired.
I also think that we are going to have to have an ecological assessment to make sure that there are no special habitats there.
‘We have received £350 from the district council, and hopefully £350 will come from the county council, but I think we have to take each stage as it arises.’
Parish councillors agreed that danger notices should be erected at the pond site.
Runners limber up for the big test
SEVEN members of Liss runners will be taking part in the London Marathon on Sunday, April 12th.
In training here, are from the left, Alan Wilkins, Jenny Broadhead, Pamela Gregory, Tania Hanscombe, Tom Greenslade and Tony Pateman.
The seventh member of the Runners' team is Philip Edwards.
Some of the competitors have run the London Marathon before, a few as many as three times.
For others it will be their first attempt.
The abilities of the team range from ‘serious’ athlete to ‘I just want to finish’.
All seven have full-time jobs but all have been averaging about 50 miles a week in training recently.
The Runners' sponsorship is going to a wide variety of charities including Alzheimer's Disease Research, Breakthrough (research into breast cancer), Mencap and the West Sussex Macmillan Appeal for Cancer Research.
Liss Runners meet at the Newman Collard Sports Ground, Liss on Sundays at 9.30 a.m. and Wednesdays at 7 p.m. and all abilities are catered for.
The club have a flourishing social side and everyone is welcome.
Messiah from scratch
ANYONE who enjoys listening to choral music, especially the works of Handel, may care to join Fernhurst Choral Society in singing Handel's Messiah.
On April 25th the St. Mary's Church, Bramshott, the society are organising a ‘scratch’ version and all may take part.
It doesn't matter if you can't sing and only want to listen.
In an effort to help funds for the church and its path, a charge of £3 will be made for listeners and singers.
Tickets will be available at the door or in  advance from Judith Horsfield, telephone 0428 652724.
For those intending to take part, the doors of the church open at 5 p.m. rehearsals begin at 5.15 until 6.30 p.m.
There will be an hour's break during which organisers hope the weather will be fine enough for  a picnic and the performance begins at 7.30 p.m.
Meter raid
NO respecters of the Sabbath, burglars broke into the St. Saviour's Community Centre in Liss Forest late on Sunday night and rifled the electric meter.
Bohunt volunteer for appraisal
WORK is now well advanced at Bohunt School, Liphook, for the new appraisal scheme for teachers.
The government plan is that over a four year term, there will be appraisal of all teachers in schools.
In Hampshire, schools were asked to select one of four yearly phases for the introduction of the scheme.
Bohunt volunteered for the first year, which started last autumn.
The appraisal will be time consuming and includes an examination of teaching and the other aspects of teachers' job such as lesson planning and syllabus development.
Headteacher Dr. Alan Leech said: ‘The staff at Bohunt were keen to join the new appraisal system as part of their commitment towards the fullest maintenance to teacher and pupil standards.
The school's plan to complete the appraisal of some 62 teachers by the summer term is well on target’.
Asked to organise a tea party to raise funds for the Royal British Legion women's section's national birthday scheme, Liphook branch hit on the idea of turning theirs into a Mad Hatter's tea party.
Members dressed up as the characters from Alice in Wonderland and had jam tarts and sandwiches in the refreshments on offer.
Commandeering a large pot of tea and a plate of jam tarts, Elizabeth Budd, Wynne Jackson, Betty Bullock, Betty Coyte, Kath Vale, Angela Knowles and Jill Elson, alias the Dormouse, Cheshire Cat, Queen of Hearts, White Rabbit, Mad Hatter, Alice and the King, prepare to tuck in.
Liphook are top Chamber for sport
SPORTS enthusiasts representing Petersfield Chamber of Trade gave their opposition a tough fight in the four chamber sports competition on Saturday with Liphook emerging as victors in the final moments.
The friendly competition between Petersfield, Liss, Haslemere and Liphook Chambers of Trade is run annually, and this year was organised by last year's winners Petersfield.
About 170 competitors took part in the sports evening which included football, squash, table-tennis, badminton and netball.
In a very closely fought contest Peter Thompson won the men's squash, and a team from Grant Thornton won the seven-a-side football.
Outright winners on points of the Four Chamber Shield was Liphook who also won the netball, mixed badminton, ladies' table tennis and ladies' squash individual events.
Birthday gift to Mother Teresa
A COLLECTION made by friends of Gem Arnold Parker, organiser of the Headley branch of the Co-Workers of Mother Teresa, amounted to £432.
Mrs. Arnold Parker, who recently celebrated her 80th birthday with a party at the Church Centre, had asked her guests to contribute to the fund instead of bringing presents and flowers.
The latest appeal by Mother Teresa asks for blankets for Madras.
Anyone with blankets to spare is asked to contact Mrs. Arnold Parker at her home, Logan, Headley Fields.
Easter in the air at WI
LIPHOOK WI secretary Elsie Penny presented a birthday corsage to president Pauline Williams, who then welcomed Joan Stephens as a visitor to the March meeting.
Sue Cale demonstrated the art of making hot cross buns using fast action dried yeast.
The recipe she used was taken from the WI Book of Bread and Buns.
Her interesting talk and demonstration made the whole operation look so easy that members were inspired to go home and make their own.
While the buns were cooking members were divided into teams.
Each team was provided with crepe paper, pins, a needle, rubber band, a doily and a paper plate.
They then had half an hour to make a hat accompanied by much laughter.
The winners were the Purple team.
The play-reading group are currently reading An Inspector Calls and the next meeting is on Thursday at 14 Candleford Gate at 10 a.m.
The walk this month took members from Redford to Stedham Mill.
On the way Olive Williams pointed out snowdrops which had naturalised and were growing in profusion.
Be a tree warden?
AN appeal for Liss tree wardens was made to residents at the parish council's annual general meeting by parish councillor Jim Duckham.
‘We have quite a number of trees with Tree Preservation Orders on them,’ he said, ‘and ours is a very wide area where we could do with more wardens.
We would like to see five for the parish.’
Anyone wanting more information should contact Mr. Duckham on Liss 0730 892087.
Behind the scenes at M&S
SECRETARY Tom Cunningham paid tribute of the Civil Service Retirement Fellowship's meeting at Liphook Church Hall to chairman Dorothy Vaughan returning after six years.
He welcomed the new chairman, Dr. Alan Wilson.
An audience of some 100 people enjoyed a talk by Anna Marshall and Justine Hisgood on Marks & Spencer.
What was interesting was the social aspects of the company.
Every store encourages members to raise money for charity which is doubled by the company.
In this way they raised £5.25m in 1991.
Shoplifting has reached epidemic proportions and this gave rise to a lively discussion.
Members put their particular sartorial and dimensional problems to the speakers.
The talk was one of the many social activities which include visits to Exbury Gardens, Bournemouth and Haslemere Theatre.
The talk at the next meeting at Liphook Village Hall on April 9th is ‘Wild Flowers Abroad’ by Mr. H. Ward.
Tile thieves strike
DID you see anyone on the roof of The Venue, formerly The Spaniard Inn, at Bramshott Chase during Thursday/Friday night?
Some 1,000 roof tiles, valued at about £300, were stolen.
Whitehill police would like to hear from anyone who saw someone on the roof — a ladder was left behind.
The building is empty and boarded up.
THANKS MUM…saying it with flowers
Children and church helpers spent Saturday afternoon making certain there were enough traditional Mothering Sunday posies to go round for mothers of all ages.
At the Church centre, helpers prepared their attractive spring posies, while at the Methodist Church Hall (left), Claire Carrig (6) and Matthew Carrig (4) found time to pop outside the hall and practise handing a posy of primroses, daffodils, rosemary and foliage to their mother, Kathy.
Golf marathon raised £6,000 for Rainbow
A LOCAL family have given a £6,000 boost to the Rainbow Trust funds.
Last July Aileen Penn and her family set off on a sponsored marathon round of golf that was destined to criss-cross the country and take them on a 1,000 mile bicycle ride.
Along the way Aileen told people all about the charity and the work they do for children with terminal or life threatening illnesses, she also explained just what the charity had done for her family when they were faced with such a situation.
Before they set off last year, Aileen hoped to raise the ambitious total of £30,000 needed to pay for two extra domiciliary workers at the Trust headquarters at Great Bookham — but it was not to be.
The family are not downhearted; they have made many people across the country aware of the Trust and their work.
Aileen is proud of her family for their support and for what they have achieved.
Her son-in-law Mark Glazier is ‘terrific’.
He cycled 70 miles in bad weather and gale force winds to make certain we reached our next game on time.’
The  celebrities she met were marvellous.
‘Willy Thorne, for example took part in a ProAm game at Alsager and insisted that one of the three charities who were to receive donations just had to be the Rainbow Trust and that meant £1,400 cheque.
‘There were many people who made donations or offered to help and they must be thanked.’
The help and advice given by Peter Allis was also invaluable.
She is certain that this interest in their marathon game helped to smooth away many problems which could have arisen.
Many local people are already asking when she begins her next fundraising venture.
‘The truth is it won't be this year’, she said.
It has taken nearly nine months to finalise all the accounts and each venture takes about six months to plan.
At the moment we shall be taking a break but if anyone else would like to raise funds for the Trust or wants information we would be delighted to do what we can to help.’
Aileen's telephone number is 0428 724648.
High hopes for new junior school this year
LISS looks set to get its new junior school this year, villagers heard at the parish council's annual general meeting but there is bitter disappointment that it could be at the cost of a community centre.
Hampshire County Council are asking EHDC to drop their community complex plans for part of the Liss junior school site as they want to maximise income from the school's sale to pay for the new school.
Speaking at the meeting, county councillor David Clark said: ‘I am fairly confident that the new school will get the all-clear this year.
‘Every year I say I am optimistic,’ he added, ‘but there is the political will in the council to agree with the new scheme and they would like to get Liss' problem out of the way and a new school built.’
Parish council chairman Gillian Woodcraft said: Although the new school is still planned, lack of funding has delayed the start yet again and the county council wish to include the island site, between Rake Road and Mill Road, in the sale of the land occupied by the existing school to maximise resources.’
But speaking about the possible loss of a new community centre, she added: ‘The parish council have reluctantly taken the view that the Junior School is paramount at this time but, should land values improve by the time the site is actually sold, the community centre should still be a possibility.
At present there is no funding for a community centre.’
Make a date for fun
A SUNDAY Funday is being planned in Grayshott for June 14th — with lots of attractions and activities for children, families and local people.
Organised by Grayshott School, it will include a knockout programme for village groups and clubs, competitions, displays and many of the usual fete-time attractions.
Alan and his Tiger survive 700 gruelling miles
AIMING to be top of his class as a rally driver, 40-year-old Alan Gape has just driven his car, a 1965 Sunbeam Tiger, in the Charringtons RAC Historic Car Rally, taking 39th place.
Not bad for a first international race and the Liphook company director never even had to change a wheel.
Just as well, because unlike the many professional entries, he had no back-up team and no spare parts.
All they carried was the car's normal spare wheel and its tool kit.
On Monday morning he drove the car to work so that he could show his colleagues the slightly dented bumper.
It stood up to the race well and he and co-driver John Anthony had a fabulous time.
They can't wait until next year's race to see if they can do even better.
For Alan this has been the culmination of a story which began in 1981 when he bought an old 1965 Sunbeam Tiger and spent eight years rebuilding it — a labour of love.
The car has a Ford V8 4.2 litre engine which can develop 250 brake horse power.
It was Alan's wife who entered him for his first rally and he enjoyed it so much he decided to continue.
Although he has only been rallying for one year he has already appeared on the BBC Top Gear championship series when viewers saw him win his grand touring class.
As a member of the Historic Rally Car Club he gained 1st place in his class and 11th overall in the series of eight rallies held at Longleat.
After gaining his international licence, the Charrington RAC Rally was his first international competition.
It was also the first time he had driven with navigator John Anthony, a retired fire officer from South Nutfield.
The two met at a rally and decided to team up for the Charrington RAC.
Over 100 competitors took part from many countries including America, Sweden and Norway.
There were at least two world champions lining up for the start and many seasoned and experienced drivers.
The 700 mile route began and ended at Bath, including 22 special stages of competitive driving over tarmac and loose gravel roads, through forests such as Radnor, hill climbing at Prescott and a water splash at Weston Park.
Alan's Sunbeam Tiger negotiates a water splash without any trouble.
From the villages
BENTWORTH
ACCESS APPROVED
LOCAL planners have agreed that a new vehicular access can be created at 3 Parsonage Cottages, Station Road, Bentworth.
FOUR MARKS
‘YES’ TO GARAGE
A TRIPLE garage and storage building can be built at Cranford House, Alton Lane, Four Marks.
The application was approved by district planners last week.
EXTENSION APPROVED
PERMISSION for the addition of a bedroom and bathroom at Long Reach, 12 Lymington Bottom Road, Four Marks has been granted by local planners.
OUTLINE CONSENT FOR PAVILION
PLANS for a new pavilion and recreation centre at Four Marks have been given outline permission.
The proposal for the recreation ground in Brislands Lane was agreed in principle at East Hampshire District Council last week.
The new building will serve the existing football and cricket pitches, tennis court and bowling green.
The district permission does not give approval to the layout plans submitted with the application or for any residential use in the building.
FOUL PLAY
CONCERN was expressed at a recent meeting of the Four Marks Recreation Centre that some dog owners are allowing their pets to foul the football pitch.
On occasions it has been necessary for members to ‘walk the pitch’ and clear up before being able to play.
The committee appeal to all members of the public who walk their dogs in this area to try to prevent their dogs from fouling the actual pitch, and if they do, to please remove it!
VINTAGE VEHICLE STORE
OUTLINE planning permission has been granted for the erection of a building to store vintage vehicles at the Old Coal Yard site in Station Approach, Four Marks.
The proposal, submitted by Mid-Hants Railway plc, will give a group of enthusiasts somewhere to store and repair old buses and coaches.
Their work and the building, however, will not be open to the general public unless they are admitted as ‘Watercress Line’ visitors.
HOUSE CAN BE REPLACED
OUTLINE permission for the replacement of a detached dwelling at 27 Blackberry Lane, Four Marks has been granted by district planners.
HOLYBOURNE
‘NO’ TO HOUSE PLAN
AN application for outline permission to erect a detached house at 90 London Road, Holybourne has been turned down by local planners.
MEDSTEAD
BUNGALOW PLAN REFUSED
A PROPOSAL for the erection of a bungalow with garage on land adjoining Rosebury in Soldridge Road, Medstead has been refused by district planners.
ROPLEY
EXTENSION TOO BULKY
PROPOSALS for a first floor extension, detached double garage and internal alterations at Midfield, Gascoigne Lane, Ropley have been refused by local planners.
They felt that the proposed development would detract from the rural character of the area because of its size, height and bulk.
CONSENT FOR HOUSE
APPROVAL has been given by local planners for a detached house to be built on land adjacent to Glebe End in Vicarage Lane, Ropley.
BUNGALOW APPROVED
A FOUR bedroom bungalow, with a detached double garage, can be built on land to the south of Wagtails, in Hammond Lane, Ropley.
The application was agreed by East Hampshire District Council planners last week.
SHED CONVERSION
LOCAL planners have agreed to the conversion of a shed at Monkwood House, Monkwood, Ropley to a playroom.
Black T-shirt leads to mistaken arrest
BORDON MAN CLEARED OF DAMAGE
A YOUNG man's distinctive T-shirt had led to a case of mistaken identity.
Alton magistrates have decided.
They declared Terry Thurgood of Kingfisher Close, Bordon, not guilty of using threatening and abusive words and damaging a car, in an incident which occurred outside the Prince of Wales pub, Whitehill on September 21st.
The court heard that four soldiers — Paul Fraser, Ian Smith, Brian Sim and Sean Bland — had arrived at the pub at about 10.40 p.m. in Fraser's white Volkswagen Sirocco and stayed there watching the title fight between boxers Chris Ewbank and Michael Watson on the television.
Pub fight
While they were at the pub a fight broke out, which was declared incidental to the case in question, during the course of which a beer glass had been hurled against the ceiling and landed close to them.
The four soldiers, who are now all stationed in Germany but were then in Bordon, each said in evidence that it was this incident which had persuaded them to leave the pub.
They were followed across the car park by at least two men, one of whom shouted after them, issuing the challenge ‘I'll take on any two of you’.
As Fraser tried to drive out of the car park one of the men tried to prise open the sunroof of his car, then kicked the side of it, causing dents in the driver's side wing and door.
The cost of the damage was at least £1,100, Fraser said.
All four men's evidence agreed that the assailant was wearing blue jeans and a black T-shirt with the word ‘authentic’ written on it in white lettering, and that he was between five foot eight and five foot ten inches tall.
Only Mr. Smith said he had been able to see the man's face.
They drove off to the police station and later returned to the pub with two officers.
On approaching the pub they could see a figure in a black T-shirt with white lettering through the opaque glass of the gents' toilet.
Pc Keith Black went into the toilet with Mr. Smith and they found the figure to be Mr. Thurgood, wearing a T-shirt which fitted the soldiers' description.
He was then arrested.
Sweatshirt
When interviewed later, 24-year-old Mr. Thurgood denied that he had left the pub during the evening and denied knowledge of the incident.
He said that he thought he was being arrested in connection with the fight.
Giving evidence in court, he said that it had been very crowded because there had been a  karaoke session before people started watching the boxing match.
He had been wearing a blue sweatshirt over his T-shirt, which he had taken off after the pub fight broke out.
He said that he had been in a corner of the bar talking to the landlord and friends during the time that the incident took place.
He named another person who, he said, was wearing a T-shirt identical to his on that evening.
Giving his height as six-foot, he said that he always wore glasses except when playing football.
When Pc Black had found him in the toilets he said he had temporarily removed his glasses to wipe them, and that a friend who was there had brought them to him at the police station.
Peacemaker
Landlord Bill Long, who has since moved to another pub, gave evidence in support of the defendant, verifying that he had been within his sight for the time in question, except for a brief spell when he was collecting glasses.
‘He would have had to have been very fast to get out to the car park in that time,’ he said.
Mr. Long also said that Mr. Thurgood had helped calm things down when the fight, which had been caused by another customer, broke out.
The protagonist had punched one of the soldiers, whom he accused of throwing the glass, and Mr. Long had been forced to hit him in self-defence, which ended the fight.
Defending solicitor Mr. Blundell asked the magistrates to consider whether Mr. Thurgood would have played the part of peacemaker and then gone out and attacked the soldiers' car.
He suggested they consider Mr. Long's evidence carefully —‘he is the only one with no axe to grind,’ he said.
Town's Christmas light under threat
WITHOUT contributions from all traders there may well be no Christmas lights in Petersfield this year.
Chamber of Trade chairman, Dick King, told the Chamber of Commerce annual general meeting: ‘I believe it is basically wrong for membership subscriptions to finance what is in effect a benefit provided for the town, and enjoyed by many other businesses who do not contribute a penny to the upkeep.
‘I believe the time has come when the Chamber should say that we can no longer afford to fund the lights from subscriptions alone, said Mr. King emphasising that unless all traders contribute there may well be no lights this year.
Mr. King said it was crucial that everyone works together to bring trade to the town during the period of upheaval while the centre development is built.
‘A major factor in attracting customers will be assuring them that they can park quickly, cheaply and conveniently despite the upheavals,’ he said.
After thanking the committee for their work during the year, Mr. King announced that John Edelsten, John Sayer and Eddie Bryant would not be standing for re-election.
He thanked John Edelsten for his ten years of service as treasurer and presented him with an engraved tankard as a token of the Chamber's gratitude.
Jenny Broadhead takes over from John Edelsten as treasurer.
Church can expand
A TEMPORARY building can be sited at the Church of the Good Shepherd at Lymington Bottom in Four Marks.
Permission was granted — for a one year period — by local planners last week.
The temporary building will be used to give additional space for church activities.
Stable block can be built
PERMISSION has been given for the erection of a stable block at Ashlea House, in South Town Road, Medstead.
The planning application, which incorporates three loose boxes plus a tack room and store, was granted by local councillors last week.
Update for the Watch team
THE Pinewood Village Neighbourhood Watch Scheme have had a visit from crime  preventation officer Bill Slater and Whitehill policeman Alan Hastings, at a meeting attended by seven of the ten co-ordinators.
The Pinewood scheme, in existence for four years, covers nearly 300 households.
Co-ordinators were given an update on recently published crime figures and a general briefing with emphasis on the importance of locking outbuildings to prevent the theft of things like power tools, lawn mowers and fishing tackle.
The emphasis of the open discussion was on being positive and being aware  of crime  preventation responsibilities.
The meeting took place at the home of area co-ordinator Mike Burley.
Consent for demolition
A PROPOSAL to demolish the bungalow at Wyards Farm, Basingstoke Road, Alton and replace it with a new home has been agreed by district planners.
Village post office is back!
WHEN Farringdon Post Office was closed in August as part of a general economy drive, villagers got together in protest.
A petition was drawn up, letters written and phone calls made in a campaign supported by parish council and the vicar, Dr. Graham Hodge.
Their views were heard, and on Monday post master Ian Hover was able to declare the counter in the corner of the village stores open for business once again.
‘Our area manager said there had been more reaction to the closing of this post office than they had ever known,’ Mr. Hover told the Herald.
Counter staff June Fifield and Diane Langley spent Monday morning in training ready for their first full day's opening on Wednesday.
On Tuesday, which is their half-day, customers were welcomed to the store, owned by Val Read, with a glass of wine.
‘Some of our customers are OAPs without cars, and with a pretty unreliable bus service they couldn't get to Alton easily,’ Mrs. Read said.
Now the task remains to ensure that the restored Post Office counter does sufficient business to justify its remaining open.
Mr. Hover is determined that it should.
‘It's part of village life,’ he said.
‘We've got to keep it going.’
WITH NSPCC HANDLING 2,000 CASES A DAY — Demand for new government to ‘put children first’…
ABUSE IN CARE WARNING
AS details are being worked out to develop even closer working relationships with social services, health, education and the police, the NSPCC in this area are calling on political parties to put children high on the general election agenda.
The Surrey and Hampshire border branch brought a message back from a hard-hitting annual council meeting of the society, at London's Barbican.
It was that a newly-elected government should consider the facts that every day, the NSPCC's professionals are working with an average of nearly 2,000 cases, involving some 4,300 children; that around 120,000 calls were handled by the society in the first year of their new, free 24-hour national child protection line; and that more children than ever before are getting in touch with the NSPCC.
Council member Robin Radley, president of the Surrey/Hampshire branch, backs the call to the newly elected government to:
Ensure that the UN  Convention on Children's Rights is properly reflected in all service provision and legislation affecting children.
A Children's Rights Commissioner should be appointed immediately to ensure that children's rights in the UK are upheld.
Produce a strategy to prevent child abuse and neglect.
This strategy would facilitate crucial improvements to preventative services such as family care centres and counselling facilities.
Invest urgently in therapeutic treatment services for abused and neglected children, including, for example, vulnerable children who have suffered abuse in residential care.
Introduce a nationally co-ordinated policy for the protection of children.
At present responsibility falls into several government departments.
Swiftly introduce new legislation to put an end to the trauma and misery suffered by child witnesses in court proceedings.
NSPCC director Christopher Brown commented: ‘The collapse of recent child abuse cases and our own experience with child witnesses leaves me in no doubt that urgent action in the form of new legislation must be one of the first concerns of a new government after the election.
‘Society expects children to do something most adults would find terrifying — give details of the most intimate obscenities performed on them in front of court officials, the public and the media and often their abusers.
This has simply got to stop.’
The NSPCC view is that while the current Criminal Justice Act will introduce some welcome improvements, it does not go far enough.
What is wanted is for:
New legislation to be introduced at the earliest opportunity to put an end to the current need for children to give live evidence and face intimidating cross examination in either open court or by video-link.
Pre-trial hearings with children's statements to be videotaped in advance with judges, defence and prosecution counsel present in child-friendly rooms.
All courts to have video-link facilities.
Child abuse cases to be given priority to avoid delays and enable therapeutic help to be offered at the earliest opportunity.
The NSPCC considers it outrageous that children in the greatest need are denied the help they need because of the bureaucratic delays of an inefficient legal system.
Treatment facilities
In addition, the NSPCC are urging that more treatment facilities be provided in recognition of the vital role therapeutic treatment plays in helping children overcome the effects of abuse and neglect.
Therapeutic help for children is often delayed by the court process and court appearances can increase the trauma to the child and the length of therapeutic treatment subsequently needed.
Child protection services have traditionally focused on investigation, and the NSPCC, in recognition of the importance of therapeutic treatment, are shifting the emphasis in its own work.
One major shock disclosure is that social workers, care workers and teachers are involved in ‘institutional abuse’ of a considerable scale.
As the director of child services, Jim Harding, said: ‘For abuse to take place in an institution where a child has been sent for protection must be one of the cruellest experiences you can dish out to any human being.’
Funding appeal
With over 50,000 children being helped every year the ravages of the recession have left the NSPCC with a £2.2m deficit.
This, despite a record total income, mostly given voluntarily, last year.
More public help is desperately needed if cuts in services are to be avoided.
One fun way will be through this year's Bikethons…
JOIN THE BIKETHON
DOZENS of cycling enthusiasts from this area have booked to join one of the NSPCC's Bikethon events — to Paris (entries now closed) and Brussels, as well as the 100-mile Portsmouth Challenge.
It's the fifth year that the NSPCC have organised the events.
More than 1,500 cyclists have taken part in the past — raising over £250,000.
This year's events start on May 1st, when 500 riders will be raising money for children, cycling to Paris.
Then on August 8th there's the Portsmouth Challenge — 100 miles from start to finish.
And on August 26th, there's the big one!
It's a six-day cycling holiday with luxury ferries and hotels, and is suitable for riders of any experience.
Further information from 0234 340 335.
Actress Julie Johnson in the line-up last year…and more riders and more star names will be joining the Bikethons this year.
Slavic slant on the gospel
THE annual visit to Headley Down of a member of the Slavic Gospel Association again proved an interesting experience at St. Francis' Church last week.
The curate, the Rev. Bruce Nicole, opened the meeting before Peter Barry showed a video of the association's work in Russia.
Local people interviewed on the film spoke of the emptiness of atheism and even those who remain atheists acknowledged that the spreading of the gospel, now allowed in the country, will only do good.
The enthusiasm with which Russians accept Bibles from the association was amply demonstrated, even though there are never enough to satisfy the demand.
The illustrated Bibles are especially popular with children.
The meeting ended with coffee and a bookstall provided further information on the work of the SGA.
The best from your greenhouse
TIPS on how to get the best all year round use from small greenhouses were given to the large audience attending a Bramshott, Liphook and District Horticultural Society evening.
Mr. G. W. Ace gave an interesting and informative talk on making the most of a small greenhouse.
The first priority must be to assess conditions and to choose the correct greenhouse for the user's needs.
Flowers with a new twist
‘CRINK um — Crank um’ was the keep-you-guessing subject for the March meeting of the Alton Flower Arrangement Group.
But Anne Silver from Liphook revealed all during her demonstration which involved six floral designs, each incorporating a wealth of twists and turns.
The first was an assembly of colourful baskets filled with spring flowers, and the second a modern design of two large black hoops with fasciated willow, cerise pink gerberas and arum leaves.
An arrangement entitled ‘Bullets’ featured shell cases, bronze  chrysanthemums , budded  daffodils and alstromerias.
A Hogarth curve of red spray carnations and red roses was shown with a collection of assorted bottles and  acacia seed pods.
While an example of continental style emerged from the straight and twisted stems of giant logweed, complemented with stalks of gerbera, blue iris, cream narcissi and tulips.
Mrs. Silver's final design embraced the art of lace making, with bobbins beads and large pins intertwined with delicate lace, blue irises and pink roses.
The speaker was thanked by Freda Morris, for a wealth of helpful hints and ideas which had proved ‘a real inspiration’ to flower club members.
The results of the members' spring arrangement competition were: Novice: 1 Brenda Warwick, 2 Vivienne Barnes, 3 Pam Talbot and Pat James.
Advanced: 1 Polly Chiverton, 2 Maureen Smith.
Gulf Commander tells an inside story
AN inside account of the Gulf War was given to the Alresford and District branch of the Royal Air Forces Association at a recent meeting at the Kingsworthy Sports and Social Club.
Although the club is some miles from Alresford, extra space allowed the association to welcome members of the Winchester RAFA and ATC, the Royal British Legion and the committee of the Kingsworthy club.
Guest speaker was Air Vice Marshal I. D. Macfadyen who was Chief of Staff at HQ EFME in Riyadh, and subsequently Commander of British Forces Middle East, succeeding General Sir de la Billiere.
Air battle
In a talk with slides, Air Vice Marshal  Macfayden took his audience through the war, illustrating how the air battle had dominated the campaign.
He spoke of the build-up of the forces, with all the linguistic problems involved.
He gave  some idea of the size of the operation with some interesting statistics.
For example, the Americans were landing 747-type aircraft every eleven minutes, and they erected a tented city in six weeks.
The convoy carrying equipment from the docks stretched for 46 miles.
He said that Iraq were a formidable opponent with the world's fourth largest army and eighth largest air force operating from 56 airfields.
There was also the threat of chemical warfare.
Chinook helicopters from Odiham were ready to evacuate casualties and to move troops to the forward areas.
Low flying
A four-phase plan to destroy Iraq's capability involved 24-hour patrols by the RAF and USAF and required low flying to crater air fields.
The total number of aircraft used from all nations to oppose Iraq was 2,400.
The Air Vice Marshal described how US Stealth bombers took out most of the Iraqi radar installations and in addition targeted nuclear and scud missile sites, admitting that Iraq's defences were extremely good.
During the war there were a total of 111,000 sorties of which the RAF made 4,000.
An  extremely lively question and answer session followed and a vote of thanks on behalf of Alresford RAFA was given by Air Commodore Brian Sills.
Lunch Club's thank you to doctor
A GIFT of £100 worth of garden tokens was presented to Dr. Christopher Brill by an unseasonal Father Christmas at the Senior Citizens' Luncheon Club last week.
The gift was to mark Dr. Brill's retirement from general practice.
He is a keen gardener, and expressed great pleasure at the choice of present.
Club organiser Maureen Mayers thanked Dr. Brill for all his thought and care over many years, and wished him a long and happy retirement.
Dr. Brill's love of music is also well known, and after lunch he was entertained by the choir and orchestra of Perin's Community School, under the direction of their head of music, Richard Stannard.
Fund-raisers
A MAMMOTH jumble sale, organised by Barbara Quinn in the Community centre recently, raised £650 for the St. Francis Animal Sanctuary.
A RECENT well supported jumble sale in the Methodist Church Hall raised £90 for church funds.
Praise for prudent control during decoration project
A TRIBUTE to the way the Community centre had been maintained during the year was paid by president Major Dougie Covill at a recent Alresford and District Community Association annual general meeting.
Major Covill particularly referred to the re-decoration of the Phair Hall on the first floor of the centre.
Chairman June Roadnight reported that management of the association had been conducted prudently.
She praised Nigel and Becky Hobday, who were treasurer and membership secretary respectively, and have now moved to Romsey, for their contribution to the association.
During the year the largest project had been the re-decoration of the Phair Hall, costing £3,766, but Mrs. Roadnight expressed  appreciation of Alistair Harley for all the general maintenance jobs he undertakes at the centre.
Also thanked were Robbie Winters, a very efficient bookings secretary, and secretary Margery Harley who devotes much time to the association.
It was reported that the association will be sharing in the Alresford Eurofest Celebration Day in July.
They have also been approached by the inter-church committee, who hope to organise a weekly coffee bar for young people between the ages of 14 and 18.
Two meetings  have taken place, and although the centre is not considered wholly suitable, it may be used if no other venue is found.
The chairman thanked all committee members, with special mention of Violet Scrace's Friday coffee mornings.
Elected for the coming year were:
News from Alresford
Angela is top nurse
SISTER Angela Peel of the Alresford Group Surgery, has been named as Practice Nurse of the Year, 1991 after a nationwide competition organised by the major pharmaceutical company Boehringer Mannheim.
The organisers were looking for a nurse who could show how her work — both before and after the changes brought in with the New Contract — had helped her patients.
Mrs. Peel is secretary of the North Hampshire Practice Nurse Group.
She joined the Alresford Surgery (where she is the most experienced of the team), after working as an occupational nurse with Bass at Alton.
For the competition she presented her work in the surgery's ‘Healthwise’ clinic, designed to encourage a healthy lifestyle through attention to weight, diet and exercise.
A paper written by Mrs. Peel is to be published shortly.
With her prize of £1,250 Mrs. Peel has chosen to buy a Lego table to entertain young children in the waiting room and a cautery set to improve the range of treatments available in the practice's minor surgery programme.
Sister Angela Peel, recently named as Practice Nurse of the Year
SARAH'S GLORY
THIS year's carnival queen and princesses were crowned at the St. John Ambulance spring dance held at Perin's School recently.
The contest attracted 24 entrants and the judges — Mrs. D. Crosse from St. John Ambulance, Keith Brundish and Brian Ranger of the Rotary Club of Alresford, organisers of the carnival — faced a difficult task.
The winner was 15-year-old Sarah Hardy from Old Alresford, a student at Perin's School.
Sarah enjoys swimming and badminton and also admits to enjoying school.
Her princesses are Emily Carr, aged 12, from Alresford, and Gina Beck, aged 10, from Ropley.
Emily is in her first year at Perin's School where she is in the netball team, and also plays flute and piano.
She is a guide and a member of the St. John's Church choir.
Gina has taken part in the carnival before, having been on the Ropley brownies float in the parade.
She attends Ropley School and enjoys dancing, horse riding and drama, as well as bell-ringing and singing in the Ropley Church choir.
Sarah was officially crowned by Keith Brundish, junior vice-president of Alresford Rotary, who expressed appreciation at being able to hold the competition at the dance.
The carnival will take place on Sunday, June 7th starting with the procession from Broad Street to Arlebury Park at 1.30 p.m.
This year's theme is The Wild West and the Rotary Club and their president, Barry Framp, promise ‘an afternoon of fun and spectacle’.
Queen Sarah Hardy is crowned by Keith Brundish, junior vice-president of Alresford Rotary.
Her princesses are, from the left, Gina Beck and Emily Carr.
Croissants at the Centre
THE Community Centre became a continental café for the morning on Saturday when the Alresford Twinning Association invited the public to join them for coffee and croissants.
The morning was an opportunity for the association to give details of their link with Bricquebec to Normandy.
Reckoning the rice wine
RICE wines made from a recipe given last year were presented at an annual members' judging evening of the Alresford and District Wine Circle at the John Pearson Hall last week.
Twelve bottles were entered in the competition and the winner was Marilyn Pullinger.
During the evening a cheque for £100 — the proceeds of the January fancy dress dance — was presented to Barbara Griffiths, for the Alresford and District Community Minibus service.
Conservation in the garden
WHAT can the ordinary gardener do to help conservation?
Peter Maunder had some answers to this tropical question when he spoke to members of the Alton Horticultural Society.
Mr. Maunder spoke about the need for managed conservation and pointed out that it is not enough to just let everything grow.
This frequently leads to over growth by the strongest weeds, which can quickly choke less robust plants.
He illustrated this by showing slides of downland areas used by walkers and grazed by rabbits and sheep, who naturally control hawthorn scrub and invasive weeds.
Another area needing careful management is the water meadow, where control of water flow is vital.
This point was appreciated by members of the audience thinking of Alton's own water meadow problem.
Mr. Maunder then gave a list of ‘don'ts’ including not using peat based compost — he suggested coconut fibre or copra bean substitutes — and not buying hardwood trellis.
Be careful, he warned, when buying bulbs such as cyclamen — some rarer varieties are gathered indiscriminately from certain parts of the Mediterranean and Turkey area and are in danger of disappearing.
He also warned against buying Columbian coffee and eating too many beefburgers and he finished his ‘don'ts’ by saying ‘don't be buried, be cremated instead’, causing much amusement among his audience.
The next meeting of the society will be on April 9th at the Assembly Rooms, Alton, when the society are holding their spring flower evening.
Running the marathon to save the elephants
A DOUBLE challenge — to run the London Marathon and help save the elephant from  extinction — is being undertaken by a man from Old Alresford.
Mark Thwaites is to pound his way around the capital on April 12th in an effort to raise more than £1,000 for the charity Tusk Force.
The 21-year-old, who has competed in the Luton and Brussels marathons, has been in constant training since October and is hoping to complete the course in under three hours.
Tusk Force is one of the nominated charities for this year's ADT sponsored event.
Over the past 15 years more than one million elephants have been slaughtered in Africa for their ivory, reducing their numbers to a mere 600,000 today.
All money raised for the charity from the marathon will be channelled into specific projects in five African countries where the future of the elephant is known to be under particularly serious threat.
In 18 months Tusk Force have already funded two mobile  workshops worth £60,000 for the Kenyan Wildlife Service.
These off-road vans are equipped as ‘garages on wheels’ to reach and repair broken down vehicles, enabling anti-poaching patrols to stay mobile.
If you want to help Mark reach his sponsorship target then phone him with your pledge on 0962 733987.
SPRING BIRTHDAY FOR WI
DAFFODIL yellow outfits worn by members of the Harmony Mark Four Singers, and attractive table decorations arranged by Jane Weygood, brought spring sunshine to the Old Alresford WI's birthday meeting.
The singers entertained members with a wide repertoire, both modern and old, and they were warmly thanked by Elizabeth Lawrence.
President Marjorie Clarke expressed pleasure at seeing Kay Hampton back after her recent illness and she reported on the good progress being made by Sue Rankin and Miss Elliott who had also been ill.
A recent jumble sale made £200 for the Le Court Cheshire Home, Greatham, and it was announced that the outing this year will be to Sissinghurst, when husbands  and friends will be invited to join in.
Tea concluded the afternoon.
OLD SCHOOL'S HIGH MARKS
THE Old School House Restaurant, West Street, Alresford has been awarded two rosettes by the AA's 1992 Restaurant Guide.
Gaining one of the highest ratings in the area.
The Old School House ranks with some top London names including the Dorchester Grill, in the two rosette league.
Each restaurant in the guide has been visited anonymously by inspectors.
 They said of The Old School House: ‘The food is refreshingly simple in concept, but is cooked with originality and flair.’
From the left: Proprietors Gary Nicholls and Neal O'Leary of The Old School House Restaurant, show off their award.
Tripping around the sights with flowers
MARION Catt of Cadnam was the guest of the Alresford Flower Club, at a meeting in the Methodist Hall last week.
She demonstrated five floral  arrangements on the theme of ‘Day Tripper’.
The first arrangement was ‘Seaside’, using sea fern, conifers, white spider chrysanthemums, peach spray carnations and yellow lilies, as well as shells and dry seaweed.
The next was ‘London’— a modern exhibit with two black tubes representing buildings and thick blue wire, the Thames.
She used the new red bergenia flower and deep red gerbas to very good effect.
The National Trust were depicted with pheasant feathers, laurel and conifer, and blooms of cream and pink, and her representation of ‘Salisbury Cathedral’ was a stunning arrangement incorporating two brass candlesticks on stone slabs with white candles and white lilies.
Nearer to home, ‘New Forest’ was a continental design on a bed of moss, with a selection of spring flowers, fir cones and fungi.
Award for The Soke
ALRESFORD Chamber of Trade and Commerce have received an environmental award for improvements to the area on the edge of its historical pond, The Soke.
The award has been presented by the organisers of the Britain in Bloom competition for the dramatic changes which have taken place since their last visit.
Nearly £15,000 has been spent on landscaping and surfacing the area by The Globe public house and down to Alresford Pond.
Chamber chairman Jan Robb passed on the award to Roy Robins of the Alresford Society in recognition of the work carried out by Mr. Robins and the society in driving the scheme through to completion.
The award certificate will be displayed in the library and The Soke will officially be opened by the Mayor of Winchester on April 11th.
Gripping thriller to ‘make you think’
THE Medstead Players will be introducing some excitement to the village hall this weekend with a psychological thriller, The House by the Lake, by Hugh Mills.
The original cast included Andrew Cruickshank and Flora Robson.
‘It is not a frightening play, but it makes you think,’ said director Tina Higgins, who first read the play like a novel.
‘I couldn't put it down.
It was gripping.’
The company are looking on the thriller as ‘a challenge’.
They are best known for their pantomimes and comedy and felt the need for a change.
‘We wanted to stretch ourselves,’ said Tina.
It is the first time the players have been able to field a large cast of nine for a serious production, with some 20 members involved in all.
‘We have a superb set, designed by a local artist, and have updated the original 50s script to make it more relevant,’ added Tina.
Tickets for tonight's (Friday) and Saturday evening's performance will be available at the door or from the booking office on 0420 62123.
Curtain up is at 8 p.m.
New glider hangar approved
A NEW hangar to house two gliders can be built at Lasham Airfield.
The planning application was agreed by the district council last week.
7 day TV guide
PICK OF THE Films
Saturday
Any Which Way You Can (1980), BBC1, 6.55pm Clint Eastwood, Sondra Locke and Clyde the orangutan are back in this fast-moving comedy sequel to Every Which Way But Loose.
Los Angeles trucker and sometime pugilist Philo Beddoe is ready to give up the fight game — until gambling mobster James Beekman (Harry Guardino), who is looking for a match for his champion Jack Wilson, persuades him to change his mind.
Live and Let Die (1973), LWT, 6.30pm.
Roger Moore lacked the toughness of Sean Connery, but gives a smooth, suave performance in this wildly improbable story.
It's the usual imaginative, expensive production, in this case whisking us from London to New York to New Orleans.
Jane Seymour is the cool heroine and Julius W Harris is a really nasty baddie whose right arm has been severed by an enthusiastic crocodile.
Sunday
The Grapes of Wrath (1940), Channel 4, 2pm.
Oscar-winner John Ford's magnificent film of John Steinbeck's classic novel about the gruelling journey of a family forced to leave their drought-stricken Oklahoma farm during the Depression and travel overland to California in search of work.
With Henry Fonda, Jane Darwell and John Carradine, Fonda was nominated for an Oscar, while Darwell won one.
Monday
Trapped in Silence (1986), Thames, TVS, 10.40pm.
Kiefer Sutherland stars as Kevin Richter, an uncontrollable teenager whose hidden past holds the key to changing his life.
Is Jenny Hubbell (Marsha Mason) the only person who can get through to Kevin?
Tuesday
The Producers (1967), Channel 4, 10pm.
Mel Brooks' glorious bad-taste comedy starring Zero Mostel as a crooked Broadway producer who co-opts a timid accountant (Gene Wilder) to help mount a mega flop that will make their fortune.
With Kenneth Mars, Dick Shawn and Estelle Winwood.
Mel Brooks won an Academy Award for this uproariously funny film, which also marked his debut as a director.
One of the high spots is a dancing Nazi chorus of boys and girls forming a revolving swastika in the musical number Springtime for Hitler.
Wednesday
Satisfaction (1988), ITV, 10.50pm.
Julia Roberts, Liam Neeson and Deborah Harry star in the story of rock band Jennie Lee and the Mystery.
From a tough neighbourhood, they spend their first summer playing a rich beach resort club.
The group is held together by Jennie (played by Justine Bateman), whose brains and determination control their volatile friendships and music.
Thursday
Scandal (1989), Channel 4, 10pm.
The real-life story of the 1963 Profumo affair — the most sensational political sex scandal of the century, which led to the fall of Harold Macmillan's government.
Starring John Hurt as the social-climbing osteopath Stephen Ward who introduces Mandy Rice-Davies (Bridget Fonda) and Christine Keeler (Joanne Whalley Kilmer) to cabinet minister John Profumo (Ian McKellen) and Russian spy Ivanov (Jeroen Krabbe).
Leslie Phillips plays Lord Astor.
Manhattan (1979), BBC2, 12.15am.
Woody Allen wrote and directed this comedy in which he stars as New Yorker Isaac Davis who is in love with his city but disgruntled with his job as a TV comedy writer.
To add to the angst, he's also worried about his affair with a 17-year-old drama student.
His life becomes even more complicated though when he starts to fall in love with his best friend's lover and learns that his ex-wife is about to publish an expose of their marriage.
How much can one man take?
Friday
A Cop for the Killing (1987), BBC1, 9.50pm.
This movie-drama is based on actual events and stars James Farentino as Lt Ray Wiltern, head of the Los Angeles Police Department's finest undercover narcotics squad.
When one of the fiercely loyal team is gunned down in the line of duty, the unit seems ready to collapse.
The badly shaken Wiltern knows that if it does, however, he will lose his one chance to nail the biggest cocaine supplier in Los Angeles.
Enfield the Alien returns in strange company
YOU can see why penniless old ladies object to paying licence fees to the BBC to watch comedians like Harry Enfield, when they thoroughly disapprove of him.
Some of his characters are very clever indeed, but jokes about colostomy bags and babies who drink gin and mug social workers are not everybody's cup of cocoa.
Harry Enfield's Television Programme, his second series of sketches about characters we have grown to know and loathe, is back on BBC2 on Thursdays with an even wider selection for the rogues' gallery.
Stavros and Loadsamoney have gone because he didn't want them to become repetitive and boring, but in their place are newcomers like The Rugby Players — three middle-class yobbos whose hobbies including drinking and mooning at women — space travellers The Aliens, seen trying to learn English, and world's worst publican Leslie Norris, who can't remember anything he is told.
Back for another airing are The Old Gits, the pair of horrible old pensioners, Mr ‘You Don't Want To Do That’, The Slobs and The Scousers, those Liverpool favourites joined this time by Barry and Terry from Brookside.
Tim Nice But Dim, the upper-crust simpleton, returns to canvass for the election and the DJs are joined by real-life DJ Alan ‘Fluff’ Freeman (he got his nickname from wearing a fluffy jumper).
He intends to concentrate on writing for the next year, with a summer break to make an irreverent beginner's Guide to Opera, co-written with his colleague Paul Whitehouse.
‘We may do the odd Christmas special, but as far as series go, this is it,’ says Harry, who doesn't believe in letting new ideas develop into a formula.
‘I've been on telly just about non-stop for 12 months, but I've got a few ideas I haven't had time to work on.’
The boy from Horsham, Sussex, declares his ambition is to have a bath with politician Virginia Bottomley.
Harry Enfield in friendly mood as a bespectacled alien.
Edward investigates murder most grisly
Herald TeleView by Sally Lowe
WHEN he played cop turned-publican Eddie Royle in EastEnders, he met a grisly end by being stabbed to death in a park.
In his latest role, Michael Melia dies with a bullet through the head.
But this time it's all in the cause of truth, as he re-enacts a notorious true life murder from the 1960s in the latest ITV crime series, In Suspicious Circumstances.
The victim he portrays is Freddie Mills, champion British boxer of the 1940s who became a celebrity in the '50s and opened first a restaurant and then a nightclub.
In 1965 he was found dead in his car, shot through the eye.
The verdict was suicide, but many people thought he was murdered, and this series looks again at the evidence — although as usual the final verdict is left to the viewer.
Each of the six murder and mystery cases in the Monday night series takes up 30 minutes, with two being shown together.
The first two involved vanishing actress and dancer Mollie Mozelle, and wealthy Edith Rosse (Sue Johnston), who died shortly after refusing to lend money to her friend Maundy Gregory.
Actor Edward Woodward again introduces the cases, and has a curious link with one of them.
The story Unjust Desserts on April 13 describes a Croydon family in which three members died from arsenic poisoning.
The actor was brought up in Croydon not far from the family's home and remembers how it was known as The Arsenic House and how local children were afraid of it.
Also in the series are An Uncommon Murder, which tells how an East End Jewish refugee was found battered to death on Clapham Common, and the story of Louise Masset, the first woman to be hanged this century after she was accused of killing her young son.
But the death of Freddie Mills due for screening on April 6 is perhaps the most fascinating mystery, because the ex-boxer was so well known and because the case is the most recent.
Melia too has intriguing links with the story.
His own father John Melia (no relation to actor Joe) was a professional, if reluctant, boxer, and he himself is now 47, the age Mills was when he died.
Mills died on Melia's 20th birthday and he recalls that when he was a child, Freddie was a boys' idol and boys used to pretend to be him.
Melia, like Freddie's 78-year-old widow Chrissie and his children, does not believe Mills killed himself.
It's true he had money problems and he was upset when his close friend, singer Michael Holliday, committed suicide the previous year after a marriage break-up.
But Mills was also known for his resilient and bubbly personality and he had even been a Samaritan.
His nightclub was often visited by the infamous Kray twins, both former boxers.
Could he have been the victim of an extortion racket, and did his inability or unwillingness to pay lead to his murder?
‘I found Freddie Mills very interesting because he personified the British character.
However hard you knocked him down, he always got up,’ says Michael, a former drama teacher.
‘He was also the first sportsman to become a celebrity.
His mantle was taken up by Henry Cooper and later on by others.
He adored children and people loved him.
‘I would love it if this programme opened a can of worms.
There is a social stigma about suicide and his family don't believe he did it.
It's 26 years ago, but so what?
It was a tremendous huge fantastic story to get into this small format, and there is a film there.
‘A lot of anonymous letters have been sent to Chrissie over the years.
One said that a man had been approached to carry out a contract killing on Freddie, but he refused because he liked him.
So according to the letter someone called The Guv'nor did it himself.’
Edward Woodward narrates the murder mysteries in the ITV series on Mondays at 9 p.m.
Out of the archives
CHANNEL 4's Saturday night series TV Heaven which dishes up gems from the archives has been so successful that the BBC have jumped on the bandwagon.
BBC1 have got children's TV presenter Phillip Schofield, soon to rejoin the cast of the stage show Joseph and The Amazing Technicolour Dreamcoat, to introduce clips from programmes between 1962 and 1987 over a 12-week run, starting on Monday.
BUSINESS HERALD
Beware! a stamp will cost 96p
IF the last 20 years are anything to go by, in the year 2001 first class stamp will cost 96p, says Prudential — Britain's biggest insurance company.
Twenty years ago it cost only 3p to post a first-class letter, whereas today it costs 24p — an increase of 800 per cent.
And postage stamps are not the only things that have gone up in price.
Over the last 20 years a pint of milk has increased five-fold from 5p to 26p today, and a loaf of bread has gone up from 10p to 47p.
The effects of inflation are not limited to the shopping basket, says Raoul Pinnell, Prudential's marketing director.
Those special events are treats that we save up for look forward to are also subject to the ravages of inflation.
£9,000 wedding
Did you know that an average wedding today costs about £9,000?
Not many people have that kind of money, so it is important to take a long-term view of saving.
There are many ways of saving for an event like a wedding that will make sure that you can buy more than just the confetti.
A Prudential savings plan, taken out for a term of 10 years or more, is the ideal way to save for future events.
It will pay out a healthy lump sum at the end of the term you choose, just when you need it.
And the longer you are prepared to leave it, the higher the likelihood of a better return.
For example, regular monthly contribution of £30 for 15 years from August, 1976, would have given you a return of £19,520 compared with a return of £10,261 in a building society higher rate account.
So if you have got your heart set on a big wedding for the kids or a fast car when you retire, it is worth putting some money away as soon as possible to make sure the clouds of inflation don't darken your horizon, adds Mr. Pinnell.
New name at solicitors
THE commercial department of West Surrey solicitors Hart Brown and Co. have taken on another highly experienced lawyer.
Brian Shacklady was formerly a partner with the well-known London firm of Speechly Bircham.
Hart Brown and Co. established over 70 years ago, have offices in Guildford, Woking, Godalming, Cranleigh, Cobham and Farnham.
They are the largest firm of solicitors operating solely in Surrey.
Moving Up
THE biggest single letting of industrial premises in Alton for several years has seen local printers Repro Workshop Ltd. expand into a 15,000 sq.
ft. unit at Caker Stream Road, on Mill Lane Industrial Estate.
Repro have taken a new 10-year lease.
CLOVER LEAF WINNERS
CLOVER Leaf Cars have presented a silver rosebowl to their Mercedes-Benz service and parts department at Odiham for the third year running.
The rosebowl is the company's annual award for consistent high quality service to customers.
Each quarter every branch within Clover Leaf send out up to 200 surveys to customers, and Odiham have maintained their high scoring.
Each department members also received a tankard.
PR plans for training
A NATIONAL organisation representing the training interests of 80 percent of the UK's working population have appointed the Guildford-based Parallel Group to prepare their public relations strategy.
The National Council of Industry Training Organisations — NCITO — are the umbrella body for more than 100 industry training organisations, responsible for the training of 22 million people.
Each is the independent body recognised by government as responsible for promoting training in its own part of the economy.
As sector specialists, they complement Training and Enterprise Councils, who look after the local training needs.
‘But with the launch of TECs, their contribution is in danger of being overlooked,’ says Parallel director Colin Moore.
‘The ITO movement is the invisible giant of training and is playing a major role in establishing the new national vocational qualifications.
Its specialist knowledge means NCITO should be more widely recognised as the voice of sector-based training.’
The Parallel Group have conducted a complete review of NCITO's public relations strategy, and their proposals are now being implemented.
These include establishing contact with MPs, leading academics, employers' groups and trade unions, as well as a media relations campaign.
Colin Moore is also preparing a training workshop on basic PR techniques for ITO staff.
Flick of a switch opens up Europe
BANK'S COMPUTER LINK-UP
BUSINESSES in the south can find out how much they will be affected by the single European market at the flick of a switch in a unique initiative called Pharos, launched at Southampton by National Westminster Bank.
The Pharos single market adviser is a computer programme allowing companies with IBM compatible machines to build up a profile of their business by asking a series of questions.
It identifies key issues directly affecting the company and gives advice on strategy or operations.
NatWest believe it is the first bank in the world to offer this kind of computerised advisory service to business customers.
The system has been developed by the bank and Ernst and Young's management consultants with the CBI.
Roger Clays, NatWest regional senior sales manager, said research by the bank and the Department of Trade and Industry showed that most businesses were well aware of the single market but were not so sure about its impact.
‘With Pharos, they will be just a few keystrokes away from the information they need to appreciate the detailed impact of community legislation on their businesses.’
Brett Gill, senior partner of Ernst and Young, said: ‘This initiative is an excellent example of where our expertise, in both the market and the use of technology to address business issues, has enabled us to help NatWest address a problem facing many businesses across the UK.
‘Two of the keys to developing successful business strategies are access to good information and knowing which questions to ask.
Pharos provides excellent support in both these areas.’
Simon Askins, regional director of the Southern CBI, said: ‘The single market will affect all businesses, whether they are exporters, importers or simply trading within the UK.
‘It is vital that companies prepare themselves for the new Europe and this initiative will help firms in the south.
Pharos covers many issues including tax, environment, consumer protection, product standards and health and safety.
Using Pharos does not require computing skills.
Designed for smaller and medium-sized businesses and even for business units of multinational corporations as a corporate planning checklist, the system has been tested successfully by many companies, as well as computer specialists.
In a series of extensive field trials, users were impressed with the range of issues researched and the degree of detail produced.
An update facility means that users have access to a system which is continuously available as an in-house, interactive consultancy service.
Pharos is being offered free to all NatWest's business customers, Ernst and Young clients and CBI members.
However, any business which would like a free copy should contact 0800 777888 free, or ask at any NatWest branch.
Update disks will be available half yearly for £40 (plus VAT) a year for NatWest customers, Ernst and Young clients and CBI members.
Others will pay £125 (plus VAT).
High flyers in the garden
TAKE-OVER AT RAKE
A FORMER Royal Navy pilot has saved one of the region's best known garden centres — and has unveiled plans for its future expansion.
Andrew Prince, who flew planes and helicopters in the navy, bought the Swan Garden and Leisure Centre at Rake from the receivers, Cork Gully last week.
With him was Andrew Peck, a partner at Sherwin Oliver solicitors, one of Hampshire's leading commercial law firms, who assisted him in the deal.
His move secures the 14 jobs at the site and keeps the famous A3 landmark alive.
The five-acre centre is now being substantially refurbished and will re-open as Prince's Garden Centre at Easter.
There are plans to recruit more staff later this year.
The site is well known to travellers on the Portsmouth road.
Strawberries and other local produce have been sold there before the war.
Since then the site has been home to a nursery and more lately a garden centre, attracting more than 20,000 visitors a year.
Mr. Prince, aged 43, said: ‘I'm a gardening fanatic, and became interested in buying the centre as soon as I heard it was available.
It is in a well-known and attractive location, and is brimming with possibilities for future expansion.’
Mr. Prince has a degree in forestry and spent two years after his graduation working as a forest conservator in Guyana, South America, followed by a further two years with the New Zealand State Forest Service.
He now lives in the New Forest.
Prince's Garden Centre will stock a wide range of horticultural goods, with special emphasis on top-quality indoor plants.
PHILIP — THE VOICE OF OPTIMISM
BUILDING WINE CELLAR
RECESSION — what recession?
That's the optimistic outlook of Bordon businessman Philip Voice, who says he's never had it so good.
Twenty-seven-year-old Philip set up his now flourishing landscape and garden maintenance business when he was just 19 using an old Mini to get around in.
‘In those days it was a pound made, a pound spent,’ says Philip, whose proud boast is that he started off without any outside financial backing.
Now based at Oakhanger, Philip has built the business up so now he has three vans, all his own equipment, employs five full-time staff and regularly has to call in sub-contractors.
‘For us it's been quite the reverse of a recession.
We've increased business by about 50 per cent in the past six months and our turnover is going to be double last year.
‘Without sounding conceited, I think it's because we go out of our way to offer a very good service.
We work on Saturdays and Sundays and I like to think we do everything properly and never let anyone down,’ he says.
Philip points out he is  in the fortunate position that he loves his work and is currently employed on his most unusual project to date.
A routine grass-cutting job for one of the Zetters pools company turned into something more exciting.
Philip was called upon to build a wine cellar dug out of the side of a hill.
‘I'd never been asked to do anything like it before and it is a little eccentric.
I designed it but incorporated the customer's ideas which is important to do as far as possible.
NURSING SALE
SALES of nursing and residential care home in the south have been buoyant last year, according to national business agent, Christie and Co.
‘Although prices appear to have dropped by up to 15 per cent,’ states Craig Woollam, associate director of the company's Winchester office in his end-of-year review, ‘nursing and residential care homes in good locations have maintained their values.
‘There have also been fewer for sales or receiverships when compared to many other business sectors.
Occupancy in homes has been marginally affected by a downturn in the economy though businesses have generally continued to trade profitably.
‘In such circumstances prospective vendors have chosen to carry on working rather than offer their properties for sale at lower values.
‘The market has been hindered by a decrease in the number of first-time buyers who are usually interested in the smaller units — with 20 beds or less.
As in the residential housing market this has a knock-on effect on the saleability of larger properties.’
BOSSES PLAN THE BIG ‘BUY-IN’
BRITAIN'S next generation of buy-in managers will be experienced managing directors seeking greater job satisfaction and who are prepared to invest around £100,000, according to research by investment capital group 3i.
This picture emerges from an analysis of 715 applications to join 3i's management buy-in programme which has enabled 3i to build up a picture of the business experience and personal characteristics of future MBI managers.
According to the research, over half — 55 percent — have an average of five years' managing director experience in at least two positions and eight out of ten claim experience of turning around a company.
Over two-thirds have previously been involved in making an acquisition.
Most of these future buy-in managers are currently in their forties, although 23 percent are in their thirties and a fifth are over 50.
When asked what motivated them to undertake an MBI, 37 percent said job satisfaction and 26 percent independence.
Only 24 percent mentioned wealth.
Southampton-based Stephen Denford, director responsible for 3i's investment activities in Hampshire, says the research indicates a new wave of MBI activity and highlights factors which affect their success.
‘There are an increasing number of executives looking to break out of the corporate hierarchy and run their own business and it appears that MBIs are catching up with MBOs as a method of achieving that goal.’
Mr. Denford said the survey is backed up by a sharp rise in 3i's own buy-in activity where its market share is now around 40 percent.
‘In the last few months, we have seen more managers taking advantage of the bottom of the economic cycle to buy into businesses.
As companies continue to dispose of non-core subsidiaries, this next generation of MBI managers will have golden opportunities to acquire companies at realistic prices.’
Mr. Denford added that the results of this survey accord with earlier 3i research into the factors that make a successful buy-in.
‘We know from experience that MBIs have always carried a far greater risk than MBOs.
This is often due to the buy-in manager's less intimate knowledge of the business compared with that of the existing management.
‘However, we also know that the risks can be mitigated and the most successful buy-ins have been those led by managers able to pick a good team.
Time up
TIME is running out for house-buyers hoping to take advantage of the temporary suspension of stamp duty.
Introduced at the end of last year, the waiving of the tax finishes on August 19th.
College success
HAMPSHIRE County Council's Farnborough College of Technology is the first education and training establishment in the country to be awarded the BS 5750 mark of quality for their customised training for business.
The college's training department has since 1988 designed specialist short courses to business and industry, ranging from European marketing for managers to courses for engineers.
The award of the British Standard BS 5750 (part 1) means that the college can now claim to be a training centre of excellence.
At the award presentation, Eric Hathaway, of the British Standards Institution, said: ‘The award is not given lightly.
It is earned through hard work and only through continued hard work and high standards can be retained.
Farnborough Customised Training — the industry training department at Farnborough College — provide training and consultancy service to a wide range of firms and organisations.
Regular clients include BOC and SmithKline Beecham, professional bodies including the British Medical Association, specialist research groups and government departments and agencies.
Lower rate
BRADFORD and Bingley Building Society are extending until June 30th the deadline by which buyers of their possessed homes can apply for a 6.99 percent mortgage rate — one of the lowest in Britain.
YES, YOU CAN CHANGE THINGS!
WEST Surrey directors have been urged to turn consumer champions — and stamp out price-rigging wherever they find it.
The call came from the director general of the Office of Fair Trading, Sir Gordon Borrie, in a hard-hitting review of this 16 years' work, at a recent Institute of Directors' branch meeting.
He said they could ensure British business was genuinely competitive only by notifying his office of any suspect cartels.
Referring to allegations of a petrol-price cartel, he said insufficient evidence had emerged to date to warrant further investigation — except on the Isle of Wight.
But, pledging his department's commitment for consumer rights, fair descriptions and competitive pricing for all, he said directors were well-placed to help shape policy ‘by becoming consumer whistle-blowers’.
Real competition
He said consumers should insist on their rights being upheld, and his 300 staff were determined to help them.
Industry regulators were necessary and were mostly effective.
‘Regulation is OK, but competition is better — real competition would mean the end of official regulators,’ he added.
Banks now opened on Saturdays because the building societies had gone on the attack.
Breakfast was now served on all internal early morning UK flights after British Midland led the way.
But the consumer could benefit still further.
For example, competition could cut the size of phone bills and end the imposition of unreasonable bank charges on small businesses.
Partnership
THE Partners in Enterprise campaign run by leading business advisers Grant Thornton of Petersfield, has been extended to deal with the overwhelming response.
The campaign offers a free, confidential business performance check for owner-managed businesses.
Soaring costs of funerals
CHOSEN Heritage, the pre-planned funeral specialists, have commissioned a comprehensive survey of funeral prices, showing that last year the amount spent on funerals increased by more than twice the rate of inflation.
The average funeral bill was £956.71p against £867.29p in 1990, an increase of 11.3 percent.
Prices in the south have risen more steeply, making the average cost of a funeral over £1,000.
One of the main reasons for the increase was the 15 percent rise in crematorium fees.
Also firms with town centre premises have been hit by the uniform business rate and 1990 rating revaluation.
Wage and salary awards, high interest charges, the rise in VAT and general inflation all add up to increased overheads, which are reflected in the price of a funeral.
The survey looked at the total cost of a funeral, including the fees paid via the funeral director for cremation or burial, minister's fees, flowers, obituary notices and so on.
Typically between 25 percent and 30 percent of the funeral bill will make up such fees.
‘Statistics such as these are worrying for elderly people,’ said manager Graham Williams, ‘which is why our scheme is so popular.
With Chosen Heritage you can pay for the funeral now at today's prices then stop worrying about the increasing costs.’
The survey was carried out on behalf of Chosen Heritage by the independent research organisation Third Age International.
Copies are available from Chosen Heritage, Farringdon House, East Grinstead, RH19 1EW.