

Toby was drinking cider when Dominic sauntered into the Mess bar at six o'clock two days later.
‘What'll you have, Dominic?’ he asked languidly.
The paediatric S.H.O. glanced around the room, but the only other occupants formed a tightly-knit group in the opposite corner, where they were loudly debating an ethical issue.
‘Pint of bitter, please,’ he said with obvious reluctance.
Toby eased himself out of his chair and proceeded to draw a pint for Dominic.
Smoothly, he set it on the table, then resumed his seat.
‘I hear you got the paediatric registrar job.’
‘So I did.
A reasonable choice, though I say it myself.’
‘Why do you think they gave it to you?’
‘That's rather an insolent question.
Why shouldn't they?’
‘I don't suppose it was anything to do with that so-called physiology paper of yours, with its introduction culled from a German review article, and results ‘borrowed’ from the chief technician's own private research?’
Dominic's handsome face darkened for a moment then, surprisingly, he smiled.
‘You're right.
It has nothing to do with that at all.’
‘Do you expect me to believe that?’
‘I don't give a toss what you believe.
What concern is it of yours?’
‘Meryl is my friend.
She was enjoying the life she'd made for herself here in Nottingham, and now she'll have to go elsewhere.
It just seems a pity.’
‘Behold my tears of remorse.
Grow up, Toby.
It's a tough world.
Meryl will have to take the knocks like everybody else.’
He stretched his throat and gulped down a third of the liquid in the glass.
Wiping his lips with the back of his index finger, he turned his attention back to Toby.
‘Listen to me, pal, because there are a few things you could  learn.
If I wanted Meryl, I could have her.
Right now.
Despite this storm in a teacup about one piddling registrar job.
Just you watch.
At least I'd know what to do with her.
And I'll tell you something else.
Your holier-than-thou attitude cuts no ice with me.
I've heard things about you that make my stomach turn!
You know what I'm referring to.’
His voice dropped to a low hiss.
‘So take my advice, Toby.
Lay off, and save your preachings for someone who'll appreciate them.’
He slammed the glass down onto the table, and a small quantity of the beer sloshed over the side.
‘Dear me, how careless,’ said Toby.
‘No, just uncouth,’ sneered Dominic, and stalked out of the room.
Anthea Darnell sat at the mahogany desk in the living room of her cottage, writing a rough draft of her forthcoming lecture on bubonic plague.
The setting sun glowed at the bottom of her half-acre garden, lightly gilding the fruit blossom with a pinkish-gold lustre and reflecting a few faint rays from the greenhouse windows.
She switched on a desk lamp, and quickly scanned what she had just written, murmuring to herself.
‘In 1346 the population of Europe comprised eighty million people, and was growing at a rapid rate.
Over the next few years, the cycle was completely reversed, and twenty million people died.
The cause of this devastation was the Black Death.
(Graphs here; population curves for the whole century.)
‘It began among the flea-bearing rodents of Central Asia.
The plague bacillus, known by the Latin name Yersinia pestis, was carried on marmot skins by fur traders travelling along the old Silk Road from the East.
(Photograph of a marmot, if possible.)
‘A particular blackspot was the port of Kaffa in the Crimea, which had been under siege by the Mongols.
Both besiegers and besieged were struck down in large numbers, and the Mongols fled.
Kaffa and its ships swarmed with rats; plague was quickly disseminated by sea to many Mediterranean ports.
Western Turkey and Sicily were initially affected, but by 1348 it had spread  as far as Spain and Morocco.
Muslims and Christians either blamed each other, or blamed the Jews.
(Show map of the Mediterranean and the Black Sea.)
‘The first outbreak in England occurred at Weymouth in 1348, almost certainly via a claret ship from Bordeaux, which was an English possession at that time.
(Tasteful joke here about claret.)
‘The disease was not actually known as the Black Death during the fourteenth century.
This sobriquet is a product of the sixteenth century.
At the time, people called it: ‘The Great Pestilence’ or ‘The Great Dying’.
It could present clinically in one of three forms, bubonic, pneumonic, or septicaemic plague, bubonic being the commonest…’
This part, the focal point of her lecture, needed to be handled with care.
The content was to be informative, while avoiding giving offence to the more fastidious members of the audience — all too easily done with some of the elderly ladies.
Anthea had obtained a colourful series of slides showing modern plague victims from the Far East with their various swellings and eruptions.
Sadly, she would have to be very discerning.
Mention of the Great Plague in 1665, whilst scarcely medieval, would be relevant here.
She could explain the sinister origins of the nursery rhyme, ‘Ring a Ring of Roses.’
Anthea sighed and leafed through a reference book.
The sharp medical edge of her lecture would be blunted towards the end by placing the Black Death in its broader context.
Mention the economic and social sequelae, the effect on the Hundred Years' War when soldiers, too, fell victim…the weakening of England's hold on territories in France.
Then there were potential questions to consider.
Why Yersinia pestis ?
That was easy.
Yersin was one of the workers who isolated the bacillus in 1894.
What remedies did the people themselves employ?
All sorts of bizarre things; discussion of these would save the subject from becoming too sombre.
Putting the pad of A4 paper aside for a moment, she consulted a list.
Her position as secretary of the Medieval Circle's East Midland branch gave her the lion's share of the organisation for conventions such as these, a situation in which Anthea thrived.
In addition, she undertook to research and deliver lectures on any  medical aspects of history that were likely to be of interest to fellow members.
The substance of her treatise on the Black Death had been carefully checked with a microbiologist and a specialist in tropical medicine.
She also intended to prepare a simplified hand-out.
Her own lecture would be best on the Saturday, she decided.
The subjects to be covered were diverse, scanning a period of over a century, but they could be arranged in an approximately chronological order.
‘Simon de Montfort’ could be the first lecture on the Friday morning, to be followed by ‘The Battle of Evesham’, which promised to be quite enlightening.
‘The Castles of Edward the First’ and ‘Medieval Festivals’would take up the afternoon.
On Saturday morning, ‘Campaigns in France; The Black Prince’ would tie in nicely datewise with her own contribution.
Best not to call it ‘The Black Death’, however.
Too much black altogether.
She pencilled ‘Plague in the Fourteenth Century’ at the top of the page.
What was the next subject?
Ah, yes.
A representative from the College of Arms had kindly agreed to come and talk about heraldry.
In that case, it would make more sense to switch the other two lectures so that shields and banners followed something warlike.
Anthea leaned back in the chair and idly tapped her teeth with the knuckles of her left hand.
Usually, a rigid time schedule for these symposia was arranged well in advance, and a programme sent to the members who had booked.
But on this occasion, a certain amount of flexibility was necessary.
Dr Dunn, the lecturer from Bristol Polytechnic, had another weekend commitment to fit in, and Dr Peters was ill.
It was lucky that Professor St John Goth, Nottingham University's emeritus medieval history professor, could always be relied on.
He had booked for the full residential weekend, as he did every time one was held.
For a further hour she worked steadily, then looked at her watch and began to tidy the papers away.
A few pale streaks of mauve were all that remained of the sunset; inside, the room was cosy with shaded lamps, a thick brown carpet and rich mahogany furniture.
The cottage was Anthea's pride and joy.
It represented tangible proof of her achievements after years of struggle in a male-dominated  profession.
That other great attainment, status, was more fickle, more dependent on time, place, and the concepts of people around her.
Now, in her prime years, she was treated with respect, deference and even a little awe.
But later — just another retired doctor, quickly forgotten…
The price of her success was something she had resolutely ignored until recently.
Apart from one searing, doomed encounter during her final year at medical school, the question of a choice between her personal life and the profession had never cropped up.
She had enjoyed the  camaraderie of colleagues, and the mild flirtation which often underlay it.
She had kept her looks and her health, and had spent her free time productively with a variety of projects and committees.
Only over the last few months had she noticed the subtle swing of attention away from her towards medical students, or the younger female doctors.
Doctors like Meryl Armitage, who wasn't even particularly intellectually gifted, but had pleasant manners, a pair of compelling green eyes — and youth.
It was pathetic, really.
Her peer group was struggling with the male menopause, of course, but the sting of rejection had been no less sharp.
And then Dominic had appeared, with the face of a dark angel and the blarney of his Irish heritage.
Twenty-two years her junior — but the unthinkable had still happened.
The sound of the doorbell echoed in the hall.
Anthea moved to a mirror and smoothed her closely permed black hair before stepping forward with a smile on her lips.
Meryl was still puzzled by the lack of feedback from her consultant with respect to her failed job application.
Even if sympathy wasn't forthcoming, she had hoped at least for a little guidance, some clue as to where she had fallen short, or advice for the future.
Instead, Anthea Darnell's only communications, apart from ward and clinic work, concerned the approaching symposium.
Dominic's demeanour was unchanged, but Meryl found it hard to avoid treating him coolly.
Whether he noticed was unclear; probably not, since he made the eminently logical suggestion that  they should drive to Randall Lodge together, and to her chagrin she could think of no good reason to refuse.
With luck, he would need all his concentration for the traffic.
Once again she found Toby in the Mess late on a Wednesday afternoon.
‘Hello there, Meryl.
Did you decide to go to your symposium?’
‘Yes, I did.
It starts tomorrow evening.
Just a buffet meal after the registration, and an introductory talk from Anthea; the real nitty-gritty begins on Friday morning.’
‘Dominic…?’
He let the question hang delicately in the air.
‘He'll be there.
It's his first time.
We're travelling up together, believe it or not.
I don't know if he knows any history.’
‘The Battle of the Boyne, no doubt.’
She flashed him a quick grin.
‘Hardly within our limits.
I'm already worried that people will confuse the Black Death with the Great Plague.’
‘1348 and 1665.
Both mainly bubonic.
It's possible.’
‘I told you you should join.
Most of us are only amateurs.
You're not expected to have a Ph.D.
in history.’
‘One day, perhaps.
But I like to imbibe history from books, at my own pace, in elegant surroundings, preferably with a background of Mozart's Flute and Harp Concerto.’
‘I'll see what we can arrange for you.’
Donald Cummins, a plump registrar in geriatrics, entered the room noisily and thundered his way to their corner.
‘Nurse Batty is at it again,’ he announced.
‘Oh no.
What is it this time?’
Toby went so far as to straighten his back.
‘She collected all the patients' false teeth last night — and put them into the same bowl!
None of them has been identified, so all the old grannies are champing toothlessly today.’
His companions rocked with laughter.
‘Reminds me of Nurse Crane when I was doing surgery,’ said Toby.
‘Every ward round she religiously made a note in her little book which wound drains to shorten.
When we had become very curious about why none of the drains had fallen out, it transpired that she was diligently cutting an inch a day off the other end!’
Meryl crunched a piece of celery with relish and made a covert appraisal of the other guests at the long table.
On her left was a thin, grey-haired woman with deep lines between her eyes and curving past the sides of her mouth.
She had introduced herself in rather a peevish voice as Gladys someone-or-other.
Meryl remembered her face from previous meetings, but this was their first real contact.
Across the table sat a group of three boisterous lads and further along, but too far for conversation, was Dominic, talking animatedly with a well-built young man whose quiff of blond hair kept falling into his eyes.
Professor St John Goth sat at her right elbow, dividing his attention with perfect diplomacy between Meryl and Anthea Darnell, who had the seat on the other side.
‘I love these meetings,’ he was saying to Meryl.
‘They're like a holiday for me.
No-one's too old to learn, and it's a good excuse to see my friends and exchange a bit of gossip.’
‘I'm looking forward to your lecture,’ said Meryl frankly.
‘I've always found Henry the Third's reign confusing.
It's difficult to imagine him as a Plantagenet — rather like Edward the Second.
They were both weak kings who gave generous patronage to foreigners and annoyed their own barons…neither had any military ability to speak of.’
‘You prefer warrior kings, then?’
Meryl looked down at her plate.
‘Well, I can't deny I find them more interesting.
Social reform was very worthy, of course, but I confess I'd rather hear about the battles.
How they coped with all that armour…
People were supposed to be shorter then, but some longbows were over six feet in length, not to mention bills and halberds and pikes.
A line of pikemen must have looked like some kind of rampaging porcupine.’
The professor's grey moustache twitched, and his hawkish face creased into a smile.
‘Medieval armies captured my imagination, too, as a boy, and I haven't grown out of it yet.’
‘It's not just the bloodthirsty aspects,’ she continued.
‘I'd like to learn about the tactics, the weather, the terrain — everything that influenced the final result.’
‘You'll enjoy the lecture after mine, then.
Mr Stewart is going to  describe the battle of Evesham in full detail.’
‘Good.
I simply can't understand how Simon de Montfort, with his experience, could allow himself to be trapped in a loop of the Avon.’
‘I trust all will be explained.
How are things with you at the District Hospital?
You're still with Anthea, I gather.’
‘Oh, ticking over,’ said Meryl vaguely, trying to ignore the unpleasant pang of reminder engendered by his question.
‘I shall have to look for another job before too long, though.
Wherever I go, I hope there will be a local branch of the Circle.’
‘If there isn't, you could start one.’
The meal progressed, and Meryl lingered over her coffee.
About half of the sixty-five guests had wandered through into the lecture hall, but since Anthea was due to give the address and she was still talking to the professor, there was time to spare.
Obliquely across the table, Dominic rose to his feet with the large blond young man, and skirted round the end of the table to stand behind Meryl's chair.
‘Meryl, have you a minute?
This is Lee Horan, from Illinois.
He's a medical student, doing an obstetrics and gynaecology elective at the District.
Dr Darnell asked him along here.
Lee — Meryl Armitage, my colleague in paediatrics.’
‘Pleased to meet you, Meryl.
Her small hand was enveloped by his huge one, and squeezed.
‘I sure was lucky that someone dropped out this weekend.
I've always been fascinated by British history.
I went to London two weeks running to look at the Tower!’
‘Well, I hope you enjoy the symposium.
The programme is quite diverse — something for everyone, that's the aim.’
‘We're just going through to the hall,’ said Dominic.
‘Please join us.’
Lee's deep blue eyes raked her body with unabashed interest, and she felt immediately defensive.
‘In a couple of minutes.
Do go ahead.’
As she turned back to her coffee, she became aware that Anthea was gathering up her bag and some programmes, and the professor was sitting oddly rigid in his chair, staring after the two young men with an appalled expression on his face.
Meryl wondered for a moment if he were ill.
‘Professor…’
He blinked, and tore his gaze away from them with an effort.
‘Meryl, do you know that young man's name?
On the left, with the curly black hair?’
‘Yes.
It's Dominic Wetherby.
I work with him.’
‘Dominic Wetherby.’
His voice dropped to a whisper, and he looked absolutely stunned before nodding as if in agreement with what she had said.
Meryl hesitated, not liking to leave him, then she heard Anthea's clear tones.
‘Come along, Aubrey.
You're not allowed to miss my welcoming speech.
This is going to be an eventful weekend for all concerned.’
The oak benches in the lounge bar of The Crown were hard; nevertheless, Dominic felt perfectly relaxed.
He could see that Lee was attracted to Meryl, and this amused him, because he knew instinctively that he only had to turn on his own powerful charm and the result would be a foregone conclusion.
Meryl had joined them with some reluctance after the welcoming address, but the moment had been well chosen; Anthea and the professor had been deep in conversation with an eager group of ladies from Leicester, leaving Meryl momentarily alone.
He sipped his beer, and gave a proportion of his attention to Lee, who was explaining the difficulties of transatlantic obstetric practice under the eagle eye of a litigation-hungry public.
The rest of his mind clinically assessed the options that this residential weekend had suddenly thrown open to him.
His affair with Anthea was a mistake.
It needed to be terminated, and soon.
He acknowledged to himself his own share of the blame.
Ever since his time as a medical student, he had been drawn towards women who were higher up the career ladder, revelling in both the challenge and the reflected glory when he  succeeded.
‘You've landed an S.H.0.?’ his friends would gasp.
Yes, those ladies had given a useful fillip to his prestige.
Paradoxically, Anthea now threatened to become a millstone to drag him down.
After his first flush of self-congratulation for seducing someone who held such power in the hospital hierarchy, doubts had quickly set in.
His whole future, far from being secure, was now endangered.
Never mind the plaudits of friends.
The affair had to be kept secret, or the scandal within the hospital would irrevocably damage his career.
And Anthea had become emotionally dependent on him in an alarmingly short time…
He looked across the table at Meryl, who was giving a good impression of hanging on to every word Lee said.
It was quite true that she had deserved that paediatric registrar post.
Despite his utterances during the brief encounter with Toby, Dominic had actually been surprised to be offered the job.
Only a fool would have turned it down, of course, but he was uncomfortably aware that Anthea, who had persuaded him to apply, had been instrumental in his appointment.
Being beholden to anybody was not part of Dominic's grand strategy.
That would have to stop.
A cynical smile crossed his face, hidden behind the lip of the beer glass.
Kill two birds with one stone, Dominic lad.
Anthea, out.
Meryl, in — for a short while, at least.
As well as proving to Anthea he meant business, it would put one over that nauseating Toby Latimer in no mean fashion.
A few months as a registrar in Nottingham, then he would be well set up for a job in the place of his choice.
References would be no problem.
If Anthea was still feeling vindictive by then, he would ask Dr Taggart.
‘…and people think a healthy baby is a right,’ Lee was saying.
‘If there's something wrong, it has to be the doctor's fault.
Do you know that two-thirds of obstetricians in the States have been sued at least once in their lives?
My chief's brother has given up the obstetrics side of his practice altogether now, and just does the gynaecology.’
‘I'd hate to practise defensive medicine,’ commented Meryl.
‘All those unnecessary tests and procedures.
Harrowing for the patient, not to mention the expense incurred.
And clinical freedom being slowly stifled.’
‘It's stifled by all the trials, as well,’ continued Lee.
‘If you were doing oncology, you'd be trapped in a straitjacket of protocols.’
‘Just a minute,’ chipped in Dominic, deciding it was time he made his contribution.
‘Clinical trials are a vital part of modern medicine.
You wouldn't want the management of patients to be based on anecdotal evidence, would you, with all its distortions?
Trials at least provide a statistically acceptable basis for deciding whether or not a treatment is any good.’
‘You're right,’ said Lee generously.
‘I was just getting carried away.
Doctors in the 'thirties had it easy.
They did what they thought was best in the circumstances.’
‘And wrung their hands when patients died of simple infections because penicillin hadn't been discovered,’ teased Dominic.
‘Why are we all talking about medicine?’ asked Meryl.
‘It's always the same when medics get together.
Would you mind if we changed the subject?
This is a history weekend.
Lee — when did you become interested in British history?’
‘Let's see, now.
I think it was when I came across that marvellous little book by Sellar and Yeatman —1066 and All That .
An English friend sent it to me.
I realised I was missing half the jokes, so I mugged up from a textbook — and here I am, ready for more!’
Dominic chuckled.
‘I like that book, too.
Especially where the duties of medieval barons are outlined…
‘To hasten the King's death, deposition, insanity, etc., and make sure that there were always at least three false claimants to the throne’, among other things.’
Lee laughed heartily, showing his large strong American teeth, while Meryl flashed a glance of surprise at Dominic.
So she thought he didn't know any history, did she?
Wrong again, Meryl.
‘Perhaps Professor St John Goth can use that in his lecture tomorrow,’ said Lee.
‘Simon de Montfort seems to have been a pretty important baron.’
‘Before he was hacked into several pieces at Evesham.’
‘My favourite story concerns his son,’ Meryl nursed her gin and tonic as she spoke.
‘He was called Simon too, just to be confusing.
Shortly before the battle of Evesham, Prince Edward surprised Simon Junior's knights asleep in Kenilworth town, where the  castle garrison had gone to use the baths.
Half of them ran away starkers, and Simon himself had to row across the mere — some versions say he swam — in his nightshirt to get back inside the castle.
After a tremendous pounding from the siege guns of the royal army the following spring, they still hadn't surrendered, so the Archbishop of Canterbury came to excommunicate them.’
‘What happened?’
‘Oh, one of the defenders put on clerical robes and jeered back at him from the top of the curtain wall.’
They approached the imposing front door of Randall Lodge at five minutes to eleven.
‘Just in time,’ whispered Dominic, checking his watch.
‘We might have been locked out.’
‘Dr Darnell said she'd lend a key to anyone who wanted to stay out late,’ said Lee, staggering slightly and leaning on Meryl's shoulder, to her irritation.
‘Apparently the domestic staff go off duty around nine-thirty, after they've finished the washing-up.’
‘There's bread and cheese in the kitchen if anybody wants some.’
Dominic looked at them both enquiringly, but there was no response.
Inside, they quietly ascended the huge curved staircase which led to their bedrooms on the upper floor.
Some members were housed in an annexe, but they were fortunate enough to have been allocated the spartan, but adequate rooms in the main building.
At the top of the stairs, they paused.
Dominic and Lee would take the corridor straight ahead; Meryl's room was in the parallel east wing corridor, reached via the gallery overlooking the stairwell.
‘Goodnight,’ she whispered.
Dominic gave a small bow.
‘Until tomorrow.’
After a hearty cooked breakfast the next morning, Meryl hurried to the hall to find a good seat where she would get the best out of the professor's lecture.
About half way back, next to the central aisle, would be ideal, she decided.
As she sat down and took out her notebook, she noticed the grey-haired woman, Gladys whatever-it-was, enter the hall and look around uncertainly.
Meryl hastily dropped her eyes.
Their encounter the previous day had proved to be somewhat tedious, her most thoughtful conversational gambits earning only strange, disconnected replies.
The prospect of a repetition held no appeal.
Perhaps Gladys would join the group of Leicester ladies who were fluttering with anticipation in the back corner.
It was not her lucky day.
There was a rustle beside her as Gladys removed a shapeless cardigan and hung it over the back of the adjoining chair.
She was wearing a cheap polyester dress in hideous shades of brown and pink, and her hair looked wispy and unkempt.
‘You don't mind if I sit here, do you?’ she asked.
‘Of course not,’ replied Meryl, without her usual warm smile.
Damn.
More rustling followed as Gladys delved into a large grey synthetic leather bag.
‘I'll just get my glasses…’
A moment later, the contents were all over the floor, and the woman gave a cluck of annoyance.
Sighing inwardly, Meryl bent to help.
A motley collection of tawdry items was scattered over an area at least four feet square.
She crouched down to retrieve a comb from underneath the seat in front, and her fingers brushed what appeared to be a small piece of card.
On closer inspection, it proved to be the photograph of a young girl of seven or eight years.
The features, if considered alone, were plain, but somehow the innocence and trust of the child shone through.
It was a black and white picture, superficially scratched, and curling at the edges, as if it had received much handling.
‘Here,’ said Meryl, passing it across to the woman squatting beside her.
‘Thank you,’ she replied, then looked narrowly at Meryl.
‘My niece…a lovely child.’
She seemed to think some kind of explanation was necessary.
‘Yes,’ agreed Meryl with tact.
They continued to scrabble on the floor until all the spilt items had been retrieved.
There was an air of expectancy around them as Professor St John Goth ascended the platform in his slow, deliberate way.
Meryl handed over the last of the spoils, a nail file and some kind of newspaper cutting, then settled in her seat to give her full attention to the lecture.
Outside Meryl's bedroom window, a tree swayed in the slight breeze and the last streaks of light finally faded from the sky.
She pulled the thin green curtains together and sat on her bed.
It was not yet ten o'clock, so presumably Dominic and Lee were still at The Crown.
She had turned down their invitation tonight, partly because she was tired, and partly because she wanted to read the typed hand-outs which had accompanied the day's lectures.
The papers lay there unread, however, because her mind was in a turmoil.
Dominic was the cause of her confusion.
After dinner they had walked in the grounds as a threesome before Lee had suggested another trip to the pub.
When she had politely declined, despite their pressure, Dominic had smiled at her, a smile of dazzling sweetness, and reached out his hand to hold the side of her face, gently caressing the smooth skin just above her jaw with his thumb.
It was a gesture of possession, which had flooded Lee's face with disappointment and her own with a mixture of conflicting emotions.
‘Whatever you want, Meryl,’ Dominic had said, his eyes brilliant with an unmistakable message.
‘I'll see you later.’
Meryl burned at the memory of that piercing look, which had shot right through her armour of professional resentment to the vulnerable core.
Somehow he knew that she felt in need of comfort that weekend — even that provided by the man she had most cause to hate.
Was it Dominic's fault that he had been given the job she wanted so badly?
No.
Fostering a grievance was childish.
Immature.
The idea of him coming to her room both excited and disturbed her.
She had not misread the general gist of his words, imprecise though they were.
His statement was really an invitation, an offer for her to think about, delivered in the confident style of one who was used to having his own way with women.
In normal circumstances, this would have infuriated her far  more than the clumsy attentions of Lee, but tonight a treacherous part of her soul kept hissing, ‘Why not?
He's gorgeous, and you're lonely.
Why not?’
Meryl shook her head to scatter insidious images, and her hand strayed blindly towards the tiny radio on the bedside chest of drawers.
She pressed a button.
A tinny voice rang out, reading the ten o'clock news bulletin.
‘…the escape of Sidney Burrows from Rampton top security hospital at six o'clock this evening.
Members of the public are warned not to  aproach this man, who is highly dangerous.
In the Lebanon…’
Meryl switched it off again and stared across the room, her heart thudding.
Rampton.
The place where the criminally insane were kept under lock and key.
Stranglers.
Rapists.
People who wielded axes and carving knives.
Barely six miles away from Randall Lodge.
She shivered as she thought of the creature who might even now be stalking the velvet blackness outside, looking up at the lighted windows, deciding whether or not to break in.
Through the wall came the murmur of someone else's radio.
The Lodge's original bedrooms had each been converted into two or three small chambers, poorly soundproofed.
Chiding herself for her reflex reaction of fear, Meryl strode to the window and examined the catch.
Perfectly firm, she told herself.
Satisfied?
At eleven-thirty Meryl was still restless.
She had changed into a loose gauzy nightdress and released her hair so that it fell, witch-like, over her shoulders.
With long, slow strokes she brushed it, then applied a small quantity of ‘Blue Grass’ to her wrists and throat.
She had made up her mind about Dominic.
She wanted to see him, but was no longer sure if he intended to come to her.
He might be downstairs in the plush lounge, or in his own room talking to Lee.
Nothing would persuade her to actually go and find out.
That was altogether too brazen.
But the walls of her room seemed suddenly oppressive, and she needed to be somewhere less claustrophobic.
Closing the door quietly behind her, she padded along the  corridor to its junction with the gallery.
Anthea's room was the only one to open onto the gallery itself, opposite the huge stairwell, and round the far corner was the men's corridor.
Meryl Sank down on a window-seat and listened; already the house was uncannily quiet.
There was to be a very full programme of lectures on the Saturday, and a formal dinner, so no doubt people were getting a good night's sleep in readiness.
Despite the carpeted floor and the mules on her feet, Meryl already felt chilled, as if cold water was slowly rising up her legs.
Just to talk to Dominic would be enough tonight, if only she knew where he was.
A few words of friendship, some indication that she now bore no grudge about the job.
If anything else was to happen, so be it.
His physical attractions were undeniable, and the idea of an abrupt transition from colleague to lover no longer seemed remarkable.
A brief fling, no questions asked…
Nearby, a door opened then closed again.
As Meryl leaned forward in the alcove, poised to stand, Gladys emerged soundlessly from the ladies' corridor, still wearing her garish dress.
She passed Meryl's niche oblivious of the girl's presence and paused to admire an altar cloth hanging near Anthea's bedroom.
Meryl coughed briefly to advertise her presence, and Gladys swung round.
‘Hello.
You'll catch cold like that.’
The older women indicated Meryl's state of attire with a careless gesture of her hand.
‘I know.
I should have brought a dressing-gown.
Aren't these lovely altar cloths and tapestries?
Dr Darnell brought them.’
‘Who?’
‘Anthea Darnell, the branch secretary.
These statuettes are hers as well.’
Meryl ran a finger over the contours of a bronze statuette of the Black prince, standing proudly on a table against the gallery wall.
Gladys was still examining the altar cloth's intricate embroidery.
‘I see,’ she said vaguely.
‘I sent my money to the treasurer.’
After a few minutes of stilted, low-voiced conversation, Gladys retreated to her room, and Meryl thankfully resumed her seat in the window.
She half-pulled the heavy red velvet curtain, so unlike the flimsy drapes which graced the bedrooms, to avoid the embarrassment of being seen, aimlessly lurking, by someone else.
The minutes ticked by, and the house seemed to settle for sleep.
Just when she had decided to go back to her room rather than turn into a block of ice, a warning creak issued from the men's corridor.
Meryl shrank back into her deeply shadowed glory-hole and caught her breath.
Dominic was walking softly but purposefully along the gallery, coming straight towards her.
So he wanted her after all!
When he went round the corner to her room and knocked, she would have to pretend that she had been down to the kitchens.
His light tap was on another door altogether.
Meryl stared unseeingly ahead, teeth clenched, rigid with an icy rage.
Thirty minutes since Dominic had gone inside that room…time enough for a readjustment of ideas, time enough to let resentment flood back to the place it had just left.
You poor dupe, she told herself.
The casting couch in reverse.
Incredible, but true.
Anthea lay stretched on her narrow single bed, sweat filming her face, and a sheet wrapped tightly around her left ankle.
Alongside, Dominic was utterly silent, and she could feel his body growing cooler as he slouched against the bed-head with casual unconcern for his nakedness.
Not even a perfunctory kiss on the cheek this time.
Their coupling had been not only loveless, but a complete disaster.
She was swamped by humiliation and a sudden hollow anxiety as to their future.
It was as if Dominic had spent the last two months play-acting and tonight had decided to drop the façade — totally, with no mercy.
‘I think we need to talk, Anthea.’
Not Thea.
Another Dominic had called her Thea.
That young man had been full of laughter, a bright-eyed echo of her own youth, one whose passion and sensitivity had made her dare to dream of a permanent partnership.
Now he had vanished, and left nothing at all behind.
She sat up in the bed and pulled the covers up to her armpits in an attempt to recoup a little of her dignity.
It was not the tome for any kind of deep discussion; her senses were in shock, and she  knew she would be worsted.
Dominic would have all the answers she didn't want to hear.
‘Not just now.
There's time enough…
Would you get us something to eat?’
He gave a chuckle which sounded almost like the other
Dominic, and swung his legs over the side of the bed.
‘Not like this I won't.
Where's your dressing-gown?’
‘Hanging from that hook.
There's bread and cheese down in the kitchens.’
She watched him as he crossed the room and donned the peach-coloured robe, all his movements easy and confident.
He reminded her of statues she had seen of Apollo.
Such a beautiful body.
So lean-limbed, slim and perfect.
All he needed was a bow or a lyre.
Apollo…a patron of medicine, yes.
But god of divine distance, threatening from afar, feared by his peers, making men aware of their own guilt —
Anthea gripped the mangled sheet fiercely in her long, strong fingers.
Dominic, tying the belt of the dressing-gown, seemed unaware of her.
She bit her lip against a surge of mingled fury and regret.
I'm a consultant, she wanted to scream.
You can't treat me like this!
He opened the door noiselessly and disappeared.
Anthea inhaled sharply, and her nostrils flared.
Not Apollo!
Oh, no.
Only the body, that deceitful outer shell, the skin smooth and pale as marble.
Inside he was Pan.
Lazy, lusty Pan.
She stood up and scanned the room, as if for inspiration.
Her mind was crowded with images of pointing fingers, elbows nudging ribs, her carefully nurtured reputation in ruins.
How discreet was Dominic likely to be?
It might amuse him to rub salt into her wound, to display that notches-on-the-bedhead braggadocio shared by so many of his fellows.
She had to do something — and very quickly.
Dominic crept carefully down the stairs, keeping a tight hold on the gleaming mahogany banister.
The gallery light was out — not unreasonable at this hour — and he had been unable to find the switch.
A single wall-lamp glowed in the hall.
He felt no concern, as the dimness suited his purpose.
It would  be inconvenient to be spotted by Lee, and he was in no mood for smalltalk with anyone else.
Tonight was quite difficult enough.
Only Anthea's insistence had brought him to her room, where matters had taken their own turn.
He had intended to visit Meryl, who was probably fast asleep by now.
At least he had been non-specific, so the chances were still good.
But there was Anthea to contend with first.
A small worm of self-disgust reared its blind head within his belly.
Dominic, you're a gigolo.
You've really done it this time.
He walked along the small passage leading to the kitchen, then padded beyond it into the scullery before pressing a light-switch.
There was no point in attracting attention.
The kitchen bread-bin yielded three loaves of wrapped sliced white bread, and a single granary loaf.
Dominic sorted through the steely shapes in the table drawer until he found the bread-knife.
Deftly, he cut four thick slices from the granary loaf, then began his search for the cheese.
In the fridge, of course.
Bound to be.
He pulled on the refrigerator door, which opened with a slight squeak, and crouched down behind it to assess the produce on the brightly-lit shelves.
Cheddar.
What else?
White Cheshire.
Double Gloucester.
Danish Blue — ah!
And wait a minute…
Sage Derby.
One of his favourites.
As he reached out for the cheese, he heard a faint sound behind him…
Anthea?
He began to turn his head, but was a lifetime too late.
With the flash of a million stars exploding, his brain registered its outrage as he was viciously felled.
A police Sierra cruised along the A614 near the mining village of Ollerton.
It was two a.m., and Constable Rennie, at the wheel, was experiencing a vague sense of anticlimax and incipient boredom.
Thirty minutes earlier the radio had crackled with news of a definite sighting of the escapee Burrows, who had broken  into a deserted farmhouse between Retford and Gainsborough.
Members of the Special Operations Unit had immediately surrounded the area, trapping him in a pocket of countryside.
It now seemed very unlikely that Constable Rennie would be able to realise his dream of personally apprehending the madman; he didn't know whether to feel frustrated or relieved.
His colleague stirred, and fixed his attention on a large dark car which was making a stately progress towards them on the  southband lane.
‘Look at that joker.
Twenty-five miles an hour at the most.
What do you think?’
‘It's the sight of us, me boy.
Strikes fear into the most innocent…hang on.’
As they swept past the car, a Daimler, Rennie caught sight of the driver's face.
One glimpse brought all his prejudices bubbling up from their hidden depths.
Boredom forgotten, he licked his lips.
‘Probably drunk,’ he said tersely to Constable Phelps.
‘Let's stop him.’
The road was empty apart from the retreating rear end of the Daimler, still visible in his driving mirror.
Without any kind of warning to Phelps, he executed an unnecessarily dramatic handbrake turn, followed his quarry for long enough to ascertain its speed, then quickly overhauled it, flashing his ‘Police.
Stop.’
sign.
The driver of the other car pulled up without demur.
As Rennie swaggered towards him, he obligingly wound down the window, depriving Rennie of the peremptory tap he enjoyed.
‘Good morning, Constable.
How may I help you?’
The cultured voice played on Rennie's baser instincts, but in the presence of Phelps, he thought it advisable to behave as impeccably as he could.
‘Good morning, Sir.
We observed that you were travelling excessively slowly on a wide road, unimpeded by any other traffic.
Can you explain why?’
‘Certainly.
I'm afraid my speedometer has just started to jam.
On catching sight of your car, it seemed wise to go carefully.’
‘May we see your driving licence, please?’
‘Of course.’
The driver reached across to the passenger seat for  a receptacle which caused Rennie's lip to curl in scorn.
He extracted the licence and handed it through the window.
‘Your name, Sir?,
He answered without hesitation.
‘Your address?’
This was also supplied.
‘Would you mind telling me where you have just been, and where you are going?’
‘I've been to a party in the village of Sutton, and I'm on my way home.’
‘Did you have anything to drink?’
‘Let me see…yes, one Campari and soda at about nine o'clock.
Nothing else.
I'm driving, you understand.’
Rennie understood that his leg was being gently pulled, and he didn't like it.
Phelps stood silently in the background.
‘I shall have to ask you to undertake a breathalyser test, Sir.
Please would you step outside the car?’
The blue Daimler slowly disgorged its occupant, whose unfolded height was five inches greater than Constable Rennie's own.
‘Blow here, please — a good full breath.’
The man's languid effort appeared to be a calculated insult.
Checking his temper, Rennie coldly advised him to do better.
‘I hold the instrument,’ he added, when the driver made as if to grasp it.
‘I press the little buttons.
You just blow.’
To his chagrin, the red light obstinately refused to glow, and the meter needle barely moved.
He handed the device to Phelps with a suppressed snort.
‘Thank you, Sir.
Would you now please demonstrate that all your lights are in working order?’
‘With pleasure.’
At the conclusion of the episode, Rennie contented himself with a warning about defective speedometers.
Something he had noticed on the man's driving licence prompted reticence.
Nevertheless, as the Daimler drove smoothly away, he scribbled its number in his notebook.
By nine a.m., Detective Inspector Richard Montgomery of Nottingham C.I.D.
and his trusty assistant, Detective Sergeant William Bird, were speeding up the same road.
The information they had was sketchy, to say the least, but they had responded immediately to the appeal of Retford's station sergeant.
‘A young doctor on a conference at Randall Lodge.
Blunt instrument murder.
Whatever next?’
Sergeant Bird shook his head in disbelief.
‘Do they know what the murder weapon was?’
‘Not yet.’
Montgomery was staring through the windscreen with his chilly blue eyes, presumably working out his plan of action once they arrived.
The Incident Room.
Who to interview.
The collation of evidence from the scenes-of-crime officers.
‘It doesn't sound like our friend Burrows,’ he continued.
‘The modus operandi is quite different.
And Channing says there was no obvious evidence of a break-in.
Nevertheless, we've got to keep an open mind.’
‘As the great man pointed out, we can't theorise without data,’ cited Sergeant Bird, who spent most of his evenings alone with a book.
Montgomery gave a brief smile.
‘We certainly haven't enough data at the moment.
Perhaps we'll find Burrows’ fingerprints at the scene, then it'll be ‘Elementary, my dear Watson’.
Sorry; I'm forgetting.
He didn't say that, did he?
It's one of those myths.’
‘Actually, Sir, he did.’
‘No, no.
I remember reading it somewhere.
It's a misquote.
Conan Doyle really wrote something like —‘Excellent!’
I cried.
‘Elementary,’ said he.
'' That story about betrayal in the Indian Mutiny.
Holmes had made a deduction regarding Watson himself.
It's been twisted like Nelson's dying words.
People are claiming he didn't gasp, ‘Kiss me, Hardy’.
He may have said, ‘Kismet’.'
‘Kismet?’
Fate, Destiny.
An interesting idea.
‘Spoils the romance, Sir.
But I stand firm on Sherlock Holmes.
Would you care to wager?’
Montgomery hesitated.
His bulky, kindhearted sergeant was not a betting man by nature, and if persuaded to do so, only backed certainties.
Volunteering a wager was unprecedented, therefore highly suspicious.
Even so, Montgomery was sure of his ground.
‘We're talking about Conan Doyle's Sherlock Holmes,’ he said cautiously.
‘None of these modern imitations.’
‘Of course,’ replied Sergeant Bird, quite unperturbed.
‘I am saying that I can produce a printed Sherlock Holmes story by Conan Doyle which contains the words ‘Elementary, my dear Watson.’
You say I can't.
Is that correct?’
‘You're on for a fiver.’
Sergeant Bird relaxed more comfortably in the seat with a satisfied smile on his face.
‘Nearly there.’
The countryside had become flatter since they had passed the raw black scars on the mining areas and the remaining tracts of Sherwood Forest.
They drove carefully through the tiny village of Barton — a huddle of brick houses, a church and a post office — and spotted the stone gateposts of Randall Lodge on the right.
A uniformed constable was standing there, trying to look nonchalant.
‘People are being discouraged to leave the building,’ said Montgomery.
‘It could be an inside job.’
Two more constables guarded the main door.
As Montgomery pulled on the handbrake, Sergeant Channing of the Retford police emerged eagerly to greet him.
‘Is Frobisher here yet?’ asked Montgomery when the introductions were completed.
Frobisher was Nottingham's Home Office pathologist.
Although close to retirement, he still took an active part in teaching the University students, and the breadth of his knowledge embraced not only clinical forensic work, but also the most up-to-date laboratory tests.
Many times he had been able to explain the results of complicated chemical analyses performed in conjunction with his own rôle, for which Montgomery had cause to be grateful.
‘No, Sir,’ replied Channing.
‘But Dr Lawton has seen the body.’
‘Tell me all you know.’
‘Well, this Lodge is owned by Trent Regional Health Authority.
They hold various courses and conferences here.
When it's not in use for that sort of purpose, it's hired out.
This weekend the Medieval Circle, a bunch of amateur historians, is holding a  convention.
There are sixty-five resident members, who all arrived on Thursday evening.
Thirty have bedrooms in the Lodge itself, and the rest sleep in an annexe at the back.
A handful of other members who live locally attend just for the lectures.
‘The building is locked at eleven o'clock each night, but anyone wishing to stay out later may be given a key.
There is a housekeeper, Mrs Reynolds, who organises the catering with the help of three local ladies.
She leaves at nine-thirty, when dinner is finished and the washing-up is done.
Bread and cheese is left in the kitchen for anyone who is hungry during the night.
‘One of her assistants comes in early each morning to begin the preparations for breakfast.
Today it was Sarah Parker, a girl of nineteen who lives next door to the church.
She unlocked the scullery door at seven-fifteen this morning — actually, she was late.
She should have started at seven — and found the body almost immediately.’
‘You said on the ‘phone that there was no obvious sign of a forced entry.
Is that still the case?’
‘Yes, Sir.
We've checked the whole of the ground floor, and everything seems in order.
Two officers are examining the first floor right now; there is some ivy.’
‘What about the victim?’
‘Twenty-six-year-old doctor, name of Dominic Michael Wetherby.
He was senior house officer in paediatrics at the District Hospital.
Two of his colleagues are here as well, his consultant Anthea Darnell, and the other S.H.
0.
Meryl Armitage.’
‘Right.
Show me.’
They entered a large hall gleaming with mahogany furniture.
To the right a magnificent staircase, carpeted in deep wine red, curved round to adjoin the left hand side of the gallery above.
Tapestries bearing heraldic devices hung on the walls, and medieval artefacts including statuettes, shields and facsimile books of hours, were displayed on strategically positioned tables.
They passed through an open doorway beneath the stairs into a short, narrow corridor which led to the kitchen.
‘Just a cloakroom off here,’ commented Channing, demonstrating.
They stepped into the kitchen itself, and Montgomery's face registered surprise.
‘This is how the body was found?’
‘Yes, Sir.
Exactly like this.’
In front of the refrigerator lay the shape of a man, but all that could be seen were the backs of the calves, and the pale, poignant soles of a pair of bare feet.
The rest was shrouded by a white linen tablecloth, which gave every appearance of being carefully arranged.
At the place where the head distorted the linen into a spherical bulge, the crisp whiteness was marred by an ugly dark red stain.
An elderly myopic gentleman stepped forward.
‘This is Dr Lawton,’ said Channing.
‘Detective Inspector Montgomery, Detective Sergeant Bird.’
‘I haven't been able to examine the body fully,’ said Dr Lawton at once.
‘I was loath to disturb this curious state of affairs until your officers had completed their search for clues and the photographs had been taken.
However, I did slightly disarrange the lower part of that tablecloth in order to ascertain the core temperature.
This young man died between twelve and two this morning, probably close to one o'clock.’
Montgomery rapidly commandeered the library as his interview room.
It was a gracious, high-ceilinged room, well placed for his purposes and steeped in the smell of leather and lavender furniture polish.
The moulded plasterwork of the walls was probably original, but the shining parquet floor had clearly been added much more recently and gave the room a stark, functional look.
Only the Wilton rug stretched between two fireside chairs beckoned as a cosy oasis.
Through the first tall window one end of a mobile trailer, the main incident room, could just be seen.
‘We'll let the lectures continue,’ he said to Channing.
‘It's the best possible thing.
We can interview people singly and discreetly while the rest are kept entertained.’
A burly constable was already standing by the public telephone, and no-one so far had been sufficiently intrepid as to approach him.
Sergeant Bird nodded to him and began his own tour of the premises.
Everything was an intriguing mixture of old and new.
The  house itself, with its creeper-clad walls and pillared portico, represented relatively recent history.
Its Palladian style, which reminded him of a less pristine version of Broadlands, was modified, and he suspected that the building was actually less than two hundred years old, despite the weathering of the stone.
Inside, the oak panelling and crystal chandelier of the hall and stairway co-existed happily with the gleaming appliances in the kitchen and the uncomfortable plastic chairs of the lecture room.
His gaze wandered over the flags, tapestries and shields adorning the walls.
Presumably they were only here to set the scene for the current convention, as nothing represented a period later than the fifteenth century.
Many of the devices he could recognise; there was the Stafford knot, and that rose-en-soleil was surely something to do with Edward the Fourth.
Each depiction of arms was neatly labelled beneath.
‘The Earls of Berkeley’, he read thoughtfully, and considered the motto, ‘Dieu avec Nous ’.
‘Nous avec Dieu’ would be more appropriate now — that line of earls was extinct.
Extinct, like Dominic Wetherby.
Remembering his duty, he strode briskly up the stairs, keeping his eyes open for any suspicious signs.
He examined the gallery, then set off along the left-hand corridor where the men's bedrooms were.
At the bottom end he could go no further, and so retraced his steps.
He paused by the window seat, a replica of one he had noticed at the other end of the gallery.
This was the west side of the house, which was built in the shape of an E without the middle prong.
The view from the window was limited, but there were glimpses of rolling parkland beyond the mass of trees outside.
Randall Lodge's attractive formal gardens stretched round the east and south-east aspects.
On the point of continuing his general reconnaissance, Sergeant Bird suddenly stiffened.
Below, wading through the shrubbery with the most furtive air he had ever seen, was a thin man with a beaky nose.
Without hesitation, the sergeant swung round and hurried down the stairs as lightly as his own considerable bulk would allow.
He strode up to the constable on duty by the front door.
‘Has a young man asked permission to leave?,
‘No, Sir.
No-one has gone out this way.’
‘Thank you.’
He ran to the corner of a large clump of rhododendron bushes flanking the parking area and peered along the drive.
Anyone trying to escape undetected from the house, and heading for the village, would have to emerge from his cover at a point approximately half-way up the drive, or attempt to climb a very high wall.
Perhaps he hoped to bluff the policeman at the gate.
Within two minutes, the figure had reappeared and scuttled across the drive, looking faintly ridiculous bent double in broad daylight.
Sergeant Bird followed him into the parkland at a leisurely pace, then watched from behind a tree as the fugitive made three attempts at the lowest portion of the wall.
Eventually, with much scrabbling, he was over, and had dropped from sight.
His pursuer smiled grimly, and waited as many seconds as he dared before heaving himself over the wall with surprising agility.
Yes, the man was now across the road, walking towards the village with as casual a mien as he could muster.
He was going into the post office — no, the telephone box.
Striding as quickly as he could whilst avoiding drawing attention to himself, Sergeant Bird covered the hundred and fifty yards that separated them, and stood close behind a sharp-featured elderly lady who had just placed her shopping bag on the pavement next to the telephone box in a proprietary way.
There was a small hole in one of the panes of glass, but to his annoyance, Sergeant Bird could hear very little of the murmured conversation inside.
It didn't last long.
The beaky man came out, looking at no-one, hesitated, then went into the post office.
As the elderly lady began to pick up her bag, Sergeant Bird detained her.
‘Excuse me, madam.’
‘Yes?’
She glared at him, her eyebrows arched.
‘I am Sergeant Bird of the Nottinghamshire C.I.D.,’ he said, showing her his identification and shielding the manoeuvre from the post office window by means of his broad back.
‘We are investigating an incident at Randall Lodge, and need all possible assistance from members of the public.’
‘What sort of incident?’ she demanded at once.
‘I am not at liberty to say just yet, madam, but its nature is serious.
I'd be greatly obliged for your help.’
‘But I've never been to the Lodge.
How can I help you?’
With his best disarming manner, he explained.
Norman Pinder was creeping through the last few yards of shrubbery before he would reach the window of the small seminar room.
When the hand of the Law descended on his shoulder, he leapt into the air like a startled rabbit, then almost collapsed.
‘Excuse me, Sir.’
Montgomery looked up from the pile of papers he was scrutinising with a small frown.
‘Yes, Will?
What is it?’
‘I just caught one of the incumbents of this house leaving the premises in a decidedly surreptitious manner.
He climbed out of a ground floor window at the rear, then left the park at the point where the wall is lowest, avoiding our man at the gate.
He made a telephone call in the village, then bought some toothpaste at the shop.
The post office there is a kind of general store.
I apprehended him when he was about to re-enter through the same window.’
‘Strictly we can't detain them,’ said Montgomery.
‘But that's suspicious behaviour.
All right— who is he and what was his story?’
‘Name of Norman Pinder.
Aged thirty-two.
Married, but his wife isn't here.
She's at their home in Grantham.
He's been a member of the Medieval Circle for twelve years and goes to all their functions.
He tried to deny he'd been to the village at first, but when I told him I'd watched his every move he said he'd gone for toothpaste and avoided our constables because he didn't think they'd allow him to go out.’
‘Pretty thin.’
‘Exactly.
He seems absolutely terrified of something.
And that phone call…
Part of it was overheard by one of the village ladies waiting just outside the telephone box.
Apparently he was talking to someone called Helen, and used the words, ‘You've got to say I was with you’.'
‘Bring him in, Will.
Let's see what he can tell us.’
‘Absolutely terrified’ began to look like an understatement.
The man whom Sergeant Bird ushered in through the door seemed to be buckling at the knees, and his Adam's apple jerked furiously in his throat as he swallowed time and again.
Beneath a crown of thinning mousy hair, pale grey eyes started thyrotoxically from their sockets.
His loose lips quivered.
‘Mr Pinder, I gather,’ began Montgomery.
‘Do sit down.
I'm Detective Inspector Montgomery.’
Norman Pinder subsided in a tangled mass of limbs, and his chair shot backwards over the highly polished parquet floor.
‘I haven't done anything,’ he gasped, when he had recovered his equilibrium.
‘No-one is suggesting you have,’ said Montgomery soothingly.
‘We just want your assistance with our enquiries.
Everyone here is going to be asked to give a statement.
Now, why did you sneak into the village in such an underhand manner, instead of asking our permission?’
‘I don't need your permission!’ squeaked Pinder, then decided that belligerence was something he couldn't sustain.
‘You'd have stopped me,’ he went on more quietly.
‘Why did you go?’
‘To get some toothpaste.
I'd run out.’
‘Funny time to run out, a day after the convention starts.
Didn't you notice you'd only packed the tail-end of a tube?’
‘Er, actually, I hadn't run out.
I forgot to bring any.’
‘I see.
What did you do yesterday, then?’
‘Borrowed some.’
‘From whom?’
‘One of the men on my corridor.’
‘Describe him.
He can confirm your story.’
‘I — er, well…
Shortish, with dark curly hair —’ He broke off at Montgomery's expression.
‘No, it wasn't.
I can't remember.
It isn't important.’
‘That's your opinion.
I beg to differ.
I think your difficulty arises from the fact that if you choose someone who's alive, they'll deny it, and if you indicate that it was Dr Wetherby, whose bedroom on my plan is next door to yours, you immediately establish a connection with him which will interest us.
I'm  prepared to hazard a guess that if we searched your belongings we'd find a perfectly respectable tube of toothpaste there.’
Pinder dropped his eyes, then raised them again appealingly.
‘You're right, Inspector.
I just wanted a reason for having been out, in case I was caught coming back.’
He was silent while the seconds ticked away, then he began again after a convulsive swallow.
‘I wanted to make a telephone call to my wife.
If she heard on the News that a man had been murdered here, she might have thought it was me.
I was going to reassure her.’
‘Very reasonable.
What's your wife's name, Mr Pinder?’
‘Vera.’
‘And the telephone number?’
‘Grantham five nine one four five.
But I didn't get through.
It's no good you ringing her.’
‘No, we wouldn't waste our time.
We intend to speak to Helen.
What's her number, please?’
The pale eyes goggled, and the Adam's apple repeated its imitation of an express lift.
‘I don't know what you mean,’ he articulated at last.
‘Look, Mr Pinder,’ sighed Montgomery.
‘We've a lot of people to see.
We know the substance of your conversation with Helen, and if you can explain it yourself now, it will count in your favour.
‘We can find out,’ he continued patiently.
‘It will simply take less time if you tell us.’
‘Who says I spoke to Helen?’
‘You've heard of wire taps…’
Montgomery was deliberately vague, but it was enough.
Norman Pinder's shoulders sagged miserably.
‘Helen's my sister,’ he began, then the door behind him opened.
‘Beg your pardon, Sir.
Dr Frobisher is asking for you.
He's completed his examination in the kitchen.’
The constable stood to one side to allow the detectives to file past him, Norman Pinder slouching between them.
‘Wait here in the hall,’ Montgomery instructed Pinder.
‘Sergeant Bird will be back for further words with you shortly.’
Inside the kitchen, Frobisher was kneeling beside the body, peering through his bifocals at the horrible dent in the skull.
‘Ah, Montgomery.
Your lads have been over this place with a fine-tooth comb.
I gather it's safe to touch things now.
Come and look.’
His fingers probed the matted blood-stained hair which obscured the injury.
‘Definitely a blunt instrument: even though the scalp appears cleanly lacerated in one place, there's a lot of bruising around it.
These hairs have been driven into the wound but not cut through — you see?
Depressed fracture of the skull beneath.
Occipito-parietal region.
Looks like just one blow.
No other injuries — but look at this hand!’
Dominic Wetherby's right hand was clutching a packet of cheese so tightly that it was impossible to prise it out of the dead grip.
‘Cadaveric spasm,’ said Frobisher.
‘It's a lot rarer than novelists would have you believe.’
‘Time of death?’ asked Montgomery.
‘Ah.
Difficult to be entirely sure.
This kitchen is unheated, and underneath the cloth he's only wearing a pair of underpants.
Cooling could well have been accelerated.
I'd say twelve at the earliest and three at the latest.’
‘Can't you be more precise?’
‘No.
Sorry.’
‘This tablecloth,’ went on Montgomery.
‘It was stuck to the wound with clotted blood.
Does that mean it was placed there almost immediately after the blow?’
‘Not necessarily.
Blood may have continued to ooze for some time after death, though less so here than from a dependent part.
That often happens with scalp wounds.
The cloth could have been placed there half an hour or so later.’
‘All right.
Could there have been a fight causing him to fall and hit the back of his head on something?
Or even a natural death, with the same result?’
‘That did occur to me, but it seems most unlikely.
For a start, the wound's a bit high on the head for a straight fall onto the occiput.
And it's a very distinctive shape, which doesn't conform with anything in this room.
I'll be able to tell you more when I've done the full PM.
For instance, if you fall on the back of your head, there's often damage to the opposite side of your brain — bruising, contusion, sometimes even laceration.
It's called a  ‘contre-coup’ injury.
I've seen them after road accidents when people have been hurled out of their cars.
You might even fracture your orbital plates — those are thin layers of bone above your eyes.
That could give you black eyes…there's no sign of that in this young man.’
Montgomery made his own examination of the body, his mouth compressed into a thin line of concentration.
‘Could the body have been moved?’ asked Sergeant Bird.
‘The main bloodstains are here right in front of the ‘fridge,’ said Montgomery from his crouched position.
‘And there are some more you don't know about.
While you were out chasing Norman Pinder, these were found.’
He opened the ‘fridge door, which just missed grazing Dominic's battered head, and pointed to the inside of the door near the egg compartment: it was defaced by a thin trail of minute splatters resembling blood.
‘The direction of the droplets is consistent with the theory that Dr Wetherby was crouched like me, reaching cheese from the ‘fridge, when he was struck from above and behind,’ continued Montgomery.
‘You'll notice that this ‘fridge opens from right to left, so the door would conceal the identity of anyone entering the kitchen for a few seconds at least.
The blood's being tested, but I'm not expecting to hear that it's of animal origin.’
He stood up.
‘We've got to find the murder weapon.
It's something very heavy, with an unusual, almost rounded end.
A cosh, perhaps?’
‘You don't think that fellow Burrows could have done it?’ asked Frobisher. 'From what I gather, he's still at large.’
‘Burrows strangled five women,’ said Montgomery.
‘He hasn't been known to use any other kind of violence.
If we assumed that Wetherby came across him unexpectedly on the premises, and turned away to give the alarm, how does that fit with the cheese and the bloodstains?
The alternative is a cold-blooded murder as we described before.
I suppose it's not completely out of the question, but there's no indication of how he got in.
They left the kitchen with its awful occupant, and returned to the library.
‘Right, Will,’ said Montgomery.
‘I'm going to ring the Chief  Super and keep him in touch with developments.
Channing is organising the house-to-house in the village.
We'll have our work cut out here taking statements from every person in this Lodge — the fingerprint boys will be after them, too.
I shall interview these four myself.’
He pointed to the names on his list.
‘What about the Nottingham end?’ asked his sergeant.
‘I'm sending Brian Jackson to make some enquiries at the District Hospital, then he can join us here.’
His face took on a long-suffering expression.
Jackson, albeit a married man with children like himself, had an incorrigibly juvenile streak which grated on Montgomery's nerves.
In fairness, he thought, there was probably a basic personality clash, because he greatly enjoyed his banter with William Bird if the time and place were right.
Anthea Darnell walked into the library with an erect back and a confident gait, slim, elegant, and giving every appearance of being in command of herself.
Her black hair was immaculate, and the pure silk violet dress fitted to perfection.
The polish on her fingernails neatly complemented the shade.
Montgomery wasn't fooled at all.
Behind the mask of her dark blue eyes lurked horror and shock, perhaps even guilt.
A muscle near her right cheekbone fluttered at erratic intervals, and the nail polish was chipped.
No new coat from a steady hand that morning.’
‘Dr Darnell,’ he began as soon as he had introduced himself, ‘I know that Sergeant Channing has asked you a lot of questions already, but in your position as co-ordinator here, you'll appreciate that your help is very important to us.
We need to know not only the practical arrangements for the resident members, but anything you can tell us about Dominic Wetherby himself.
I believe he worked for you.’
‘Yes.
‘With me’ is more correct; we're all employed by the Health Authority.’
Montgomery made a mental note of this small display of the pedantic.
It was a common enough defence mechanism, but he was interested to see how many Anthea Darnell would be needing to employ.
‘Tell me about Dominic.
What sort of doctor was he?’
‘Bright, reasonably ambitious.’
‘Did he enjoy his work?’
‘Yes.
He was good with the children.
The Irish in him, I think.’
‘He was a senior house officer, is that right?’
‘At this moment, yes, but he'd been promoted to registrar and would have assumed that title in a fortnight's time.’
‘So there were no career difficulties or worries?’
‘None at all.’
‘What did you think of him personally?’
‘He was friendly and outgoing.
I don't know what he did with his spare time, although I suspect from his conversation that a lot of it was spent in pubs.’
‘Did he have a girlfriend or fiancée?’
Anthea looked thoughtful.
‘No fiancée, but there were various girls.
None of them seemed to last very long.’
‘Can you give me any names?’
She gave a regretful smile.
‘I'm sorry.’
‘All right.
Let me know if you think of any later…
You said he had an Irish manner.
Was he Irish?’
‘No.
Just his grandmother.
She came from County Antrim, he told me.’
‘Ah, Ulster.
Did he have any political connections?’
‘None that I've heard of.’
‘Where are his family now?’
‘New Zealand, Inspector.
It's rather unfortunate.
Will you be contacting them?’
‘Yes, as soon as we can.
Now — when did you last see Dominic?’
Did he imagine it, or did that shapely but rigid mouth tremble just a little?
Still, it was natural to be upset when someone you know has been brutally murdered.
He watched her closely whilst appearing to consult his notes.
A handsome woman, with a streak of sensuality.
Quite unlike the dry, academic, sexless lady consultants he had met before.
‘It was at dinner last night.
He was sitting near me with Lee, an  elective student from Illinois.
I believe they went out to The Crown afterwards.’
‘Did he seem his normal self?’
‘Yes…
I didn't notice anything unusual.
They were discussing some of the howlers from 1066 and All That.’
‘What about earlier?
Did he appear to be worried or apprehensive?
Has he ever said anything to indicate that someone has a grudge against him?’
Her helpless shrug seemed to lack conviction.
‘No, Inspector.
Nothing.’
‘Do all your members know each other?’ he asked abruptly.
She gave him a penetrating look in return.
‘No.
Ours is a national society.
They come from all parts of the country, although it's true that a function organised by one particular branch will tend to attract mainly members from that area.
But surely…?’
Montgomery interrupted her.
‘I ask for two reasons.
First, could somebody be impersonating a member?
You only have the names.
Secondly, could an outsider have walked into the Lodge quite openly on Friday night before eleven o'clock and been taken for a member by anyone who happened to come across him?’
‘I see,’ said Anthea slowly.
‘As to your first point, although I said that the members don't necessarily all know each other, I have personally recognised every resident here in this Lodge.
The only new members were Dominic and Lee.
As for the others, there's a hard core who attend virtually all the Circle's functions; I've seen them many times over the years.
They tend to come in large groups, but there are singletons and couples as well.
These are people with a genuine interest in history coupled with a knowledge that might surprise you, considering they are amateurs.
‘The rest I think of as the ‘fringe element ‘’.
They attend sporadically, and their basic understanding of history is usually sketchy.
Often they are middle-aged or elderly ladies, who look upon it as a social club.
Nothing wrong with that, of course, except that they sometimes develop ridiculously romantic notions about figures from the past, and write ill-conceived letters to the national press which bring the Circle into disrepute.’
‘Thank you.
My second point?’
‘Ah, yes.
That is possible.
It's quite a horrifying thought, but someone could indeed have walked inside before the front door was locked and hidden in the building.’
‘How did the annexe people get their bread and cheese?’
‘There's a kitchenette; they had their own supply.
Sally Curtiss, the Circle's membership secretary, is here, so I entrusted her with the annexe key.’
‘So they had no access to the main building after eleven o'clock?’
‘Not unless one of them had asked me for a spare key — and no-one did.’
Montgomery made a few notes, then continued his questioning.
What can you tell me about Norman Pinder?’
‘Norman Pinder?’
Anthea seemed quite amazed.
‘I — he's a harmless little chap.
Comes to nearly all our meetings.
He tends to join the Leicester ladies, who mother him a bit…is that what you want to know?’
‘It's all helpful.
Is Mrs Vera Pinder a member?’
A few seconds elapsed before Anthea replied, a thoughtful frown creasing her fine brow.
‘I don't know.
I've never seen her at a meeting, but she could still be an associate member.
Sally would be able to tell you.
She's got all the records.’
‘Did either Norman or Vera know Dominic?,
‘I've already said that this was Dominic's first appearance at a Circle function.
And I've never laid eyes on Vera.’
‘You're quite sure that there is no possibility that they could have met — in some other context?’
‘I can't imagine it.
You must ask Mr Pinder himself.
As far as I know, he has no connection with either Nottingham or medicine.’
‘Right, then…
Perhaps you'd be kind enough to describe your own movements last night, including the substance of any conversations you had.
We're checking on every person who spent the night under this roof, in order to build up the fullest picture of events.
Officers will also be taking fingerprints — for exclusion, of course.’
Anthea's eyelids quivered and dipped.
For one reason or another, thought Montgomery, this woman has had a very poor  night's sleep.
He waited, overtly patient, for her to begin, but underneath the table his foot was tapping noiselessly.
She swallowed, then steepled her fingers together.
‘Dinner started at seven.
I was seated next to Professor St John Goth, as I had been on the previous night; Dominic and Lee were opposite, and Mr and Mrs Maclean from Stirling were on my right.
The boys seemed very cheerful.
They were laughing and joking throughout the meal.
Afterwards, I went with Aubrey — the professor, that is — to the lounge for coffee.
We stayed there at least an hour.
It was after nine-thirty when we finished, because I remember that Mrs Reynolds had gone home and I washed up the cups myself.’
‘What did you discuss?,
‘We were wondering whether it would be possible for the Circle to achieve royal patronage.
The Richard the Third Society has the Duke of Gloucester as its patron, which is very pertinent because, as you know, Richard the Third held the title of Duke of Gloucester for many years before he became king.’
Montgomery hadn't known, but he nodded all the same.
‘Did you talk about anything else?’
‘Nothing personal.
Only Circle matters.’
‘After nine-thirty — what then?’
‘I went up to my room and worked on the lecture I'm due to present this afternoon.
Normally I would have completed it well in advance, but it's been a busy week.
After that I went to bed; I suppose it would be around midnight.’
‘Surely you went to the bathroom before retiring?’
‘Yes, but I didn't meet anyone.’
‘Did you see or hear anything at all which might be regarded as suspicious or unusual — either then, or earlier in the evening?’
‘I'm sorry, Inspector.
Nothing of that sort comes to mind.
Naturally, I've been thinking it over ever since poor Sarah burst into my room this morning.
It's terrible.’
‘Well, thank you for your time, Dr Darnell.
If there are any further points requiring clarification, we shall ask for your assistance again.
But for now, that's all.’
Anthea drew herself up in the chair and her dark eyes flashed like rapiers at Montgomery.
‘That is not all, Inspector,’ she said in a low, terse voice.
‘You've  been asking all the questions, and I've done my best to answer them.
Now I should like to ask something myself.
There's a strong rumour going round this Lodge that a strangler from Rampton was on the loose in this area last night, and hasn't yet been caught.
Now a young man in the prime of his life is dead, and no-one has given us any official advice or information.
Some of the ladies are frankly terrified, even those with bedrooms on the first floor.
It is my duty to reassure them — but I need the facts.
Do you think that he's the murderer?’
Montgomery compressed his lips for a moment.
The embarrassing reality was that Burrows had proved more wily than his pursuers had given him credit for, and had managed to give the S.O.U. the slip.
The press would already be buzzing like wasps round a jampot, and it would be the main item on every news bulletin.
There was no virtue, therefore, in telling Anthea Darnell anything less than the truth at this stage.
‘It's possible, but unlikely,’ he said carefully, and was surprised to see apprehension trickling across her previous expression of hostile determination.
‘At the time of the murder he appears to have been lying low in a barn near Gainsborough.
And there's no good evidence that an outsider was involved.’
‘But — that means…you think…you think someone here did it!’
Her face was stiff.
Montgomery's voice came very softly.
‘I'm afraid that can't be ruled out.’
‘Coffee, Sir?’
Sergeant Bird entered the library bearing a laden tray minutes after Anthea Darnell had left the room.
Montgomery looked up gratefully at the sound of rattling cups.
‘Like the U.S. cavalry, just in the nick of time,’ he said.
'My goodness, a whole pot!
I suppose you've been charming that splendid lady Mrs Reynolds.’
The sergeant's face assumed a suitably modest expression.
It was well known among his colleagues that William Bird's avuncular manner tended to pay dividends where ladies were concerned; he seldom went short of ample refreshments during the pursuit of justice.
In fact, he was positively bombarded with home-made cakes and pastries.
‘Try these,’ he advised, proffering a plate.
‘Chocolate orange creams.
I've had…a couple.’
‘You'll never be a thin man, Will,’ mourned Montgomery.
‘Oh, the pipe keeps my weight down.’
At this patently mendacious statement, Sergeant Bird began patting his pockets, but Montgomery knew the signs by now.
‘No, you don't.
Go and poison the air in the trailer if you have to.
Any information of value from Pinder?’
‘I think so.
He's suddenly very eager to help us.
It turns out that he has a mistress here — I know, hilarious, isn't it?— one of the ladies from Leicester.
They only meet during residential Circle functions, i. e. once or twice a year.
His wife, who isn't interested in history at all, is a real dragon, and he spends most of his life completely under her thumb.
These illicit meetings provide the only excitement on his horizon.
‘Pinder told his wife that he would be staying with his sister Helen who lives in Retford, to avoid wasting a lot of time travelling.
When he heard of the murder this morning, he was terrified of being questioned, imagining that Vera would somehow get to hear that he'd spent the night at the Lodge — especially if he was detained.
He wanted us to think he'd been in Retford.
That was pretty stupid, because not only was he on the list of residents, but he'd been seen at mealtimes by several of the other members.
‘Anyway, his story for last night is fairly straightforward.
After dinner he went out with four of the ladies from Leicester, including his special friend Pamela Berry, to The Crown, where they sat in a corner of the lounge bar until closing time.
Although they didn't know their names at the time, they spotted Dominic Wetherby and the American boy, Lee Horan, going into the public bar, but no-one suggested that the two parties should join up.
‘When they got back to the Lodge around eleven o'clock, Pinder ostentatiously said ‘'goodnight’ to the group and went back to his own bedroom.
In the interests of discretion, he waited until nearly twelve-thirty before creeping round to the ladies' corridor.
There was a solitary light burning dimly in the hall below.
He didn't see anyone down there, but he insists that as he passed the alcove at the end of the gallery, he had the  strong impression that someone was sitting in there, watching him.’
‘Which alcove?’ interjected Montgomery.
‘The one on the ladies’ side?’
‘Yes.
He couldn't say whether the person was male or female, because the curtain was drawn halfway across.
But he felt what he called ‘emanations of malevolence’ coming from that alcove.
Rather fanciful, perhaps, but he's quite adamant about it.’
‘What did he do then?’
‘Carried on to Miss Berry's room and tapped very softly on the door.
He stayed there until six forty-five this morning, then went back to his own room.
He saw nothing unusual at that time.’
‘Corroboration?’
‘Every detail was independently confirmed by Miss Berry.
What they spoke about, what he wore — even a secret bottle of wine.’
‘I see.’
Montgomery digested the information, then cast his sergeant a quizzical glance from under his finely marked eyebrows.
‘Do you believe him, Will?,
‘Yes.
Obviously he behaved in a highly suspicious manner today, but a guilty conscience can inspire one to do strange things.
His explanation has the ring of truth.
However, I don't think a little checking into his background would go amiss.’
‘I agree.
There's still a one and a half hour gap to be accounted for, and any link between Pinder and Dominic Wetherby would change the emphasis completely.
Can you organise the enquiry?
I'm going to have a few words with the professor.’
He gulped down the coffee and picked up his pen.
Professor St John Goth was very tall and slightly stooped.
His iron-grey hair and moustache were neatly trimmed.
Montgomery had expected an air of authority from this venerable man, who had spent most of his seventy-odd years lecturing students, but Aubrey St John Goth seemed distant, distracted, his grey eyes veiled by a deep sadness.
‘May we just go over the events of last night again?’ asked Montgomery, his incisive brain stringing together the salient  points of a decidedly hesitant statement.
‘After dinner you had coffee with Dr Darnell until a quarter to ten.
Then you came into this library to look at the books, spending perhaps twenty minutes here.
You had a bath, and some time around ten-thirty went down to the kitchen wearing your dressing-gown and slippers to make yourself a mug of Ovaltine.
You met no-one.
Within ten minutes you were in your bed, reading hand-outs on ‘The Castles of Edward the First’ and ‘Medieval Festivals’.
Eventually you went to sleep.
Is that correct?’
‘Yes, Inspector.
For some reason I didn't sleep well.
That's quite unusual for me.’
‘You've no idea why?’
‘No.’
The voice was strong, but the note hollow.
Montgomery's inner antennae quivered gently.
‘Were you disturbed, perhaps?
Some noise outside?’
‘There was nothing outside the building — just a bit of rustling in the trees.
In the corridor, though, odd doors were opening and closing.’
‘Can you be more specific?
What time?’
‘Let me think.
The last time I looked at my watch before dozing was a quarter to one.
A few minutes before that, I heard a door click somewhere nearby.
I don't recall hearing it locked, though.
That's a distinctive sound.’
He paused.
‘Later, another door closed.
I can't tell you when that was.
I'd been in a light sleep.
It was still dark, that's all I know for certain.
I dozed on and off until dawn.’
Montgomery consulted his room plan.
‘Your room is the first on the right in the men's corridor.
Next door to you was Dr Wetherby, and beyond him Norman Pinder.
Across from you was an empty room, and the room opposite Dr Wetherby's was occupied by Lee Horan.
Now, Professor, can you think very carefully about those noises…which side of the corridor did they seem to be coming from?’
The grey head shook regretfully.
‘I'm sorry.
I'd be a liar if I tried to pretend I knew the answer to that one.
They were close by — within two or three bedrooms of mine.’
‘Could you have heard noises from round the comer?’
‘I don't think so.
I doubt I'd have been able to hear anything from the gallery.’
‘All right.
We'll leave that for now.
Let me ask you about Dominic Wetherby.
Had you ever met him before this weekend?’
‘No.
Never.’
‘Did you exchange any words at all, either on Thursday night or Friday?’
‘The usual commonplace remarks —‘Good morning’, ' ‘Nice weather' ‘, that sort of thing.
I didn't hold any deep conversations with him; he seemed to socialise mainly with the other young people — that American boy in particular.’
‘You are quite sure that he said nothing to you which might provide us with a clue to the killer?’
‘Nothing.’
‘Did you see him talking to Dr Darnell at any time?’
‘Well, naturally.
They work together, and she invited him here.
They spoke on several occasions.
After dinner last night, for instance.’
‘When exactly?’
The professor looked mildly surprised.
‘I suppose it would be around eight-thirty.
She had a few words with him while I was speaking to Meryl Armitage — a delightful girl.’
‘Quite.’
Montgomery wasn't interested in Meryl Armitage — yet.
‘You've known Dr Darnell for many years, haven't you?’
‘Nearly twenty.
Our main point of contact is the Circle, but we have occasionally come across each other at cultural events in Nottingham.’
‘Would you describe her character to me, as you see it?’
Hmm.
No-one is all things to all people, and Anthea is no exception.
She's a tough, single-minded lady who hasn't achieved her present position without treading on more than a few toes.
Personally, though, I like her, I respect her, I enjoy her company, which can be very entertaining when she chooses.
I suspect all doctors must learn how to turn charm on and off like a tap.
I've seen her snap at people, I've seen her behave rudely, but beneath all that there's a streak of real kindness.’
‘Did you visit each other 's homes?’
The professor gave a gentle smile.
‘No, our friendship was never quite on that footing.
We're both highly independent people.
So saying, when my wife Catherine died of cancer, Anthea sent me persistent invitations to spend a few days at her cottage, or even just come for a meal.
I was very touched.
That's what I meant by her kindness.
I didn't want to go out, though.
I didn't see why I should enjoy living again so soon when poor Catherine had had all that she valued slowly torn away from her…’
His eyes clouded over for a moment, and his voice became gruff.
‘After another family tragedy, I realised that I couldn't shut myself off for ever, so I started attending the Circle meetings again.
Now I look forward to them tremendously — and a lot of that is due to Anthea.
She's a fine lady.
Very fine indeed.’
As Montgomery showed the professor to the door, he was struck by areas of similarity between the story he had just heard, and the past history of Sergeant Bird.
William Bird's wife Jean had been killed five years before in an horrific road accident involving a drunken driver.
There had been no children.
Though remarkably free from bitterness, the sergeant had withdrawn from the company of his friends to an alarming extent, even allowing for his love of literature.
So Professor St John Goth had also lost his mate.
That would account for the sadness, but other nuances remained unexplained.
‘The world is full of widows.’
Who said that?
Montgomery wasn't sure, but in his own mind there were few more melancholy sights than a widower trying to manage on his own.
Gladys Brown clenched her hands and stared down at the bony knuckles.
She had to make a decision soon, and there was nowhere she could turn to for guidance.
The police were interviewing everyone.
The fingerprinting had started.
Circle members were looking at each other with slowly dawning horror and suspicion.
It surely meant that those detectives didn't think that the madman had done it.
If so, there was danger all round…
That nice young girl.
But then again, was she nice?
She had  helped to pick up all the things spilt from the bag, but there had been that look in her eye just before — a familiar look, contempt, indifferently hidden.
Yes, she was one of those, despite her pretending to be friendly.
So why should she be protected, any more than the rest of them?
If she was innocent, there was nothing to worry about.
Blinking and muttering to herself, Gladys made up her mind.
She would tell the police what she had seen.
Meryl followed the young detective constable to the library door with a sick feeling in her stomach.
This whole thing was a nightmare, a sea monster inextricably wrapped around her limbs which would be with her until the day she died.
It was ghastly' frightening enough in its unreality, but the real terror would strike when she accepted that it was true.
She had seen Detective Inspector Montgomery earlier on, passing a window.
His hard face and cold eyes had accentuated her fear.
She had fervently hoped to be taken to the sergeant with the kindly expression and ruddy cheeks, or one of the men in the trailer, but it was not to be.
Now Montgomery would see right through her with those eyes.
Her legs quivered.
She longed for Toby, who would tell her what to say and what to do.
She would have rung him, if it hadn't been for the tall constable standing meaningfully by the telephone.
No, she was on her own.
A crash-course in lying — that was what she was about to undertake.
At all costs, she must remember her story and stick to it.
‘Dr Armitage?
Do come in and take a seat.
I'm Detective Inspector Montgomery.’
His voice was pleasant and well-modulated, with only the faintest of Nottingham accents.
Meryl sank down in the chair gratefully.
‘This must be an awful shock to you.
I understand you worked with Dr Wetherby.’
‘Yes.’
The whisper fluttered across the table like an echo.
‘Do you think you could tell me about him?
Were you good friends?’
She cleared her throat, then to her dismay tears suddenly sprang to her eyes.
The more she tried to suppress them, the  more insistent they became until hot rivulets seared down her cheeks and spat into her lap.
‘God — I'm so sorry.
Dominic…’
She put her head in her hands and sobbed in earnest.
‘It's all right.
Take your time.’
Even in the depths of her distress Meryl recognised with bitter irony that here was someone else with the facile professional kindness that doctors developed.
The real man stood back a pace and watched.
She sniffed, and blew her nose on a large white handkerchief which had appeared as if by magic.
‘I'm sorry,’ she repeated.
‘It's been such a shock.
He was so strong and healthy…and young.
How could anyone…?’
‘You worked in paediatrics together,’ said Montgomery, firmly steering the conversation back to the point.
‘Was he a good doctor?
‘A little bit lazy,’ she replied slowly.
‘But the children loved him.
He told them marvellous stories — Irish legends, fairies, all kinds of things.’
‘Were you just colleagues, or close friends?’
‘Somewhere in between the two, really.
When you work long hours with people, bonds are inevitably formed.
I didn't see him in the evenings, though, unless there was a hospital party or something.’
‘So you weren't going out with him?’
‘Oh — no.
Definitely not.
It's never a good idea to get too involved with a colleague, but there would have been practical problems anyway.
We work a one-in-three rota, which means that we're on duty every third night and weekend, as well as doing an ordinary working week.
We'd have only been off duty together during Dave Mason's nights on call.
He's our registrar.’
‘Thank you.
Did Dominic have a girlfriend?’
The question was innocuous enough, but Meryl felt her muscles becoming tense.
‘A succession of them, I think,’ she answered.
‘I don't know who the latest one was.’
‘Can you think of any reason why someone should want to kill him?’
A spasm of pain gripped her like a vice.
Her throat was tight — chokingly tight.
Across the gleaming table, Montgomery's face seemed almost luminous.
In desperation, Meryl resorted to her  favourite trick of concentrating on a new subject when the old one became too much to bear.
Taking a ragged breath, she looked at Montgomery, noting the ice-blue eyes with their perfectly shaped eyebrows, the thin mouth and the slight hollows under the cheekbones.
Her gaze lingered on his pallor and the sprinkling of grey in his darkish hair.
Diagnosis — chronic overwork, like many doctors.
Prescription — holiday in Bermuda.
‘Dr Armitage?’
Reality flew into focus.
‘There's no reason, Inspector.
I don't know of anyone who could be described as an enemy of Dominic.’
‘Did he make any medical errors?
Could the parents of some sick or dead child have a grudge against him?’
‘No — I don't know.
I can't imagine…’
‘All right.
Let's come to this particular weekend.
Did he seem his usual self?’
‘Yes.’
‘No hint of anxiety or apprehension?’
‘No.
He was cheerful whenever I saw him.’
‘When was the last time you did see him?’
‘Last night.’
The tremor was back in her voice, and she fought to control it.
‘He was going with Lee to The Crown.
They asked me to join them, but I didn't want to…
I never saw him again.’
‘How did you spend the evening?’
‘I talked to a couple from Stirling for a while — Mr and Mrs Maclean.
We stayed in the dining room for our coffee.
After that, I went upstairs to read the hand-outs we'd been given.
At ten o'clock I put the radio on and heard about the man who'd escaped from Rampton.
That really alarmed me, because Rampton's so close.
Around twenty-to-eleven, I went down to the kitchen for some milk.
It felt cold in there.
Someone had left the scullery window open, so I closed and fastened it.’
‘Why didn't you tell us this earlier?’
Montgomery's face was so forbidding that she quailed.
‘I — people say that Dominic was killed much later.
In the middle of the night.
When I closed the window, I was thinking specifically of Sydney Burrows, then I heard he'd gone to Gainsborough after all.
I fastened it properly…
I'm sorry if I should have told you before.’
‘When we've finished here you can show me which window.
But first — carry on.’
‘I came back to my bedroom with the milk and changed for bed.
I cleaned my teeth in the washbasin, then sat reading until perhaps eleven-thirty.’
She paused, suddenly wondering whether to stick to her prepared story, or to change it.
That peculiar woman Gladys — would she remember?
No, it was too incriminating to mention.
She raised her head to look frankly at Montgomery.
'After that I went to sleep.’
‘Did you sleep well?’
He was scrutinising her openly in return.
‘Like a log.’
‘When did you wake up?’
‘Quarter to eight.
I overslept.’
‘So you heard none of the commotion when Sarah Parker roused Dr Darnell?’
‘No.
I was sleeping very soundly.’
‘You weren't disturbed by any other noises, in the night?’
‘No.’
‘You're absolutely certain?’
‘Yes.’
Montgomery gave a short exhalation which could have represented disbelief, frustration or simple boredom.
Meryl wondered if he had a sense of humour, although now wasn't the time to find out.
Probably he did.
It would be dry and acid, revealed only to a chosen few.
‘Dr Armitage, I confess I had hoped for a little more from someone who knew Dr Wetherby so well and was resident at the same convention.
Please think carefully.
Can you recall any suspicious incident, or comment, however trivial it may have seemed, which could help our investigation?
So far we have an apparently motiveless murder of an innocuous young doctor, and nothing to go on.’
Here was the crunch.
If the police went charging up a blind alley as a result of her information, it wouldn't be her fault.
They surely couldn't prove an innocent person guilty.
Calmer now that the crisis was past, she continued to gaze steadily at the inspector's weary, intelligent face.
‘There is something…
It may not be relevant at all, but I'd  better tell you.
On Thursday night we had a light supper after we'd registered and unpacked our things.
I was sitting next to Professor St John Goth, who's a long established member of the Circle, and often lectures at our meetings.
At the end of the meal, Dominic came to have a few words with me.
He was accompanied by Lee Horan.
When they'd gone through into the lecture hall, I noticed the professor staring after them with a very odd look on his face — a stunned, frozen look.
He asked me who the young man with the dark curly hair was, and I told him.
He sort of nodded.
We didn't get a chance to say any more, because Anthea ushered us into the hall almost immediately afterwards.’
Montgomery's expression had sharpened.
‘That's very interesting.
Would you describe the professor's look as one of recognition?’
Meryl considered carefully.
‘I — think so.
Initially, it seemed to be a mixture of surprise and — horror.
Then, yes, I believe he did know who Dominic was.’
‘Did he say anything about it on a subsequent occasion?,
‘No.
It never cropped up again.’
‘Right, then.’
Montgomery stood up.
‘Let's see that scullery window.’
Above the rambling parkland belonging to Randall Lodge was an area which had once been a rigidly formal garden, but was now only just kept in check by two elderly men.
May was the month to see it to best advantage: azaleas spilled cascades of coral and blood-red flowers over the pathways, lilac bushes waved their plump, perfumed arms, interspersed by spiky sentinels of variegated holly, and overhead, leaning in regally protective attitudes, the magnolia trees spread a lustrous canopy of waxen, creamy blooms.
It should have been peaceful, a haven of bright birdsong and softly rustling leaves.
The herb garden should have basked half-drowsing in its own pungent scents of thyme, rosemary, basil and lemon balm, undisturbed in the brave spring sunshine.
Instead, men were tramping through the shrubbery, parting the delphiniums, running their hands between every pansy and wallflower, even lifting the clumps of lobelia which cascaded  down the side of a weathered stone urn.
Some of the men wore uniforms, others didn't.
They were looking for an instrument of murder.
‘I've found it, Sir.’
Montgomery put down the telephone as Sergeant Bird hurried into the library on the tail of his brisk knock.
‘Really?
Thank God for that.
Show me.’
He didn't need to ask what his sergeant was referring to.
The lack of murder weapon had preyed on their minds.
‘That was Frobisher on the phone,’ he went on.
‘Wants us to join him at the mortuary as soon as we can…
Spill the beans, Will.
What was it, a paperweight?’
‘No.
A bronze statuette.
I'm as near certain as can be.
It's the ideal offensive weapon, and right on the spot.’
He lead the way upstairs and turned smartly along the gallery.
Just past Anthea Darnell's room he paused by a small Chippendale table.
‘Here.
The Black Prince.’
Montgomery stared long and hard at the object.
It represented a medieval knight in full armour, the helmeted head surrounded by a thin coronet, the sides of the face and neck swathed in chain mail.
The figurine stood erect on its plinth, a long sword clutched in the left hand pointing downwards, the fingers of the right hand casually curled, but close to the deadly sheathed dagger in the belt.
The gallery windows faced east and west, so only a pale token of early afternoon sun fell onto the statuette, which glowed duskily.
‘Who did you say this fellow was again?’
Montgomery kept his eyes on the knight, running a torch beam over every chink of the armour in search of tell-table signs.
‘Edward, the Black Prince.
He was the son of Edward the Third, one of our more warlike kings, but he died the year before his father did, and that's how we came to get the boy-king Richard the Second in thirteen seventy-seven.’
‘Trust you to know that.
Why are there fleurs-de-lys on his tunic?
I thought they were French.’
‘His, er, surcoat has both the lions of England and the lilies of France because we were laying claim to the disputed French throne at the time.
Edward the Third made a bid through his  mother, Isabella, and quartered the French royal arms with his own.
The barons were always keen for a bit of booty, so our invasion of France was fully supported.’
‘Crécy!’ cried Montgomery triumphantly.
‘That's right.
And Poitiers…
Try the left elbow, Sir.’
‘Oh, yes…yes indeed.
I think this statuette was washed under cold water —.
but they missed a bit.’
He turned to Sergeant Bird, his face suddenly serious.
‘I agree with you.
I think this was the murder weapon.
That helmet is just the right size and shape to have inflicted the blow we saw.
Before we get it fingerprinted, which I suspect will be a waste of time, and tested for blood, which won't be, please would you nip down and winkle out Norman Pinder from wherever he's parked himself?
I've got an idea.’
While Sergeant Bird was in the lecture hall, Montgomery walked over to one of the other statuettes and lifted it a few inches.
Yes, solid bronze was very heavy.
Every officer must have noticed the figurines, yet no-one had considered them as a possible murder weapon.
Why?
He realised that some were small, barely six inches high, while others had sword-arms raised or banners flying.
The Black prince was the only smoothly tapered statuette, easily grasped, eleven inches from helmet to plinth.
Absolutely perfect.
Moments later, Norman Pinder flapped along the gallery, hyperventilating furiously.
‘Ah, Mr Pinder, thank you for coming up,’ said Montgomery in genial tones.
‘There's something I'd like to ask you.’
‘It wasn't me.
I swear it…’
The eyes were starting out of his head like those of a fish, and the Adam's apple was going into overdrive yet again.
Montgomery clapped a reassuring hand on his shoulder, but that had the wrong effect.
Norman Pinder promptly fainted.
When he had recovered, Montgomery tried once more.
‘Tell me about Thursday night, Mr Pinder.
Did you visit Miss Berry?’
To his surprise, the young man mumbled and shook his head.
‘No.
She didn't want me to…women's things…’
‘I see.
But you did go to her room last night, didn't you?
That's what you said.’
‘Yes, Sir.’
He averted his eyes, a stark picture of guilt.
‘Do you remember passing this statuette?’
Montgomery moved aside to reveal the bronze knight.
‘The Black Prince!
What superb moulding!’
‘We'd be obliged if you didn't touch it,’ said Montgomery hastily.
‘Just think back and tell us if you noticed the statuette last night during your — perambulations.’
‘No, Sir.
I'm sure I would have done if it had been here…
I've always been very interested in the Hundred Years’ War.
There's an effigy on the Black Prince's tomb at Canterbury Cathedral, just like this except that his hands are together in prayer…’
‘Thank you, Mr Pinder.
Now please concentrate.
You say you didn't see the statuette, but you told Sergeant Bird earlier that your attention was directed towards that alcove, where you felt that someone was hiding…’
‘Someone was !’ burst out Norman Pinder.
‘Someone —evil.’
‘Is it not possible, then, that the statuette was here, but you simply didn't notice it?’
The young man suddenly seemed to shrink into himself, and turned a face imprinted with fear towards Montgomery.
‘That's the weapon, isn't it?’ he whispered.
‘Everyone was wondering what it was.
The Black prince.
He killed the people of Limoges, you know.
Butchered them, in the Age of Chivalry.
Now he's killed someone else.
My God.’
‘You still haven't answered the question.’
Montgomery's voice was very gentle.
‘Yes, I have.
The statuette wasn't here.
I'd have spotted it.
I was creeping along the gallery very slowly, and although the light was dim, it wasn't that bad.’
‘What about coming back?
Daylight would have been shining up the gallery from that east window.’
Norman Pinder shook his head.
‘It's no good.
I never saw it before you showed me just now.
It might have been on the table, obscured by this banner.
Then again, it might not.
I don't know.
But I had a clear view of the table last night, and it wasn't there.
I'm certain of that.’
It was a small bleak mortuary in a small bleak hospital.
Every time Sergeant Bird came into contact with death, he felt the same sense of mild amazement that the spark of life, so intangible, should be so absolute.
For here lay no more than a piece of meat, oblivious, inanimate, an object to be examined without reverence.
He could almost believe in the concept of the soul, because something more than physiological processes had inhabited this boy's body, something total, something unique; the pathetic shell it had left behind, with a luggage label hanging from the toe, bore silent witness to that.
At least the corpse wasn't particularly unpleasant.
While he didn't envy Frobisher his job, William Bird could cope well enough with the less salubrious demands of his own.
It was Jackson who did his best to avoid such things.
‘Now you're here,’ said Frobisher, ‘We'll go straight to the skull.’
He picked up a vicious-looking knife and incised the scalp from ear to ear, passing the blade behind the vertex of the head.
He then carefully peeled the front part forwards, muttering to Montgomery about the bruising this revealed.
‘I'll do microscopy where necessary, of course, but this is all consistent with our blunt instrument.’
After peeling the rest of the scalp backwards, they pored over the well-demarcated fracture in the skull.
‘I'm going to take the lid off myself,’ said Frobisher.
‘I don't trust these technicians.
They go using mallets and chisels, and ten to one they'd extend the fracture line.
The hand saw is best; you've got complete control.’
Montgomery and Sergeant Bird peered across the body while the skull-cap was being removed, their plastic aprons rustling softly.
‘Now let's see…’
Frobisher made further comments about the skull and its membranes, before examining the visible surface of the brain which was purple, boggy and split.
Carefully he  inserted his gloved fingers beneath the frontal lobes and lifted them up.
‘No sign of contre-coup.
I'm going to remove this lot altogether and look at it properly.’
Deftly he dissected each cranial nerve as it appeared, cut through the detaining tentorium then reached down low beyond the foramen magnum to divide the spinal cord.
Taking the brain in two hands, he slowly lifted it out backwards.
‘As well as this obvious damage,’ he said to them, ‘there is some oedema — swelling.
See the loss of the normal corrugations of the brain surface.’
He flipped the brain upside down.
‘Yes — look.
These small cerebellar projections — we call them the tonsils — have been compressed against the bony rim of the foramen magnum.
They're discoloured.’
He looked up abruptly.
‘How urgently do you need the full results?’
‘As soon as you can let us have them,’ replied Montgomery.
‘Good.
No point spoiling the ship for a ha'p'oth of tar.
It's easier to slice up the brain when it's been fixed in suspension — much more accurate.
You don't want any clever Q. C. s saying that the bungling pathologist has obscured a natural cause of death — not that there's much doubt left in this case.’
He played a gentle stream of water over the specimen in his hand.
‘We can still look at the arteries on the ventral surface of the brain,’ he continued.
‘But there's not much blood down here to suggest he burst an aneurysm.
They're commonly found at the junction of two vessels…’
Sergeant Bird watched fascinated while Frobisher diligently examined every vessel, finally dissecting them right off the base of the brain in order to see the other side.
The ring of arteries seemed so tiny and vulnerable in his estimation, considering the extreme importance of their function.
‘Nothing,’ breathed the pathologist when he had finished.
‘I'm relieved to hear it,’ said Montgomery.
‘We've found what appears to be the murder weapon.’
As they drove back to Randall Lodge, the afternoon sun still shone mockingly bright.
‘So, Wetherby was a fit young man, just as we thought,’ stated Montgomery.
‘Yes, Sir.
But whoever killed him didn't need to be especially fit with a weapon like that in their hand.’
‘I know.
It could have been any one of those residents, even the frailest woman.
I had hoped that the facts would make themselves so apparent that the motive could emerge in its own good time — but it's not looking that way at all.
If we're finally able to exclude Burrows from this tangle, and all my instincts tell me he's not involved, then we shall have to start looking for a compelling reason for one of those people to smash Wetherby over the head with a statuette.’
‘It would seem not to be premeditated,’ mused Sergeant Bird.
‘The statuettes belonged to Dr Darnell.
No-one could have known that she was going to bring them for the weekend.’
‘I don't think we can go that far,’ Montgomery disagreed.
‘If you went to a residential symposium with murder in mind, you'd expect to come across some suitable weapon, whether it was a heavy saucepan or a carving knife.
The Black Prince may have been an unforeseen bonus.
I wish I knew how reliable Pinder is…he's so flaming emotional, with his fainting fits and his ‘emanations of malevolence’.'
As the car drew up in front of the Lodge with a crunch of gravel, Detective Sergeant Allen strode out to meet them.
‘Something that might interest you, Sir,’ he began as they climbed up the steps of the parked trailer.
‘Fingerprints on that scullery window — Mrs Reynolds and Dr Armitage.
Good, clear prints.
There's a blurred thumbprint on the base of the statuette which matches Dr Darnell's thumb.
But the best of the lot is the tiny chip of violet nail polish we found caught in a torn portion of the table-cloth.’
A distinct picture of Anthea Darnell's fingernails materialised in Montgomery's mind, the small defects in their pristine surface reflecting the niggling misgivings he had experienced during the interview.
There was so much more he needed to know…
‘What about that stain on the statuette?’
‘Definitely blood, Sir.
They're grouping it right now.’
‘Good.
I'd like you to take a sample of the polish from Dr Darnell's fingernails, and have the lab match it against the flake you found.’
He turned to Sergeant Bird.
‘If Pinder was right, and the  statuette was not on the table when he crept past at twelve-thirty, that could well be the time of the murder, or very shortly afterwards.
It's my guess that the statuette was then replaced, and was obscured from his line of vision by the banner this morning.’
‘Or was replaced later on.’
‘Yes, but that would have become progressively more risky as people began to stir.’
He shrugged.
‘We're still theorising without all the data.
I'm going to interview Lee Horan.
Perhaps you'd carry on with the Leicester ladies, and Gladys Brown.’
‘He was just a regular guy, Inspector.’
Lee Horan's good-natured face was puzzled and sad.
‘I can't believe what's happened.
It seems so — Gothic.’
Montgomery remembered his strictures to Norman Pinder that the Black Prince was to be mentioned on pain of unspeakable doom.
The man was remarkably easy to terrify, but for how long did that overcome his propensity to babble?
It might be prudent to put it to the test.
‘What exactly have you heard, Mr Horan?
I'm sure rumours must be flying about like wildfire.’
Lee looked wary.
‘Well, some poor crazy feller broke into the Lodge last night and killed Dominic.
Hit him over the head.
That's what everyone's saying.’
‘Did they indicate the weapon used?’
‘No, Sir.’
‘You realise that you were one of the last people to see Dr Wetherby alive?’
Lee shifted uncomfortably.
‘Yes.’
‘Tell me about last night.
Start with dinner.’
‘We had, er, veal escalopes and some kind of fresh fruit salad.
It was very good.
Dominic and I were laughing a lot, because we were making up our own historical jokes in the style of 1066 and All That .
Dr Darnell was across the table with the professor, and they sometimes joined in.
After that, she spoke to Dominic while I had a chat with the prof. and Meryl Armitage.
‘We went to The Crown — Dominic and I, that is; Meryl didn't want to come — and played darts in the saloon bar.
I suppose it  came into my room for a few minutes to see a book I'd been telling him about, then he left and I hit the sack.
Your English beer's a bit strong for me.
And they should cool it down.
‘Did you go to sleep promptly?’
‘Yes, I crashed out almost immediately.
But I did wake up once in the night.
It was quarter to two.
My watch has got luminous markings, that's how I know.
One of the doors in the corridor was clicking shut.’
‘Have you any idea which one?’
‘No, Sir.
I can only say that it sounded like one of those across the passage from my room.’
‘Did you hear anything else?’
‘No.’
‘Right.
When did you first meet Dr Darnell?’
Lee brushed the quiff of blond hair away from his forehead and screwed up his eyes.
‘About six weeks ago.
I'm doing an elective attachment at the District Hospital.
She came to speak on neonatal care at one of the obs and gynae meetings.
Afterwards, we got talking.
She was interested to find out that I liked British history; she told me about the Medieval Circle.
It was pure good luck that someone dropped out so I could come this weekend — at least, I thought so at the time.’
‘What are your impressions of Dr Darnell?,
‘Good-looking woman.
Interested in everything I had to say.
I've heard she's very competent professionally.
I can't comment on her personal life, of course.’
‘Did there seem to be any, er, special bond between her and Dominic Wetherby?’
‘Gee!’
Lee gaped, astonished for a moment before recovering.
‘I've no idea.
I saw nothing to suggest that.
In fact, initially I thought Meryl was Dominic's chick.’
‘Why?’
‘It's hard to explain.
His attitude towards her last night — looks, gestures.
He could tell I fancied her myself, so I assumed he was just making sure I knew how the land lay.
He said ‘See you later’, or something similar, to Meryl after dinner.
We were taking a stroll in the garden; I forgot to mention that.’
‘You said ‘initially’.'
‘Yes.’
He began to look embarrassed.
‘I — er, commiserated with her this morning.
Asked if he'd been her boyfriend for long.
She put me straight immediately.
Said there was nothing between them, and Dominic often acted silly.
We talked a bit more, about when we'd heard the news, and so forth.
It was obvious she hadn't seen him since I had.
She was completely in the dark about how it could have happened.’
Staggeringly ingenuous, thought Montgomery, or possibly very cunning indeed.
Aloud, he said, ‘What's your own opinion of Meryl, Mr Horan, apart from her being an attractive girl?’
‘Sir, I only met her this weekend.
She's all right.
Sense of humour.
Not banal, like a lot of girls…’
He broke off and stared at Montgomery, his face suddenly incredulous.
‘You just can't be serious, Inspector!’
‘About what?’
‘You know.
Meryl Armitage.
You're surely not connecting her with Dominic's death?’
‘That would appear to be your idea, not mine.’
‘Come off it!’
He blushed.
‘I'm sorry.
But why are you asking about Meryl at all?
What is her character to do with anything?’
He's got it badly, thought Montgomery, resisting an urge to tell the red-faced American boy to calm down.
‘I'm asking about everybody's character,’ he said in tones of reason.
‘Even yours.’
Lee shuffled and subsided.
‘I see.
You've got your job to do, I suppose.
But wouldn't it make more sense to catch that nutter who's roaming the countryside around here?’
‘We shall.
It's only a matter of time.’
Montgomery sincerely hoped that his optimism would be justified.
‘I've been ever so worried, Sergeant.’
William Bird tried to look bland and encouraging as the woman leaned across the desk towards him, but an onslaught of speculation and comment from the Leicester ladies had left him feeling somewhat shell-shocked.
Surely it was time for tea.
‘She's such a pleasant young girl, you see,’ continued Gladys Brown insinuatingly.
‘I'm sure it doesn't mean anything, but we all have our duty to do.’
‘You're right, Mrs Brown.
The police wouldn't get far without  help from public-spirited persons like yourself.
Anything you say is in absolute confidence.’
‘Well…’
She peered furtively over her left shoulder, but no-one else was in the small seminar room.
‘I wanted to look at the tapestries, Sergeant.
Such beautiful handicrafts.
Last night, I mean.
I didn't feel tired, even though it was after eleven-thirty, and I hadn't brought anything to do.
So I came out of my room for a little walk along the gallery.
Someone had hung up all these colourful banners, and altar cloths, and pictures of knights and castles.
It was a real treat to see them.
Then — I heard a cough, and that young doctor, Meryl, came out of the window alcove.
I'm sure she'd been sitting there, but she was hardly wearing anything !
Just a flimsy nightdress and something on her feet.
Her hair was all long and loose.
I thought she must have been waiting for someone…’
‘What did she say?’
‘I can't remember exactly.
We looked at the tapestries, then I went back to my room.
She was still there, on the gallery, when I left.’
‘Can you be more precise about the time, Mrs Brown?
Did you see the clock when you returned to your room?’
The woman's lined face became vague and flaccid.
‘No.
It would be somewhere near to midnight.
Maybe quarter to.
We didn't talk for long.’
She fixed him suddenly with a beady stare from beneath the crêpy lids.
‘She's like the rest, really.
They don't talk to me.
Sergeant.
I'm not good enough for them.
It's as if they think there's something wrong with me.
as if I'm peculiar…
You don't think that, do you, Sergeant?’
‘Of course not,’ lied William Bird gamely.
‘Some people like to mix at these conventions, and some don't.
They may be a bit shy.
Did the young man Dominic Wetherby ever speak to you?’
Her lower lip trembled and her eyes blurred.
‘Poor young man…
No, we never exchanged a word.
I didn't even know who he was until afterwards.
I hardly saw him…’
‘Who do you know here?’
She looked at him suspiciously.
‘I told you.
They don't talk.
I came here for the history.
My own company's good enough for me.’
He hastily smoothed her ruffled feathers, then went on with his questioning.
‘Did you see or hear anything later in the night?’
‘Yes.
I hadn't been in bed all that long.
Half an hour, perhaps.
There was a quiet knocking on one of the doors nearby.
No, I don't know which.
If you want my opinion, it was a man , and I'm sure there were goings-onin my corridor last night!’
She gave a self-righteous sniff while Sergeant Bird made laborious notes, his mind wandering the midnight passageways of Randall Lodge.
Detective Sergeant Brian Jackson was driving through the more prosperous part of Long Eaton, a village on the outskirts of Nottingham which happened to be just over the Derbyshire border.
Most of the houses he had seen were drab, workmen's dwellings, but here on the periphery was an attractive tree-lined road which bespoke money, and plenty of it.
It was well into the afternoon by now, and Jackson was feeling the after-effects of a hastily bolted cheese sandwich at lunchtime.
That bastard Montgomery would be expecting him in Retford before long, with the results of his enquiries.
Then there would be more tedious interviews, probably with women.
Jackson had nothing against women per se , but he was slightly unnerved after encountering so much brisk efficiency among the nursing staff of the District Hospital.
They hadn't been short of opinions, either, and Dominic Wetherby was now becoming something more than just a name.
He had evidently been popular with the medical students and a certain section of the nurses.
Opinion among doctors seemed to be more polarised, depending on whether or not they had worked with him; the term ‘lazy devil’ had passed more than one set of lips that morning.
It had been interesting, too, to hear about his controversial promotion.
The attitude of the men he had spoken to had been essentially laissez-faire , but some of the women, Raleigh Ward nurses especially, were still quite steamed  up about it.
They evidently thought that Meryl Armitage should have had the job.
Number forty-seven was a huge red-brick house in gracious grounds, with a double garage and parking space for three more cars.
A blue Daimler stood at the edge of this area.
Jackson was somewhat surprised to find that the house was divided into two flats, each with its own letter-box and doorbell.
‘Dr Latimer,’ he read, and pressed the bell firmly.
A few seconds elapsed before an orange shape shimmered on the other side of the glass, and the sound of the disengaging lock reached his ears.
As the door swung open, Jackson was momentarily startled.
There before him stood one of the tallest, thinnest men he had ever seen outside a circus.
The long silk kimono wrapped round him accentuated his height, and Persian slippers enclosed the slender feet.
From a nearby room filtered strains of Baroque music.
‘Dr Toby Latimer?’ he began.
‘In person,’ replied Toby, looking enquiring, but receptive.
‘My name is Detective Sergeant Jackson.’
He flourished his ID.
‘I'd like to speak to you about a serious matter concerning one of your colleagues.
May we step inside?’
‘But certainly.’
Toby led the way into a thickly carpeted hallway, then turned abruptly right and entered a living room resplendent with rich sage-coloured draperies, velvet sofas, and glass-fronted cabinets full of porcelain.
In the corner was a Steinbeck piano, with intricate silver candelabra on each end of the lid.
Wherever the Baroque music was coming from, and it was somewhere in the room, the equipment was well camouflaged; Jackson could see no hint of electronic gadgetry to mar the overall appearance of timeless opulence.
‘So…
A Sergeant Calls,’ Toby quipped gaily.
‘To what do I owe the pleasure?,
‘I'm afraid I have bad news,’ said Jackson in a stony voice.
‘Dr Dominic Wetherby was murdered this morning near Retford.’
‘What?’
Toby looked completely taken aback.
‘Dominic?
But that's incredible…
What do you mean, murdered?’
‘Hit on the head by a person or persons unknown.
They told me at the hospital that you've worked with him in the past, so I thought you might be able to help me with my general enquiries.’
He met Toby's pale eyes challengingly.
Already he felt uneasy here, in the presence of someone from out of his sphere.
‘Well — yes.
That goes without saying.
Of course I shall, but…dear me.
Dominic!— Would you like some tea, Sergeant?’
‘Don't mind if I do.’
Jackson was very thirsty.
And pickled onions had definitely been a bad idea.
‘Please make yourself at home, then.
It won't take long.’
With a swish of kimono, Toby glided out of the room, leaving Jackson to assess his surroundings more closely.
Those pictures on the wall — all originals, he would swear to it.
The porcelain…
Jackson didn't know Ming from Royal Worcester, but he could recognise quality.
These doctors must be grossly overpaid, unless — yes, Toby Latimer clearly had a private income which allowed him to indulge his tastes to the full.
All right for some!
Toby had reappeared with the tray, and set it down on a small marble table, before Jackson was aware of his presence.
He poured a golden stream of liquid into two delicate bone china cups, and held one out to Jackson, who sipped it cautiously.
The smoky, slightly bitter flavour was not to his liking.
‘Milk and two sugar, please,’ he said, replacing the cup on the tray.
With an infinitesimal lift of the eyebrow, Toby provided these things, but both men were aware that battle lines were being drawn.
It was not a propitious staff to the interview.
‘Fire away, Sergeant,’ invited Toby, lolling in a Queen Anne chair.
Jackson made his final attempt with the tea, then set it down with a grimace of distaste.
‘Did you like Dominic Wetherby?’ he asked bluntly.
Once again that supercilious look.
Toby considered his answer.
‘No, I didn't.
He was one of those ‘look after number one’ types, not averse to trampling on other people if it got him where he wanted to be.
More important, he was neither honest nor trustworthy.
That's not to say that he ever endangered a patient, but it didn't worry him if someone else took the rap for his misdemeanours.
He had a smooth tongue, and confidence in its use.’
‘He sounds like the type who would make enemies.’
‘Mmm — not exactly.
You see, the more positive side of his  personality compensated neatly for the rest.
People were drawn to him almost against their will, even when they knew his faults.
Especially women.
They always seemed to find him attractive, and were prepared to make excuses for his more glaring defects.’
‘Were there any special women in his life recently?’
‘Ah —‘Nor hell a fury’, is that it?
I really can't say.
Dominic was with a different nurse every time I saw him.
That was the general pattern.’
‘Did he get on with the other paediatric S.H.O., Dr Armitage?’
‘I imagine so.
It seemed to be a happy team.
David Mason could give you more details.’
‘Thank you, I've already spoken to Dr Mason.
It's your opinions I'm interested in…
I gather Meryl Armitage is a good friend of yours?’
‘That sums it up nicely.’
‘Nothing more?’
‘No, Sergeant.
Pleasantly platonic, I assure you.’
‘Was she ever involved with Dominic Wetherby?’
‘You tell me.
Anything's possible.
All I know is that she never said so, and they'd have had precious little opportunity, one or other of them being on call for two out of any three nights.’
Toby lounged more comfortably in his chair, while Jackson chafed at the lack of hard evidence.
‘Nice flat, this,’ he commented, swinging into the attack.
‘Costs a bit, I daresay.
How do you manage to collect all these antiques on a registrar's salary?’
‘Is your question one of personal curiosity, or does it represent an official line of enquiry?’ countered Toby, crossing his skeletal ankles.
‘The latter.’
‘Ah.
Then I must answer you…
My father died when I was five, and left me a large sum of money in trust until my twenty-fifth birthday.
I still haven't touched the capital, but the interest enables me to live in a manner which is, er, conducive to my disposition.
I own this house, by the way, but it seemed wasteful not to have a tenant on the upper storey.
He's not interested in gardens, so I keep that for myself.’
‘Why do you work, if you don't have to?’
‘One must be occupied,’ murmured Toby, ‘And besides, there's always room for altruism.
I feel a sense of responsibility towards my less fortunate fellow creatures.’
Jackson almost snorted.
‘I gather you're not married,’ he said.
‘Don't you have dynastic ambitions?’
Toby pursed his lips then smiled.
‘Sorry, Sergeant.
You won't convince me that the answer to that is necessary for your enquiry.
I suggest you return to the study of Dr Wetherby.
Isn't the clue to a murder usually found in part of the victim's past, or his dealings with people?
That would be a much more fruitful field of study.’
‘When I want your advice, I'll ask for it,’ snapped Jackson, nettled.
He rose to his feet.
‘Thank you for your time, Dr Latimer.
If we find that there's anything else we need to know, someone will contact you.’
My pleasure, said Toby airily.
‘There's just one thing, if you ‘d be so kind.
Did the incident take place at Randall Lodge?’
‘Yes.’
‘Is Meryl all right?
She wasn't hurt?’
Sergeant Jackson paused by the door.
‘It was a murder, Sir, not a ruddy massacre.’
Jackson was still smarting when he returned to the station in the city centre.
‘Condescending sod,’ he thought, gathering up his papers before his journey to Retford.
A tap on the glass heralded one of his friends in the uniformed branch.
‘Hey, Brian,’ said Tim Rennie.
‘Just the man.
I've got some news for you.’
He placed both his palms on the front of Jackson's desk and leaned forward.
‘You're investigating that Retford murder, aren't you?
The doctor.
Well, listen to this.
Phelps and I picked up one of his colleagues at two o'clock this morning, driving suspiciously slowly down the A614 near Ollerton.
The Alcometer reading was negligible, so we let him go with a warning.’
‘That's interesting.’
‘Wait.
You haven't heard it all.
He was wearing women's clothes and make-up, and there was a wig next to his handbag on the passenger seat.
Said he'd been to a party.
It could have been  vicars and tarts, of course, but I reckon he's one of those transvestites that hang out up there.
We've come across them before.
There's a group that's come out of the closet and swaps clothes,
‘What exactly are you implying, Tim?’
‘Well, some of them are straight, and some of them are bisexual, if not actually homo.
Seems funny to me that he was so near to the scene of the murder at that particular time.
Supposing he was involved with Wetherby, and they had a row.’
‘I'm not sure.
Everyone places Wetherby very firmly at the hetero end of the spectrum.
But blackmail…that's a better theory, especially if the other doctor had a packet.
What's his name?’
‘Toby Latimer.
Do you know him?’
‘Hallelujah.’
Jackson drawled the word with a slow complacency.
He smiled up at Rennie.
‘Tell me more.
The whole incident.
You've just made my day.’
‘Anything from Jackson yet?’
‘No.’
Montgomery answered Sergeant Allen's query with an economical monosyllable.
His initial high hopes of a clear-cut solution to the Wetherby murder were plummeting in direct relation to his blood sugar.
Pure copper's instinct told him that Burrows was not involved; the alternative, however, was frightful.
One of these so-respectable people had either committed the deed or engineered it.
Three of the four he had interviewed personally had been evasive, or told outright lies.
Their motives he could only guess at, but shielding probably came high on the list.
Did they know, or only suspect?
They would all have to be questioned again, amplification and detail demanded, opinions subordinated to facts.
Uneasily, Montgomery felt that his hand was hovering over the proverbial can of worms; remove the lid and there they would be, writhing in a tortuous, slimy, unholy mass.
He looked enquiringly across the table at Sergeant Allen.
‘What did the annexe people say?’
‘They saw no evil and heard no evil.
I imagine they're speaking plenty of it, though.
Likewise the seven men who had rooms beyond Norman Pinder.’
‘Well, I've just heard from Channing, and his men have drawn a total blank in the village.
No suspicious persons, no cars’ nothing.
The Press are linking this incident firmly with Burrows, and I'm inclined to let them.
Our release tonight will be a very bland one.
We may lull the real culprit into a sense of false security.’
He spread a pile of statements into a fan, like huge playing cards.
‘I believe the clues lie in here.
There are already plenty of pointers and anomalies, and I'd like to go through them with you to try to sift out the red herrings and give due precedence to the important facts.
Will's tied up with Gladys Brown, but he'll be along soon.
‘First, the hard evidence.
That flake of violet nail-polish in the tablecloth covering the body.
I expect to hear that it matches Dr Darnell's fingernails.
Certainly it does as far as the naked eye is concerned.
There are four possible interpretations: One, she handled the tablecloth earlier in some innocent capacity.
Two, she played a part in the murder.
Three, she found the body and covered it up, but was too afraid to admit what she had done.
That might in itself imply that she felt for some reason that she would be suspected, or perhaps she knew who the killer was and preferred to keep quiet.
Four, it's remotely possible that someone used that flake to frame her.’
‘Didn't she identify the body?
It could have happened then.’
Detective Constable Smythe leaned forward eagerly.
‘Yes, and no; I've checked this bit very carefully.
Sarah Parker ran upstairs when she'd made the discovery and battered on Dr Darnell's door, close to hysteria.
That woke several of the people in nearby rooms, including the professor.
He went downstairs with Dr Darnell and two others, and pulled aside the cloth just sufficiently for her to see the visible part of the face.
She didn't approach the body; neither did anyone else.
‘So — let's consider the statuette.
That stain was Wetherby's blood.
There were no prints except for the blurred thumbprint on  the base, which you told me matches Dr Darnell's. — Come in, Will.
The Black prince belongs to her, so that would be reasonable.
In fact, there should be more of her prints there.
I think we can safely assume that the statuette was washed and wiped clean after the event.’
‘If Pinder is to be believed, it was missing at twelve-thirty,’ said Sergeant Bird, taking a seat as quietly as a man of his bulk could manage.
‘Yes, I'm coming on to that.
Our last bit of objective evidence, such as it is, concerns those prints on the scullery window.
We would expect Mrs Reynolds's to be present.
She's a regular employee here.
The other prints were those of Dr Armitage.
She did have an explanation when I spoke to her, and at that point we were unaware of the prints ourselves.
She said — just a moment.
Ah, yes — somewhere around ten-forty she went down to the kitchen for some milk, and found the room unduly cold.
She noticed that the scullery window was open, and fastened the hasp firmly.’
‘When did she tell you this, Sir?’
Allen's face wore a puzzled expression.
‘This afternoon.’
‘Surely with all the talk of a madman she'd have volunteered any information the moment Channing crossed the threshold?’
‘Exactly.
That's what I would have thought.
Her story was that the morning news placed Burrows near Gainsborough, and she thought that exonerated him.
In addition, the murder took place a good two hours after the window was closed.’
‘Nothing to stop him hiding in the house.’
‘I know.
Rather a good bolt-hole, if you think about it.
He could have doubled back to Gainsborough later.
There would have been time.
It's the MO that's all wrong…
Right now, though, I want your opinions about that scullery window.’
‘Could be the truth,’ said Sergeant Bird.
‘Then again, she might have opened and closed it herself to provide a misleading story.’
‘I can't accept that.
If she wanted us to blame Burrows by faking an entry point, surely the simplest thing would have been to leave the window open?
And she wouldn't have left it plastered with prints…
Sergeant Allen?’
‘I've got a better one, Sir.
I suggest she opened the window for  someone else, and didn't expect her own fingerprints to be taken.
If she'd already heard of Burrows’ escape, she would assume that our attention would be directed towards him.
When we took the prints of all the residents, she realised she'd have to say something.’
‘So you mean the confederate closed the window — with gloves on — and hid somewhere.’
‘Yes, Sir.’
‘Mmm.
It's worth some thought.
If her story was the truth, I can think of only one reason why she didn't come forward right away.
She knew it was irrelevant.’
They slowly digested the ramifications before Montgomery once more became brisk.
‘Let's move on to some of the other points from these statements.
Obviously, when thirty or so people take rooms in a house, there's going to be some to-ing and fro-ing at night.
I'm not just referring to the kind that Pinder indulged in, but trips to the bathroom, that sort of thing.
‘The murder was committed some time between twelve and three.
During that period of time, various doors were opening and closing.
Professor St John Goth heard a door a few minutes before he last looked at his watch at twelve-forty-five.
There was another noise later, but he's unable to specify when.
Lee Horan, however, is fairly sure that he heard a door click at one-forty-five.’
‘Gladys Brown heard a soft tapping in the ladies’ corridor at twelve-thirty,’contributed Sergeant Bird.
‘I assumed it was Pinder going to see Pamela Berry.’
‘A fair assumption.
It's quite likely that the professor's first sound was Pinder closing his own door.
That leaves the other click to be accounted for.
Could that be when Wetherby left his room to go down to the kitchen?’
‘He may not have actually been in his room, Sir,’ said Allen.
‘The boys said the bed was rumpled, but they weren't convinced it had been slept in.
Could the professor have made a mistake?
Or even told a lie?’
‘That's our problem in one.’
Montgomery's smile was ironic.
‘We're having to rely on dubious testimony.
Pinder, for instance.
What credence can we give to his story of some malevolent person waiting in a window alcove?
Waiting for what?
How could  anyone know that Wetherby was going to get hungry and go down to the kitchen for some cheese?
Wouldn't it be simpler to sneak into his room and attack him there?
The doors have locks, but a lot of people don't bother using them.
‘Say his door waslocked.
In that case, our malevolent might have decided to wait around on the off-chance that he would go to the kitchen or bathroom.
But from that alcove you can't see the bathroom, or any part of the men's corridor.
You can from the other, if you lean out.
Isn't it all rather far-fetched?’
‘Excuse me, Sir.’
Sergeant Bird looked very grave.
‘I've just come from a session with Gladys Brown, a strange woman who has the room next to Meryl Armitage's.
She claims that Meryl was sitting on that window seat last night, wearing just her nightclothes.
She was vague about the time, but it was definitely late on.
Her feeling was that Meryl had been waiting for someone…
I'd hesitate to give much weight to her story in the normal run because she does seem to have a screw loose, but it ties in so well with Norman Pinder's recollections, and they are totally independent witnesses.’
‘Meryl Armitage,’ repeated Montgomery thoughtfully.
‘Her name keeps cropping up in this case.
The American lad, Lee Horan, was under the impression that she was Dominic's girlfriend, but apparently she denied it to him, as she did to me.
Anthea Darnell is unaware of anything of that nature.
Perhaps Jackson has turned something up at the hospital.
Why should she hang around on a window seat in the middle of the night?
And if she was Dominic's girlfriend, why wasn't she at the pub with him earlier?
It doesn't make any sense at all.
I must question her again.
And the professor.’
‘The professor?’
‘Yes.
He apparently showed an interest in Wetherby on Thursday night — pointed him out to Meryl Armitage and asked his name.
That is, if she is to be believed.
It could be another blind alley.’
‘How many people didknow Wetherby before this weekend?’ asked Allen.
‘As far as we can gather, only Anthea Darnell and Meryl Armitage.
At the moment, they're vying for position under the microscope.
But if nothing concrete emerges, we shall check the  backgrounds of every person who stayed in this Lodge last night.’
Montgomery glanced at his watch.
‘Damn.
They're about to start dinner.
I do want to get on.’
‘Perhaps we should take the opportunity to grab a bite ourselves,’ suggested Sergeant Bird with an appealing look.
‘Mmm.’
Montgomery sounded abstracted.
‘What's Jackson playingat?
He should have arrived or rung hours ago!’
‘I'll just rustle something up, then,’ said Sergeant Bird, making for the door.
He halted as the telephone rang shrilly.
Lee Horan stood in the centre of the small bedroom and fastened his tie, leaning towards the mirror only to check the end result.
He felt slightly uncomfortable, having seen three men in lounge suits on his way back from the bathroom; the only clothes he had with him were casual ones.
It seemed odd, anyway, to be holding a kind of celebratory dinner, the original highspot of the weekend, when someone had just been killed in the very kitchen where the preparations were taking place.
Somehow irreverent…and yet, what else could people do but follow the prescribed pattern, listen to the lectures, try to hide their fear and act normally.
It was surely an ideal situation for the police, with all the witnesses to hand, and even decent interview facilities.
He smoothed out a couple of folds in his best V-necked lambswool pullover, and slipped it over his head.
The beige toned with his cream shirt, and tie in muted shades of brown.
He sent a little prayer ceilingwards that at least there would be no dinner jackets, then ran a comb through his hair as an afterthought.
His cheeks still tingled with the woody-scented aftershave lotion he had slapped on them.
Sherry first in the lounge, he recalled, then dinner.
The hum of conversation in the lounge sounded restrained as Lee approached the door.
He paused, seeking out Meryl, uncertain as to what colour she would be wearing.
His eyes met those of Anthea Darnell for a moment, but deliberately slid away before she could invite him to join her group.
Her gown was long, emphasising her slender figure, and starkly black.
God.
The well-shaped nails were a pearly plum colour this time.
Even a  bare second had shown him the gauntness of her face, its pallor throwing the make-up into a strange relief, like those simulated three-dimensional photographs.
A group of ladies was clustered round the beautifully carved oak sideboard, and the gleam of the silver tray on top indicated the location of the sherry.
It was already poured, and just as his hand closed on the last glass with pale gold contents, he caught sight of Meryl near the window with Gladys.
She was inclining her head, and nodding periodically, but her fidgeting fingers gave Lee the confidence to wave across the room and catch her attention.
To his relief, she smiled back, excused herself from Gladys, and walked straight across the rich Wilton carpet to where he was standing.
‘Thank heavens,’ she breathed.
‘I thought I was stuck there…has she followed me?’
‘No.’
Lee grinned down at the girl whose auburn head scarcely reached his shoulder.
‘Is she that bad?’
‘Awful.
Very mildly schizophrenic, I'm almost certain.
Just enough to be a real pain.
Sorry, I sound terribly selfish, don't I?,
‘No.
Honest.’
‘She talks about history, then gets it all wrong.
That doesn't make her schizophrenic, of course, but it's the little things, her paranoia, her unkempt appearance…and yesterday she was whispering to me about microphones in the lecture room.
There aren't any.’
Lee began to chuckle, then stopped short as a sinister thought entered his head.
‘Meryl…
You don't suppose…
I mean, if she's peculiar, do you think she could have had something to do with Dominic's death?’
‘No.’
Meryl sounded quite adamant.
‘She's only slightly barmy, and even schizophrenics need a reason to be violent, real or imagined.’
‘But that's just it!
Some imagined slight, some grievance…’
‘No, Lee.
I can't believe that.’
‘She might hate all doctors,’ he persisted.
‘Perhaps they clapped her away once.’
‘In that case, why are Dr Darnell and I walking around in one  piece?
I'm sure you're wrong.
She'd never even met Dominic before this weekend.’
She turned away and took a sip of sweet sherry.
Lee sensed that Meryl was unhappy with their subject of conversation, and if he charged on blindly, she would go and join someone else.
‘What are we eating tonight?’ he asked.
It was the best he could do at short notice.
‘Are you hungry?
I'm starving.
It's supposed to be smoked salmon with avocado, sole Véronique, medallions of venison, and some kind of Pavlova.
Raspberry, I think.
The menus are on the table next door.’
‘Wow!’ he cried enthusiastically, making her laugh.
‘Then coffee and petits-fours,’ she added.
‘Good place, this.
It should be a hotel…’
His voice trailed off.
Randall Lodge.
Four-star food.
Beds like boards.
Come and be murdered.
‘Another sherry, Meryl?’
‘No thanks.
They seem to be moving now.
Yes.
Let's go through.’
as if impelled by some nameless undertow, the mass of people gently flowed towards the doorway, some still holding their sherry glasses aloft.
Lee noticed the bright colours worn by many of the ladies.
Had they felt a flicker of disrespect, he wondered, dressing for a jamboree which was now more like a wake?
People could hardly carry sombre clothes with them, just in case someone happened to die…
His mouth gave a wry twist as he remembered an old lady in his home town who used to buy up sympathy cards by the dozen.
Perhaps when you were in her age bracket, it made sense.
‘Something runny, Lee?’
‘Not really.’
He held her arm lightly just below the cobalt blue cape sleeve, and steered her through a small group of women who had chosen to prolong their discourse by the door.
They turned into the dining room, and gasped at the long row of glowing candles which stretched down the table to the further limits of vision.
It was macabre.
Someone had goofed.
Or maybe they were merely sticking to the original arrangements for the meal.
Candles.
Obscurely appropriate.
Was the guy a Catholic?
Anthea Darnell, a tall dark stalagmite, was standing at the head of the table, with professor St John Goth on her immediate right.
Lee lead Meryl towards them only to find that she resisted furiously.
‘Further down,’ she whispered.
‘But there's —‘
‘Please , Lee.’
As they passed close to the couple at table both the women recoiled as if the Devil himself had suddenly sprung up between them.
Lee saw Anthea's eyes glittering blackly in the dancing candlelight, her chin drawn up in defiance or outrage.
Beneath his fingertips, the flesh of Meryl's upper arm had contracted into goose-bumps, and an uncontrollable tremor had shaken her small frame.
What was it with these women?
The hairs on the back of his neck began to rise with the blast of primitive hatred which had rushed through the air.
Amidst shuffles and low-voiced murmurings the rest of the members took their places and eyed each other uneasily across the table.
Then an expectant silence emerged, tightening within each skull like an old elastic band, until it was broken by a sharp rat-tat from the top of the table.
‘Professor, ladies and gentlemen.’
Anthea Darnell's voice was as clear and confident as ever, the voice of a woman who was accustomed to receiving undivided attention from others.
'As you all know, this was to have been a happy occasion, an opportunity for members old and new to join together and indulge ourselves with history in pleasant surroundings, linked in our common interest by the traditions of the Circle.
Tragically, Dominic Wetherby, a respected doctor at the District Hospital and one of our newest recruits, died here last night.
Those of us who knew him are shocked and saddened by his death.
To the majority who never had the chance to meet him properly, I should like to tell you that he was a merry young man who tempered his quick intelligence with humour, and would, in time, have made worthwhile contributions both to medicine and to the Circle…’
Once again, Lee could discern Meryl's tension, although he dared not risk craning round to see her face.
Her breath was hissing in and out audibly as if her teeth were clenched.
His gaze  casually swept up the table instead, skimming the bowed heads and carefully composed expressions until it reached Professor St John Goth, where it stopped short with a sense of shock.
The professor stood rigidly, gripping the high back of his chair with bony hands; in the sinister candlelight, his eyes burned with some unforgettable memory, cankerous, unexpurgated.
‘…so please join me now for a minute's silence in memory of Dominic Wetherby.
— Dominic.’
Anthea finished her short address in the same strong tones, and Lee stared down at his knife, puzzled and disturbed.
As Meryl held out the plate of petits-fours laughingly to Lee, she knew that someone was standing by her shoulder.
‘Tell me about Illinois, Lee,’ she invited, assuming that the figure was one of the kitchen staff.
The person cleared his throat, then a male voice whispered softly in her left ear, ‘Dr Armitage?’
‘Yes?’
She swung round rather abruptly, and recognised the young man as one of the detective constables who had been haunting the Lodge all day.
He had a long, thin face, clipped hair which would have delighted the services, and a pair of mournful, liquid brown eyes.
‘I'm sorry to disturb you.
Inspector Montgomery asks if you would be kind enough to step into the library when you've finished your coffee, and give him a few minutes of your time.’
Meryl privately doubted that this phraseology was accurate.
He had much more likely said: ‘Get Dr Armitage in here — as fast as you can.’
Lee's look of sympathy embarrassed her.
He was like a large, untidy St Bernard dog, with a dog's unflinching devotion, so difficult to shake off.
He didn't realise that she needed time and space, privacy to sort out the tangle inside her head and make a considered decision about her future actions.
‘Yes,’ she said to the constable.
‘Thank you for bringing the message.
I'll join him as soon as possible.’
‘They're bound to keep wanting you,’ Lee reassured her when their unwelcome companion had gone.
‘You worked with Dominic.
They'll be after Dr Darnell, too, I'll bet.’
‘Mm.
Would you excuse me, please, Lee?
I might as well go now.’
She left the table and walked straight-backed out of the dining room and across the hall to the library door, where the same constable was waiting outside.
He turned the knob and opened it with ceremony.
‘Dr Armitage, Sir.’
Montgomery remained seated at the gleaming table, and motioned with his hand for Meryl to sit down opposite.
She interpreted this as a bad sign.
Behind her, as the door clicked to, she was aware that the young constable had also entered the room and was standing four or five feet away, his arms folded.
‘Thank you for coming so promptly,’ began the inspector in a flat voice.
‘We've been taking statements all day, and have discovered certain — anomalies in yours which need sorting out.
The sooner the better, I'm sure you'll agree.’
‘Carry on,’ she said, equally flatly, as if her stomach wasn't bucking and churning and threatening to betray her.
‘Let's start with your relationship with Dominic Wetherby.
I believe you said it was purely professional?’
‘I said we were friends.
I pointed out that a certain amount of intimacy was inevitable when you work so closely with someone.
But he wasn't my boyfriend.’
‘Lee Horan had the impression that he was.
He based this on certain words and gestures of Dominic's last night, while you were all three together after dinner.’
‘Oh, that!
I explained that to Lee.
Dominic was just fooling around — flirting.
He is — was — partly Irish, you know.
It didn't mean anything at all.’
‘So he didn't say, ‘See you later’, or words to that effect?’
She affected a small frown of concentration.
‘No.
I don't think so.
He may have said, ‘See you’, or ‘See you again’, something general.’
‘You're sure?
Absolutely sure that he didn't express any intention of visiting you later in the evening?’
‘Quite sure.
That would have been really late.
There was no reason.’
‘Very well.
Let's move on.
When we last spoke, you told me that you were reading in bed until eleven-thirty, when you went  to sleep, and your last sortie from the bedroom had been to the kitchen for milk at approximately ten-forty.
We have a witness, however, who is certain that she saw you sitting in a window alcove at the end of the gallery much later on, perhaps as late as midnight.’
‘That's ridiculous!
Who —?
Ah, wait!
Was it Gladys who said that?
Gladys — Smith?’
‘Brown.’
‘She's thinking of Thursday night.
I was out on the gallery just before I went to bed, looking at all the tapestries and statuettes.
She came along and we had a few words.’
‘What were you wearing?’
Meryl looked down coyly.
‘My night things.’
‘Go on.’
‘There's nothing more to say.’
‘Did you sit on the window seat?’
‘For a minute or so, yes.’
Montgomery stared at her, and Meryl felt a slow flush beginning to bloom beneath her cheekbones.
Didn't he realise how strange the Gladys woman was?
Should she spell it out to him, or would that fatally overplay her hand?
Remember vivas and interviews; candidates dig their own pits quite happily, with minimal help from the examiners.
Why didn't the inspector saysomething?
His face wasn't sceptical, just enquiring.
She licked her lips.
‘Inspector Montgomery, I don't know whether you've met Gladys yourself, but she's a little— odd.
I don't think her memory is very reliable.’
‘I see’ he said.
‘Can you give me a more precise opinion, as a medical person?’
‘Yes.
I would say early schizophrenia — the paranoid type that older people seem to be more susceptible to.
She may or may not have had a longstanding paranoid personality; that's hard for relatives to cope with, but not necessarily pathological.’
‘I understand.
We meet plenty in the course of our duties.’
The thin bridge of empathy between two professional people was abruptly dashed away.
‘So according to you, Gladys is not to be believed.
She is an unreliable witness.
Tell me, during the, er, ‘minute or so’ that you were sitting in the alcove, did you see Norman Pinder walk along the gallery?’
‘He's the nervous-looking man, isn't he?
No.
I didn't see him.’
‘Did you pull the curtain in front of you?’
‘No.’
‘Did you happen to notice that rather fine statuette of the Black Prince outside Anthea Darnell's room?,
‘No — I mean, yes.’
‘Did you ever pick it up?’
‘No.’
‘Did you touch it?’
‘Yes, I believe I did.
I ran my finger down it.’
‘Why?’
‘I — I don't know.
One just does .
Like marble pillars and mantelpieces.
I was feeling the surface of the bronze.
It was very cold, and hard…
I suppose that's obvious.’
She realised he was getting her flustered, and clamped her mouth shut before the trickle of explanations became a torrent.
How pale and remorseless his eyes were, even though the set of his other features was quite neutral.
‘Had you been wearing your nightclothes earlier on, when you went down and closed the scullery window?’
‘You're forgetting, Inspector.
That was last night.
No, I was dressed then.’
‘My apologies.
You're quite sure that you closed the window firmly?’
‘Positive.’
‘Tell me about Toby Latimer.’
His abrupt change of subject left her floundering, and a mischievous thought twinkled across her mind.
Didn't he know that flight of ideas was one of the cardinal signs of schizophrenia?’
‘Why do you ask me about Toby?’
She sounded bemused.
‘Just one of the lines of our enquiry, which encompasses very broad limits.’
‘I'm sorry, but unless you tell me why you want to know, I can't help you.’
‘Now you'reforgetting, Dr Armitage.
It's you we're trying to help.
If this murder remains unsolved, who knows what might happen next?’
‘I don't mind being general about Toby, but his personal life is up to him.’
‘That's interesting.’
Montgomery smiled, but it was not a pleasant smile.
‘What gave you the idea we were going to ask you about his personal life?
Is there something to hide?’
‘No.
It's just that you people probe into all sorts of things.
I naturally assumed…’
‘Ah.’
‘Well, then?’
‘Can you describe to me Toby Latimer's professional position?’
‘He's a registrar in rheumatology.
He has the appropriate postgraduate qualification, and his future career shouldn't present any difficulties.
Both staff and patients trust him.’
‘I understand he worked with Dominic Wetherby once.’
‘Yes, two years ago.
Dominic was his houseman in general medicine.’
‘Did Dominic ever make any comments regarding Toby to you?’
‘What sort of comments?’
‘Opinions.
Was there anything he didn't like about Toby?’
‘I don't know.
He never said.’
‘And you, Dr Armitage?’
‘Me?’
‘Is there anything about Toby that makes youuneasy?’
‘No!
He's my friend.
I can relax with him.
Why should he make me uneasy?’
Montgomery ignored the question and carried on.
‘What kind of out-of-hours activities does he enjoy?’
Meryl almost smiled.
‘Activity’ is the wrong word for Toby.
He isn't keen on physical exertions.
He likes to eat out, or listen to concerts, or attend antiques fairs.
Oh, I forgot — he does a little gardening, but he employs a man for any heavy work.’
‘Is he physically disabled?’
‘No.’
‘Who are his other friends?’
Meryl was struck dumb.
She had absolutely no idea.
There was a huge, watertight compartment in Toby's life whose contents she couldn't begin to guess at.
This must be what the inspector meant by ‘something to hide’.
Well, she didn't know the answer.
‘Hospital people, I suppose.’
‘You don't sound very sure.’
‘I'm not.
I don't live in his pocket.
He might play poker for all I know.’
‘Perhaps baccarat would be more appropriate.’
Yes, that sounded just right.
‘You've met him?’ she asked eagerly, relieved that the all-pervading air of hostility seemed to have receded.
‘No, but one of my sergeants has.
Did Toby ever mention friends in Retford?’
This was a key question, for all its careless delivery.
Meryl knew she had misjudged the situation.
These detectives were never off their guard.
There was purpose in everything they said.
She sensed danger for Toby, but didn't know how to avoid it.
She had lied enough already.
‘Yes, once.’
‘Who were they?’
‘I don't know.’
‘Did he ever mention even a Christian name?,
‘No.’
‘Do you think Toby is attractive to women?,
‘I — I really can't say.’
‘Are you attracted to him?
Does he exude male sexuality?’
‘No — that is, it's a personal thing, isn't it?
Pheromones, chemistry.
Some people have wild affairs while others don't see where the attraction lies.’
‘True, Dr Armitage.
Let me put it another way.
Can you imagine Toby having an affair with anywoman?’
‘Perhaps,’ she said doubtfully.
‘How about with a man?’
‘Oh, I don't think he's queer!
Just a loner, who rejoices in his own autonomy.’
‘Do you think there might be a reason for that?’
Meryl shrugged helplessly.
‘Does he like dressing up, Dr Armitage?
For parties or plays, perhaps?’
‘I'm sorry.
I don't know.’
Her voice dropped to a weary whisper and her eyes felt gritty.
It must have been those candles at the table.
Requiem Mass.
‘All right.
One last thing.
Did Toby know that you and Dominic would be here this weekend?’
‘Yes.
We talked about the Circle quite a lot.
I tried to persuade him to join.’
‘Thank you very much.
We are most interested in what you had to say.’
This time Montgomery stood up, ‘I'd advise you, however, to think things over tonight.
If there's anything you feel that you should have mentioned, and didn't, perhaps you'll let us know tomorrow.
In any case, we shall be speaking with you again.’
With this veiled warning echoing in her ears, Meryl left the room.
Montgomery stretched in his chair and yawned.
‘Let's leave it ‘til tomorrow,’ suggested William Bird.
‘No.
Time's not on our side.
We've got them all under one roof for less than twenty-four hours now…we must get the proof we need, or a confession.’
‘You definitely think it was Meryl Armitage?’
‘We can't be certain about anyone just yet, but such evidence as we have seems to point in that direction.
Only Drs Armitage and Darnell knew Dominic Wetherby before this weekend, with the possible addition of professor St John Goth, whom I intend to see tonight, despite your objections.
That loose end needs tying up.
‘If Armitage did it in conjunction with Latimer, that explains the window, the lurking on the gallery, and the presence of Latimer acting suspiciously in the area at just the time the murder was committed.
She admits to touching the Black Prince, so its suitability as a weapon could well have occurred to her then.
Of course, she may be simply an accomplice.
One thing's for certain— she lies through her teeth every time I ask her something.’
‘What would the motive be, and where does Dr Darnell's nail polish fit in?’
‘The motive — I don't know.
Perhaps some ghastly medical error committed by Latimer while he was working with Wetherby.
Wetherby may have decided to feather his nest by blackmail.
Or perhaps he knew something unsavoury about Latimer's personal life.
He may well be a transvestite, but I can't help wondering whether the make-up was simply a blind to ‘Prove’, as it were, that he'd been to a party that night, in case anyone picked  him up.
The nail polish…
I've thought all along that Anthea Darnell knows something, and I suspect that she heard, or saw, or guessed what happened, and she's shielding Meryl.
The tablecloth was probably her own gesture towards decency.’
‘Phew!
It's a rum do.
I must confess, Sir, that that seems the most likely answer.
I've just been round to see Mrs Reynolds in the village, and she's adamant that all the kitchen and scullery windows were closed when she left at nine-thirty.
She was quite outraged when I hinted otherwise.
From what I've read, Meryl Armitage did say that she heard about the Rampton escapee on the ten o'clock news.
She may have used the window as a convenient piece of misdirection, or she may have opened it to let Latimer in.
He couldn't have come in earlier through the front door because there would have been a substantial risk of either Dr Darnell or Wetherby himself seeing him.
‘Yes, most of it fits, but just one thing niggles me about Dr Armitage's story.’
‘Go on, Will.’
‘Well, she admits to meeting Gladys Brown late at night on the landing.
She says Thursday, Gladys says Friday, but no matter…
When I was a little boy, Sir, we had prayers in class every morning at school.
You had to close your eyes for the Lord's Prayer.
One young lad, Jackie Page, always used to pipe up, ‘Sir, Sir, Trevor's got his eyes open!’
Trevor would be put in the corner — and Jackie as well.
He never could grasp the logic that to see Trevor it was obvious to the teacher that his own eyes must have been open.’
‘I begin to twig, Will.
You're thinking of Gladys Brown and Meryl Armitage.’
‘Yes.
So far we've been concentrating on Meryl's reasons for hanging round on the gallery in the middle of the night; all well and good, but what was Gladysdoing there?’
‘You're working late, gentlemen,’ the professor observed mildly from his chair.
‘Force of circumstances.’
Montgomery's reply was crisp.
‘We don't have a lot of time.’
‘Well, I'm at your disposal.’
‘Good.
You recall my asking you earlier on today whether or not you had met Dominic Wetherby before this weekend?
Yes.
Do you also recall your answer?’
‘Certainly.’
‘Would you care to modify it if I tell you that we have reason to believe that you recognised Wetherby at dinner on Thursday night?’
‘No, Inspector.
I told the truth.
I had not met Dominic Wetherby previously.
I had merely seen his photograph.’
‘Isn't that taking semantics a little too far?
You understood what we were asking.’
‘Perhaps.
But it was not in my interests to correctly interpret your question.
I like to avoid painful memories.’
Montgomery became aware of the absolute stillness of Sergeant Bird beside him, even as his own body under a rather creased white shirt held its vital functions in abeyance, blood crawling sluggishly through arteries and veins, diaphragm petrified.
The room was quiet, dim and mysterious.
A small lamp reflected the deep lustre of the table-top.
‘So you acknowledge that you knew Wetherby before.
May I ask in what capacity?’
‘You may.
He killed my daughter.’
The detectives were momentarily stunned before Sergeant Bird' at a discreet signal from Montgomery, began to intone the caution in a deadpan voice.
St John Goth, far from looking tense and hunted, visibly relaxed.
‘Thank you, Sergeant.
I know you're only doing your duty; I suppose it's time I did mine.’
He inclined his head towards Montgomery.
'I persuaded myself that I didn't want to introduce irrelevances into your investigation, when in fact I was protecting myself from having to relive traumas of the past.
It didn't work anyway.
Ever since I laid eyes on Dominic Wetherby I've been unable to rest.
When I do go to sleep, I see Geraldine's face, and she's always crying…’
‘Perhaps you'd like to tell us from the beginning,’ said Montgomery softly.
‘Geraldine was your daughter?’
‘Yes.
I became a father late in life, and I know it's a cliché, but she was the apple of my eye.
When Catherine died, she was all I had left, but you can't hang on to young people…they're not an insurance against loneliness in old age.
They have their own hopes and ambitions, their own lives to lead.
You have children, Inspector?
Then you'll know what I mean.
‘Geraldine went to Bristol University to study geography; she had a teaching career in mind.
During her second year, she met a first-year medical student, and became quite involved with him.
By her third year, they were engaged.’
His eyes, peering down the corridors of memory, began to sharpen with recollection.
‘At university, as in any other institution, there is a pressure to conform with one's peers.
Girls, particularly in their final year of study, often feel that they are expected to become engaged.
All their friends are doing it, and they are aware that never again will they be in the situation where young people of similar ages, interests and academic abilities can mingle so freely and in such numbers.
By saying this, I am accepting that Geraldine herself may well have engineered the engagement.
Nevertheless, I firmly believe that the young man concerned regarded it as the means to an end — I leave that to your imaginations — and not in any way binding.
‘I think Geraldine knew, deep down, that I wouldn't approve of her choice.
She showed me his photograph once, and he was certainly a good-looking chap with his wide smile and curly hair, but she never brought him home or suggested we should meet.
Each time I went to Bristol, she took me out for tea on her own, or with a girlfriend.
Her fiancé was probably equally in the dark about me.
I know that Geraldine was going through a phase of socialism, and inverted snobbery, almost, to put it unkindly but accurately.
Youngsters do at that stage.
They grow out of it later.
That was probably another reason for hiding her background and never inviting anyone home.
She didn't want them to know that her life had been quite a privileged one.
‘Anyway, I have reason to believe that she told her young man I was a history teacher in a modest direct grant school.
That was the story I had later from one of her flatmates.
She evidently saw  no difficulty in reconciling that with the fact that the man she hoped to marry was training to become a doctor.
The man being Dominic Wetherby, of course.
‘When he let her down it was just three weeks before her Finals.
That was unspeakably callous.
He must have known that in her hurt and disillusion she would have been unable to work, to do her vital revision.
Geography isn't a difficult subject.
I think that knowledge tipped the scales.
She knew she was going to jail.
She was devastated by the loss of Dominic.
Young girls feel things so deeply…she must have seen no future at all.
‘It was the Roman way, Inspector.
I'd described it to her myself.
Although my subject is medieval history, we used to read and discuss all history from biblical times onward.
Her flatmate, Trudy, found her…lying in a crimson bath, her skin milk-white.
She'd left a note for me, saying she was sorry…
No excuses, no explanations — it was Trudy who told me why.
Dominic's part was neatly hushed-up at the inquest, and they blamed it squarely on exam worries.
He wasn't even there.
‘So we'd never met, you see.
But for six years I carried his image in my mind, determined that he should somehow be made to pay.
No, please.
I know what I'm saying.
I didn't kill him.
I'd have told you straight away if I had done.
There's no family to be ashamed of me.
I did want to, once, yet…now that someone else has done it, I feel nothing but pity.
Two wrongs cannot make a right.
It's such a waste of young life.
‘Vengeance is mine’, saith the Lord.
'' He's right, you know.
It's no-one else's.’
Montgomery toyed with his pen before he spoke.
‘Thank you for being so honest, Professor.
I'm sorry if it's brought back everything you've been trying to forget.
Tomorrow I shall be asking three or four salient witnesses to stay on here for an extra night after the others have gone home.
I'd be grateful if you would join them.’
‘Are you arresting me?’
The professor's tone was calm and unworried.
‘No — but I'm afraid I can't speak for the future.’
‘Very good, Inspector.
Is there anything else?’
‘Yes.
Just one final thing…’
Anthea Darnell sat wearily on the bedroom's only chair, still wearing her black dress.
She picked up a hand mirror, but what she saw was not reassuring; the harsh overhead light remorselessly picked out the tiny lines at the corners of her mouth, the discoloured skin around her eyes, the dry, wrinkled neck.
Dominic had made her feel young.
But what a price to pay for two months of passion!
A price too high for both of them.
The police probably knew everything; it was only a matter of time now before they challenged her about that sample of nail polish.
How would they interpret the killing itself?
Did a white-hot surge of anger and disillusion count as a mitigating circumstance, disturbing the balance of the mind?
Nothing seemed to matter any more.
She was tired, tired beyond belief.
Anthea turned out the light and stretched full length on the bed.
The curtains rustled softly, but it was too dark to see unnatural shapes and shadows; instead, they crowded her mind.
Dominic, I'm sorry — so sorry.
It was all my fault.
Forgive me.
Behind her eyelids, the living Dominic refused to materialise.
Only the feet, sad little feet, small for a man, pale and dead.
She moved slightly to ease the constriction of the black dress.
Black for mourning, black for devilry…the goat's face of pan.
No, the face of Apollo, and the character of Pan.
Strange.
Pan, the only god to die.
An intolerable weight seemed to press on her forehead and slowly she slid into sleep.
At three o'clock, Anthea woke.
Some vague sound had alarmed her — a creak, a footstep, maybe even a door handle turning.
Her sleep had been deep and dreamless.
Groping for the bedside light, she knocked her alarm clock off the table.
It fell with a crash which rattled her composure and set her heart thudding.
She picked it up, trembling with fatigue, and inspected it by touch and audition alone.
Intact.
Lucky clock.
Instinct told her that there would be no more sleep for her that night.
Small penance; Dominic had all the sleep in the world.
Round the corner, Meryl was also awake, pacing the room in her dressing-gown, thinking furiously about the dreadful position she was in.
Surely a court would see it as manslaughter.
Murder was premeditated, not something committed in the heat of the moment, a blind reflex lashing-out.
Three years in jail — five?
Seven?
Frenchmen recognised the crime passionnel .
What would a jury of stolid Britons think?
Either way, though, it was the end of a medical career.
She pondered the hard work it entailed just to qualify, let alone to try to forge ahead in one's own chosen speciality.
All wasted, poured down a drain of dishonour.
Whatever the police said or did, decided Meryl, she was going to resign her post at the District.
Seeing Anthea each day would be a constant reminder, and neither woman could deny that the masks of civility each had been holding up to the other for months were now trampled underfoot.
She shuddered at the recollection of Anthea's naked hatred at dinner.
The thought of facing her the next day was quite terrifying, but not an obligation Meryl intended to shirk.
The sooner she informed the hospital of her intention, the sooner she could actually leave.
She glided to the window and stared out, pulling the flimsy curtains behind her.
Somewhere in the impenetrable blackness was a desperate man, cold, hungry, hunted.
Like everyone else in the Lodge, Meryl had locked her window and door and mentally earmarked a makeshift weapon among the everyday objects by the bed, but she felt dissociated from the whole procedure.
The chance of danger from that quarter was slight; the wolf was already in the sheep-pen.
At breakfast time the general atmosphere among the residents was still subdued, but much less strained than the previous evening.
Outside was sunshine and jubilant birdsong; inside the dining room, the smell of bacon and rattle of cutlery seemed comfortingly prosaic.
‘Nice day, isn't it?’
Norman Pinder gave Meryl a hesitant smile over the top of his tray.
She noticed that the stack of bacon, egg, sausage and fried bread heaped on his plate was enough to feed a small army; he really ought to get his thyroid seen to.
‘Yes,’ she agreed, and followed him to the table.
Lee was sitting with Anthea and Sally Curtiss, the membership secretary.
He looked hurt when she didn't join him, his emotions transparent as a child's.
The echoing chord of fond exasperation was becoming familiar to Meryl.
Nobody owned her.
Kindness she appreciated, shackles she did not.
‘If this was a hotel, there'd be Sunday papers,’ said Norman.
‘I miss not having one.
I'm sure there'll be lots to read about that man Sydney burrows.
‘The village shop may open for an hour or two,’ replied Meryl.
‘Oh…
I don't think so.
It's a post office.
And anyway — we can't go out.’
‘Rubbish.
Who's going to stop you?’
‘The police.’
‘They can't.
Not unless they're arresting you!’
Meryl accompanied her feeble joke with a grimace, then stared as his face blanched over a period of seconds, and his fork hovered aimlessly between plate and mouth.
Oh hell, she thought.
Another one.
‘If the shop's open, I'll buy you a paper at coffee time,’ she said hastily.
‘What would you like?’
‘The Sunday Shocker , please — thank you.’
Meryl gulped down her orange juice in an effort to subdue the mental image of Norman Pinder avidly turning the pages of his favourite Sunday newspaper, his eyes popping out even further, if that were possible.
They're all mad in here, except me, she concluded, watching as Gladys Brown tacked across the room, seeking a welcoming face, her hair wild, her mouth working in little bursts of movement.
To Meryl's relief a very normal Pamela Berry plumped her rounded behind on the chair opposite Norman's, and proceeded to cheer him up.
Her tray held a bowl half-filled with cereal, and a cup of black coffee.
Life could be unfair for some.
Meryl finished her own meal and stood up in a leisurely fashion.
The first lecture was due to start in half an hour — time enough for what she had to do.
She excused herself from Norman Pinder and his friend, then slid out of the chair and returned her tray to the serving hatch.
A few yards away, Anthea Darnell was just rising, giving Lee a charming smile.
Perfect.
She waited as Anthea came towards her and added her tray to the stack.
The older woman's face was drawn and grey-tinged.
The bold make-up she affected was all wrong today; it hid nothing, and accentuated the harsher signs of ageing.
Meryl felt no pity.
‘Good morning, Dr Darnell.’
‘Good morning, Meryl.’
If Anthea was experiencing surprise or suspicion, she kept it to herself.
‘Could you spare me five minutes before the lectures start?’
‘I imagine so, yes.
Would the lounge be suitable?’
‘No.
It's not very private.
I think the garden would be better.’
‘Very well.
I shall be back in five minutes’ time.
Wait for me here.’
Establishing the upper hand with the habit of a lifetime, Anthea tapped her way out of the room, leaving Meryl feeling unpleasantly exposed.
‘What did you want to discuss?’
Anthea's tone was one of politely concealed impatience.
Brilliant sunshine poured down into the herb garden, and the drowsy hum of bees seemed curiously at odds with the sharpening tension between the two doctors.
Meryl felt slightly dizzy among the heady scents of the plants, but nevertheless plucked a rosemary leaf from its stem and held it to her nose, crushed between finger and thumb, before releasing it to twist emptily to the ground.
‘It doesn't need any discussion,’ she said.
‘I just wanted to let you know that I intend to resign my post at the District.’
‘I see…
Presumably you've given this careful thought.’
‘Of course.’
‘Do you have another job to go to?’
‘Not yet.’
‘Well, I'd be pleased to provide any references you need, but may I suggest that you consider a little more before acting precipitately.
I know we're all very upset by what's happened here, but damaging your career now won't help you in the long run.’
A surge of fury shot through Meryl, swamping her fear of Anthea.
What crass hypocrisy, pretending to worry about her  career when she had been instrumental in its destruction!
Only the thought of the month they still had to work together contained her rage, held back the biting comments.
She stared sullenly at Anthea, and said nothing.
‘You're aware that a month's notice is required.
The Personnel Department will need your resignation in writing.’
‘They'll have it tomorrow morning — or as soon as I'm free to give it.’
Anthea gave a cool nod of acknowledgement.
Her face was blank, and Meryl found herself wondering how she could ever have imagined that they had some kind of common bond, women in medicine, friendship.
From far away came the call of a wood pigeon.
Anthea waited a moment for Meryl to speak, then consulted her watch.
‘We'd better be getting back.
Think about what I said, won't you?’
‘No,youthink!’
Anthea had already half-turned towards the house, but now she swung back in astonishment.
‘I beg your pardon?’
‘You heard.’
Meryl's voice was quivering with passion.
‘How can you stand there and talk about jobs when the real issue is hanging above our heads!
I thought you'd at least ask the reasons…it would have been a chance to admit where things went wrong.
But no, you won't face it.
Well, now you have to listen.
I can't go on protecting you.
I won't go on protecting
‘You!’
‘Meryl…’
Anthea's expression was pure concern.
‘What are you saying?’
‘You know what I'm saying.
I know all about you and Dominic.
I accept it was an accident.
There's no other explanation.
You didn't know what you were doing at the time.
He provoked it, I'm sure.
But you've got to tell the police.
You must.
They think it was me .
She clenched her fists, on the verge of tears.
For a moment’ Anthea's face was etched with horror, then the black eyes glared down at Meryl with outrage and venom.
‘How dare you,’ she hissed.
‘Do you think I don't see through your little game?
My God, how stupid I've been.
Half of last  night, I thought about you, but a piece of the jigsaw was missing.
You've just provided it.
My instincts were right.
God forgive you, Meryl.
You'd better stay out of my sight.’
She walked from the herb garden so rapidly that Meryl was unable to utter another word.
Trembling with shock, she leaned against a sundial and re-ran the disastrous interview in her mind from start to finish.
Instead of alarming Anthea, she had handed her a weapon.
Now there was a stronger motive for the killing of Dominic Wetherby than mere resentment over a promotion leap-frog.
The police would make much of that.
Anthea stalked across the car park of Randall Lodge like a woman with a purpose.
Outside the incongruous police trailer she paused and knocked smartly on the door.
A short delay elapsed before Detective Sergeant Allen appeared.
‘Dr Darnell.
Good morning.
Can I help you?’
‘Yes.
I wish to speak to Inspector Montgomery.’
‘I'm afraid he's in Nottingham just now.
Would you like to talk to me, or wait until he's back?
It will be before lunchtime.’
She frowned.
‘I'll wait, thank you.
Do let me know the minute he returns.’
‘Certainly, Doctor.
Are you sure I can't be of assistance?’
‘Quite sure.
Good day, Sergeant.’
Anthea Darnell strode to the main door of the Lodge without a backward glance.
Montgomery sipped his coffee appreciatively and allowed his gaze to wander round the cool green room until it reached the languid man draped in the chair opposite.
‘Blue mountain?
It's very good.’
‘We aim to please, Inspector.
People with discerning tastes are, alas, becoming a rarity.’
For a moment Montgomery pondered how well Toby Latimer would have got on with Brian Jackson.
Badly, he decided.
A  meeting of unlike minds.
Nevertheless, Jackson had managed to convey the essence of this tall, eccentric doctor in his report, enough to make Montgomery very curious to meet him in the flesh.
‘I'll come straight to the point,’ he said.
‘You were driving your Daimler on the A614 — southbound — at two a.m. yesterday morning.
The police officers who stopped you noted that you were wearing women's clothing — is that correct?’
Toby stifled a yawn with long, elegant fingers.
‘My dear Inspector, I had high hopes of you.
I trust you're not going to bore me after all.’
‘I wasn't aware that I was here for your entertainment.
Would you care to answer the question?’
‘If you insist, but that ground has already been adequately covered by your delightful sergeant.
Very well…
Yes, I was in women's clothing.
Yes, I am a transvestite.
No, I am not a homosexual.
Will that suffice?’
‘No.
Tell me what time you went to the party, and when you left.’
‘I can't be absolutely precise, but I would say about eight forty-five and one-thirty respectively.’
‘Who can vouch for you?’
‘I'd prefer not to divulge their names.
I'm sure you understand.’
There was no time to pander to Toby's sensitivities.
Montgomery shook his head.
‘I'm sorry.
Without some corroborative evidence, you must realise that your position becomes a serious one.
I'm not making judgments.
I just want facts.’
Toby gave a bitter laugh.
‘Judgments!
You may claim disinterest, but plenty of others are willing to stand as Solomon.
They've never heard of glass houses.
Even rape seems to be more respectable — more ‘normal’— than the simple act of enjoying fine silks and satins next to one's skin.
I appreciate beauty, Inspector.
For men or women.
What a heinous offence!’
‘The actual offence we're considering here is murder.’
Montgomery's voice became brisk.
‘I don't care what went on at the party unless it was blatantly against the law.
But I want those names.’
Toby reluctantly supplied them, taut-faced.
In other circumstances.
Montgomery would have played his suspect like a fish, a skilful, unhurried contest of wits, waiting for the ultimate carelessness, the slip which would open doors.
Now, it was a luxury he couldn't afford.
A working ormolu and bronze lion mantel clock — Louis Quinze, he could almost hear his wife Carole exclaiming — reminded him of the relentless passage of time.
He had to get back to Retford soon.
He already knew that the knot of pressmen by the Lodge gates was swelling by the hour, and the Super intended to issue an interim statement to keep them happy.
They wanted results…
He refused to contemplate what would happen if he failed to provide them.
‘Dr Latimer, I hope you'll agree that your presence on the 614 so close to the time of the crime appears to be something of a coincidence?’
‘Unreservedly, Inspector.
After all, what is coincidence?
Simply a concurrence of events which one will inevitably encounter every now and then if the law of averages is to be believed.
Think of all the times I haven't come across my next-door neighbours on holiday in Innsbruck, or met my dentist while eating a cream meringue…more coffee?’
‘Thank you, yes.
Tell me what you know about the Medieval Circle.’
Toby pursed his lips as he poured.
‘Not a lot.
I believe it's a bunch of enthusiastic amateurs who go on jaunts to places of historical interest, or hold symposia, etc.
They've got a few respectable names, of course.
The odd professor.
A smattering of lecturers…’
He shrugged.
‘That's all.’
‘Have you ever been a member?’
‘Heaven forbid.
Meryl goes on at me to join periodically, but I haven't yet succumbed.’
‘How long has she been affiliated?’
‘Oh, some five years.
Possibly longer.
I remember ructions once when she was my houseman.
They'd planned a trip to Warwick Castle, but she couldn't get the time off.
C'est la vie .
I took her myself another weekend.’
‘So she worked with you five years ago?’
‘Yes.’
‘And you've also worked with Dominic Wetherby?’
‘Yes, worst luck.
He didn't pull his weight, but knew how to keep it from the consultants.
Not quite honest in other respects, either.’
‘You don't hide your dislike, Dr Latimer.’
‘Why should I?
I don't believe in apotheosising the dead.
De mortuis nil nisi bonum, and all that bunkum.
It'll only make your job more difficult.
If he was a little creep, you might as well know it.’
‘Thank you.
We appreciate candour.
I gather Dominic only recently joined the Circle…
Presumably Meryl invited him…?’
‘You're wrong there.
She wasn't keen on the idea at all.
I think it was Anthea — our own answer to the Valkyrie.’
A quiet warble sounded in the hall.
With a polite excuse, Toby padded noiselessly from the room and lifted the receiver; as the conversation progressed, Montgomery became aware that he was speaking to Meryl Armitage.
‘Sorry about that.’
Toby was all affability on his return.
‘Now — where were we?’
‘Was that Dr Armitage?’
‘Yes, it was, actually.
Quite a surprise.’
‘What did she want?’
‘Oh, I don't think our private conversations would interest you.
‘Dr Latimer.’
Toby seemed suddenly to reconsider.
The pale eyes sought Montgomery's own earnestly, a hint of unaccustomed supplication in their depths.
‘She's frightened,’ he said.
‘She says the Rampton escapee isn't a suspect and you are trying to pin Dominic's murder on her.
I told her that's ridiculous.
It is , isn't it?
She wants moral support.’
‘Why ring you?
Where do her family live?’
‘Somewhere in East Anglia.
Felixstowe.
She doesn't want to worry them.
It's natural.
You know what families can be like.
So she rings her friend.’
‘Mm.’
‘I'd like to see her, Inspector, at the Lodge.’
‘That wouldn't be wise, Dr Latimer.
We would prefer you not to, just at present.’
His meaning clear, Montgomery adroitly changed the subject.
‘Who lives up there?’ he asked, pointing towards the ceiling.
‘Ah.
That is Rupert's flat.
He's tall, blond, very muscular…but he doesn't like gardening, so I do most of it myself.’
‘What's his surname?,
‘King.
Rupert King.’
‘Was he at the party on Friday night?’
Sadly, no.
It s not quite his cup of tea…
I imagine he was at home with his highly attractive wife.’
He gave an ironic smile, content that Montgomery had been taken in.
‘So sorry, Inspector.’
Even the hallway was plush, thought Montgomery as he took his leave ten minutes later.
He accepted Toby's outstretched hand, its appearance as limp as a flipper, only to find that the grasp was strong and confident.
The man was not simply a present enigma.
He was going to stay that way.
‘Good hunting, Inspector.’
‘Thank you.
We'll probably be calling again.’
‘Then you'll waste your valuable time.
Let me tell you who to look for.
Someone with a grudge.
A longstanding grudge.’
‘Norman's like me,’ insisted Helen Crawford, nêe Pinder.
‘He wouldn't hurt a fly.’
Sergeant Bird's gaze strayed idly upwards to the strip of Vapona hanging from a kitchen cupboard, then slowly retraced its path to fix on the anxious woman he was interviewing.
His plate held the last few crumbs of a generous slice of pound cake.
Beneath his elbow, the pine table was spotlessly scrubbed.
Here was one of those houses with a well-placed sense of priority, where the nucleus was its kitchen; William Bird wholeheartedly approved.
Mr Crawford, plumber, had retreated embarrassed to his garage on discovering the identity of their guest, but children tumbled in and out to raid the fridge or show their mother some lurid trophy from the garden.
Sergeant Bird had seen at least five different faces.
Despite the general chaos, this visit was much more relaxed than the previous one.
Vera Pinder had proved to be a formidable  mountain of a woman, verging on caricature, who refused to listen to a word, but kept aggressively repeating, 'Are you arresting him?
Over my dead body!’— a tempting proposition — and bandying the phrase, ‘Police harassment’, gleaned from the media, at every opportunity.
Helen Crawford, by contrast, was quietly spoken and eager to please.
‘You mustn't worry,’ he said to her.
‘These are just routine enquiries.
Norman is a clerk, I believe.’
‘Yes.
He works for Page and Glassman.
They're very impressed with him…they'll tell you.
I can give you their number…’
‘Thank you.
Perhaps later.
Has Norman ever been in hospital?’
‘Once.
He went to Casualty.
A nosebleed.’
The glamour of medicine.
‘Did he ever meet Dr Wetherby?’
‘Not that I know of.
We hadn't heard the name here before —‘She inclined her head towards a folded newspaper which bore the single chilling word MURDER as the only visible part of its headline.
‘Thank you.
Does he talk to you about the Medieval Circle?’
‘Sometimes.
He loves those meetings.
It gets him out of the house, away from her — oh!’
Helen Pinder flushed slightly and covered her mouth.
‘I'm sorry.
I shouldn't have said that.
But she bullies him, day in, day out.
It's not right.
She doesn't do anything.
She lives off his wages.’
‘Does he lose his temper?’
‘I think he'd like to sometimes, but he doesn't really know how.’
‘Has he acted in a strange manner recently?’
‘No more than usual,’ she replied artlessly.
‘Why do you think he rang you yesterday morning?’
Helen Pinder plucked at the edge of her apron.
‘I — I don't think I ought to say.
I'm sorry, Sergeant Bird.’
‘Would it help if I told you that Norman has already discussed what was said with me?
He asked you to pretend that he was staying here and going to the symposium on a daily basis.
You tried to dissuade him from telling that particular story, in his own interests.
Didn't the request surprise you, though?
Has he ever suggested this before?’
‘No.’
She looked at Sergeant Bird uncertainly, then appeared to  make up her mind.
‘I don't want to harm Norman in any way, Sergeant.
He's my brother, and I love him.
If the least word of mine was to cause him trouble, I don't know what I'd do.
But I know he's innocent.
That's why I'm going to tell you my view of his phone call.
‘We're very close; we always have been.
Since he married Vera — the one big mistake in his life — she has tried to force us apart, and keep him from his family.
She doesn't succeed, but she manages to make Norman very miserable.
‘I've had an impression for over a year now that he meets someone special at these conventions.
We had a good Christian upbringing, and I know I ought to condemn him if that's the case, but I don't.
I say, good luck to him.
I'm glad he's getting something out of life, a glimmer of pleasure among all the drudgery.
‘If he does have a friend in the Circle, he probably told Vera before he left that he would be spending the nights here.
That would appeal to her parsimony — where he is concerned.
There would be virtually no risk of her ringing to check up; she can ‘t abide me, and she's even worse with Frank and the kids.
She thinks I let Norman down somehow by marrying a plumber — not that she has any job at all!
‘He may have done it before, and said nothing to me because he knew I wouldn't approve.
But this time somebody was murdered.
It's horrible.
I feel so sorry for that dead boy's family.
Norman must have panicked, and acted stupidly.
He didn't think…
I'm sure that must be what happened…’
‘Hell's teeth,’ thought Brian Jackson.
‘I always get the rough end of the stick.’
His hand was poised ready to knock again on the peeling green front door.
Street noises battered against his eardrums — children yelling, a dilapidated van revving furiously, the mandatory barking dog — and dust needled his eyes.
From somewhere nearby came a very dubious smell.
A man could catch something round here, no problem.
He knocked impatiently, competing with the dog for sheer volume.
This was number twelve.
Number eight was empty.
If  no-one answered soon he would have to chalk it up as a wasted trip, and Montgomery would not be amused.
Obliquely above, a sash window rattled skywards.
‘If that's you, Fred, you can — off!’ shrieked a coarse voice from the bedroom.
As the window began its descent, Jackson recovered enough to sharply call, ‘Excuse me!,
There was a pause, than a woman's reddened, raddled face squinted at him over the sill.
‘You what?
Who are you?’
‘If you'd be kind enough to come down to the front door, I'll explain everything.’
He smiled politely.
‘Like bloody hell I will!
It's Sunday morning.
What do you want?’
‘I need your help just for a few minutes.
I'd be most obliged if you'd open your door so I can tell you what this is about.’
Jackson's genial, reassuring tone snaked out past clenched teeth.
He was reluctant to announce his status to the whole street; already a desultory crowd of idlers was gathering across the road.
Come on, you old cow, he thought.
A muted grumbling followed, then the slamming of a door.
A small boy of about six came up to Jackson and stared at him from a distance of two feet before pulling a face and running away.
The sergeant began to have serious worries respecting his car, which was parked round the corner, an open street map of Mansfield on the passenger seat.
The scraping of a bolt recalled him to the issue in hand.
‘Well, let's have it.’
The woman took up an uncompromising stance on the doorstep, arms folded, chin raised.
Her feet were in shapeless slippers, and her cardigan was askew.
She had probably just been getting dressed when he knocked.
‘I'm very sorry to bother you,’ Jackson said smoothly, ‘But I'd like a few minutes of your time.
I'm a police officer.’
He treated her to a brief flash of his identity card before tucking it away out of sight; people were still gaping at him as if he were some alien from outer space.
Perhaps his trousers looked too smart.
The woman's eyes narrowed suspiciously, almost vanishing in a dried-up riverbed of wrinkles.
She seemed to be about sixty.
The numerous spidery capillaries scrawling their florid graffiti  across her nose and cheeks gave their own silent clue as to her habits.
‘We don't talk to the police here.
Mind your own business!’
She stepped back with remarkable alacrity, but Jackson was quicker, using his foot to halt the closing door.
In the absence of his brother officers, he seldom allowed mere laws or conventions to fetter him.
‘I haven't come to make trouble,’ he said urgently, low-voiced.
‘I just wanted to ask you a few questions about your neighbour, Gladys Brown.
Won't you help, Mrs —‘
The hard eyes still bored into him from the gloom of the hall, but the expression of hostility began a slow metamorphosis into one of malevolent interest.
‘Gladys Brown,’ she repeated, ignoring the invitation to supply her own name.
‘I always knew she'd come to no good.
You're after her, aren't you!’
‘Well, not exactly.
We just need a bit of background information.
May I come in?,
‘I suppose so.
Mind you wipe your feet.’
The exhortation was rather superfluous in view of the filthiness of the hall.
Strange things mushroomed from the wall, their fungoidal fingers groping halfway up the stairs, and the house reeked of mould and damp.
‘Come in here.
The parlour.’
She indicated an old-fashioned armchair, covered in threadbare brown velvet.
Jackson sat down very gingerly.
It creaked, and a spring dug into his vulnerable parts.
‘Would you be kind enough to tell me your name?’ he asked, wriggling while still attempting some semblance of charm and authority.
‘Mrs Fitton.
No, don't you go writing things down, or you're out on your ear.
I've lived here nearly forty years, ever since I were first married.
Mr Fitton passed on, he did.
Gladys Brown and her husband came to number ten quite a few years after we moved in.
Maybe ten years, maybe twelve.
I don't know.
They brought their little girl, Lesley — a toddler.’
‘Were they good neighbours?’
‘Kept to themselves, mostly.
But I heard them shouting, right through these walls.
She were a nutter.
Kept looking at you  odd-like.
Fair drove her husband out of his mind as well.
A right pair.
He left her eventually.
Can't say as I blame him.
It were long
after they lost the kid.’
Some instinct whispered to Jackson that this was important.
‘What happened to the child?’ he asked lightly.
‘She died in hospital.
That meningitis.’
This was pronounced with a kind of funereal satisfaction, and for a moment Jackson could imagine the remorseless gossip that someone else's tragedy had afforded her at the time.
He felt unexpected stirrings of sympathy for Gladys Brown.
‘That's very sad.
How old was she?’
‘Seven or thereabouts.’
‘Did she die at home?’
‘No.
The Memorial.’
‘Was Gladys's behaviour more unusual after that?’
‘I can't say.
She were always odd.’
‘When her husband left, did anyone else come to live with her?’
‘No-one's that daft.
You'd need the patience of a bloody saint.
I never saw any other family, anyway.’
‘Has she been in hospital herself?’
‘You mean mental hospital?’
Mrs Fitton leaned forward eagerly.
‘No, but she should be.
I think her husband wanted to put her there.’
‘Do you happen to know who her G.p. is?’
‘She won't see a doctor.
Hasn't seen one for years.
Afraid they'll clap her away, I imagine.’
‘Does she work?’
‘Yes.
Goes to the factory up road.’
‘Do you work there, Mrs Fitton?’
‘Not on your life.
I do a bit of cleaning hereabouts.
Why do you want to know?’
‘Oh, I just wondered if you were close to Gladys.
Chats at tea-break, that kind of thing.’
‘I told you.
She keeps to herself.’
‘Thank you.
May I just go back to one point?
The child Lesley — can you remember the month when she died?’
‘How the hell should I remember that?
She weren't my kid.
It were twenty-odd years ago!’
‘I thought something might have stuck in your mind.
Whether there was snow, for instance.
Or if you'd been on holiday.’
She snorted.
‘Holidays!
Who can afford them?
I dare say you can.
Do you have children?’
‘Yes.
Three.’
Her gaze lost focus and she licked her lips in an unpleasantly reptilian way.
‘It were winter,’ she said slowly.
‘Yes, winter, The funeral car got bogged down in a snow drift.
That's it.
That's what happened.
A snow drift.’
Meryl was surprised to find that she had enjoyed the lecture and become thoroughly involved in its subject.
Around her, the applause was warm and spontaneous for Dr Dunn, a small delicate-looking man who had delivered a pithy treatise on the Marcher Lords, illustrated by good quality slides.
She was fired with enthusiasm now to visit the border counties and soak up their atmosphere — the twisting Wye Valley, the Malvern Hills' first harbingers of the rugged Welsh mountains beyond, unspoilt Shropshire's towering Ludlow fortress.
Her only brush with the topic so far had been a visit to Mortimer's Hole at Nottingham Castle.
‘I reckon that's the mark of a good lecturer,’ murmured Lee.
‘The people here were with him every step of the way.
Dr Darnell came over like that, as well.
A real pro.’
Meryl grudgingly agreed.
She didn't want to think of Anthea Darnell.
Their conversation was still raw in her mind.
‘Mass exodus for coffee,’ she smiled, trying to distract Lee.
He stood up and lumbered towards the tail end of the queue; she trailed behind slowly, wondering how she could leave on her own without offending him.
‘Sugar, Meryl?
I've forgotten.’
‘No coffee for me, thanks, Lee.
I'm — going out.
For a paper.
May I get you one?’
He hesitated.
It was clear from her manner that she didn't want company.
His face closed uncharacteristically.
‘I guess not.’
Once outside in the fresh air she felt less trapped.
The lecture had allowed a mental flight; now vigour flowed through her limbs.
The air was balmy and birds sang.
Crunching up the gravel drive past a clump of rhododendrons, she heard a scuffle in the undergrowth.
A rabbit, perhaps.
Or even a fox.
She crouched down, holding her breath, and peered in the direction of the sound.
Another rustle followed before a glossy blackbird hopped out and made off towards the parkland.
Faintly disappointed, she emptied her lungs and resumed the walk which would bring her to the main gate.
Seconds later, the breath once again hissed into her chest, this time with painful intensity.
A large group of people was standing just beyond the wrought-iron gate.
Her first dismayed impression of a milling crowd crystallised into twenty or so individuals sporting cameras with huge zoom lenses, tripods and all sorts of contraptions.
The Press Corps, waiting.
In a blind reflex not too far from panic, she wheeled into the bushes and began to thrash her way through them.
Under no circumstances was she going out of that gate.
While half of her brain hated and despised them for the job they were doing, the other half acknowledged that at least part of her present mission was to buy newspapers and read what was said.
The shrubbery gave way to a patch of sycamore trees.
Sunlight probed reticently through the thick green canopy, dappling random clumps of fern underfoot.
The moist, mossy smell was soothing.
To Meryl's vexation, the boundary wall proved to be nearly eight feet high.
A quick assessment of the brickwork was unrewarding; it was obstructively free of helpful niches or projections.
The rest of the grounds were unfamiliar to her.
No doubt the wall was lower at some point — down at the edge of the parkland, perhaps — but she had neither the time nor the inclination to find out.
Crossing the drive would lay her open to those telescopic lenses, and a Press hungry for news might well photograph anything that moved in the vicinity of Randall Lodge.
Hanging the strap of her bag round her neck, she began to climb a sturdy sycamore adjacent to the wall.
Her knee grazed against the bark, but her tights remained miraculously intact.
Gingerly, she lowered herself onto the wall, and sat astride its smooth apex, still partially concealed by overhanging branches from the tree.
Up the road, she could see the village shop, a child emerging with ice cream.
Good — it was open.
Getting back was going to be a problem.
She pondered anxiously for a moment, then decided to jump down anyway.
It would be just her luck if Inspector Montgomery drove past while she was swinging there like a monkey.
Outside the shop, with its gay blue and white awning, two ladies were chatting and another one was visible in the telephone box.
Meryl extricated a copy of the Sunday Shocker from the rack with as much nonchalance as she could muster, and hid it within the folds of her own more conservative newspaper as soon as she had paid for them both.
She then stood next to the telephone box, her stomach beginning to tighten in a way which was becoming sickeningly familiar.
Do come on, she thought, as the grey-haired occupant of the box showed no sign of reaching the end of her conversation.
Eventually, the woman left, after putting the remaining coins back into her purse with maddening slowness.
Her fingers shaking, Meryl dialled Toby's number.
The wall seemed insurmountable.
Even the most undignified scramble would achieve very little.
Meryl tucked the papers under her arm and decided to walk around the boundary until she came to an alternative entrance.
She could either turn round, or brazen her way past the pressmen to the lower reaches of the parkland.
Steeling herself, she stepped forward.
As she came within earshot of the group, she became aware of a huge suppressed excitement permeating their ranks.
Little snippets of their talk registered in her brain as she strolled past, looking vague and preoccupied.
‘He's just the mouthpiece.’
‘Montgomery…’
‘It's true, I tell you.’
‘Caught near Gainsborough after all.’
The last remark startled her.
Had Burrows been caught?
As soon as she was safely past the shuffling fraternity, she opened her own newspaper and rapidly scanned the front page.
A discreet little paragraph entitled ‘Escape from Rampton’ told her nothing new.
The journalist was circumspect, only tentatively linking the escape with the murder.
The Sunday Shocker , by contrast, had no such inhibitions.
Its misleading and highly-coloured story was liberally embellished with photographs, some relevant, like the Superintendent in charge of the case, and some rather desperate, such as an uninspiring view of Sarah Parker's front door.
A car flashed by on the other side of the road.
She took little notice until it reappeared on her own side, and drew up alongside her.
‘Isn't it Dr Armitage?’
Meryl recognised Sergeant Bird, and nodded.
‘Yes.’
‘Aren't you going in the wrong direction?’
‘Not really.
I'm looking for another entrance.
The main gate's a popular place at the moment.’
‘The press?
I wouldn't worry about them.
Jump in.’
She climbed into the car without hesitation, and waited until he had turned round again, using a side road opposite, before speaking.
‘People are saying that Sydney Burrows has been caught.
Is that true?’
Sergeant Bird stared ahead through the windscreen, giving most of his attention to the road.
‘Yes,’ he said.
‘Does that mean the case is solved?’
He pressed gently on the brake and indicated the right turn into Randall Lodge.
‘Well, he hasn't confessed to any new murders.
But he was only apprehended four hours ago.’
Pressmen gave way before the car like the bow wave of a ship, and probed the side windows with their alert, worldlyeyes.
Meryl caught sight of two female journalists, trendy in jumpsuits, their faces hard and confident.
Did they really cope so well in a man's world, or was it all just an act?
‘Sergeant Bird!’ a voice yelled from the back.
The car, already slowed to a crawl, stopped halfway through the open gates.
‘Can you confirm that Burrows is in police custody?’
‘There'll be a statement at twelve o'clock.’
The sergeant's voice was calm and pleasant.
‘Did he murder the doctor?’
‘Sorry, lads and lasses.
We've no information for you right now.
Superintendent Talbot will issue a statement at twelve.’
‘Is Montgomery in the Lodge?’
‘What was the murder weapon?’
‘Who's the lady with you?’
The questions rose to a clamour, but no-one stood in the way as Sergeant Bird smoothly drove off again with a regretful shake of his head.
Round the corner of the drive he turned and grinned at Meryl, who had kept her face down, striving to maintain a deadpan expression.
‘You don't fancy instant fame, then?’
‘Fame.
Notoriety.
Some people confuse the two.
I don't want either.’
‘You're wise.
Those that have it often come to wish they hadn't.’
She expected him to take the opportunity to cross-question her about the murder.
Inspector Montgomery had no doubt briefed his juniors.
Fleetingly, a wild urge rose up inside her to spill everything, to tell this placid, almost paternal sergeant about her deepest resentments, her stupidity, her lies.
But it was too late.
She was committed to a course of action and was prepared to see it through.
No interrogation was forthcoming.
They drew up with a rasp of gravel just behind the trailer, and Sergeant Allen's head popped out as if on a string.
‘Will — have you seen Montgomery?’
‘No, but I'm sure he's on his way.’
Allen looked as if he would have liked to have said more, but the presence of Meryl evidently constrained him.
Thanking Sergeant Bird for the lift, she left the two detectives together and entered the Lodge.
At lunchtime, a hubbub broke out as members of the Circle digested the news of Sydney Burrows' capture.
‘Thank heavens!
I've been so scared!’ squeaked one of the Leicester ladies.
‘I suppose he'll get another sentence now, for what he did here,’ commented another.
‘It doesn't make any difference,’ said Pamela Berry.
‘I'm sure he was in hospital for an indefinite period anyway.’
‘Well, that's no good if they can get out.’
Meryl walked away from the group, having handed the Sunday Shocker to a grateful Norman Pinder.
Lee was with Anthea and the professor.
Gladys Brown was wandering about aimlessly, clutching a handout; on spotting Meryl, she immediately gravitated towards her.
‘We can all breathe in our beds now,’ she said.
‘Yes.’
‘They'll make him tell.
They've got those machines.’
‘Er, perhaps…
If he has anything to tell.’
‘What do you mean?’
The question shot out like a bullet, and the faded eyes were suddenly hostile.
‘Nothing.
The police don't seem to be entirely certain whether or not it was Burrows, that's all.’
‘Well, if they're trying to imply it was one of us, you're just as much a suspect as I am!’
Meryl could sense the woman's agitation and anger, and cast around for some diversion.
‘It's all routine,’ she said.
‘What did you think of the lecture?
I felt rather sorry for piers Gaveston.’
The lecture had focussed on Edward the Second.
‘I don't know.
All those Edwards.
Kings…
I don't know.’
Meryl escaped as soon as she could.
Gladys Brown made her thoroughly uneasy.
If the police were to question Gladys again, might they actually believe her evidence?
It was one person's word against another.
And one of them was a borderline schizophrenic…
Not for the first time did it occur to Meryl that there was an obscure kind of convenience in having a schizophrenic on the premises.
Suspicion did tend to focus on these people.
Lee certainly had his doubts, so perhaps others did, too…
If Gladys were blamed, she would be treated kindly.
In hospital, trained staff would listen to her ramblings, make her feel welcome; she would be better off, in fact.
There was only one flaw.
Gladys had never met Dominic, and had had no reason to kill him.
Gladys Brown glowered at Meryl's slender retreating back.
That girl was going to try to put the blame on her, she could tell.
No doubt she had her own share of secrets, but no-one would suspect her .
Much easier to turn on poor folk like Gladys Brown, who couldn't defend themselves.
It was all a conspiracy.
But let them try!
She had never known that young man.
Never.
Let them try to pin it on her!
It wouldn't be as easy as they imagined.
Montgomery fought the lethargy seeping into his bones.
It was going to be another protracted day; he had to stay alert and miss nothing.
The press were barely satisfied with Talbot's midday statement.
Before long, he would be required to produce more than just carefully worded facts about the murder that everyone knew already from the grapevine.
‘So,’ he said, surveying the faces of his officers across the table.
‘Anthea Darnell wants to see me, does she?
I thought she might.
That nail polish was a positive match, and she's got some explaining to do.
Before you bring her in, let's just assess the current state of play.
‘Norman Pinder appears to be clean.
In that case, his evidence carries a little more weight.
Burrows vehemently denies being anywhere near here, and swears he didn't commit the murder.
I don't think he did.
I saw Toby Latimer myself; I confess I can't make him out at all.
We're chasing up two other people who were at that party, and who both seem to have gone out for the day.
One of them is the host.
If they confirm that he left at one-thirty, then that doesn't give him much time to have entered Randall Lodge and killed Wetherby; he was practically at Ollerton by two a.m., driving slowly despite being in his Daimler.
‘Which brings us back to that window.
Who opened it, and  why?
I asked the professor last night about his nocturnal prowlings on Friday.
He made himself some Ovaltine in the kitchen around ten-thirty p.m.
He was wearing his dressing-gown.
In answer to a leading question about the temperature Of the room, he reflected that it had been cold and draughty .
He didn't look for
the source of the draught, just went back upstairs as quickly as possible.
Let's say for the sake of argument it was the scullery window.
That means it was opened before ten-thirty.’
‘Mrs Reynolds,’ said Sergeant Allen flatly.
‘She forgot to close it.’
‘She'd have you for that suggestion.’
Sergeant Bird leaned back in his chair.
‘Everyone can make mistakes,’ retorted Allen.
‘These housekeepers sometimes think they're infallible.
It's the most likely explanation.
This window's a storm in a teacup.’
‘But Meryl Armitage's prints on the frame were quite clear,’ said Montgomery.
‘So do we accept that she did merely close it later?
There's one thing I find very interesting.
The first news of Burrows’ escape released to the general public was a radio bulletin at ten o'clock that night.
I feel the two facts are connected in some way…
‘Anyone in the kitchen late on Friday night must be treated with suspicion in any case.
The window could have been closed before or after the murder…
So there you are.
If we've nothing to add on this question, I suggest we shelve it for now and hear what Anthea Darnell has to say.’
Anthea was as brisk as ever.
‘Inspector Montgomery.
You asked if it would be possible for certain material witnesses to stay on at the Lodge for an extra night while you continue your investigations on the spot.
Fortunately, it is.
I've arranged everything with Mrs Reynolds.
The next booking is a course which isn't due to start until Friday.
My members are willing to assist you to the best of their ability.’
‘That's very kind indeed.
We appreciate the inconvenience incurred…
You say all the designated members are agreeable?’
‘I haven't been able to speak of this matter with Dr Armitage yet, but I'm sure she will co-operate.
Cover at the hospital has been sorted out.
The other parties, professor St John Goth, Lee Horan, Mr Pinder and Mrs Brown are glad to help.
As am I.’ She gave a thin smile.
‘We all want to see this concern cleared up quickly.’
‘Yes.
A sentiment we would echo.
Is this what you were wanting to see me about, Dr Darnell?,
The room suddenly hummed with tension.
Anthea Darnell's coal-black eyes fixed on each of the officers in turn, then riveted their gaze to Montgomery's face.
Her expression was frighteningly stark.
‘Not exactly,’ he said, then cleared her throat.
‘I haven't been entirely honest with you, Inspector.’
Montgomery said nothing.
‘I'm hoping you'll understand why.
I thought — I thought the case would be solved without my needing to divulge this information.
I prayed that it would.’
She looked down at her knees.
Above the scoop neckline of her peacock blue dress, an ill-defined rash of mottled pink broke out, then faded.
as if to confirm her agitation, waves of a hyacinth-like perfume reached Montgomery's nose.
He sat patiently.
‘Dominic was my lover,’ she pronounced in a low, husky voice.
‘I didn't kill him, but I'm probably the last person to have seen him alive.
And later that night I saw him dead.’
‘Tell us what happened,’ invited Montgomery.
‘He came to my room late on Friday night, maybe a quarter or ten to twelve.
We — he stayed less than an hour.
I asked him for some bread and cheese, and he went down to the kitchen.’
‘What was he wearing?’
‘My dressing-gown.
It's peach-coloured.
I waited for quite a long time.
I thought he might have met someone down there and become embroiled in conversation.
I dared not go down myself…nobody knew about our relationship.
He might even have gone back to his own room.
Eventually, I couldn't stand it any more.
I put my clothes on, and crept down the stairs.
The gallery  was fairly dim, but the hall light was burning.
Everything was very quiet.
‘As I padded down the passage to the kitchen, I felt that something was wrong.
It's hard to explain, but there was an atmosphere— deadly, brooding, silent as the grave.
I opened the kitchen door, and…
I saw his feet.
‘He was quite dead.
There was no question of it.
The refrigerator door was wide open, and he was lying just behind it, slumped face downwards.
The back of his head —,’ she swallowed, ‘It was bashed in.
He was clutching a piece of cheese.
Sage Derby.
I felt numb with shock.
I just didn't know what to do.’
‘Which lights were on?’ asked Montgomery.
‘The passage light, which I had switched on, and — let me see — the scullery light.
Yes.
There's a wide door between kitchen and scullery which is usually left propped open.
I remember it shining through.
But the light from the refrigerator itself showed me what had happened…there was a lot of food on the shelves, but it was strong enough to see…’
The dark, sticky mass that had been Dominic Wetherby's head.
‘So the kitchen light itself wasn't on?’
‘No.
That made it worse, somehow.’
‘Please continue, Dr Darnell.’
‘I — I felt frozen.
Mentally frozen, I mean.
Then I realised that whoever had done it could be hiding somewhere near, waiting to attack again.
I was almost paralysed with fear, until outrage took over.
I became angry, and started to open cupboard doors and check places like the downstairs cloakroom.
There was no-one.’
‘Suddenly it all came home to me.
Dominic was dead, and he had been in my bedroom barely half an hour before he was killed.
My position was appalling.
I'm afraid I started to think about my own skin at that point.
I wiped the handles of the cupboards I had touched with my handkerchief, but left the cloakroom door because we all use that room.
I eased the dressing-gown from Dominic's shoulders and waist, and folded it round the collar, which was bloodstained.’
She looked up with inward-seeing eyes.
‘I know I should have raised the alarm then and there.
I didn't, for all the wrong reasons.
Selfish reasons.
But I couldn't leave him like that, his  back and legs bare.
I found a tablecloth, white linen, and covered him with it.
It wasn't big enough for the feet — I had to hide that head.
Blood was still oozing from it, very slowly.
‘When I left the kitchen, I remembered that his clothes were in my room.
I went back upstairs — nobody was stirring — and locked myself in.
I was reluctant to go out again; I just sat on the bed, trembling.
After a few minutes I roused myself, gathered up the clothes, and went round to Dominic's room, holding his key through a handkerchief.
I knew which one it was — I'd seen Sally's list.
In the event, the door wasn't locked.
I tried to make the bed look slept in…
God, I behaved shamefully.
The clothes I folded neatly on the chair.
Then I put the key on the chest of drawers, and left.’
She sat in an attitude of dumb submission, weary and spent, as if careless of the future her words had painfully shaped for her.
Montgomery had seen too many such people to feel more than a token sympathy.
It was a great pity she had not spoken up earlier.
And even now, was it the full story?
‘Thank you, Dr Darnell,’ he said.
‘Two things spring immediately to mind.
When you were searching the kitchen area for the assailant, did you notice if one of the windows wasn't properly closed?’
A faint look of dull surprise crossed her face.
‘No.
They all seemed to be fastened.
I checked the outer doors, too, and they were locked.’
‘Good.
And do you happen to recall whether any of the statuettes had been removed or disarranged?’
She gave a hard, contemptuous laugh which jarred on the ears of the listeners.
‘You're very cautious, Inspector.
Since your officers removed the Black prince from the gallery yesterday, I'd be a fool not to understand the significance.
Let's call a spade a spade.
The answer is no.
I was too agitated to notice anything like that at the time.’
‘The gallery was dimly lit,’ pointed out Montgomery.
‘Not so dim,’ she snapped, rapidly regaining her usual demeanour.
‘In other circumstances, I might well have noticed whether or not the statuette was missing.
That night, I didn't.’
Montgomery nodded.
Her evidence accorded with Norman Pinder's impressions.
‘Had anyone seen the statuette before this weekend?
Or remarked on it in your presence?’
Anthea Darnell rested her chin on her hand, and considered.
As she tilted her face upwards to answer, her bone structure was thrown into transitory relief.
She had clearly been a very good-looking woman when younger, and even now was handsome; paradoxically, the artifices she employed to emphasise this were the very features to strike a false note.
The lipstick was too bright, the nails garish.
‘Sally has seen the statuettes at my cottage on random occasions.
No-one else, as far as I can remember.
But several people admired them here.
Not the Black Prince specifically, but the whole display.
Lee spoke about them, Miss Berry, the professor…many people.’
‘Isn't it rather unusual to make a display of your own collection of medieval artefacts?
In terms of security, I mean?’
Anthea drew herself up and glared at him.
‘Not at all.
The Circle members are entirely trustworthy!
I resent your implication.’
Montgomery shrugged.
‘Admittedly theft is a minor misdemeanour when compared with murder.’
His words, deliberately intended to curb her growing assurance, struck home.
‘I presume the items were insured.’
‘That is correct.’
‘Right, then.
Tell me when you first became aware of Sydney Burrows’ escape.’
‘It was Sarah Parker.
She came running up to my room about twenty-past seven and hammered on the door.
Almost the first thing she said was that a madman had escaped from Rampton and killed someone in the kitchen.
She started crying, and within two minutes Aubrey had arrived from round the corner, with some others behind him.
Four of us went down to confirm her story, then Aubrey rang the local police.’
‘So the escape and the murder were immediately connected in people's minds.’
‘Yes.
It seemed reasonable.’
‘Does it still seem reasonable?’
Montgomery spoke casually, toying with his pen.
The paper in front of him remained a virginal white; Sergeant Bird had the role of scribe.
‘I can't say.
You indicated to me when we last met that it wasn't.’
‘Then I'd like your own view, Dr Darnell.
Theories must be abounding nineteen to the dozen.
Heaven knows, we've heard enough these last thirty-six hours.
I'm sure you must have thought a lot about who killed Dominic.’
‘As I said before, it seemed to be the work of a random killer.’
‘Ah.
But the method was not consistent with Burrows’ previous record, and we found no point of entry at all.’
‘He must have sneaked in earlier, then.’
‘You don't feel that it could be someone from inside the Lodge, do you?’
‘Why are you asking me?
Surely it's your job to find out.’
‘Please answer the question.’
‘I don't know.
I can't imagine it.
There's no reason.’
‘Dr Darnell, can you describe your relationship with Dr Wetherby?’
Her lips tightened and a flame of anger burned across the cheekbones Montgomery had admired.
‘I told you.
We were lovers.’
‘I know.
But were your feelings for him maternal, or passionate?
Were the affections mutual?
Was one of you afraid of losing a tenuous hold on the other?’
‘These things are personal, Inspector.’
‘If you decline to answer, we'll be forced to make assumptions.’
‘Assumptions aren't evidence.’
‘Did you quarrel on Friday night?’
‘No.’
‘What was it you said to him after dinner?’
‘I've no idea.
Probably something trivial.’
‘Two people saw you holding a short conversation with Dominic.
Can you remember any part of it?’
‘I had several conversations with him.
There was nothing special about that one.’
‘Who knew about your liaison?,
‘Nobody.’
‘Do you not think that someone suspected?’
‘How should I know?’
‘Oh, a hint here, a sign of jealousy there.
By the way, I gather his appointment to the registrar post was an unpopular one.’
‘What are you trying to say, Inspector?’
‘I'm just waiting for your comment.’
‘He was the right man for the job.’
(Not person, thought Montgomery.
Some women were happier working among men.)
‘I heard he was rather lazy.’
‘One or two people claimed that, certainly.
But I saw no sign of it.
He had the right attitudes and ambitions, and was intellectually capable of the job.’
‘Where did Meryl Armitage fall short?’
‘Such things are often indefinable.
She's competent enough at an undemanding level, but I can't envisage her coping with a position of responsibility.’
‘Did she resent being passed over for the post?’
‘We never discussed it.
Some mild chagrin would be natural enough.’
‘Was she in love with Dominic?,
‘I can't say.
But he couldn't possibly have been in love with her!’
Little muscles twitched beneath Anthea's shoulder blades as she walked across the hall towards the lecture room.
Her dress was sticking uncomfortably to her back and her palms were wet.
Inspector Montgomery's sudden termination of the interview had taken her by surprise initially, but now she understood his strategy.
He was not satisfied with her story.
He was giving her time to reflect.
There would be more questions later.
Her mind skimmed back to the dinner on Friday night.
Everyone's mood had been cheerful and relaxed.
Dominic and Lee had been playing the fool as only young men can.
And afterwards — no-one could possibly have heard her own conversation with Dominic.
She had made sure of that.
Their voices had been very low.
‘Dominic — why don't you take Lee to the pub again, then come and see me later?’
‘Too risky, Thea.
You're the branch secretary.
Everyone knows
you here.’
‘I meant really late.
Midnight.’
‘I don't think we should.
Not in this place.’
She had tried to pretend that only discretion was holding him back.
Respect for her position and reputation.
It had been out of the question to recognise — reluctance.
So she had forced the issue, and given him a command.
‘Dominic, I want you to come.’
In the library, Montgomery regarded his two sergeants keenly.
‘Well, did you spot it?’
‘Yes,’ said Sergeant Bird.
‘Wetherby goes downstairs for bread and cheese, and fails to reappear.
Among the possible explanations, Dr Darnell states that he might have returned to his own room.
Crazy idea — unless something had gone wrong between them.’
‘My thoughts exactly.
If not an argument, some shift of power to his side.
She was his consultant, remember.
He owed his job to her.’
‘She's evasive on the subject of Meryl Armitage,’ contributed Allen.
‘Go on.’
‘Well, you asked her late last night whether people would stay on an extra night.
This afternoon she's managed to confirm that they are all willing — except for Armitage, whom she says she hasn't spoken to.
I find that odd.
Her own S.H.0.
Surely she would have been one of the first to hear.
They were all at breakfast and lunch.’
‘Mmm.’
Montgomery's gaze still moved in slow oscillations between Sergeant Bird's rosy face and Allen's pale one.
‘She was vehement, don't you think, when it came to the question of an attraction between Wetherby and Armitage.
A spurt of irrational jealousy.
Makes you wonder.
And does Armitage somehow know about their affair?
If she found out this weekend, that could be quite significant.
But is it enough for murder?
That's the real point.’
‘At least we know the time of the murder,’ said Sergeant Bird practically.
‘Yes.
If the story isn't false, it was very close to the time of  Norman Pinder's expedition along the gallery.
Perhaps fifteen minutes later.
Certainly Dr Darnell's account of the trip to Wetherby's room with clothes coincides neatly with Lee Horan's recollections.
And it was probably the second door that the professor heard.’
Sergeant Allen looked grim.
‘It seems pretty obvious to me that she's guilty,’ he said.
‘We've got the motive, the opportunity — everything!
Wetherby threatens to end the affair and make her a laughing-stock, especially if he intends to flaunt a new liaison with Armitage under her nose.
She sees red and kills him with a very convenient weapon.
She's already described how she was able to think about wiping off fingerprints shortly after his death; that denotes a cool customer who doesn't often lose control.
‘After arranging Wetherby's room, she washes the top part of her dressing gown in cold water, knowing it will be dry by morning.
She cleans up the Black Prince and puts him back on his table.
Then she tells nothing but lies.’
‘That's good.
That's very good.’
Montgomery inclined his head, a brief token of assent.
‘Why has she come to confess now?’
‘Simple.
The nail polish.
She knew we'd got a clue, even if she didn't know what it was.
Or maybe she's found out that someone saw her, so she's been forced to spin a plausible tale.’
‘And the tablecloth?’
‘Confirms it was a crime of passion.
She kills him, with one violent blow.
But she loved him.
There must have been some kind of remorse.
I think that part of her story was true…looking down at what she had done, seeing the bare legs and the blood…’
Montgomery smiled.
‘I agree there's probably enough evidence to pull her in.
But it's all circumstantial.
There's something missing, something that could change the whole slant of our investigation.
And I don't know what it is.’
Brian Jackson was very pleased with himself.
From his promising interview with the redoubtable Mrs Fitton, he had driven directly to Mansfield Memorial Hospital with medical records in mind.
Initiative, that.
Unfortunately, being a Sunday, the department had been closed, but Switchboard had eventually managed to  contact one of the Records staff.
Now she emerged from the tall forest of filing shelves, a middle-aged woman wearing a look of tremulous satisfaction.
‘I believe this is what you want, Sergeant.’
She sat down on the other side of the desk.
‘But I'm not sure of the rules — confidentiality, you know.
Data protection.
Medical ethics.
I ought not to hand over the case notes until it's authorised.’
Damn.
That would take time.
‘There should be no problem.
We're talking about a child who died, not a living patient.
Confidentiality isn't involved.’
She seemed only slightly reassured.
‘I have to be certain.
My job could be at stake if I make an error of judgment.’
‘I understand,’ soothed Jackson.
‘I wouldn't want to compromise your position.
Of course not.
Perhaps you'd just tell me the details, and I'll make one or two notes.
Then you keep the file.’
There was no further demur.