

In the Suburbs
CHAPTER FIVE
I loved drinking tea and I loved cycling.
I would bike to the tea shop in the High Street and see what blends they had.
My bedroom contained boxes and boxes of tea, and I was always happy to have new brews with which to concoct more original combos in my teapot.
I was supposed to be preparing for my mock A levels in History, English and Politics.
But whatever happened I knew I would fail them.
I was too concerned with other things.
Sometimes I took speed —‘blues’, little blue tablets — to keep me awake, but they made me depressed, they made my testicles shrivel up and I kept thinking I was getting a heart attack.
So I usually sipped spicy tea and listened to records all night.
I favoured the tuneless: King Crimson, Soft Machine, Captain Beefheart, Frank Zappa and Wild Man Fisher.
It was easy to get most of the music you wanted from the shops in the High Street.
During these nights, as all around me was silent — most of the neighbourhood went to bed at ten-thirty — I entered another world.
I read Norman Mailer's journalism about an action-man writer involved in danger, resistance and political commitment: adventure stories not of the distant past, but of recent times.
I'd bought a TV from the man in the chip shop, and as the black-and-white box heated up it stank of grease and fish, but late at night I heard of cults and experiments in living, in California.
In Europe terrorist groups were bombing capitalist targets; in London psychologists were saying you had to live your own life in your own way and not according to your family, or you'd go mad.
In bed I read Rolling Stonemagazine.
Sometimes I felt the whole world was converging on this little room.
And as I became more intoxicated and frustrated I'd throw open the bedroom window as the dawn came up, and look across the gardens, lawns, greenhouses, sheds and curtained windows.
I wanted my life to begin now, at this instant, just when I was ready for it.
Then it was time for my paper-round, followed by school.
And school was another thing I'd had enough of.
Recently I'd been punched and kicked to the ground by a teacher  because I called him a queer.
This teacher was always making me sit on his knee, and when he asked me questions like ‘What is the square root of five thousand six hundred and seventy-eight and a half?’, which I couldn't answer, he tickled me.
Very educational.
I was sick too of being affectionately called Shitface and Curryface, and of coming home covered in spit and snot and chalk and wood-shavings.
We did a lot of woodwork at our school, and the other kids liked to lock me and my friends in the storeroom and have us chant ‘Manchester United, Manchester United, we are the boot boys’ as they held chisels to our throats and cut off our shoelaces.
We did a lot of woodwork at the school because they didn't think we could deal with books.
One day the woodwork teacher had a heart attack right in front of our eyes as one of the lads put another kid's prick in a vice and started to turn the handle.
Fuck you, Charles Dickens, nothing's changed.
One kid tried to brand my arm with a red-hot lump of metal.
Someone else pissed over my shoes, and all my Dad thought about was me becoming a doctor.
What world was he living in?
Every day I considered myself lucky to get home from school without serious injury.
So after all this I felt I was ready to retire.
There was nothing I particularly wanted to do.
You didn't have to do anything.
You could just drift and hang out and see what happened, which suited me fine, even more than being a Customs Officer or a professional footballer or a guitarist.
So I was racing through South London on my bike, nearly getting crushed several times by lorries, head bent over the dropped handlebars, swiftly running through the ten Campagnola gears, nipping through traffic, sometimes mounting the pavement, up one-way streets, breaking suddenly, accelerating by standing up on the pedals, exhilarated by thought and motion.
My mind was crawling with it all.
I had to save Jamila from the man who loved Arthur Conan Doyle.
She might have to run away from home, but where could she go?
Most of her friends from school lived with their parents, and most of them were poor; they couldn't have Jamila with them.
She definitely couldn't stay with us: Dad would get in shit with Anwar.
Who could I discuss it with?
The only person I knew who'd be helpful and objective and on my side was Eva.
But I wasn't supposed to like her because her love for my father was buggering up our entire family.
Yet she was the only sane  grown-up I knew now that I could cross Anwar and Jeeta off my list of normals.
It was certainly bizarre, Uncle Anwar behaving like a Muslim.
I'd never known him believe in anything before, so it was an amazing novelty to find him literally staking his life on the principle of absolute patriarchal authority.
Through her mother's staunch and indulgent love (plus the fibbing extravagances of her wonderful imagination), but mainly because of Anwar's indifference, Jamila had got away with things some of her white counterparts wouldn't dream of.
There had been years of smoking, drinking, sexual intercourse and dances, helped by there being a fire escape outside her bedroom and the fact her parents were always so exhausted they slept like mummies.
Maybe there were similarities between what was happening to Dad, with his discovery of Eastern philosophy, and Anwar's last stand.
Perhaps it was the immigrant condition living itself out through them.
For years they were both happy to live like Englishmen.
Anwar even scoffed pork pies as long as Jeeta wasn't looking.
(My dad never touched the pig, though I was sure this was conditioning rather than religious scruple, just as I wouldn't eat horse's scrotum.
But once, to test this, when I offered him a smoky bacon crisp and said, as he crunched greedily into it, ‘I didn't know you liked smoky bacon,’ he sprinted into the bathroom and washed out his mouth with soap, screaming from his frothing lips that he would burn in hell.)
Now, as they aged and seemed settled here, Anwar and Dad appeared to be returning internally to India, or at least to be resisting the English here.
It was puzzling: neither of them expressed any desire actually to see their origins again.
‘India's a rotten place,’ Anwar grumbled.
‘Why would I want to go there again?
It's filthy and hot and it's a big pain-in-the-arse to get anything done.
If I went anywhere it would be to Florida and Las Vegas for gambling.’
And my father was too involved with things here to consider returning.
I was working on all this as I cycled.
Then I thought I saw my father.
As there were so few Asians in our part of London it could hardly have been anyone else, but the person had a scarf over most of his face and looked like a nervous bank robber who couldn't find a bank.
I got off my bicycle and stood there in Bromley High Street, next to the plaque that said ‘H. G. Wells was born here’.
The creature with the scarf was across the road in a crowd of shoppers.
They were fanatical shoppers in our suburbs.
Shopping was to them what the rumba and singing is to Brazilians.
Saturday afternoons, when the streets were solid with white faces, was a carnival of consumerism as goods were ripped from shelves.
And every year after Christmas, when the sales were about to begin, there'd be a queue of at least twenty idiots sleeping in the winter cold outside the big stores for two days before they opened, wrapped in blankets and lying in deckchairs.
Dad normally wouldn't have been out in such madness, but there he was, this grey-haired man just over five feet tall, going into a phone-box when we had a working telephone in our hall.
I could see he'd never used a public phone before.
He put on his glasses and read through the instructions several times before putting a pile of coins on top of the box and dialling.
When he got through and began to speak he cheered up as he laughed and talked away, before becoming depressed at the end of the call.
He put the phone down, turned, and spotted me watching him.
He came out of the phone-box and I pushed my bicycle beside him through the crowds.
I badly wanted to know his opinion on the Anwar business, but obviously he wasn't in the mood for it now.
‘How's Eva?’
I asked.
‘She sends her love.’
At least he wasn't going to pretend he hadn't been talking to her.
‘To me or to you, Dad?’
I said.
‘To you, boy.
Her friend.
You don't realize how fond she is of you.
She admires you, she thinks —‘
‘Dad, Dad, please tell me.
Are you in love with her?’
‘Love?’
‘Yes, in love.
You know.
For God's sake, you know.’
It seemed to surprise him, I don't know why.
Maybe he was surprised that I'd guessed.
Or maybe he hadn't wanted to raise the lethal notion of love in his own mind.
‘Karim,’ he said, ‘she's become close to me.
She's someone I can talk to.
I like to be with her.
We have the same interests, you know that.’
I didn't want to be sarcastic and aggressive, because there were certain basic things I wanted to know, but I ended up saying, ‘That must be nice for you.’
He didn't appear to hear me; he was concentrating on what he was saying.
He said, ‘It must be love because it hurts so much.’
‘What are you going to do, then, Dad?
Will you leave us and go away with her?’
There are certain looks on certain faces I don't want to see again, and this was one of them.
Confusion and anguish and fear clouded his face.
I was sure he hadn't thought much about any of this.
It had all just happened in the random way things do.
Now it surprised him that he was expected to declare the pattern and intention behind it all in order that others could understand.
But there wasn't a plan, just passion and strong feeling which had ambushed him.
‘I don't know.’
‘What do you feel like?’
‘I feel as if I'm experiencing things I've never felt before, very strong, potent, overwhelming things.’
‘You mean you never loved Mum?’
He thought for a while about this.
Why did he have to even think!
‘Have you ever missed anyone, Karim?
A girl?’
We must have both been thinking of Charlie, because he added kindly, ‘Or a friend?’
I nodded.
‘All the time I am not with Eva I miss her.
When I talk to myself in my mind, it is always her I talk to.
She understands many things.
I feel that if I am not with her I will be making a great mistake, missing a real opportunity.
And there's something else.
Something that Eva just told me.’
‘Yeah?’
‘She is seeing other men.’
‘What sort of men, Dad?’
He shrugged.
‘I didn't ask for specifications.’
‘Not white men in drip-dry shirts?’
‘You snob, I don't know why you dislike drip-dry shirts so much.
These things are very convenient for women.
But you remember that beetle Shadwell?’
‘Yeah.‘
‘She is with him often.
He is in London now, working in the theatre.
He will be a big shot one day, she thinks.
He knows those artistic types.
She loves all that art-fart thing.
They come to her  house for parties.’
Here Dad hesitated.
‘She and the beetle don't do anything together in that way, but I am afraid that he will romantically take her away.
I will feel so lost, Karim, without her.’
‘I've always been suspicious of Eva,’ I said.
‘She likes important people.
She's doing it to blackmail you, I know she is.’
‘Yes, and partly because she's unhappy without me.
She can't wait for me for years and years.
Do you blame her?’
We pushed through the throng.
I saw some people from school and turned my head away so as to avoid them.
I didn't want them to see me crying.
‘Have you told Mum all this?’
I said.
‘No, no.’
‘Why not?’
‘Because I'm so frightened.
Because she will suffer so much.
Because I can't bear to look at her eyes as I say the words.
Because you will all suffer so much and I would rather suffer myself than have anything happen to you.’
‘So you'll be staying with Allie and me and Mum?’
He didn't reply for a couple of minutes.
Even then he didn't bother with words.
He grabbed me and pulled me to him and started to kiss me, on the cheeks and nose and forehead and hair.
It was crazy.
I nearly dropped my bike.
Passers-by were startled.
Someone said, ‘Get back in yer rickshaw.’
The day was closing in on me.
I hadn't bought any tea and there was an Alan Freeman radio programme on the story of the Kinks that I wanted to listen to.
I pulled away from Dad and started to run, wheeling my bike beside me.
‘Wait a minute!’ he shouted.
I turned.
‘What, Dad?’
He looked bewildered.
‘Is this the right bus stop?’
It was strange, the conversation Dad and I had, because when I saw him at home later and over the next few days he behaved as if it had never happened, as if he hadn't told me he'd fallen in love with someone else.
Every day after school I rang Jamila, and every day the reply to my question, ‘How are things?’ was always, ‘The same, Creamy,’or, ‘The same but worse.’
We agreed to have a summit meeting in Bromley High Street after school, where we'd make a decision on what to do.
But that day I was leaving the school gates with a group of boys when I saw Helen.
It was a surprise because I'd barely thought of her since I was fucked by her dog, an incident with which she had become associated in my mind: Helen and dog-cock went together.
Now she was standing outside my school in a black floppy hat and long green coat, waiting for another boy.
Spotting me, she ran over and kissed me.
I was being kissed a lot lately: I needed the affection, I can tell you.
Anybody could have kissed me and I'd have kissed them right back with interest.
The boys, the group I hung around with, had stinking matted hair down to their shoulders and wore decomposing school jackets, no ties, and flares.
There had been some acid, some purple haze, going round the school recently, and a couple of boys were tripping.
I'd had half a tab at prayers in the morning but it had worn off by now.
Some of the boys were exchanging records, Traffic and the Faces.
I was negotiating to buy a Jimi Hendrix record — Axis: Bold as Love — from a kid who needed money to go to an Emerson, Lake and Palmer concert at the Fairfield Hall, for fuck's sake.
I suspected this fool was so desperate for money that he'd concealed the bumps and scratches on the disc with black shoe polish, so I was examining its surface with a magnifying glass.
One of the boys was Charlie, who'd bothered to turn up to school for the first time in weeks.
He stood out from the rest of the mob with his silver hair and stacked shoes.
He looked less winsome and poetic now; his face was harder, with short hair, the cheekbones more pronounced.
It was Bowie's influence, I knew.
Bowie, then called David Jones, had attended our school several years before, and there, in a group photograph in the dining hall, was his face.
Boys were often to be found on their knees before this icon, praying to be made into pop stars and for release from a lifetime as a motor-mechanic, or a clerk in an insurance firm, or a junior architect.
But apart from Charlie, none of us had high expectations; we had a combination of miserable expectations and wild hopes.
Myself, I had only wild hopes.
Charlie ignored me, as he was ignoring most of his friends since he'd appeared on the front page of the Bromley and Kentish Times with his band, Mustn't Grumble, after an open-air gig in a local sports ground.
The band had been playing together for two years, at school dances, in pubs and as support at a couple of bigger concerts, but  they'd never been written about before.
This sudden fame impressed and disturbed the whole school, including the teachers, who called Charlie ‘Girlie’.
Charlie brightened at the sight of Helen and came over to us.
I had no idea that he knew her.
On tip-toe she kissed him.
‘How are the rehearsals?’ she asked, her hand in his hair.
‘Great.
And we're doing another gig soon.’
‘I'll be there.’
‘If you're not, we won't play,’ he said.
She laughed all over the place at this.
I intervened.
I had to get a word in.
‘How's your dad, Charlie?’
He looked at me with amusement.
‘Much better.’
He said to Helen, ‘Dad's in the head hospital.
He's coming out next week and keeps saying he's going home to Eva.’
‘Really?’
Eva living with her own husband again?
That surprised me.
It would surprise Dad too, no doubt.
‘Is Eva pleased?’
I said.
‘As you well know, you little pouf, she nearly died.
She's interested in other things now.
Other people.
Right?
I reckon Dad'll be getting the bum's rush to his mum as soon as he steps in our door.
And that'll be that between them.’
‘Oh God.’
‘Yeah, but I don't like him too much anyway.
He's sadistic.
There'll be room in our house for someone else.
Everything in our lives is going to change pretty soon.
I love your old man, Creamy.
He inspires me.’
I was flattered to hear this.
I was about to say, If Eva and Dad get married you'll be my brother and we'll have committed incest, but I managed to shut my trap.
Still, the thought gave me quite a jolt of pleasure.
It meant I'd be connected to Charlie for years and years, long after we left school.
I wanted to encourage Dad and Eva to get together.
Surely it was up to Mum to get on her feet again?
Maybe she'd even find someone else, though I doubted it.
Suddenly the suburban street outside the school was blasted by an explosion louder than anything heard there since the Luftwaffe bombed it in 1944.
Windows opened; grocers ran to the doors of their shops; customers stopped discussing bacon and turned; our teachers wobbled on their bicycles as the noise buffeted them like a  violent squall; and boys sprinted to the school gates as they came out of the building, though many others, cool boys, shrugged or turned away in disgust, gobbing, cursing and scuffling their feet.
The pink Vauxhall Viva had quadrophonic speakers from which roared the  Byrds's ‘Eight Miles High’.
In the back were two girls, driven by Charlie's manager, the Fish, a tall, straight-backed and handsome ex-public school boy whose father was rumoured to be a Navy admiral.
They said his mother was a Lady.
The Fish had short hair and wore uninspired clothes, like a white shirt, crumpled suit and tennis shoes.
He made no concessions to fashion, yet somehow he was hip and cool.
Nothing confused that boy.
And this enigma was all of nineteen, not much older than us, but he was posh, not common like us, and we considered him to be superior, just the right boy to be in charge of our Charlie.
Almost every afternoon when Charlie was at school he turned up to take him to the studio to rehearse with his band.
‘Want a lift anywhere?’
Charlie shouted to Helen.
‘Not today!
See you!’
Charlie strolled to the car.
The closer he got the more agitated the two girls became, as if he'd sent a wind on before him which made them flutter.
When he climbed in beside the Fish they leaned forward and kissed him enthusiastically.
He was rearranging his hair in the rear-view mirror as the monster moved out into the traffic, scattering small boys who'd gathered at the front of the car to try and open the bonnet, for God's sake, and examine the engine.
The crowd dispersed quickly as the vision floated away.
‘Wanker,’ boys said despondently, devastated by the beauty of the event.
‘Fucking wanker.’
We were going home to our mothers, to our rissoles and chips and tomato sauce, to learn French words, to pack our football gear for tomorrow.
But Charlie would be with musicians.
He'd go to clubs at one in the morning.
He'd meet Andrew Loog Oldham.
But at least for now I was with Helen.
‘I'm sorry about what happened when you came to the house,’ she said.
‘He's usually so friendly.’
‘Fathers can get moody and everything.’
‘No, I mean the dog.
I don't approve of people being used just for their bodies, do you?’
‘Look,’ I said, turning sharply on her and utilizing advice I'd been  given by Charlie about the treatment of women: Keep 'em keen, treat 'em mean.
‘I've got to walk to the bus stop.
I don't want to stand here all afternoon being laughed at like a cunt.
Where is the person you're waiting for?’
‘It's you, silly.’
‘You came to see me?’
‘Yes.
D'you have anything to do this afternoon?’
‘No, 'course not.’
‘Be with me, then?’
‘Yeah, great.’
She took my arm and we walked on together past the schoolboy eyes.
She said she was going to run away from school and go to live in San Francisco.
She'd had enough of the pettiness of living with parents and the irrelevance of school was smothering her head.
All over the Western world there were liberation movements and alternative life-styles — there had never been a kids' crusade like it — and Hairy Back wouldn't let her stay out after eleven.
I said the kids' crusade was curdling now, everyone had overdosed, but she wouldn't listen.
Not that I blamed her.
By the time we had heard of anything you could be sure it was over.
But I hated the idea of her going away, mainly because I hated the idea of staying behind.
Charlie was doing big things, Helen was preparing her escape, but what was I up to?
How would I get away?
I looked up and saw Jamila hurrying towards me in black T-shirt and white shorts.
I'd forgotten that I'd agreed to meet her.
She ran the last few yards and was breathing heavily, but more out of anxiety than exhaustion.
I introduced her to Helen.
Jamila barely glanced at her but Helen kept her arm in mine.
‘Anwar's getting worse and worse,’ Jamila said.
‘He's going the whole way.’
‘D'you want me to leave you two together?’
Helen asked.
I quickly said no and asked Jammie if I could tell Helen what was happening.
‘Yes, if you want to expose our culture as being ridiculous and our people as old-fashioned, extreme and narrow-minded.’
So I told Helen about the hunger-strike.
Jamila butted in to add details and keep us up to date.
Anwar hadn't compromised in the slightest, not nibbling a biscuit or sipping a glass of water or smoking a single cigarette.
Either Jamila obeyed or he would die  painfully, his organs failing one by one.
And if they took him to hospital he'd just do the same thing again and again, until his family gave in.
It was starting to rain, so the three of us sat in a bus shelter.
There was never anywhere to go.
Helen was patient and attentive, holding my hand to calm me.
Jamila said, ‘What I've agreed with myself is that it's going to be tonight, at midnight, when I decide what to do.
I can't carry on with this indecision.’
Every time we talked about Jamila running away from home, where she could go and how we could get money to help her survive, she said, ‘What about my mother?’
Anwar would blame Jeeta for everything Jamila did.
Jeeta's life would be living death and there was nowhere she could escape to.
I had the brilliant idea that both Jamila and Jeeta should run away together, but Jeeta would never leave Anwar: Indian wives weren't like that.
We went round and round until Helen had a brain-wave.
‘We'll go and ask your father,’ she said.
‘He's a wise man, he's spiritual and —‘
‘He's a complete phoney,’ said Jamila.
‘Let's at least try it,’ Helen replied.
So off we went to my house.
In the living room, with her almost translucent white legs sticking out of her dressing-gown, Mum was drawing.
She closed her sketch-book quickly and slipped it behind her chair.
I could see she was tired from her day in the shoe shop.
I always wanted to ask her about it but could never bring myself to say something as ridiculous as, ‘How was your day?’
Consequently she never discussed her work with anyone.
Jamila sat down on a stool and stared into space as if happy to leave the subject of her father's suicide to others.
Helen didn't help herself or increase the possibility of peace on earth by saying she'd been at Dad's Chislehurst gig.
‘I didn't see it,’ said Mum.
‘Oh, what a shame.
It was profound.’
Mum looked self-pitying but Helen went on.
‘It was liberating.
It made me want to go and live in San Francisco.’
‘That man makes me want to go and live in San Francisco,’ said Mum.
‘But then, I expect you've learned everything he has to teach.
Are you a Buddhist?’
It seemed pretty incongruous, the conversation between Mum and Helen.
They were talking about Buddhism in Chislehurst, against a background of mind-expansion, freedom and festivals.
But for Mum the Second World War was still present in our streets, the streets where she'd been brought up.
She often told me of the nightly air-raids, her parents worn out from fire-watching, houses in the familiar streets suddenly plunged into dust, people suddenly gone, news of sons lost at the Front.
What grasp of evil or the possibilities of human destruction could we have?
All I materially knew of the war was the thick squat block of the air-raid shelter at the end of the garden which as a child I took over as my own little house.
Even then it contained its rows of jam-jars and rotten bunk-beds from 1943.
‘It's simple for us to speak of love,’ I said to Helen.
‘What about the war?’
Jamila stood up irritably.
‘Why are we discussing the war, Karim?’
‘It's important, it's —’
‘You idiot.
Please —’ And she looked imploringly at Mum.
‘We came here for a purpose.
Why are you making me wait like this?
Let's get on with the consultation.’
Mum said, indicating the adjoining wall, ‘With him?’
Jamila nodded and bit her fingernails.
Mum laughed bitterly.
‘He can't even sort himself out.’
‘It was Karim's idea,’ Jamila said, and swept out of the room.
‘Don't make me laugh,’ Mum said to me.
‘Why are you doing this to her?
Why don't you do something useful like clearing out the kitchen?
Why don't you go and read a school book?
Why don't you do something that will get you somewhere, Karim?’
‘Don't get hysterical,’ I said to Mum.
‘Why not?’ she replied.
When we went into his room, God was lying on his bed listening to music on the radio.
He looked approvingly at Helen and winked at me.
He liked her; but then, he was keen for me to go out with anyone, as long as they were not boys or Indians.
‘Why go out with these Muslims?’ he said once, when I brought a Pakistani friend of Jamila's home with me.
‘Why not?’
I asked.
‘Too many problems,’ he said imperiously.
‘What problems?’
I asked.
He wasn't good at being specific; he shook his head as if to say there were so many problems  he didn't know where to begin.
But he added, for the sake of argument, ‘Dowries and all.’
‘Anwar is my oldest friend in the world,’ he said sadly when we told him everything.
‘We old Indians come to like this England less and less and we return to an imagined India.’
Helen took Dad's hand and patted it comfortingly.
‘But this is your home,’ she said.
‘We like you being here.
You benefit our country with your traditions.’
Jamila raised her eyes to heaven.
Helen was driving her to suicide, I could see that.
Helen just made me laugh but this was sober business.
I said, ‘Won't you go and see him?’
‘He wouldn't listen to Gandhi himself,’ Jamila said.
‘All right,’ said Dad.
‘You come back in ninety-five minutes, during which time I will have meditated.
I'll give you my answer at the end of this thought.’
‘Great!’
So the three of us left the cul-de-sac which was Victoria Road.
We walked through the gloomy, echoing streets to the pub, past turdy parks, past the Victorian school with outside toilets, past the numerous bomb-sites which were our true playgrounds and sexual schools, and past the neat gardens and scores of front rooms containing familiar strangers and televisions shining like dying lights.
Eva always called our area ‘the higher depths’.
It was so quiet none of us wanted to hear the sound of our own embarrassing voices.
Here lived Mr Whitman, the policeman, and his young wife, Noleen; next door were a retired couple, Mr and Mrs Holub.
They were socialists in exile from Czechoslovakia, and unknown to them their son crept out of the house in his pyjamas every Friday and Saturday night to hear uncouth music.
Opposite them were another retired couple, a teacher and his wife, the Gothards.
An East End family of birdseed dealers, the Lovelaces, were next to them —old Grandma Lovelace was a toilet attendant in the Library Gardens.
Further up the street lived a Fleet Street reporter, Mr Nokes, his wife and their overweight kids, with the Scoffields — Mrs Scoffield was an architect — next door to them.
All of the houses had been ‘done up’.
One had a new porch, another double-glazing, ‘Georgian’ windows or a new door with  brass fittings.
Kitchens had been extended, lofts converted, walls removed, garages inserted.
This was the English passion, not for self-improvement or culture or wit, but for DIY, Do It Yourself, for bigger and better houses with more mod cons, the painstaking accumulation of comfort and, with it, status — the concrete display of earned cash.
Display was the game.
How many times on a visit to families in the neighbourhood, before being offered a cup of tea, had we been taken around a house —‘The grand tour again,’ sighed Dad — to admire knocked-through rooms, cunning cupboards and bunkbeds, showers, coal bunkers and greenhouses.
In the pub, the Chatterton Arms, sat ageing Teddy Boys in drape coats, with solid sculpted quiffs like ships' prows.
There were a few vicious Rockers too, in studded leather and chains, discussing gang-bangs, their favourite occupation.
And there were a couple of skinheads with their girls, in brogues, Levi's, Crombies and braces.
A lot of them I recognized from school: they were in the pub every night, with their dads, and would be there for ever, never going away.
They were a little startled to see two hippies and a Paki walk in; there was some conversation on the subject and several glances in our direction, so I made sure we didn't eyeball them and give them reason to get upset.
All the same, I was nervous they might jump on us when we left.
Jamila said nothing and Helen was eager to talk about Charlie, a subject on which she was obviously preparing for an advanced degree.
Jamila wasn't even contemptuous, as she abstractedly poured pints of bitter into herself.
She'd met Charlie a couple of times at our house and wasn't thrilled by him, to say the least.
‘Vanity, thy name is Charlie’, was her conclusion.
Charlie made no effort with her.
Why should he?
Jamila was no use to him and he didn't want to fuck her.
Jamila saw right through old Charlie: she said there was iron ambition under the crushed-velvet idealism which was still the style of the age.
Helen gladly confirmed that not only was Charlie a little star at our school but he was illuminating other schools too, especially girls' schools.
There were girls who followed Mustn't Grumble from gig to gig just to be near the boy, recording these concerts on reel-to-reel tape-recorders.
Rare photographs of Charlie were passed around until they were in tatters.
Apparently he'd been offered a record contract which the Fish had turned down, saying they weren't good  enough yet.
When they did get good they'd be one of the biggest bands in the world, the Fish predicted.
I wondered if Charlie really knew this, felt this, or whether his life as he lived it from day to day was as fucked-up and perplexed as everyone else's.
Later that night, with Jammie and Helen behind me, I rapped on the door of Dad's room.
There was no response.
‘Perhaps he's still on another level,’ said Helen.
I looked at Jammie and wondered if she, like me, could hear Dad snoring.
Obviously: because she banged loudly and impatiently on the door until Dad opened it, his hair standing on end, looking surprised to see us.
We sat around his bed and he went into one of the formidable silences which I now accepted as the concomitant of wisdom.
‘We live in an age of doubt and uncertainty.
The old religions under which people lived for ninety-nine point nine per cent of human history have decayed or are irrelevant.
Our problem is secularism.
We have replaced our spiritual values and wisdom with materialism.
And now everyone is wandering around asking how to live.
Sometimes desperate people even turn to me.’
‘Uncle, please —’
Dad raised his index finger a fraction of an inch and Jamila was reluctantly silent.
‘I've decided this.’
We were all concentrating so much that I almost giggled.
‘I believe happiness is only possible if you follow your feeling, your intuition, your real desires.
Only unhappiness is gained by acting in accordance with duty, or obligation, or guilt, or the desire to please others.
You must accept happiness when you can, not selfishly, but remembering you are a part of the world, of others, not separate from them.
Should people pursue their own happiness at the expense of others?
Or should they be unhappy so others can be happy?
There's no one who hasn't had to confront this problem.’
He paused for breath and looked at us.
I knew he was thinking of Eva as he said all this.
I suddenly felt desolate and bereft, realizing he would leave us.
And I didn't want him to leave, because I loved him so much.
‘So, if you punish yourself through self-denial in the puritan way, in the English Christian way, there will only be resentment and more unhappiness.’
Now he looked only at Jamila.
‘People ask for  advice all the time.
They ask for advice when they should try to be more aware of what is happening.’
‘Thanks a lot,’ said Jamila.
It was midnight when we took her home.
Her head was bowed as she went in.
I asked her if she'd made her decision.
‘Oh yes,’ she said, starting up the stairs to the flat where her parents, her tormentors, were Lying awake in separate rooms, one trying to die, the other no doubt wishing for death.
The meter in the hall which regulated the lights was ticking loudly.
Helen and I stared at Jamila's face in the gloom for a clue as to what she was going to do.
Then she turned, was shrouded in darkness, and went up to bed.
Helen said Jamila would marry the boy.
I said no, she'd turn him down.
But it was impossible to tell.
Helen and I climbed into Anerley Park and lay down on our backs on the grass by the swings, and looked at the sky, and pulled our clothes down.
It was a good fuck, but hurried, as Hairy Back would be getting anxious.
I wondered if we were both thinking of Charlie as we did it.
CHAPTER SIX
The man walking towards England, towards our curious eyes, and towards the warm winter overcoat that I held in my hands, was not Flaubert the writer, though he had a similar grey moustache, two double chins, and not much hair.
Not-Flaubert was smaller than me, about the same size as Princess Jeeta.
But unlike her — and the exact shape of her body was difficult to determine because of her roomy salwar kamiz — Changez had a stomach that rode out before him, with a dark-red stringy knitted jumper stretched over it.
The hair that God had left him was sparse, dry and vertical, as if he brushed it forward every morning.
With his good hand he shoved a trolley loaded with two rotting suitcases, which were saved from instant disintegration only by thin string and fraying pyjama cord.
When Not-Flaubert spotted his name on the piece of cardboard I was holding, he simply stopped pushing the trolley, left it standing among the shoving airport crowd and walked towards Jeeta and his wife-to-be, Jamila.
Helen had agreed to help us out on this day of days, and she and I rescued the trolley and staggered around, heaving Changez's junk into the back of the big Rover.
Helen wouldn't hold on to anything properly in case mosquitoes jumped out of the suitcases and gave her malaria.
Not-Flaubert stood by us, not getting into the car until, sanctioned by his regal nodding approval, I finally locked the boot, ensuring his sacred suitcases were safe from dacoits and thuggees.
‘Maybe he's used to servants,’ I said to Helen in a loud voice, as I held the door open for him to slide in next to Jeeta and Jamila.
Helen and I got in front.
This was a delicious moment of revenge for me, because the Rover belonged to Helen's dad, Hairy Back.
Had he known that four Pakis were resting their dark arses on his deep leather seats, ready to be driven by his daughter, who had only recently been fucked by one of them, he wouldn't have been a contented man.
The actual wedding was to be held the next day, and then  Changez and Jamila would stay at the Ritz for a couple of nights.
Today there would be a small party to welcome Changez to England.
Anwar was standing anxiously at the window of Paradise Stores as the Rover turned into the street, stopping outside the library.
Anwar had even changed his suit; he was wearing a late 1950S job, as opposed to the usual early 1950s number.
The suit was pinned and tucked all over, for he was bony now.
His nose and cheekbones protruded as never before, and he was paler than Helen, so pale that no one could possibly call him a darkie or black bastard, though they might legitimately have used the word bastard.
He was weak and found it difficult to pick up his feet as he walked.
He moved as if he had bags of sugar tied to his ankles.
And when Changez embraced him in the street I thought I heard Anwar's bones cracking.
Then he shook Changez's hand twice and pinched his cheeks.
This effort seemed to tire Anwar.
Anwar had been extraordinarily exuberant about Changez's arrival.
Perhaps it was something to do with his not having a son and now having gained one; or perhaps he was pleased about his victory over the women.
Whatever the extent of his self-inflicted frailty, I'd never seen him as good-tempered as he had been recently, or as nervously loquacious.
Words weren't his natural medium, but these days, when I went to help out in the shop, he inevitably took me aside — blackmailing me with samosas, sherbet fountains and the opportunity not to work — for an extended ear-bashing.
I'm convinced he drew me aside, away from Jeeta and Jamila, into the store-room, where we sat on wooden boxes like skiving factory workers, because he was ashamed, or at least bashful, about his unsweet victory.
Recently Princess Jeeta and Jamila had been in funereal moods, not for a second allowing Anwar to enjoy the pleasure of his tyranny.
So all he could do, poor bastard, was celebrate it with me.
Would they never understand the fruits of his wisdom?
‘Things are really going to change round here with another man about the place,’ he told me jubilantly.
‘The shop needs decorating.
I want some boy who can climb a ladder!
Plus I need someone to carry boxes from the wholesaler.
When Changez arrives he can run the shop with Jamila.
I can take that woman’— he meant his wife —‘out somewhere beautiful.’
‘Where beautiful will you take her, Uncle, to the opera?
I heard there's a good production of Rigoletto on at the moment.’
‘To an Indian restaurant that a friend of mine owns.’
‘And where else beautiful?’
‘To the zoo, dammit!
Any place she wants to go!’
Anwar became sentimental, as unfeeling people often do.
‘She has worked so hard all her life.
She deserves a little break.
She has given us all so much love.
So much love.
If only the women could grasp my points of view.
They will begin to understand only when the boy gets here.
Then they will see, eh?’
I also learned in the store-room-of-secrets that Anwar was looking forward to having grandchildren.
According to Anwar, Jamila would become pregnant immediately, and soon there'd be little Anwars running all over the place.
Anwar would attend to the kids' cultural upbringing and take them to school and mosque while Changez was, presumably, redecorating the shop, moving boxes and impregnating my girlfriend Jamila again.
As Anwar and I had these conversations Jamila liked to open the door to the store-room and just point the black barrel-ends of her eyes at me as if I were sitting with Eichmann.
Upstairs in the flat, Jeeta and Jamila had prepared a steaming, delicious feast of keema and aloo and all, and rice, chapatis and nan.
There was Tizer and cream soda and beer and lassi to drink, all of it laid out on white tablecloths with tiny paper napkins for all of us.
You wouldn't have believed from the pristine state of the scrubbed room overlooking the main road to London that a man had tried to starve himself to death in it only a few weeks before.
It was hell on earth at first, the party, with everyone awkward and self-conscious.
In the silence, Uncle Anwar, Oscar Wilde himself, made three attempts to jump-start the conversation, all attempts stalling.
I examined the threadbare carpet.
Even Helen, who looked around at everything with great sympathetic curiosity and could usually be relied upon for cheer and irritating opinion, said nothing but ‘yum-yum’ twice and looked out of the window.
Changez and Jamila sat apart, and although I tried to catch them looking at each other, I can guarantee that not a single surreptitious glance was exchanged by the future bed-mates.
What would Changez make of his wife when he finally looked at her?
The days of tight tops and mini-skirts for women were gone.
Jamila was wearing  what looked like several sacks: long skirts, perhaps three, one over the other, and a long smock in faded green beneath which the flat arcs of her braless breasts were visible to the slightly interested.
She had on her usual pair of National Health glasses, and on her feet a rather unrelenting pair of Dr Martens in brown, which gave the impression that she was about to take up hill-walking.
She was crazy about these clothes, delighted to have found an outfit she could wear every day, wanting, like a Chinese peasant, never to have to think about what to put on.
A simple idea like this, so typical of Jamila, who had little physical vanity, did seem eccentric to other people, and certainly made me laugh.
The one person it didn't seem eccentric to, because he didn't notice it, was her father.
He really knew little about Jamila.
If someone had asked him who she voted for, what the names of her women friends were, what she liked in life, he couldn't have answered.
It was as if , in some strange way, it was beneath his dignity to take an interest in her.
He didn't see her.
There were just certain ways in which this woman who was his daughter had to behave.
Eventually four relatives of Anwar's turned up with more drink and food, and gifts of cloth and pots.
One of the men gave Jamila a wig; there was a sandalwood garland for Changez.
Soon the room was noisy and busy and animated.
Anwar was getting to know Changez.
He didn't seem in the least displeased with him, and smiled and nodded and touched him constantly.
Some time passed before Anwar noticed that his much-anticipated son-in-law wasn't the rippling physical specimen he'd expected.
They weren't speaking English, so I didn't know exactly what was said, but Anwar, after a glance, followed by a concerned closer study, followed by a little step to one side for a better angle, pointed anxiously at Changez's arm.
Changez waggled the hand a bit and laughed without self-consciousness; Anwar tried to laugh too.
Changez's left arm was withered in some way, and stuck on the end of the attenuated limb was a lump of hard flesh the size of a golf ball, a small fist, with only a tiny thumb projecting from the solid mass where there should have been nimble, shop-painting, box-carrying fingers.
It looked as if Changez had stuck his hand into a fire and had had flesh, bone and sinew melted together.
Though I knew a remarkable plumber with only a stump for a hand who worked for Uncle Ted, I couldn't  see Changez decorating Anwar's shop with one arm.
In fact, had he four Mohammed Ali arms I doubted if he'd know what to do with a paintbrush, or with a toothbrush for that matter.
If Anwar now perhaps had reason for entertaining minor reservations about Changez (though Changez seemed delighted by Anwar, and laughed at everything he said even when it was serious), this could be nothing compared to Jamila's antipathy.
Did Changez have any idea of the reluctance with which his bride-to-be, now moving across to her bookshelf, picking up a book by Kate Millett, staring into it for a few minutes and replacing it after a reproachful and pitying glance from her mother, would be exchanging vows with him?
Jamila had phoned me the day after Helen and I fucked in Anerley Park to tell me of her decision.
That morning I was so ecstatic about my triumph in seducing the dog-owner's daughter that I'd completely forgotten about Jamila's big decision.
She sounded distant and cold as she told me she would marry the man her father had selected from millions, and that was the end of it.
She would survive, she said.
Not one more word on the subject would she tolerate.
I kept thinking to myself, Typical Jamila, that's exactly what she would do, as if this were something that happened every day.
But she was marrying Changez out of perversity, I was sure of it.
We lived in rebellious and unconventional times, after all.
And Jamila was interested in anarchists and situationists and Weathermen, and cut all that stuff out of the papers and showed it to me.
Marrying Changez would be, in her mind, a rebellion against rebellion, creative novelty itself.
Everything in her life would be disrupted, experimented with.
She claimed to be doing it only for Jeeta, but there was real, wilful contrariness in it, I suspected.
I sat next to Changez when we started to eat.
Helen watched from across the room, unable to eat, virtually retching at the sight of Changez balancing a plate on his knee, garland trailing in his dal, as he ate with his good hand, nimbly using the fingers he had.
Maybe he'd never used a knife and fork.
Of course, Jamila would be entertained by that.
She'd crow all over the place to her friends, ‘Do you know my husband has never been in contact with cutlery before?’
But Changez looked so alone — and close up I could see bits of  bristle sticking out of his badly shaved face — that even I couldn't laugh at him in my usual way.
And he spoke to me so kindly, and with such innocent enthusiasm, that I felt like saying to Jamila, Hey, he's not so bad!
‘Will you take me on the road here to see one or two things that I might like to see?’
‘Sure, whenever you like,’ I replied.
‘I also like to watch cricket.
We can go perhaps to Lords.
I have brought my own binoculars.’
‘Excellent.’
‘And visit bookshops?
I hear there are many establishments in the Charing Cross Road.’
‘Yes.
What do you like to read?’
‘The classics,’ he said firmly.
I saw that he had a pompous side to him, so certain he seemed in taste and judgement.
‘You like classics too?’
‘You don't mean that Greek shit?
Virgil or Dante or Homo or something?’
‘P. G. Wodehouse and Conan Doyle for me!
Can you take me to Sherlock Holmes's house in Baker Street?
I also like the Saint and Mickey Spillane.
And Westerns!
Anything with Randolph Scott in it!
Or Gary Cooper!
Or John Wayne!’
I said, to test him, ‘There's lots of things we can do.
And we can take Jamila with us.’
Without glancing at her, but filling his mouth with rice and peas until his cheeks bulged — he really was a greedy gobbler — he said, ‘That would be much fun.’
‘So you two pricks are big mates.now,’ Jamila hissed at me later.
Anwar had reclaimed Changez and was patiently explaining to him about the shop, the wholesaler and the financial position.
Changez stood there looking out of the window and scratching his arse, completely ignoring his father-in-law, who had no choice but to carry on with his explanation.
As Anwar was talking Changez turned to him and said, ‘I thought it would be much more freezing in England than this.’
Anwar was bewildered and irritated by this non sequitur .
‘But I was speaking about the price of vegetables,’ said Anwar.
‘What for?’ asked Changez in bewilderment.
‘I am mainly a meat-eater.’
Anwar said nothing to this, but dismay, confusion and anger passed over his face.
And he glanced down at Changez's duff hand again as if to reconfirm that his brother had really sent over a cripple as a husband for his only daughter.
‘Changez seems all right to me,’ I told Jamila.
‘Likes books.
Doesn't seem an overwhelming-sexual-urges type.’
‘How do you know, clever dick?
Why don't you marry him, then?
You like men, after all.’
‘Because you wanted to marry him.’
‘I don't ‘want’ anything but to live my life in peace.’
‘You made your choice, Jammie.’
She was furious with me.
‘Ah, pah!
Whatever happens I'll be relying on you for support and concern.’
Thank God, I thought, as just then Dad turned up at the party.
He'd come straight from work, and he wore his best bespoke Burton's suit, a yellow waistcoat with a watch on a chain (a present from Mum), and a striped tie in pink and blue with a knot as fat as a bar of soap.
He looked like a budgerigar.
Dad's hair was shining too, as he liked to put olive oil on it, convinced that this lubrication of the scalp banished baldness.
Unfortunately, if you got too close to him you were tempted to look around for the source of the odour — perhaps there was an overdressed salad in the vicinity?
But lately he'd been concealing this whiff with his favourite aftershave, Rampage.
Dad was plumper than he'd ever been.
He was turning into a porky little Buddha, but compared to everyone else in the room he was life itself, vibrant, irreverent and laughing.
Beside him, Anwar had become an old man.
Dad was also being magnanimous today; he reminded me of a smooth politician visiting a shabby constituency, smiling, kissing babies, shaking hands with relish — and departing as soon as he decently could.
Helen kept saying, ‘Take me away from here, Karim,’ and really getting on my nerves, so soon Dad and Helen and I went downstairs.
‘What's going on?’
I asked Helen.
‘What are you so fed up about?’
‘One of Anwar's relatives was behaving weirdly towards me,’ she said.
Apparently, whenever she'd gone close to this man he'd shooed her away, recoiling from her and muttering, ‘Pork, pork, pork, VD, VD, white woman, white woman.’
Apart from this, she was angry with Jamila for marrying Changez, the sight of whom made her feel ill.
I told her to go to San Francisco.
Downstairs in the shop Anwar was now showing Changez around.
As Anwar pointed and explained and waved at tins and packets and bottles and brushes, Changez nodded like a bright but naughty schoolboy humouring the eager curator of a museum but taking nothing in.
Changez didn't seem ready to take over the running of Paradise Stores.
Spotting me leaving, he hurried over and took my hand.
‘Remember, bookshops, bookshops!’
He was sweating, and the way he held on to me indicated that he didn't want to be left alone.
‘And please,’ he said, ‘call me by my nickname — Bubble.’
‘Bubble?’
‘Bubble.
Yes, and yours?’
‘Creamy.’
‘Goodbye, Creamy.’
‘Goodbye, Bubble.’
Outside, Helen had the Rover roaring and the radio on.
I heard my favourite lines from Abbey Road: ‘Soon we'll be away from here, step on the gas and wipe that tear away.’
To my surprise Eva's car was also parked outside the library.
And Dad was holding the door open.
He was buoyant today, but also edgy and more authoritative than I'd seen him for ages, when mostly he'd been gloomy and sulky.
It was as if he'd made up his mind about something yet was not sure if it was the right thing to do.
So instead of being relaxed and content, he was tenser and less tolerant than ever.
‘Get in,’ he said, pointing to the back seat of Eva's car.
‘What for?
Where are we going?’
‘Just get in.
I'm your dad, aren't I?
Haven't I always taken care of you?’
‘No.
And it's like I'm being taken prisoner.
I said I'd be with Helen this evening.’
‘But don't you want to be with Eva?
You like Eva.
And Charlie's waiting at home.
He really wants to discuss one or two things with you.’
Eva smiled at me from the driver's seat.
‘Kiss, kiss,’ she said.
I  knew I was going to be deceived.
They're so stupid, grown-ups, thinking you can't see through every fucking thing they do.
I went to Helen and told her that something heavy was happening, I wasn't sure what it was, but I had to leave her now.
She kissed me and drove away.
All day I'd felt calm, though aware that everything in Jamila's life had changed; and now, on the same day, if I was right about the looks on the two faces in the car with me, the same thing was going to happen to me.
I waved at Helen's car, I don't know why.
But I never saw her again.
I liked her, we were starting to go out, then all this happened and I never saw her again.
Sitting behind Eva and Dad in the car, watching their hands constantly fluttering towards each other, you didn't have to be a genius to see they were a couple.
Here before me were two people in love, oh yes.
And as Eva drove, Dad didn't take his eyes from her face.
This woman I barely knew, Eva, had stolen my father.
But what did I really think of her?
I hadn't even looked at her properly.
This new part of my life wasn't a woman who would seem attractive straight-on in a passport photograph.
She had no conventional beauty, her features were not exquisitely proportioned and her face was a bit chubby.
But she was lovely because the round face with the straight dyed-blonde hair, which fell over her forehead and into her eyes, was open.
Her face was constantly in motion, and this was the source of her beauty.
Her face registered the slightest feeling, concealing little.
Sometimes she became childlike and you could see her at eight or seventeen or twenty-five.
The different ages of her life seemed to exist simultaneously, as if she could move from age to age according to how she felt.
There was no cold maturity about her, thank Christ.
She could be pretty serious and honest, though, explaining hurt and pain as if we were all openly human like her, and not screwed-up and secretive and tricky.
That time she'd told me how lonely and abandoned she felt when she was with her husband, those confessional words, ‘lonely and abandoned’, which usually would have me cringing all over the place, made me shiver.
When she was ecstatic, and she was often ecstatic, ecstasy flew from her face like the sun from a mirror.
She was living outwardly, towards you, and her face was always watchable because she was  rarely bored or dull.
She didn't let the world bore her.
And she was some talker, old Eva.
Her talk wasn't vague approbation or disapproval, some big show of emotion.
I didn't say that.
There were facts, solid and chewable as bread, in this feeling.
She'd explained to me the origin of the Paisley pattern; I had the history of Notting Hill Gate, the use of a camera obscura by Vermeer, why Charles Lamb's sister murdered their mother, and a history of Tamla Motown.
I loved this stuff; I wrote it down.
Eva was unfolding the world for me.
It was through her that I became interested in life.
Dad, I reckon, was slightly intimidated by her.
Eva was cleverer than he was, and more capable of feeling.
He hadn't encountered this much passion in a woman before.
It was part of what made him want and love Eva.
Yet this love, so compelling, so fascinating as it grew despite everything, had been leading to destruction.
I could see the erosion in the foundations of our family every day.
Every day when Dad came home from work he went into the bedroom and didn't come out.
Recently he'd encouraged Allie and me to talk to him.
We sat in there with him and told him about school.
I suspected he liked these ink-stained accounts because, while our voices filled the room like smoke, he could lie back concealed in its swathes and think of Eva.
Or we sat with Mum and watched television, braving her constant irritation and sighs of self-pity.
And all the time, like pipes dripping, weakening and preparing to burst in the attic, around the house hearts were slowly breaking while nothing was being said.
In some ways it was worse for little Allie, as he had no facts about anything.
For him the house was filled with suffering and fluffed attempts to pretend that suffering didn't exist.
But no one talked to him.
No one said, Mum and Dad are unhappy together.
He must have been more confused than any of us; or perhaps his ignorance prevented him from grasping just how bad things were.
Whatever was happening at this time, we were all isolated from each other.
When we arrived at her house, Eva put her hand on my shoulder and told me to go upstairs to Charlie.
‘Because I know that's what you want to do.
Then come down.
We have to discuss something important.’
As I went upstairs I thought how much I hated being shoved  around all over the place.
Do this, do that, go here, go there.
I would be leaving home pretty soon, I knew that.
Why couldn't they get down to the important stuff right away?
At the top of the stairs I turned for a moment and found out.
Eva and my father were going into the front room, hand-in-hand, and they were reaching for each other low down, and clutching, tongues out, pressed against each other even before they'd got through the door.
I heard it lock behind them.
They couldn't even wait half an hour.
I poked my head through Charlie's trap-door.
The place had changed a lot since last time.
Charlie's poetry books, his sketches, his cowboy boots, were flung about.
The cupboards and drawers were open as if he were packing.
He was leaving and altering.
For a start he'd given up being a hippie, which must have been a relief to the Fish, not only professionally but because it meant the Fish could play Charlie soul records — Otis Redding and all — the only music he liked.
Now the Fish was sprawled in a black steel armchair, laughing as Charlie talked and walked up and down, pouting and playing with his hair.
As Charlie paced, he picked up an old pair of frayed jeans or a wide-collared shirt with pink flowers on it, or a Barclay James Harvest album, and tossed it out of the skylight and into the garden below.
‘It's ridiculous the way people are appointed to jobs,’ Charlie was saying.
‘Surely it should happen at random?
People in the street must be approached and told that they are now editor of The Times for a month.
Or that they are to be judges, or police commissioners, or toilet attendants.
It has to be arbitrary.
There can be no connection between the appointment and the person unless it is their utter unsuitability for the position.
Don't you agree?’
‘Without exception?’ enquired the Fish, languidly.
‘No.
There are people who should be excluded from high position.
These are people who run for buses and put their hands in their pockets to ensure their change doesn't jump out.
There are other people who have sun-tans that leave white patches on their arms.
These people should be excluded, because they'll be punished in special camps.’
Charlie then said to me, though I thought he hadn't noticed me, ‘I'll just be down,’ as if I'd announced that his taxi was waiting.
I must have looked wounded, because Charlie broke a little.
‘Hey, little one,’ he said.
‘Come here.
We might as well be mates.
From what I hear we'll be seeing a lot of each other.’
So I clambered up through the hole and went to him.
He bent forward to put his arms around me.
He held me fondly, but it was a characteristic gesture, just as he was always telling people he loved them, using the same tone of voice with each of them.
I wanted to smash through all that crap.
I reached round and got a good handful of his arse.
There was plenty of it, too, and just perky enough for me.
When, as predicted, he jumped in surprise, I whipped my hand through his legs, giving his whole beanbag a good tug.
He was laughing and wincing even as he threw me across the room into his drum-kit.
I lay there, half crying and pretending not to be hurt, as Charlie continued to pace, flinging flowered clothes into the street below and discussing the possibility of a police force being set up to arrest and imprison rock guitarists who bent their knees while they played.
A few minutes later, downstairs, Eva was next to me on the sofa, bathing my forehead and whispering, ‘You silly boys, you silly boys.’
Charlie sat sheepishly opposite me and God was getting cranky next to him.
Eva's shoes were off and Dad had removed his jacket and tie.
He'd planned this summit carefully, and now the Zen of the entire thing had gone crazy, because just as Dad opened his mouth to start talking blood had started to drip into my lap from my nose as a result of Charlie chucking me into his drum-kit.
Dad started off in statesman-like fashion, as if he were addressing the United Nations, earnestly saying he'd come to love Eva over the time he'd known her and so on.
But soon he took off from the earthly tediousness of the concrete for a glide in purer air.
‘We cling to the past,’ he said, ‘to the old, because we are afraid.
I've been afraid of hurting Eva, of hurting Margaret, and most of hurting myself.’
This stuff was really getting on my nerves.
‘Our lives become stale, they become set.
We are afraid of the new, of anything that might make us grow or change.’
All this was making my muscles feel slack and unused, and I wanted to sprint up the street just to feel myself alive again.
‘But that is living death, not life, that is —‘
This was enough for me.
I interrupted.
‘D'you ever think how boring all this stuff is?’
There was silence in the room, and concern.
Fuck it.
‘It's all vague  and meaningless, Dad.
Hot air, you know.’
They watched me.
‘How can people just talk because they like the sound of their own voices and never think of the people around them?’
‘Please,’ Eva begged, ‘don't be so rude as to not let your father finish what he's started.’
‘Right on,’ Charlie said.
Dad said, and it must have cost him a lot to say so little after he'd been put down by me, ‘I've decided I want to be with Eva.’
And they all turned and looked at me compassionately.
‘What about us?’
I asked.
‘Yes, you'll be provided for financially and we'll see each other whenever you like.
You love Eva and Charlie.
Think, you're gaining a family.’
‘And Mum?
Is she gaining a family?’
Dad got up and put his jacket on.
‘I'm going to speak to her right now.’
As we sat there, Dad went home to end our lives together.
Eva and Charlie and I had a drink and talked about other things.
I don't know what.
I said I had to piss, but I ran out of the house and walked around the streets wondering what the fuck to do and trying to imagine what Dad was saying to Mum and how she was taking it.
Then I got into a phone-box and made a reverse charges call to Auntie Jean, who was drunk and abusive as usual.
So I just said what I intended to say and put the phone down.
‘You might have to get over here, Auntie Jean.
God — I mean, Dad — has decided to live with Eva.’
CHAPTER SEVEN
Life goes on tediously, nothing happens for months, and then one day everything, and I mean everything, goes fucking wild and berserk.
When I got home Mum and Dad were in their bedroom together and poor little Allie was outside banging on the door like a five-year-old.
I pulled him away and tried to get him upstairs in case he was traumatized for life, but he kicked me in the balls.
Almost immediately the heart-ambulance arrived: Auntie Jean and Uncle Ted.
While Uncle Ted sat outside in the car Jean charged straight into the bedroom, pushing me aside as I tried to protect my parents' privacy.
She shouted orders at me.
Within forty minutes Mum was ready to leave.
Auntie Jean had packed for her while I packed for Allie.
They assumed I'd go to Chislehurst with them, but I said I'd turn up later on my bike; I'd make my own arrangements.
I knew I'd be going nowhere near them.
What could be worse than moving to Chislehurst?
Even for two days I wouldn't be able to bear the sight of Auntie Jean first thing in the morning, without her make-up on, her face blank as an egg, as she had prunes, kippers and cigarettes for breakfast and made me drink Typhoo tea.
I knew she'd abuse Dad all day too.
As it was, Allie was crying and yelling, ‘Bugger off, you Buddhist bastard!’ as he left with Mum and Jean.
So the three of them bundled out, their faces full of tears and fear and pain and anger and shouting.
Dad yelled at them, ‘Where are you all going?
What are you leaving the house for?
Just stay here!’ but Jean just told him to shut his big gob.
The house was silent, as if no one had been there.
Dad, who had been sitting on the stairs with his head in his hands, went into action.
He wanted to get out too.
He stuffed his shoes and ties and books into every plastic bag I could find before stopping himself, as he realized it was undignified to disfigure the house before deserting it.
‘Forget it,’ he said.
‘Let's take nothing, eh?’
I liked that idea: it seemed aristocratic to me, just walking out empty-handed as if we were above all objects.
Eventually Dad phoned Eva to say the coast was clear.
She came tentatively into the house, as warm and gentle as anything, and she took Dad out to the car.
Then she asked me what I was going to do and I had to say I wanted to go with her.
She didn't flinch as I expected her to.
She just said, ‘OK, get your things, it'll be lovely to have you.
We're all going to have a terrific time together, you know that, don't you?’
So I got about twenty records, ten packets of tea, Tropic of Cancer and On the Road, and the plays of Tennessee Williams, and off I went to live with Eva.
And Charlie.
That night Eva put me in her clean little spare room.
Before getting into bed I went into the large bathroom beside her bedroom, where I hadn't been before.
The bath was in the centre of the room, with an old-fashioned brass spigot.
There were candles around the edge of it and an old aluminium bucket beside it.
And on the oak shelves were rows of lipsticks and blushers, eye-make-up removers, cleansers, moisturizers, hair-sprays, creamy soaps for soft skin, sensitive skin and normal skin; soaps in exotic wrappings and pretty boxes; there were sweet-peas in a jam-jar and an egg-cup, rose-petals in Wedgwood saucers; there were bottles of perfume, cotton wool, conditioners, hair-bands, hair-slides and shampoos.
It was confusing: such self-attention repelled me, and yet it represented a world of sensuality, of smell and touch, of indulgence and feeling, which aroused me like an unexpected caress as I undressed, lit the candles and got into the bath in this room of Eva's.
Later that night she came into my room in her kimono, bringing me a glass of champagne and carrying a book.
I told her she looked happy and luminous, which made her look even more happy and luminous.
Compliments were useful tools of the friendship trade, I told myself, but in her case it was true.
She said, ‘Thank you for saying that.
I haven't been happy for a long time but now I think I'm going to be.’
‘What's that book?’
I said.
‘I'm going to read to you,’ she said, ‘to help you appreciate the sound of good prose.
And because you'll be reading to me in the next few months when I'm cooking and doing chores.
You've got a good voice.
Your dad said you've mentioned being an actor.’
‘Yes.’
‘Let's think about that, then.’
Eva sat down on the edge of the bed and read me The Selfish Giant , dramatizing all the characters and imitating a smug vicar at the sentimental end of the story.
She didn't try overhard, she just wanted to let me know I was secure with her, that the break-up of my parents' marriage wasn't the worst thing that ever happened, and that she had enough love to cover us all.
She was strong and confident now.
She read for a long time, and I had the bonus of knowing my father was waiting impatiently to fuck her again on this night of nights which was really their honeymoon.
I thanked her gratefully, and she said, ‘But you're beautiful, and the beautiful should be given everything they want.’
‘Hey, what about the ugly ones?’
‘The ugly ones.’
She poked her tongue out.
‘It's their fault if they're ugly.
They're to be blamed, not pitied.’
I laughed at this, but it made me think of where Charlie may have inherited some of his cruelty.
When Eva had gone and I lay for the first time in the same house as Charlie and Eva and my father, I thought about the difference between the interesting people and the nice people.
And how they can't always be identical.
The interesting people you wanted to be with — their minds were unusual, you saw things freshly with them and all was not deadness and repetition.
I longed to know what Eva made of things, what she thought of Jamila, say, and the marriage of Changez.
I wanted her opinion.
Eva could be snobby, that was obvious, but if I saw something, or heard a piece of music, or visited a place, I wouldn't be content until Eva had made me see it in a certain way.
She came at things from an angle; she made connections.
Then there were the nice people who weren't interesting, and you didn't want to know what they thought of anything.
Like Mum, they were good and meek and deserved more love.
But it was the interesting ones, like Eva with her hard, taking edge, who ended up with everything, and in bed with my father.
When Dad moved in with Eva, and Jamila and Changez moved into their flat, there were five places for me to stay: with Mum at Auntie Jean's; at our now empty house; with Dad and Eva; with Anwar and Jeeta; or with Changez and Jamila.
I finally stopped going to school  when Charlie did, and Eva arranged for me to go to a college where I could finish my A levels.
This college seemed as if it was going to be the best thing that happened to me.
The teachers looked the same as the pupils and everyone was equal, ha, ha, though I made a fool of myself by calling the male teachers sir and females miss.
It was the first time, too, that I'd been in a classroom with girls, and I got in with a bad bunch of women.
The ceremony of innocence was well drowned as far as they were concerned.
They laughed at me all the time, I don't know why; I suppose they thought I was immature.
After all, I'd only just stopped doing my paper-round and I heard them talking about headlong stuff I never knew about before: abortions, heroin, Sylvia Plath, prostitution.
These women were middle class but they'd broken away from their families.
They were always touching each other; they fucked the lecturers and asked them for money for drugs.
They cared little for themselves; they were in and out of hospital for drug addiction and overdoses and abortions.
They tried to take care of each other and sometimes of me.
They thought I was sweet and cute and pretty and everything, which I liked.
I liked it all, because I was lonely for the first time in my life, and an itinerant.
I had a lot of spare time, and from leading a steady life in my bedroom with my radio, and with my parents downstairs, I now wandered among different houses and flats carrying my life-equipment in a big canvas bag and never washing my hair.
I was not too unhappy, criss-crossing South London and the suburbs by bus, no one knowing where I was.
Whenever someone — Mum, Dad, Ted — tried to locate me, I was always somewhere else, occasionally going to a lecture and then heading out to see Changez and Jamila.
I didn't want to be educated.
It wasn't the right time of my life for concentration, it really wasn't.
Dad was still convinced I was trying to be something — a lawyer, I'd told him recently, because even he knew that that doctor stuff was a wind-up.
But I knew there'd have to come a time when I broke the news to him that the education system and I had split up.
It would break his immigrant heart, too.
But the spirit of the age among the people I knew manifested itself as general drift and idleness.
We didn't want money.
What for?
We could get by, living off parents, friends or the State.
And if we were going to be bored, and we were usually bored, rarely being self-motivated, we could at least be bored on our own terms, lying  smashed on mattresses in ruined houses rather than working in the machine.
I didn't want to work in a place where I couldn't wear my fur coat.
Anyway, there was plenty to observe — oh yes, I was interested in life.
I was an eager witness to Eva and Dad's love, and even more fascinated by Changez and Jamila, who were, can you believe, living together in South London.
Jamila and Changez's flat, rented by Anwar, was a two-room box affair near the Catford dog track.
It had minimal busted furniture, yellow walls and a gas fire.
The one bedroom, which contained a double mattress covered by an Indian bedspread with swirling colours, was Jamila's room.
At the end of the bed was a small card-table which Changez bought for her as a wedding present; I'd carried it back from a local junk shop.
There was a Liberty-pattern tablecloth over it, and I bought Jamila a white vase in which there were always daffodils or roses.
She kept her pens and pencils in a peanut-butter jar.
Also on the table and piled up around her on the floor were her post-Miss Cutmore books: the ‘classics’ as she called them — Angela Davis, Baldwin, Malcolm X, Greer, Millett.
You weren't supposed to stick anything on the walls, but Jamila had pinned up poems by Christina Rossetti, Plath, Shelley and other vegetarians, which she copied out of library books and read when she stretched her legs by taking a few steps around the tiny room.
On a sticking-out piece of board nailed to the windowsill was her tape-recorder.
From breakfast until the three of us cracked late-night beers, the place grooved to Aretha and the other mamas.
Jamila never closed the door, so Changez and I drank and looked through at our Jamila's concentrating-so-hard profile, head bowed, as she read and sang and wrote in old school exercise books.
Like me, she'd run right out on all that ‘old, dull, white stuff’ they taught you at school and college.
But she wasn't lazy, she was educating herself.
She knew what she wanted to learn and she knew where it was; she just had to shovel it all into her head.
Watching Jamila sometimes made me think the world was divided into three sorts of people: those who knew what they wanted to do; those (the unhappiest) who never knew what their purpose in life was; and those who found out later on.
I was in the last category, I reckoned, which didn't stop me wishing I'd been born into the first.
In the living room there were two armchairs and a table to eat take-aways  off.
Around it were two steel chairs with putrid white plastic on the seats.
Beside it was a low camp-bed covered in brown blankets on which, from the first, Jamila insisted, Changez slept.
There was no discussion of this, and Changez didn't demur at the crucial moment when something could — maybe — have been done.
That was how it was going to be between them, just as she made him sleep on the floor beside their honeymoon bed in the Ritz.
While Jamila worked in her room, Changez lay joyously on the camp-bed, his good arm suspending a paperback above him, one of his ‘specials’, no doubt.
‘This one is very extra-special,’ he'd say, tossing aside yet another Spillane or James Hadley Chase or Harold Robbins.
I think a lot of the big trouble which was to happen started with me giving Changez Harold Robbins to read, because it stimulated Changez in a way that Conan Doyle never did.
If you think books don't change people, just look at Changez, because undreamed-of possibilities in the sex line suddenly occurred to him, a man recently married and completely celibate who saw Britain as we saw Sweden: as the goldmine of sexual opportunity.
But before all the sex trouble got properly into its swing there was all the other trouble brewing between Anwar and Changez.
After all, Changez was needed in the shop even more urgently now that Anwar had so enfeebled himself on the Gandhi-diet in order to get Changez to Britain in the first place.
To start off Changez's career in the grocery business, Anwar instructed him to work on the till, where you could get by with only one arm and half a brain.
And Anwar was very patient with Changez, and spoke to him like a four-year-old, which was the right thing to do.
But Changez was far smarter than Anwar.
He made sure he was hopeless at wrapping bread and giving change.
He couldn't manage the arithmetic.
There were queues at the till, until customers started walking out.
Anwar suggested he come back to till-work another time.
Anwar would find him something else to do to get him in the grocery mood.
So Changez's new job was to sit on a three-legged stool behind the vegetable section and watch for shop-lifters.
It was elementary: you saw them stealing and you screamed, ‘Put that back, you fucking thieving tom-cat!’
But Anwar hadn't catered for the fact that Changez had mastered the supreme art of sleeping sitting up.
Jamila told me that one day Anwar came into the shop and discovered  Changez snoring as he sat on his stool, while in front of his closed eyes an SL was shoving a jar of herrings down his trousers.
Anwar blew up all over the place.
He picked up a bunch of bananas and threw them at his son-in-law, hitting him so hard in the chest that Changez toppled off his stool and badly bruised his good arm.
Changez lay writhing on the floor, unable to get up.
Finally Princess Jeeta had to help Changez leave the shop.
Anwar bellowed at Jeeta and Jamila and even yelled at me.
I just laughed at Anwar, as we all did, but no one dared say the one true thing: it was all his own fault.
I pitied him.
His despair became obvious.
He was moody all the time, with a flashing temper, and when Changez was at home, nursing his bad arm, Anwar came to me as I worked in the store-room.
He'd already lost any respect or hope he'd once had for Changez.
‘What's that fucking fat useless bastard doing now?’ he enquired.
‘Is he better yet?’ 'He's recuperating,’I said.
‘I'll recuperate his fucking balls with a fucking flame-thrower!’ said Uncle Anwar.
‘Perhaps I will phone the National Front and give them Changez's name, eh?
What a good idea, eh!’
Meanwhile Changez was getting better and better at Lying on camp-beds, reading paperbacks and strolling around town with me.
He was always up to any adventure that didn't involve working at tills or sitting on three-legged stools.
And because he was slightly dim, or at least vulnerable and kind and easily led, being one of the few people I could mock and dominate with impunity, we became mates.
He'd follow me where I fancied, as I avoided my education.
Unlike everyone else he thought me quite deviant.
He was shocked when I took off my shirt in the street to get some damn sun on my tits.
‘You are very daring and non-conformist,yaar,’ he often said.
‘And look how you dress, like a gypsy vagabond.
What does your father say?
Doesn't he discipline you very hard?’
‘My father's too busy with the woman he ran off with,’ I replied, ‘to think about me too much.’
‘Oh God, this whole country has gone sexually insane,’ he said.
‘Your father should go back home for some years and take you with him.
Perhaps to a remote village.’
Changez's disgust at everyday things inspired me to show him South London.
I wondered how long he'd take to get used to it, to become, in other words, corrupt.
I was working on it.
We wasted  days and days dancing in the Pink Pussy Club, yawning at Fat Mattress at the Croydon Greyhound, ogling strippers on Sunday mornings in a pub, sleeping through Godard and Antonioni films, and enjoying the fighting at Millwall Football Ground, where I forced Changez to wear a bobble-hat over his face in case the lads saw he was a Paki and imagined I was one too.
Financially Changez was supported by Jamila, who paid for everything by working in the shop in the evenings.
And I helped him out with money I got from Dad.
Changez's brother sent him money, too, which was unusual, because it should have been the other way round as Changez made his way in the affluent West, but I was sure celebrations in India at Changez's departure were still taking place.
Jamila was soon in the felicitous position of neither liking nor disliking her husband.
It amused her to think she carried on as if he weren't there.
But late at night the two of them liked to play cards, and she'd ask him about India.
He told her tales of run-away wives, too-small dowries, adultery among the rich of Bombay (which took many evenings) and, most delicious, political corruption.
He'd obviously picked up a few tips from the paperbacks, because he spun these stories out like a kid pulling on chewing-gum.
He was good at them, linking all the stories together with more gum and spit, reintroducing the characters with, ‘You know that bad bad man who was caught naked in the bathing hut?’, as in a wild soap opera, until he knew that at the end of her day spent sucking on dusty brain juice, her maddening mouth would inevitably say, ‘Hey, Changez, husband or whatever you are, don't you know any more about that politician geezer that got thrown into jail?’
In turn he made the polite mistake of asking her what she believed socially and politically.
One morning she laid the Prison Notebooks of Gramsci on his chest, not realizing that his addiction to paperbacks wasn't entirely undiscriminating.
‘Why haven't you read this if you're so interested?’ she challenged him weeks later.
‘Because I prefer to hear it from your mouth.’
And he did want to hear it from her mouth.
He wanted to watch his wife's mouth move because it was a mouth he'd come to appreciate more and more.
It was a mouth he wanted to get to know.
One day, while we were roaming around junk shops and the Paperback Exchange, Changez took my arm and forced me to face  him, which was never a pleasant sight.
He made himself say to me at last, after weeks of dithering like a frightened diver on a rock, ‘D'you think my Jammie will ever go in bed with me?
She is my wife, after all.
I am suggesting no illegality.
Please, you've known her all your life, what is your true and honest estimation of my chances in this respect?’
‘Your wife?
In bed with you?’
‘Yes.’
‘No chance.’
‘What?’
‘No way, Changez.’
He couldn't accept it.
I elaborated.
‘She wouldn't touch you with asbestos gloves on.’
‘Why?
Please be frank, as you have been until now on every other matter.
Even vulgar, Karim, which is your wont.’
‘You're too ugly for her.’
‘Really?
My face?’
‘Your face.
Your body.
The whole lot.
Yuk.’
‘Yes?’
At that moment I glimpsed myself in a shop window and was pleased with what I saw.
I had no job, no education, and no prospects, but I looked pretty good, oh yes.
‘Jamila's a quality person, you know that.’
‘I would like to have children with my wife.’
I shook my head.
‘Out of the question.’
This children issue was not trivial for Changez the Bubble.
There had been a horrible incident recently which must have remained on his mind.
Anwar asked Changez and me to wash the floor of the shop, thinking that perhaps I could successfully supervise him.
Surely this couldn't go wrong?
I was doing the scrubbing and Changez was miserably holding the bucket in the deserted shop and asking me if I had any more Harold Robbins novels he could borrow.
Then Anwar turned up and stood there watching us work.
Finally he made up his mind about something: he asked Changez about Jamila and how she was.
He asked Changez if Jamila was ‘expecting’.
‘Expecting what?’ said Changez.
‘My bloody grandson!’ said Anwar.
Changez said nothing, but shuffled backwards, away from the fire of Anwar's blazing contempt, which was fuelled by bottomless disappointment.
‘Surely,’ said Anwar to me, ‘surely there must be something between this donkey's legs?’
At this Changez started to explode from the centre of his vast stomach.
Waves of anger jolted through him and his face seemed suddenly magnified while it flattened like a jellyfish.
Even his bad arm visibly throbbed, until Bubble's whole body shuddered with fury and humiliation and incomprehension.
He shouted, ‘Yes, there is more between this donkey's legs than there is between that donkey's ears!’
And he lunged at Anwar with a carrot that was Lying to hand.
Jeeta, who had heard everything, rushed over.
Some strength or recklessness seemed to have been released in her by recent events; she had increased as Anwar had diminished.
Her nose had become beaked and hawked, too.
Now she placed the obstacle of her nose between Anwar and Changez so that neither could get at the other.
And she gave Anwar a mouthful.
I'd never heard her speak like this before.
She was fearless.
She could have shrivelled Gulliver with her breath.
Anwar turned and went away, cursing.
She sent Changez and me out.
Now Bubble, who hadn't had much time to reflect on his England-experience, was obviously starting to think over his position.
Conjugal rights were being denied him; human rights were being suspended at times; unnecessary inconvenience was happening everywhere; abuse was flying around his head like a spit-shower — and he was an important man from a considerable Bombay family!
What was going on?
Action would be taken!
But first things first.
Changez was searching in his pockets for something.
He eventually hoiked out a piece of paper with a phone-number on it.
‘In that case —
‘In what case?’
‘Of the ugliness you so helpfully mention.
There is something I must do.’
Changez telephoned someone.
It was very mysterious.
Then I had to take him to a big detached house divided into flats.
An old woman opened the door — she seemed to be expecting him — and as he went in he turned and instructed me to wait.
So I stood around like a fool for twenty minutes.
When he emerged I saw behind him at the door a small, black-haired, middle-aged Japanese woman in a red kimono.
‘Her name is Shinko,’ he told me happily as we walked back to the flat.
The tail of Changez's shirt was sticking out of his unbuttoned fly like a small white flag.
I decided not to inform him of this.
‘A prostitute, eh?’
‘Don't be not-nice!
A friend now.
Another friend in unfriendly cold England for me!’
He looked at me with joy.
‘She did business as described to the T by Harold Robbins!
Karim, all my entire problems are solved!
I can love my wife in the usual way and I can love Shinko in the unusual way!
Lend me a pound, will you, please?
I want to buy Jamila some chocolates!’
All this messing around with Changez I enjoyed, and I soon considered him part of my family, a permanent part of my life.
But I had a real family to attend to — not Dad, who was preoccupied, but Mum.
I rang her every day, but I hadn't seen her during the time I'd been living at Eva's; I couldn't face any of them in that house.
When I did decide to go to Chislehurst, the streets were quiet and uninhabited after South London, as if the area had been evacuated.
The silence was ominous; it seemed piled up and ready to fall on me.
Practically the first thing I saw when I got off the train and walked along those roads again was Hairy Back and his dog, the Great Dane.
Hairy Back was smoking his pipe and laughing with a neighbour as he stood at his gate.
I crossed the road and walked back to examine him.
How could he stand there so innocently when he'd abused me?
I suddenly felt nauseous with anger and humiliation — none of the things I'd felt at the time.
I didn't know what to do.
A powerful urge told me to return to the station and get on the train back to Jamila's place.
So I stood there for at least five minutes, watching Hairy Back and wondering which way to go.
But how could I have explained my actions to Mum, having promised to turn up and see her?
I had to carry on walking.
I knew it did me good to be reminded of how much I loathed the suburbs, and that I had to continue my journey into London and a new life, ensuring I got away from people and streets like this.
Mum had taken to her bed in Jean's place on the day she left our house, and she hadn't got up since.
But Ted was OK: I was looking forward to seeing him.
He had completely changed, Allie told me; Ted had lost his life in order to find it.
So Ted was Dad's triumph; he really was someone Dad had freed.
Uncle Ted had done absolutely nothing since the day Dad exorcized him as he sat with a record-player in his lap.
Now Ted didn't have a bath or get up until eleven o'clock, when he read the paper until the pubs were open.
The afternoons he spent out on long walks or in South London attending classes on meditation.
In the evenings he refused to talk — this was a vow of silence — and once a week he fasted for a day.
He was happy, or happier, apart from the fact that nothing in life had much meaning for him.
But at least he recognized this now and was looking into it.
Dad had told him to ‘explore’ this.
Dad also told Ted that meaning could take years to emerge, but in the meantime he should live in the present, enjoy the sky, trees, flowers and the taste of good food, and perhaps fix a few things in Eva's house — maybe Dad's bedside light and tape-recorder — if he needed any practical therapy.
Ted said he'd go fishing if he needed therapy.
Anything too technical might catapult him into orbit again.
‘When I see myself,’ Ted said, ‘I am Lying in a hammock, just swinging, just swinging.’
Ted's whole hammock behaviour, his conversion to Ted-Buddhism, as Dad called it, incensed Auntie Jean.
She wanted to cut down his swinging hammock.
‘She's wild with him,’ said Mum, with relish.
This fight between Ted and Jean seemed to be her life's single pleasure, and who could blame her?
Jean raged and argued, and even went so far as to attempt tenderness in her effort to get Ted back to ordinary but working unhappiness.
After all, they now had no income.
Ted used to boast, ‘I've got ten men under me,’ and now he had none.
There was nothing under him but thin air and the abyss of bankruptcy.
But Ted just smiled and said, ‘This is my last chance to be happy.
I can't muff it, Jeanie.’
Once Auntie Jean did rip through to raw feeling by mentioning the numerous virtues of her former Tory boy, but Ted retaliated by saying (one evening during his vow of silence), ‘That boy soon saw the light as far as you're concerned, didn't he?’
When I got to the house Ted was singing a pub song and he practically bundled me into a cupboard to discuss his favourite subject — Dad.
‘How's yer father?’ he said in a great whisper.
‘Happy?’
He went on dreamily, as if he were speaking of some Homeric adventure.
‘He just upped and went off with that posh woman.
It was incredible.
I don't blame him.
I envy him!
We all want to do it, don't we?
Just cut and run.
But who does it?
No one— 'cept your dad.
I'd like to see him.
Discuss it in detail.
But it's against the law in this house to see him.
You can't even talk about it.’
As Auntie Jean entered the hall from the living room Ted pressed a finger to his lips.
‘Don't say a word.’
'About what, Uncle?’ 'About any bloody thing!’
Even today Auntie Jean was straight-backed and splendid in high heels and a dark-blue dress with a diamond brooch in the shape of a diving fish pinned to her front.
Her nails were perfect little bright shells.
She shone so brightly she could have been freshly painted; you were afraid that if you touched her you'd smudge something.
She seemed ready to attend one of those cocktail parties where she smeared her lips on cheeks and glasses and cigarettes and napkins and biscuits and cocktail sticks until barely a foot of the room was not decorated in red.
But there were no more parties in that house of the half-dead, just the old place containing one transformed and one broken person.
Jean was tough and liked to drink; she would endure for a long while yet.
But what would she do when she realized that, with things as they were, she was on a life sentence, not just a temporary suspension of essential pleasure?
‘It's you, is it?’ said Auntie Jean.
‘I s'pose it is, yeah.’
‘Where've you been?’
‘At college.
That's why I stay other places.
To be near college.’
‘Oh yes, I bet.
Pull the other one, Karim.’
‘Allie's here, isn't he?’
She turned away.
‘Allie's a good boy, but he dresses up a lot, doesn't he?’
‘Yeah, he was always one for the outré .’
‘He's changing his clothes three times a day.
It's girlish.’
‘Very girlish.’
‘I think he plucks his eyebrows too,’ she said firmly.
‘Well, he's hairy, Auntie Jean.
That's why they all call him Coconut at school.’
‘Men are supposed to be hairy, Karim.
Hirsuteness is a characteristic of real men.’
‘You've been a big detective lately, haven't you, Auntie Jean?
Have you thought of applying for the police force?’
I said, as I went upstairs.
Good old Allie, I thought to myself.
I never bothered much about Allie, and most of the time I forgot I  even had a brother.
I didn't know him very well and I despised him for being well behaved and creeping around telling stories about me.
I kept away from him so the rest of the family wouldn't find out what I was up to.
But for once I was grateful he was around, both as company for Mum and as an irritant for Auntie Jean.
I'm probably not compassionate or anything, I bet I'm a real bastard inside and don't care for anyone, but I fucking hated treading up those stairs to Mum, especially with Jean at the bottom watching my every step.
She probably had nothing else to do.
‘If you was down here,’ she said, ‘I'd bloody slap you for your cheek.’
‘What cheek?’
‘The bloody cheek you've got inside of you.
All of it.’
‘Shut up, will you,’ I said.
‘Karim.’
She nearly strangled on her own anger.
‘Karim!’
‘Get lost, Auntie Jean,’ I said.
‘Buddhist bastard,’ she replied.
‘Buddhists, the lot of you.’
I went in to Mum.
I could hear Auntie Jean shouting at me but I couldn't make out anything she was saying.
Auntie Jean's spare room, in which Mum lay curled up in her pink nightie, her hair unbrushed, had one entire wall made of mirrored cupboards which were stuffed with old but glittering evening dresses from the perfumed days.
Beside the bed were Ted's golf clubs and several pairs of dusty golfing shoes.
They'd cleared nothing away for her.
Allie told me on the phone that Ted fed her, coming in and saying,''Ere, Marge, have a nice bit of fish with some bread and butter.’
But he ended up eating it himself.
I was reluctant to kiss my mother, afraid that somehow her weakness and unhappiness would infect me.
Naturally I didn't think for a minute that my life and spirit could stimulate her.
We sat for a while, saying little, until I started into a description of Changez's ‘specials’, his camp-bed and the bizarre spectacle of a man falling in love with his wife.
But Mum soon lost interest.
If other people's unhappiness couldn't cheer her up, nothing would.
Her mind had turned to glass, and all life slid from its sheer aspect.
I asked her to draw me.
‘No, Karim, not today,’ she sighed.
I went on and on at her: draw me, draw me, draw me, Mummy!
I railed against her.
I was pretty angry and everything.
I didn't want  her to give herself over to the view of life that underlay all this, the philosophy that pinned her to the shadow-corners of the world.
For Mum, life was fundamentally hell.
You went blind, you got raped, people forgot your birthday, Nixon got elected, your husband fled with a blonde from Beckenham, and then you got old, you couldn't walk and you died.
Nothing good could come of things here below.
While this view could equally have generated stoicism, in Mum's case it led to self-pity.
So I was surprised when at last she started to draw me, her hand moving lightly over the page once more, her eyes flickering with some interest at last .
I sat there as still as I could.
When she pulled herself out of bed and went to the bathroom, instructing me not to look at the sketch, I got the chance to examine it.
‘Sit still,’ she moaned, when she'd returned and started again.
‘I can't get your eyes right.’
How could I make her understand?
Maybe I should say nothing.
But I was a rationalist.
‘Mum,’ I said.
‘You've been looking at me, your eldest son, Karim.
But that picture — and it's a great picture, not too hairy — is of Dad, isn't it?
That's his big nose and double chin.
Those bags under his eyes are his suitcases — not mine.
Mum, that's just not anything like my face.’
‘Well, dear, fathers and sons come to resemble each other, don't they?’
And she gave me a significant look.
‘You both left me, didn't you?’
‘I haven't left you,’ I said.
‘I'm here whenever you need me.
I'm studying, that's all.’
‘Yes, I know what you're studying.’
It's funny how often my family were sarcastic about me and the things I was doing.
She said, ‘I'm all on my own.
No one loves me.’
‘Yes they do.’
‘No, no one helps me.
No one does anything to help me.’
‘Mum, I love you,’ I said.
‘Even if I don't act like it all the time.’
‘No,’ she said.
I kissed her and held her and tried to get out of the house without saying goodbye to anyone.
I crept downstairs and was outside and successfully making for the front gate when Ted sprinted around the side of the house and grabbed me.
He must have been lurking, waiting.
‘Tell yer dad we all appreciate what 'e's done.
He's done a big bucketful for me!’
‘All right, I'll do that,’ I said, pulling away.
‘Don't forget.’
‘No, no.’
I almost ran back to South London, to Jamila's place.
I made myself a pot of mint tea and sat silently at the living-room table.
My mind was in turmoil.
I tried to distract myself by concentrating on Jamila.
She sat at her desk as usual, her face illuminated by the cheap reading light beside her.
A big jar of purple wild flowers and eucalyptus stood on the top of a pile of library books.
When you think of the people you adore there are usually moments you can choose — afternoons, whole weeks, perhaps — when they are at their best, when youth and wisdom, beauty and poise combine perfectly.
And as Jamila sat there humming and reading, absorbed, with Changez's eyes also poring over her as he lay on his bed surrounded by ‘specials’ covered in fluff, with cricket magazines and half-eaten packets of biscuits around him, I felt this was Jamila's ultimate moment of herselfness.
I, too, could have sat there like a fan watching an actress, like a lover watching his beloved, content not to be thinking about Mum and what we could do about her.
Is there anything you can do about anyone?
Changez let me finish my tea; my anxiety dissipated a little.
Then he looked at me.
‘OK?’ he said.
‘OK what?’
Changez dragged his body from his camp-bed like someone trying to walk with five footballs under their arms.
‘Come on.’
He pulled me into the tiny kitchen.
‘Listen, Karim,’ he whispered.
‘I must go out this afternoon.’
‘Yeah?’
‘Yes.’
He tried to move his pompous features significantly.
Whatever he did gave me pleasure.
Irritating him was one of the guaranteed delights of my life.
‘Go out, then,’ I said.
‘There's no guard stopping you, is there?’
‘Shhh.
Out with my friend Shinko,’ he said confidentially.
‘She's taking me to the Tower of London.
Then there's new positions I've been reading about,yaar .
Pretty wild and all, with the woman on her  knees.
The man behind.
So you stay here and keep Jamila distracted.’
‘Distract Jamila?’
I laughed.
‘Bubble, she doesn't care if you're here or not.
She doesn't care where you are.’
‘What?’
‘Why should she, Changez?’
‘OK, OK,’ he said defensively, backing away.
‘I see.’
I went on needling him.
‘Speaking of positions, Changez, Anwar has been in the asking-after-your-health-position recently.’
Fear and dismay came instantly into Changez's face.
It was heaven to see.
This wasn't his favourite subject.
‘You look shit-scared, Changez.’
‘That fucker, my father-in-law, will ruin my erection for the whole day,’ he said.
‘I better scoot.’
But I secured him by his stump and went on.
‘I'm sick of him whining to me about you.
You've got to do something about it.’
‘That bastard, what does he think I am, his servant?
I'm not a shopkeeper.
Business isn't my best side,yaar , not my best.
I'm the intellectual type, not one of those uneducated immigrant types who come here to slave all day and night and look dirty.
Tell him to remember that.’
‘OK, I'll tell him.
But I warn you, he's going to write to your father and brother and tell them what a completely fat lazy arse you are, Changez.
I'm telling you this with authority because he's made me typing monitor in the matter.’
He grasped my arm.
Alarm tightened his features.
‘For Christ's sake, no!
Steal the letter if you can.
Please.’
‘I'll do what I can, Changez, because I love you as a brother.’
‘Me too, eh?’ he said affectionately.
It was hot, and I lay naked on my back with Jamila beside me on the bed.
I'd opened all the windows in the flat, drenching the atmosphere in car fumes and the uproar of the unemployed arguing in the street.
Jamila asked me to touch her and I rubbed her between the legs with Vaseline according to her instructions, like ‘Harder’ and ‘More effort, please’and ‘Yes, but you're making love not cleaning your teeth.’
With my nose tickling her ear I asked, ‘Don't you care for Changez at all?’
I think she was surprised that such a question could occur to me.
‘He's sweet, Changez, it's true, the way he grunts with satisfaction  as he reads, and bumbles around the place asking me if I want some keema.
But I was compelled to marry him.
I don't want him here.
I don't see why I should care for him as well.’
‘What if he loves you, Jammie?’
She sat up and looked at me.
She thrust her hands at me and said passionately, ‘Karim, this world is full of people needing sympathy and care, oppressed people, like our people in this racist country, who face violence every day.
It is them I sympathize with, not my husband.
In fact, he irritates me intensely sometimes.
Fire Eater, the man's barely alive at all!
It's pathetic!’
But as I painted her stomach and breasts in the little kisses I knew she loved, biting and nibbling her all over, trying to relax her, she was still pondering on Changez.
She said, ‘Basically he's just a parasitical, sexually frustrated man.
That's what I think of him when I think of him at all.’
‘Sexually frustrated?
But that's where he's gone now.
To see his regular whore!
Shinko, she's called.’
‘No!
Really?
Is it true?’
‘Of course.’
‘Tell me, tell me!’
So I told her about Changez's patron saint, Harold Robbins, about Shinko, and about the positions problem.
This made us want to try numerous positions ourselves, as Shinko and Changez were no doubt doing as we spoke.
Later, as we held each other, she said, ‘But what about you, Karim?
You're sad, aren't you?’
I was sad, it was true.
How could I not be when I thought of Mum Lying there in that bed day after day, completely wrecked by Dad having run off with another woman?
Would she ever recover?
She had great qualities, Mum, of charm and kindness and general decency, but would anyone ever appreciate them and not hurt her?
Then Jammie said, ‘What are you going to do with your life now you've stopped going to college?’
‘What?
But I haven't stopped going.
I just don't turn up for lectures that often.
Let's not talk about it, it makes me depressed.
What will you do now?’
She became fervent.
‘Oh me, but I'm not hanging around, though it may look like it.
I'm really preparing for something.
I just don't know what it is yet.
I just feel I have to know certain things and that one day they will be of great use to me in understanding the world.’
We made love again, and we must have been tired, because it can't have been less than two hours later that I woke up.
I was shivering.
Jamila was fast asleep with a sheet over her lower half.
In a fog I crawled out of bed to pick up a blanket which had fallen on the floor, and as I did so I glanced through into the living room and made out, in the darkness, Changez Lying on his camp-bed watching me.
His face was expressionless; grave if anything, but mostly vacant.
He looked as if he'd been Lying there on his stomach for quite a while.
I shut the bedroom door and dressed hurriedly, waking Jamila.
I'd often wondered what I'd do in such a position, but it was simple.
I scuttled out of the flat without looking at my friend, leaving husband and wife to each other and feeling I'd betrayed everyone — Changez, Mum and Dad, and myself.
CHAPTER EIGHT
‘You do nothing,’ said Dad.
‘You're a bloody bum.
You're destroying yourself wantonly, d'you know that?
It sickens my whole heart.’
‘Don't shout at me, I can't stand it.’
‘I've got to, boy, to get it into your thick head.
How did you manage to fail all those exams?
How is it possible to fail every single one?’
‘It's easy.
You don't show up for any of them.’
‘Is that what you did?’
‘Yes.’
‘But why, Karim, especially as you pretended to me you were going off to take the damn exams.
You left the house so full of the confidence I gave you.
Now I see why,’ he said bitterly.
‘How could you do it?’
‘Because I'm not in the right mood for studying.
I'm too disturbed by all the stuff that's happening.
You leaving Mum and all.
It's a big deal.
It affects my life.’
‘Don't blame me if you've ruined your life,’ he said.
But his eyes filled with tears.
‘Why?
Why?
Why?
Don't interfere, Eva,’ he said, as she came into the room, alarmed by our shouting.
‘This boy is a complete dead loss.
So what will you do, eh?’
‘I want to think.’
‘Think, you bloody fool!
How can you think when you haven't got any brains?’
I knew this would happen; I was almost prepared for it.
But this contempt was like a typhoon blowing away all my resources and possessions.
I felt lower than I'd ever felt before.
And then Dad ignored me.
I couldn't sleep at Jamila's place any more for fear of having to face Changez.
So I had to see Dad every day and have him deplore me.
I don't know why he took it so fucking personally.
Why did it have to bother him so much?
It was as if he saw us as having one life between us.
I was the second half, an extension of him, and instead of complementing him I'd thrown shit all over him.
So it was a big cheering surprise when I opened the front door of  Eva's house one day to find Uncle Ted standing there in his green overalls, a bag of tools hanging from his fist, smiling all over his chopped face.
He strode into the hall and started to peer expertly at the walls and ceiling.
Eva came out and greeted him as though he were an artist returning from barren exile, Rimbaud from Africa.
She took his hands and they looked into each other 's eyes.
Eva had heard from Dad what a poet among builders Ted was.
How he'd changed and refused to go on and now was wasting his talent.
This alerted Eva, and she arranged for them all to go out for supper.
Later they went to a jazz club in the King's Road — Uncle Ted had never seen black walls before — where Eva slyly said to Dad, ‘I think it's about time we moved to London, don't you?’
‘I like the quiet of Beckenham, where no one bothers your balls,’ said Dad, thinking that that was the end of the matter, as it would have been had he been talking to Mum.
But business was going on.
Between jazz sets Eva made Ted an offer: come and make my house beautiful, Ted, we'll play swing records and drink margheritas at the same time.
It won't be like doing a job.
Ted jumped at the chance to work with Eva and Dad, partly out of nosiness — to see what freedom had made of Dad, and could perhaps make of Ted — and partly out of the returning appetite for labour.
But he still had to break the news to Auntie Jean.
That was the difficult bit.
Auntie Jean went into turmoil.
Here was work, paid work, weeks of it, and Ted was delighted to do it.
He was ready to start, except that the employer was Jean's enemy, a terrible, man-stealing, mutilated woman.
Jean pondered on it for a day while we held our breath.
Finally she solved the problem by agreeing to let Ted do it provided none of us told Mum and as long as Ted gave Jean a full report at the end of each day on what precisely was going on between Dad and Eva.
We agreed to these conditions, and tried to think of salacious things for Ted to tell Jean.
Eva knew what she wanted: she wanted the whole house transformed, every inch of it, and she wanted energetic, industrious people around her.
We got down to it immediately.
With relief, I abandoned any pretence at being clever and became a mystic assistant labourer.
I did the carrying and loading and smashing, Eva did the thinking, and Ted ensured her instructions were carried out.
Dad fastidiously avoided the whole muck of building, once spitting  an Arab curse at us: ‘May you have the builders.’
Ted replied with an obscurity he thought would delight Dad.
‘Haroon, I'm kissing the joy as it flies,’ he said, laying into a wall with a hammer.
The three of us worked together excellently, elated and playful.
Eva had become eccentric: when a decision was needed Ted and I often had to wait while she retired upstairs and meditated on the exact shape of the conservatory or the dimensions of the kitchen.
The way forward would emerge from her unconscious.
This was not wildly different, I suppose, to what went on in a book I was reading, Edmund Gosse's Father and Son, in which the father would pray before any crucial decision and await God's direction.
Before lunch Eva had us traipse out into the garden, where we bent and stretched, and sat with our backs straight, and breathed through alternate nostrils before we ate our salads and fruit.
Ted went in for it all with great, childlike alacrity.
He took to the Cobra position as if it had been designed for him.
Unlike me, he seemed to enjoy appearing foolish, thinking he had become a new, open person.
Eva encouraged us to play, but she was a shrewd boss too.
We laboured for her because we liked her, but she tolerated no lazy work: she was a perfectionist and she had taste, insisting on only the best materials, which was unusual in the suburbs, where Victorian or Edwardian houses were generally smashed open and stripped bare, only to be filled with chipboard and Formica.
Finally the house was painted white, every room.
‘White is the only colour for a house,’ Eva announced.
There were polished dark wood floors and green blinds.
Heavy wrought-iron black fireplaces were installed once more, to Ted's irritation, as he'd spent much of his working life tearing out fireplaces so women like my mother didn't have to get up early on freezing mornings to make up the fire on their knees.
When Auntie Jean slammed Uncle Ted's tea on the table at the end of each day — a meat pie and chips, or a nice bit of rump steak and tartar sauce (he hadn't the nerve yet to go vegetarian)— she sat opposite him with a stiff drink and demanded facts about Eva and Dad.
‘So what did you tell her last night, Uncle Ted?’
I'd ask him the next day as we worked.
But what was there to tell?
I couldn't imagine Ted contemplating the nature of Eva and Dad's taut happiness or telling of how they were always trying to pull  each other 's tracksuit bottoms down and playing games like seeing who could throw a lolly-stick in a bin the most times out of ten.
Perhaps he was more specific, speaking of what he usually saw when he came to work in the morning — Eva in her blue silk pyjamas and red robe shouting and laughing and giving orders to me for breakfast, and reading aloud from the papers.
In the old days Mum and Dad took the Daily Mirror , that was all.
Eva liked to sprinkle the house with about five papers and three magazines a day, skimming over Vogue and the New Statesman and the Daily Express before dumping the lot into the wastepaper basket beside the bed.
Perhaps Ted told Jean of the walks the four of us took when Eva got tired of working; and the time Eva's feet hurt and she hailed a cab — absolute Roman decadence for Dad, Ted and me.
We took a two-hour tour of South London with Eva drinking Guinness and hanging out the window cheering as we passed down the Old Kent Road, stopping beside the famous site of Dr Lal's surgery and the dance hall of love, where Mum met Dad and fell.
But I doubted if Ted could say anything about all this joy and good times.
It wouldn't be what Jean would want to hear.
It wouldn't be of any use to her.
Obviously Ted and I weren't always around to scrutinize the intricate excitements of this new love, especially as Dad and Eva spent many evenings over the river in London proper, going to the theatre to see controversial plays, to German films or to lectures by Marxists, and to high-class parties.
Eva's old friend Shadwell was starting to make his way as a theatre director, working as an assistant at the Royal Shakespeare Company, running workshops on Beckett and putting on plays by Artaud and new writers at fringe venues.
Eva helped Shadwell out by designing one of these productions and making the costumes.
This she loved, and it led to her, Dad and Shadwell going to dinners and parties with all kinds of (fairly) important people — not the sort we knew in the suburbs, but the real thing: people who really did write and direct plays and not just talk about it.
Eva wanted to do more of this; she discussed furnishings and house decoration with the better-off ones — they were always buying new places in the country, these people, and she knew how to make herself useful.
How smart and glamorous they looked when they went off to London in the evenings, Dad in his suits and Eva with shawls and hats and expensive shoes and handbags.
They glowed with happiness.
And I'd walk around the empty house, or ring Mum for a chat; sometimes I'd lie on the floor in Charlie's attic and wonder what he was doing and what kind of good time he was having.
Dad and Eva would come back late, and I'd get up to see them and hear, as they undressed, who'd said what to whom about the latest play, or novel, or sex-scandal.
Eva would drink champagne and watch television in bed, which shocked me, and at least once a week she said she was determined to take us all to London for good.
And Dad would talk about the play and say how the writer wasn't a patch on Chekhov.
Chekhov was Dad's favourite all-time writer, and he always said Chekhov's plays and stories reminded him of India.
I never understood this until I realized he meant that his characters' uselessness, indolence and longing were typical of the adults he knew when he was a child.
But one subject Jean and Ted must have discussed was money.
It was even bothering me.
We were haemorrhaging money on the house.
Unlike Mum, who took scarcity for granted, Eva bought whatever she wanted.
If she went into a shop and something caught her eye — a book of Matisse drawings, a record, Yin and Yang earrings, a Chinese hat — she bought it immediately.
There was none of the agonizing and guilt over money we all went through.
‘I deserve it,’ she always said.
‘I was unhappy before with my husband, and I won't be unhappy again.’
Nothing would stop her.
When I mentioned this profligacy to her one day as we were painting side by side, she dismissed me, saying, ‘When we run out of money I'll get us some more.’
‘Where from, Eva?’
‘Haven't you noticed, Karim, the world's full of money!
Haven't you noticed it sloshing around the country?’
‘Yeah, I noticed it, Eva, but none of it's sloshing against our house.’
‘When we need it I'll draw some of it over here.’
‘She's right,’ said Dad, somewhat magisterially, when I went to him later and told him what she'd said, trying to make him see how demented it was.
‘You have to be in the correct frame of mind to draw masses of money to you.’
Coming from someone who'd obviously never been in the right frame of mind magnetically to attach anything but his salary to himself — money Anwar always referred to as ‘unearned income’— this seemed a bit rich.
But love and Eva had unrolled the carpet of Dad's confidence, along which he now ebulliently danced.
They made me feel conservative.
Dad started doing guru gigs again, once a week in the house, on Taoism and meditation, like before except that this time Eva insisted people paid to attend.
Dad had a regular and earnest young crowd of head-bowers — students, psychologists, nurses, musicians — who adored him, some of whom rang and visited late at night in panic and fear, so dependent were they on his listening kindness.
There was a waiting list to join his group.
For these meetings I had to hoover the room, light the incense, greet the guests like a head waiter and serve them Indian sweets.
Eva also insisted on Dad improving the service: she got him to consult esoteric library books early in the morning before work and asked him at breakfast, in a voice which must once have enquired of Charlie if he'd done his technical-drawing homework, ‘And what did you learn this morning?’
Eva knew a man on the local paper, the same co-operative journalist who got Charlie on the front page of the Bromley and Kentish Times, and he interviewed Dad.
Dad was photographed in his red waistcoat and Indian pyjamas sitting on a gold cushion.
His commuter companions were impressed by this sudden fame, and Dad told me delightedly how they pointed him out to each other on Platform Two.
To be recognized for some achievement in life lifted Dad immensely; before Eva he had begun to see himself as a failure and his life as a dismal thing.
But the office, where he was an unelevated lazy Indian who had run away from his wife and children, there was disapproval from the clerks he worked with: there was mockery behind his back and in front of his face.
On the picture in the newspaper a bubble was drawn protruding from his mouth saying, ‘Dark mystery of life solved by dark charlatan — at taxpayers’ expense.’
Dad talked about leaving his job.
Eva said he could do what he liked; she would support them both — on love, presumably.
I doubted whether Ted spoke to Auntie Jean of this, or of the other manifestations of love that filled our hours — of Eva, for example, imitating the numerous grunts, sighs, snorts and moans which punctuated Dad's conversation.
Ted and I discovered her once in the ripped-out kitchen running through a symphony of his noises  like a proud mother reproducing the first words of a child.
Dad and Eva could discuss the most trivial things, like the nature of the people Dad met on the train, for hours, until I had to shout at them, ‘What the fuck are you talking about!’
They'd look at me in surprise, so enthralled had they been.
I suppose it didn't matter what they said; the words themselves were a caress, an exchange of flowers and kisses.
And Eva couldn't leave the house without returning and saying, ‘Hey, Haroon, I found something you might like’— a book on Japanese gardens, a silk scarf, a Waterman's pen, an Ella Fitzgerald record and, once, a kite.
Watching this, I was developing my own angry theories of love.
Surely love had to be something more generous than this high-spirited egotism-à-deux?
In their hands love seemed a narrow-eyed, exclusive, selfish bastard, to enjoy itself at the expense of a woman who now lay in bed in Auntie Jean's house, her life unconsidered.
Mum's wretchedness was the price Dad had chosen to pay for his happiness.
How could he have done it?
To be fair to him, it was a wretchedness that haunted him.
He and Eva argued about this: she thought him indulgent.
But how could it honestly be otherwise?
There were occasions when we were watching TV or just eating when waves of regret rippled across his face.
Regret and guilt and pain just overwhelmed him.
How badly he'd treated Mum, he told us.
How much she'd given him, cared for him, loved him, and now he was sitting in Eva's house all cosy and radiant and looking forward to bed.
‘I feel like a criminal,’ he confessed innocently to Eva once, in a moment of forgetfulness, truth unfortunately sneaking through.
‘You know, someone living happily on money he's committed grievous bodily harm to obtain.’
Eva couldn't help herself crying out at him, and he couldn't see how suddenly and cruelly he'd wounded her.
She was being unreasonable.
‘But you don't want her!
You weren't right for each other!
You stultified each other.
Weren't you together long enough to know that?’
‘I could have done more,’ he said.
‘Made more effort to care.
She didn't deserve to be hurt so.
I don't believe in people leaving people.’
‘This guilt and regret will ruin us!’
‘It is part of me —‘
‘Please, please, clear it out of your mind.’
But how could he clear it out?
It lay on him like water on a tin roof, rusting and rotting and corroding day after day.
And though he was never to make such almost innocent remarks again, and though Eva and Dad continued to want to make love all the time, and I caught her giggling while she did idiotic things with him, like snipping the hair in his ears and nostrils with a huge pair of scissors, there were looks that escaped all possible policing, looks that made me think he was capable only of a corrupted happiness.
Perhaps it was in the hope of siphoning off this water that she put the beautiful white Ted-decorated house on the market as soon as it was finished.
She'd decided to take Dad away.
She would look for a flat in London.
The suburbs were over: they were a leaving place.
Perhaps Eva thought a change of location would stop him thinking about Mum.
Once the three of us were in Eva's car in the High Street and Dad started to cry in the back.
‘What is it?’
I said.
‘What's happened?’
‘It was her,’ he replied.
‘I thought I saw your mother go into a shop.
And she was alone.
I don't want her to be alone.’
Dad didn't speak to Mum on the phone, and he didn't see her, knowing that this was for the best in the long run.
Yet he had photographs of her in every jacket pocket, and they fell out of books at the wrong time and upset Eva; and when he asked me about Mum, Dad and I had to go into another room, away from Eva, as if we were discussing something disgraceful.
In packing up the house and moving us to London, Eva was also in pursuit of Charlie, who was only rarely around now.
For him too, it was obviously true that our suburbs were a leaving place, the start of a life.
After that you ratted or rotted.
Charlie liked to sleep here and there, owning nothing, living nowhere permanent, screwing whoever he could; sometimes he even rehearsed and wrote songs.
He lived this excess not yet in despair but in the excitement of increasing life.
Occasionally I'd get up in the morning and there he'd be in the kitchen, eating furiously, as if he didn't know where his next grub was coming from, as if each day was an adventure that could end anywhere.
And then he'd be gone.
Dad and Eva travelled to all Charlie's gigs, at art colleges, in pubs and at small festivals in muddy fields, Eva writhing and cheering all  through them, beer in hand.
Dad blinked at the back, disturbed by the noise and the crowd, the wild St Vitus dancing over young inert figures comatose in puddles of beer.
He was disturbed by the grief, the stinking clothes, the bad trips, the fourteen-year-olds carted off in ambulances, the random unloving fucking and miserable escapes from family to squalid squats in Herne Hill.
He'd much rather have advised a disciple — the earnest girl Fruitbat, perhaps, or her relentlessly smiling lover, Chogyam-Jones, who dressed in what looked like a Chinese carpet; their flattery was becoming necessary.
But Dad accompanied Eva wherever she needed him.
He was certainly enjoying life more than ever before, and when Eva finally announced that we were moving to London he admitted that it was the right thing to do.
As we packed Charlie's things in the attic, Dad and I talked about Charlie's problem: the fact was he knew the band didn't have an original sound.
Their bauble was this striking singer-guitarist with exquisite cheekbones and girl's eyelashes, who was being asked to model clothes for magazines but not to play at the Albert Hall.
Failure made Charlie arrogant.
He developed the habit of carrying a book of poetry in his pocket, which he might open at any time for a swig of the sublime.
It was an enraging affectation, worthy of an Oxford undergraduate, especially as Charlie might do it in the middle of a conversation, as he had done recently at a college gig: the Union President was talking to him when Charlie's hands reached into his side pocket, the book was extracted and opened, and the man's eyes popped in disbelief as Charlie imbibed a beakerful of the warm South.
What a confused boy he was.
But from the start Eva had insisted he was talent itself, that he was beautiful and God had blown into his cock.
He was Orson Welles — at least.
Naturally, long knowledge of this divinity now pervaded his personality.
He was proud, dismissive, elusive and selectively generous.
He led others to assume that soon world-dazzling poetry would catapult from his head as it had from those of other English boys: Lennon, Jagger, Bowie.
Like Andre Gide, who when young expected people to admire him for the books he would write in the future, Charlie came to love being appreciated in several high streets for his potential.
But he earned this appreciation with his charm, which was often mistaken for ability.
He could even charm himself, I reckoned.
What was this charm?
How had it seduced me for so long?
I would have done anything for Charlie, and was, in fact, even now sorting out twenty years' worth of his possessions.
I wasn't alone in this vulnerability to him.
Many others would say yes to him before he asked for anything.
How did it work?
I'd observed the varieties of charm.
There were those who were merely ravishing, and they were the least talented.
Then there were those who were powerful, but lacked other virtues.
But at least power was self-created, unlike exquisite cheekbones.
Further on were those who were compelling to listen to; and above them were those who could make you laugh, too.
Others made you marvel at their cleverness and knowledge: this was an achievement as well as an entertainment.
Charlie had a pinch of all this; he was an all-round player.
But his strength was his ability to make you marvel at yourself.
The attention he gave you, when he gave you attention, was absolute.
He knew how to look at you as if you were the only person who'd ever interested him.
He asked about your life, and seemed to savour every moment of your conversation.
He was excellent at listening, and did it without cynicism.
The problem with this was that neurotics flocked to him.
No one else would listen to them, but Charlie had done so once, say, and they couldn't forget him; perhaps he'd fucked them too.
But Eva had to keep them away from him, saying if it was very urgent they could leave a note.
And he'd escape the house by climbing over the back fence while they waited out the front all day.
After seeing it work for so long, I began to perceive Charlie's charm as a method of robbing houses by persuading the owners to invite you in and take their possessions.
I was in no doubt: it was robbery; there were objects of yours he wanted.
And he took them.
It was false and manipulative and I admired it tremendously.
I made notes on his techniques, for they worked, especially with girls.
Ultimately none of this was innocuous.
No; Charlie was the cruellest and most lethal type of seducer.
He extorted, not only sex, but love and loyalty, kindness and encouragement, before moving on.
I too would gladly have exercised these master-skills, but there was one essential ingredient I lacked: Charlie's strong will and his massively forceful desire to possess whatever it was that took his fancy.
Make no mistake, he was unusually ambitious.
But he was getting nowhere and felt frustrated.
He could see that it was getting  late, and ultimately he was only in a rotten rock ‘n’ roll band called Mustn't Grumble which sounded like Hawkwind.
Charlie rarely saw his own father when he'd been a patient and sad character living with his mother.
But when Charlie was staying at Eva's house he spent hours with my father, to whom he told the truth.
Together they divined for Charlie's talent.
Dad drew him maps to the unconscious; he suggested routes and speeds, clothing for the journey and how to sit at the wheel when approaching the dangerous interior.
And for days and days, under the full moon of high expectation, Charlie laboured to wrench a fragment of beauty from his soul — in my view (and to my relief), to no avail.
The songs were still shit.
It took me some time to work this out, for I still had such sympathy for Charlie that I couldn't look at him coolly.
But when I had recognized his weakness — his desire to join a club called Genius — I knew I had him.
If I wanted I could take some revenge on him, which would also — some puny power — be a bitter reproach to my own pointless life.
Sometimes I told Eva I wanted to be a photographer or an actor, or perhaps a journalist, preferably a foreign correspondent in a war zone, Cambodia or Belfast.
I knew I hated authority and being ordered around.
I liked working with Ted and Eva, and they let me come and go more or less as I wished.
But my aim was to join Mustn't Grumble as a rhythm guitarist.
I could play a little, after all.
When I put this to Charlie he almost choked with laughter.
‘But there is a job that's just right for you,’ he said.
‘Oh yeah, what is it?’
‘Start Saturday,’ he said.
And he gave me a job as Mustn't Grumble's occasional roadie.
I was still a nothing, but I was in a good position to get at Charlie when the time was right.
And it was right one evening, at an art college gig where I was helping lug the gear to the van.
I'd heard Dad and Eva in the bar analysing the performance as if it were Miles Davis's farewell appearance.
Charlie strolled past me, his arm around a girl who had her tits hanging out, and he said, to make her laugh, ‘Hurry up, Karim, you great girl's blouse, you friend of Dorothy.
Bring my acid to the dressing room and don't be late.’
‘But what's the hurry?’
I said.
‘You're not going anywhere — not as a band and not as a person.’
He looked at me uncertainly, fondling and patting his hair as usual, unsure if I was joking or not.
‘What d'you mean?’
So: I had him.
He'd walked right into it.
‘What do I mean?’
‘Yeah,’ he said.
‘To go somewhere you gotta be talented, Charlie.
You got to have it upstairs.’
I tapped my forehead.
‘And on present evidence a back-door man like you hasn't got it up there.
You're a looker and everything, a face, I'll concede that.
But your work don't amaze me, and I need to be amazed.
You know me.
I need to be fucking staggered.
And I'm not fucking staggered.
Oh no.’
He looked at me for a while, thinking.
The girl dragged at his arm.
At last he said, ‘I don't know about that.
I'm breaking up the band anyway.
What you've said isn't relevant.’
Charlie turned and walked out.
The next day he disappeared again.
There were no more gigs.
Dad and I finished packing his things.
In bed before I went to sleep I fantasized about London and what I'd do there when the city belonged to me.
There was a sound that London had.
It was, I'm afraid, people in Hyde Park playing bongos with their hands; there was also the keyboard on the Doors's‘Light My Fire’.
There were kids dressed in velvet cloaks who lived free lives; there were thousands of black people everywhere, so I wouldn't feel exposed; there were bookshops with racks of magazines printed without capital letters or the bourgeois disturbance of full stops; there were shops selling all the records you could desire; there were parties where girls and boys you didn't know took you upstairs and fucked you; there were all the drugs you could use.
You see, I didn't ask much of life; this was the extent of my longing.
But at least my goals were clear and I knew what I wanted.
I was twenty.
I was ready for anything.
In the City
CHAPTER NINE
The flat in West Kensington was really only three large, formerly elegant rooms, with ceilings so high that I often gaped at the room's proportions, as if I were in a derelict cathedral.
But the ceiling was the most interesting part of the flat.
The toilet was up the hall, with a broken window through which the wind whipped directly up your arse.
The place had belonged to a Polish woman, who'd lived there as a child and then rented it to students for the past fifteen years.
When she died Eva bought it as it was, furniture included.
The rooms had ancient crusty mouldings and an iron-handled bell-pull for calling servants from the basement, now inhabited by Thin Lizzy's road manager, a man who had the misfortune, so Eva informed me, to have hair growing out of his shoulders.
The sad walls, from which all colour had faded, were covered by dark cracked mirrors and big sooty paintings which disappeared one by one when we were out, though there were no other signs of burglary.
Most puzzling of all was the fact that Eva wasn't perturbed by their disappearance.
‘Hey, I think another picture's disappeared, Eva,’ I'd say.
‘Oh yes, space for other things,’ she'd reply.
Eventually she admitted to us that Charlie was stealing them to sell and we were not to mention it.
‘At least he has initiative,’ she said.
‘Wasn't Jean Genet a thief?’
Within the three large rooms were partitions that made up other, smaller rooms, and the kitchen, which contained the bath.
It was like a student flat, a wretched and dirty gaff with lino on the floor and large white dried flowers waving from the marble fireplace.
The rooms' great spaces were interrupted by busted brown furniture.
There wasn't even a bed for me; I slept on the sofa in the front room.
Charlie, who also had nowhere to go, sometimes slept on the floor beside me.
Dad stood looking at the flat in disgust.
Eva hadn't let him see it before; she just bought it quickly when we sold the house in Beckenham and had to get out.
‘Oh my God,’ Dad groaned, ‘how have we come to live in such filth?’
He wouldn't even sit down, in case a spider jumped out of an armchair.
Eva had to cover a chair in stapled-together plastic bags before it was hygienic enough for his arse.
But Eva was happy.
‘I can really do something with this,’ she kept saying, striding around, as Dad turned pale; and there in the centre of the room she held him and kissed him again and again in case he lost his nerve and faith in her and longed to be with Mum.
‘What d'you think?’ said Dad, turning to me, his other worry.
‘I love it,’ I said, which pleased him.
‘But will it be good for him?’ he asked Eva.
Eva said yes.
‘I'll look after him,’ she added, with a smile.
The city blew the windows of my brain wide open.
But being in a place so bright, fast and brilliant made you vertiginous with possibility: it didn't necessarily help you grasp those possibilities.
I still had no idea what I was going to do.
I felt directionless and lost in the crowd.
I couldn't yet see how the city worked, but I began to find out.
West Kensington itself was made up of rows of five-storey peeling stucco houses broken up into bed-sits that were mostly occupied by foreign students, itinerants and poor people who'd lived there for years.
The District Line dived into the earth half-way along the Barons Court Road, to which it ran parallel, the trains heading for Charing Cross and then out into the East End, from where Uncle Ted had originally come.
Unlike the suburbs, where no one of note — except H. G. Wells — had lived, here you couldn't get away from VIPs.
Gandhi himself once had a room in West Kensington, and the notorious landlord Rachman kept a flat for the young Mandy Rice-Davies in the next street; Christine Keeler came for tea.
IRA bombers stayed in tiny rooms and met in Hammersmith pubs, singing ‘Arms for the IRA’ at closing time.
Mesrine had had a room by the tube station.
So this was London at last, and nothing gave me more pleasure than strolling around my new possession all day.
London seemed like a house with five thousand rooms, all different; the kick was to work out how they connected, and eventually to walk through all of them.
Towards Hammersmith was the river and its pubs, full of hollering middle-class voices; and there were the secluded gardens which fringed the river along Lower Mall and the shaded stroll along the towpath to Barnes.
This part of West London seemed like the country to me, with none of the disadvantages, no cows or farmers.
Nearby was expensive Kensington, where rich ladies shopped, and a walk from that was Earls Court, with its baby-faced male and female whores arguing and shoving each other in the pubs; there were transvestites and addicts and many disoriented people and con-merchants.
There were small hotels smelling of spunk and disinfectant, Australian travel agents, all-night shops run by dwarfish Bengalis, leather bars with fat moustached queens exchanging secret signals outside, and roaming strangers with no money and searching eyes.
In Kensington nobody looked at you.
In Earls Court everybody did, wondering what they could wrench from you.
But West Kensington was an area in between, where people stayed before moving up, or remained only because they were stuck.
It was quieter, with few shops, not one of them interesting, and restaurants which opened with optimistic flourishes and invitations but where, after a few weeks, you could see the desolate owner standing in the doorway wondering where he'd gone wrong; his eyes told you the area wasn't going to revive in his lifetime.
But Eva ignored all such eyes: this was where she reckoned she could do something.
‘This place is going places,’ she predicted, as we talked sitting around a paraffin heater, the sole source of warmth at the time, the top of which was draped with Dad's drying underpants.
Around the corner from the flat was a roaring famous bar and house of fights and dope called the Nashville.
The front of it had oak beams and curved glass in the shape of a Wurlitzer jukebox.
Every night the new groups blew West Kensington into the air.
As Eva had known, the location of the flat would always be a draw for Charlie, and when he turned up one evening to eat and sleep I said, ‘Let's go to the Nashville.’
He looked at me warily and then nodded.
He seemed keen enough to go, to investigate the latest bands and see what was happening in music.
But there was a heaviness in his response.
Later he tried to change his mind by saying to me, ‘Don't you want to go somewhere quieter than that, where we can talk?’
Charlie had avoided concerts and gigs for months.
He was afraid of finding the London bands too good, as if he'd see a young group with such talent and promise that his own brittle hopes and aspirations would be exploded in a terrifying second of illumination and self-knowledge.
Myself, I went to the Nashville every night and reckoned that Charlie's glory in South London was the most he'd ever get.
In  London the kids looked fabulous; they dressed and walked and talked like little gods.
We could have been from Bombay.
We'd never catch up.
Predictably, I had to pay for Charlie.
I did it willingly because I still loved his company so much, but I had little money.
As property prices in London were moving upwards, Eva's shrewd plan was to decorate the flat as we had the last house, sell at a profit, and move on.
But she was still meditating for hours and waiting for the voice of the flat to inform her of its favoured colour scheme.
When word came, Ted and I would obey, and we'd get paid.
Until then I was broke and Ted was left at home reminiscing with Mum about the war and trying to stop Jean from drinking.
Charlie was soon drunk.
We were sitting in the small, side bar in the Nashville.
I noticed that he was starting to smell.
He didn't change his clothes too often, and when he did he just picked up whatever was around him — Eva's jumpers, Dad's waistcoats, and always my shirts, which he borrowed and I never saw again.
He'd crash some party, see a better shirt in the closet, change into it, and leave mine behind.
I'd started locking my shirts in a desk drawer every night, except that now I'd lost the key with all my Ben Shermans in there.
I'd been looking forward to telling Charlie how depressed and lonely I'd been since we moved to London.
But before I'd managed a single moan, Charlie pre-empted me.
‘I am suicidal,’ he announced grandly, as if he were pregnant.
He said he was circling in that round of despair where you don't care one iota what happens to you or anyone else.
A famous footballer with a famous perm was sitting next to Charlie listening to this.
The Perm was soon taking pity on Charlie, as people tended to, and Charlie was asking him about the pressures of fame as if it were something that concerned him from day to day.
‘What d'you do,’ Charlie said, ‘when the reporters won't leave you alone?
When they're outside the window every morning?’ 'It's all worth it,’the Perm replied.
‘Sometimes I run out on to the pitch with an erection, I'm so excited.’
He bought Charlie, but not me, drinks.
I wanted to get away from the Perm and talk to Charlie, but Charlie wasn't going anywhere.
Luckily I'd had some speed earlier: when I was on blues I could get through anything.
All the same I felt disappointed.
Then, just as  someone mentioned the band were preparing to go on next door, my luck changed.
I saw Charlie suddenly jerk forward and vomit in the footballer's lap, before collapsing backwards off his stool.
The Perm got excited.
After all, he did have a pond consisting of Charlie's last Chinese meal steaming in his crotch.
He'd told us earlier that he was planning on taking a woman to Tramp that night.
Anyway, the Perm leapt up and booted Charlie a couple of times in the ear with those famous feet until the heavies pulled him away.
I managed to heave Charlie into the main bar and prop him up against a wall.
He was half unconscious and trying to stop himself crying.
He knew what things had come to.
‘Take it easy,’ I told him.
‘Keep away from people tonight.’
‘I feel better, OK?’
‘Good.’
‘For the moment.’
‘OK.’
I relaxed and looked around the dark room, at the end of which was a small stage with a drum-kit and mike-stand on it.
Maybe I was just a provincial or something, but I began to see that I was among the strangest audience I'd seen in that place.
There were the usual long-hairs and burned-out heads hanging at the back in velvet trousers or dirty jeans, patchwork boots and sheepskin coats, discussing bus fares to Fez, Barclay James Harvest and bread.
That was the usual clientele, the stoned inhabitants of local squats and basements.
But at the front of the place, near the stage, there were about thirty kids in ripped black clothes.
And the clothes were full of safety-pins.
Their hair was uniformly black, and cut short, seriously short, or if long it was spiky and rigid, sticking up and out and sideways, like a handful of needles, rather than hanging down.
A hurricane would not have dislodged those styles.
The girls were in rubber and leather and wore skin-tight skirts and holed black stockings, with white face-slap and bright-red lipstick.
They snarled and bit people.
Accompanying these kids were what appeared to be three extravagant South American transvestites in dresses, rouge and lipstick, one of whom had a used tampon on a piece of string around her neck.
Charlie stirred restlessly as he leaned there.
He hugged himself in self-pity as we took in this alien race dressed with an abandonment and originality we'd never imagined possible.
I began  to understand what London meant and what class of outrage we had to deal with.
It certainly put us in proportion.
‘What is this shit?’
Charlie said.
He was dismissive, but he was slightly breathless too; there was awe in his voice.
‘Be cool, Charlie,’ I said, continuing to examine the audience.
‘Be cool?
I'm fucked.
I just got kicked in the balls by a footballer.’
'He's a famous footballer.’
‘And look at the stage,’ Charlie said.
‘What rubbish is this?
Why have you brought me out for this?’
‘D'you wanna go, then?’
‘Yes.
All this is making me feel sick.’
‘OK,’ I said.
‘Lean on my shoulder and we'll get you out of here.
I don't like the look of it either.
It's too weird.’
‘Yeah, much too weird.’
‘It's too much.’
‘Yeah.’
But before we could move the band shambled on, young kids in clothes similar to the audience.
The fans suddenly started to bounce up and down.
As they pumped into the air and threw themselves sideways they screamed and spat at the band until the singer, a skinny little kid with carroty hair, dripped with saliva.
He seemed to expect this, and merely abused the audience back, spitting at them, skidding over on to his arse once, and drinking and slouching around the stage as if he were in his living room.
His purpose was not to be charismatic; he would be himself in whatever mundane way it took.
The little kid wanted to be an anti-star, and I couldn't take my eyes off him.
It must have been worse for Charlie.
‘He's an idiot,’ Charlie said.
‘Yeah.’
‘And I bet they can't play either.
Look at those instruments.
Where did they get them, a jumble sale?’
‘Right,’ I said.
‘Unprofessional,’ he said.
When the shambolic group finally started up, the music was thrashed out.
It was more aggressive than anything I'd heard since early Who.
This was no peace and love; here were no drum solos or effeminate synthesizers.
Not a squeeze of anything ‘progressive’ or ‘experimental’came from these pallid, vicious little council estate kids with hedgehog hair, howling about anarchy and hatred.
No  song lasted more than three minutes, and after each the carrot-haired kid cursed us to death.
He seemed to be yelling directly at Charlie and me.
I could feel Charlie getting tense beside me.
I knew London was killing us as I heard, ‘Fuck off, all you smelly old hippies!
You fucking slags!
You ugly fart-breaths!
Fuck off to hell!’ he shouted at us.
I didn't look at Charlie again, until the end.
As the lights came up I saw he was standing up straight and alert, with cubes of dried vomit decorating his cheeks.
‘Let's go,’ I said.
We were numb; we didn't want to speak for fear of returning to our banal selves again.
The wild kids bundled out.
Charlie and I elbowed our way through the crowd.
Then he stopped.
‘What is it, Charlie?’
‘I've got to get backstage and talk to those guys.’
I snorted.
‘Why would they want to talk to you?’
I thought he'd hit me; but he took it well.
‘Yeah, there's no reason why they should like me,’ he said.
‘If I saw me coming into the dressing room I'd have myself kicked out.’
We walked around West Kensington eating saveloy and chips drenched in vinegar and saturated with salt.
People gathered in groups outside the burger place; others went to buy cigarettes from the Indian shop on the corner and then stood at the bus stop.
In the pubs the bar staff put the chairs upside down on the tables and shouted, ‘Hurry up now, please, thank you.’
Outside the pub people argued about where to go next.
The city at night intimidated me: the piss-heads, bums, derelicts and dealers shouted and looked for fights.
Police vans cruised, and sometimes the law leapt out on to the street to grab kids by the hair and smash their heads against walls.
The wrecked kids pissed into doorways.
Charlie was excited.
‘That's it, that's it,’ he said as we strolled.
‘That's fucking it.’
His voice was squeaky with rapture.
‘The sixties have been given notice tonight.
Those kids we saw have assassinated all hope.
They're the fucking future.’
‘Yeah, maybe, but we can't follow them,’ I said casually.
‘Why not?’
‘Obviously we can't wear rubber and safety-pins and all.
What would we look like?
Sure, Charlie.’
‘Why not, Karim?
Why not, man?’
‘It's not us.’
‘But we've got to change.
What are you saying?
We shouldn't keep up?
That suburban boys like us always know where it's at?’
‘It would be artificial,’ I said.
‘We're not like them.
We don't hate the way they do.
We've got no reason to.
We're not from the estates.
We haven't been through what they have.’
He turned on me with one of his nastiest looks.
‘You're not going anywhere, Karim.
You're not doing anything with your life because as usual you're facing in the wrong direction and going the wrong way.
But don't try and drag me down with you.
I don't need your discouragement!
Don't think I'm going to end up like you!’
‘Like me?’
I could hardly speak.
‘What am I that you hate so much?’
I managed to say.
But Charlie was looking across the street and not at me.
Four kids from the Nashville, two girls and two boys, were piling into a car.
They whooped and abused passers-by and fired water-pistols.
The next thing I saw was Charlie sprinting through the traffic towards them.
He dodged behind a bus and I thought he'd been knocked down.
When he re-emerged he was ripping his shirt off — it was my shirt, too.
At first I thought he was using it to wave at people, but then he bundled it up and threw it at a police car.
Seconds later he'd leapt into car with the kids, his bare torso on someone's lap on the front seat.
And the car took off up the North End Road before he'd got the door shut.
Charlie was away to new adventures.
I walked
A few days later Eva made an announcement.
‘Karim,’ she said.
‘Let's start working together again.
It's time.
Ring Uncle Ted.’
'Great,’ I said.
‘At last.’
But there was one thing she wanted to do first.
She had to give a flat-warming party.
There was a theory of parties she said she wanted to try out.
You invited people you thought would dislike each other and you watched them get along swingingly.
For some reason I didn't believe her when she said this; I wasn't convinced that she was being straight.
But whatever she was up to— and it was something — she spent days ticking and marking the party guest list, a thick, creamy piece of paper she kept with her at all times.
She was unusually secretive about the whole thing and had intricate conversations  with God-knows-who on the phone, and certainly wouldn't speak to Dad and me about what she was doing.
What I did know was that Shadwell was involved.
It was his contacts she was using.
They were conspirators.
She flirted with him, used him, led him on and asked him favours.
It bothered me, but Dad was unworried.
He patronized Shadwell; he wasn't threatened.
He took it for granted that people would fall in love with Eva.
But it was affecting Dad.
For instance, he wanted to invite his meditation group to the party.
Yet Eva insisted that no more than two of them come.
She didn't want the new smooth crowd to think she was mixing with a bunch of basket-weavers from Bromley.
So Chogyam-Jones and Fruitbat came, arriving an hour early, when Eva was still shaving her legs in the bath in the kitchen.
Eva tolerated them since they paid for Dad's thoughts and therefore her dinner, but when they went into the bedroom to chant I heard her say to Dad, as she put on her yellow silk blouse for that brilliant evening, ‘The future shouldn't contain too much of the past.’
Later, just as the party was starting and Eva was discussing the origin of the word ‘bohemian’ with Dad, Fruitbat pulled out a handy pad and asked if she could write down something that Dad had said.
The Buddha of suburbia nodded regally, while Eva looked as if she wanted to cut off Fruitbat's eyelids with a pair of scissors.
When this eagerly awaited party actually happened, it had been going forty minutes before Dad and I realized that we knew virtually no one there.
Shadwell seemed to know everyone.
He was standing at the door, greeting people as they came in, simpering and giggling and asking them how so-and-so was.
He was being totally homosexual too, except that even that was a pose, a ruse, a way of self-presentation.
And he was, as always, a picture of health, dressed in black rags and black boots and twitching maniacally.
His face was white, his skin scrofulous, his teeth decaying.
Since I'd been living in the flat, Shadwell had been coming to see Eva at least once a week, during the day, when Dad was at the office.
He and Eva went out on long walks together, or to the cinema at the ICA to see Scorsese films and exhibitions of dirty nappies.
Eva made no effort to have us talk to each other, Shadwell and I; in fact I felt she wanted to discourage conversation.
Whenever I saw her and Shadwell together they always looked pretty intense, as if they'd just had a fight or shared a lot of secrets.
Now, as the party fodder turned up in their glittering clothes, I began to see that Eva was using the evening not as a celebration but as her launch into London.
She'd invited every theatre and film person she'd run into over the past few years, and a lot she hadn't.
Many were Shadwell's acquaintances, people he'd met only once or twice.
Every third-rate actor, assistant film director, weekend writer, part-time producer and their friends, if they had friends, slid on to our premises.
As my darling new mother (whom I loved) moved radiantly about the room introducing Derek, who had just directed Equus at the Contact Theatre, to Bryan, who was a freelance journalist specializing in film, or Karen, who was a secretary at a literary agency, to Robert, who was a designer; as she spoke of the new Dylan album and what Riverside Studios was doing, I saw she wanted to scour that suburban stigma right off her body.
She didn't realize it was in the blood and not on the skin; she didn't see there could be nothing more suburban than suburbanites repudiating themselves.
It was a relief when at last I saw someone I knew.
From the window I spotted Jamila getting out of a cab, accompanied by a Japanese woman and Changez.
I was delighted to see my friend's happy pudding face again, blinking up at the collapsing mansion in which our flat was located.
As I caught his eye I realized how much I wanted to hold him in my arms again, and squeeze his rolls of fat.
Except that I hadn't seen him since he lay on his camp-bed and watched me sleeping naked with his beloved wife, the woman I'd always characterized to him as ‘sister’.
I'd spoken frequently to Jamila on the phone, of course, and apparently Changez — solid, stable, unshakeable Changez — had turned quite mad after the naked-on-the-bed incident.
He'd railed at Jamila and accused her of adultery, incest, betrayal, whoredom, deceit, lesbianism, husband-hatred, frigidity, lying and callousness, as well as the usual things.
Jamila was equally fine and fierce that day, explaining just who her damn body belonged to.
And anyway, it was none of his business: didn't he have a regular fuck?
He could shove his hypocrisy up his fat arse!
Changez, being at heart a traditional Muslim, explained the teachings of the Koran on this subject to her, and then, when words were not sufficient to convince her, he tried to give her a whack.
But Jamila was not whackable.
She gave  Changez a considerable backhander across his wobbling chops, which shut his mouth for a fortnight, during which he miserably carried his bruised jaw to his camp-bed — that raft in a storm — and didn't speak.
Now he shook hands with me and we held each other.
I was slightly worried, I must admit, that he would knife me.
‘How are you, Changez?’
‘Looking good, looking good.’
‘Yes?’
Without any hesitation he said, ‘Let's not beat around any bushes.
How can I forgive you for screwing my wife?
Is that a nice thing to do to a friend, eh?’
I was ready for him.
‘I've known Jammie all my life,yaar .
Long-standing arrangement.
She was always mine in so far as she was anyone's, and she's never been anyone's and never will be anyone's, you know.
She's her own person.’
His sad face trembled as he shook his sincere, hurt head and sat down.
‘You deceived me.
It was a blow against the centre of my life.
I couldn't take it.
It was too much for me — it hit me hard, in the guts, Karim.’
What can you say when friends admit such hurt without vindictiveness or bitterness?
I didn't ever want to aim a blow against the centre of his life.
‘How are you two getting along anyway?’
I asked, shifting the subject.
I sat down beside him and we opened a Heineken each.
Changez was thoughtful and serious.
‘I've got to be realistic about adjustment.
It's unusual for me, an Indian man,vis-à-vis the things that go on around my wife.
Jamila makes me do shopping and washing and cleaning.
And she has become friends with Shinko.’
‘Shinko?’
He indicated the Japanese woman who had arrived with him.
I looked at her; I did recognize her.
Then it occurred to me who Shinko was — his prostitute friend, with whom he conjured Harold Robbins's positions.
I was amazed.
I could hardly speak, but I could snigger, for there they were, Changez's wife and his whore, chatting together about modern dance with Fruitbat.
I was puzzled.
‘Is Shinko a friend of Jamila's, then?’
‘Only recently, you complete cunt.
Jamila made up her mind she didn't have sufficient women friends, so she went to call on Shinko's house.
You told her about Shinko, after all, for no reason, gratis, thank you very much, I'll do the same for you some day.
It was bloody embarrassing at first and all, I can tell you, as these two girls sat there right in front of my nose, but the girls it didn't phase out at all.’
‘And what did you do?’
‘Nothing!
What could I do?
They were instant friends!
They were discussing all the subjects usually kept under the pillow.
The penis here, the vagina there, the man on top, the woman here, there and everywhere.
I just have to put up with all the humiliations that fall on my head in this great country!
It's been difficult, too, since Anwar-saab has become insanely mad.’
‘What are you on about, Changez?
I don't know anything about this.’
He sat back, regarded me coolly and shrugged complacently.
‘But what subject do you know about?’
‘Eh?’
‘You never go there, yaar, just as you avoid me now.’
‘I see.’
‘It makes you sad,’ he said.
I nodded.
It was true that I hadn't been to see Jeeta or Anwar for a long time, what with the moving and my depression and everything, and wanting to start a new life in London and know the city.
‘Don't leave your own people behind, Karim.’
Before I had a chance to leave my own people and find out exactly how Anwar had gone insanely mad, Eva came over to me.
‘Excuse me,’ she said to Changez.
‘Get up,’ she said to me.
‘I'm all right here,’ I said.
She tugged me to my feet.
‘God, Karim, won't you do anything for yourself?’
Her eyes were bright with the thrill of things.
As she talked she didn't stop looking around the room.
‘Karim, darling, your big moment in life has arrived.
There's someone here dying to meet you again, meet you properly.
A man who will help you.’
She led me through the throng.
‘By the way,’ she murmured in my ear.
‘Don't say anything arrogant or appear too egotistical.’
I was annoyed with her dragging me away from Changez.
‘Why not?’
I said.
‘Let him talk,’ she said.
She'd mentioned someone who would help me, but I saw only Shadwell ahead of me.
‘Oh no,’ I said, and tried to pull away.
But she continued to haul me forward like a mother with a naughty child.
‘Come on,’ she said.
‘It's your chance.
Talk about the theatre.’
Shadwell didn't require much encouragement.
It was easy to see that he was clever and well read, but he was also boring.
Like many spectacular bores, his thoughts were catalogued and indexed.
When I asked him a question he'd say, ‘The answer to that is — in fact the several answers to that are…
A.’ And you'd get point A followed by points B and C, and on the one hand F, and on the other foot G, until you could see the whole alphabet stretching ahead, each letter a Sahara in itself to be crawled across.
He was talking about the theatre and the writers he liked: Arden, Bond, Orton, Osborne, Wesker, each suffocated just by being in his mouth for a minute.
I kept trying to get back to Changez's lugubrious face, which reclined morosely in his good hand as the guests filled the air around him with cultivated noises.
I saw Changez's eyes fall caressingly on his wife's form and then rest on his prostitute's grooving hips as the two of them got down to Martha Reeves and the Vandellas.
Then, spontaneously, Changez pushed himself up and danced with them, lifting each foot ponderously from the floor like a performing elephant, and sticking his elbows out as if he'd been asked, in a drama class, to be a flamingo.
I wanted to dance with him and celebrate the renewal of our friendship.
I crept away from Shadwell.
But I caught Eva's eye.
She glared at me.
‘I can see you want to get away,’ said Shadwell, ‘to much more charismatic folk.
But Eva tells me you're interested in acting.’
‘Yes, for a long time, I suppose.’
‘Well, are you or aren't you?
Am I to be interested in you or not?’
‘Yes, if you're interested.’
‘Good, I am interested.
I'd like you to do something for me.
They've given me a theatre for a season.
Will you come along and do a piece for me?’
‘Yes,’ I said.
‘Yes, yes, I will.’
After the guests had gone, at three in the morning, as we sat among the debris and Chogyam and Fruitbat threw rubbish into  plastic bags, I wanted to discuss Shadwell with Eva.
I said he was boring as hell.
Eva was already irritable; this Madame Verdurin of West London felt Dad and I hadn't appreciated the quality of her guests.
‘Whose intelligence did you engage with this evening, Karim?
You two behaved as if we were still in the sticks.
And it is wicked, Karim, to mind Shadwell being dull.
It's a misfortune, not a fault.
Like being born with a nose like a turnip.’
‘She's changed her tune,’ I said to Dad.
But he wasn't listening.
He watched Eva all the time.
Now he felt playful: he kept tickling the cushion next to him and saying, ‘Come here, come here, little Eva, and let me tell you a secret.’
They still played sickening games that I couldn't avoid, like putting sperm on each other 's nose and calling one another Merkin and Muffin, for God's sake.
Chogyam turned to Dad.
‘What is your view on this matter of boredom?’
Dad cleared his throat and said that boring people were deliberately boring.
It was a personality choice, and responsibility couldn't be avoided by saying they were like turnips.
Bores wanted to narcotize you so you wouldn't be sensitive to them.
‘Anyway,’ Eva whispered, sitting beside Dad now and cradling his drowsy head as she looked up at me.
‘Shadwell has a real theatre and for some reason he likes you.
Let's see if we can land you a theatre job, eh?
Is that what you want?’
I didn't know what to say.
This was a chance, but I was frightened of taking it, frightened of exposing myself and failing.
Unlike Charlie's, my will wasn't stronger than my misgivings.
‘Make up your mind,’ she said.
‘I'll help you, Creamy, in any way you want.’
Over the next few weeks, with Eva directing me — which she loved — I prepared a Sam Shepard speech from The Mad Dog Blues for my audition with Shadwell.
I'd never worked so hard at anything in my life; nor, once I'd started, had I wanted anything so badly.
The speech began: ‘I was on a Greyhound bus out of Carlsbad heading for Loving, New Mexico.
Back to see my dad.
After ten years.
All duded out in a double-breasted suit with my shoes all shined.
The driver calls ‘Loving’ and I get off the bus…’
I knew what I was doing; I was thoroughly prepared; but that didn't mean that when the day came I wasn't in a state of nervous  collapse.
‘Are you familiar with The Mad Dog Blues ?’
I asked Shadwell, sure he would never have heard of it.
He was sitting in the front row of his theatre watching me, a notebook balanced on the leg of his rancid trousers.
He nodded.
‘Shepard is my man.
And there are not many boys who would not want to be him, because A he is attractive, B he can write and act, C he can play the drums and D he is a wild boy and rebel.’
‘Yes.’
‘Now do The Mad Dog Blues for me, please.
Brilliantly.’
Shadwell's theatre was a small wooden building like a large hut, in suburban North London.
It had a tiny foyer but a wide stage, proper lights and about two hundred seats.
They produced plays like French without Tears , the latest Ayckbourn or Frayn, or a panto.
It was primarily an amateur place, but they did do three professional productions a year, mostly of plays on the school curriculum like The Royal Hunt of the Sun .
When I finished, Shadwell started to applaud with the tips of his fingers, as if scared his hands would give each other a disease.
He climbed up on stage.
‘Thank you, Karim.’
‘You liked it, yeah?’
I asked, out of breath.
‘So much so that I want you to do it again.’
‘What?
Again?
But I reckon that was my best shot, Mr Shadwell.’
He ignored me.
He had an idea.
‘Only this time two extra things will occur: A, a wasp will be buzzing around your head.
And B, the wasp wants to sting you.
Your motivation — and all actors love a bit of motivation — is to brush, push, fight it away, OK?’
‘I'm not sure Sam Shepard would approve of this wasp business,’ I said confidently.
‘He really wouldn't.’
Shadwell turned and peered exaggeratedly into every cranny of the deserted theatre.
‘But he's not fucking here, unless I've gone blind.’
And he went and sat down again, waiting for me to begin.
I felt a complete wanker, waving at that wasp.
But I wanted the part, whatever the part was.
I couldn't face going back to that flat in West Kensington not knowing what to do with my life and having to be pleasant, and not being respected by anyone.
When I'd done with Shepard and the wasp, Shadwell put his arm round me.
‘Well done!
You deserve a coffee.
Come on.’
He took me to a lorry driver's cafe next door.
I felt elated, especially when he said, ‘I'm looking for an actor just like you.’
My head rang with cheering bells.
We sat down with our coffee.
Shadwell put his elbow out half-way across the table in a puddle of tea, resting his cheek on the palm of his hand, and stared at me.
‘Really?’
I said enthusiastically.
‘An actor like me in what way?’
‘An actor who'll fit the part.’
‘What part?’
I asked.
He looked at me impatiently.
‘The part in the book.’
I could be very direct at times.
‘What book?’
‘The book I asked you to read, Karim.’
‘But you didn't.’
‘I told Eva to tell you.’
‘But Eva didn't tell me anything.
I would have remembered.’
‘Oh Christ.
Oh God, I'm going mad.
Karim, what the hell is that woman playing at?’
And he held his head in his hands.
‘Don't ask me,’ I said.
‘At least tell me what the book is.
Maybe I can buy it today.’
‘Stop being so rational,’ he said.
‘It's The Jungle Book.
Kipling.
You know it, of course.’
‘Yeah, I've seen the film.’
‘I'm sure.’
He could be a snooty bastard, old Shadwell, that was for sure.
But I was going to keep myself under control whatever he said.
Then his attitude changed completely.
Instead of talking about the job he said some words to me in Punjabi or Urdu and looked as if he wanted to get into a big conversation about Ray or Tagore or something.
To tell the truth, when he spoke it sounded like he was gargling.
‘Well?’ he said.
He rattled off some more words.
‘You don't understand?’
‘No, not really.’
What could I say?
I couldn't win.
I knew he'd hate me for it.
‘Your own language!’
‘Yeah, well, I get a bit.
The dirty words.
I know when I'm being called a camel's rectum.’
‘Of course.
But your father speaks, doesn't he?
He must do.’
Of course he speaks, I felt like saying.
He speaks out of his mouth, unlike you, you fucking cunt bastard shithead.
‘Yes, but not to me,’ I said.
‘It would be stupid.
We wouldn't know what he was on about.
Things are difficult enough as it is.’
Shadwell persisted.
There seemed no way he was ever going to get off this subject.
‘You've never been there, I suppose.’
‘Where?’
Why was he being so bloody aggressive about it?
‘You know where.
Bombay, Delhi, Madras, Bangalore, Hyderabad, Trivandrum, Goa, the Punjab.
You've never had that dust in your nostrils?’
‘Never in my nostrils, no.’
‘You must go,’ he said, as if nobody had ever been there but him.
‘I will, OK?’
‘Yes, take a rucksack and see India, if it's the last thing you do in your life.’
‘Right, Mr Shadwell.’
He lived in his own mind, he really did.
He shook his head then and did a series of short barks in his throat.
This was him laughing, I was certain.
‘Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha!’ he went.
He said, ‘What a breed of people two hundred years of imperialism has given birth to.
If the pioneers from the East India Company could see you.
What puzzlement there'd be.
Everyone looks at you, I'm sure, and thinks: an Indian boy, how exotic, how interesting, what stories of aunties and elephants we'll hear now from him.
And you're from Orpington.’
‘Yeah.’
‘Oh God, what a strange world.
The immigrant is the Everyman of the twentieth century.
Yes?’
‘Mr Shadwell —’ I started.
‘Eva can be a very difficult woman, you know.’
‘Yeah?’
I breathed more easily now he'd changed the subject.
‘The best women always are,’ he went on.
‘But she didn't give you the book.
She's trying to protect you from your destiny, which is to be a half-caste in England.
That must be complicated for you to accept — belonging nowhere, wanted nowhere.
Racism.
Do you find it difficult?
Please tell me.’
He looked at me.
‘I don't know,’ I said defensively.
‘Let's talk about acting.’
‘Don't you know?’ he persisted.
‘Don't you really?’
I couldn't answer his questions.
I could barely speak at all; the muscles in my face seemed to have gone rigid.
I was shaking with embarrassment that he could talk to me in this way at all, as if he knew me, as if he had the right to question me.
Fortunately he didn't wait for any reply.
He said, ‘When I saw more of Eva than I do now, she was often unstable.
Highly strung, we call it.
Yes?
She's been around, Eva, and she's seen a lot.
One morning we woke up in Tangier, where I was visiting Paul Bowles — a famous homosexual writer — and she was suffocating.
All her hair had dropped out in the night and she was choking on it.’
I just looked at him.
‘Incredible, eh?’
‘Incredible.
It must have been psychological.’
And I almost added that my hair would probably fall out if I had to spend too much time with him.
‘But I don't want to talk about the past,’ I said.
‘Don't you?’
This stuff about him and Eva was really making me uncomfortable.
I didn't want to know about it.
‘OK,’ he said at last.
I breathed a sigh of relief.
‘Happy with your father, is she?’
Christ, he was a nippy little questioner.
He could have slain people with his questioning, except that he never listened to the answers.
He didn't want answers but only the pleasure of his own voice.
‘Let's hope it lasts, eh?’ he said.
‘Sceptical, eh?’
I shrugged.
But now I had something to say.
Off I went.
‘I was in the Cubs.
I remember it well.
The Jungle Book is Baloo and Bagheera and all that, isn't it?’
‘Correct.
Ten out of ten.
And?’
‘And?’
‘And Mowgli.’
‘Oh yes, Mowgli.’
Shadwell searched my face for comment, a flinch or little sneer perhaps.
‘You're just right for him,’ he continued.
‘In fact, you are Mowgli.
You're dark-skinned, you're small and wiry, and you'll be  sweet but wholesome in the costume.
Not too pornographic, I hope.
Certain critics will go for you.
Oh yes.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha!’
He jumped up as two young women carrying scripts came into the cafe.
Shadwell embraced them, and they kissed him, apparently without revulsion.
They talked to him with respect.
This was my first indication of how desperate actors can get.
‘I've found my Mowgli,’ Shadwell told them, pointing down at me.
‘I've found my little Mowgli at last.
An unknown actor, just right and ready to break through.’
‘Hallo,’ one of the women said to me.
‘I'm Roberta,’ said the other.
‘Hallo,’ I said.
‘Isn't he terrific?’
Shadwell said.
The two women examined me.
I was just perfect.
I'd done it.
I'd got a job.
CHAPTER TEN
That summer a lot happened quickly to both Charlie and me: big things to him; smaller but significant things to me.
Although I didn't see Charlie for months, I rang Eva almost every day for a full report.
And, of course, Charlie was on television and in the newspapers.
Suddenly you couldn't get away from him and his blooming career.
He'd done it.
As for me, I had to wait the whole summer and into the late autumn for rehearsals of The Jungle Book to begin, so I went back to South London, happy in the knowledge that soon I'd be in a professional production and there'd be someone in the cast for me to fall in love with.
I just knew that that was going to happen.
Allie had gone to Italy with his smart friends from school, looking at clothes in Milan, for God's sake.
I didn't want Mum to be alone, now she'd left Ted and Jean, and moved back into our old house.
Fortunately they'd given her the job back at the shoe shop, and she and I had to spend only evenings and weekends together.
Mum was feeling much better, and she was active again, though she'd become very fat at Ted and Jean's.
She still didn't speak much, concealing pain and her wound from voices and trite expression.
But I watched her transform the house from being their place — and it had been only a place, child-soiled, functional — into her home.
She started to wear trousers for the first time, dieted, and let her hair grow.
She bought a pine table from a junk shop and slowly sandpapered it down in the garden, and then sealed it, something she'd never done before, never even thought of doing before.
I was surprised she even knew what sandpaper was; but I could be such a fool in not knowing people.
There were shaky cane chairs to go with the table, which I carried home on my head, and there Mum sat hour after hour, doing calligraphy — Christmas and birthday cards on squares of lush paper.
She cleaned as never before, with care and interest (this wasn't a chore now), getting on to her knees with a scrubbing brush and bowl of water, behind cupboards and along skirting boards.
She washed down the walls  and repainted doors smudged with our fingerprints.
She repotted every plant in the house and started listening to opera.
Ted came by with plants.
He loved shrubs, especially lilac bushes, which Jean had consequently banned from her garden, so he brought them to our place.
He also came by with old radios and plates, jugs and silver candlesticks, anything he picked up on his roaming trips around South London while he waited for Eva to continue work on the new flat.
I read a lot, proper books like Lost Illusions and The Red and the Black , and went to bed early, in training for love and work.
Although I was only a few miles away over the river, I missed the London I was getting to know and played games with myself like: if the secret police ordered you to live in the suburbs for the rest of your life, what would you do?
Kill yourself?
Read?
Almost every night I had nightmares and sweats.
It was sleeping under that childhood roof which did it.
Whatever fear of the future I had, I would overcome it; it was nothing to my loathing of the past.
One morning rehearsals started.
I said goodbye to Mum sadly, left South London and went to stay with Dad and Eva once more.
And every day I ran from the tube to the rehearsal room.
I was the last to leave at night.
I loved the hard work and being with the ten other actors, in the pub, in the cafe, belonging to the group.
Shadwell had obviously spent many weekends on the Continent observing European theatre.
He wanted a physical Jungle Book made of mime, voices and bodily invention.
Props and costumes would be minimal.
The jungle itself, its trees and swamps, the many animals, fires and huts, were to be fashioned from our bodies, movements, cries.
Yet most of the actors he'd assembled hadn't worked in that way before.
On the first day, when we all jogged five times around the rehearsal room to warm up, there were many exhausted lungs.
One woman had worked only in radio — as a disc-jockey.
One actor I became friendly with, Terry, had done only agit-prop before, touring the country in a van with a company called Vanguard in a music-hall pastiche about the miners' strike of 1972 called Dig!
Now he found himself playing Kaa, the deaf snake known for the power of his hug.
And Terry did look as if he had a powerful hug.
He was going to spend the show hissing and flinging himself across the scaffolding arch which ran up the sides and across the top of the stage, and from which monkeys dangled, taunting Baloo the bear, who couldn't climb and groaned a lot.
Terry was in his early forties, with a pale, handsome face — a quiet, generous, working-class Welsh man-boy.
I liked him instantly, especially as he was a fitness fanatic and his body was solid and taut.
I decided to seduce him, but without much hope of success.
I didn't clash with Shadwell until the second week, at the costume fitting.
At the start, everyone was respectful towards him, listening carefully to his soporific explanations.
But he soon became a joke to most of us, because not only was he pedantic and patronizing, he was also frightened of what he'd started and disliked suggestions for fear they implied that he was going wrong.
One day he took me aside and left me with the designer, a nervous girl who always wore black.
She carried a yellow scarf and had a jar of shit-brown cream in her hand, which she was trying to conceal behind her back.
‘This is your costume, Mr Mowgli.’
I craned my neck to examine the contents of her hand.
‘Where is my costume?’
‘Take your clothes off, please.’
It turned out that on stage I would wear a loin-cloth and brown make-up, so that I resembled a turd in a bikini-bottom.
I undressed.
‘Please don't put this on me,’ I said, shivering.
‘Got to,’ she said.
‘Be a big boy.’
As she covered me from toe to head in the brown muck I thought of Julien Sorel in The Red and the Black , dissimulating and silent for the sake of ambition, his pride often shattered, but beneath it all solid in his superiority.
So I kept my mouth shut even as her hands lathered me in the colour of dirt.
A few days later I did question Shadwell about the possibility of not being covered in shit for my debut as a professional actor.
Shadwell was concise for once.
‘That's the fucking costume!
When you so eagerly accepted your first-ever part did you think Mowgli would be wearing a kaftan?
A Saint-Laurent suit?’
‘But Mr Shadwell — Jeremy — I feel wrong in it.
I feel that together we're making the world uglier.’
‘You'll survive.’
He was right.
But just when I was feeling at home in the loin-cloth and boot polish, and when I'd learned my lines before anyone else and was getting as competent as a little orangutan on the scaffolding, I saw that our conflicts hadn't ended.
Shadwell took me aside  and said, ‘A word about the accent, Karim.
I think it should be an authentic accent.’
‘What d'you mean authentic?’
‘Where was our Mowgli born?’
‘India.’
‘Yes.
Not Orpington.
What accent do they have in India?’
‘Indian accents.’
‘Ten out of ten.’
‘No, Jeremy.
Please, no.’
‘Karim, you have been cast for authenticity and not for experience.’
I could hardly believe it.
Even when I did believe it we discussed it several times, but he wouldn't change his mind.
‘Just try it,’ he kept saying as we went outside the rehearsal room to argue.
‘You're very conservative, Karim.
Try it until you feel comfortable as a Bengali.
You're supposed to be an actor, but I suspect you may just be an exhibitionist.’
‘Jeremy, help me, I can't do this.’
He shook his head.
I swear, my eyes were melting.
A few days passed without the accent being mentioned again.
During this time Shadwell had me concentrate on the animal noises I was to make between the dialogue, so that when, for instance, I was talking to Kaa the slithering snake, who saves Mowgli's life, I had to hiss.
Terry and I had to hiss together.
When hissing, the thought of Dad lecturing to Ted and Jean at Carl and Marianne's was an aid.
Being a human zoo was acceptable, provided the Indian accent was off the menu.
Next time it was mentioned the entire cast was present.
‘Now do the accent,’ Shadwell suddenly said.
‘I trust you've been rehearsing at home.’
‘Jeremy,’ I pleaded.
‘It's a political matter to me.’
He looked at me violently.
The cast watched me too, most of them sympathetically.
One of them, Boyd, had done EST and assertion-training, and primal therapy, and liked to hurl chairs across the room as an expression of spontaneous feeling.
I wondered if he might not have some spontaneous feeling in my defence.
But he said nothing.
I looked towards Terry.
As an active Trotskyite he encouraged me to speak of the prejudice and abuse I'd faced being the son of an Indian.
In the evenings we talked of inequality, imperialism, white supremacy, and whether sexual experimentation was merely bourgeois indulgence or a contribution to the dissolution of established society.
But now, like the others, Terry said nothing but stood there in his tracksuit waiting to slide hissingly across the floor once more.
I thought: You prefer generalizations like ‘after the revolution the workers will wake up filled with unbelievable joy’ to standing up to fascists like Shadwell.
Shadwell spoke sternly.
‘Karim, this is a talented and expensive group of highly trained actors.
They are ready to work, hungry to act, full of love for their humble craft, keen, eager and centred.
But you, only you I am afraid, yes, only you out of everyone here, are holding back the entire production.
Are you going to make the appropriate concession this experienced director requires from you?’
I wanted to run out of the room, back to South London, where I belonged, out of which I had wrongly and arrogantly stepped.
I hated Shadwell and everyone in the cast.
‘Yes,’ I said to Shadwell.
That night in the pub I didn't sit at the same table as the others but moved into the other bar with my pint and newspaper.
I despised the other actors for not sticking up for me, and for sniggering at the accent when I finally did it.
Terry left the group he was sitting with and joined me.
‘Come on,’ he said, ‘have another drink.
Don't take it so badly, it's always crap for actors.’
'Crap for actors' was his favourite expression.
Everything always seemed to be crap for actors and you just had to put up with it — while the present corruption continued.
I asked if people like Shitwell, as we called him among other things, would shove me around after the revolution; whether there'd be theatre directors at all or whether we'd all get a turn at telling the others where to stand and what to wear.
Terry didn't appear to have thought about this before and he puzzled over it, staring into his bitter and a bag of smoky bacon crisps.
‘There will be theatre directors,’ he said eventually.
‘I think.
But they'll be elected by the cast.
If they are a pain the cast will throw them out and they'll return to the factory they came from.’
‘Factory?
How will we get people like Shadwell into factories in the first place?’
Terry looked shifty now; he was on sloping ground.
‘He'll be required to do it.’
‘Ah.
By force?’
‘There's no reason why the same people should do all the shit work, is there?
I don't like the idea of people ordering other people to do work they wouldn't touch themselves.’
I liked Terry more than anyone I'd met for a long time, and we talked every day.
But he did believe the working class — which he referred to as if it were a single-willed person — would do somewhat unlikely things.
‘The working class will take care of those bastards very easily,’ he said, referring to racist organizations.
‘The working class is about to blow,’ he said at other times.
‘They've had enough of the Labour Party.
They want the transformation of society now!’
His talk made me think of the housing estates near Mum's house, where the ‘working class’ would have laughed in Terry's face — those, that is, who wouldn't have smacked him round the ear for calling them working class in the first place.
I wanted to tell him that the proletariat of the suburbs did have strong class feeling.
It was virulent and hate-filled and directed entirely at the people beneath them.
But there were some things it was hopeless to discuss with him.
I guessed that he didn't intervene in my dispute with Shadwell because he wanted the situation to deteriorate further.
Terry didn't believe in social workers, left-wing politicians, radical lawyers, liberals or gradual improvement.
He wanted things to get worse rather than better.
When they were at their nadir there would be a transformation.
So for things to get better they had to get worse; the worse they were the better they'd be in the future; they couldn't even start to get better before they'd started to go drastically downhill.
This was how I interpreted his arguments.
It exasperated him.
He asked me to join the Party.
He said I should join to prove that my commitment to the ending of injustice wasn't all hot air.
I said I would sign up with pleasure on one condition.
He had to kiss me.
This, I said, would prove his commitment to overcoming his inbred bourgeois morality.
He said that maybe I wasn't ready to join the Party just yet.
Terry's passion for equality appealed to my purer mind, and his hatred of existing authority appealed to my resentments.
But although I hated inequality, it didn't mean I wanted to be treated like everyone else.
I recognized that what I liked in Dad and Charlie was their insistence on standing apart.
I liked the power they had and  the attention they received.
I liked the way people admired and indulged them.
So despite the yellow scarf strangling my balls, the brown make-up, and even the accent, I relished being the pivot of the production.
I started to make little demands of Shagbadly.
I required a longer rest; and could I be driven home by someone, as I felt so tired?
I had to have Assam tea (with a touch of lapsang souchong) available at all times during rehearsal.
Could that actor slide a little to the right; no, a little further.
I began to see that I could ask for the things I needed.
I gained confidence.
I spent little time at home now, so I was unable to be a detailed witness to the Great Love in the same account-keeping way as before.
I did notice that Eva's absorption in the particulars of Dad's life had waned.
They saw fewer Satyajit Ray films now, and went less to Indian restaurants; Eva gave up learning Urdu and listening to sitar music at breakfast.
She had a new interest; she was launching a huge campaign.
Eva was planning her assault on London.
At the flat there were drinks parties and little dinners every week, which irritated me, as I had to wait for everyone to finish filling the air with their thoughts on the latest novel before I could go to bed on the sofa.
And often, after a day's rehearsal, I had to listen to Shadwell telling the dinner party how well his production of The Jungle Book was going, how ‘expressionistic’ it was.
Fortunately Eva and Dad were often out, as Eva accepted all the numerous invitations she and Dad received from directors, novelists, editorial assistants, proof-readers, poufs, and whoever else it was she met.
I noticed that at these ‘do's’, as I still called them, to rile her, Eva was constructing an artistic persona for herself.
People like her loved artists and anything ‘artistic’; the word itself was a philtre; a whiff of the sublime accompanied its mention; it was an entrance to the uncontrolled and inspired.
Her kind would do anything to append the heavenly word ‘artist’ to themselves.
(They had to do it themselves — no one else would.
) I heard Eva say once, ‘I'm an artist, a designer, my team and I do houses.’
In the old days, when we were an ordinary suburban family, this pretentious and snobbish side of Eva amused Dad and me.
And it had seemed, for a time, to be in retreat — perhaps because Dad was its grateful recipient.
But now the show-off quotient was increasing  daily.
It was impossible to ignore.
The problem was, Eva was not unsuccessful; she was not ignored by London once she started her assault.
She was climbing ever higher, day by day.
It was fantastic, the number of lunches, suppers, dinners, picnics, parties, receptions, champagne breakfasts, openings, closings, first nights, last nights and late nights these London people went to.
They never stopped eating or talking or looking at people performing.
As Eva started to take London, moving forward over the foreign fields of Islington, Chiswick and Wandsworth inch by inch, party by party, contact by contact, Dad thoroughly enjoyed himself.
But he wouldn't recognize how important it all was to Eva.
It was at a dinner party in the flat, when they were in the kitchen together fetching yogurt and raspberries, that I heard for the first time one of them turn on the other in anger.
Eva said, ‘For Christ's sake, can't you cut down on the bloody mysticism — we're not in Beckenham now.
These are bright, intelligent people, they're used to argument, not assertion, to facts, not vapours!’
Dad threw back his head and laughed, not feeling the force of her criticism.
‘Eva, don't you understand one plain thing?
They have to let go of their rationality, of their interminable thinking and bothering over everything.
They have control mania!
It's only when we let go of life and allow our innate wisdom to flourish that we live!’
He picked up the desserts and hurried into the room, addressing the table in these terms, Eva becoming more furious until an intense discussion broke out about the importance of intuition in the breakthrough stage of science.
The party flowered.
During this time Dad was discovering how much he liked other people.
And, having no idea how important this or that person was, whether they worked for the BBC or the TLS or the BFI, he treated them all with equal condescension.
One night, after a rehearsal and drinks with Terry, I came into the flat to find Charlie getting dressed in Eva and Dad's bedroom, prancing in front of a full-length mirror which leaned against the partition wall.
At first I didn't recognize him.
After all, I'd seen only photographs of his new personality.
His hair was dyed black now, and it was spiky.
He wore, inside out, a slashed T-shirt with a red swastika hand-painted on it.
His black trousers were held together by safety-pins, paperclips and needles.
Over this he had a black  mackintosh; there were five belts strapped around his waist and a sort of grey linen nappy attached to the back of his trousers.
The bastard was wearing one of my green waistcoats, too.
And Eva was weeping.
‘What's the matter?’
I said.
‘Keep out of this,’ said Charlie, sharply.
‘Please, Charlie,’ Eva implored him.
‘Please take off the swastika.
I don't care about anything else.’
‘In that case I'll keep it on.’
‘Charlie —‘
‘I've always hated your fucking nagging.’
‘It's not nagging, it's for compassion.’
‘Right.
I won't be coming back here, Eva.
You're such a drag now.
It's your age.
Is it the menopause that's making you like this?’
Beside Charlie on the floor was a pile of clothes from which he pulled jackets, macs and shirts before throwing them aside as unsuitable.
He then applied black eye-liner.
He walked out of the flat without looking at either of us.
Eva screamed after him, ‘Think of those who died in the camps!
And don't expect me to be there tonight, you pig!
Charlie, you can forget my support for ever!’
As arranged, I went to Charlie's gig that night, at a club in Soho.
I took Eva with me.
It didn't take much to persuade her to come and nothing would have prevented me from seeing precisely what it was that had turned my schoolfriend into what the Daily Express called ‘a phenomena’.
I even made sure we got there an hour early in order to take everything in.
Even then the queue for the gig stretched around the block.
Eva and I walked among the kids.
Eva was excited and perplexed and intimidated by the crowd.
‘How has Charlie done this?’ she kept asking.
‘We'll soon find out,’ I said.
‘Do their mothers know they're here?’ she asked.
‘Does he really know what he's doing, Karim?’
Some of the kids were as young as twelve; most were about seventeen.
They were dressed like Charlie, mostly in black.
Some of them had orange- or blue-streaked hair, making them look like cockatoos.
They elbowed and fought and gave each other tongue-sandwiches, and spat at passers-by and in each other 's faces, there in the cold and rain of decaying London, with the indifferent police looking on.
As a concession to the New Wave I wore a black shirt, black jeans, white socks and black suede shoes, but I knew I had uninteresting hair.
Not that I was the only one: some older men in 1960s expensive casual clothes, Fiorucci jeans and suede boots, with Cuban heels for Christ's sake, were chasing the band, hoping to sign them.
What, then, had Charlie done since that night in the Nashville?
He'd got in with the punks and seen immediately what they were doing, what a renaissance this was in music.
He'd changed the group's name to the Condemned and his own name to Charlie Hero.
And as the mood of British music snapped from one paradigm to another, from lush Baroque to angry garage, he'd forced and battered Mustn't Grumble into becoming one of the hottest New Wave or punk bands around.
Eva's son was continually being chased by national papers, magazines and semioticians for quotes about the new nihilism, the new hopelessness and the new music which expressed it.
Hero was to explain the despair of the young to the baffled but interested, which he did by spitting at journalists or just punching them.
He had a smart head, Charlie; he learned that his success, like that of the other bands, was guaranteed by his ability to insult the media.
Fortunately, Charlie had a talent for cruelty.
These insults were published widely, as were his other assaults on hippies, love, the Queen, Mick Jagger, political activism and punk itself.
‘We're shit,’ he proclaimed one night on early evening television.
‘Can't play, can't sing, can't write songs, and the shitty idiot people love us!’
Two outraged parents were reported as having kicked in their TV screens at this.
Eva even appeared in the Daily Mirror under the headline: PUNK MUM SAYS I M PROUD OF MY SON!
The Fish ensured that Charlie was in the news and firmly established as a Face.
He was also ensuring that their first record,The Bride of Christ , would be out in a few weeks.
Offence had already been caused.
With luck the record would be vilified and banned, guaranteeing credibility and financial success.
Charlie was well on his way at last.
That evening, as always, the Fish was polite and gentlemanly.
He reassured Eva that he and Charlie knew exactly what they were doing.
But she was anxious.
She kissed the Fish and clutched his arm, and openly begged him, ‘Please, please, don't let my son become a heroin addict.
You've no idea how weak he is.’
The Fish got us a good position at the back of the club, where we stood on wooden beer crates holding on to each other as the floor  seemed about to crack open with heat and stomping.
I soon felt as if the entire audience were lying on top of me — and the band were still in the dressing room.
They came on.
The place went berserk.
The Condemned had thrown out everything of their former existence — their hair, clothes, music.
They were unrecognizable.
And they were nervous, not quite at ease yet in their new clothes.
They crashed through their set as if they were in a competition to see who could get through the most songs in the shortest time, sounding like an unrehearsed version of the group Charlie and I had seen in the Nashville.
Charlie no longer played rhythm guitar but stood clutching a mike stand at the edge of the stage, howling at the kids, who pogoed like road drills, and spat and lobbed bottles until the stage was littered with broken glass.
He got cut on the hand.
Beside me, Eva gasped and covered her face.
Then Charlie was smearing blood over his face and wiping it over the bass guitarist.
The rest of the Condemned were still nonentities, the clerks and Civil Servants of the music business.
But Charlie was magnificent in his venom, his manufactured rage, his anger, his defiance.
What power he had, what admiration he extorted, what looks there were in girls' eyes.
He was brilliant: he'd assembled the right elements.
It was a wonderful trick and disguise.
The one flaw, I giggled to myself, was his milky and healthy white teeth, which, to me, betrayed everything else.
Then a riot started.
Bottles flew, strangers punched each other and a tooth flew down Eva's cleavage.
I had blood all over me.
Girls passed out on the floor; ambulances were called.
The Fish efficiently got us out.
I was thoughtful as we walked through Soho that night.
Beside me, Eva, in her jeans and tennis shoes, stepped along lightly, trying to hum one of Charlie's songs and keep up with my fast pace.
Eventually she took my arm.
We were so easy with each other, we could have been going out together.
We said nothing; I presumed she was speculating about Charlie's future.
On my side, I burned with less envy of Charlie than I'd imagined I would.
This was because one strong feeling dominated me: ambition.
As yet it was unfocused.
But I was completely impressed by Charlie's big con trick, by his having knocked on the door of opportunity and its opening up to him, its goods tumbling out.
Now he could take what  he wanted.
Until this moment I'd felt incapable of operating effectively in the world; I didn't know how to do it; events tossed me about.
Now I was beginning to see that it didn't necessarily have to be that way.
My happiness and progress and education could depend on my own activity — as long as it was the right activity at the right time.
My coming appearance in The Jungle Book was meagre in comparison with Charlie's triumph, but soon eyes would be on me; it was a start, and I felt strong and determined.
It would lead upwards.
As we got into the car I looked at Eva and she smiled at me.
I felt she hadn't been thinking about Charlie at all— except as an inspiration — but that, like me, she'd been dwelling on what she might do in the world.
Driving us back home, Eva banged the steering wheel and sang, and yelled out of the window.
‘Weren't they great?
Isn't he a star, Karim!’
‘Yeah, yeah!’
‘They're going to be big, Karim, really huge.
But Charlie will have to jettison that group.
He can make it on his own, don't you think?’
‘Yeah, but what will happen to them?’
‘Those boys?’
She waved them away.
‘But our boy's going up.
Up!
Up!’
She leaned over and kissed me on the cheek.
‘And you too, OK?’
The dress rehearsal of The Jungle Book went well.
We were all surprised by how smooth it was; no one forgot their lines, and technically all was fine.
So we went into the first preview, in front of an audience, with plenty of confidence.
The costumes were amusing and the audience applauded them.
The naughty monkeys screeched their high-pitched calls as the Pack Council met to discuss the man cub's future.
But as Shere Khan growled from the distance in his Hamlet's ghost voice, ‘The cub is mine.
Give him to me.
What have the Free People to do with a man's cub?’
I heard a cracking noise above me.
Unprofessionally, I looked up, to see the iron net of the scaffolding bending, swaying and finally tipping towards me as bolts snapped and lights crashed down on to the floor of the stage.
Voices in the audience shouted out warnings to us.
Most of the front row jumped to their feet and fled up the aisle away from the danger.
I deserted the play, as did the other actors on stage, and leapt into the audience.
I landed on Shadwell, who was already on his feet  screaming at the technicians.
The play was abandoned for that night and the audience sent home.
The rows were horrific, Shadwell a monster.
Two other previews were cut.
There was to be only one preview before the first night.
Naturally, I wanted Mum to be at the first night, and Dad too.
But as they hadn't seen each other since the day they both left the house, I didn't think my debut in The Jungle Bookwas the best time for a reunion.
So I invited Mum, with Uncle Ted and Auntie Jean, to the preview.
This time nothing went wrong.
Afterwards, Uncle Ted, who had his suit and Brylcreem on, announced a treat.
He would take us all out to Trader Vics at the Hilton Hotel.
Mum had dressed up, and was looking all sweet in a blue dress with a bow at the front.
She was cheerful, too; I'd forgotten how happy she could be.
In a fit of unshyness she'd left the shoe shop and was working as a receptionist at a doctor's practice.
She began to discuss illness with authority.
Mum wept with pride at my Mowgli.
Jean, who hadn't wept since the death of Humphrey Bogart, laughed a great deal and was good-tempered and drunk.
‘I thought it would be more amateur,’ she kept saying, obviously surprised that I could be involved in anything that wasn't a total failure.
‘But it was really professional!
And fancy meeting all those television actors!’
The key to impressing Mum and Auntie Jean, and the best way to keep their tongues off the risible subject of my loin-cloth, which inevitably had them quaking with laughter, was to introduce them to the actors afterwards, telling them which sit-coms and police programmes they'd seen them in.
After dinner we went dancing in a night club in the West End.
I'd never seen Mum dance before, but she slipped out of her sandals and danced with Auntie Jean to the Jackson Five.
It was a grand evening.
However, I imagined that the praise I received that night was merely to be a preview of the steaming sauna of appreciation that I'd receive after the first night.
So after the opening I ran out of the dressing room to where Dad, in his red waistcoat, was waiting with all the others.
None of them looked particularly cheerful.
We walked up the street to a restaurant nearby, and still no one spoke to me.
‘Well, Dad,’ I asked, ‘how did you enjoy yourself?
Aren't you glad I didn't become a doctor?’
Like a fool, I'd forgotten that Dad thought honesty a virtue.
He was a compassionate man, Dad, but never at the expense of drawing attention to his own opinions.
‘Bloody half-cocked business,’ he said.
‘That bloody fucker Mr Kipling pretending to whity he knew something about India!
And an awful performance by my boy looking like a Black and White Minstrel!’
Eva restrained Dad.
‘Karim was assured,’ she said firmly, patting my arm.
Fortunately, Changez had chuckled all through the show.
‘Good entertainment,’ he said.
‘Take me again, eh?’
Before we sat down in the restaurant Jamila took me aside and kissed me on the mouth.
I felt Changez's eyes on me.
‘You looked wonderful,’ she said, as if she were speaking to a ten-year-old after a school play.
‘So innocent and young, showing off your pretty body, so thin and perfectly formed.
But no doubt about it, the play is completely neo-fascist —‘
‘Jammie —‘
‘And it was disgusting, the accent and the shit you had smeared over you.
You were just pandering to prejudices —‘
‘Jammie —‘
‘And cliches about Indians.
And the accent — my God, how could you do it?
I expect you're ashamed, aren't you?’
‘I am, actually.’
But she didn't pity me; she mimicked my accent in the play.
‘Actually, you've got no morality, have you?
You'll get it later, I expect, when you can afford it.’
‘You're going too far, Jamila,’ I said, and turned my back on her.
I went and sat with Changez.
The only other significant event of the evening was something that happened between Eva and Shadwell at the far end of the restaurant, beside the toilet.
Shadwell was leaning back against the wall and Eva was angry with him, making hard gestures with her fists.
Many bitter shades of disgust and pain and dejection passed over his face.
At one point Eva turned and gesticulated towards me, as if she were taking him to task for something he'd done to me.
Yes, Shadwell had let her down.
But I knew that nothing would ever discourage him; he'd never give up wanting to be a director, and he'd never be any good.
So that was it.
The Jungle Book was not mentioned again by any of them, as if they weren't ready to see me as an actor but preferred me in my old role as a useless boy.
Yet the play did good business, especially with schools, and I started to relax on stage, and to enjoy acting.
I sent up the accent and made the audience laugh by suddenly relapsing into cockney at odd times.
‘Leave it out, Bagheera,’ I'd say.
I liked being recognized in the pub afterwards, and made myself conspicuous in case anyone wanted my autograph.
Sometimes Shadwell came in to watch the show, and one day he started being nice to me.
I asked Terry why this was.
‘I'm baffled too,’ he said.
Then Shadwell took me to Joe Allen's and offered me a part in his next production, which would be Molière's Le Bourgeois Gentilhomme .
Terry, whose gentleness of heart so melted my own that I helped him sell his newspapers outside factories, on picket lines and outside East End tube stations at seven-thirty in the morning, was encouraging.
‘Accept it,’ he said.
‘It'll do you good.
‘Course, it's crap for actors, but it's experience for you.’
Unlike the other actors — they'd been in the business much longer than I had — I had no idea what work I could get.
So I accepted.
Shadwell and I embraced.
Eva said nothing about it.
‘What about you, Terry?’
I asked one evening.
‘Have you got any work lined up?’
‘Oh yeah.’
‘What?’
‘Nothing precisely,’ he said.
‘But I'm waiting for the call.’
‘What call?’
‘I can't tell you that, Karim.
But I can say confidently that the call is going to come.’
When I turned up at the theatre and Terry and I got changed next to each other, I frequently made a point of saying to him, ‘Well, Terry, has the call come yet?
Has Peter Brook rung?’
Or one of us would rush into the dressing room just before curtain-up and tell Terry there was someone who urgently needed to talk to him on the phone.
Twice he fell for it, running half-dressed out of the room and instructing everyone to hold the show for a few minutes.
He wasn't thrown by our malice.
‘I'm not bothered by your childish games.
I know the call's going to come.
It's not something that makes me anxious at all.
I'm going to wait patiently.’
One night, half-way through the run, the box-office manager excitedly rang through to us back-stage and said that the theatre director Matthew Pyke had booked a ticket for The Jungle Book.
Within fifteen minutes everyone in the cast — apart from me — was talking about this.
I'd never seen such chatter, nervousness and exhilaration in the dressing room before.
But I did know how crucial such visits by hot directors were to actors, who worried constantly about their next job.
The Jungle Book they'd forgotten about: it was in the past.
Now they sat in the tiny dressing room, their washing hanging on the radiators, eating health food and tirelessly sending information and soft-focus photographs of themselves to directors, theatres, agents, TV companies and producers.
And when agents or casting directors deigned to see the show, and stayed to the end, which was rare, the actors crowded around them afterwards, buying them drinks and roaring with laughter at anything they said.
They ached to be remembered: upon such memories an actor's life depended.
This was why Pyke's appearance was so exciting.
He was our most important visitor ever.
He had his own company.
You didn't have to go through him to get to someone who counted: he counted in his own right.
But why had he come to see our pissy show?
We couldn't work it out, although I noticed that Terry was being very cool about the whole thing.
Before the show some of us crowded into the tiny lighting box as Pyke, in his denim dungarees and white T-shirt — he still had long hair — took his seat.
He was accompanied by his wife, Marlene, a middle-aged blonde.
We watched him consult the programme, turning each page and examining our faces and the oblong patch of biography beneath the photographs.
The rest of the cast stood outside and waited for their turn to get a look at Pyke.
I said nothing, but I had no idea who Pyke was and what he'd done.
Was it plays?
Films?
Opera?
Television?
Was he American?
At last I asked Terry; I knew he wouldn't be contemptuous of my ignorance.
Terry eagerly gave me the whole picture; he seemed to know enough about Pyke to write his biography.
Pyke was the star of the flourishing alternative theatre scene; he was one of the most original directors around.
He'd worked and taught at the Magic Theater in San Francisco; had therapy at the  Esalen Institute in Big Sur with Fritz Perls; worked in New York with Chaikin and La Mama.
In London, with a couple of contemporaries from Cambridge, he started his own company, the Movable Theatre, for which he did two ravishing productions a year.
These productions played in London at the end of their well-meant journey around arts centres, youth clubs and studio theatres.
Fashionable people attended the London opening: there were bright rock-stars, other actors like Terence Stamp, politicos like Tariq Ali, most of the ordinary acting profession, and even the public.
Pyke's shows were also commended for their fantastic intermissions, dazzling occasions where the fashionable audience came dressed in such style they resembled Chinese peasants, industrial workers (boiler suits) or South American insurgents (berets).
Naturally Terry had hard-line views on all this, and as we changed for the show on that charged night he proclaimed them to the entire cast, as if he were addressing a meeting.
‘Comrades, what is Pyke's stuff?
What is it, after all — just think for a minute — but a lot of reformist and flatulent ‘left-wing’ politics!
It's plump actors pretending to be working class, when their fathers are neuro-surgeons.
It's voluptuous actresses — even more beautiful than you all are — hand-picked and caressed by Pyke!
Why do they always perform the whole show in the nude?
Ask yourself these questions!
It's fucking crap for actors, comrades.
Absolute crap for actors!’
The other actors shouted Terry down.
‘It's not crap for actors!’ they cried.
‘At least it's decent work after doing The Jungle Bunnyand thrillers and beer commercials.’
Terry had taken off his trousers by now, and two women in the cast were looking through a gap in the curtain as he prepared to propagate his analysis of Pyke.
Slowly he hung his trousers on a hanger, which he placed on the communal rail which ran through the dressing room.
He liked girls looking at his muscly legs; he liked them hearing his muscly arguments, too.
‘Oh yes,’ he said.
‘You're right.
There's truth in what you say.
It's better than fuck-all.
Much better.
That's why, comrades, I sent Pyke my particulars.’
Everyone groaned.
But with Pyke to impress in the audience we had good reason to spring energetically over the scaffolding.
The show was the best it had ever been, and its proper length, for once.
Recently we'd been taking ten minutes a night off it in order to have more time in the pub.
After this show we changed quickly, without the usual bickering and jokes and attempts to pull each other 's underpants off.
Naturally I was the slowest, having the most to remove.
There wasn't a working shower and I had to clean off my make-up with cold-cream and by splashing water from the sink over myself.
Terry waited impatiently for me.
When I'd finished and it was just the two of us left I put my arms around him and kissed his face.
‘Come on,’ he said.
‘Let's move.
Pyke's waiting for me.’
‘Let's stay here for a while.’
‘Why?’
I said, ‘I'm thinking of joining the Party.
I want to discuss various ideological problems I have.’
‘Bollocks,’ he said.
He moved away from me.
‘I'm not against this,’ he said.
‘What?’
‘Touching.’
But he was against it.
‘It's just that I have to think about my future right now.
My call has come, Karim.’
‘Yeah?’
I said.
‘Is this it?
Is this the call?’
‘Yeah, this is fucking it,’ he said.
‘Please.
Come on.’
‘Do up my buttons,’ I said.
‘Christ.
You.
You stupid boy.
OK.
Come on.
Pyke's waiting for me.’
We hurried to the pub.
I'd never seen Terry look so hopeful about anything before.
I really wanted him to get the job.
Pyke was leaning against the bar with Marlene, sipping a half of lager.
He didn't look the drinking type.
Three of our company went up to him and chatted briefly.
Pyke replied, but barely seemed bothered to move his lips.
Then Shadwell came into the pub, saw Pyke, nodded contemptuously at us, and left.
Instead of going over to Pyke, Terry led me to a corner table among the old men who drank alone every night, and there he calmly sucked his roll-ups as we sipped our usual pint with a whisky chaser.
‘Pyke's not showing much interest in you,’ I pointed out.
Terry was confident.
‘He'll be over.
He's very cold — you know what middle-class people are like.
No feelings.
I reckon he wants my  working-class experience to give his puerile political ideas some authenticity.’
‘Say no,’ I advised him.
‘I bloody might.
Critics always say his work's ‘austere’ or ‘puritanical’because he likes bare raked stages and theatres with their brickwork sticking out all over the place and no props.
as if my mum and the working class like that.
They want comfortable seats, french windows and sweets.’
Just then Pyke turned towards us and raised his glass a fraction of an inch.
Terry smiled back.
‘'Course, Pykie's got his virtues.
He's not self-promoting like those other cunt directors and conductors and producers who just live off other people's talent.
He never does interviews and he never goes on telly.
He's good like that.
But,’ said Terry darkly, leaning towards me, ‘this is something you should know, if you're lucky enough to work with him one day.’
He told me that Pyke's private life wasn't a desert of austere and puritanical practices.
If the inevitably deformed critics who admired his work — and the critics who sat with their faces pointing up at us did seem to have the countenances of gargoyles, while the aisles were crammed with their wheelchairs — knew of certain weaknesses — certain indulgences, let us say — they would see Pyke's work in a different light.
‘Oh yes, a very different light.’
‘What kind of light?’
‘I can't tell you that.’
‘But, Terry, surely we hide nothing from each other?’
‘No, no, I can't say.
Sorry.’
Terry didn't gossip.
He believed that people were made by the impersonal forces of history, not by greed, malice and lust.
And besides, Pyke was now walking straight towards us.
Terry hurriedly stubbed out his roll-up, pushed his chair back and got up.
His hand even went up to flatten his hair.
He shook hands with Pyke.
Then he introduced us to each other.
‘Nice to see you, Terry,’ Pyke said smoothly.
‘Yeah, and you, and you.’
‘You make an excellent snake.’
‘Thank you.
But thank God someone's doing some classy work in this crumby country, eh?’
‘Who do you mean?’
‘You, Matthew.’
‘Oh yes.
Me.’
‘Yes.’
Pyke looked at me and smiled.
‘Come and have a drink at the bar, Karim.’
‘Me?’
‘Why not?’
‘OK.
See you later, Terry,’ I said.
As I got up Terry looked at me as if I'd just announced I had a private income.
He sank back into his chair as Pyke and I walked away from the table, and tossed the whisky down his throat.
As Pyke got me a half of bitter I stood there regarding the rows of inverted bottles behind the barman's head, not looking at the other actors in the pub, who I knew were all staring at me.
I meditated for a few seconds, concentrating on my breathing, immediately aware of how shallow it was.
When we were set up with drinks, Pyke said, ‘Tell me about yourself.’
I hesitated.
I looked at Marlene, who was standing behind us, talking to an actor.
‘I don't know where to begin.’
‘Tell me something you think might interest me.’
And he looked at me with full concentration.
I had no choice.
I began to talk rapidly and at random.
He said nothing.
I went on.
I thought: I am being psychoanalysed.
I began to imagine that Pyke would understand everything I said.
I was glad he was there; there were things it was necessary to say.
So I told him things I'd never told anyone — how much I resented Dad for what he'd done to Mum, and how Mum had suffered, how painful the whole thing had been, though I was only now beginning to feel it.
The other actors, who were now gathered around Terry's table with jars of yellow beer in front of them, had turned their chairs around to watch me, as if I were a football match.
They must have been amazed and resentful that Pyke wanted to listen to me, of all people, someone who was barely an actor.
When I faltered as the realization hit me that it wasn't Mum who'd neglected me, but I who'd neglected Mum, Pyke said gently, ‘I think you may like to be in my next production.’
I woke from my introspective dream and said, ‘What kind of show will it be?’
I noticed that when Pyke was about to talk he put his head  thoughtfully to one side and looked away into the distance.
He used his hands flirtatiously, slowly, not flapping or pointing but caressing and floating, as if wiping his flat hand inches from the surface of a painting.
He said, ‘I don't know.’
‘What kind of part will it be?’
He shook his head regretfully.
‘I'm afraid I can't begin to say.’
‘How many people will be in it?’
There was a long pause.
His hand, with the fingers splayed and taut, waved in front of his face.
‘Don't ask me.’
‘D'you know what you're doing?’
I asked, more bravely.
‘No.’
‘Well, I don't know if I want to work in that vague kind of way.
I'm inexperienced, you know.’
Pyke conceded.
‘I think it may revolve around the only subject there is in England.’
‘I see.’
‘Yes.’
He looked at me as if I were sure of what this was.
‘Class,’ he said.
‘Is that OK for you?’
‘Yes, I think so.’
He touched me on the shoulder.
‘Good.
Thank you for joining us.’
It was as if I were doing him a big favour.
I finished my drink, quickly said goodbye to the other actors and got out as fast as I could, not wanting to register their smirks and curiosity.
I was walking across the car park when someone jumped on my back.
It was Terry.
‘Leave it out,’ I said sternly, pushing him off.
‘Oh yeah.’
There were no laughs in his face.
He looked very low.
He made me feel ashamed of my sudden happiness.
1 walked to the bus stop in silence with him beside me.
It was cold, dark and raining.
‘Has Pyke offered you a part?’ he said at last.
‘Yes.’
‘Liar!’
I said nothing.
‘Liar!’ he said.
I knew he was so incensed he couldn't control himself; I couldn't blame him for the fury which inhabited him.
‘It can't be true, it can't be true,’ he said.
Suddenly I shouted out into the night air.
‘Yes, yes, yes, it is true!’
And now the world had some tension in it; now it twanged and vibrated with meaning and possibility!
‘Yes, yes, fucking yes!’
When I got to the theatre next day someone had laid a dirty red carpet from the dressing-room door to the spot where I normally changed.
‘Can I help you off with your clothes?’ one actor said.
‘Can I have your autograph?’ said another.
I received daffodils, roses and an acting primer.
The EST freak, Boyd, said, as he took off his trousers and shook his penis at me, ‘If I weren't white and middle class I'd have been in Pyke's show now.
Obviously mere talent gets you nowhere these days.
Only the disadvantaged are going to succeed in seventies’ England.’
For a few days I was too cowardly to tell Shadwell of Pyke's offer, and that I was not going to do the Moliere.
I was happy and didn't want the pleasure of anticipation soured by a row with him.
So Shitvolumes started preparing his next show as if I were going to be in it, until one day, just before The Jungle Bookwas about to go up, he came into the dressing room.
‘Jeremy,’ I said, ‘I think I'd better tell you something.’
We went into the communal lavatory, the only private space backstage, and I broke the news to him.
Shadwell nodded and said gently, ‘You're being ungrateful, Karim.
You shouldn't just bugger off, you know, it's not right.
We all love you here, OK?’
‘Please understand, Jeremy — Pyke's a big man.
Very important.
Surely there's a tide in the affairs of men which taken —‘
Shadshit's voice suddenly rose to rehearsal pitch and he walked out of the toilet and into the dressing room.
Behind us in the auditorium the show was about to begin, and the audience were in their seats.
They could hear every syllable.
I felt particularly ridiculous hurrying along behind him in my loin-cloth.