

The impact of traffic in residential areas
The main function of a residential area is to house people and to provide the everyday necessities of life.
As well as homes we would expect to see schools, clinics, shops and social and religious institutions, with perhaps some offices, businesses and small factories in addition.
In terms of traffic, the street system should provide access to and from the dwellings and activities, as well as distributing traffic to and from nearby main roads.
The major difference between new and older housing areas is often in the relationship to traffic arteries and in the organisation of traffic.
In newer areas one would expect main roads to form boundaries, yet residential areas in the past were often arranged around the town centre along major roads, so that in older areas a distributor with shops on either side may even form the centre of a residential district.
However, the presence of a mainly traffic-orientated road within a district of housing — though not ideal — should not divert attention from the fact that the area's main use is for living, not travelling.
The environmental impact of motorised traffic in residential areas
The impacts of traffic on street life were described as ‘subtle, complex and, in many instances, very destructive’ by Donald Appleyard in his pioneering work in the 1970s Pushkarev and Zupan agree, though they perhaps express their view with more poetic licence:
‘When everything was finished, when our beloved planet assumed a fairly habitable look, motorists appeared on the scene…note that the automobile itself was invented by pedestrians but somehow the motorists forgot that very quickly.
Gentle and intelligent pedestrians began to get squashed.
Streets, created by pedestrians, were usurped by motorists.
Roadways were widened to double their…size, sidewalks narrowed…pedestrians began to cower in fear against the walls of buildings.’
These views seem to be widespread.
When the National Consumer Council carried out its ‘Consumer Concerns Survey’ in 1979–80, problems faced by pedestrians and in the neighbourhood emerged as particular sources of complaint.
Some 24 per cent of respondents had encountered problems during the previous year with walking, 21 per cent with dirty streets, 19 per cent with traffic or trains around the home and 14 per cent with dust and smells.
Such results are subject to great difficulties of interpretation.
For example, responses may confuse experience in the street with that at home, or that from the town in general with that in the neighbourhood  in particular .
People may also learn to live with problems, complaining less as they get used to them.
Nevertheless, though the detail may be problematic, the general importance of ‘street related’ issues in people's appreciation of the quality of life is clear.
There is, as one study concluded, ‘an overwhelming desire to shop and live in conditions free from disturbance and interference from traffic’(Figure 2.1).
What are the environmental impacts of traffic?
Noise is one of the most widespread concerns, whether stemming from a background rumble or the occasional roar of a high-revving car or motor-bike.
Brake- and tyre-squeal, together with banging of unsecured loads or loose bodywork causes as much disturbance as engine noise and probably more anxiety.
Stationary vehicles may cause considerable nuisance, through having doors slammed, sound-systems overamplified or starter-motors repeatedly engaged, especially when this happens late at night or early in the morning.
The air pollution that is associated with car use has been more popularly understood in recent years.
The effect of lead compounds on children, of other emissions on the ‘greenhouse effect’ and sulphurous and nitrous emissions on acid rain have all become matters for widespread discussion.
However, none of these pollutants is actually visible, so that in a residential area the types of air pollution that cause the greatest annoyance are the traffic fumes, smell and dust which penetrate houses, discolour exterior paintwork and make walking and cycling less pleasant.
Even when it is at rest, silent and apparently non-polluting, the car continues to have environmental impacts.
It reduces visual amenity by blocking views, cluttering open space and damaging pavement surfaces when parked (Figures 2.2 and 2.3).
In front gardens, lawns are paved over for off-street parking space and in the road more intrusion results from signs, barriers and other traffic-related street furniture.
Much litter is related to vehicles too, whether thrown from them in passing or resulting from their roadside cleansing or repair.
These environmental problems associated with traffic in housing areas affect very large numbers of people.
Around a half of all people claim to be bothered by noise, a third by dirt, a half by fumes and a quarter by vibration.
But even these concerns pale by comparison with the fears that people have about traffic safety.
For example, a 1982 opinion poll in the UK found that in answer to the question ‘What is most valued as a contribution to the quality of life?’, the percentage wanting ‘safe streets’ was 72 compared to 53 for ‘attractive countryside’, 51 for ‘unpolluted atmosphere’and 46 for ‘good public transport’and only 37 for ‘access to a car’.
If our concern is with the habitability of residential areas, it is clear that the prevention of accidents and the limitation of their severity must be the principal goal.
Danger in the street
To identify the accident problems specific to residential areas is an immensely difficult task.
For example, though it is known that some 80 per cent of pedestrian fatalities in Britain occur on built-up roads, statistics are not available separately for residential areas.
Indications of the likely proportions come from studies in two Dutch towns and in Berlin, which show some 20 per cent of injury-related accidents in built-up areas occurring on typical residential streets, and from OECD members who report that about thirty per cent of urban accidents occur on non-arterial roads.
If these proportions were applied broadly to Britain, some 50–60,000 accidents would occur on non-arterial roads each year, including 35–40,000 on residential streets.’
The analysis of such accidents is also bedevilled by the fact that they are scattered widely through residential areas, with few clusters or ‘black-spots’ in evidence.
The low frequency with which accidents occur at specific locations means that statistical comparison of incidents or evaluation of counter-measures is fraught with difficulty.
Some spatial variations in accident distribution are observable, however, as Dutch research shows that the majority of accidents occur on roads that serve a distribution function.
This depends very much on the age of the victim though, for accidents involving small children usually occur in their own residential street, whilst older children are more often involved at junctions and along busier streets.
The character of the area also has a bearing on accident occurrence.
Older residential areas appear to be less safe than new ones, a result of mixed land uses and functions, higher densities and lack of play space.
In all residential areas, safety is at its lowest in long straight streets, in streets with many junctions and those with few play facilities.
The relatively quiet street with lines of parked cars is particularly dangerous: the Netherlands Association for Protecting the Pedestrian reports that 70 per cent of the fatal accidents in that country involving child pedestrians occur in such streets (Figure 2.4).
Not all sections of the population are equally susceptible to accidents.
Those aged above 60 have a pedestrian casualty rate per head of population which is nearly double that of the 20–39 age group, whilst their greater likelihood of dying from a particular accident gives them a fatality rate six and one half times higher.
The reliance of elderly people on walking as a mode of transport increases their exposure to risk whilst their failing faculties raise the likelihood of them not seeing the striking vehicle.
According to OECD studies the proportion of elderly people killed and injured is greater in residential areas than elsewhere in urban areas.
This is so also for children, so that together these two groups often constitute the majority of casualties on residential streets.
Children represent the most vulnerable group in residential areas, whether on foot or as cyclists.
One English study showed accident rates of 5–9 year olds 15–20 times higher in residential areas than the 17–59 age group, whilst another has shown that young pedestrians account for 38 per cent of recorded casualties in residential area accidents and young cyclists a further nine per cent.
Study after study reveals the dangers of lightly trafficked streets near home for young children.
To take two examples, in Groningen half the number of pedestrian accidents to those under 13 occur in streets with less than 200–350 motor vehicles per hour.
In Rotterdam, half of the 5–9 year olds involved in accidents were hit by cars within 200 metres of their homes.
In recent years, the pedestrian accident rate for children has improved relative to that for adults.
The number of under 10 year olds killed or seriously injured each year has fallen by 37 per cent from 1976–86 in Britain, compared to a 7.5 per cent reduction for all age groups.
Though there is no evidence from residential areas specifically, because  car-child collisions take place predominantly near the child's home, these statistics might seem to indicate an improvement in the safety of residential neighbourhoods for children.
However, the fall in child-pedestrian casualties may, contrarily, indicate a reduction in accident opportunity, as parents have removed their children from the street because the environment has become more dangerous, not less.
Over the long term there has been an ‘age-migration’ of the accident statistics, whereby the number of under-15s killed per annum has fallen by 61 per cent from 1927–82 compared to an 80 per cent increase for the 15–24 year old group.
This is associated with a reduction of freedom for the former group and increasing personal access to motorised transport for the latter.
Fearful of the obvious dangers of traffic and molestation, parents have reacted by forbidding street play to younger offspring and by chauffeuring them around in the family car, itself more widely available.
The reduction in child pedestrian fatalities may not therefore be quite what it seems, having perhaps more to do with parental sacrifice of the freedom of movement of their children than with any tangible gains in traffic safety.
The consumption of parents' time in this role as ‘transport guardians’ is, as Hillman and Whalley have pointed out, an additional major societal consequence.
Safer streets for children
As children are those that are most at risk from impact by vehicles in housing areas, any search for safer streets should focus principally on them (Figure 2.5).
Strategies can best be categorised under the headings of the so-called ‘three E's’ or engineering, education and enforcement.
Engineering involves changing the road environment so that the road user is physically guided into taking the correct action
Education means supplying road users with information and practical training to cope with this environment
Enforcement requires the application of traffic laws designed to guide users safely round the road system.
We may deal with these in turn.
The engineering approach not only includes the road system designs that are debated in this book, but also incorporates attempts to modify the vehicles.
These could involve technical improvements to reduce the likelihood of collision, for example through the introduction of anti-lock braking systems.
Soft top- and front-designs could also be developed to minimise pedestrian injury once a collision has occurred, such as impact-absorbing bumpers, recessed windscreen wiper spindles, and hard junctions between bonnet and wing moved to the sides rather than the top of the car.
This approach is typified by Mackay, who has argued that because injury reduction was more realistic in the short term than accident prevention, one should think of the front end of a car ‘primarily as a structure with which to hit a pedestrian’.
Vehicle lighting systems could be improved too, though it is true to say that much could also be gained by improving the conspicuity of pedestrians at night and in fog and rain.
Secondly, much effort over the years has gone into education for road safety, though the concentration on advice to adult pedestrians and training for children has the unfortunate effect of apparently placing on the victim the principal responsibility for avoiding an accident.
The OECD has recently recommended instead that education for improving safety of pedestrians should be aimed at motorists as well as pedestrians, perhaps via mass-media campaigns.
It has also endorsed continual and greater efforts to instruct children in traffic safety, for there is ample evidence that by such means the knowledge of road safety procedures can be improved.
However, to change the behaviour of young children and to maintain the changes requires programmes of instruction that are ‘far more intensive than has conventionally been the case in the past.’
Thirdly, as far as enforcement is concerned, there are many ways in which compliance with the traffic laws is essential for pedestrian safety — illegal parking and drunken-driving being obvious examples.
However, for pedestrian safety, controlling vehicle speed is crucial, for the likelihood of collision and the severity of the consequences both increase with rising speeds.
Thus it was that the 30 mph (50 km/h) speed limit in built up areas led to a 50 per cent reduction in pedestrian deaths in London by 1935.
However, there are two further problems involved here, those of disregard for the limit and the level at which the limit is set.
Firstly, in most streets in Britain where a 30 mph limit is in force, there are no physical obstructions to prevent speeding.
Adherence to the limit tends to be checked only by chance observation from police cars or by  targeting a specific street about which residents have complained.
Given their manpower resources, it is not reasonable to expect the police to be able to enforce rigorously a large-scale, blanket speed limit in residential areas and it is apparent that they do not try to do so.
The efficacy of speed limits thus depends on drivers' self-discipline, but this is known to be lax, particularly as modern cars are neither designed nor advertised to encourage low-speed driving.
It is perhaps overstating  the case to say that motorists can speed with impunity in residential areas, but it is certainly true that the limit is widely disregarded and rarely enforced.
With powerful cars, no physical obstacles and with the knowledge that legal retribution is unlikely, it is not surprising that the 30 mph limit is held in contempt by many drivers all of the time and abused by nearly all drivers some of the time.
Simply putting up speed limit signs, then, is known not to work.
If limits are restricted to special locations and/or special times, such as near schools at opening and closing times, compliance is more likely, with less speeding if the reason for the limit is clearly indicated.
With that said, a large number of studies have shown that physical measures are much more effective in reducing speeding.
As the OECD research group on traffic safety in residential areas has commented, ‘signing regulations should be supported by engineering structural measures as enforcement would be expected to be minimal.’
The second problem is that even if a motorist — despite all the odds — actually adheres to the recommended limits, all the evidence points to the fact that he or she is still driving too fast for the safety of local residents.
An emergency stop from 50 km/h (30 mph) takes 33 metres, which, in a situation where a driver may be confronted at any moment by a dashing child, is clearly far too much.
At 30 km/h the braking distance is reduced to 16 metres (Figure 2.6).
Not only does this make collision avoidance more likely, but it also dramatically reduces the severity of the consequences for the pedestrian.
Swiss research has shown, for example, that at collision speeds of below 25 km/h only three per cent of pedestrians are severely injured whereas at over 50 km/h less than ten per cent survive.
For many observers, there is a dangerous gap in the middle of this set of procedures.
We fail to design pedestrian-friendly cars, to enforce slow speeds in housing areas, or to educate drivers in pedestrian safety.
In relying on child-training, we try to inculcate ‘traffic sense’ in children, despite the evidence that present levels of training do not succeed in getting the message to stick.
Indeed, some argue that young children cannot have traffic sense precisely because they are children.
They cite a child's restricted field of vision, inability to estimate speeds and perception of the street as an exciting adventurous place, not a dangerous one.
They argue that children are dashing, impulsive and playful; to try to eliminate this would be to attempt to deny their stage of development.
This line of thinking is adopted by the Netherlands Association for Protecting the Pedestrian which contends that ‘children are not pocket-sized adults’, citing the various ways in which children interpret traffic signs.
For example, the familiar red triangular sign picturing two running children, internationally accepted as a warning to motorists that they are approaching a school, was interpreted by almost all of a sample of children as being a sign for them to observe, not one for cautioning drivers .
The meaning that they gave it should send cold shivers down the spine of any parent: fully a half thought that it was an instruction to cross the road, and half of these thought that it was showing you how to do it — by running!
This is anecdotal evidence to be sure, but it lends support to a considerable body of opinion which sees training of children as either inadequate or ineffective:
‘It is the single car being driven fast down an empty street which creates the greatest danger.
It is understandable: the child considers himself safe in the residential street and is inattentive on the way to school.
He does not notice the noiseless, fast moving car until it is too late…
The driver cannot react in time to the child running unexpectedly into the street.
The motorist is driving too fast because he doesn't expect any children, or he expects them to be careful’
Of all the elements that go to make up the accident causation system, the one that has received the least attention in residential areas is the design of the road network itself.
Modifying the behaviour of drivers and victims, or improving the design of the vehicle has had only limited success.
The age-migration of accident victims is further evidence of the failure of existing approaches.
It shows that the street has been given to the car and attempts have been made to adjust the child: on finding that the child cannot be adjusted parents have removed it from the street.
It has left society with the obligation to give much more serious thought to adjusting the street environment rather than concentrating on adjusting the behaviour of the user.
The way that this has been done in the past is the subject of the next chapter; the way that it might be done in the future is the justification for this book.
Streets for people
If, as indicated above, there are paramount safety and environmental reasons for addressing the traffic problem in residential areas, then it should not be forgotten that there are social arguments too.
Appleyard and Lintell's research in San Francisco showed how residents' privacy diminished in heavily trafficked streets, their network of acquaintances shrank, their sense of personal territory was restricted and their interest in the street was curtailed by its streams of traffic.
To many the street now has a negative connotation, as phrases such as‘streetcrime’ and ‘on the street’might indicate.
The word ‘street’ is ‘used as a metaphor for what is aberrant and fearful in the light of social norms.’
Yet a living street is a multi-functional place, with its interest provided by its contrasting uses.
It is, for example, a public space and yet a private one too, as an extension of the adjacent buildings.
Again, it is a canal for all kinds of transport and yet is a bridge to the outside world, providing access.
With respect to these many functions ‘creating and recreating a living street is finding  the balance appropriate to the circumstances.'’
It is evident that in many of our residential areas no such balance any longer exists, for the street has been given over entirely to the car, with other functions now expected to be subordinate to it.
Transport has, in DeJong's phrase, ‘differentiated and killed the street’ in a sequence of events through time.
First came the banishment of pedestrians to pavements and the widening of surfaces by demolition and the infilling of watercourses.
Later the addition of a third dimension in the form of cables and pipes sterilised the overlying surface as did the laying of rails to facilitate rapid movement by tram.
The final destruction of the road's equilibrium took place when it was given over to high speed travel by car.
As DeJong says, ‘One single purpose has attained predominance, has acquired the monopoly for which everything is sacrificed: the others have been driven out, either totally or into special roads’.
Among the casualties of the process that he lists are animals, nature, street-trades, professions at the edge of the street, celebrations and recreation, official and military displays, processions and parades, and children and children's games.
If habitability and safety are to return to residential streets a balance in their use must be restored, but the established view resists the necessary shift in direction.
As Anderson puts it,
‘the actual and potential characteristics of streets are too little considered.
Architects often bury themselves in individual building projects, ignoring any responsibility to the public space of the city; planners work at a scale where the street is seen only as a traffic channel…‘
Yet the movement towards balance is growing, not just for the environmental and safety reasons outlined earlier, but also for social reasons.
In particular, there is a need to give priority to the street's primary use, for the residential street environment is a matter of continual concern to residents, but of only fleeting interest to the passing driver.
Justice demands therefore that it be designed primarily for living.
not travel.
Moreover, those who have greatest need of the street should have at least an equal right to its use, so that children and elderly people.
for example, should not have their links with the outside world severed by traffic flows past their doors.
It is thus not fanciful to claim, as De Boer has done, that the social motives of protecting ‘liveability’ in residential areas demand nothing less than ‘recapturing the street from the automobile’.
Radburn, Buchanan and Scaft: guiding principles of traffic and housing
The previous chapter has shown how conflict arises between those passing through a street and those living on it.
A ‘liveable’ street must not have fast or heavy traffic, or else it will be abandoned to transport, even though its design may not be appropriate for this use.
Throughout the world the growth of automobility has produced increasing volumes of fast-flowing traffic through ill-suited road networks.
For the traveller it has meant congestion and delay; for the resident it has produced noise, ugliness and fear, and a turning away from the street as the centre of community activity.
Though these problems are a characteristic feature of modern life, they have been with us for a very long time.
In Britain road ‘improvement’ schemes to widen roads and remove traffic bottlenecks were under way by the 1930's in order to allow greater volumes and speeds of traffic.
The approach was reactive and piecemeal, with little appreciation of traffic now as a system or of the relationships between land use and traffic generation.
Each engineering ‘solution’ to a problem was simply, in time, overwhelmed by the increasing volume of traffic.
However, as shopping still had to be done, schools reached and roads crossed whatever the road width or traffic volume, accident levels continued to rise and living environments to deteriorate.
An exception to these incremental approaches to growing traffic-related problems was the broader perspective provided by Alker Tripp, an Assistant Commissioner at Scotland Yard with much experience of traffic problems in a large city.
It was he that realised that if solutions to deteriorating road safety were to be sought in terms of the physical environment for traffic, it was not simply a matter of improving roads, but of redesigning whole road systems:
‘It is wrong to have the local groups of population clustering about conduits that carry high speed traffic; it is equally wrong to lead the heavy traffic through places where shopping crowds congregate…
Replanning is the only cure.’
Two practical features of Tripp's proposals were his advocacy of a hierarchy of roads — arterial, sub-arterial and local — and the use of ‘precincts’ of shopping, business or residences from which traffic would be excluded.
These ideas were to prove fruitful in the longer term, but their immediate practical impact was small.
The beliefs of the time were not to be easily undermined: as traffic grew the conventional wisdom was that roads should be widened to accommodate it.
However, as the widened roads generated traffic to fill the space and as post-war prosperity spread car ownership, so the ‘solution’ of forcing larger volumes of traffic along urban streets led to ever-increasing congestion, public agitation and governmental concern.
The report that resulted  — Buchanan's Traffic in Towns — dealt with the broad sweep of issues surrounding car use and the resulting physical form of towns.
Though changing methods of planning for traffic specifically in residential areas were not a central thrust of Traffic in Towns , the book provided a context for residential area strategies which, in the event, have guided a number of countries in the ensuing quarter century.
Environmental Areas
One of Buchanan's enduring practical proposals was that of a hierarchy of urban roads, which would be so arranged as to create ‘urban rooms’ from which through traffic would be excluded.
These ‘environmental areas’ were not car-free precincts on the Tripp model, but consisted of areas penetrated only by ‘local distributors’and ‘access roads’that carried traffic essential to the local conduct of shopping, living and working.
Non-essential traffic would be diverted to ‘district’ and ‘primary distributors’(Figure 3.1) The ‘environmental area’concept was seen as applicable throughout the city, producing an interlacing framework of distributing roads embracing cells of quieter activity.
These principles were readily accepted and widely implemented in new developments from the 1960s onwards.
They were particularly influential in the later new towns where they reaffirmed and codified practice already established in the ‘Mark I’ towns.
However, it proved much more difficult to apply the concept to established urban areas with their great diversity of fabric and layout.
Nevertheless, where redevelopment took place, primary distributors were inserted in inner city areas with interstitial cells frequently reconstructed as environmental areas.
Many of the 900 General Improvement Areas announced in the 1969–73 period were ‘urban rooms’ on the Buchanan principle, though their size was small and not all of the levels of the road hierarchy were present.
However, where major reconstruction was not envisaged, attempting to insert hierarchies into existing networks was likely to be problematical, both in terms of provision of the major distributor roads and the environmental areas between them.
Many of the boundary roads to which through traffic would be displaced are lined with housing: as Plowden comments, ‘the environmental consequences of imposing yet heavier traffic burdens on them cannot be dismissed simply by christening them ‘arterial roads’ or ‘distributors’.’
To widen them into new highways would be immensely expensive and responsible for great social dislocation.
In short, the message of Traffic in Towns was that in order to find civilized ways of accommodating larger volumes of cars, more money could be spent on physical alteration to the area to raise environmental standards or to increase accessibility levels, or both.
Money would have to be found to civilize the car or its use would have to be restrained.
In the event, few attempts at car restraint were made because it was assumed that the money would be found for reconstruction, but in the crisis-ridden post-1960s British economy, available funds never approached the levels needed for a widespread application of environmental area principles.
Moreover, deep-rooted public opposition to urban road construction emerged in the 1970s, so that the only feasible way forward would have been a policy of car restraint.
But this nettle was never grasped; in the absence of a coherent national urban transport policy neither restraint nor reconstruction have been consistently practised and British cities have become used to ‘muddling through’, without any clear idea of the goal they are trying to achieve.
The contrast with West Germany is sharp, for although the 1965 German equivalent of Traffic in Towns echoed Buchanan's views on the need for the establishment of environmental standards, the response can be seen as the departure point for much of the environmental traffic management practised there since.
Provided with the same choices as the UK, the German recognition of the inadequacy of funds and the consequent inevitability of restraint measures has proved to be prescient.
The pedestrianisation  of the city centres and the huge investment In public transport systems as alternatives to road building have meant that ‘German cities have led and the rest of the world — including Britain — have followed at a distance.’
Traffic segregation: Radburn and Bijlmermeer
Of course the influence of Buchanan has not been confined to Western Europe.
In the USA the concept of ‘environmental areas’ was seen as a powerful reinforcement of the similar ideas contained in Clarence Perry's ‘neighbourhood units’and the design of Stein and Wright for Radburn, New Jersey in 1928.
Within the ‘urban rooms’ there are, however, significant differences in the treatment of circulation, with the Radburn design confronting head-on a problem that Buchanan sidestepped.
Hillman amongst others has pointed to the way in which the impacts of local traffic inside Buchanan's environmental areas seem to be ignored, as if the only danger comes from through traffic.
In fact the remaining internal traffic certainly impinges on children's road safety and reduces their freedom to get around outside the immediate vicinity of the house.
As Plowden summarises, ‘Action on through traffic is…hardly ever sufficient as a means of creating or restoring good environmental conditions.’
In contrast, Radburn's layout adopts the apparently obvious solution to this problem by segregating the traffic from the people so that they are no longer in direct conflict.
The houses cluster along short culs-de-sac from distributor roads, and separate footways and cyclepaths occupy the central open space.
Variants of this Radburn design have been much used in post-war Britain, so that culs-de-sac and loop-streets are familiar elements in post-war housing areas.
The first application, at Laindon East in Basildon new town, is illustrated in Figure 3.2.
Here vehicle access to the dwellings is via culs-de-sac which end in forecourts to garages, with houses directly adjacent or reached along short footpaths.
The whole district is served by a comprehensive system of footpaths which allow access to the neighbourhood centre and school without the need for a road crossing.
in other applications of the principle architects experimented with combinations of loop roads and culs-de-sac, footpath or courtyard access and end-on blocks, all designed to achieve traffic segregation and all claiming to be ‘Radburn’ in style.
Many of these housing areas were very successful in their own way, though none achieved the ‘informal naturalness’ of the original: as Hall comments ‘Radburn is the best Radburn layout.'’
Some, indeed, were criticised for aspects of their habitability, such as mothers' inability to watch, from the kitchen, children at play on the open space located at the front of the houses.
In general, though, it was not so much that the Radburn approach was questioned, but more perhaps that the densities at which it was increasingly being applied were inappropriate.
The original seven dwellings to the acre had been raised in Britain to around seventeen, at which density ‘culs-de-sac and walkways, cars and garages did not merge into the landscape so happily.'’
Where densities need to be even higher for reasons of land availability or cost, the combination of traffic segregation with an attractive living environment is more difficult still to achieve, for it usually implies construction of grade-separated routes for pedestrians and motorised traffic.
There have been many variants, but one of the most extensive and thorough applications of this principle has been at Bijlmermeer in south-east Amsterdam.
Here in the 1960s was planned a new environment of high-rise blocks in a parkland landscape, with the entire ground level reserved for pedestrian and cycle traffic (Figure 3.3).
Motorised movement is restricted to an elevated system of roads which connect to large parking garages.
Shopping and other facilities are located at ground level underneath the garages and are accessible by lifts.
The traditional street has been replaced in this layout by walkways within the buildings and footpaths which connect to shops, services, garages and the elevated metro stations (Figure 3.4).
Obviously such strict separation of functions results in a much reduced level of conflict between pedestrian and vehicle and a consequent lowered accident rate.
In Bijlmermeer itself, for example, Wegman has shown that children under 12 are involved in fewer accidents than in more traditional street layouts.
Nevertheless, these arrangements have been subjected to considerable criticism, although much of it is related to the high-rise building, difficulty of supervising children, industrialised building materials and the other, now familiar, complaints  about such brutal townscapes.
There are perceived transport disadvantages too, not least the lack of vehicle access to the front door for the disabled and for family occasions such as weddings and funerals.
The segregation of people and vehicles, what is more, has led to new and unforeseen problems, such as the fear that cars are more easily stolen or vandalised when they are out of sight or that segregated pedestrian areas make identification of strangers more difficult and facilitate unobserved escape from the scene of criminal activity.
Indeed in the case of Bijlmermeer, there is concern over the residents' increased fear of assault by assailants concealed in shrubbery close to walkways between the flat blocks, so that in future some vehicular access to some of the blocks is to be permitted, even though it undermines the integrity of the segregation principle.
Significantly, more recent housing in the same development has been constructed without either high-rise building or segregated traffic arrangements.
These experiences in Holland are by no means unique.
Similar criticism has emerged from elsewhere, such as in Sweden where the so-called SCAFT guidelines for the layout of residential neighbourhoods on traffic segregation principles have led to ‘dull residential areas’ with operating difficulties for public transport services.
Wherever such arrangements have been attempted, they have led to the growing realisation that segregation does not provide a balanced solution for both traffic and environmental problems.
In any case, such approaches could scarcely be adopted in existing residential areas, because of high cost, the unsuitable arrangements of roads, or lack of space.
As a consequence of these practical deficiencies, the principle of strict traffic segregation has been replaced in most Western societies by a repertoire of policies developed not just to improve traffic safety, but to do so without detracting from the quality of life in residential districts.
Box 1: OECD-RECOMMENDED SAFETY MEASURES IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS
New residential areas
‘…strict differentiation of streets according to their traffic function leads to safer residential areas;
…distribution of traffic into a residential area with multiple access from a ring road is safer than central distribution;
…full segregation of vehicle and pedestrian and cycle movements is accompanied by very low accident rates;
…cul-de-sac streets are safer than loop streets and of course safer than ordinary through-streets;
…on roads providing a distributive function, accident rates are minimised where frontage access is prohibited and the layout of the residential development is such that pedestrians and cyclists have no need to use routes that run alongside highways.’
Existing residential areas
The same principles that govern the design of new streets are equally applicable.
Additionally, there should be objectives to:
‘…prevent residential areas being used by through traffic, except under exceptional circumstances;
…influence driver behaviour so that drivers are induced to follow planned routes at moderate speeds, and with proper attention being given to the needs of pedestrians and cyclists;
…use physical measures in support of legal and statutory regulations in order to overcome the lack of enforcement of such measures as speed limits, one-way streets and turning prohibitions.
A wide variety of measures are used to achieve these aims.
The general experience is that they are likely to prove most effective when applied on an area-wide basis, and with the additional objective of improving the quality of the environment.’
Source: OECD (1986)
Goals of residential area design
As we have seen, it has long been accepted that there is a need for an hierarchical layout of the road system in order to ensure that the type of traffic flowing on each type of road is appropriate for that road.
Such an approach has characterised many Western cities in the post-war period and has undoubtedly retarded the rate of deterioration in the quality of life in residential areas.
Where through traffic can be diverted from ‘environmental areas’ to distributor roads already so busy that the additional vehicles go unnoticed, this approach can clearly produce net benefits.
However, these traffic management methods do not address the fundamental issue: in residential areas the street should be for the residents, but in reality the road design and the traffic legislation favour the car.
Despite the apparent gains that have been made, the street outside the home remains a source of danger, particularly to children: in the Netherlands two thirds of the fatal accidents to children under six occur within the immediate environment of their home.
Clearly, exclusion of through traffic is a necessary but not sufficient condition for creating safe and liveable streets.
Naturally, progress towards safer and more liveable residential areas will vary from country to country; indeed, the fact that the speed of advancement in Britain is so much less than that on the near Continent is the principal justification for this book.
Rates of progress are, though, difficult to compare without a common yardstick; obviously, evaluation of a country's progress towards its own goals does not aid international comparison, given the differing priorities placed on residential safety and environmental quality by different governments and, indeed, by different local authorities.
Instead, comparison of progress with a checklist of internationally agreed good practice would be more helpful, though of course, knowledge of what constitutes good practice can only emerge after experience has accumulated.
A suitable yardstick of good practice has been provided by the OECD, which in its contribution to Road Safety Year in the European Community in 1986 produced a synthesis of road safety research, with aims that included ‘identifying those safety measures that should be reconsidered in national and international road safety policy formulation.’
It is important to note the context in which these recommended measures, which are illustrated in Box 1, should be set.
The OECD's view was that
‘They cannot be considered only with respect to their potential ability to reduce accidents, but must be designed and evaluated while taking into account their impact on other factors capable of improving people's ‘feeling’ towards the area they live in: practicability (access, parking, orientation, etc.), satisfaction of basic needs of the residents (communication, rest, play, pleasantness of the environment, etc.) and avoidance of nuisances.’
Given the importance of safety in residential areas for children, it would be valuable to extend this checklist to cover those measures that have a particular effect on them.
As the OECD study indicates:
‘It is of great importance that a child's environment enables him to enlarge his living sphere, according to his own abilities and without being restrained by traffic, from his home surroundings to the neighbourhood and beyond.
However, this ideal is prohibited by the urbanisation of our environment.
The structures of cities and traffic impose fairly tight limits on the young child's range of movement.’
In order to extend these limits as far as possible, and to increase safety within them, the OECD recommends a particular suite of measures, as illustrated in Box 2.
Box 2: OECD-RECOMMENDED SAFETY MEASURES FOR THE BENEFIT OF CHILDREN IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS
‘Based on experience in new residential areas, environmental countermeasures regarding child safety should aim at:
…reducing the number of vehicles passing through residential areas by providing attractive alternative routes for through traffic and by providing appropriate distributor routes;
…locating activities generating child trips (eg schools, playgrounds) close to dwellings in the residential areas, thus reducing the necessity to cross busy roads;
…reducing drastically the speeds of vehicles in residential areas both by means of traffic regulations and by appropriate changes in road design;
…preventing sight restrictions (eg parked cars), thus improving the visibility of children to drivers and vice-versa, provided these measures do not raise the speeds driven at these points.’
Source: OECD (1986)
Conclusions
As Boxes 1 and 2 make clear, there is a great deal that  needs to be done if a residential area is to be designed and operated as a safe and habitable district.
The concentrate of ‘good practice’ illustrated in these boxes has been distilled, with hindsight, from experience in a variety of countries.
most particularly the Netherlands and West Germany.
The conception of ideas, their application and the learning process in these countries will be examined in the next three chapters, which in turn provide a basis for comparison with the OECD checklist and with UK experience examined in Chapter Seven.
The comparison will not show British progress in a very nattering light, for although Traffic in Towns was a hugely influential report in its day, nothing of significance has been added to it in the UK in a quarter of a century.
As we shall see, the centre of gravity of ideas, research and innovation now resides firmly south and east of the North Sea.
Pioneering approaches to traffic restraint in the Netherlands
The first moves towards redefining the-role of traffic in residential areas unquestionable took place in the Netherlands in the 1970's and in particular in the city of Delft.
Planners there began to ask why it was that their residential streets were so dull and so unsafe, and why it was impossible to do anything else there except drive cars, even though most of the time there were no moving cars.
Traffic was seen as one of the greatest sources of blight, causing unsafety, discomfort and taking most of the space.
The nub of the problem was identified as the lack of attention in the planning process to the way in which abstract objectives of a plan were actually carried out in the designs.
The planners realised that if a quiet residential street is designed using the same process as that used in designing a main road, it should not cause surprise if cars drive along it as though it were a highway.
The goal of a quiet residential street would not be reached; the result would be a quiet but unsafe street dominated by traffic, even if there were no cars there most of the time.
The question was: could the situation be resolved by improving the integration of the thought and design processes, so that what was built better achieved what was intended?
From these beginnings developed the startling and revolutionary notion that in residential areas traffic and people should not be segregated but instead should be integrated.
Cars should not be banned, but instead should be admitted on the residents' terms — that is, slowly and without superior rights.
Although a traffic function would remain, the car would be demoted from the position of priority which it had come to hold in most streets.
Playing, walking, recreation and social events would be restored to their historical position as focal points of street life.
This could be facilitated by the construction of a new residential environment, with the street rebuilt without pavements and used for both motorised and foot traffic, with space shared, uses mingling and with all users granted equivalence.
In such a ‘residential precinct’ or ‘Woonerf’, wheeled traffic would have to adapt to pedestrian behaviour: as Grotenhuis put it ‘all traffic participants in a woonerf are considered equal, and…the pedestrian is a bit more equal than the others.'’
To achieve these general goals the law would need to be changed, but that would patently be insufficient to foster the great shift in behaviour of users which would be required.
The physical environment would have to be remodelled to enforce the new legal speed limits, so that speeds would be reduced by design as well as sign (Figure 4.1).
Consequently, when these innovative ideas were taken up nationally and the Residential Precinct Regulation was adopted in the traffic legislation of the Netherlands in September 1976, great care was taken to set down minimum design requirements and special rules for conduct within a Woonerf.
By law, in a Woonerf vehicles are restricted to  ‘walking pace’ and compliance is encouraged by abolishing continuous kerbs and pavements, creating a space that is as much used by children as by cars (Figure 4.2).
Other speed-reducing devices may be added, such as regular shifts in the axis of the road, together with changes in the profile in the form of ramps and speed humps (Figure 4.3).
Narrowings that allow a cycle to pass but not two cars are frequently added, often reinforced by the placement of trees, planters and street furniture.
In contrast to the flowing design of fast roads, design elements are angular and of pedestrian-scale, typified by low-level lamp posts which avoid the ‘sea of light’ provided by high poles in traffic streets (Figure 4.4).
Improving the mutual visibility of users of the street and the equivalence of functions is similarly achieved by a mixture of legal and physical measures.
The traditionally superior rights of traffic are taken away by permitting walking and playing everywhere.
Even if play areas are created off-street, the impression must not be given that the rest of the street is not intended for playing children.
Moreover, it is permissible to make objects multi-functional, for example where a speed-bump is designed also to attract children's play.
Rows of parked cars must not be permitted, so that children cannot dash out unseen.
Obtrusive yellow lines restricting parking are avoided by the simple expedient of allowing parking only in places indicated, the reverse of the more usual situation where it is permitted except where banned (Figure 4.5).
Though it was not mandated by the enabling legislation, environmental  improvement was seen by many planners as a necessary condition before the street could become one based on human dimensions rather than those of traffic.
Consequently, amenity has often been added to the street in the form of trees, plants, high quality paving materials and the like.
However the legislation specifically forbad the use of vegetation or planters in the roadway that would either obstruct vision or be high enough to hide children from the view of approaching drivers.
This point is sometimes misunderstood: the intention was never to intimidate drivers into low speeds by designing visual handicaps into the streets (Figure 4.6).
Crucial to the success of Woonerven is the marriage of law and design.
For example, as the boundary of a Woonerf marks a point at which the law changes, there must be a sign to say so.
However, entrances and exits must also be dearly recognisable as such by their physical design so that all participants are in absolutely no doubt that different rules apply here for traffic behaviour (Figure 4.7).
It goes without saying that such developments demand fundamental changes of attitude on behalf of drivers.
Because travelling at walking pace is so rare an experience for car drivers, the Woonerf must be well designed to ensure that the need for low speeds is made very clear.
Mutual respect and cooperation is needed so that drivers do not unnecessarily hinder pedestrians, or playing children deliberately impede cars.
Of course such respect is encouraged by the implementation of traffic management so that through-traffic is discouraged.
Thus, not only will few cars enter Woonerven areas, but a high proportion of them will be driven by residents who will have a vested interest in the safe operation of the new street layout.
Evaluation of the Woonerf concept
In view of the fact that the enabling legislation was not passed until 1976, the construction of some 2,700 Woonerven by 1983 represents impressive diffusion.
Their average size was of two streets of approaching 200 metres in length, though still more streets had a range of Woonerf features but not the official designation.
Without doubt, the residential precinct has been popularly adopted by both planners and public in the Netherlands.
This sudden and widespread redesign of streets in housing areas has prompted a number of evaluation studies, themselves reviewed by the Road Safety Directorate and the Ministry of Transport.
They report that nationally 70 per cent of the population thought Woonerven to be attractive or highly attractive.
Amongst users they are assessed more positively than traditional residential areas by non-motorised users, but not by motorists.
Residents appreciated the low traffic volume and near absence of through-traffic and a majority of them was in complete agreement over the restrictions on cars.
They thought that Woonerven were safer, but the principal benefit was seen to be the bigger play areas and the environmental improvements.
The results of behavioural surveys have been mixed, with the pattern of activities more varied than in traditional streets, but few residents encouraged to go out more.
Dissatisfaction with some detailed aspects of Woonerf operation was also seen.
such as having to zig-zag to cross the street.
Children appear to benefit more than adults from the increased opportunities for interaction and recreation, a conclusion confirmed by Eubank-Ahrens' research in German Woonerven.
In terms of accidents, it appears that within Woonerven the number involving injury has been reduced by about 50 per cent.
Moreover, given the low speeds of motorised traffic.
reported to average 13–25 km/h, severity of injury must have declined.
These speeds are lower than in traditional streets, but they are greater than walking pace and are regarded as still being too high by elderly people and parents of young children.
Part of the problem is that making corners with radii suitable for service vehicles such as fire engines also makes them wide enough for cars to travel through quickly (Figure 4.8).
New ramps that trucks could mount or circumvent at low speeds are one solution.
but they might exacerbate another problem, that of slalom-style riding by adventurous, youthful moped-riders who often view the street furniture as more of a challenge than a deterrent to speed.
Despite these problems, two-thirds of the children consider the residential street to be safer than the customary street with pavement.
In newly constructed areas application of the Woonerf principle had become well proven and routine by the early 1980's.
However, there are difficulties of extending the concept to existing residential areas, particularly to inner-city neighbourhoods where the narrow streets often have inadequate space to satisfy the stringent legal requirements of the original Woonerf legislation.
These streets also carry large volumes of through traffic.
much of it taking a shortcut to the city centre ('rat-running').
Around are already overloaded traffic streets on to which traffic excluded from a Woonerf must be superimposed.
What is more, there is a major problem with parking.
Although per-capita car-ownership levels may be low, the residential densities in inner-city districts may be such as to yield high absolute numbers of cars, with consequent flooding of narrow streets with parked vehicles.
Many would have to be removed for  a successful Woonerf to be created, yet this would not only be expensive in construction or land costs (or both), but may also impinge on other, equally deserving neighbouring areas.
It is also unlikely to be popular with car-owning residents well aware of the increased likelihood of car vandalism or theft in garages not subject to residents' casual surveillance.
Despite these particular difficulties with older urban areas, it is generally true to say that in less than a decade the Dutch created and adopted a revolutionary residential environment which, even in car-dominated cities, displayed many of the benefits of the street in the pre-motorised era.
Cars have been accommodated but not welcomed and through traffic has been discouraged.
Safety levels have improved and with lower speeds have come reductions in noise and anxiety for residents.
With the increase in greenery and play space the streets have become both more attractive and lively.
As Pressman reports, Woonerf streets exhibit a stronger social cohesiveness, much brought about by the involvement of the residents themselves in a sophisticated process of planning their own surroundings.
Without doubt, an environment has been established that has returned the street to the ownership of its residents.
Perhaps most important of all, the interest displayed in the Woonerf has demonstrated the hunger that exists throughout the Western world for a successful method of reclaiming the streets from a century of growing domination by the car.
Testing the Woonerf against alternatives
Remodelling of residential areas into Woonerven is, of course, expensive.
Not only is there a need for high quality street furniture and paving materials, but the planning process is lengthy and costly.
For example, given that streets must be dug up and completely reconstructed to create a Woonerf, there are the complexities of coordination with utilities which use  the street as conduits for pipes and cables.
Because a Woonerf will not be created unless its residents want it, they too will expect to be involved in the planning, whilst there are additional complications of assuaging the fears of commercial interests such as shopkeepers.
Dutch experience has been that close cooperation is needed between planners and all of these groups as well as others such as the police, mandating a cautious, incremental, flexible and thus costly style of planning.
The high costs were one of the justifications for the creation of a Government Working Party on Woonerven in 1984, with a brief to assess the operation of Woonerven some seven years after the first legislation.
The group identified three specific problems: the large number of design and furniture requirements; the fact that many Woonerven did not meet these requirements; and that there was no legal regulation for Woonerf-like areas that were not located in residential areas but had been set up in shopping streets (Winkelerven)(Figure 4.9) and village centres (Dorpserven).
The principal recommendation of the Working Party was that the number of mandatory design and furniture standards be reduced from fourteen to six couched in more general terms to permit greater freedom of interpretation.
This does not represent a reduction in commitment to the idea of Woonerven.
Indeed the three essential elements — no through traffic, walking-pace driving, and no difference between a carriageway and a pavement — are restated.
But reformulation of the specifications permits a broadening of the concept, whereby in future the word Woonerf should be replaced by the word ‘Erf (precinct) and the homespun Woonerf sign be replaced by the internationally agreed symbol for rest and play areas (Figure 4.10).
By means of such extension of coverage and refinement of details, a once-innovative idea was confirmed as a mature and essential tool in traffic restraint strategies of Dutch urban areas.
This canonisation of Woonerven did not imply that other traffic restraint tools were not being investigated.
If Woonerven had been expensive, there must be doubt as to whether they had been value for money.
Woonerven had demonstrably reduced accidents, but it could be that there were elements of the design which alone and inexpensively, could achieve similar or even greater reductions.
For example, if it were shown that the reduction of through-traffic was the principal reason for the reduction in accidents, then it would be efficacious to dispense with the expensive street furniture and speed-reduction measures.
In reality of course the effect of individual measures depends upon the combinations in which they are used, so it becomes important to test packages of improvements against each other and against control areas in which no changes have been made.
Such a strategy underpinned the demonstration project which had been running since 1977 in Eindhoven and Rijswijk.
In each town three options for traffic restraint had been tested, with before and after surveys of a number of criteria.
The first option involved simply eliminating through traffic, principally through the use of one-way systems.
In option two areas, attempts were made at eliminating through traffic in addition to reducing traffic speeds, particularly by using speed humps and parking rearrangements to create carriageway narrowings.
In option three areas, streets were set out as Woonerven.
In some respects, all three approaches produced similar outcomes, such as the reduction in car accessibility and diminution of through traffic as a result of the traffic restraint measures.
In other respects the options were very different from each other speeds fell greatly in option two and three areas, and the most positive street images were experienced by those in option two.
There was higher ‘residential quality in the Woonerven, but no additional ‘traffic/liveability’ quality.
In accidents, of course Woonerven came out well, but so did the ‘average cost area’ option two.
Moreover, maintenance of the street in option two areas was cheap compared to Woonerven where costs were raised by labour-intensive methods of sweeping and cleaning necessitated by the street layout.
All in all, the Eindhoven/Rijswijk work showed that extreme reconstruction into a Woonerf was effective but expensive, whilst traffic diversion was cheap and had few positive impacts.
The intermediate level of reconstruction, option two, reduced speeds and gave very promising results in accident reduction.
In terms of value for money, this ‘exclude through traffic and cut down speeds’ option was clearly the most effective.
Thus was born the 30 km/h zone idea.
In April 1983 the law was changed to permit individual streets to be restricted to 30 km/h and a year later whole zones were allowed to follow suit.
To ensure compliance by motorists, standards for 30 km/h streets were set out by the Ministry of Transport.
Thus it was stipulated that the character and condition of the road, together with the speed-reducing  provisions installed on it, must be such that a maximum velocity of 30 km/h is a logical consequence of these circumstances.
There must be no through traffic, yet.
quite specifically, the design of the road must avoid giving the impression that the area is a Woonerf.
In short, local authorities must not simply erect a standard speed-restriction sign, but must in addition equip the road with effective speed-reducing measures without eradicating the distinction between pavement and roadway.
Shared-space was not to be part of the 30 km/h concept.
By August 1986, some 195 30 km/h zones had been created, encouraged by Government publicity and guidance to local authorities on design principles.
Again a series of experimental projects was set up in order to evaluate the effect of the measure on traffic safety.
Key variables were thought to be the size of the selected area, the population characteristics and the traffic structure.
The criteria for evaluation in the before and after studies were mainly those of traffic volume and behaviour, accidents and the experience of the residents as regards traffic and safety.
Early results from one such experimental area, the De Vliert district of 's-Hertogenbosch, show a 33 per cent fall in through traffic.
Some 85 per cent of speeds are between 20 and 30 km/h at the humps and 30 to 35 km/h in the spaces between.
With these speed reductions a significant fall in traffic conflicts can be anticipated.
This order of magnitude of improvements is reflected in the interim results from the first ten projects.
Mean speeds have been reduced from 27 to 22 km/h (a 20 per cent fall), with the most effective measures proving to be road-humps (less than 60 metres apart) and mini-roundabouts.
The latter also reduce observed conflict at –unctions, although no accident data are yet available to demonstrate the consequences.
Overall, it seems that over two-thirds of the people are positive about the experiment, although this is, of course, dependent on how serious the situation was before.
The principal interim recommendations are simple but important.
First, a traffic sign is not enough; infrastructural measures are always necessary.
Second, for maximum effect the measures must not only be ‘in harmony with the surroundings’ but also ‘In agreement with the feelings of the inhabitants’.
As a result of these successes, the 30 km/h zone has become a widely used measure throughout the Netherlands, though styles vary from place to place.
Through traffic is usually reduced by road closures and speeds are cut by carriageway narrowings, small roundabouts and by various types of humps, which additionally increase conspicuity of intersections and other traffic.
Although the sophisticated Woonerf-type street furniture is not used, that does not imply that the zone needs to be dull.
For example, the Leidsebuurt district of Haarlem has received comprehensive treatment as a 30 km/h zone (Figure 4.11), with a concentration on the creation of raised plateaux in the roadway (speed tables) spectacularly patterned with black and white paviours (Figures 4.12–4.15).
Each internal street has been repaved, with speed bumps installed at 40 metre intervals or paviours arranged to look like bumps even though there is actually no bump at all(Figure 4.16).
Some details are fascinating, such as the light poles in the street erected so that sufficient space is still left on the footway for a double buggy to pass (Figure 4.17).
Double kerbs are used in places to prevent pavement parking (Figure 4.18) and the boundaries of the zone are indicated by huge patterned entrance ramps, visible in Figure 4.15.
Conclusions
In the Netherlands, the general problem of residential habitats despoiled and endangered by speeding traffic and parked vehicles is well known, as are the general solutions of preventing through traffic, reducing traffic speeds and controlling parking.
There are many identifiable specific issues too.
For example, accidents in residential areas are widely dispersed so that the key is to find low-cost measures which cover the entire residential area rather than specific accident black-spots.
There is a need too to find solutions to the problems of older residential areas, for these are generally less safe than new ones as a consequence of their land uses, building densities, street patterns and traffic composition.
Unsurprisingly, in its work on safer residential areas the Dutch Government is being actively encouraged by a number of pressure groups representing cyclists, pedestrians and children, for these are the most vulnerable of road users.
There is a consensus that the search for safe living environments must continue, but there are debates over how best these might be achieved.
The wisdom of the Buchanan approach to traffic flow is appreciated, for the division of roads into those for through movement, local distribution and access is seen as an essential first step in preparing the way for other measures.
Within the residential areas the habitat function must be improved without reducing the accessibility of destinations.
Through traffic must be kept out and speeds of remaining traffic reduced.
Much still needs to be learned from research, ranging from detailed investigations into the relationships between accidents, traffic behaviour and residents' perception of safety, to continuing long-term analysis of the extent and nature of traffic-related problems in residential areas.
Moreover, as the Netherlands Institute for Road Safety Research has argued, further work is necessary to establish priorities for tackling the problems and to identify the particular measures that are most effective.
One point, though, that is clearly understood is that legal measures alone are not sufficiently effective and must be supplemented by infrastructural measures, which have the advantage that the spatial layout of an area has a direct influence on the behaviour of road users.
Where such approaches are combined with traffic integration, however, there are drawbacks, particularly of cost and the difficulty of application in neighbourhoods where densities are high, traffic heavy and space restricted.
The Woonerf, though without doubt a valuable contribution to safe living areas, has not proved to be a universal solution.
Comparative testing of cost-effectiveness has led to most newly-built housing areas being designed now around the 30 km/h provision with associated speed-reducing measures.
However, the results of the detailed evaluation of the 30 km/h approach are still awaited and may yet result in further shifting of priorities and strategies.
In the Netherlands, the task of refining and extending the revolutionary concept of the Woonerf and separately applying its most valuable elements continues more than a decade after its inception.
The development of traffic calming in West Germany
If one country above all others has been associated in the public mind with ‘green’ politics in the 1980's that country would almost certainly be the Federal Republic of Germany.
German street protests over environmental issues such as nuclear power have provided stark contrast, on our television screens, with the quiet observance of bureaucratic process in Britain.
On a range of issues from river pollution to waste incineration at sea, from airport expansion to noxious exhaust emissions, the opposition seems to have been led by the non-British north-west Europeans, with the Germans to the fore.
With an established Green Party to articulate public anxiety, together with a national rallying point provided by the devastation of forests by acid rain — at least some of which is attributable to vehicle exhaust emission — it should not be surprising that transport has emerged as a ma–or cause of environmental concern in West Germany.
The Verkehrsberuhigung concept
Visitors to West German cities cannot fail to be impressed by the peaceful, car free centres served by integrated public transport systems.
Germany has led Europe in pedestrianising its centres, but this is not a physical manifestation of recent green or anti-car attitudes, for the traffic free schemes pre-date the recent shift in public consciousness.
Moreover, whilst it is true that the great popularity of the environmental improvements in the centres has turned attention towards restraining traffic in other areas, it is also clear that as car ownership and use rises, there is no political  consensus for banning cars in the rest of the city.
If environmental improvements were to be sought outside the centre, they would have to be achieved through restraining the car, not excluding it.
When the movement to spread the benefits of restraint through the rest of the city gathered pace in the 1970s, the Germans were fortunate in having the leading exponents of these principles living next door to them in the Netherlands.
In these early days the Germans very much followed the Dutch leads; indeed the regulations introduced in 1980 for restraining traffic in residential roads were a straight translation of those adopted in the Netherlands' Woonerven.
As in the Netherlands, the goal was to restrain traffic, so that speeds and volumes would be reduced.
Given that much traffic such as goods deliveries and rubbish removal is essential to the city's functioning, the purpose was to filter-out non-essential movement so that necessary traffic would flow more smoothly not more slowly.
The term used for such restraint is Verkehrsberuhigung, literally meaning traffic-calming (Figure 5.1).
Thus was shared space introduced to Germany, with a new traffic sign indicating a rest and play area, new priorities, changed parking arrangements, speed  limits set at walking/running pace and a street design using similar principles and infrastructure to the now familiar array used in the Woonerf So popular have these approaches to residential area layout become that some variant of restraint is now the norm in newly constructed housing areas.
However, shared space approaches, as the Dutch have discovered, are very costly to apply to existing residential areas because they require the existing street surface to be almost entirely rebuilt.
They cannot therefore meet the needs of cities that are searching for a method to restrain traffic over large areas.
Moreover, they are suitable only for residential roads where the traffic flow is light (a peak flow of under 250v/hr in both directions) and are not therefore applicable to larger city districts which would normally contain a hierarchy of road types.
In searching for an effective way of restraining wider areas, the German traffic planners again looked abroad for inspiration and again they found it in a near-neighbour.
In Britain in the 1960's Colin Buchanan's Traffic in Towns had suggested.
road closures, diversions and one-way systems as a method of traffic reduction in ‘environmental areas’.
By these devices through traffic would be deflected onto high-capacity ‘primary distributor’ roads better suited to higher speeds, so that safety and environmental improvements would take place in the residential areas.
Thus the volume and character of traffic in the street would be related to the need for environmental protection.
However, the disadvantages of this approach are well known, with disbenefits for those residents on heavily-trafficked streets as well as more circuitous journeys for all residents due to the road closures (Figures 5.2a and b).
The result is higher mileage, more energy use and more pollution.
Moreover, if one-way systems are introduced, cycle use is discouraged and safety is decreased by the increased vehicle speeds.
It was unlikely therefore that this idea would be dusted off and applied to German city neighbourhoods without considerable modification.
The key to its adaptation was the realisation that the street system could remain as fully connected as before, with closures made unnecessary, provided that the speeds on those streets were reduced (Figure 5.2c).
In that event, short-cut traffic would be deterred, yet residents could still reach their.
homes directly.
There would be a more uniform distribution of traffic across the area and traffic volumes would be brought into line with area functions and land-use policies.
The speed reductions would be achieved, by applying at critical points in the network, some of the same sort of Verkehrsberuhigung measures as those which were at that time being installed in the new rest and play areas.
In this way the goals of ‘environmental areas’ would be achieved without incurring the disadvantages.
Of course, some traffic diversion is involved, so that conditions elsewhere could worsen.
However, the loss of through traffic from the residential area leads to a dramatic improvement in the environment of a very large number of people.
It is often the case that this is not offset by the relatively small environmental loss experienced along the already very busy distributor road by a relatively small number of people as a result of the addition of a relatively small number of vehicles.
The first attempt to put any of these ideas into practice took place in North Rhine Westphalia in 1977–8.
As reported by Draeger, the area-wide traffic restraint project there involved 17 towns and was aimed at improving road safety in residential areas, raising the quality of living, reducing noise and providing more space for pedestrians and for children's play.
The recommendation from the evaluation studies that ‘the traffic restraint concept as a principle of planning should be continued’ represents the first official adoption in German planning of traffic restraint.
Furthermore, though the application of such measures to major roads was rejected at this stage, the studies concluded that ‘in the long term, traffic restraint concepts together with appropriate land use and general transport planning concepts can effect reductions in vehicular traffic in the city as a whole’.
Raising the publics consciousness
As the 1970's drew to a close, the rate of introduction of traffic restraint schemes was accelerating, with some 250 projects in 125 cities implemented by 1981.
Moreover, as will be seen shortly, that year saw the start of a major federal research program designed to evaluate traffic restraint practices and to present firm evidence on the cost-effectiveness of the approaches.
Despite the fact that results were not due until 1988 at the earliest, Länder and federal agencies continued to encourage the adoption of traffic restraint strategies.
On the one hand a series of publications demonstrated to planners at the local level why they should adopt the approach of restraining traffic and how they should put such plans into practice (figure 5.3).
On the other, given that all official approaches stressed the importance of public participation, there was clearly a public education job to do as well.
It would have been unremarkable had this been done through the publication of explanatory leaflets and brochures emanating from the Ministry of Transport.
In the event, however, it was a glossy book from the Town Planning Ministry in 1986 that really took the message to the public — and that message was so remarkable that it deserves examination in some detail.
Stadtverkehr im Wandel meaning Town traffic in change began by stressing the role of streets in a child's growth as it learned ‘to be at home in the town’.
Streets, it stressed, are not just for transport and are certainly not just for cars.
In 70–80 per cent of all streets in the town, the amount of time spent by the car driver is under 30 per cent of that of the total time spent by all other people on the street.
The second major message of the report was to try to distinguish between mobility and accessibility.
Who is more mobile, it asked, the car-driving ‘Herr Müller’ who travels 58km daily in getting to work and back or the walking-cycling-bus-using ‘Herr Schultz’who travels a shorter distance but manages to reach more destinations?
‘We have enough traffic but we lack accessibility’ argued the text.
We are being taken to the ‘limits of pain’ brought on by a means of transport which is too loud, ugly, congested, dirty, dangerous and expensive.
We need to adopt different thought processes to surmount two crucial barriers.
Eliminating the ‘barrier of speed’ would lead to slower travel which is quieter, safer, takes up less space, greater ease of crossing the road, better air, less stress and less arrogance.
Change is possible it argued, citing Copenhagen, Hannover, The Hague and Odense, all of which display rising use of public transport and cycles and falling car use as a result of their transport policies.
The next task the document set for itself was to ensure that the word ‘Verkehrsberuhigung’ is explained.
However, what is most interesting is that a deliberate attempt was made to sell it as a concept rather than as what might have hitherto been seen as a package of infrastructural measures.
Thus Verkehrsberuhigung was described as ‘an unfortunate word’, because it means more than making the traffic quiet, it means making surrounding areas better.
Verkehrsberuhigung means to lessen the disadvantages of traffic yet still to keep all the advantages of transport.
Verkehrsberuhigung means, it argued, improvements for pedestrians, cycles, buses and trams, an increase in traffic safety, an improvement of the environment where you live, a stimulation of central living and shopping, less noise, less exhaust fumes, a more pleasant appearance and less traffic signs, greenness, and less comfort and speed for car traffic.
The message was emphasised by stressing the street as part of the system, whereby disadvantages may sometimes have to be accepted in one place for the sake of the whole network.
Using practical suggestions for network treatment, it was argued that the Verkehrsberuhigung is not just a treatment of isolated streets but must be area-wide in nature.
One of the great strengths of the Stadtverkehr book is that it is visually exciting and attractive, well seen in the sections called ‘streets of tomorrow’ and  ‘Streets of Today’.
Here it was stressed that many streets and squares will in the future look very different from today, with each being treated individually, selecting an approach from a multitude of possibilities (Figure 5.4).
There are, the book argued, many ways of ‘being at home in the town’, with many examples of good practice already visible today in maturing towns; in densely populated areas with narrow streets; in ‘a celebratory way’ by making a quiet little green island at the opening of a street; in a new town; in existing residential areas where the space around the houses and garages is used to make a series of squares and narrowings; or ‘in a happy way’where flowers and trees are so colourful that parked cars are less intrusive.
In a variety of other examples particular effects can be achieved by careful design, including' child-friendly', ‘intimate’, ‘tidy’ and ‘neighbourly’.
A similar approach by visual example was taken to the opportunity to create town squares out of existing junctions.
Former squares, it was argued, have often become the victims of car traffic, with their sweeping turns and filter lanes leaving no alternative to asphalt.
‘Is there no room for squares?’ asked the text, for ‘they are absolutely necessary for town planning.’
All manner of possibilities exist as the examples in Figure 5.5 show.
Towns could take some space at a normal street comer to give ‘more chance to be seen and to see others’(a); or could create a vest-pocket park (b); or a play area (c); or an island in a cul-de-sac for the local children (d).
It might even be possible to create a ‘place in the sun’, where car parking has been placed underground because a place in the sun for townsfolk is more important than a place in the sun for cars (e).
Further ideas illustrated on the right of Figure 5.5 include a working square that delivery vans can enter (f), the ‘death of the traffic light forests’ ie. less traffic-orientated paraphernalia and thus more town (g), and the construction of an island which decorates and gives form, yet allows a smooth flow of slowed-down traffic (h).
General advice on making squares was offered with stress on making the limits and form of a square  clear, making the traffic conform to decorative town planning and cutting down the space dedicated to vehicles in favour of giving additional tracks or spaces for other purposes, even if these sometimes have to be driven over.
Each junction requires its own solution or compromise and seldom, it was argued, is today's solution the best one.
Town planning needs and traffic needs clash most openly when it comes to squares and junctions, which is why the town at that point must reflect the needs of planning and give least consideration to the needs of traffic.
The book summarised its approach to the new attitude towards traffic restraint in towns in the phrase ‘new rights, new duties, new possibilities.’
There are, it argued, many ways to quieten traffic using existing law such as that permitting 30 km/h zones, rest and play areas, pedestrian zones and limits on parking.
Moreover putting up barriers, banning night driving, giving priority to public transport and permitting cycling the ‘wrong way in one way streets are other applications of the law.
However, it is perfectly feasible to calm traffic without the use of the law in quite normal streets, provided that cars can be made to travel slowly and with consideration.
This may be achieved where cobbling makes drivers aware of the presence of pedestrians, where a tree breaks up the straight line of the centre of the road or where narrowings make drivers proceed especially slowly and carefully.
The principal aim is to create the impression from just looking at the street that it is not, just there for cars but for pedestrians, cyclists and residents too.
As a consciousness-raiser,Stadtverkehr im Wandel was splendid stuff, a cascade of ideas and surprises, supported by well-selected examples which were attractively illustrated.
Its message was iconoclastic, even radical and certainly not at all the type of thing that one would expect to see emanating from a government department, with the seal of approval provided by a preface over the minister's signature.
To be advocating area-wide traffic restraint before the evaluation of the federal research areas was complete was either prescient or presumptuous, depending  upon your view point.
In any event, the book was certainly a success in bringing Verkehrsberuhigung as a concept, rather than as a mere package of infrastructural measures, to a wider public.
In this it was perhaps too successful, for it provoked so much hostility from the car lobby that reprinting of the book ceased some two years after it was first published.
It was of course also deeply flawed.
As a production of the Ministry of Town Planning much of its message clearly trespassed on the domain of the Ministry of Transport, so that it was scarcely surprising that some intractable transport problems were glossed over in the euphoria for a brave new world.
From an ‘Ideas’ book, one shouldn't perhaps expect much in the way of detailed costings of large schemes, but the lack of any attempt to cost even some of the individual measures lent the whole exercise an air of unreality.
And because there was nothing on costs there could be nothing on cost-effectiveness, no appraisal of different ways of achieving similar goals.
It is all very well to say that local circumstances will dictate responses but there will be many similar circumstances from place to place, so that there is clear benefit in adopting common approaches if not standard solutions.
To propose that individual cases should be treated on their merit is not particularly helpful if there is no guidance as to what a merit is.
What is more, the crucial issue of traffic segregation should have been discussed in Stadtverkehr , given its relevance to cost-effectiveness, design and indeed a whole range of issues connected to the principles of traffic quietening.
In the book there are illustrations of traffic calming scenes in which walkers stroll among the cars and bikes, whilst elsewhere they remain on pavements, protected by kerbs.
In some examples, tracks for various transport modes are distinct and separate, yet in others there is nothing to guide the prospective traveller or vehicle.
The question is a simple one: should traffic restraint schemes segregate pedestrians or not?
Providing an answer, in contrast, is not simple and the search for it goes to the very heart of the Verkehrsberuhigung concept.
The images in the book are bound by their presentation and stillness to impart an air of safe serenity, but in reality there can be great differences between the sense of security experienced by the users of different schemes and indeed between the principles on which these approaches are based.
Verkehrsberuhigung in practice
In view of the existence of such stimuli to public awareness of traffic calming, together with proximity to the innovative traffic planners in the Netherlands, it is not surprising that the Germans have constructed many Woonerven in residential areas, as we have seen.
However, both the ideas and the practice have changed as experience has accumulated, with two particular issues dominating the debate.
First, the full shared-space Woonerf-type treatment, involving rebuilding the entire carriageway, is very expensive.
Consequently.
there have been experiments with 30 km/h zones in an attempt to win safety gains inexpensively.
In 1983, a five-year experiment with so-called ‘Tempo 30’ zones began, so that by early 1988 there were already 5,000 zones in the country, a number that is still increasing.
In some cities, Tempo 30 is now the norm.
Hamburg, for example, has about 30–40 per cent of its road system designated as 50 km/h main streets, with all of the remaining non-industrial roads designated or planned as Tempo 30.
Second, there has been concern over the appropriate speeds for traffic in calmed areas.
The ‘walking/running speed’ at which vehicles must travel is variously interpreted as up to 20 km/h, but evidence from early shared-space streets showed that this is exceeded by 85 per cent of the vehicles.
Such speeds would seem to be at variance with the shared space concept; indeed some have gone so far as to suggest eight km/h as a more appropriate maximum consistent with child safety.
As the likelihood of restricting drivers to eight km/h for all but the shortest distances appears remote, the implication is that all shared-space areas must be for small groups  of houses only or short culs-de-sac.
For larger areas where higher speeds would thus be tolerated, there is an argument that sight-distances must be lengthened to improve inter-visibility and thus reduce accident potential.
The cutting back of vegetation, abandonment of pinch-points and ‘opening-out’ of the street that this would imply would be a negation of the townscape properties that residents of Woonerf-'like areas profess to enjoy.
It therefore follows that if car speeds cannot be reduced, large residential areas can make gains in both their environmental traffic qualities and in their safety only by the dilution of the shared-space ideal by the provision of footpaths as pedestrian refuges.
These concerns have led to two approaches to calming housing areas in West Germany, those that rely solely on the law to reduce speeds and those that, additionally, incorporate redesign of the street.
The ‘Tempo 30’ zones were initially an outcome of arguments for cheapness put forward by traditional traffic engineers unconvinced of the need for redesign of the roadway.
Tempo 30 zones need not therefore consist of anything more complex than a set of signs, an arrangement which pays lip-service to safety improvement yet costs little money.
However, there is now increasing evidence that the impact of such measures alone on vehicle speed is very limited.
Bowers, for example, reviews research indicating that speed falls from 55 to 45 km/h in such zones, with the associated implication that speeds for the fastest 15 per cent of drivers would be above 50 to 55 km/h.
It seems unlikely that such reductions could make a significant impact on either the number or severity of accidents.
These approaches may be illustrated by reference to an example, Neugraben, a suburb of the city that pioneered Tempo 30, Hamburg.
The dual carriageway main road by-passes the centre, which is a pedestrianised shopping zone.
Secondary distributor roads have no speed signs, but are interrupted by frequent pedestrian crossings of traditional design.
Residential roads (Figure 5.6) are all marked with the Tempo 30 sign, but none has received any speed-reducing measures.
Cyclists use the street and pedestrians the segregated pavement.
Where parking is off-street the streets seem relatively safe, but where it is not there are obvious dangers.
As Figure 5.7 shows, parked vehicles leave inadequate space for two cars to pass; observed driver reaction was to treat this ‘narrowed’ section as a one-way street, down which they drove at well over 30 km/h, despite the potential hazard of crossing pedestrians hidden behind the parked vehicles.
This is anecdotal evidence to be sure, but given the lack of any measures to enforce the speed limit it was hard to see how any safety gains had been made here at all.
The alternative approach to speed reduction has, in addition to Tempo 30 laws, involved the treatment of residential areas by redesign of the space, though pavements are normally retained.
In this practice there is a parallel with Dutch work, for like the 30 km/h zone experiments in Holland, though these avoid the use of sophisticated Woonerf-style street furniture, they still attempt to incorporate the infrastructural works that increase the driver's perception of the need for slow-speed behaviour.
The main design elements, which are explained below, include pinch points, chicanes, speed tables, priority from the right and the elimination of one-way streets.
Pinch points or gateways may be formed by the placement of vertical elements such as trees at a point where the carriageway is artificially narrowed (Figure 5.8).
This is unlikely by itself to reduce speeds significantly, but it does act as a facilitating element in making other measures possible and in releasing former carriageway space for other uses.
By incorporating parking at right angles to the kerb in 50m stretches on alternate sides of the road, a series of 45 degree chicanes in a formerly straight street can be created (Figure 5.9).
This divides the vista into short stretches, an important element in persuading drivers to slow down.
No parking spaces are lost in this arrangement, a vital consideration in inner-city districts.
Planting must be generous and carefully placed so that the alternate blocks of cars do not dominate the view down the axis of the street and create what  Bowers has called a ‘sea of metal’.
A speed-table differs from a speed hump in that it is designed as a ramp up to a raised plateau with a descending ramp on the other side.
(Figure 5.10) Front and rear wheels are expected to occupy the table simultaneously for a brief period.
Some designs leave gaps for two wheeled traffic, to avoid the danger of skidding, and for buses, to aid passenger comfort.
Tables are installed at gateways and usually comprise distinctive paving materials.
At intersections, the tables are raised to the level of the footpath, thus becoming ‘raised pavements’ and allowing easy crossing by prams and wheelchairs (Figure 5.11).
The speed-table is a crucial feature of speed restraint; without it the chicanes created by offset parking produce a racetrack effect and the more usual ‘hump’ alternative, though very effective in speed reduction, can promote stop-go driving which is noisy and polluting.
Enforcing priority from the right at junctions means that all junctions act as speed reducing features, as drivers will not risk rapid travel through a crossing in the knowledge that one other leg always has priority over them.
Eliminating one-way streets negates their effect of increasing speeds and necessary distances travelled.
One-way streets expose larger numbers of people to higher levels of noise and pollution from more dangerous traffic; there is thus decreased emphasis on their use in new schemes and conversion of existing one-way streets to two-way operation.
Conclusions
The Germans have thus had the choice of a variety of packages of measures for use in various situations.
New residential areas built in the Woonerf style and Tempo 30 zones enclosed by signs represent the extremes of expense and cheapness, sophistication and simplicity.
In many ways the most interesting developments lie between these, particularly where 30 km/h zones have been equipped with speed-reducing infrastructure yet have retained some of the characteristics of separate rights of way for vehicles and pedestrians.
These 30 km/h schemes with speed-reducing infrastructure have reduced the severity of accidents by about 50 per cent.
Maintenance costs have not proved to be excessive, particularly as local residents are encouraged to adopt part of the street greenery.
Capital costs have varied greatly, but in no case have reached the sort of level that one would have expected from shared space schemes, where costs are raised by the needs for complete resurfacing.
With the reduction in stop-start driving, exhaust pollution is much reduced, tyre noise is low, and engines are idling as cars typically proceed smoothly at 20–30 km/h.
As such preliminary results seem to indicate that these approaches are safer and quieter than unreconstructed streets, as well as being more widely applicable than the Woonerf-style rebuilding which must be restricted to lightly trafficked streets, the case for their continued application seems to be a strong one.
Whether or not they are cost-effective by comparison with other approaches is another matter.
It was a need to answer precisely that question that led to the establishment of the large scale comparative research project analysed in the next chapter.
Testing the ideas: the federal research programme in West Germany
As has been seen, the Dutch development work on traffic restraint was not simply lifted wholesale by the West Germans, but rather modified and extended.
Whilst the international transferability of traffic restraint ideas has not been questioned, there has been a desire to evaluate results of specific measures and approaches.
In particular, most of the early Verkehrsberuhigung work had involved schemes that covered only a street or two with low traffic flows, so little was known about the benefits or drawbacks to the wider urban area.
The potential benefits of traffic calming on a more extensive scale seemed likely to be widespread, having an impact not just on the policies of the Department of Transport, but also on those of Town Planning and the Environment.
Accordingly the research agencies within these ministries were brought together in 1981 to attempt an inter-disciplinary research programme and to promulgate the results.
The programme goals and design
The focus of the research was to be a number of experimental areas representing a variety of town sizes, locations and physical characteristics.
Using this diverse ‘laboratory’ it was hoped to shed light on future methods of environmental traffic management and in particular to improve traffic safety, environmental quality, conditions for walkers and cyclists and the recreational opportunities within neighbourhoods.
Explicit in the design of the projects was the attempt to achieve these aims without diverting traffic to other areas — in other words there was to be a genuine experiment in calming existing traffic in situ, not simply exporting the problems to other districts.
It followed that the selected areas would be large and would include main roads.
The question was: if a broad view is taken both in terms of the areas covered and the nature of the potential solutions, is it possible to improve the environment and safety of large areas, or even whole towns, by adopting a package of measures that are simple and inexpensive, but because they are integrated, are more effective than single measures would be on their own?
The issue of cost was to be tackled head-on in this research programme, so that guidance could be offered on the cost-effectiveness of a variety of approaches to a variety of local circumstances.
As Döldissen summarised,
‘As far as costs are concerned, it is envisaged that traffic restraint strategies will finally be applied to all town quarters, not just to a selected elite.
The amount of funds needed for each quarter will depend on the gravity of the problems encountered there and the population density etc.
It is the aim of this programme to develop traffic restraint strategies that every town or city can afford…
‘In order to achieve this, measures must be developed that can be applied at particular neuralgic points only and that will all the same have a traffic restraining effect on the whole area.
Such measures are the provision of cycle paths and bus lanes and the introduction of 30 km/h zones with only partial reconstruction of the streets within the zone.
It will certainly not be possible to totally reconstruct all the streets of an area at a cost of up to DM 1 million/100m as has been done for single streets in the past’
The outcome of the projects was to be examined in the light of potential impacts on urban development, transport road safety and the environment.
The research programme was thus to have a broad base to provide broadly applicable results.
It was different from previous work in that main roads were to be included; public transport as well as walking and cycling were to be considered; and particular importance was to be attached to the attempt to lower costs and achieve area-wide benefits by applying fewer and simpler measures.
Its hallmarks were to be found in the large scale of the treated areas and in the integrated nature of the treatment.
Six towns of different sizes were selected for the research, representing different regions, different traffic situations and thus together representing the diversity of problems that one would expect to find across the country.
For each of the areas an environmental traffic management strategy was formulated and ‘before’ studies on the existing traffic and environmental situation carried out.
The strategies naturally varied from case to case, but all addressed the broad goals outlined above and all included a publicity programme of meetings, brochures and media coverage.
The specific intent of the measures can be summarised by examining the priorities for the different modes.
Priority was to be given to walking , not only because it was felt that this would give disproportionate environmental benefits and would aid access to public transport, but it would recognise the dominance of local movement by foot transport.
Where pedestrian volumes were heavy, walkers should have special pedestrian routes.
Roads, both major and minor, should be made easier to cross.
Traffic speeds must be lowered to improve pedestrian safety, sometimes by creating shared space environments.
The same sort of approaches were adopted for cycling for the same reasons.
In addition, cycle paths and contra-flow lanes were seen as vital in aiding direct journeys, with safety protection added in the form of turning lanes and priority at junctions.
Bike parking and signposting were to be improved and experiments with bikes in pedestrian areas were to be tried.
In general, the measures were to attempt to create an environment for cycling which was safe, direct, comfortable and in which cyclists felt that they were being encouraged and provided for.
For public transport attempts were to be made to free buses from congestion delay at traffic lights by providing priority treatment or bus lanes.
Stops were to be made friendlier to the passenger and facilities for bike-and-ride, park-and-ride and the carriage of bikes on public transport vehicles encouraged.
Proposals for private motorised travel were, on the other hand, very different, for this mode was seen to be at the root of many of the traffic and environmental problems of the experimental areas and so every effort was to be made to curb the excesses of its use.
There was too much car use on short trips, speeds were too high, through traffic despoiled residential areas and parking created unpleasant, dangerous and crowded conditions in streets.
To a certain extent, the provision for walking and cycling would reduce dependence on cars, but in addition a battery of measures aimed at reducing speeds on residential and main roads, reducing through travel and reorganising parking would produce, it was hoped, considerable  benefits to the quality of life in the areas concerned.
Döldissen has listed the major characteristics of the six research areas (Figure 6.1).
To get a feel for the approaches adopted, some of them will be examined in more detail in this chapter.
Buxtehude, which is studied first, is most interesting for the way in which an attempt has been made to treat a large area of a small town, ranging from centre to suburb.
In contrast, the Moabit experimental area in Berlin has a large population and, together with the Neustadt model area in Mainz, is representative of the treatment of an established, densely built-up area of a major city.
Lastly, Ingolstadt is used to exemplify the approach that could be adopted in an historically important and attractive city centre.
The Buxtehude research area
Buxtehude is a small commuter town in the Elbe floodplain near Hamburg.
Of the total population of around 33,000, some 11,000 live in the area north of the railway line which forms the southern boundary to the experimental area.
In 1982, prior to the research project, there were heavy flows of traffic through the town centre along the Bahnhofstrasse (Figure 6.2).
This traffic was seen as a major problem not only for the town centre activities but also for the three schools, recreational facilities and residential areas located along the Konopkastrasse to the west, which was used as a bypass.
The parallel Altländerstrasse was also used by many as short-cut to the station.
A number of possible solutions had been examined, but one by one abandoned.
The notion of unrestrained traffic on through roads edged by noise bunds was early rejected as failing to deal with problems at source.
A circulation plan that interrupted movement through the imposition of frequent detours and culs-de-sac was seen to be stressful for drivers and likely to lead to detours through neighbouring streets.
Most interesting of all was the abandonment of early attempts at traffic restraint, using ‘rest and play area’ signs and physical measures to ensure that drivers were made aware that very low speed limits were in force.
It was felt that such speed limits were not practical over the wide area that was to be covered by the experiment, and that it would be better to scrap such treatment of individual streets and instead integrate such areas into a widespread system of 30 km/h streets.
The key elements in the strategy for Buxtehude
There are four elements to the strategy of environmental traffic management used in Buxtehude.
First, the road system within the area would scarcely be changed in layout, but instead the widths and junctions would be altered to reduce traffic speeds.
Second, flows would be changed by downgrading the western section of the ring road, with through traffic passing through the area via the eastern leg only.
Third, Tempo 30 would be introduced throughout the experimental area, with only minor exceptions.
Last, specific measures would be taken to make walking and cycling easier and safer.
In all these measures the public would be informed and consulted, so that meetings and publicity would be vital parts of the projects.
The altering of road design to reduce speeds is well seen in the Altländerstrasse, a distributor road west of the town centre.
Figure 6.3 shows the first experimental infrastructure in place during the test phase, but the previous character of the road can still clearly be seen.
There are long sightlines and high lamp posts, but these give way after rebuilding (Figure 6.4) to pedestrian-scale poles, a tree planted in the road as a slowing device (marked by reflective posts to aid night visibility) and changes in paving colours to break up the long vista.
There are changes in parking arrangements too, with car parking moved to the pavement but with kerbs removed (Figure 6.5).
This ensures that when commuters' cars are absent during the day the space they free is incorporated into the  pavement for walking and playing uses, not into the carriageway where it would encourage higher speeds.
Early work on improving junctions in residential roads in the experimental area used temporary measures such as concrete tubs, but the final design makes use of ramps, tightening of the radius of the entrance, coloured paviours to emphasize the right of way of crossing foot and cycle traffic, tree planting and flowerbeds (Figures 6.6 and 6.7).
Similar stages in reconstruction may be seen in the examination of the remodelling of the junction between the Altländerstrasse and the main road bounding the trial area to the north.
Previously, speeding traffic along the main road often used the traffic islands painted on the road for overtaking purposes and was able to turn at speed into Buxtehude at this generously proportioned junction (Figure 6.8).
In rebuilding, the aim was to reduce the width of such turnings into residential areas and at the same time to achieve an optical signal that the restraint area had begun.
Width tests with an articulated bus (Figure 6.9) established an appropriate radius and the junction was restyled using temporary street furniture.
Only after a period of observation of the new layout in use was it confirmed by rebuilding with permanent structures.
In Figure 6.10 the new entrance ramp can be seen, together with a clearly distinguished cycle crossing, the gain in green space and the unambiguous signal — even when seen from the air — of the need for changed driver behaviour.
The removal of the Konopkastrasse's ring road function is the second element of the Buxtehude strategy, and is evident in its changed relationship with crossing foot traffic.
Previously, this 7.5m-wide road acted as a western bypass carrying some 6,500 vehicles per day.
Crossings took the traditional form (Figure 6.11): there is no doubt here as to whom the road is for, or that walkers may only cross when permitted to do so by car drivers.
However, this crossing is on a route from the town centre to housing areas and schools which is heavily used by pedestrians and cyclists, so the opportunity was taken to reconstruct the junction to meet the needs of soft  traffic (Figure 6.12).
Now cars have to change level by climbing a ramp to a cobbled raised pavement.
Speeds are lowered by a pre-warning road narrowing 40m before the crossing, as well as by the restricted width of the road at the crossing itself.
The vertical elements at the crossing form a gateway and are used to add greenery not only to the street but also to the pedestrian and cycle route.
This junction in many ways symbolises the reversal of priorities in Buxtehude.
Gone is the wide fast road and its dangerous crossing, where the stripes gave walkers a false sense of security.
In its place is a junction which forces traffic to slow to walking pace to cross the ramp (Figure 6.13) and which, when seen from the perspective of the crossing traffic (Figure 6.14) seems more like a continuation of the pedestrian route.
Originally it was planned to give crossing traffic priority here, but at present drivers do not have sufficient  visibility through the greenery to comply.
Use has thus evolved on a pragmatic basis: casual observation by the author showed that vehicles rarely crossed the junction at more than 15 km/h; that they gave way to walkers and cyclists in nearly every case (Figure 6.15) and indeed that some pedestrians failed even to bother to look for traffic before crossing.
That may be somewhat over-confident perhaps, but the operation of this layout for three years without an accident certainly does not argue for radical changes in form or priority.
The effectiveness of such a crossing is aided by treatment along the length of the road, where a series of narrowings are designed to keep speeds down (Figure 6.16).
This produces extraordinary scenes when traffic is heavy, with cars proceeding smoothly and quietly over the ramps, almost like a school of porpoises.
Again the signal as to how to behave is given to drivers entering the area by remodelling junctions at the point of entry the before/after pair of illustrations show the treatment of the Konopkastrasse/main road intersection by reducing turning space, lowering light poles, emphasizing cycle lanes and planting greenery.
The adoption of Tempo 30 speed limits across the  entire area was the third element of environmental traffic management in the Buxtehude experimental area.
However, the Road Traffic Act of 1982/3 did not allow for Zone signs to be introduced even on a temporary basis, so it was necessary for an information sign to be erected at every junction, showing not only a 30 km/h speed limit, but also drawing the driver's attention to the changed priority (right before left).
This is no longer necessary, so Tempo 30 signs are now just placed at entrances to the zone as a whole, often reinforced by ramps (Figure 6.17).
Within the zone, physical measures are used to reinforce the message, or in the case of newly built areas, the street system is designed around this speed maximum (Figure 6.18).
Driver education had to be part of the strategy too, so that during the introduction of the Tempo 30 zone, drivers could monitor their own behaviour.
An induction plate in the road measured car speed, with the results being displayed ahead for the driver's information (Figure 6.19).
Active promotion of the green modes was the final strand in the battery of measures applied in Buxtehude.
A systematic approach has been taken, with origins and destinations of principal walk and cycle journeys analysed to identify the route network that was needed.
A hierarchy of facilities has been created in response to these perceived needs (Figure 6.20).
The town centre has been pedestrianised and acts as one of the major foci for walk trips.
Heavily used routes sometimes take the form of segregated pavements alongside roads, with extra protection at crossings in the form of raised pavements, narrowed roads, visual warnings for drivers and the like.
Elsewhere, when cycle and pedestrian desire-lines coincide, a system of joint pedestrian paths and cycle-ways has been created.
These tracks are segregated from motorised traffic along their length and protected at crossings, as in the Konopkastrasse example discussed earlier.
The surface is not subdivided in any way: cyclists are expected to keep to the left and to have consideration for walkers.
Some tracks are only short-cuts where cycles have been directed to former walkways in order to improve the directness of their journeys.
Others are new opportunities, such as those provided by constructing bridges to make new connections possible.
Many of these measures are small in themselves, but it is important to realise that the changed atmosphere in the town — in the sense of more greenery, more skeet play possibilities, lower noise levels and so on— represents a sum that is greater than the parts in developing a pedestrian- and cycle-friendly environment.
There have been a number of new initiatives aimed specifically at cyclists.
First, where dense cycle flows coincide with motorised through traffic, separate cycle paths have been constructed.
These usually share space with the pavement, but are delineated by different coloured or textured surfacing.
They maybe two-way if space permits (Figure 6.21) or may form part of a one-way system where it does not (Figure 6.22).
The problem with this sort of provision is that the cycle lanes have to be carried across junctions, which represent both bottlenecks and accident black spots on the network.
In Buxtehude, the most common measure is to ensure that the crossing cycle lane is conspicuous, as seen in (Figure 6.17), with the priority to the right rule giving added protection and often ensuring that cyclists can maintain their pace.
At major intersections, where cyclists may wish to turn left, added facilities can be provided in the form of ‘positioning lanes (Figure 6.23).
These are augmented by an advanced stop line to aid cyclist visibility at the junction and to provide an early start to the turning manoeuvre (Figure 6.24).
Second, where the land use is predominantly residential and where there is no through car traffic but much potential cycle movement, 'cycle streets’ have been created (Figure 6.25).
Here residents' cars are allowed to drive along the track for access, but cycles have absolute priority and cars must pull off to park.
Where roads are crossed, raised crossings are provided, with ramps from the road up to the cycle-street's level and markings to indicate clearly that it is crossing cars that must give way.
Vegetation at the intersections is kept low to aid visibility.
Such ‘Fahrradstrasse’ are not created as a function  of cyclist density, though some attempts have been made to funnel cross-town traffic along them to ensure that motorists are intimidated by the greater volume of cycle traffic.
Instead, they should be seen as an experiment, with criteria for success being those of safety, behaviour of users and degree of acceptance by cyclists and motorists.
To date the accident record is good and the tracks are popular with cyclists.
However, some of the streets are long (up to 1.5 km) so that some motorists have expressed frustration at having to drive behind a cycle at cycle speed for some distance.
It is fair to say that this is probably not a very pleasant experience for the cyclist either, so that‘give and take’ is an essential ingredient of operating such facilities in practice.
The final variant on provision for cyclists occurs in areas where streets are relatively narrow and pass predominantly through housing districts.
Here cycle tracks may be taken from road space, but as they are delimited only by markings they are available for cars to pull into when they need to pass oncoming traffic.
Where speed restraint measures are built, the cycle lane can be carried outside them to ensure that bikes are not slowed in the same way as cars (Figure 6.26).
The hierarchy of facilities provided for walking and cycling in Buxtehude is thus extensive as Figure 6.20 shows, ranging from pedestrianised areas, pedestrian priority routes, shared tracks for walking and cycling, cycle lanes along main routes, cycle priority streets and cycle lanes in roads.
Additionally, there are occasional examples of cycle lanes being carried in streets against the flow of one-way  traffic systems.
The only parts of the experimental area where there are no facilities for cyclists are in those residential streets that are sufficiently lightly and slowly trafficked as to constitute no danger to cyclists sharing the roadway with cars.
Cycling and walking in Buxtehude town centre
Apart from these four principal strategies, there is one  further experiment in Buxtehude over whose implementation there has been considerable controversy.
The pedestrianised shopping area in the town centre was originally designed for foot traffic only, with a system of one-way bicycle paths taking cyclists away from this area.
However, an experiment is now taking place here whereby cyclists may share the space with the walkers on the basis of equality.
Most German towns have, in the past, banned cycles from pedestrian areas on the grounds of danger to children and to frail and elderly walkers.
Buxtehude has set out to show that if cyclists can be persuaded to be disciplined, if pedestrians can be more tolerant and if the police will be more supportive then mixing the modes is possible.
The edge of the pedestrianised zone thus displays a number of features of interest (Figure 6.27).
Here the signs indicate that the cycle track ends and that cars are forbidden from entering, while the surface alterations and provision of bike parking would be what one would expect from a well-planned shopping centre.
However, the ‘Radfahrer frei’ sign indicates that cycling is allowed, though riders are warned by the cartoon underneath (Figure 6.28)‘But not this way!’
Beyond can be seen a mixture of walkers, mounted and dismounted cyclists and even the occasional moped (Figure 6.29).
Given the number of people who are likely to oppose such a policy, it requires perseverance in implementation and faith in the ability of traditional attitudes to change.
The prize is seen as well worth the effort.
the view of the traffic planners here is that if the bike is to be seen as a realistic substitute to the car over distances of up to two km, then every point must be made accessible to it.
To force cyclists to lock and unlock their bikes, detach and reattach shopping bags, lift off children and carry them perhaps for some distance, are all seen as ways of penalising cyclists and by implication encouraging the convenience of car use.
The thinking is that cyclists and pedestrians, though not always comfortable companions, stand to gain more by tolerating each other in mutual exclusion of the car than by continuing traditional attitudes which will prevent a full realisation of the benefits to town centres of encouraging the soft modes of transport.
Results of the Buxtehude measures
What have these measures actually achieved in Buxtehude?
The critical variable is speed, because so many of the environmental and safety improvements are dependent upon it.
In residential areas average speeds remained at about 30 km/h, which is seen as appropriate for this type of road.
On main roads, the 50 km/h average speed also remained unchanged, an unhelpful but hardly unexpected outcome given the lack of treatment these received roads in the experiments.
On the distributor roads however, such as the Altländerstrasse and the Konopkastrasse, mean speeds have fallen from 51 to 31 km/h.
This indicates widespread public compliance with the speed  limits, particularly in view of the fact that, by law, motorists in 30 km/h zones must exceed 39 km/h before the police can prosecute.
There are unlikely to be dramatic  improvements in noise levels and air quality as a result of these speed reductions, simply because 80 per cent of the traffic now is on the main roads.
Nevertheless, noise levels on the distributor roads have fallen typically by four dB(A), with falls of around 18 per cent in carbon monoxide levels and 10 and 30 per cent in hydrocarbons and nitrous oxide respectively.
Moreover, smoother driving is as much a characteristic of Tempo 30 as the lower overall speeds, as Döldissen has shown (Figure 6.30).
As it has been seen in Buxtehude that drivers take about six months to change their driving style and attitude, further falls in emissions are possible as they increasingly adopt defensive driving in third gear as an appropriate style rather than the aggressive driving in second gear that characterises their responses on first encountering Tempo 30 zones.
If the 30 km/h is achieved through third gear defensive driving, the reduction in hydrocarbon emission is as high as 20 per cent and that for nitrous oxide nearly 50 per cent.
There are considerable gains to be made too in fuel consumption, for while second gear driving at 30 km/h actually consumes seven per cent more fuel than driving at 50 km/h, third gear defensive approaches yield a seven per cent fall.
Changes in street design and responses in terms of reduced speed and different driver behaviour are certain to affect the frequency, severity and type of traffic accidents.
Results for the first three years of the experiment show that serious injury accidents fell by two-thirds and light injury accidents by one third.
Measured by cost of damage, serious accidents fell by a half whilst those resulting in light damage rose by a quarter.
Buxtehude planners are confident that these results are a consequence of the introduction of environmental traffic management, for drivers now have a wider angle of visibility, a shorter time to react and a reduced braking distance.
Put simply, minor bumps have increased while serious collisions have reduced in number, a result which was always anticipated.
In the first three years of the experiment not a single pedestrian was injured seriously enough while crossing the road to feel that it warranted reporting.
However a worrying trend is the sharp rise in the number of accidents involving cyclists, but without further research it is not possible to say whether this is a consequence of the doubling of the number of cyclists in Buxtehude in four years, a trend encouraged by the introduction of environmental traffic management.
Evaluating the Buxtehude strategy
An evaluation of the Buxtehude experimental area is relatively straight forward.
On the debit side, there is unlikely to have been a significant shift of travel in such a small town from cars towards public transport or indeed towards the bicycle.
Moreover, main road traffic has scarcely been slowed and the rising number of cyclist casualties should cause concern.
Finally, the outcome of the experiment of mixing foot and cycle traffic in a pedestrianised shopping area is as yet by no means conclusive.
On the other hand, there is overwhelming evidence of success.
The impressive speed reductions on the distributor roads, the safety gains, the rise in the mobility of non-motorized people in terms of dramatically increased numbers of cyclists, the pollution reductions and quieter traffic in residential areas, all point to the rapid achievement of some of the principal goals of traffic calming.
Nor have the costs been high; at only 14 DM per square metre of street, they are not only absolutely low but are more than offset by the saving to society of the reduced accident level that results.
For example, the total cost of the Buxtehude experiment is 5.0 million DM, yet the saving in accident compensation has been estimated at 1.4 million DM for the first year of the experiment alone.
Perhaps the proof of the pudding can be seen in public attitudes, for no such projects can come to fruition without substantial support from the public.
In Buxtehude, great emphasis has been laid on  publicity and, especially during the unpopular trial stage, on public participation.
The consequence is that of those questioned in an opinion poll carried out in Buxtehude by the German Automobile Association ADAC, 67 per cent of the car drivers and 76 per cent of the inhabitants approve of 30 km/h as a speed limit.
The percentage of drivers that would prefer the old 50 km/h limit has fallen from 46 per cent before, to six per cent after, the experimental period.
Through its remarkable experimental work and its sensitivity to public concerns, Buxtehude has shown that the claim that the motoring public will not tolerate such speed restrictions is quite false.
The Neustadt research area in Mainz
There are several experimental areas in Mainz, but the most interesting is the Neustadt area close to the city centre.
Here a late-19th century district of five or six storey apartments arranged along narrow gridiron streets was suffering from many of the environmental problems characteristic of inner-city areas — lack of greenery, unsafe junctions, chaotic parking conditions and fast traffic, much of it rat-running between neighbouring traffic generators such as the railway station to the south and the four-lane Rhein Allee to the north.
The measures advanced in the research project to address these problems are very diverse, with treatments ranging from re-striping the parking areas to rebuilding the street.
Part of the experiment was to discover resident reactions to the measures and to relate these to the expenditure incurred, thus providing a crude measure of cost-effectiveness.
A sine qua non of environmental traffic management here has been the reduction of through traffic by closing access from the Rhein Allee Within the treated area, the most radically changed streets have been repaved at a uniform level so that there is scarcely a distinction between pavement and carriageway (Figure 6.40).
Now that rest and play (sign 325) regulations are in force, there are low speeds, less noise, more greenery, greater freedom for pedestrians, cyclists and children and virtually no complaints about through traffic.
The residents overwhelmingly support the restructuring, with 82 per cent regarding their residential situation as better or somewhat better than before and only eight per cent feeling that it is worse.
Complaints remain that the traffic still does not drive at walking pace and that there are still insufficient play areas of good quality.
Moreover costs are high, averaging 110 DM per square metre of the street, with recurrent expenditure on the maintenance of the street furniture and the cultivation of the planted areas.
Not all streets can be treated in this way, if only because some traffic-generating land uses, sited within the area, would raise vehicle flows above acceptable levels for designation as rest and play streets.
Thus some streets have been subjected to partial redesign, wherein pavement and carriageway are kept separate on the whole, but crossing points are restructured as speed tables.
In some cases these are resurfaced using cobbles and in others they remain asphalt, with warning triangles painted on the road.
In both cases however, they have reduced speeds sharply and have permitted a degree of multifunctional use of the space (Figures 6.31 and 6. 32).
Along the streets themselves there are pinch points reinforced by planting and ramps.
Chicanes are created by alternating strips of right-angle parking on opposite sides of the road, reinforced by a shifting of the designated carriageway from side to side.
These features are illustrated in plan in Figure 6.33, and in Figure 6.34, which shows the actual appearance of the street.
The simplest form of traffic calming used in Mainz is the re-organisation of parking.
The profile of the street remains unchanged, but parking takes the form of stretches of right-angle and alongside parking, alternating from one side of the road to the other every 50 metres or so.
The artificial chicane produced by this arrangement produces speed reductions of 20–30 km/h and there have also been reductions in traffic densities and noise levels.
Costs have been  relatively low, averaging some 28 DM per square metre of the street.
Though residents find little change in the quality of living under these arrangements, they are generally pleased with the traffic calming that has resulted, though less so than those who live in the streets that have been completely rebuilt.
Taking all of these approaches together, it is clear that some intractable problems remain.
Despite the fact that most space is given over to circulation and parking, with special provision made for particular needs (Figure 6.45), the area is still overwhelmed by the sheer volume of parked vehicles.
Many are double parked, left on the pavement or in other inappropriate places (Figure 6.35).
Moreover, in contrast to much of Buxtehude, the spaces are occupied for most of the day so that space is not freed for other uses, such as children's play or adults' talk.
This domination of the surface space by parking results in insufficient planting, so that the alternate lines of cars and canyon-like streets are inadequately softened by greenery.
It also leaves few opportunities to create new play or pedestrian areas in the narrow streets.
Without the creation of new off-street parking areas, this problem is likely to intensify.
With that said, however, it is still possible to produce impressive results provided that opportunities to plant tall trees in the middle of the road are taken.
In time these may dramatically change the view: Figure 6.36 is taken from the same point as Figure 6.34, but in summer rather than winter and also one year later, some five years after the reconstruction of the road.
The point needs to be made too that although aesthetic benefits are welcome, the purpose of traffic calming has broader goals.
The housing styles, narrowness of the streets and the location of the district vis-a-vis the rest of the city all militate against Neustadt becoming an environmentally attractive area overnight.
In traffic terms however, these streets are quiet, safe and free from excessive through travel and aggressive driving; as such they must be judged a great improvement on what went before.
If in time ways can be found to beautify the street further, then that would be a bonus on top of the already achieved traffic calming gains.
The Moabit research area in Berlin
There are many similarities between the experimental areas in Mainz-Neustadt and those in the Moabit district of Berlin.
Both are inner-city areas, with tall residential buildings and workplaces lining narrow turn-of-the-century streets.
Through traffic had been a problem and the desirability of reducing traffic volumes and speeds and securing associated environmental and aesthetic benefits had been seen.
Many devices used to achieve these goals were also similar ramps, pinch points, parking layout changes, planting, rest and play streets and so on.
However, the differences between the approaches are also significant and illustrate how local circumstances will affect the perception of the problem and thus the kind of solutions adopted.
As in Mainz, one of the first tasks was to discourage through traffic.
Few roads were closed off in Moabit, but all entrances to the area were provided with necked-down junctions, with paving changes, ramps, vegetation and the necessary legal warning (Figure 6.37).
In Moabit there had already been some traffic management in the past, but this had relied largely on the use of one-way streets.
Because of the speed increases that these induce, together with lengthened journeys that they cause, these are now seen as being quite at variance with traffic calming principles.Thus former one-way carriageways were made two-way and all were narrowed, typically from over 6m to 4–5m.
This permitted parallel parking on one side of the road, in addition to the pre-existing right-angle parking on the other, thereby raising parking provision by 50 per cent(Figure 6.49).
The narrowing on its own was unlikely however to reduce speeds significantly, so pinch points were placed at intervals of about 50m along the road.
These were emphasized by strategic tree planting or the placement of some other strong vertical element at the pinch point, thus reinforcing  the narrowness of the road by creating a gateway.
In view of the potential danger to children of arranging unbroken lines of parked cars on both sides of the road it is critical that speeds are brought to very low levels in such schemes.
One further adopted measure thus was to offset the carriageway or create a chicane by using planting on one side only and switching the right-angle parking from one side to the other (Figure 6.50).
However, the State Conservation Office decided that retention of the historic straight alignment was advisable in many of Moabit's streets, so that the intended chicanes were sometimes replaced by a further speed reduction measure.
The device chosen was a carefully designed, small, speed table surfaced with distinctive flat cobbles, with gaps on each side that would allow buses and large trucks to pass without generating noise for residents, discomfort for passengers, or damage to the road surface as a result of impact by heavy vehicles.
Additionally, cycles and motor cycles could pass either side of the table to avoid the potential skid risk in wet or icy conditions (Figure 6.38).
At junctions the tables were enlarged to cover the whole area of the intersection, permitting crossing by pedestrians and buggies without change of level.
In streets where the carriageway has been offset, the Moabit experiments have used the area gained from the roadway to provide additional space for residents.
The results are impressive, with squares created for, amongst other things, play and rest (Figure 6.39), a fountain and paddling pool (Figure 6.40) and small shrubberies (Figure 6.41).
However, as Figure 6.41 shows, the space for these uses has been won often by removing cars to off-street parking areas, yet the opportunity for doing so is strictly limited by the availability of existing breaks in the facades of the buildings.
Consequently saturation street parking emerges as just as serious a problem as it has done in Mainz, particularly near the busy perimeter roads with their shops and offices.
When cars are parked on or near tables and pinch points.
penetration of the area by larger service vehicles  becomes very difficult.
The measures are designed to deter non-essential traffic and to encourage drivers of essential vehicles to proceed slowly and considerately, not to obstruct and frustrate them.
The Achilles heel of these approaches in inner-city areas is thus clearly the lack of parking space, which, if not solved, will rapidly  dissolve the goodwill of many residents, whether car owners or otherwise.
The research area of Ingolstadt
Much of the interest in the experimental modification in Ingolstadt lies in its treatment of a heavily trafficked ring road, as will be seen in Chapter Ten.
It is also of relevance however because it is the only one of the experimental areas that deals principally with a town centre and thus with functions that are as much commercial and retail as they are residential.
Moreover, though the small centre of Buxtehude is attractive enough, Ingolstadt is the only one with a heritage of historic buildings set in an ancient street pattern.
Unsurprisingly, the treatment of roads here had to be different.
The inner parts of the city of Ingolstadt are girdled by a combination of lengths of wall, gateways, military structures and, to the south, the River Danube.
Through traffic is diverted along the outer ring, whilst traffic bound for the city is encouraged to park in one of the many large car parks located in the Renaissance fire-protection zone between the ring roads (Figure 6.42).
This encouragement is unlikely to prove sufficient on its own to deter shoppers and others from attempting to drive closer to destinations within the old city.
Pedestrianisation of the area inside the ring would be an obvious policy, but there is much housing here, with the resultant generation of demands for vehicular access for residents' cars and for provision of services.
As a consequence, Ingolstadt has used selective street closure around the principal street, which is pedestrianised (Figure 6.43) and that crossing it, which is closed to all bar buses and taxis.
This divides the city into quarters and obstructs cross-core traffic.
Motorists entering the core, are confronted by 30 km/ h signs and strong visual clues as to how to behave: surfaces change and comers are necked down and given over to non-traffic uses (Figures 6.44 and 6.45).
Within each quarter there are selected road closures and some one-way streets, making journeys even more circuitous for non-residents.
However, there was much early resistance to these measures by residents, probably as a result of the closures being enforced by unattractive barriers (Figure 6.46).
As the experiment has matured, the infrastructure has become more sophisticated, adding to, rather than detracting from, the quality of the urban environment (Figures 6.44 and 6.45).
As Bowers has pointed out, however, it must be questioned whether the same results could not have been achieved by a strictly enforced parking policy, given the lack of parking space.
The ancient streets could perhaps have been left to enforce their own low driving speeds through their narrowness, their cobbled surfaces and their lack of visibility over anything more than a few metres.
By whatever means it has been achieved, however, the end result is one of a system of streets that permits access to essential users whilst maintaining an atmosphere of serenity and charm.
It is a far cry from the noisy and polluted conditions that characterise many historically-valued British town centres.
Results of the traffic management projects
At the time of writing (1989) full analysis of the model towns programme had yet to be completed.
However, some results were available and the ‘after’ studies for Buxtehude and Berlin were complete.
These have been outlined by Döldissen, whose work is drawn upon here.
Speeds .
Using evidence from all six towns, it appears that very substantial speed reductions (of up to 20 km/h) have been achieved with a reduction in the range from maximum to minimum.
In general, the more intensive the measures the lower were the speeds achieved, and the higher the original speeds the greater the reductions possible.
The results in Buxtehude have already been described, with little success seen on the main roads, but startling reductions — from 51 to 31 km/h — on the distributors within the Tempo 30 area.
In ‘rest and play’ streets in Moabit, where driving should be at' walking/running pace' (7–20 km/h), the average speed of unhindered vehicles was reduced from 39 to 20 km/h.
Unquestionably, the physical measures and publicity have resulted in considerable success in achieving this most crucial aim of environmental traffic management.
Traffic reduction in residential areas .
Established methods of keeping traffic out of residential areas have been avoided in the model towns, for the disadvantages  of barriers and one-way systems are now well known.
Nevertheless, through traffic has been dramatically reduced, demonstrating the efficacy of the battery of infrastructural and legal measures adopted.
Again this is a key finding, for little can be done about speeds, safety and environmental traffic management issues so long as housing areas have through traffic inflicted upon them.
Mobility and modal split .
Few results are available yet on this theme, though some tentative conclusions may be drawn.
In Buxtehude, as we have seen, there has been a sharp rise in bicycle use, though this is likely to be a result of the greatly increased opportunities for cycling (and walking) rather than of transfer from other modes.
It would be surprising if the remaining model areas did not also show gains for the soft modes.
On the other hand, there is no evidence yet of transfer to public transport; in a small town like Buxtehude this would not be expected anyway, but in the larger city schemes it seems likely that the failure to induce any significant modal switching will be one of the bigger disappointments of the experimental programme.
Perhaps this reflects over-ambitious goals rather than failure of the projects, for it will only be when attempts to calm large areas are made that possibilities emerge of encouraging former car journeys to be made by public transport.
Road safety .
The effects of the measures on accidents in Buxtehude have already been described, with serious injury accidents down by a third and considerable financial savings being made in addition to the more important human ones.
These results seem likely to be repeated elsewhere.
In Moabit, for example, there have been falls of 57 per cent in fatal injuries, 45 per cent in severe injuries, 40 per cent in light injuries and a fall in accident costs of 16 per cent .
The major beneficiaries of this trend were soft modes, with pedestrian accidents down by 43 per cent, cyclist accidents by 16 per cent and those involving children down by 66 per cent .
Again, there seems to be clear vindication of environmental traffic management approaches emerging from these experiments.
Noise .
Just as in Buxtehude, significant falls in noise levels have been recorded in the other towns.
Döldissen reports typical reductions of five to six dB(A) in the experimental areas, a fall of such magnitude that it is equivalent to either halving the traffic volume or to sealing in the motors of all passing vehicles.
In Berlin.
the average fall in sound pressure levels of four to five dB(A) was attributed to a decrease in the number of passing vehicles, to a reduction in speeds and to a change in driving style.
This is firmly supported by the research of Eichenauer and others who comment that the ‘often heard supposition that in these traffic calmed streets people drive louder at higher numbers of rpm is wrong’.
Nor was the sound level on the main roads increased despite the greater concentration of traffic there; indeed the smoother driving on these roads may have reduced the sound level of some of them, though this has yet to be verified.
Environmental quality .
As far as air quality is concerned, it must be stressed that significant improvements were not expected in the absence of considerable shifts in modal split.
Nevertheless, pollution emissions have fallen in Buxtehude and the smoother, slower driving seems bound to produce beneficial effects in other schemes too.
Nor should the ecological impacts of these measures be forgotten, for the unsealing of asphalt surfaces has lead to increases in area of trees, shrubs and plants.
Besides the improvement to the view for the inhabitants, there is clearly benefit for wildlife as well as spin-offs such as greater levels of dust  adsorption onto the leaves, increased humidity, larger areas of shade for summer days and greater insulation for winter nights.
Neighbourhood development The works have obviously improved the appearance of the model areas  and the new spaces created have provided increased opportunity for neighbourhood interaction.
Street activities have increased by 60 per cent in Moabit and there is evidence elsewhere too of cafés, shops and restaurants spilling out into the street.
As always with such radical experiments, business people feared for their prosperity, equating passing traffic with increased turnover.
However that myth has been laid to rest for good in Germany's pedestrianised city centres and unsurprisingly it has proved unfounded in the experimental areas too.
Indeed, local firms report increased turnover, despite the continuing fears about inadequate parking space.
As far as house prices and rents are concerned, no evidence has emerged yet of any changes that could be attributable to the environmental traffic management schemes.
However, this is an aspect that must be studied closely over a longer period, for there is a danger in some of the inner-city schemes of officially-induced gentrification.
Thus long-established residents could be priced out of their neighbourhood by richer in-migrants attracted by the environmental and aesthetic improvements to an area which still retains the benefit of close proximity to workplaces in the city centre.
Costs .
The costs of such schemes will clearly vary with circumstances such as the degree of severity of the pre-existing problems and the intensity and quality of the measures adopted.
Thus Moabit's work cost some 29 DM per square metre of street, but a third of this was the cost of the planting.
In Buxtehude costs were as low as 14 DM per square metre, whereas the high total cost for Ingolstadt (18 million DM) reflects expenditure on high quality improvement measures which were not essential for the environmental traffic management scheme to work.
It is difficult to put these sums into context for there is no knowing what benefit has been achieved compared to what would have resulted from some other social expenditure.
Nevertheless, if cost effectiveness is seen as a relevant criterion, the potential savings in accident costs alone promise to more than recoup the outlay on the environmental traffic management schemes.
Conclusions
The preliminary conclusion must be that the general approach taken in the research projects has been clearly vindicated.
In Döldissen's words:
‘…the environmental traffic management schemes have been very successful.
They have led to considerably lower speeds and less traffic without producing new problems elsewhere.
Traffic safety, the environmental situation and neighbourhood development possibilities have improved.
The potential mobility of non-motorized persons is also enhanced, though it may take some time (and, probably, more measures) for the modal split to change significantly.
The costs are low enough for the schemes to be applied to whole towns…it is estimated that the measures will be amortized within three to six years on account of saved accident costs.’
The very existence of such a high-profile federally-sponsored project has given greater confidence to planners elsewhere to adopt their own solutions to local problems.
All over the country, Verkehrsberuhigung is being adopted in advance of the results of the research, often with remarkable results.
To take just two examples: in Nuremberg junctions have been remodelled to accommodate cafés and pedestrian-friendly squares (Figure 6.49), whilst in Freiburg narrow, calmed streets with insufficient space for extensive tree-planting have been greened by the simple expedient of growing climbing plants to mask the canyon-like street walls (Figure 6.50).
As these examples indicate, there have been great environmental gains in traffic restraint areas, quite apart from the traffic improvements.
Drab vistas of bare streets lined with parked vehicles have been replaced by attractive and surprising views, differentiated by greenery, alternative parking arrangements and varied paving materials.
The extension of cafés into the street and the appearance of sitting and play  areas has produced, as Bowers has said, ‘a more congenial ambience’ and has ‘successfully reintroduced ‘liveable streets’, often in the most unpromising surroundings.
15 The high quality of the environment in the project areas provides a spectacular contrast with unreconstructed streets nearby — and indeed with the public environment we have grown to accept as the norm in Britain.
The case for a British version of this research programme is already a powerful one on safety and traffic grounds alone.
Moreover, such a demonstration would produce an accessible shop window of ‘green’ street environments which could have just as dramatic an effect on the way we think about our public spaces as it has done for the Germans.
However, when traffic calming is  introduced on a large scale to Britain, it is vital that the lessons that have been learned in the German experiments are explicitly recognised.
These lessons must not only concern infrastructure, but also process; not only the ‘what ’ of traffic calming but also the ‘how ’.
Specifically, the model areas research projects have demonstrated the requirement for very careful public consultation and involvement in the process, yet also the need for strength of purpose on the part of the planning authority.
The quality of the publicity material in the research areas has been high, but has needed to be, for the public have initially been deeply sceptical about some of the proposals.
In Buxtehude, despite the distribution of detailed information sheets with artists impressions of what residents' streets would look like after calming (Figure 6.51), opposition to the proposals was fierce and sustained, led by the unconvinced editor of the local newspaper.
However, as streets were reconstructed one by one by a determined local authority, so did the success of calming begin to emerge and opposition to soften.
The newspaper changed sides and the public's antagonism changed to vocal support as the safety and environmental benefits became clear for all to see.
Now Buxtehude is something of a Mecca for other traffic planners paying tribute to what has been achieved and taking the Verkehrsberuhigung message back to  their own communities.
It is likely that the introduction of traffic calming to any particular housing area in Britain will also produce opposition to what the residents may well see as disruptive and eccentric ideas.
But the demonstration projects in West Germany have shown above all that though the public might be sceptical at first, they will quickly become enthusiastic supporters.
Indeed far from being fearful of continued public objection, local authorities should be more concerned about their ability to be able to keep up with public demand for calming various residential areas once the ideas take off.
If German experience is anything to go by, initial public wariness will be replaced by warm approval, as residents come to appreciate the manifest advantages of living in a residential area that has been reclaimed from domination by the car.
Streets behind: in residential traffic planning areas in Britain
In Britain the principle of a hierarchy of urban roads, involving primary, district and local distributors, with residential access roads in the housing areas, has become generally accepted since the work of Buchanan.
The goal is to divert through traffic yet continue to permit access, with this to be achieved by closing some residential streets at their junction with main roads, by closing streets within the area to create culs-de-sac or loop roads, or by restricting some streets to one-way traffic.
In general, safety and environmental benefits are sought in the living areas and through traffic is deflected on to those roads better suited to its needs for speed and high capacity.
Variants of this cell system can be seen in many British urban areas.
Very commonly, though, the road hierarchy is incomplete or elements of it are inappropriate, most frequently when major distributors are lined with housing There are thus disbenefits for residents on heavily trafficked streets to which through traffic is diverted.
Within the environmental areas there may be disadvantages too, such as more circuitous journeys as a result of one-way systems or road closures, together with higher vehicle speeds and correspondingly lower safety levels.
Nevertheless, there are clear overall safety benefits from these approaches, which lead accidents in residential areas to fail more than they rise on peripheral roads.
The development of traffic management in residential areas in Britain
The application of these ideas to established urban areas has been obstructed both by public expenditure restrictions and by community opposition to new road construction.
Obviously, it is easier to arrange the layout of the road network and the geometry of individual streets before housing is built on a greenfield site.
Britain has had an unrivalled opportunity to do this in the post-war new towns, where the circumstances permitted experimentation with all manner of innovative layouts.
It does appear that, in general, British new towns have a better than average safety record: a 1975 TRRL report suggests that the frequency of injury accidents in seven ‘Mark One’ new towns was about 20 per cent less than in other towns.
Dupree attributes greater road safety in the new towns to their being the trend-setters for many transport innovations:
‘…the idea of pedestrian/vehicle segregation began to take off in the 1950s and much of the pioneer work was done in the new towns.
It manifested itself in pedestrianised town centres  and neighbourhood centres, in Radburn type housing layouts, by the provision of a direct footpath system quite separate from, and more direct than, the roads, and by bridges or underpasses where footpaths crossed the distributor roads.
The provision of a cycle track system in some towns also made a contribution to safety’
Without more detailed evidence, it is not possible to attribute the higher safety levels in new towns to particular causes.
For example, we do not know whether we should attribute Stevenage's low casualty rates (3.9 per 1,000 population in 1979 compared to 6.5 for British towns as a whole) to its pedestrianised town centre, its extensive cycleway system or some other reason.
Similarly, there is no way of knowing whether it was Cumbernauld's highly segregated traffic arrangements that led to casualty rates some 30 per cent below the national average for built-up areas.
These figures represent an improvement over those for existing towns, but are not particularly impressive.
After all, the new towns have been built in a car-familiar age and do not have accident rates inflated by large numbers of pre-car districts of great traffic danger.
Although the Radburn layouts were safer than earlier designs, they failed to solve the triangular conflict between safety, environmental attractiveness and access.
The omnipresent cul-de-sac, for example, lowered speeds but not enough for child safety, especially on the long straight legs.
Moreover, mothers may have encouraged children to play on the road surface where they could be seen from the kitchen window instead of on the grass at the front where they could not.
It is possible too that women were trading off the traffic safety of the secluded footpaths for the personal safety of the well-lit roads.
As has been seen in Chapter Three, the high densities at which the layout was built in Britain reduced its aesthetic appeal.
Nor did it allow families to get the car very close to the house as they preferred to do.
One solution to the safety/environment/access conflict was found in a new design for The Brow estate in Runcorn new town in Cheshire (Figure 7.1).
Here the cul-de-sac was designed for low speed as Dupree describes:
‘…the designers set out deliberately to create a pedestrian dominated area…short culs-de-sac (gave) access to several small courtyards-, around which a half dozen or so houses were grouped quite informally.
Very low traffic speeds were induced by varying the road width…small radius curves and short sight lines were introduced as a continual reminder of the need for slow driving…there was no kerb and no separate footway.’
The resultant housing development at The Brow was acclaimed as a breakthrough, indicating that safe and attractive layouts could result where collaboration between architect, highway engineer and landscape architect was achieved.
Most importantly, it demonstrated that there were alternative ways of dealing with the car without compromising on safety, access or environmental quality.
Unsurprisingly, the shared space arrangement at The Brow was copied elsewhere, at first in other new towns such as Washington, and later in other new developments, so that variants of the theme can now be seen in new housing estates in Britain.
They are, however, far from ubiquitous, unlike shared space or low speed streets are in new developments in West Germany and Holland.
Moreover, they are virtually unknown in established residential areas.
In other words The Brow, though a significant development, was not as influential as the early Woonerven in Delft have proved to be.
Why it failed to be a British launching pad for Continental-style progress in traffic calming is an issue well worth investigating.
Comparisons with Continental experience
The developments that followed the success of The Brow were different from the Dutch innovations in  several crucial respects.
Most importantly, a different view was taken on measures to restrict the speed of motorised traffic.
In Holland the view had always been taken that changes in physical design of the street and in the legal rules governing its use were simultaneously necessary if dramatic changes in behaviour were to be achieved.
The elements of this may be recalled.
They were, first, practical measures such as speed humps to make drivers aware of their speed and thus slow their vehicles; second, a designed environment that conveys to the driver the fact that the area is one whose function is principally for living not travelling, with a consequent imparted feeling that awareness of soft traffic is imperative; third, a legal change in priority, so that all occupants of the street space are equal; and fourth, lest drivers are encouraged to view the new street layout as a challenge to driving skill rather than an encouragement of self-restraint and caution, a new regulation on car speeds.
This was, admittedly, the rather indeterminate ‘walking speed’, though in more recent years it has been followed by widespread adoption of 30 km/h limits, especially in Germany.
There are thus four strands from which shared space in the Netherlands is woven.
Only one of these, that of the designed environment, has been adopted in Britain, and infrequently at that.
No legal change in priority has been contemplated, so that drivers may continue to assume dominance over foot traffic in housing areas.
Speed humps are subject to extensive limiting criteria and have legal implications, and so are rarely used.
As far as speed limits lower than the ‘normal urban’ 50 km/h (30 mph) limit are concerned, this is subject to the consent of the Secretary of State which is ‘in practice rarely given.’
The process of acceptance of shared space in Britain has been one of an incremental shift in engineering design, with the aims of building safe housing areas remaining intact but with methods altered.
Perceived as a change of means rather than ends, it has passed off without public discussion of the goals, methods or results.
There is no doubt at all from Dutch and German experience that widespread public participation could be expected if changes were proposed in priority in streets or in speed limits.
Partly because these changes have been seen as shifts in design philosophy to be applied incrementally to new housing areas or to rehabilitated inner city districts, there has been no attempt to apply them to established residential areas.
Such areas require more than simple changes to the plan of the street if safety is to be radically improved.
As permutations of speed restraint measures, lower speed limits and priority changes are not part of the package being applied in new areas, they are not seen as appropriate for existing ones either.
Because the application of these new designs in new residential areas has been quiet and uncontroversial, the panoply of safety measures that could be applied as on the Continent has not been publicly discussed.
Moreover, these are mutually reinforcing trends.
Quiet changes in design appear only to be relevant to new areas, so that public debate and understanding is limited.
There is thus no ground-swell of demand for traffic calming to be applied to those places that would benefit most, existing residential areas where accident rates are higher than in new estates.
As a consequence there is no practical experience and no feedback to modify the approach in the design of subsequent estates.
The application of traffic calming in Britain has thus been almost imperceptible, implemented here and there on new housing estates, and usually in a very diluted and faint-hearted manner.
This combination of a strictly limited set of measures, and their application only to new housing, goes a very long way to explaining why public ignorance of these matters is so widespread in Britain.
If there is no knowledge of how things might be better, ferment for improvement is unlikely.
The great majority of people do not live in traffic calmed layouts and would not be familiar with their design or purpose.
There may be occasional discussion of calming principles in the literature and appraisals of such designs in practice, but the lasting impression provided by an examination of residential areas in Britain is the exceptionally slow pace of change by comparison with that on the Continent in general and Holland and West Germany in particular.
A last distinction between calming experience in Britain after The Brow and that on the Continent since the Woonerf, lies in the dissimilar attitudes of government transport departments as reflected in their literature.
The  availability of detailed, comprehensive and up-to-date guidance on good practice is critical for local authorities that rarely feel able to take risks in design that might have long-term financial consequences.
One of the most important impacts of The Brow should thus have been on the content and dissemination of subsequent official guidance on residential road layout.
In fact, information on shared space principles quickly became available in local guides, most obviously in Cheshire, but Roads in Urban Areas , the standard Department of Transport manual from 1966, remained in use.
However, the highway-orientated designs of this manual, with their detrimental effect on pedestrian comfort and environmental attractiveness, had been clearly undermined by the success of the new integrated approaches to traffic in residential areas.
Revision of this 1966 manual would clearly have a major role in influencing local developments in the future, just as Dutch and German Government publications had propagated nationally the relevant experience gained in local experiments.
The new design guide, issued jointly by the DoE and DTp in 1977, was keenly awaited: transport planners had every right to anticipate bold initiatives.
Design Bulletin 32 (1977): Residential Roads and Footpaths
DB32 , as it became colloquially known, was the long awaited planners' guide, advising on the considerations which should be taken into account in the layout of residential roads and footpaths in new housing schemes, as well as in improvement areas.
Whether British experience has come anywhere near  the good practice ideal enshrined in the OECD guidelines set out in Chapter Three can be seen from an examination of the principal design guidelines set out in its pages.
The objectives of DB32 are admirable, stressing exclusion of non-access traffic, holding down traffic flows and speeds near homes, and reducing danger from on-street parking.
As a statement of aims the detailed recommendations of the section on ‘minimising danger and nuisance from non-access vehicular traffic’ are exemplary.
In terms of OECD good practice, all of the principles for new areas are followed except for full segregation and those for child safety are adopted too.
Speeds of ‘well below 30 mph’(50 km/h) are discussed as targets for access roads and shared surfaces are discussed in the context of culs-de-sac or short loops.
In terms of broad objectives, the document is hard to fault.
When it comes to practical advice, however, there are sins aplenty, of omission and commission.
There is more emphasis on traffic volumes than on speeds, with road geometry used as the speed restricting device and the target seen as being some unspecified speed below 30 mph (50 km/h).
Speed control devices are mentioned but not emphasised, so there is no overt discussion of pinch points, ramps, tables etc.
The notion of shared space ‘may be acceptable’ for short loops or culs-de sac, but a ‘cautious approach’is advised: for example, such layouts are said to need segregated play space so that the road will not be used as the main location for play.
This lacks the boldness of the Dutch approaches that date from the same period, so that fundamental changes in the function of the road surface and attitudes towards its use cannot be achieved.
Indeed, there is a wider point here: in the entire document, there is not a single acknowledgement of a non-British source of information and no non-British reading is recommended.
There is no evidence that any Continental work is even known about, let alone thought to be relevant.
DB32 comes across as a sensible and logical set of recommendations based more on past experience in Britain and common sense, than on research, imagination or emulation of successful ideas from overseas.
That is its problem.
If government advice is this cautious, and local authorities with their restricted budgets likely to be less adventurous still, then the likelihood of innovative work resulting is remote.
It is worth remembering that the UK at the time of this publication was already adrift of the best practice elsewhere, with fatality rates double those of the Netherlands for pedestrians and more than triple those of Sweden for children.
There was clearly every incentive to produce a challenging set of guidelines but the opportunity was missed.
In this climate of caution and introspection, little has been achieved in the decade since 1977.
Ideas, practice, experience, and debate have continued apace on the other side of the North Sea, but Britain has become becalmed, drifting in the absence of a strong policy current.
By 1986, Hass-Klau was asking whether environmental traffic management exists in Britain and concluding that ‘since the mid-1970s, Britain has largely stopped innovating in traffic restraint policies’.
The failure to begin to revise DB32 until 1988 symbolised an inability to recognise that Britain was falling far behind Continental practice.
By early 1989, a consultation draft Supplement to DB32 was circulating among local authorities.
It did not claim to  supersede DB32 which remained ‘an essential source of background evidence and reasoning for use when interpreting the new guidelines'’ and the objectives remained the same.
However, there are a number of significant departures from the earlier document.
First, without doubt the Supplement is a more practical guide, more heavily illustrated, with much more specificity than the general advice  proffered by DB32, a change which is bound to encourage more innovation among the more timid local authorities.
Second, the hierarchy of residential roads has been deepened by the addition of a series of new classifications at the low-volume end as Figure 7.2 shows.
There is more variety and imagination than before and of course an opportunity to specify stricter flow and speed characteristics for these roads than when  they were less differentiated.
For example, the Supplement recommends target maximum speeds on major access roads of 50 or 40 km/h, depending on the number of dwellings served, of 40 or 30 km/h on collector roads, of 30 km/h on access roads serving over 30 houses, and of under 30 km/h for smaller groups.
This is a significant change, for there is, in safety terms, a world of difference between these speeds and the ‘well below 30 mph’(50 km/h) as advised by DB32.
As a rule, pedestrians hit by a car at 30 km/h do not sustain serious injuries, whilst at a collision speed of over 50 km/h, the result is almost always severe injuries, which are often fatal.
Third, actual measures recommended are far more imaginative than those in DB32.
It is argued that studies of innovative road layouts ‘suggest that the innovative features have been generally successful in creating areas in which speeds are well below those normally occurring on most traditional roads’.
Accordingly, examples of innovative features are given, illustrated here in Figure 7.3.
They include ‘speed restraint points’(which appear similar to speed tables or raised crossings); speed control bends of more than 90 degrees deflection and with tight radii and mountable shoulders; speed control islands to interrupt unavoidably long and straight stretches of road where speeds would otherwise be excessive; and speed control humps, though it is warned that these ‘ought not to be used in new housing schemes when other speed reducing features would be effective.’
Fourth, the Supplement embraces the concept Or shared spaces for cars and pedestrians.
As Figures 7.4 and 7.5 show, these may be referred to as Car Ways, Access Ways, Mews Courts, or Housing Squares depending upon design and capacity.
Speeds are expected to be low — less than 20 km/h in most cases — and entrance ramps, changes in surface materials, and tree and shrub planting may be used to ensure compliance.
All of these matters are embraced much more enthusiastically in the Supplement than they were in the original design bulletin.
Authorities are ‘strongly urged…to be receptive to imaginative and innovative  designs’ and developers ‘encouraged to be bold yet flexible’, whereas the original talked in terms of‘caution on some issues where matters of safety or the risk of increased expenditure on maintenance may be involved’.
With that said, however, it is hard to see this having a great deal of effect on safety in residential areas in Britain.
For one thing, as it applies only to areas of new or rehabilitated housing, it can have only a marginal impact on overall levels of safety in all residential areas, at least for the  foreseeable future.
Furthermore, the manual is concerned with matters of design alone and does not address the benefits that might arise from legal changes — because it cannot.
For example, though an access road might be designed to encourage speeds below 30 km/h, there is no law to prevent driving at 50.
The Woonerven experience in Holland was an early indication Or the benefits that can arise when changes in the law accompany changes in physical design, yet these cross-fertilisation benefits are not realised when just one form of speed deterrent is strengthened.
Just as we should not expect too much from those West German areas that have simply erected speed restriction signs without reinforcing the message with physical infrastructure, so design changes alone, though better than legal changes alone, are still inadequate.
A further problem is that although we should be glad that speed control measures are encouraged more strongly than they were in 1977, they are only applied to very small developments.
The message to drivers is very different from that in schemes that treat whole neighbourhoods or groups of streets.
In Buxtehude for example, an attempt is made to calm the car across a broad area using a battery of devices, providing the driver with an unambiguous message that he or she is welcome, but on the terms set by the residents.
That message in the British approach only applies to tiny areas in the immediate vicinity of small groups of houses.
Elsewhere within residential areas the car remains king.
Lastly, there is a unimodal view about these British approaches that seems unimaginative and  static in perspective.
Admittedly the Supplement devotes space to provision for cycling and it repeats DB32 ‘s general advice to have regard for the special road and footpath layout requirements that might result from the consideration of bus routes and stops.
But this is defensive in tone, with these matters seen as constraints rather than opportunities.
There is no attempt, for example, to design-in the ability to run minibus services on direct routes through housing areas to give door-based service, or to focus foot- and cycle-ways on bus stops, or to provide cycle facilities and shelter at bus stops, and so on .
The impression given by the Bulletin and its Supplement is that there is universal acceptance that the car will be the preferred and available mode of transport throughout the lifespan of the houses that are being constructed; that individual car-ownership for all eligible people will be the norm; and thus, though the need to curb the excesses of the car is recognised, other forms of transport are aberrances which must be made to fit around the key elements of the design, which are car-friendly.
All of these assumptions are, to say the least, challengeable.
In sum then, though the Supplement has a good deal more to commend it than its 1977 parent, it comes across as a car-orientated guide, static in outlook and narrow-minded in perspective.
The contextual statements in the introduction are taken from the guide of twelve years ago, with no apparent recognition that in traffic planning terms there has been little short of a revolution in the intervening period.
The failure to adopt successful Continental practices can only be construed as complacency.
For example British ministers of transport are fond of drawing attention to the view that on some criteria the UK has the safest roads in Europe.
But when it comes to pedestrian deaths, only two countries from the whole of Western and Southern Europe and Scandinavia — Austria and Greece — have a rate that is significantly worse.
If we compare our rates with the best, they were double those of the Netherlands in 1979 as we have seen, and by 1985 had worsened to two and one half times the Dutch rates.
It might be felt that this is not perhaps the set of circumstances in which ignoring ail Continental experience would seem to be a logical and easily justified decision.
A new look st the problems?
One of the reasons for the improvement in pedestrian safety on the Continent over the past decade, is that the focus of traffic calming work has been on the areas where most people live, that is on existing, not new, residential areas.
DB32 and its Supplement were, as has been stressed, design manuals for local authority use when planning the external environment of new housing developments and areas of city renovation.
Such an aim precludes the production of a strategy to deal with the manifest traffic-related problems of existing residential areas, so that the manuals should not be criticised for what they were not designed to do.
There is, however, evidence of a policy vacuum on existing residential areas in that the principal traffic manuals guiding local authority actions date from the mid-1960's.
There was no clue to contemporary thinking at the DTp throughout the 1970's: indeed, it was not until 1987 that a new standard reference work was published which could reasonably be expected to provide up to the minute advice on traffic planning in existing urban areas.
Roads and Traffic in Urban Areas was heralded by an HMSO flyer which, referring back to the volume's antecedents, commented that:
‘…the solutions of the ‘Sixties are no longer adequate for today's world.
Things have changed...
The provision of access and parking facilities and the increase in vehicle/pedestrian conflict are problems requiring special skills if the quality of life in urban areas is to be maintained or improved.’
It went on:
‘What was needed was a new look at the problems and the ways in which they might be solved, both in the UK and elsewhere.
Roads and Traffic is that response…supported by the Department of Transport, it is a thoroughly comprehensive, up-to-date publication…invaluable to both new and experienced  practitioners as well as in teaching institutions throughout the world.’
With a blurb like that, it would have been hard for anyone waiting for a British response to the wave of Continental traffic calming not to get excited.
Moreover, three of the four illustrations on the publicity flyer depicted pedestrianised zones, an indication — presumably — of the soft-mode bias of the manual and of dramatically changed thinking at the DTp.
In the manual there is indeed much to be welcomed.
At the outset the book recognises that ‘the United Kingdom does not have a monopoly on the best ideas or all of the problems’, so it is not a surprise to see discussion of Woonerven in the context of environmental protection and enhancement.
There is also recognition of the importance of speed reduction measures, illustrated by discussion of speed humps, rumble strips, jiggle bars and so forth.
Facilities for pedestrians and those for cyclists are given their own chapters, and there is a chapter devoted to new residential development.
This reiterates the 1977 DB32 advice and provides more specific illustration similar to that in the Supplement Four photographs of good practice are included, all taken from DB32.
Roads and Traffic in Urban Areas has, by its own proclamation, set itself up as the Bible for traffic planners.
It is instructive to see what the reviewer in The Planner thought of it
‘.. it will be a great disappointment to those looking for advice on the best available techniques of traffic management, or integrated transport and land use planning.
The problem is that the most exciting and far-reaching developments are now to be found outside the UK, and the manual mostly excludes foreign practice.
‘…So the current practice described in the manual may be ‘good practice’ by UK standards, but much of it is miserable by European standards.
These are not just my comments.
At a conference held last year to launch the manual, speakers from the platform and from the floor voiced their disappointment.
The general feeling was that the manual covered well the practice of the 1970s and early 1980s, but that a further manual to stimulate more modem and innovatory practice would be desirable.
‘For me, the manual is too firmly rooted in the philosophy of the 25 years old Buchanan report: the acceptance of growth in car traffic rather than living standards as the starting point for transport planning, the passive acceptance of declining public transport, the idea that we must choose between accessibility and environmental quality and the rather spurious notion that economic vitality demands a certain level of access by car’
When it comes to advice for residential areas, the manual is deeply disappointing.
The flyer may have had three of its four photographs taken in pedestrian zones, but walking and cycling get less than five  per cent of the space in the book.
Design for residential areas gets three per cent; speed reduction measures less than one per cent .
It may be a valuable reference book on established practice, but what does the indefensible pedestrian accident rate in Britain have to say about the validity of that?
The contrast with Stadtverkehr –m War–del the glossy German government publication with its wealth of imaginative ideas that were reviewed in Chapter Five, could hardly be greater.Whether dealing with residential areas, walking, cycling, public transport, or traffic calming the British manual is bereft of new ideas, cautious in tone and apparently oblivious to the revolution sweeping through Europe.
Out of date as soon as it was published, it will do nothing to lift Britain from its position near the bottom of the league table for pedestrian safety, nor to address the fact that in individual residential areas the quality of life continues to be blighted.
The use of demonstration projects
The limited application of traffic calming in Britain has been, as we have seen, principally in new housing areas, yet the greatest gains from traffic calming are likely to appear in existing residential areas where adverse traffic conditions lead to a lack of safety.
However, no hard-pressed city government is likely to fund accident reduction research or to experiment with possibly expensive infrastructure provision or management methods, especially as the cost saving from accident reduction does not for the most part accrue to the authority itself.
The responsibility for this type of work is one that clearly falls on central government.
For this reason, just as has been seen in Holland and Germany, the British government has become involved with research and demonstration projects on traffic safety in residential areas.
The impetus for demonstration work in Britain came from two directions.
First, experience had been gained with applying low cost safety measures in rehabilitation projects in inner city districts, such as General Improvement Areas.
These measures, when  combined to produce an area-wide effect, had succeeded in discouraging through traffic, reducing speeds of access traffic, and raising the consciousness of drivers about the dangers of the residential environment.
It seemed reasonable to suppose that such benefits could be applied to other districts of the city without necessarily designating housing improvement schemes.
Second, consideration began to be given to the different distribution of particular accident types.
Hitherto most safety improvement had been focussed on engineering remedies directed at places where clusters of accidents occurred — the so-called ‘blackspot’ approach.
This was a cost-effective method, but failed to deal with non-clustered accidents scattered throughout residential streets, with locations that changed from year to year.
These accidents disproportionately involved child pedestrians and cyclists.
As the Transport and Road Research Laboratory (TRRL) put it:
‘Under these circumstances improvements to individual intersections or short lengths of road by means of standard traffic engineering measures may be wasteful of accident resources, whilst measures that have much wider impact may be more effective.’
Accordingly, the Transport and Road Research Laboratory (TRRL) began work in the late 1970's to investigate the possible impact of area-wide measures to improve road safety.
The general approach in this ‘Urban Safety Project’ was to attempt to achieve a basic level of safety throughout an area by the use of measures to regulate turning manoeuvres, to discourage through traffic and to restrict speeds and increase drivers' awareness of their environment.
Next a management strategy would be developed to deal with the accidents not covered by, or remedied in, the first stage.
This was designed to evaluate the effectiveness of different accident and traffic strategies, so that the most cost-effective could be selected for each area.
The goal was to establish the basis for a generally applicable traffic management system and to demonstrate the likely benefits in accident reduction.
Specifically, five schemes were then implemented in Bristol, Reading, Nelson, Sheffield and Bradford between 1984 and 1986.
The major features of each of the schemes are summarised in Figure 7.6.
The approach is area-wide, so that traffic on all classes of roads may be influenced, with the object of encouraging arterial road use, discouraging through traffic from residential streets and helping traffic entering such streets to do so with greater safety.
Figure 7.7 indicates the safety objectives and measures for one of the schemes, West Reading.
The types of infrastructural measures used are generally well established ones, such as mini-roundabouts, islands and turning bans on the distributor roads.
Humps and rumble strips are used on residential streets to reduce speeds.
The measures are designed to reinforce each other to produce a combined accident reduction which will make their introduction as a package cost-effective, even in areas with scattered accidents where normal ‘value for money’ criteria for accident prevention treatment are not met.
Monitoring will continue for two years after implementation, with lessons learned used to produce guidelines for local authorities to extend their accident reduction programmes.
By 1988 interim results indicated that around 10 per cent fewer accidents occurred than would have been expected without the schemes.
Reductions were experienced in all of the towns, with the estimates of effect ranging from four to thirty per cent.
Although the number of accidents involving specific road user groups is small, the indications are that the benefits have fallen to pedestrians, particularly children, and cyclists.
If these measures were applied to the country as a whole, it is conservatively estimated that a reduction of over 10,000 in jury accidents could be achieved every year.
Though these accident reductions are to be welcomed, they have to be seen in the context of what could have been achieved using alternative approaches, such as those used in Buxtehude or Berlin-Moabit.
As seen in Chapter Six, both of these schemes cut serious injuries by a half, much more impressive than a reduction of one tenth in all injuries.
And the point about the German schemes is that they achieved much more besides because they attempted more: measures of noise, air quality and levels of-street activity have all improved, and there are dramatic specific results, such as Buxtehude's growth of cycling or Moabit's greening of the environment.
In contrast, the success of the scheme in West Reading is questioned by one commentator, who refers to the ‘dreary’ and ‘ineffective’road narrowings.
Above all, though, are the speed reductions which characterise all of the German schemes (and from which most benefits stem) yet which are scarcely mentioned in the British project.
One very revealing paragraph in the Urban Safety Project indicates the extent of the inherent problems:
‘Very few local access roads have been treated along their length; where through traffic needs to be discouraged, treatment has mainly been directed at the access points to the local residential area.
This provides an added potential benefit to traffic travelling along the main routes by reducing the number of locations where this is in conflict with turning traffic, but provides little control over speeds once traffic has penetrated the residential area.
But the numbers of accidents on local roads within the residential neighbourhoods are on average less than one quarter of the total in the area and more comprehensive treatment is not cost effective on safety grounds alone.’
(my emphasis)
There are two difficulties here.
First, the solutions adopted are all from the same stable, that of semi-traditional, soft, road engineering such as mini roundabouts, turning bans and the like.
Some of these are indirect ways of reducing speeds, but nowhere is the direct way used ie a change in the law to bring speed limits below 50 km/h, applied street by street or across a zone, delimited by signs, enforced by the police, publicised widely, and then supported by  infrastructural measures to ensure compliance as well as by environmental enhancement to reinforce perception of the changing function of the street to one of pedestrian ownership.
Without a commitment of this sort to reducing speeds, it is hard to imagine sustainable, widespread and substantial accident reductions of the order of fifty per cent or more.
The second difficulty is the narrow definition of the problem as a safety one.
In the German schemes, it was hoped to improve not only traffic safety, but also environmental quality, conditions for walkers and cyclists and recreational opportunities.
The approach there was to adopt a package of measures that were simple and inexpensive, but because they were integrated, would be more effective than single measures would be on their own.
Clearly, that is at variance with the TRRL work where, if safety grounds alone do not justify ‘cost-effective’ treatment, then no measures would be taken, despite the fact that on a variety of criteria together treatment would most probably be worthwhile.
Not surprisingly, the reaction of local residents to the schemes was less than enthusiastic.
As the project team commented: ‘The public are naturally unwilling to accept change, particularly when it may involve some travelling disadvantage, unless they can recognise clear compensating benefits….
’ Such benefits of environmental traffic management might include the greening of the streetscape, the growth of child play opportunities, or more chance for adult use of the street to sit and talk.
These can go a very long way to mollifying those individuals whose journeys are lengthened by traffic-affecting measures.
It is naive to imagine that engineering schemes that interrupt long established travel patterns will be accepted with equanimity in exchange for accident benefits that are difficult to substantiate due to their scattered and infrequent nature.
More tangible benefits than this are absolutely essential if the scheme is to have public support, without which it is unlikely to work.
A fundamental disadvantage with the conception of the British schemes is that such compensation is neither considered nor provided.
However admirable may be the aim of the Urban Safety Project — ten to fifteen per cent reduction in accidents — the limited scope of these schemes cannot be ignored.
In residential areas there are no attempts to create shared space on the Woonerf model and there is no discussion of the environmental works that can so improve their habitability.
Though pedestrians and cyclists are to be ‘encouraged to use the facilities provided for them’ there do not appear to be any facilities other than the traditional footpath.
This is a very far cry from, for example, the diversion to cycles being actively sought in Germany's ‘bicycle friendly towns’(Chapter Nine).
Similarly, although there are some bus gates in the schemes, there is nothing positive in the way of encouragement for modal diversion towards public transport as there is in Delft (also discussed in Chapter Nine).
Overall, the TRRL Urban Safety Project has some similarities to the six German model city schemes in that it is specifically area-wide in scope and it does attempt an appraisal of a variety of schemes.
However, its principal aim of accident reduction is only one of those incorporated in the goals of the German projects, which deal with a much more extensive array of environmental and aesthetic improvements.
The German perception of the issue is as an opportunity to civilise traffic for the benefit of residents.
That approach is altogether different from that in Britain, where the project is designed to advise local authorities on how to deal with an accident problem.
With goals so limited, one should not expect a revolution in residential environments to emerge from current British research.
Conclusions
We have seen in this chapter that little has been achieved in British residential areas in terms of safer and more attractive environments.
In existing housing areas it is hard to see any changes at all, despite the fact that so many of these are extremely unsafe by comparison with newer areas.
In recently built estates an anaemic variant of shared space is now  encountered, but there are no priority changes, no reduced speed limits, and rarely any speed reduction measures.
One of the few reviews of how shared space has operated in Britain has been provided by Bowers and others in 1984.
They note the fact that sight-lines in shared spaces are restricted on the assumption that drivers will be slowed by uncertainty.
They question the theoretical basis of this approach, arguing that not only might the driver treat this as a challenge to driving skill, but that in the trade off between caution and speed, the driver could equally strike a bargain on the side of risk, especially where the shared space is lengthy.
They cite observed speeds in excess of 60 km/h on access roads in support of this view.
Thus the theory predicts low speeds and thus safety; the observed reality is one of inappropriately high speeds.
They conclude that under these more realistic assumptions about car and pedestrian speeds, shared space as currently advised in DB32 is dangerous.
From this position there are two choices.
The first is to accept the speeds that are actually being observed and redesign the surfaces to allow sight-lines which are consonant with these speeds.
From a review of child and car stopping distances under various assumptions, they conclude that for a car travelling at only 16 km/h about 30m sight distance would be required, but that this is much greater than that normally feasible in existing shared space areas.
If speeds of 32 km/h were assumed for the car, then 56m sight distances would be required.
The obvious problem here is that to provide such sight lines would
‘lead to a form of prairie planning which would negate many of the townscape qualities which the residents in the case studies greatly appreciated.
It would force a return to the Roads –n Urban Areas style of road and housing layout which is widely agreed to be less than desirable–
The second choice is to accept the sight-lines actually available in shared spaces and find a way to lower speeds.
Given the sight distances actually available, speeds should be restricted to about 8 km/h, but cars are unlikely to travel this slowly unless physical measures are put in place.
If poor visibility in itself is rejected as a means of achieving speed reduction through anxiety, other measures are necessary.
Bowers et al argue that the simplest and most effective measure is the speed hump.
Slowing vehicles by physical measures such as humps
‘would permit the continued use of the design approaches using ‘shared space’ which have been hailed as being highly successful in environmental and aesthetic terms; the short sightlines which form a natural part of the ‘intimate spaces’created in these schemes would cease at really low speeds to be short compared with stopping distances, and hence would pose little threat.’
In sum then, this research has shown that the existing short sight-lines demand that cars travel slower than they do; the solution is either to lengthen the sight-lines or to slow the cars.
The first approach, which will effectively abandon the shared space principle, is not recommended by the researchers, for it is the application of the shared space approach that they question, not the approach itself:
‘It is worth emphasising that a return to first principles of traffic safety for children does not give support for the abolition of shared space’ approaches in favour of either ‘Radburn'-style pedestrian-vehicle segregation…nor a return to Roads In Urban Areas’styles of design with relatively wide, fast roads in residential areas’
The favoured solution is therefore to find ways of slowing cars to speeds at which the short sight-lines are not a danger to children.
Speed humps can do this, whereas the evidence is that present methods do not.
Moreover, it is argued that humps should be more widely used still:
‘.. where local roads are purely residential roads, even if they are not culs-de-sac, there seems to be no reason not to extend this approach to them if desired.
In general, speeds in small residential areas should be restricted to 15 km/ h or less’.
In Britain at the moment, most shared space is restricted to very small areas immediately in front of small groups of houses.
Other residential roads are usually untreated, so that speeds are often high.
Shared surfaces are thus tiny islands in a sea of ‘normal’ driver behaviour, which is thus expected to change on entering the shared space, not on entering the residential area as a whole.
As safety in shared spaces is currently sought by short sight lines, this variant of the principle cannot be extended to residential roads in general.
If speed reducing measures such as humps were to be applied to other residential roads, then all manner of surface treatments for safety and environmental improvement — including shared spaces where appropriate — become feasible.
Only by extending the application of safety counter-measures beyond tiny groups of houses and to large districts can safety be achieved across whole residential areas rather than in fragments of them.
Encouraging the green modes: walking
It has been a central theme of this book that traffic restraint in residential areas should reduce the existing discouragement of walking and cycling, with local movement made safer, pollution reduced and so on.
Modal choice, however, is not solely concerned with the start point of a trip: for those Journeys that terminate beyond the immediate neighbourhood it is a question of finding the easiest mode for the whole route.
Making 99 per cent of a journey safe and convenient by foot or bike is futile if the remaining one per cent contains a dangerous road crossing or a threatening subway.
If that part of the journey from home to destination that lies outside the immediate neighbourhood cannot be made safely and easily by bike or on foot, then the environmental and safety gains made inside neighbourhood traffic calmed areas are unlikely to be fully utilised.
Consequently, it is necessary to adopt policies of city-wide encouragement of these ‘green’ modes if the calming of residential areas is to realise its potential (Figure 8.1).
A pro-walking policy would have to start with the recognition of the vital role that walking plays in everyday life, yet this role is at present often ignored in transport policies.
Admittedly, walking behaviour differs greatly between people of different age, class and sex and between journeys for different purposes, so that generalisation is often unhelpful.
Nevertheless, it is useful to remember that children walk more than any other age group and women walk more than men.
Moreover, walking varies greatly in importance depending on trip purpose.
Some 60 per cent of education journeys and 43 per cent of shopping and personal business trips are made on foot, with one fifth and one third of all walk Journeys respectively being made for these purposes.
Overall, in Britain, more than one in three of all journeys are made door-to-door on foot and pedestrian journeys of half a mile or less make up one-sixth of total personal transport demand.
Walking is really two separate transport modes, as travel on foot to access other modes such as car or bus is different in almost all respects from walking the whole way.
‘Access’ walks are of course shorter than whole walk journeys, representing nearly one third of all walk stages but less than one fifth of all walked kilometres.
They also involve different participants.
It is noticeable that the group that in general is in control of the transport system (ie males aged 25–60) have, on any given day, the highest percentage making access walks but no walk journeys, so that many in this group will be more familiar with easier, shorter journeys than those such as women, children and the elderly who have over-average representation in the walk journey category.
This male group also has the lowest percentage making walk journeys, and uses walking to meet less of its travel requirements than any other age and sex group.
It is not therefore surprising that walking is very much taken for granted by transport decision-makers, a familiarity that has two consequences.
First, walking is not perceived as a serious form of transport.
Most trips involve a certain amount of walking and most people can walk, with 97 per cent of the population able to go out on foot.
It causes no widespread congestion or great traffic problems.
Walking, it seems, is just something that we do, like breathing.
Transport only happens, apparently, when a motor is started.
The implicit view is that walking is irrelevant to city transport problems because it does not cause pollution, or accidents, or noise, or congestion: it is not a problem as such.
The notion that it is extremely relevant precisely because it does none of these things seems to go unappreciated in official circles.
This neglect of walking has been apparent for years.
No statistics on walking were available in Britain until the publication of the National Travel Survey (NTS) 1975/6 report in 1979.
Any attempt to identify temporal trends is frustrated by the omission from the main analyses of the 1985/6 NTS of all journeys of under one mile, within which category 70 per cent of all walking journeys fall.
Nor are these trips included in the most frequently consulted travel statistics, those in Transport Statistics Great Britain and Social Trends .
Hillman has graphically shown what will result when these data are used as the basis for planning, as in the case of recent DoE advice to local authorities on planning for shopping provision.
By using NTS figures and thus omitting journeys of under one mile, over one third of all shopping trips — those done by walkers — were totally ignored.
The modal split of the remaining, motorised, shoppers was, of course, dominated by the car-borne, so this was then used as the basis of advice to the local authorities to ensure that they were providing sufficient car-parking space.
The second consequence of the failure to accord to walking the dominant role in urban transport that its trip share warrants, is that facilities for it are either absent or neglected.
In urban areas in Britain, over 37 per cent of all journeys are made door-to-door on foot, yet official data continue to stress that walking only accounts for three per cent of all mileage.
The inference from this is, in Hillman's words, ‘that longer journeys are considered far more pertinent to policy and therefore more worthy of attention and public investment.'’
Under these circumstances, it is scarcely surprising that walking in Britain is of diminishing importance, with total distance walked decreasing as is the percentage of all journeys that are made on foot.
Needs and provision
The potential for increasing the safety and attractiveness of walking is enormous, as may be seen if the needs of walkers and the facilities provided are even crudely compared.
These needs and facilities are both part of the pedestrian environment, which might be defined as the interface between the walker's personal ability to cope with environmental challenge, the location and accessibility of destinations, and the characteristics of the environment en route .
The interaction of these three elements leads to discordances and complaint, as when a frail person-s destinations are t–o distant, or when pram-pushing mothers encounter narrow pavements.
In general, pedestrians prefer to walk on the level and by direct routes.
They are sensitive to rain, heat, cold and splash from roads.
They attempt shorter distances when conditions are unfavourable and walk further when surroundings have been made visually attractive by art work, shop windows and the like.
They avoid places where they perceive the risk of assault to be high.
They are extremely vulnerable to impact by vehicles, although they will trade off this risk against increased journey length: it is not unusual to see people clambering over or through barriers designed to force them to cross roads away from junctions.
The main impediments to the free flow of people are those placed there to facilitate the free flow of motorised traffic, particularly road crossing barriers, signs embedded in the pavement and steps and ramps to carry the walker over or under the roadway. little seems to have been done in the way of formal schemes of assessment of pedestrian problems or of priorities for maintenance or design.
As Hitchcock and Mitchell put it: ‘The principle that pedestrian paths should be straight, level, smooth and free from obstruction is easily stated, as is the one that mechanical vehicles can more easily travel further or change level to achieve vehicle/pedestrian segregation.
In default of numerical techniques to quantify these principles they are easily ignored or undervalued.'’
The volume of complaint about the difficulties encountered by pedestrians is certainly high and has been recorded in a number of surveys in recent years.
In 1972 a DoE survey reported that 27 per cent were seriously bothered by traffic danger, 23 per cent by fumes and 16 per cent by noise.
The Consumer Concerns survey carried out by the National Consumer Council (NCC) in 1979–80 revealed a quarter of all respondents encountering problems walking in the previous year, over half of which were considered serious.
The principal objection was the condition of the pavements, particularly broken and uneven surfaces, car parking on pavements, dog fouling and pavement cycling.
The second concern was the shortage of pedestrian crossings.
In general the survey revealed that ‘the declining state of the environment was a ma–or worry to a large number of people’ and led the NCC to commission a further, more detailed investigation in 1986.
Respondents to this second survey spontaneously identified three particular problems — the volume of traffic (mentioned by 22 per cent of respondents), cracked and uneven pavements (19) and lack of pedestrian crossings (11).
A supplementary section incorporating prompted problems in addition showed that 46 per cent were bothered by cracked or uneven pavements, 42 per cent by dog dirt, 37 per cent by too much traffic, 32 per cent by uncleared snow or leaves, 24 per cent by vehicles parked on the pavement, and 23 per cent by a lack of pedestrian crossings.
In general older people and women identified more problems than men.
There was little difference apparent between more- and less-frequent walkers, but it was noticeable that particular sub-groups stood out as experiencing more than their share of problems.
These included frequent walkers to shops and everyday escorts to schools or day-care facilities.
Other surveys have identified the walking problems of the handicapped, for whom accessibility to shops and services is so frequently a problem.
A Coventry survey of the registered disabled showed that a half or more experienced difficulty with hills, ramps, steps and crowds, a third with crossing roads, a fifth with uneven or narrow pavements, and a tenth with kerbs.
Particular varieties of handicap bring their own specific problems, such as obstructions in the footway and crossing roads for the visually impaired, or dealing with crowds or directional information for the mentally handicapped.
The NCC survey found that amongst the chairbound, the reported problems were similar in nature to those of the wider sample, but of much greater intensity.
In identifying the needs of the disabled, we must avoid thinking solely of those with the most visible disabilities.
Although the registered disabled comprise a substantial proportion — some 12 per cent— of the population of Britain, only two to three per cent of them are chairbound and only four per cent of the registered blind have a guide dog.
It is more helpful to think in terms of‘the fragile’ or ‘the traffic vulnerable’rather than ‘the disabled’per se .
For example, many non-disabled people can become temporarily vulnerable, such as parents pushing buggies or carrying children, normally fit people with broken limbs, or shoppers with large parcels.
Others with walking limitations are not immediately identifiable, such as stroke or epilepsy victims, those with circulatory defects, or the drug- or alcohol-dependent.
Indeed in a ‘traffic vulnerable’ category we would have to include the very young and very old, so that it could comprise 30–50 per cent of population depending on age definitions.
Given that the proportion of over-75's in the population will rise by 14 per cent in the 30 years from 1 98 1, the needs of the traffic vulnerable will inevitably become more insistent.
Some of the complaints about the pedestrian environment arise because of their implications for traffic safety.
Even though the injury statistics are thought to under-estimate the problem by between 20 and 40 per cent, the known pedestrian accident rate — at 400 accidents per 100 million miles walked — is greater than that for car drivers.
Pedestrians make up one third of road user deaths, the largest single category.
The pedestrian fatality rate in Great Britain (3.1 per 100,000 population) is comparable to that of France and the GDR, but is high in comparison to other countries with similar populations and levels of traffic, such as Japan (2.9) and Italy (2.4) The Scandinavian countries are very much safer still and the Netherlands at 1.3 is more than twice as safe a place to walk as Great Britain.
There are, of course, particular danger spots in the pedestrian environment.
Over half of all casualties, for example, occur at junctions.
When NCC survey respondents were asked to identify the problems of a particular danger spot known to them, one third cited junctions and around one quarter pointed to traffic volume, traffic speed and lack of pedestrian facilities.
They overwhelmingly reported the roads to be more difficult to cross than five years previously, the change being ascribed to increased volumes of traffic (89 per cent) and faster traffic (28 per cent ).
Ramsay has likened the situation in many towns to that of a castaway on a tropical island.
Just as the castaway is limited to a coastal path around the jungly interior, so is the urban walker restricted to the quadrilateral of footpath around each block.
To get to the next section of footway the pedestrian has to risk death by collision in the road reserved for motoring, analogous to the castaway having to swim the shark-infested waters to reach the next island.
(Figure 8.2).
Some people are more likely to have an accident than others, with the young and the elderly being particularly vulnerable.27 Over half of all casualties are under nineteen and this proportion is increasing.
The 10–14 year olds are the most at risk group of all, with the under-14's more than three times as likely as adults to be injured on any particular foot journey.
Men are more often victims than women.
To some degree these victim profiles are related to elements in the pedestrian environment.
For example, a fifth of all adult casualties are at or near pedestrian crossings, whilst the disproportionate danger to children that comes from the residential street environment has already been discussed.
Horrendous though the road accident statistics are, they do not include the very large number of pedestrians who are injured in ‘pavement accidents’ by trips, slips and falls where no vehicle is involved.
Because no records of these are kept, the number of victims is unknown, but it is thought that nearly 200 die in street falls per annum in England and Wales.
It is estimated that there are 6.5 to 8.5 million pavement accidents per annum, many more than road accidents.
Though the proportion of road accident victims requiring medical attention is higher, the absolute number of pavement accidents resulting in injury is far greater, perhaps by as much as eleven to one.
It is estimated that about a third of these accidents result from damaged pavements.
Much footway damage is natural deterioration of course, but it has been estimated that overriding by vehicles is implicated in over half of the cases where planned maintenance work is carried out.
Not only then do about a quarter of respondents cite pavement parking as one of the problems for pedestrians in that they object to the loss of pavement space to the vehicle and the obstruction caused by it, but they are then subjected to considerable accident rates as a result of the broken slabs and uneven surfaces that result (Figure 8.3).
One view of the provision of facilities to meet the needs of walkers would be that, despite some inadequacies in design and maintenance, there is much for the pedestrian to be thankful for.
The most common infrastructure comprises a segregated footpath, hard-surfaced and drained, kept reasonably free of rubbish and loose obstructions.
In Britain these surfaces are inspected at least quarterly for projections, cracks and rocking slabs, and the highway authority has a clear duty to maintain these facilities to provide unobstructed and free passage.
The quantity of facilities provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians is significant, particularly when compared to the low level of provision available for the other green mode, cycling.
Others would see the acceptance of this bounded walking environment as timid and pusillanimous.
They would say that walking has been, and always will be, the principal method of human transport, yet during the current motorised interlude those that cannot or will not ride must step aside — literally — for those that do.
The walkers are expected to be grateful for the left-over street space that is allocated to them and to not object when more is taken for road widening and comer-shaving, or when motorists use the remaining pavement to park on.
Humans on foot must step over the broken flagstones and around the car-paraphernalia which is implanted in the pavement so as not to obstruct the motorised flow.
And when it comes to crossing the traffic, designated places are set aside, a limited time is given to cross, and some, perhaps through their own lack of judgement, will be unlucky and be run over.
Lest we are in any doubt about where responsibility for pedestrian casualties lies, propaganda on pedestrian accidents is aimed at the pedestrian, rarely at the motorist: as one ‘public information announcement’ has it, ‘One false move and you're dead.’
Creating a better walking environment
How might the environment for the pedestrian be improved, so that the benefits of traffic calming can be achieved?
A suitable goal might be the attainment of ‘a pleasant walking environment’, which has been defined in the NCC report What's Wrong with WALKING ? as one which is:
free from conflict with vehicles…and the unpleasant side-effects of traffic 
clean and visually attractive
comfortable and convenient
protected from the worst effects of the weather; and
personally secure
Achieving this goal would require both positive and negative actions, the one to promote pleasure and safety.
and the other to eliminate present practices that lead to unpleasant and unsafe conditions.
Without doubt, the key element here is that of traffic safety, for if pedestrian-vehicle conflict could be reduced or eradicated, the underlying attractiveness of walking would be revealed and the way cleared to solving the remaining problems.
At present the crossing of roads is the ma–or safety problem, one which can be tackled in a variety of ways.
If infrastructure is considered, there is firstly a need to improve the at-grade carriageway crossing, by providing more closely-spaced, controlled facilities and reducing the waiting time for a ‘green signal as Figure 8.1 showed.
Secondly, the provision of subways and footbridges should be avoided where possible, for they are often ignored by pedestrians who would rather dodge through the cars than climb to bridge level or expose themselves to the unpleasant and sometimes dangerous environment of a subway.
Thirdly, continuity can be given to the walking route by continuing footways across side roads, a measure which also slows down turning traffic.
This can be effectively reinforced by ‘necking down’ the junction, with pavements swelling out into the former roadway to reduce both vehicle speeds and the crossing width of the street for walkers.
Such facilities as these will be of great help where vehicles and walkers conflict.
However, it is obviously preferable to avoid conflict in the first place by integrating traffic with the urban framework.
The space-sharing Dutch and German schemes in residential areas do just this whilst the ‘winkelerf’ approach to shopping precincts also aims at integration of foot and wheeled traffic.
However, segregation of walkers from vehicles provides the greatest safety along routes where vehicle traffic is heavy and it is increasingly realised that this is an appropriate solution too where pedestrian flows are concentrated, such as in central shopping areas.
Many cities are, of course, recognising the increasing importance of pleasurable strolling and browsing in their centres (Figure 8.4).
This is nowhere more so than in West Germany, where some 800 pedestrianised areas exist with a mean size of 2,500 metres.So widespread has been this conversion of former car streets that the city centres of large German cities are effectively completely given over to foot traffic.36 Britain has been very much slower to recognise the benefits that pedestrianisation can bring.
However, most cities now have some car-free space in the form of arcades, converted streets or purpose-built pedestrian precincts.
These have grown in number very rapidly in recent years as renewing the attractiveness of the centre through environmental improvement, including pedestrianisation, has been adopted as a competitive response to the growth of out-of-town shopping.
Despite this recent acceleration, the ratio of car-free to car streets cannot be very different from the 1:1563 reported by Roberts in 1981.
Moreover, most such areas exist in isolation from the traditional provision for foot traffic in the rest of each built-up area.
Hillman and Whalley indeed make this point when they refer to central area pedestrian precincts as
‘…islands of safety isolated from the rest of the town by rivers of traffic, thus in practice largely accessible only by motorised means.
The concept of traffic-free rooms and motorised corridors unfortunately disregards the need for convenient pedestrian movement between the rooms.’
In urban Britain outside the new towns, networks of pedestrianised routes that might connect such shopping areas with housing scarcely exist.
Footpaths through parks have a significant number of users  who are actually pedestrians en route to another destination, but such use depends on the accident of alignment rather than any attempt to meet defined flows through conscious planning.
Admittedly, some authorities have seized opportunities to create linear walking routes for recreation such as‘greenways’ along canal towpaths and disused railway lines, and these provide segregated pedestrian routeways as well as recreation space.
They are much used by those on their way to shops, schools or work, especially in the summer months, but they do not meet the needs of large numbers of pedestrians in a variety of ways, such as their uneven or discontinuous walking surfaces, lack of lighting, limited destinations served and so forth.
They represent a haphazard seizing of opportunities rather than rational provision of a network to meet the whole spectrum of walkers' needs.
The most important attribute of any pedestrian network is clearly continuity of route, to provide safe and convenient access to all potential destinations.
Such networks must, for all users, be accessible and negotiable, in that surfaces and routes must not present barriers to any societal group.
There must be direct frontage access to houses, shops and workplaces and a dense mesh with frequent–unctions so as to avoid detours.
Width must be adequate for the flow and where foot traffic is heavy, conflict should be resolved by vehicles being deflected over or under the level walking route.
Such routes should increase in density towards the town centre, where they might have weather-protection canopies and be served by what Ramsay has called ‘pedestrian service points’.
Here snack bars, kiosks, toilets, seats and other walker-orientated services would cluster in a pedestrians' version of the motorway service station.
The emphasis would be on well designed infrastructure in a high quality environment, with the whole area perhaps run by a municipally-employed ‘street manager’.
As pedestrian routes approach residential quarters, flows of walkers would be thinner than in town centres and could be served by less elaborate facilities.
Here much could be achieved by freeing the existing facilities from obstructions and by introducing short-cuts to link up parts of the present network.
Pedestrian-friendly –unctions, incorporating speed tables, pinch points, and biased traffic signals could be used and enforced vehicle speed limits would be essential.
Creating short, safe and attractive access to public transport stops, perhaps by exploiting partially-pedestrianised or traffic-calmed areas, would also be necessary.
Indeed the great scope for integrating walking and public transport into a new system of transport can be realised partly through attention to the interface between the modes.
Enclosed bus/ tram stops that shelter and welcome the passenger need to be set in a traffic-calmed environment, with pedestrian priority across surrounding roads and –unctions.43 in residential areas, these pedestrian networks and public transport stops should be so organised as to provide ‘safe routes to school’, as in the Danish examples discussed in Chapter Ten.
By making walking safer, such networks would do much to make it more attractive.
Nevertheless, the walking routes would need positive environmental treatment to encourage a pedestrian ambience, such as tree-planting, provision of green areas and small-scale signs and lights.
Additionally, Ramsay has stressed the need for care in choice of wall, hedge or fence material and with the size and sitting of seats.
Naming and signing the networks is important too, as is provision of clear directional and other information signs.
Throughout the network there would be a need to attend to the litter problem, perhaps through the provision of more bins and heavy fines for littering.
Additionally, the fouling of footways by dogs must be prevented, perhaps through ‘poop-scoop’ bye-laws, or the employment of dog wardens (Figure 8.5).
It must not be forgotten that pedestrians are not only concerned with danger from traffic, but also with the threat posed by other people; as Hanna puts it ‘not all pedestrians are Good Guys’.
That 90 per cent of women are afraid to go out alone at night represents enormous numbers of journeys avoided and trips foregone.
Networks thus require good lighting, clear sight-lines and regular maintenance — as in the cutting back of shrubbery — though this may conflict with the creation of a green and intimate walking environment.
Much of the problem can be overcome by designing networks that meet people's walking needs, thereby encouraging a level of activity that ‘deters antisocial behaviour and offers the reassurance of help at hand if hassled’.
All of these measures should be designed with the mobility-impaired in mind.
Some commentators have put the case for separate facilities, particularly where a hierarchy of pedestrian provision exists.
Ramsay, for example, has promoted the concept of the sheltered footpath which, analogous to sheltered housing, would meet the special needs of the disabled.50 Others would argue that in all new pedestrian provision the opportunity must be taken to ensure that the appropriate design guidelines are followed from the outset in providing dropped kerbs at junctions, ramps, tactile information, acoustic signals, and continuity of surface for the chairbound, thus integrating the disabled into a new, safe and inviting environment for all walkers.
There are many problems still to be overcome in providing for the disabled.
In Holland, for example, an impressive manual for traffic provisions for the handicapped has been written to provide central government advice to municipalities, yet tests of facilities on the ground indicate that the manual may have to be revised and a new policy for provision worked out.
In Gouda a city-centre network of tactile strips of ribbed paving stones that could be followed by those using a stick proved adequate for elderly and chairbound users, but the blind could not manage without assistance (Figure 8.6).
Some of the textured pavement and warning tiles did not function well and some caused difficulties for the non-handicapped, as when snagging high heels.
Overall the costs were high, the use low and the cost-benefit unsatisfactory.
Nevertheless, the rewards of finding satisfactory solutions are high enough for experimental work to be continued.
Quite apart from society's moral obligation to maintain, as far as possible, an individual's quality of life through accessibility to necessary functions, there is a public economic interest too.
If facilities for the elderly and disabled are poor, the fear of walking may lead many to become house-bound or institutionalised and, once so dependent, the cost of public service provision to the individual rises very sharply.
How then, in summary, should a better walking environment be created?
It should be clear that what is being suggested here is not the creation of new precincts as islands in the traffic-orientated city, or indeed the forcing of new pedestrian underpasses through the existing road net.
Rather, the selective diversion of vehicular flows away from routes of high pedestrian demand, together with the modification of the urban fabric by pedestrian-friendly and environmentally sensitive measures will positively encourage the walk-trip.
Where flows are heavy, segregation would be the norm; elsewhere integration with vehicular traffic in calmed areas would be perfectly acceptable, provided that safety was the principal criterion and that directness of route was in no way compromised.
Unit costs can be low and land-take small, yet flows may be high, thus giving great financial and spatial economy.
If wider costs were to be considered, one could also look to savings from reduced pollution, energy consumption and accident rates, quite apart from the health maintenance benefits of a walking population.
The economic case is irresistible, but the political obstacles are legion.
New initiatives
The chairman of the NCC opened ‘What's Wrong with WALKING ?’ with the observation that many would describe their experience of being a pedestrian in the 1980's as' a walking disaster'.
He went on:
‘Walking could, and should, be a pleasurable means of getting about.
Instead for millions of consumers, it is something between a chore and a nightmare…
Walking is the only means of transport that can claim to be universal…yet  the pedestrian is the most neglected of travellers…ironically, it is perhaps because walking is so commonplace that it is neglected — pedestrians are so universal as to be almost invisible.
However, it is also the basis for our belief that improving the pedestrian's lot would deliver great benefits to an enormously large number of consumers.
It is time we put our minds to redressing the balance, to putting pedestrians back where they belong, at the centre of the transport system’.
The NCC report went on to make 59 detailed recommendations, many of them, by implication, sharply critical of current practice and attitudes at both national and local level.
In calling for radical change, the NCC recognised that pressure must be applied from both ends — downwards from central government and upwards from pedestrians themselves.
They hoped to lubricate this process by issuing an action guide for pedestrians, described as a ‘tool kit, to give people the means and the skills to create a better environment.’
These proposals have been taken up by the public transport pressure group Transport 2000 in a campaign, launched in 1988, called ‘Feet First’.
The principal objective of the campaign is to encourage walking by the promotion of demonstration pedestrian priority projects, which would act as models of good practice and thus provide guidance to local authorities and, metaphorically, a rallying point for pedestrians.
The projects, it is argued, should incorporate planning for the rational location of facilities and for network development, with the emphasis on improving access.
Speeds would have to be lowered, parking controlled and traffic restraint measures introduced.
Circulation space for vehicles should be reduced in favour of pedestrians and cyclists, with public transport benefiting from this and other favourable measures.
There is, surprisingly, no specific encouragement for greening project areas in the Feet First proposals, though cleanliness is encouraged through poop-scoop schemes.
A major emphasis of the Feet First approach is consultation, with pedestrians, disabled people, cyclists, pensioners, public transport users, motorists and businesses invited to participate throughout, including at the vital evaluation stage.
The intention is that the demonstration projects will prove attractive enough to stimulate other local authorities to follow suit.
The greatest gain, however, is most likely to be the sort of attitude-change on the part of the public that has been seen to follow the Woonerf experiments, the Dutch cycle projects and the German traffic calming demonstrations.
Given that planners are cautious in the face of uncertainty, limited budgets and a lack of experience, new ideas rarely flourish and spread until it is seen that ‘they work’.
In the advocacy of new traffic planning principles and practice, nothing succeeds like precedent.
Recapturing the city for humans on foot would bring immense benefits not only to those walking but also for the ambience and environment of the city (Figure 8.7).
The words of the Buchanan Report could profitably be recalled:
‘it does not seem to be far from the truth that the freedom with which a person can walk about and look around is a very useful guide to the civilized quality of an urban area.
Judged against this standard, many of our towns now seem to leave a great deal to be desired.’
In many city centres the creation of an attractive walking environment through pedestrianisation has undoubtedly increased both retail turnover and pedestrian flows.
In most of those same cities, the task of spreading these changes outwards into other parts of the city has scarcely begun.
Unless walking beyond housing districts is made both safe and enjoyable, the numerous benefits of residential area traffic calming will not be fully achieved.
If streets are to be seized from the dominance of ‘canned’ humans and given back to the ‘fresh’ones, a commitment to a positive policy of encouraging walking throughout the city is inescapable.
Encouraging the green modes: cycling
If traffic in residential areas is thoroughly calmed, then cycling near to home should become a safe and peaceful activity, especially for children.
But if the calming stops at the boundaries of the housing area, or if specific attempts are not made to carry cycle routes across neighbouring busy roads, then few will be able to use the cycle for their daily journeys.
Just as is the case for walking, the benefits of calming residential areas will not be realised unless provision is made for whole journeys from home to the shops, to work or to school, to be completed free from intimidation by motorised traffic.
The general benefits of encouraging cycling have long been recognised.
The bicycle is cheap to buy and run and is in urban areas often the quickest door-to-door mode.
Road and parking capacities are increased tenfold if bicycles are used instead of cars, so that urban space can be used much more efficiently.
Energy efficiency is extraordinarily high too, with calorie consumption about one-fifth of that of walking.
When taken together with walking, cycling is thought to be between ten and forty times as energy efficient, as motorised transport (Figure 9.1).
Moreover, the cycle is a benign form of transport, being noiseless, non-polluting and non-threatening to most other road users.
A cycling population would be fitter, healthier and more egalitarian than one reliant on privileged personal access to a car.
For these reasons, cycling is a way of providing mobility which is cheap for society and for the individual as Hudson puts it, ‘The provision of routes for bicycles gives people ‘freeways’ for the price of footpaths’.
However, there has been little in the way of tangible action in the post-war period to promote cycling in Britain, so that the rider has had to endure a steady worsening of the travel environment as traffic has become heavier, journeys more circuitous, accidents more pervasive and the relative attractiveness of the bike lowered by comparison with the seductive advantages of the car.
Laissez-faire transport planning has turned out to be anti-bike and pro-car in the urban context.
If cycling is to be made a safer and more attractive mode of transport, it is, as Hudson's classic book has advocated, essential that planning principles are established and followed.
The six principles that Hudson put forward are illustrated in the box.
HUDSON'S SIX FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF PLANNING FOR CYCLISTS
Since most bicycle journeys are made on general purpose roads and can be combined with bus and railway journeys, it is crucial that plans to improve cycling conditions are integrated into all transport plans.
A pre-requisite for integrated bicycle planning is the support of an appropriate administrative framework, which allows for coordination between different levels of governments, between local authority departments, and between planners and public interest groups concerned with cycling.
The aim of planning for cycling is not a product — eg a cycle track — but safe and efficient travel by bicycle.
Provisions for cyclists will therefore require both the use of existing transport infrastructure and special facilities for cyclists.
The co-existence of cyclists and drivers on the roads requires that both recognise a common set of rules.
Schemes for training, education and enforcement of cyclists' and motorists' behaviour will therefore be as important as physical planning and design.
The maintenance of bicycle facilities (often forgotten by local authorities) is essential to ensure continuing safety of cyclists.
A ‘bicycle perspective’ must permeate any planning for cyclists.
The bicycle has its own unique characteristics and cyclists are not a homogeneous group, they are people of a wide age range, cycling ability, experience, and traffic judgement, who are cycling for a variety of different reasons.
The provision of facilities
It is apparent from Hudson's remarks that inserting cycle facilities into established urban areas is not an easy task, a simple matter of earmarking space with a brush and a bucket of paint.
Instead it is necessary to think in terms of a bundle of policies translated through design guidelines into the construction of specific physical facilities that allow for a diversity of  cycling needs.
Though infrastructure provision may vary according to local circumstances, there are a number of underlying policies which should be consistent from place to place.
First, the provision of main bicycle roads connecting principal traffic-generating land uses is vital.
They should be designed with the needs of cycle traffic in mind and should normally have the right of way at crossroads.
If traffic lights are used they should have embedded loops to detect approaching cyclists and should give them longer green phases.
Everything about the construction and maintenance of such routes should be pro-cycle, so that they retain smooth surfaces, good lighting, shelter from wind, attractive landscaping and protection from vehicles (Figure 9.2).
They must be as direct as is compatible with acceptable gradients.
Second, there should be a policy of providing a network of bicycle paths.
These narrow paths should be carved from the space currently devoted to vehicle carriageways.
Separation can be by road marking, but is more effective when done with trees or plant strips.
As cyclists choose shortest routes, the network should be dense, with virtually all roads accessible for cycle movement.
Crossing of major roads should be by underpass, overbridge or traffic light-controlled grade intersections (Figure 9.3).
Third, cyclists should be accorded privileged use of existing facilities (Figure 9.4).
To ensure shortest-path routes for cyclists and to increase their safety and comfort, cycle traffic can be permitted to deviate from existing traffic regulations.
It might thus be led by special paths counter to the flow in one way streets, across pedestrianised zones or bus-only areas or through breaks in culs-de sac.
Fourth, cycling should be made as safe as possible by using parks and traffic-restrained areas (Figure 9.5).
In Woonerf-type streets cycling should be strongly encouraged, for it is here that the speed differences between cars and cycles that are so dangerous to the latter are minimised.
Care must be taken to ensure that speed-reducing obstacles such as humps can be avoided by the cyclist, to whom they are irritating and dangerous.
Fifth, sound policy must address the provision of adequate, secure cycle parking.
A range of cycle parking facilities should be available, with large-scale and secure provision at important origins and destinations (Figure 9.6).
Above all, parking must be immediately accessible to functions and must not involve crossing roads or car parks.
It is essential that this is dovetailed with the sixth policy strand, that of integration with public transport.
If door-to-door journeys are to be possible, then effective integration with public transport is essential.
This can be achieved  by providing good quality bike-and-ride facilities at public transport stops in residential areas and also at destinations for those who wish to complete their journey by cycle (Figure 9.7).
Alternatively, public transport vehicles could carry accompanied cycles, as they frequently do in Switzerland.
It should go without saying that the public transport stops must be sited at relevant and accessible points on the bicycle network whilst the potential of cycle hire at public transport stops, particularly in attractive recreational areas, should not be ignored.
Seventh and last, it is important to package the cycling policies with soft landscaping and environmental improvements.
Provision of greenery helps to protect the cyclist from the worst of the weather as well as from noise and vehicle pollution.
It has the added advantage that it accentuates the role of the cycle as a benign form of transport, one which can bestow peace and  tranquillity not only on its user but also on the general urban scene.
When these policies are interpreted locally and used as the basis for infrastructure developments to meet local needs, the success or otherwise of the approach requires evaluation.
A suitable set of criteria have again been provided by Hudson, with safety.
continuity, directness, good road surfaces, convenience and easy maintenance seeming to be of the greatest importance.
However, when resources are limited and facilities are being dovetailed into existing built-up areas, it may not be possible to maximise all of these criteria simultaneously and some compromises may have to be accepted.
In particular, because directness and safety are often traded-off by individual cyclists, safe routes must not be more than about ten per cent longer than less-safe, but direct, alternatives.
It is plain that the translation of these policies into practice will vary according to local circumstances.
However, more profound than the distinctions within countries will be those between countries, with those with a commitment to cycling contrasting with those without.
Three close neighbours from north-west  Europe provide instructive comparisons which say more about political attitudes than they do about natural advantages for cycling as a mode of transport.
Policy in the Netherlands, with its strong pro-cycling ethos, serves as an obvious yardstick by which to judge UK cycling conditions, which were described in a recent report as worse than those in any other country in Europe bar one.
West Germany provides another example, with provision overall being unimpressive to date, but with some exciting demonstration projects showing recently that cycling ‘traditions’ do not need long histories, but may be created overnight by political will and imaginative innovation.
Examination of policies for cycling in these three countries will show not only the contrasts in infrastructure provision, but will indicate also where there is good practice in designing total transport environments which are conductive to cycling and are thus supportive of the traffic calming principle.
Cycling in the Netherlands
In probably no other country is the image of cycling and the cyclist stronger than it is in the Netherlands.
The country's 14.5 million people own some 11.5 million cycles and ride them an average of over 1300 km each per annum.
There are nearly as many trips by cycle as by car, though of course the cycle trips are much shorter.
Use in rural areas is extensive, but it is in urban areas that it reaches its apogee, with some 30 per cent of home-work trips and 64 per cent of home-school trips made by cycle.
As in other Western societies, the use of the cycle has been negatively affected by the rise of the car, but the Dutch reaction to this problem has been more positive than elsewhere.
In 1975 the Dutch government introduced a ‘bicycle tracks grant’ Act to provide 80 per cent of the cost of local cycle facilities.
By 1987 240 million guilders had been spent on 280 projects in more than 100 cities, with another 200 million for rural facilities.
The availability of cash support has ensured that virtually all local  authorities are now aware of the position of the cycle in national transport policy and have their own cycle plan, usually integrated with their overall transportation plan.
Most ma–or roads now have cycle facilities and it seems likely that these have had a positive effect on the road safety of cyclists.
By 1987 Wilmink was able to conclude that the Act ‘has had a stimulating effect on the development of plans for the construction of bicycle tracks’ and that ‘attention to bicycle facilities in all stages of planning, design and maintenance of the infrastructure has become common practice.’
Although standards for cycle track construction were set as part of the 1975 Act, it was felt necessary to provide some demonstration projects to give local authorities guidelines on costs, approaches to particular problems, and above all to demonstrate how an entire cycle route might be created.
Projects in Tilburg and in the Hague in the late 1970-s provided much practical experience, nowhere more so than in The Hague where deficient participation procedures angered shopkeepers who, fearful of trade falls through loss of car parking, tried to dig up the new cycle track.
Overall there was a gain in traffic safety in the project areas and a reallocation of cycle trips, but no growth in cycling and no transfers from cars.
The principal conclusion was that in urban areas single cycle routes do not have a clear large-scale effect.
There were projects in rural areas too, such as the Arnhem-Elst-Nijmegen route, which were designed to improve conditions for the large volume of cyclists who cycle to school or work in neighbouring villages and towns.
The construction of separate cycle tracks along both sides of the road along the entire route was the major feature of these projects, but they were augmented b.y reconstructing junctions, provision of shelters for the use of schoolchildren waiting for friends before setting off, and so forth(Figure 9.8).
It was never expected that such measures would cause a transfer of car users to the bike, but it was hoped that by making the route safer and more comfortable, recreational use of the route might rise and parental objections to children cycling to school might diminish.
These goals have been achieved.
The overall result has been the successful promotion of a positive attitude in relation to bicycle use in general, a result which in space and time has impacts beyond the immediate locality of the routes.
The Delft cycle network
Though it is part of national transport policy to promote the safe use of cycles on existing cycle tracks and roads, it has only been since the Tilburg and Hague results that the possible advantages of promoting route networks have been appreciated.
Accordingly, a further demonstration project was selected in Delft to gain some understanding of how a coherent bicycle network could actually operate.
Specifically, it was hoped to discover how cyclists would use and perceive a comprehensive and integrated bicycle network and whether an increase in bicycle traffic and/or a decrease in cycling accidents would result.
The city of Delft has a population of some 100,000 and is a free standing urban area with an historic core surrounded by recent accretions, many of them in the form of high density, high-rise developments.
The Delft Cycle Plan of 1979 recognised the deteriorating conditions for many cycle trips within the city and designated four criteria for plan development: quality of facilities, quantity of provision, continuity of the network and comfort in its use.
The plan envisaged realising the desired network over a ten year period at a projected cost of 10 million guilders with a committed programme of annual subsidy from central government.
As Bovy reports, it introduced a number of innovative features in traffic planning.
These included some engineering schemes such as bridges and tunnels, but the most interesting feature was undoubtedly the hierarchy of networks.
This was to consist of a system of linkages for bicycle traffic arranged in a functional hierarchy, with each of three levels in the network being specifically designed to meet particular needs of cycle traffic, as Figure 9.9 shows.
As built, the urban network consists of the primary cycle routes which give access to schools, workplaces, the city centre, the railway station and recreational facilities throughout the city.
It comprises a rectangular grid of routes some 400–600m apart, connecting on the city edge to the regional cycle network.
These links are heavily trafficked and must therefore be high-capacity and high-convenience routes (Figure 9.10).
In general they are one-way tracks on both sides of main roads between intersections, at which there are grade-separated flyovers or level junctions with traffic light priority for cyclists (Figure 9.11).
Secondly, the district network has two specific functions.
It collects and distributes traffic to and from the urban network and it also connects facilities such as schools and shops.
The grid consists of links some 200–300m apart, with a great variety of facilities depending upon local circumstances.
With more schoolchildren and shoppers using these routes, cyclist vulnerability is greater, yet the high density of the routes precludes grade separation at all intersections.
With its mixture of paths, lanes, bridges, protected crossings and so on this is the most difficult part of the network scheme to realize (Figure 9.12).
Lastly, the sub-district or neighbourhood network comprises connections to buildings that are not immediately connected to the district or city network, together with typical neighbourhood links.
The grid diameter is 100–150m and the facilities involved are very simple paths, bridges and short missing links.
Many of the users are children and many of the routes utilise Woonerven, whose design is of course already satisfactory for carrying neighbourhood cycle traffic.
An important part of the demonstration project was a series of evaluation studies, testing developments against pre-existing conditions and against control areas outside the network.
The ‘before’ studies anticipated that although the potential use of the bicycle would be increased by the development of the network, there would be virtually no transfer from other modes to it.
Instead, it was felt that the principal impact would be in preventing the transfer to the car of a large number of cyclists who would otherwise