

Introduction
I have been entertaining at children's parties — as clown, magician, juggler and musician — for over twenty years.
During this period I have learnt a great deal about what children like [and dislike]at parties and have gathered together a selection of games, songs and magic tricks which I can guarantee will make any party a day to remember, for both children and adults.
In this book, I describe and explain these activities and although I cannot claim that this is a comprehensive guide to parties — such a task would be virtually impossible!— I do know that, if you follow my advice, your children and their friends will have a really enjoyable time!
WHEN AND WHERE SHOULD YOU HOLD A PARTY?
There are advantages in having it on your child's birthday rather than the nearest weekend, in that it is a special day and it is fitting to have it as a day of celebration.
However, there are those who take the view that, on the day of the actual birthday, they would rather have a smaller celebration with the immediate family.
This means that some quieter things can be done which are not possible if there are a great number of children around.
Then a party may be held on a different day, so there is a double celebration.
The usual length of a party is two and a half hours, with tea in the middle, and this, together with the singing of ‘Happy Birthday’, usually lasts half an hour.
However, for young children four-years-old and below, a two hour party is better.
In the United States, parties are usually shorter and last for about an hour and a half.
The choice of where to hold the party usually comes down to the home or a local hall.
The advantages of the local hall are that there will be extra room to run around in and the party is contained for a set number of hours without too much disruption at home.
Some of the large eating places, such as McDonalds and Happy Eater, have special arrangements for children's parties, whereby you just pay a fixed sum per head for food.
These places also have lists of entertainers you can choose from.
The advantages of having the party at home are, of course, the saving of the cost and also the fact that you do not have to travel with food and presents.
You also have the phone available for any emergencies and, in many ways, the whole event is more fun and less formal.
SHOULD YOU USE AN ENTERTAINER?
Many people feel that they would like to look after their children's party themselves and this book is designed to help them do that.
However, there are many who want an entertainer, either to do a one-hour spot or to organize the games, so the parents have very little responsibility apart from sorting out the room, sending out the invitations, and organizing the food.
Some agencies, such as Merlin and Reg Webb Entertainments, even give out party bags as part of their service.
This book is geared more to those parents who take a major part of the responsibility for the games and are just using the entertainer to bring an additional dimension to the party.
If you have decided to have an entertainer, the first thing is to choose what kind you would like.
In the last chapter, I have provided a list divided into a number of different sections — clowns, magicians, jesters, general entertainers and puppets.
There are, of course, advantages in having an entertainer whom the children know, in that their enjoyment is a recommendation.
Most entertainers give out cards with their own or the agency's phone number on it.
However, the problem with this is that a group of children see the same entertainer time after time.
Hence, there is a danger of the children knowing the act already, so it is a good idea to get someone from outside the usual circuit.
A relatively safe way of doing this is to go through a local agency or someone who has passed the test to become a member of the Magic Circle.
However, if you are getting someone completely unknown, it is worth asking for people you can call to get a recommendation, although the vast majority of entertainers who advertise perform very well.
TREATING YOUR ENTERTAINER
If you do have an entertainer, it is important to make sure that their work is as successful as possible.
One of the worst things you can do is to invite a few friends round who then chat in the background so that there is a  continuous hubbub.
The problem is not that parents want to spike the afternoon but that they do not think.
I have actually developed techniques to overcome this, the major one being to make the parents join in.
I usually sing the ‘Damper song’(see p.68) with actions.
and say anyone not joining in will be brought out in front of everybody else.
By the time three adults are up beside you singing, I usually find I have the attention of everyone.
In fact, this technique has led to some of my most successful parties where the parents join in and participate in the proceedings.
It is also a good idea to have the parents help out with various tricks and stunts.
You should help the entertainer to perform.
One thing that you should avoid is to give toy horns out at tea and then find the poor entertainer is facing a barrage of noise.
Also, it is a good idea to nominate an adult to make sure that the children do not interfere with the entertainer's props.
One of the problems for the entertainer is what to do if the children get over-excited.
We want the children to have a good time, and may be encouraging them to shout, but this then creates problems if some order needs to be restored because the children are too wound up.
It is difficult to move from the clown role to that of order-keeper, and so the role of other adults is important.
At one party, during games and the show, the children undid my clown trousers eight times.
Each time I had to stop and spend about thirty seconds doing them up, which destroyed the rhythm of the afternoon.
It would have been helpful if one of the parents had supported my suggestions that the joke was over and it was time to move on.
SHOULD YOUR ENTERTAINER BE THERE FOR THE WHOLE PARTY?
One of the decisions you have to make is whether to have the entertainer for just an entertainment slot or for the whole party.
Some of the agencies have been recommending the complete party and for some people this is ideal, in that they then do not have to worry.
However, the cost is a disadvantage as the full party usually costs a third more than a single hour.
However, I take the view that it is better if the parents, friends and older children become involved and take an active part.
I learned my juggling from my Uncle Norman at one of the Francome family parties.
Sometimes it is better to let the children have free time  when they just run around in the garden or hall.
Children generally suffer from too much control between school and television and do not spend enough time developing on their own.
Groups of children sometimes can invent games of their own, or maybe entertain themselves in their own way if they are free of adult interference.
If you have an entertainer, this is not likely to happen, unless you explain that you do not mind if he or she just lets the party run on its own for a while.
My experience has been that entertainers who come for just the show have maximum impact and cause great excitement, especially if they arrive dressed up.
They can then do their spot and leave, with the family and friends organizing the rest of the party.
SHOULD YOU HAVE PRIZES?
This book does contain a few games with winners but I must say that, on the whole, I do not like elimination games.
I do carry a few prizes if I have requests but I prefer to have people involved and enjoying games for the fun of joining in and having a good time, rather than to win a reward.
Invitations
You can buy some very good invitation cards, but spending time with your child making invitations can be an inventive prelude to a party.
So it is worth sitting down and trying to think of a few ideas.
With very young children, their contributions may be limited to saying in general what they think they would like and in colouring the cards.
It is important not to miss out a part of the invitation.
The cards all need the following:
1
The name and age of the child.
2
The venue.
3
The date and times of starting and finishing.
4
What kind of clothes should be worn.
5
The theme of the party, if any.
6
A request for any dietary needs of the children attending.
7
A contact number for reply.
Before you start to make the invitations, discuss all the finer details about what is to go in them, then buy all the things you will need like coloured card, felt tip pens, sharp scissors, scotch tape, ruler, compass (pair of compasses) for making circles, and envelopes.
Invitations in small presents If you want to do something a little unusual, buy children's drawing or reading books and write the invitation on the inside cover.
This is a little more expensive than a normal invitation but it is less likely that it will get lost.
Egg invitations In the United States people often decorate eggs at Easter time.
This is a good idea for a nursery rhyme party where the eggs can represent Humpty Dumpty.
Boil eggs and decorate them with paints and put tufts of wool on for hair.
Write your information on the back and tell them they can only eat the eggs after the instructions have been copied down.
 on which you can write your information.
 Any additional points can be written on the back.
Cut-out invitations If your party has a theme, design a card to represent it and get your child to colour it in and cut it out.
I include here templates for a clown and a spaceship party.
Mask invitations Cut a piece of coloured card to the shape you want, pierce a hole at each end, and insert either elastic or string.
You can make different kinds of mask for a witch or a pirate, or more elaborate ones for a masked ball.
Circle invitations A simple kind of invitation, but one which children like to make, is to draw a circle with the compass.
Then place the point on the circumference of the circle and make an arc as shown.
You then put the point of the compass at one of the junctions and make another arc.
After doing six arcs you will have a template,
Concertina invitations If your child has a favourite animal or activity, cut the card into shape but make it concertina fashion and place the different questions on the invitation in separate places.
Fold the paper into four parts and then make a template and cut round it as shown.
This is, of course, more time-consuming but can result in very attractive designs.
Invitations with balloons Buy balloons and make a cut-out shape as below with thin cardboard.
The balloons will then stand up and the base will look like feet.
Theming the Party
GREETING THE CHILDREN
When children come into a strange house they are often a little shy, so give them a warm welcome.
Try to put them with one of their friends.
Fulsome thanks for the present will make the child feel accepted and one of the ‘games to break the ice’, p.37, is useful to start.
With young children, you can ask the parent to stay.
If you know certain children are going to have difficulty in separating from parents, then it helps if they bring along a favourite toy.
A festive atmosphere encourages children to join in and have a good time, and decoration of the room or home can be helpful.
Children love balloons and these, placed on the front door, identifies your home as the one in the street where the special event is going to occur.
POSSIBLE PROBLEMS
a) Clinging child
In case there is a child who is pining for a parent, choose a spare adult who will, if required, give special attention to a needy child.
Some three-year olds are frightened of clowns.
In this case, take the child some distance away and then let him or her watch for a while until the fear recedes, which it usually does within about ten minutes.
b) Overactive child
At the other extreme to the shy child is the unruly one who does not want to join in any activity, has seen every trick the magician performs and ‘knows’ how to do them.
If you have just one like this, it is probably best to aim for a policy of containment.
However, you can also be firm, to ensure one child does not spoil the party for the rest.
On the other hand, I do not feel that all children need necessarily play all the games or join in all the activities.
c) Child without boundaries
Some children faced with a clown, an entertainer or just being at a party atmosphere at someone's home, do not wish to accept boundaries.
You will probably have child-proofed your home against some of the worst  effects but the entertainer could get upset if the props are interfered with and damaged.
It is important not to lose control.
Sometimes, for no apparent reason, all the children may become wired up.
In this case I usually get them running round for a while jumping, hopping, walking backwards and also get them to shout some calls.
One good idea is to get them to shout the response to the call of ‘Oggy’, which originated in Cornwall.
The leader calls ‘Oggy, Oggy, Oggy’ to which the response is ‘Oi, oi, oi’.
Again leader: ‘Oggy, Oggy, Oggy’ Response ‘Oi, oi, oi’.
The third and fourth time this is reduced to Leader ‘Oggy’, Response ‘Oi’, Leader ‘Oggy’, Response ‘Oi’.
The sequence finishes with one more call of ‘Oggy, Oggy, Oggy’ to the response of ‘Oi, oi, oi’.
This is a good ploy to get the children to shout loud but then to contain the noise within the call.
After a period of activity and shouting it is surprisingly easy to introduce a game like ‘dead lions’(p.39) and have all the children being as quiet as they can be.
THEMING A PARTY
It is fun to have a party with a special theme, and it also gives ideas for cakes, decorations, and presents.
Of course, it entails extra work, but there is a sense of excitement and children like dressing up.
Most children have their characters they like and so the theme may well choose itself, but I include some ideas.
One of the important things is to enjoy the preparation and not make it into a chore.
The birthday children will often have some good ideas as to the kind of decorations they would like.
With the invitations, it is helpful to give other parents a few ideas as to how they may make their children's costumes.
THEME PHRASE GAME
If you are going to have a party with a theme, this game gives you a good start.
Think of a name or phrase related to your theme.
So, for a card magic party you could have ‘pick a card’, for a football party you could have ‘score a goal’ or ‘touchdown’, and for a cowboy party you could have ‘home on the range’.
Cut out each letter of the phrase and hide them in or around the house and in other places, as you would for a scavenger hunt.
Then write up a list of clues corresponding to the place where the items are hidden.
So if you hide something in a book you could say ‘If you read you'll find  me’ or if you hide a clue under a towel you could say ‘You will find me when it's time to dry yourself’.
When the children arrive, provide them with a piece of paper listing the clues and with a space to record each letter that is found.
You can also give the number of words in the phrase.
When each letter is found, the child records it but leaves it for others to find.
Once all the letters are found, the object is to unscramble them to make up the phrase and you can make the first person the winner.
Make it a condition that the phrase is written and not spoken so the game is not spoiled for the others.
WITCHES
This is a theme which appeals to children from five upward, especially around the time of Hallowe'en (Oct 31).
One of my first ever professional engagements was as a clown with a witches' hat on over the top!
Keep the party room fairly dark and decorated with ghostly-like pictures, broomsticks with a few twigs attached for the children to practise flying on, pictures of black cats and so on.
You can also make up a book of spells and write spells on a piece of paper, or even a menu for witches' stew.
I asked children to think of a witches' stew and this is what they suggested to put on a sign on the wall:
Witches' Stew One pound of stinging nettles, five spiders found dead, half a pound of mouldy grass, two small sticks, seven old banana skins, half a pound of leaves, nine witches' toenails, three bats' wings, seven cockroaches, eight pigeons' feathers and the fur from a wire-haired fox terrier, all stewed together on Friday the thirteenth from 12 noon to 12 midnight.
Make the costume out of a black jumper and skirt, or trousers.
Make a cape out of black or green material.
Use talcum powder to create a white face or obtain theatrical makeup from chemists or party shops.
Some people like to black out a few teeth.
One idea for the party is to say that you are going to have a visit from a friendly ghost and, if the children see it, to let you know.
The room is darkened and the ghost appears in a sheet and waves to all the children before disappearing again.
You (or the entertainer) pretends not to see it and it disappears.
After two more appearances, during which  you are inconveniently looking the wrong way, you decide to go and look for the ghost.
It will then follow you in as you enter saying you could not find it.
Then, if you like, you can do a little pantomime routine where you look behind you for the ghost but it follows you around until you finally find it, and then you can do a brief activity with the ghost, like walk around the room in ‘follow my leader’ style or sing a song such as‘My kneebone's connected to my thigh bone’.
GHOSTLY STORY
This is a good game if you do not have too many children at the party.
Prepare a small box or bag containing ordinary household items for each of the expected guests.
The contents should vary according to the visitors.
They then sit in a circle and hold their bags unopened.
The lights are slightly dimmed to add effect, then the host begins a ghostly story using items they have in their bags.
When all the items have been used, the story passes to the second person who takes a turn continuing the story using her items.
The bag can contain such things as lengths of rope, white handkerchiefs, thimbles, toothpick, M and M's, bottle of red ink or nail varnish, pencil sharpener, elastoplast, a bent fork, a mask, a toy gun, a black spot, a penknife, an old sock and a banana with a face cut into its skin.
CARD MAGIC PARTY
This is a good idea, especially for those over the age of six who may feel they are getting a little sophisticated for other parties.
It is particularly suitable if you have a magician as an entertainer.
The children dress up for a saloon in the kind of gear that snooker players or riverboat gamblers wear, with the girls in long dresses.
The birthday child can have a fancy dress made up of a card, either the Joker, the King of Spades or, alternatively, the Queen of Hearts.
The decorations can have a magic theme and large cards can be made and placed on the door with balloons.
Place magic signs around the room.
A game I invented, and which is useful as children arrive, is to give them about ten or twelve cards.
They are then invited to try and throw them in a basket one at a time without looking at the value.
Then add up the total and see how people compared.
For a later game, give cards out  and the children have to find the people who had their number.
The cake can have a magic theme and be shaped like a trick, such as the ‘zig zag’.
The party bags can contain one or two little magic tricks or puzzles.
PIRATES
Make the invitations in the shape of a skull and crossbones and place them on the door instead of balloons.
Decorate the room with a treasure chest, and the children all look for hidden treasure when they arrive.
Each child has a number and looks for a packet with it on, which contains a small present.
You can also draw the map of an island with buried treasure on it, and each child places a flag with their name on in the spot where they think the treasure is likely to be.
Give the winners of the games a black spot which can be exchanged for a present or a can of coke.
For games, you can play ‘Captain's coming’[p.47]and adapt one or two others to a pirate's theme.
Instead of musical mats, children can ‘walk the plank’ and should not have a foot on it or be the last person to pass over when the music stops.
You can also play pass the pirate's parcel.
WORD SHAPE
All the letters in the alphabet can fit into word shape boxes:
This means that we can devise word shapes and various games.
You give each guest a photocopy of the shapes below and the clue.
The first person to complete each one is the winner.
Pirate's word shapes
sits on your shoulder and talks
dark dot
step out over water
merry man
Hopes his leg doesn't get woodworm
you can't see through this
holding it makes you feel sharp
island
someone's gone for a swim
get your passports ready
Answers parrot, black spot, walk the plank, jolly roger, long john silver, eye patch, cutlass, treasure, man overboard, land ahoy.
BANANA PARTY
Everyone dresses in yellow.
The invitations can be in the shape of a banana, make a large banana to put on the front door, and decorate the room with bananas and long yellow  balloons .
The ‘bobbing game’[p.50]can be played.
Another possibility is to get the children sitting in two rows.
The first person puts the banana on their feet and passes it to the next.
A non-competitive way of playing this is to get the children in a circle with, as well as bananas, several pieces of other fruit such as apples and oranges.
They then pass the fruit until it falls off.
For tea, give the children banana sandwiches and shape the birthday cake like a banana.
NUMBER PARTY
This is a theme for children aged seven and over.
Send the party invitations out on a card shaped in the number of the birthday child's age.
In Chapter 6 (Party Games), there is a special section for number games and also in Chapter 8 (Amaze Your Child).
ZOO PARTY
For this, all the children come as animals.
When they arrive give them the name of an animal and ask them to make the noise the animal makes to find similar animals.
Games that can be played include ‘dead lions’[p 39], squeak piggy squeak' [p.42]and ‘naughty monkey’[p.46].
Sing songs such as‘Nellie the Elephant’[p.74]or music from ‘The Jungle Book’.
Zoo animals
king
lively cat
took a trunk on holiday
gets up to tricks
slippery creature
goes to bed in pyjamas
gets the hump
sticks its neck out
see you later
stick in the mud
Answers Lion, tiger, elephant, monkey, snake, zebra, camel, giraffe, alligator, hippopotamus.
You can also play ‘Kim's game' [p.60]for younger children or, ‘What's the time Mr Wolf [p.58].
FARM PARTY
The children come dressed as animals or anything related to farms, such as scarecrows.
Place.
concertina cut-outs of animals around the room.
Begin the party by playing ‘farmyard’[p.37]and later ‘duck duck goose’[p.40]or ‘fox and geese’[p.47].
Songs such as‘Farmer's in the den’ or ‘Old MacDonald had a farm’[p.73]can be sung as well .
HAT PARTY
For this give a prize for the best creation.
One idea is to make some blank crowns out of cardboard and ask the children to colour them in.
Instead of musical chairs play musical hats, and hats can distinguish the teams in games such as‘criss-cross quiz’[p.44].
A good fun hat to make is one where there is a hole in the top and in the front.
Provide the inside with a channel so that a table tennis ball thrown in the top will come out of the front.
Everyone will want to have a turn throwing the ping-pong ball!
NURSERY RHYMES
The children come as nursery rhyme characters, such as Little Boy Blue, Humpty Dumpty or Bo Peep.
The invitations are in the shape of a character or scene such as‘Pussy in the well’.
One idea I developed with my daughter, and find is very popular with all children, is to sing the wrong words of a nursery rhyme and get them all to shout out the right ones.
For younger children, for example, I would do ‘Sing a song of sixpence’ correctly to get them to know the words, and then sing.
Sing a song of sevenpence (sixpence)
A pocketful of change (rye)
Four and twenty blackbirds baked in the oven (pie)
When the pie was opened the birds began to shout
(sing)
Wasn't that a dainty dish to set before a queen (king)
The king was in his counting house counting out his
change (money)
The queen was in the parlour eating bread and cheese
(honey)
The maid was in the garden hanging out her stockings
(clothes)
When down came a blackbird and pecked off her ears
(nose).
The children's responses are in brackets.
I usually follow this by singing
Baa baa green sheep have you any wool (black)
Yes sir, yes sir, three bags empty (full)
One for the master, one for the Fred (dame)
One for the little boy who lives down the avenue (lane).
EGG PARTY
The invitations are egg-shaped.
If you want to be particularly clever, write them on hard-boiled eggs.
Decorate the room with some silly egg-type signs.
‘This is an eggciting party’, ‘I am feeling eggstatic’, ‘I am having an eggcilerating time’, ‘Do not eggagerate’.
Play catching games with eggs instead of balls.
One of the races can be an egg and spoon race.
Provide paints and give a prize for the best-decorated egg.
If you have good support, one idea is to teach children how to blow an egg by placing holes in either end with a pin.
If they then paint and varnish them, they look very attractive to take home.
Also, they can all help you make and eat scrambled egg for tea.
CLOCK PARTY
This is a popular theme, as children enjoy telling the time.
The invitations can be clock-shaped with the hands pointing to the starting time, and you can make a large clock to put on the front door.
You can sing songs such as‘The Grandfather's Clock’:
The grandfather's clock was too tall for the shelf
So it stayed 70 years on the floor.
It was taller by half than the old man himself
Though it weighed not a pennyweight more.
It was bought on the morn
Of the day that he was born
It was always his treasure and pride.
But it stopped, short,
Never to go again when the old man died.
Seventy years without stumbling
Tick tock tick tock
His life seconds numbering
Tick tock tick tock
And it stopped short never to go again
When the old man died.
SOCCER PARTY
Make invitations in the shape of soccer balls and get your children to colour them in their teams' favourite colours.
Decorate the room with soccer scarves, rattles, pictures of teams and programmes from matches.
Invite the children to dress in soccer gear and play games such as‘tunnel ball’[p.60], ‘heading’[p.56], ‘balloon football’[p.57]and ‘kickit cricket’[p.59].
You can also invent little games, such as kicking a ball in a bucket or bowl of water.
The person organizing the party can come dressed as a referee and, in games such as‘bus stop’[p.41]where instructions are given, blow a whistle to attract attention for the various instructions.
Play a video tape of a soccer match during tea.
TEDDY BEARS' PICNIC
Invite the children to bring their favourite teddy or other cuddly toy.
If the weather is good, go outside to a local park or to the countryside.
One idea I had was to get the teddy bears to do the ‘hokey cokey’[p.67]with the children putting in their teddies' left arms and shaking them about.
It is one of the funniest things to see.
Buy teddy bear wrapping paper for decorations.
Give the food names such as‘Paddington's honey sandwiches’.
COWBOY PARTY
The children come in cowboy and cowgirl gear.
As well as decorating the front door with balloons, put up a sign ‘Welcome to the ranch’.
If the weather is good, build a fire and sing songs around it if possible with a guitar.
Good songs are ‘Home on the range’, ‘John Brown's body’[p.73]and ‘Around her hair she wears a yellow ribbon’ as well as other children's songs such as‘Ain't going to grieve my Lord’[p.72].
Make authentic chilli [p.32]or serve sausage and baked beans by the fire.
A good game to play is ‘Kim's game’[p.60]with items that are relevant to the cowboy theme and, in doing so, it will give you an opportunity of explaining to the younger ones the relevance of some of the items.
A list to begin with is (1) Sheriffs badge (2) piece of sharpened wood or hook to get stone out of horse's hoof (3) gun (4) small lasso (5) picture of cow (6) drawing of brand for the cow, personalized to the birthday child's initials (7) picture of a ranch or model (8) spurs (9) necktie (10) camping knife (11) tin mug (12) cowgirl boot (13) cowboy hat (14) robber's mask (15) tin of baked beans (16) dollar note (17) dinner bell (18) saddle or riding crop (19) razor (20) tin plate.
PYJAMA PARTY
All the children come to the party with their night clothes over their underclothes.
Decorate the room with stars as if it is night-time, and have the birthday child as Wee Willie Winkie.
To break the ice, play ‘blow the candle out’[p.37].
When it is time to eat, pretend it is a midnight feast and have the food in one of the bedrooms.
For younger children, sing the song ‘little bunnies’[p.65]and play ‘sleeping lions’ instead of‘dead lions’[p.39].
Perform the trick, The ‘four beds’[p.79].
You can also copy the following which is self-explanatory
Find the Word
Hidden in the sentences below are the following words related to night-time and beds.
Sheet, teddy, bed, kiss, drink, peace, rest, sleep, and dream.
To find these words you must join together consecutive letters in following words.
For example, in his chemistry exam John wrote for the first three answers blank, ether and litmus test.
The word is ‘blanket’.
1
‘The party is tonight Eddy’, said Jane.
[teddy]
2
‘It is time for you to be down to sleep Janet’ said her Dad.
[bed]
3
The mother said to her friend ‘Frank is still awake at this late hour’.
[kiss]
4
Would you like to go to the old rink to do some skating?[drink]
5
The lawyer said ‘Is she ethical or not?’[sheet]
6
The man came into the store, stamped his foot on the mat and went to the counter.
[rest]
7
Jane dug the garden as Lee picked up the weeds.
[sleep]
8
The mayor said ‘I hope a celebrity will come to the show’[peace]
9
Hurry up, Andrea!
My patience is wearing thin![dream]
Food for Parties
Food is not only essential but can also be an exciting part of the afternoon's entertainment, and most people arrange it for about an hour after the first children arrive.
In order to produce this chapter, I contacted various people I knew had produced interesting and novel food in the past.
I give suggestions about savoury, sweet and fruit and vegetable dishes and also about food that will fit into the themes I have described.
If you have any recipes that work particularly well, please let me know for future editions of this book.
Some of the points that have been made consistently by those who have produced excellent food at their parties are:
Make sure the food is set out in an attractive way so that its appearance makes the children excited.
Remember that ‘small is beautiful’, so make as near as you can to ‘one bite’ food to avoid wastage.
Children enjoy a variety of savoury food as well as sweet things so it is important to ensure there is a good balance.
Have some interesting fruit dishes, such as the kebab on page 28, and also attractive vegetables available.
Be prepared for some children to be vegetarian, so make sure there are other forms of protein than meat.
Decorate the table and dishes with little flags, coloured umbrellas and a few jelly cases filled with pretty coloured sweets.
Set a food theme before starting the preparation.
If there is an overall theme to the party this will obviously be used but, if not, then something simple like ‘pink and white’ would help.
SETTING OUT THE FOOD
There are two basic approaches to this.
Most people provide small items set out on an open plan system, which gives the children a great deal of choice.
Others, however, are convinced that it is easier to provide each child with a box of prepared food.
The advantage of the latter is that the boxes can be made up beforehand and do not have to  be set out.
They can be decorated and have the children's names on.
The disadvantage is that children do not have the same choices as if the  open-plan system was operating and, for this reason, I prefer all the food to be laid out to view.
IDEAS FOR SAVOURY FOOD
Sandwiches are very popular with children.
Some of the most popular are egg, chicken, marmite and ham.
These are best cut into eight instead of four.
You might try to be a little more adventurous and make patterns and, for example, cut egg sandwiches in the shape of an egg.
Also it is a good idea to make multi-colour sandwiches by piling brown bread and white bread up with alternative coloured fillings and then slicing through.
Make sure the next generation has straight hair by cutting off the crusts.
Other ready-made savoury goods such as‘ringos’ and potato crisps (chips) are also popular.
Cream cheese roll
One loaf of sliced brown bread
75g (3oz) cream cheese
1 tablespoon mayonnaise
salt and pepper
few sticks of celery
Makes about 32
Beat the cream cheese and mayonnaise together and add salt and pepper if desired.
Cut the celery into 1/4 inch sticks, the same length as the bread.
Roll out the bread lightly with a rolling pin after cutting off the crusts and spread thickly with the cheese filling.
Place a stick of celery across one end of each slice.
Roll up tightly, pressing the edge down firmly.
Wrap in cling film and chill until required.
Cut the rolls into half inch strips.
Porcupines
2 large oranges
125g (5oz) cheddar cheese, cubed
200g (8oz) can pineapple cubes
50 cocktail sticks
2 stuffed olives halved
1 small gherkin halved
20 cocktail sausages grilled
Cut a slice off base of oranges so they will stand firmly.
Put cheese and pineapple onto cocktail sticks and stick into  fruit to make the porcupines' spikes.
Pierce 2 olive halves and one gherkin with halved cocktail sticks and put in orange to make porcupines' eyes and nose.
Place a sausage on each of the remaining cocktail sticks and put them in the other orange.
Make the eyes and nose.
IDEAS FOR SWEET FOOD
A popular sandwich is peanut butter and jam (jelly).
This also suits vegetarians.
Of course, children also like such things as jelly, ice cream, biscuits and chocolate.
However in this section I include a few novel ideas.
Jelly boats
4 large oranges
1 packet of orange jelly (jello)
one sheet of rice paper
16 cocktail sticks
Cut the oranges in half crossways, squeeze to get out the juice and strain into a jug.
Scrape out all the membrane and pith with a small spoon taking care not to penetrate the skin and put the orange shells on a baking sheet.
Make the jelly pouring on the boiling water until it is all dissolved then add the orange juice.
Cool this slightly and then place it into the shells and chill until set.
When firm cut in half, cut the rice paper into triangles and use the cocktail sticks to make a sail on each ‘boat’.
Jewel biscuits
Fifteen biscuits
50g (2oz) plain flour
25g (1oz) butter
25g (1oz) caster sugar
beaten egg
50g (2oz) sifted icing sugar
1–2 teaspoons warm water
selection of food colourings
chocolate sugar strands/ hundreds and thousands (sprinkleys)
jelly sweets/silver balls/sugar flowers
Sift the flour into a bowl and rub in the fat until the mixture resembles breadcrumbs.
Stir in the sugar and enough beaten egg to mix to a firm dough.
Rub some flour onto your working board and add the mixture, roll out thinly and cut into shapes using the templates that are  commercially available.
Put this on a baking sheet and cook in a preheated oven 180 °C (350 °F) gas mark 4 for 12–15 minutes until golden and then cool.
Place the icing sugar in a mixing bowl and gradually add the water until the icing coats the back of a spoon quickly.
Divide the icing into portions and colour each as desired.
Spoon a little icing onto each biscuit, spread almost to the edges and decorate as desired.
Tiny fairy cakes
Marion Marks gave me a lot of ideas and she wrote to me:
‘My present favourite for prettiness —and the kids love them — are little fairy cakes.
I use a packet mix (sponge) and set out petit fours cases, drop a teaspoon of mixture into each case and bake for about eight minutes.
Then using white butter icing I make two sets of icing, say pink and white, and cover half the cakes with a layer of white and half with a layer of pink, decorate some with chocolate strands and some with hundreds and thousands (sprinkleys).
Using a cake piper reverse colours and decorate each cake with tiny names, spots, noughts and crosses, etc. and then dot some with tiny sugar flowers, silverballs, etc.
A platter of these is a certain winner.’
IDEAS FOR FRUIT AND VEGETABLES
Celery sticks, radishes, carrot sticks and baby tomatoes are all popular with children, especially if they are well presented.
Cut the tomatoes in half and then make faces on them with pieces of cheese, olive or egg.
The presentation becomes much more colourful if you mix the different vegetables together.
Fruit kebab
Buy kebab sticks and spike on to them several different coloured fruits.
For example one might be melon, banana, cherry, grape, apple, peach and strawberry.
For safety's sake, make sure the points on the ends of the sticks are blunted or masked with tape.
This is a very attractive way of presenting fruit and is a sure winner with the children.
FOOD FOR THEMES
In this section I shall suggest at least one dish for each of the party themes mentioned earlier.
Witches' stew
Experiment with this beforehand.
Take  some of the favourite things that your child likes, mix them together and serve from a warm pot with a ladle.
Card magic cake
Buy some regular sponge cake from a local store.
Take three or four cards from the pack and draw round them on greaseproof paper.
With gelatine icing sugar, make the shapes of each of the cards.
Using colouring, draw the face of each of the cards and place them in a fan on top of the cake.
Complete the icing of the cake and decorate around the base with ribbons.
Pirates' pizza
When I went to the United States in 1977, I often ate what they called ‘English Muffin'.
At the time there were none on sale in England.
Fortunately, the British can now buy them and they form a basis for this kind of pizza.
Apart from these, you need olive oil, oregano, basil, salt and pepper, parmazzone and mozzarella cheese and a jar of ready-made tomato sauce.
Toast the muffin and put a tablespoon of the sauce on it, together with a drip of oil, some mozzarella cheese and all the rest of the ingredients.
Place it in the oven or under the grill (broiler) until the cheese is melted.
Then put cocktail sticks on the top, together with little pirate flags.
Banana monster
Take about three bananas, and cut them up and arrange them on a plate in four pieces to look like a monster.
Stand the head and the tail on end.
Make a face on the head with sweets or currants.
Make holes along the length of the banana and spikes for the back, with Matchmakers shortened into quarters.
Make the lake surrounding the monster in a variety of ways.
One idea is to place a cereal like cornflakes round it and then add milk at the last moment before producing it.
Another idea is to stir up cornflour with the juice from raspberries or blackberries and boil it, stirring all the time until thick.
Allow it to cool, and then pour it on a plate.
The raspberries can act as rocks.
Number cakes
Some larger stores sell special tins of all the numbers so you can bake a cake in the shape of your child's age.
Of course, you might decide to do something different, such as to bake a simple cake and then use Matchmakers to set up an equation.
For example, if there are a total of twelve children, twelve divided by four equals three so have twelve sweets on the cake around the edges and cut the cake into quarters, each with three on, before cutting it into the individual pieces.
Elephant pizzas
Cut a template of cardboard into the shape of an elephant's head.
Divide the dough into eight equal portions and place it over the template, cutting round the edges with a sharp knife.
Arrange the heads on a baking sheet, brush with a little olive oil and place cheese and tomato on top.
Alternatively, use mushrooms, one of which has its stem for the trunk portion.
Add tomato purée and sprinkle with grated cheese.
Use olives for the eyes and celery sticks for the tusks.
Bake for ten or fifteen minutes and serve lukewarm.
One idea of the well-known chef Robert Carrier is to hard boil eggs, cut them lengthways, and then decorate them in order to make animals’ faces.
For elephants, you make the ears and trunk with green peppers, the eyes from small black olive pieces and egg white for the tusks.
For rabbits, use red pimento for ears, strips of cucumber peel for whiskers and small pieces of olive for eyes.
For a lion, use mayonnaise for the mane and pieces of coconut for the teeth.
Devil eggs
Hard boil a dozen eggs and cut them in half lengthways.
Remove the yolks and place them in a dish with mayonnaise and onions and beat them with a fork.
Next add a little vinegar and salt to taste and place the mixture back into the egg white shells.
Serve on a plate decorated with lettuce and tomatoes.
Clock cake
Make this either from ordinary cake or as an ice cream cake.
For an ice cream cake, buy a large pack of vanilla flavour and let it warm for a little while until it can be moulded into a circle, and then refreeze it.
Then, on the day of the party, decorate a clock face with twelve small sweets that your child chooses for the numbers.
Use two Matchmakers as the hands of the clock.
Nursery rhymes
A good nursery rhyme idea is Humpty Dumpty.
Get a chocolate egg about six inches high and place this on a wall made of cake.
Trace lines on it, with icing sugar to represent bricks, and on each of the bricks write a child's name.
This way, when you come to cut up the cake every child gets a piece with his or her name on it.
If you are feeling adventurous and you have a lot of children coming, you can make a second wall with pieces of chocolate surrounding it representing Humpty Dumpty having fallen off the wall.
Ding Dong Bell is another good nursery rhyme, and for this make a well out of a round piece of sponge cake laying on its side.
Use four Matchmakers to prop up a triangular piece of cake for the top of the well.
Make Pussy out of a slice of the sponge cake for a face.
Make whiskers out of Matchmakers and eyes out of green Smarties.
For The Old Woman Who Lived In A Shoe, buy or make a long cake such as a swiss roll and cut about four inches off the end.
Then fashion a heel and place the piece you have cut out over it to make the part for the ankle.
Hollow this out slightly.
Then ice the whole thing and decorate it by drawing on doors and windows.
Football theme
Make two semi-circular cakes and place them on top of each other to make a football.
Decorate with white icing sugar for the base.
Draw on the panels in red and black to make the appearance realistic.
Another possibility is to place two rectangular cakes together to make a football pitch.
Cover them in green icing sugar.
Make goalposts out of white candy sticks and corner flags out of candles.
Authentic Cowboy Chilli 1.36kg (3lbs) trimmed weight, lean beef (chuck, round, or sirloin) 1/2 cup salad oil 1/2 large onion, cut into tiny dice 1 large garlic clove, crushed 1 200g (8oz) can tomato sauce 2 cups hot water 3 tablespoons chilli powder 2 tablespoons ground cumin 1/2 tablespoon cracked black pepper 1/2 tablespoon salt 1/2 tablespoon paprika 1 tablespoon brown sugar 1 dash Tabasco sauce 1½ tablespoons flour 3 tablespoons warm water (optional) 1 400g (16oz) can chilli beans (drained) 1 400g (16oz) can kidney beans (drained)
Cut the beef, which must be absolutely free of all fat and gristle, into 1/4 to 1/2-inch cubes.
Heat about 1/4 cup salad oil in a large heavy frying pan.
Add the meat and brown over medium heat until meat is totally dry and there is no liquid in the frying pan.
This takes much longer than one thinks — at least 5 to 10 minutes depending on amount of meat.
Transfer browned meat to heavy kettle or casserole.
Add onion and garlic to frying pan and cook until just soft.
Add to meat and mix well.
To frying pan, add the tomato sauce, hot water, chilli powder, cumin, pepper, salt, paprika, brown sugar, and Tabasco.
Bring to boiling point and stir into meat.
Cover kettle and simmer over very low heat for about 1½ hours.
Add the beans and continue to heat covered for another 1/2 hour.
Stir frequently.
If chilli is in danger of scorching, add a little water.
If it is too thin, blend flour and water to a paste and stir into chilli.
Cook, stirring frequently, for 10 minutes.
Kellie's Corn Bread 6 tablespoons melted butter 1 cup yellow cornmeal 1 cup flour 1½ tablespoons sugar 4 teaspoons baking powder 1/2 teaspoon salt  1 cup milk 1 egg, beaten
Into a square 8-inch baking pan, pour 2 tablespoons of the butter.
Turn the pan around to coat bottom and all sides.
Place pan in a preheated hot oven 200 °C gas mark 6.
Into a bowl, sift together the cornmeal, flour, sugar, baking powder, and salt.
Add milk, beaten egg, and remaining 4 tablespoons butter.
Stir only until barely mixed.
With thick pot holders, remove sizzling pan from oven.
Pour in the cornmeal mixture.
Return pan to oven and increase heat to 220 °C gas mark 7.
Bake for 20 minutes or until corn bread tests done.
Serve hot with butter.
Fancy Dress Costumes
I see these as being in three separate categories.
One kind is the fancy dress which children can wear for a parade but not for the whole of a party.
The second is a practical outfit that is comfortable to be worn throughout.
A third kind is a ‘joke’ fancy dress which sets out to amuse rather than anything else.
There is a role for all three of these types at a party.
Here are some comedy ideas.
Miss Print
For this you have a young girl covered in old newspapers held on with scotch tape or cotton.
It helps if one of the larger newspapers makes the main part around the head.
Make a special hat out of newspaper and paste on signs, such as‘Read all about me’.
In a parade she can do little things like look into her Daily Mirror .
Sad Clown
I must take the blame for thinking of this one.
Dress your child up in a clown outfit and paint on a sad face.
Then, for entrance or a parade, you have them carry a melon and a cauliflower to make Melancholy.
Soccer fancy dress
The simplest way of doing this is to let the children wear an outfit with shorts, socks and shirt in the colour of their favourite team.
Some people make a football party educational and hire out a hall and a soccer coach for children to have a party and be given advice on how to play the game.
Invisible man
Dress you child's face in bandages or white kitchen roll with sunglasses, black shoes and gloves.
For a comedy touch you could add a small sign saying ‘nice to see you’.
Jigsaw
This is another of my crazy ideas.
Dress children up in paper which has wavy lines drawn on it to seem like a jigsaw puzzle.
On the front, you have a picture with a jigsaw-shaped piece missing which you have cut out and either put it on their back or hidden in a little flap on the  costume, which can be seen if people lift the flap up.
A further idea is to make a saw out of cardboard so, when the child arrives, he or she can do a little jig with the saw or, possibly better, you could put strings on the saw and have the saw doing the jig.
Norah Lettuce Leaf
Children like these kinds of silly jokes and, for this, you make a rabbit's costume.
The basic outfit can be made by wearing grey clothes including gloves.
The ears can be made out of felt and a small tail can be made of cotton wool.
Your child can have a little sign saying who she is.
Wee Willie Winkie
For this, you need an extra large shirt with the collar cut off and the arms tucked in.
Use a bobblehat for the head-dress and carry a candle in a holder.
Have a sign with the nursery rhyme: ‘Jack be nimble, Jack be quick, Jack jump over the candle stick.’
Chimney sweep
You need old clothes to which you can add soot from a burning candle.
You also need brushes which you can buy from a hardware store.
Chef
Dress your child in white with jeans and a chef's hat.
Clown
There are several different kinds of clown, of course.
The tramp clown is the one that usually appears in a circus with baggy trousers and overlarge shoes.
Buy the make-up from chemists or from one of the many party shops.
There are, of course, several ways of putting it on.
Some clowns totally white out their faces before beginning any design at all.
I sometimes do this, but usually I just white out around my eyes, which stops my makeup smudging if I am heading a ball.
Dick Whittington
You need a good pair of wellington boots, a large shirt which belts at the waist and a suitable hat.
Put a bundle into a handkerchief and tie it onto the end of the string.
Highwayperson
Make a mask and dress your child all in black.
A gaudy earring on one ear can help the effect and you can provide two pistols and a bag for booty.
Vacuum cleaner
This is something a bit out of the ordinary.
Use the arms of a real vacuum cleaner as part of your props.
Make a cylinder big enough for your child to stand in with comfort and cut out two eye holes.
The child holds the tubes in one hand the other is free.
Make a hole in the cylinder to fix a lead and plug through.
Doctor and patient
(or nurse and patient).
Fix the doctor or nurse up with white coats, stethoscope and little lights of the kind used for looking in ears.
Do up the patient in bandages.
An alternative is to have dentist and patient and make a joke of it, with the dental instruments being a hammer and a pair of pliers and the patient made up to have a large abscess.
Little Boy Blue
All you need are blue clothes, as the name suggests.
You can also use a horn or make one up out of cardboard.
Little Miss Muffet
You need traditional clothes or a fancy nightie.
She can have a spider dangling from her wrist and a bowl of curds and whey.
Party Games
GAMES TO BREAK THE ICE
1 Farmyard
This is a good game for younger children.
Each person has a piece of paper which has the name of an animal written on it.
Examples of animals which might be chosen are pigs, horses, cows, cats, dogs, ducks and sheep.
They then have to go round making the noise of that animal.
Depending on the size of the party, the organizer chooses three or four children as each animal and they have to find their group.
2 Blow the candle out
Give this to people to do as they arrive.
Place a candle on a table, well out of the way of draughts, and encourage partygoers to get about a foot away from it.
Then blindfold them and invite them to take four steps backwards followed by four forward before trying to blow out the candle.
This is quite difficult to do and provides a great deal of fun.
It has to be closely supervised but provides a good job for any adult who might be feeling somewhat self-conscious.
A variation on this is to tie up various small items, such as toys or candies in wrappers inside a bag made of fairly strong paper.
Give each child the opportunity to hit the bag with a stick.
In order to make it a little more difficult, blindfold them and take them four paces away from the target.
Allow them three swings with the stick.
Once the bag is broken, the children can share the contents.
3 Groups of people
This is a good game for mixing people.
The organizer calls out a number.
If the first number chosen is three, then all those at the party have to join in groups of three and so on.
Those left out can wait till the next time, but a clever organizer will arrange the groupings so that, as different people come, there are few left out.
As a last resort you can call out the total number of those present!
4 Group word making
A reasonably quiet game, this is especially good for older children and may even be used by adults.
As the children arrive, give them a pencil and paper and ask them to join one of three or four groups.
Each group has a word such as‘measurements’ or ‘recommendations’, and the object is to see how many other words can be made out of this.
At the end of, say, five minutes read the lists out.
For younger children, an adult may need to be sponsored as the leader of the group.
5 Who am I?
When your guests arrive, ask them to write the name of a character on a piece of paper.
This could be a real person, such as their schoolteacher, or a character from a nursery rhyme book, such as Humpty Dumpty, Little Boy Blue or Little Miss Muffet.
Explain that no one is to see what they have written on the paper and then ask them to pin it on the back of the next guest to arrive.
This process continues until everyone has a name on his or her back, the organizer putting a name on the birthday child's back, who will have started the game.
The object of the game is for the players to find out who they are.
They can wander round and ask if they are a nursery rhyme character or not, whether they are an animal or a person and whether or not they are famous.
When they think they know, they can ask one of their friends and, as soon as they guess correctly, they sit down and watch the fun as the others seek out their own identity.
6 Searching for food
This is a good game to start a party, especially when there is an animal theme.
Hide several squares of different coloured papers around the room.
These papers represent animal food.
Divide the children up into teams of about five or six each and call each team an animal.
One group will be lions, another cows and yet another horses.
Each group also has a colour.
For example, sheep may be white and lions  brown.
Each team has a leader, with the birthday child being previously asked which team she or he would like to lead.
Then send the animals to hunt for food.
When the member of the team finds any colour she makes the sound of her team so that cows would always moo.
If the colour of the paper matches that of the team the leader collects it.
If it is enemy food, the leader rips it up.
After about ten minutes the game ends, and the team with the largest amount of ‘heir own food is judged to be the winner.
The fun of the game is more in the confusion than in the winning.
7 Grandmother's footsteps
The children line up at one end of the room with the organizer (grandmother) at the other.
The leader then turns away from the children during which time they can advance.
At any point the ‘grandmother’ can turn round and anyone seen to be moving has to return to the beginning.
The first child to reach the grandmother is the winner.
8 Dead lions
This is a really good game for creating a little quiet in the middle of the party.
The children lie down on the floor and they have to stay absolutely still.
Anyone who does not do so is out.
In some versions of this, the organizer tries to make the children laugh by telling jokes.
I usually do this as little as possible so that the children stay in the game a long time.
Those who do move can help watch the other children for any movement.
There can either be an individual winner or there can be teams.
9 Sleeping beauty
Everyone sits in a circle with one child, possibly the birthday girl, being ‘Sleeping Beauty’ in the middle blindfolded.
Place keys next to her.
The organizer taps someone on the head and that child has to tiptoe round the circle while ‘Sleeping Beauty’ tries to point to the person.
If she succeeds, the person has to go and sit down.
If the person picks up the keys, then he or she can become the next sleeping beauty.
10 Sardines
One person hides.
The others then have to try and find him.
Anyone finding him quietly stays with him until there is eventually a big group of people together.
The game ends when everyone finds the hiding place.
Usually, the last person gets a big cheer.
11 Hunt the thimble
All the children leave the room and you hide the thimble.
They all come in to look for it.
When they find it, they do not say anything but sit quietly until the last person finds it when they shout ‘Hooray’ as loud as they can.
The first person to find the thimble hides it the next time.
This is another good game to quieten down the party.
12 Catch the bomb
Ask the children to sit in a circle and explain that the aim of the game is to toss the beanbag (bomb) to a child in the circle who may not be expecting it, possibly by looking one way and throwing the other.
The player thrown to must try and catch the bomb before it explodes.
If the toss was fair and he misses it, he is out and must sit on the floor in the middle.
If the throw is judged to have been too poor, the person throwing it is out.
The last player out becomes the judge of the next throw and what she says must be accepted.
Anyone making a noise could set off the bomb, therefore, if the judge catches anyone talking or making a noise, that person is out.
The last person left is the winner.
GAMES IN A CIRCLE
13 Duck duck goose
All the children sit in a circle.
The first person goes round the outside and pats on the head those sitting saying ‘duck’ each time.
Finally, the person who is ‘it’ says ‘goose’and runs round the circle in a clockwise direction.
The person ‘goosed’ then chases round and tries to catch the runner before he or she gets back to the space where the goosed person was sitting.
There are two versions of this.
One is that the children who are caught have to go again until they manage to sit down before being touched.
However, I do not play it this way but allow each person ‘goosed’ to be the next catcher.
This gives everybody a turn at catching.
I also make the rule that, before a person has had a turn, they sit with their legs crossed and afterwards place them out in front.
This enables those who have had their turn to be identified and ensures nobody is missed out.
The children usually want to play the game again.
If they do, I often play the next game as a slight change.
14 I sent a letter to my friend
Again the children sit in a circle.
This time, the person who is ‘it’ says ‘I sent a letter  to my friend and on the way I lost it.
One of you has picked it up and put it in your pocket’!
The person then goes round the circle touching on the head those sitting and saying ‘Was it you, was it you, was it you?’ until eventually says ‘It was you’.
The persons alleged to have picked up the letter then chase the accusers round the circle and try to catch them before they sit in the empty space, as in the previous game.
15 Ring on a string
The children sit in a circle holding a long piece of string, on which is tied a ring.
One person is placed in the middle and momentarily blindfolded while the children hide the ring under their hands.
They then move their hands along the string in a rhythmic motion and try to pass the ring around without the person in the middle seeing it.
As soon as the ring is found, the person holding it takes a turn in the middle.
16 Bus stop
Arrange chairs in a circle, with one entrance for the children to go in and out.
Then explain the rules of the game which are that, when a whistle is blown, the children leave their seats to go on a bus ride.
They walk round the outside of the chairs.
When the whistle is blown again, the leader gives instructions such as‘hop’, ‘walk backwards’, ‘jump with two feet together’, ‘run slowly’ or ‘walk again' until the leader eventually says ‘Bus stop’when all the children must continue the way they are going until they reach the entrance to the bus when they go and sit down.
After quite a few practice turns, the last child, or to make this part of the game quicker the last two children, to sit down are out.
They then remain seated while the rest leave for the next trip.
This is a good game for tiring out those children with a great deal of energy.
17 Follow the leader
One child leaves the room and a leader is chosen from those who remain.
The child then returns.
The leader then proceeds to do a few activities around the table such as hitting it with both hands, scratching an ear, winking an eye or nodding backwards and forwards.
The rest of those in the room have to try and do what the leader does as fast as possible afterwards, but without making obvious who the leader is.
As soon as the person who is ‘it’ guesses correctly, another person is chosen to leave the room.
18 Wink murder
One child goes out of the room while all the rest are in a circle.
While that child is away, the organizer chooses someone to be the murderer.
They then tell the other child to come back into the room.
The murderer has to wink at other children in the room.
Those winked at have to fall to the ground and play dead.
The child who has just been away from the room has to guess who is the murderer.
After five people have been ‘killed’, the chosen person has to guess who is the murderer.
19 Squeak piggy squeak
All that is needed is a cushion and a blindfold.
Choose a person, blindfold her, give her the cushion and then turn her round and round a couple of times so she is unaware as to which direction she is in.
She then, with a little help from the organizer, places the cushion on someone's lap and says ‘Squeak piggy squeak’.
The person then ‘squeaks’ and the blindfolded child has to try and guess who it is.
Once she is successful, the person she guessed is blindfolded and the game continues.
20 Priest of Paris
This is an old family game of ours and is suitable for older children and for adults.
Those playing sit round in a circle on chairs and are numbered in sequence, until the last two are reached.
These are then called ‘Manjack’ and the ‘Priest of Paris’.
The object of the game is to try and become this Priest of Paris, who begins the game choosing any number and saying, for example: ‘The Priest of Paris has lost his (her) thinking cap.
Some say this and some say that but I say number six’.
The priest then tries counting to five before number six can respond ‘Not I sir’.
The Priest then responds ‘Who then sir?’.
Then number six says for example‘I say number eight.
One two three four five’.
Number eight has to respond ‘Not I sir’ before number six reaches five.
As soon as anyone misses their cue they return to number one and all those below the number move up one.
If the Priest misses the cue, they all move up a number.
21 Squeezy
Someone is in the middle and all the other children in a circle are holding hands.
The organizer starts and squeezes the hands of the person next to him.
The squeeze is, in turn, passed on to the next person.
When a child has got the squeeze, he is allowed to hold on to it as long as he wants before passing it on to the next person.
When the organizer says ‘stop’, the child in the middle has to guess who has got the squeeze.
22 Spin the plate
The children sit in a circle and are numbered upwards from one.
A person is chosen, who spins a plate and calls out a number.
The person who has that number must catch the plate before it stops spinning.
If she does not, then she is out and gives an article as a forfeit.
They then call another number.
Anyone calling a number of someone who is already out also becomes out, and pays a forfeit.
When just one or two people are left, the forfeits are returned.
The way we usually do this is as follows.
One person holds up each of the objects in turn and says ‘This is a thing, a very pretty thing, what must the owner do to receive it?’
A second person then gives out forfeits for each person to do.
These are all noted and then everyone carries out their forfeits.
23 Pass the power
Make everyone stand in a circle and explain that you have been granted a special power which places people under your spell.
This means that, whenever you move, everyone in the circle must move.
They should do whatever you do.
You then go through a number of activities, such as clapping your hands behind your back, squatting down, pretending to jump rope (skip), doing a monkey imitation, and so forth.
After about half a minute, tap the person on your left who has now received the power and he then leads through the same activities you did, plus some new ones such as touching toes, jumping in the air, hopping and so on.
After another half a minute, the power is passed to the third person and so on until everyone has had a turn at passing the power.
24 I'm hearing bells
All the children stand in a circle facing inward, with their hands behind their backs.
One child is chosen and stands in the centre of the circle with eyes closed.
As this player counts aloud from one to ten, the other children are given a bell.
They pass it around behind their backs and must make sure that it is ringing loudly.
On the count of ten, the chosen child opens his eyes and has three chances to guess who is holding the bell behind his back.
If the guess is correct, the child holding the bell has a turn in the middle.
If all the three guesses are wrong, the child in the middle must count up to ten and try again.
25 Word list wacko
This is a game I came across in the United States and is for older children aged seven and upwards.
The children sit in a circle with the leader in the centre.
The leader takes a watch with a second hand, points to a player and calls out a letter of the alphabet.
The player chosen has three minutes to think of as many words as possible beginning with that letter.
The leader writes all the words down.
It is also possible to play this with the partygoers divided into teams.
The problem is that at first the words are coming so fast it is difficult to write them down, so you really need a helper.
NUMBER GAMES
26 Criss cross quiz
This is a larger-than-life game of noughts and crosses.
First of all, three lines of three chairs are set up.
The party is divided into two separate teams in lines and they are numbered off.
So, if there are twenty at the party, there will be two teams of ten.
Get the teams to number themselves.
The first person calls out ‘one’, the second ‘two’ and so on.
This ensures that the children do not forget their numbers.
The two teams need to be identified by some means.
This could be by one side wearing party hats and the other not or the teams could be divided according to sex.
Sometimes it is useful to appoint a team leader to help with the organization of the teams.
The entertainer calls out a number and one person from each side sits in a chair.
This process continues until one side has three people in one line.
To ensure that each person has a turn, but that it is difficult for those playing to predict when their number is coming up, I have a system of calling the numbers out.
If there are twelve children on each side.
I first go through the odd numbers in a seemingly random fashion 1, 5,3,7, 11, 9 and then downwards with the even numbers 12, 8, 10, 6,2,4.
This is a fairly simple system but is complicated enough to ensure some element of surprise.
27 One two three buzz
Again, sit the players in a circle.
They then count, but they must not say any number that is a multiple of seven or has a seven in it.
So the numbers go round in a circle one, two, three, four, five, six, buzz, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen, buzz, fifteen, sixteen, buzz, eighteen, nineteen, twenty, buzz, twenty two, twenty  three, twenty four, twenty five, twenty six, buzz, buzz, twenty nine, thirty.
An alternative to ‘buzz’ is to say ‘fizz’for five.
28 Hockey
Number the children into two equal teams and call two players.
There are then two ways to proceed.
For younger children, one way is to have hockey sticks made of two rolled-up newspapers placed either side of a ball which is put in the middle of the room.
The two players whose numbers have been called pick up the hockey sticks, and the first one to hit the ball gets the point.
For older children, make goals at either end of the room out of chair legs and give the point to the first person to score.
LAUGHTER GAMES
29 Framed picture
You need an empty picture frame big enough for a child to put his head in comfortably.
Alternatively, make a frame out of a large piece of cardboard.
The game is simple but works very well.
The person chosen puts his face in the frame as if he is a picture and then he has to try not to laugh as the rest tell their best jokes and make the funniest expressions.
As soon as the ‘framed’ person laughs, the next one takes over and tries to keep a straight face.
30 Poor pussy
The children sit around the room, while the person who is chosen to start takes a cushion and places it on someone's lap.
They then say ‘Miaow’.
The person with the cushion on their lap then has to stroke them on the head and say ‘Poor pussy’ without laughing.
If they laugh, they have to go round with the cushion.
If they do not, then the ‘pussy’ miaows two more times for the same response and possible penalty before trying to get someone else to laugh.
31 Naughty monkey
One person in the middle is the naughty monkey and has to try and make everybody else either move or laugh.
Anyone moving or laughing is out, and the last person remaining is the winner and probably has the worst sense of humour!
ELIMINATION GAMES
32 Musical chairs
This is one of the oldest games around and Kate Greenaway's Book of Games published in 1889 describes it as follows:Someone plays the piano.
Chairs must be placed down the room, back to back, one less in number than the players who gallop round them in time to the music.
Suddenly it stops, and everybody then tries to get a chair, but as there is one short someone will be left standing, and is then out of the game.
A chair is taken away and the game goes on as before until only one player, the victor, is left .
One useful tip is that, towards the end when there are few chairs left, have two children or adults stand at either end of the room.
The players then go round these people rather than simply the few chairs.
A trick I like to play when using a record or tape is to switch off the music two or three times to get everyone predicting when the end will come.
Then, on the next occasion, go to the machine and move as if to switch it off.
Many will sit down despite the fact the music is still playing.
33 ‘Simon Says'
I usually say ‘Colin says’ for this game.
The rules are quite simple.
If the leader says ‘Simon says do this’ then everybody does it.
If, however, the leader says simply ‘Do this’ with no ‘Simon says’, then the children do not do it.
So a typical sequence goes ‘Simon says put your hand in the air like this.
Now Simon says put them down by your side.
Now put them on your head.’
All those putting their hands on their head are out.
Spend some time practising.
I like a few active steps, like running round the room or touching toes.
Once I have decided to begin the game proper, I aim to get everyone out as soon as possible.
This avoids problems with those who get bored if they are out.
Going faster helps to increase the number of mistakes made, as does something unusual.
I ask the children to bend their knees and lower themselves and then stand up.
Some are concentrating so much on balancing that they forget all about the key words.
If all else fails one trick is to change the tone of your voice and with a motion of the hands say ‘OK all move into the middle now.’
I always find that all the children move without realizing that you have not said ‘Simon Says’.
34 Captain's coming
A hall or big room is ideal for this game.
The organizer tells the children that each side of the room has a number one, two, three or four.
When the entertainer calls one of these numbers the children have to run there.
If the organizer shouts ‘sharks’ the children all shout ‘Oh my legs’and grab their legs.
When the organizer shouts ‘bombs ahead’ all the children lie on the floor until they hear ‘all clear’.
The organizer can also shout ‘freeze’ and the children stay still until the organizer says ‘unfreeze’.
When the leader calls ‘Captain's coming’ everyone salutes.
If the organizer calls ‘submarines’ everyone lies down with a leg in the air.
Other commands are ‘Climb the rigging’— pretend to climb rope; ‘Man overboard’— pretend to pull the rope up; ‘Scrub the decks’— pretend to scrub the floor and ‘Captain's dog’— pretend to pat a dog.
‘Lifeboats’ is also called followed by a number.
If the organizer calls ‘lifeboats in fours’ the children get in groups of four, sit on the floor and pretend to be rowing.
Those who remain are out.
Apart from this, children are out by going to the wrong side when a number is called out, if they unfreeze without being told or if they are the last one to do one of the organizer's commands.
This game can also be played by substituting the orders with numbers.
So the shout of ‘Five’ could mean ‘sharks’, and so on.
EXPANDING GAMES
35 Fox and geese
Again, you really need a large hall or reasonably-sized garden.
One person — the fox — stands in the middle, and the others — the geese — all go to one end of the room.
At the signal from the organizer all the geese try and run from one end to the other without being caught.
Everyone the fox touches becomes a fox and helps catch until everyone is captured.
36 Chain tig
This is a playground game that we used to play a lot when I was young.
I have since used it with great success at children's parties.
The person chosen to start the game chases after the others and holds hands with the  first person caught.
These two then chase after a third and then a fourth.
When four people are caught the chain divides into two pairs and the game continues until everyone is captured.
It is not allowed for anyone in the chain to let go of hands in order to catch someone.
37 Lock Ness Monster
Divide the party into groups of, say, five, leaving two people in the middle.
These groups are called different fishes' names, such as octopus, eel, cod, shark and salmon.
Each group has a base.
The two not in groups are the Loch Ness Monsters.
The organizer tells a story.
For instance, the beginning could be ‘It was a nice sunny day and all the fishes decided to go out for a swim.
The eels were making such a noise that all the other fishes started making a noise as well, which woke up the Loch Ness Monster’.
When the name of a group of fishes is mentioned as going out for a swim all the members walk around the monsters in a circle.
The two in the middle then have to go out and catch as
many children as they can before they get back to where their group is positioned.
The people who are caught then become Loch Ness Monsters until everyone is caught.
The organizer can also say things like ‘the tide turns’ which means everyone changes direction; ‘the sea got rougher’which means everyone goes faster; and ‘the eels were hopping mad’which means all eels have to hop.
38 Ball tig
This is a game for older children.
The area must be closely defined and not be too large.
The person chosen to start the game counts up to twenty and has a light ball.
The object is to catch all the other players by hitting them with the ball.
Once someone has been caught, they help to catch.
A person can stop the ball from hitting their body by fisting it away.
ALPHABET GAMES
39 Nursery rhymes
Divide the participants into two or more teams.
The first team chooses a nursery rhyme and they all sing it together.
Then everyone sings through the alphabet.
The organizer keeps a note of the one they choose.
Then it is the second team's turn to sing.
They must choose a nursery rhyme that has not been chosen before, and then the third or fourth team continues.
Any team which cannot think of a new rhyme, or repeats one that has been chosen earlier, drops out until only one team is left.
40 Apple, banana, carrot, or ABC
The first person chooses an item beginning with the letter A and the second person repeats this, and continues with a word beginning with the letter B. The third person repeats the first two and adds a word beginning with the letter C, and so on.
Those who make a mistake, or cannot think of a word beginning with their letter, drop out.
A typical sequence might be.
Apple, basket, catch, door, elephant, fish, goalposts, house, India, Japan, kitchen, latch, movie, neighbour…and so on.
41 Alice from Alabama
The first person says a name and place beginning with A. The second person says one beginning with B and so on.
So a sequence might be, I am Alice and I come from Alabama, I am Bob and I come from Birmingham, I am Clive and I eat custard, I am Don and I eat doughnuts…and so on.
42 Spell the word
Make up two identical sets of letters to the total number of guests you have at the party.
So, if you have a total of twenty guests, make up two sets of ten letters as follows A B C D E F G H I J These should be placed upon firm card and be clearly visible.
Divide the guests into two teams and ask each member of the team to place a letter on the front of their shirt, either with scotch tape or with safety pins.
Then read from a list of words containing up to six letters, one at a time.
Some good words to use are CAB JIG FED HAD JADE JAB BEACH BAG BADE CHEF FADE 
When everyone is prepared, you call out one of the words.
The players with the required letters then form a line to make up the word as fast as they can, and the team which does it the quickest gets a point.
The first team to get to ten is the winner.
WATER GAMES
43 The bobbing game
Place either apples or bananas in a large bowl of clean water and the object is for the participants to eat the fruit without using their hands.
44 Drinking game
There are two teams and each one has a jug of water.
In relays, each team tries to drink water in identical jugs from a spoon, until at the end they can lift up the jugs to drink.
The first team to consume all the water is the winner.
45 Painting game
Draw the outlines of two clowns on pieces of large paper.
There is a large circle for the head, circles for the eyes and nose and several adjacent circles for the mouth.
Divide the children into two teams and provide them with sets of corks which are placed in a bowl of water.
Also, give them paints.
The children in turn pick up the corks in their mouths and dip them into the paint.
They then paint the clown as best they can.
The game can have a winning team, if desired.
46 Water race
Divide the children into two teams and line them up.
Put two glasses on a table about ten feet from the teams.
Each team has a spoon and there is a bowl of water situated an equal distance from both the teams.
The aim of the game is to see which of the teams can fill up  their glass the first.
The first two children fill up their spoons with water and run to the other end and deposit as much water as they have left in the glass.
They then return and give the spoon to the next person.
The game continues until one team fills the glass.
The water is likely to be spilled, have a cloth handy to wipe up any mess.
KISSING GAMES
47 Postman's knock
This is a very old game and is simplicity itself.
We used to play it when we were aged about ten or eleven.
One boy is chosen and goes out of the room.
The girls are all numbered and the boy is asked to say a number between, say, one and eleven.
He chooses the number and the girl chosen goes outside the room to give him a kiss.
The boys are then numbered off and the girl chooses a number.
48 Winking
Place chairs round in a circle and ask one sex, say the girls, to sit down on the chairs.
The boys stand behind the chairs with one boy behind a vacant one.
The boy with the vacant chair then winks at one of the girls who then tries to get to the other boy without her partner noticing.
When I was a twelve-year old this was my favourite game.
It can be played in two ways, in the simple version, the girl goes and sits in front of the boy, but I always preferred the ‘de luxe’ form when the girl kisses the boy.
TEAM GAMES
49 Ladders
Everybody finds a partner and sits in two rows opposite their partner.
They turn to face their partner with their feet straight out touching their partner's feet.
The leader either numbers each pair or gives them names such as apple, banana, cake, or other fruit.
The organizer tells a story and, when a couple's word is mentioned, they jump up and run down the outside of the teams, back to the other end jumping over the legs and then back to their seats.
One way of playing it is for the person who gets back first to get one point and it can be the first team to ten.
Another possibility is that the winning person continues the story.
50 Matchbox on noses
Select two teams and line them  up.
Give each team an empty matchbox.
The first person in each team places it on their nose and then passes it to other members of the team without using their hands.
The first team to get the matchbox to the last person is the winner.
Any team dropping the matchbox has to start at the beginning.
51 Passing oranges by the neck
This game is very similar to the previous one in that it is a race to pass the orange along.
When we played this, we usually made a rule that the teams lined up alternating sexes.
52 Key on a string
For this game, the teams line up.
The first people in each team place the keys down their neck and out through the bottom of their trouser legs or slacks.
The second person then follows so that in the end the whole team is linked together by string.
53 Give us a clue
Divide the party into two groups.
One person on each side chooses a book, film or television programme and the rest have to guess what it is, by means of mime.
There are various tricks that are used.
For example‘the’ is signalled by two fingers placed together in the shape of a T, touching the ear indicates ‘sounds like’, patting your hand on your head means ‘name’, and it is often helpful to indicate the number of words by fingers.
54 Pawn shop
This is an old family game.
Divide up the party into three or four teams and place a chair in the middle of the room.
The leader then calls for items, and the first person from one of the teams brings the article and places it on the chair.
Sometimes, instead of the article, the leader gives a set of instructions that some or all of the  teams should follow.
I always name the team equal after a number of rounds and finish with something that involves everyone.
A list of items for possible inclusion is set out below:
A left shoe, sock, shirt, comb, diary, clean handkerchief, badge, ring, a white sock, bracelet, necklace, or hairslide.
A boy on a girl's back, boy in girls' shoes and a girl in boy's shoes, girl in a boy's sweater.
First person to touch three walls, penny, balloon, three boys and girls sitting on chairs.
Boy's coat, piece of grass, a stone, a piece of wood.
The team tasks are also very popular and involve everyone.
Some ideas are as follows: the first team to have everyone sat on the floor, first team to have everyone standing on one leg.
The first team to have everyone with their hands in the air.
The first team to all sit on one chair.
The first team to hold hands in a circle.
The first team to link up in a line with their arms crossed.
55 Happy holidays
This is a good game to get the children going.
It is a relay race.
Each team has a suitcase which contains some clothes which are chosen to look funny.
They may both have an outsize man's old jacket, large shoes and socks and even a skirt or large pair of trousers (pants).
For additional effect it is a good idea to have a large pair of sunglasses and a summer type holiday hat.
The suitcase might have signs on or pictures of a holiday resort to add effect.
The first members of the teams run up to the suitcases and put everything on, run round the back of the rest of the team and then take everything off and put it back in the suitcase before running back and touching the next member of the team who repeats the process.
The team that finishes first wins the game.
56 Don't spill the popcorn
This is another popular game in the United States.
Divide your guests into two teams.
In front of each team at a distance of about two yards, place a mirror, a spoon an empty bottle or jar.
Place popcorn in a big bowl.
To start the game give the first player the bottle or jar and ask him to hold it on his head.
He then runs to the bowl of popcorn and tries to spoon as much as possible into the container on his head.
To help out, the second player holds up the mirror so that the first player can see his reflection.
The first player is only allowed to fill the spoon on three occasions.
After the first player has had his turn, he hands on to the second player.
She then tries to get as much as she can while a third person holds the mirror.
There are several ways of scoring.
One possibility is that the first team to fill their container is the winner.
Another way is to give five points to the team which finishes first and ten to the team which fills up more of the bottle in a single round.
The game is played again until one team reaches twenty five points.
57 I went shopping
The children sit on chairs or on the floor in two or more lines.
If there are two lines then it is a good idea to have the chairs facing inwards so that the teams face each other.
One person in each team is then given the name of an item that someone might buy while out shopping such as: carrots, a newspaper, a magazine, fish, jam, cheese and bananas.
The party leader then begins a story such as‘I went out shopping and I bought some bananas’.
At the mention of ‘bananas’ those given this name get out of their seats, run all around their team and back to their seats.
The first one to finish gets a point.
If the leader then mentions her ‘shopping basket’ all the team gets up, runs around the chairs and back to their seats.
The leader ensures that each item is called out in due course.
58 Passing the feather
Divide the party up into a convenient number of groups.
Give each person a straw and each team a feather.
The teams stand in line and the feather is placed on a chair at the end of the room.
The first player in each team picks up the feather by inhaling through the straw.
The second player then breathes in and tries to take it off the first until it reaches the player at the end.
This player then takes the feather and runs to the front.
The game continues until the first player is back at the front.
59 Guess what name
Children are almost as much into names as they are into ages.
This is a good game to both give enjoyment and to provoke some thought.
You divide into two teams, call out a description and mention which sex to which the name refers.
The first person from each team that calls out the answer gets a point for his or her team.
Here are some examples:
F
A hymn we sing at Christmas
M
Move up and down in water
F
Sixth month of the year
F
French for April
F
Bristol Cream
F
Flower with thorns
F
…and ivy
M
Important person at a college
M
Slang for steal
M
What you have to pay after a meal
F
Happiness
M
Serious
F
…
Ball that fortune tellers use
F & M
A letter of the alphabet
F & M
What we do to nice dogs
M
Shaft of light
F
What you can do if you are libelled
Answers: Carole, Bob, June, Avril, Sherry, Rose, Holly, Dean, Nick, Bill, Joy, Ernest, Crystal, Jay, Pat, Ray, Sue.
60 Button catcher
For this team game, get two paper cups and make them into button catchers by piercing a hole in the bottom with a needle or pin and threading through a length of reasonably strong cotton.
Tie a knot in one end of the cotton, so that it does not get pulled through the cup, and attach the other end to the button.
Each person then tries to toss the button in the air and catch it in the cup.
As each succeeds she or he passes the cup to the next person until everyone has had their turn.
61 Froggy on the lily pond
Get green material or green paper and cut it into the shape of lily pond leaves.
These are then placed on the floor, preferably in a room that's carpeted so that they will not move.
They may be held down with scotch tape.
The guests are divided into two teams and they start from either end of the room.
Each member of the team in turn has to jump on all the lily leaves.
If they fall off and into the water they start again.
Fun arises when members of both teams end up on the same leaf.
The winning team is the one which has all its frogs lined up at the other end of the room.
GAMES WITH BALLOONS
62 Heading
Stretch a length of string across the room about head high for the children.
Divide them into two teams and the game is for them to head the balloon over the string and hope the opposing team do not succeed in returning it.
This is a good game for teaching budding soccer players some of the finer points of how to head a ball without them being frightened of hurting themselves.
For younger children, play the same game but this time they can hit the ball with their hands to keep it in the air.
63 Balloon mime
This is an interesting game that I discovered in the United States.
For each child at the party, you write out the name of a nursery rhyme character, a book, or song they would know.
You then place it in the neck of a balloon and blow it up and tie it with the piece of paper inside.
When the children arrive you give them each a balloon and make up a convenient number of teams.
On the start of the game the first child from each team pops their balloon by jumping on it.
(Help can be given to anyone in trouble).
The piece of paper will then drift to the floor.
The child picks it up and mimes the phrase on the paper.
The team members try and guess the book or other item.
As soon as they succeed the next person in the team bursts her balloon and the game continues until everyone has finished.
With a small number of children it is probably best to make this a non-competitive game with everyone taking their turn one after another.
64 Balloon race
You need two pieces of string and you tie a balloon loosely onto each with a loop.
These can then be moved from one end of the string to the other.
The game then develops into a relay race, with the members of each team having to head the balloon to a marker at one end and then back so that the next person can take over.
65 Looney balloon
This is a game which can be played in two ways depending whether you have younger or older children.
Choose two teams and give each one a balloon.
Set an obstacle, such as a chair, a distance away from the teams.
Each person now hits the balloon up and around the chair and back to the next person.
To make it a little more difficult it is a good idea to make the children use their alternative hand.
Right handed children have to use their left hand and vice versa.
When the first person returns, the second takes over and the game continues until each person has had a turn.
The first team to finish may be judged the winner.
You may have a rule that if the balloon falls on the floor the person must start again.
For older children this game can be played where they head the balloon around the obstacle.
66 Balloon football
Two teams sit in lines facing each other about four feet apart and are not allowed to get off their chairs.
They are given several balloons and the object is to try and hit them over the heads of the team opposite and onto the floor.
This game can either be played with or without a goalkeeper.
If there are goalkeepers, they stand behind the row of chairs and try and stop the balloons from hitting the floor.
If the game is to be played without goalkeepers, adults are needed to retrieve the balloons.
67 Blow the balloon
Divide the party into two or more teams, depending on available space.
Each team lines up behind tape placed on the floor.
The first person in each team is given a balloon and has to blow it down the room over tape placed at the other end without touching it.
The first players then have to blow the balloons back for the second person to take over.
The winning team is the first to have their first player back at the front of the line.
If you prefer you could have the balloons blown through straws.
GAMES IN SWIMMING POOLS
68 What's the time Mr Shark
My children love to play this game which is simply the water variant of ‘What's the Time Mr Wolf’.
One person sets off across the pool facing away from the children and says ‘What's the time Mr Shark’?
The shark turns round and the reply comes back ‘It's one o'clock.’
This continues with the ‘shark’ saying different times until it says ‘dinner time’.
The shark then chases all the children and has to try and touch them before they reach the safety of the side of the pool.
There is a version of this where the children have to move forward the same number of paces as the time called out by the shark.
69 Stuck In the mud
One person is ‘it’— possibly the birthday girl — and swims around until she touches one of the other children.
They then have to stand still in the water with their arms out and their legs apart until one of the others playing frees them.
There are two versions of the game.
In the easier version for younger children, they are freed by touching their outstretched arms.
In the more difficult game, they are freed by someone swimming under their legs.
The game continues with children being caught and freed until all are captured or are tired.
70 Crocodiles
This is a game I invented to allow me to get some exercise and amuse my children at the same time.
Everyone stands at one end of the pool, and when it is time to start I swim to the end of the pool and come back.
The children all swim lesser distances and I have to catch their toes before they reach the safety of the end or the side of the pool.
71 Diving for treasure
Take some interesting, and safe, items to the pool and drop them in.
The children then dive for them and see how many items of treasure they can catch.
I prefer to let the game be fun, with little concern for competition, but sometimes children like to see who takes the shortest number of dives to pick up all the treasure.
BALL GAMES
72 Catch the ball
I developed this version of ‘catch’ in order to play a game where no one was eliminated but  where there was some interest.
The children stand around the leader in a semi-circle and are numbered off until the last two become Jack and then King or Queen.
The ball is thrown to the number one and then to two and so on.
Those who drop the ball return to number one and those below that number move up one place.
If the King or Queen is out then everyone moves up.
73 Bench ball
This game is a variant of netball.
There are two benches, one at each end of the party area.
There are two teams and each one chooses a good catcher who will then stand on one of the benches.
The rest of the team try to throw the ball to their catcher and if they succeed they get a point.
The players are not allowed to run with the ball.
74 Queenie
This is a street game which I find is popular at children's parties.
The chosen person stands with her back to the rest and throws the ball over her head without looking to see where it lands.
The other children all try to catch it and, when one of them does, they hide it behind their back.
The children all then shout out ‘Q U E E N I E spells queenie’.
Queenie then turns round and has to try and identify who is hiding the ball.
To help her, she is allowed to ask three people to turn round, which they do as far as possible without revealing whether or not they have the ball.
‘Queenie’ then guesses who has the ball and, if she is right, she has another turn.
If she is wrong the person who has the ball becomes queenie, and so on.
Make sure that the smaller children get a turn and, if one person is continually doing the catching, they can then pass it to one of the younger ones.
75 Kickit cricket
This game is sometimes called ‘Non-stop cricket’.
Place a set of wickets about ten feet from a second position from where a person is going to bowl a ball.
When the person throws the ball, the batter hits it as far as possible and then sets off to run round the obstacle placed at right angles.
The fielders try to retrieve the ball quickly and return it to the bowler.
If they are really fast, the bowler may have a chance to hit the wicket before the batter returns.
The game continues at great speed.
It can also be played as football cricket where the ball is kicked instead of being hit with the bat.
If there are a lot of children playing, it is a good idea to divide into two teams.
The game can then be really non-stop and, when one person is out, the next must rush to defend the wicket before the bowler pitches the ball again.
76 Tunnel ball
Divide the children into two equal teams and stand them in a line.
To get the distances correct, have them place their hands on the shoulders of the person in front of them.
When the game begins they all open their legs and the person at the front passes a ball under all the legs to the back.
The back person picks up the ball and runs to the front.
This process continues until the first person arrives back in the front.
This game can be repeated to make it the best of five.
If one team is losing it might be useful to give a few tips as to how to speed up.
In my youth (many years ago) I worked as a redcoat at Butlin's in Bognor Regis and used to be House Captain of York where we trained teams of holidaymakers to go as fast as possible.
The tendency is for everyone in the team to touch the ball as it goes through and to shuffle back each time someone has completed their turn.
One thing we discovered was that it is much faster for the team to close up as soon as the game starts and just hold that position as close to the next person as possible.
The ball cannot then escape and bounce all around the room.
Also it is normally possible for the ball to be passed straight to the back without anyone touching it on its way.
The last person just peels off each time the ball comes through.
77 Throwing the ball
The players sit in a circle, with one child in the middle.
A ball is thrown from player to player and the person in the middle must try to intercept it.
The person whose ball was intercepted takes the place in the middle.
MEMORY GAMES
78 Remember the story
Read a story out, choose five children to go out of the room.
One by one they return and try to remember the story and relate it to the audience.
79 Kim's game
Bring a tray into the room with about twenty items on it.
The children are given a period of time, possibly sixty seconds, to look at the items.
They then  have to write down as many as they can.
The person who guesses the most is the winner.
80 What has gone?
This is a variant of the previous game and is more suitable for younger children.
This time the tray is brought into the room and everyone looks at it.
Then one item is removed and the children have to guess which one it was.
OUTDOOR GAMES
81 Wheelbarrow race
Line up the children with one holding up the legs of the other.
The ‘wheels’ then have to walk on their hands to the finish.
This is much easier if the person carrying the legs moves up close and supports the front person under his stomach.
82 Scavenger man
Before the children arrive, hide various items around the room and, if it's a nice day, around the garden.
Place them behind curtains, under a mat, in a drawer, under plants and even stuck to windows or doors.
Then make a list of all the items and photocopy it so you can give one to each guest.
The children then have to find the hiding places and write them down.
No item should be removed and each person should keep his or her findings secret.
The sort of items you can hide are: penny, blue pen, toothbrush, comb, ball or shoe.
The person who finds the most items in ten minutes is judged to be the winner.
Alternative
Another way of playing this game is to send children out into a local park with a list of items that are  likely to be laying around naturally.
They then try to find as many as possible in the period of the game.
Some things to look for are blade of grass, stone, buttercup or daisy, twig, used match, and other items that can be found in the area.
83 Stuck in the mud
One person is ‘it’ and tries to touch the other players.
Anyone touched has to stand still with legs and arms open.
As soon as anyone crawls under their legs, they are freed.
84 Three-legged race
Divide the party players into pairs of roughly equal sizes and tie the right leg of one to the left leg of the other.
They then race to the finish.
The most efficient way to do this is to bind the legs tightly, so it is more fun to leave them relatively loose.
85 Treasure hunt
This is a good game to play if you are able to go outside.
Hide some small presents, enough for each of the children, in a spot either in the garden or nearby.
Then write out a list of clues that will eventually lead the children to the treasure.
The clues can be written in rhyme e.g. ‘look as well as you are able, the first clue is by the kitchen table, ‘You've found a clue, if you want one more take a look by the kitchen door.’
'Now I'll tell you what to do, look in the toe of an old black shoe.’
Don't you  know its getting late, look for a clue by the garden gate.’
'Go and stand on an upstairs mat and look under a cricket bat', ‘Look in a place where it is cold and you will find your pot of gold.’
Children love this game.
The crucial thing to make it last a reasonable amount of time is to use the length of your premises to the best advantage and have them going to one end and then back, otherwise they may finish surprisingly quickly.
It is particularly useful if you have access to a park to place the clues in.
86 Obstacle course
There are two ways of doing this.
One is to give all the children obstacles such as sacks, boxes, old tyres, ladders and ropes and give them the opportunity to make up their own course.
The other way is for the adults to make up a course.
Letting the children do it under mild supervision for safety reasons is probably the better idea.
There can then be a race or, better, a ‘follow my leader’ type programme.
NON-COMPETITIVE GAMES
87 The spider's web
This game is a good one to start a party.
When the children arrive give them the end of a piece of coloured wool.
They then have to try and unravel it and, in so doing, will find that it takes them in all sorts of different places until at the end they find a small present.
88 Chinese whispers
Give the children a simple message and ask them to pass it along and see what it becomes at the end.
The old joke is that in the army they once had the message ‘Send reinforcements we're going to advance’ but it became ‘Send three and fourpence we're going to a dance.’
89 Tug of peace
The idea of this is for all the people to pull on the rope as hard as possible.
However, instead of pulling the other team over a mark, the idea is for one or two to change sides to help the losing team and create a balance.
90 Magic mirror
Arrange the children in pairs so that each person has a partner.
The children then pretend that one of them is the reflection in the mirror.
The other, without making a sound, moves and does various activities, such as washing his face or poking out his  tongue to see if he is ill.
The reflection tries to follow every move.
After a short while, the roles are reversed.
91 Spinning statues
The organizer spins a person round in a circle.
When the organizer stops, the person stops in whatever position she happens to be in.
She then becomes a statue and the other guests try to imagine what she could be doing.
If you want, you can specify that the pose should be frightening, funny, difficult or amazing.
The game continues until everyone has had a turn.
COMPETITIONS
92 Newspaper and fish
Ask your child to draw about five fishes on paper and cut them out.
Each of those in the competition is given a rolled newspaper.
The children are not allowed to touch the fish with the paper and try to move it along by hitting it on the floor to create a draught.
The winners of the heats can be brought back for the final.
93 Nursery rhyme mime
Choose a subject such as nursery rhymes, books, films, or whatever subject your children are interested in.
Then write out a list.
So for children's fables you might have:
Red Riding Hood
The Three Bears
Hansel and Gretel
Oliver Twist
Boy who cried Wolf
Black Beauty
Billy Goats Gruff
Wolf who blew the house down
Now divide the children into two sections and they choose a person to start.
The two leaders come and you show them both the first item on the list.
They then mime it to the group until someone guesses the right answer, and then the next person comes up until one team reaches the end of the list.
Action Songs
I like to have a few action songs in a party, either as part of a show or as an alternative to games.
I have divided these up into two groups — for younger and older children.
ACTION SONGS FOR YOUNGER CHILDREN
1.
'Little Bunnies' is a very popular song and it helps if one or two adults lie down with the children.
The actions speak for themselves.
See the little bunnies sleeping till it's nearly noon
Shall we wake them with a happy tune
They're so still
Are they ill
Up little bunnies up up up
Hop little bunnies hop hop hop
Stop little bunnies stop stop stop
2.
If you're happy and you know it clap your hands
(clap clap)
If you're happy and you know it clap your hands
(clap clap)
If you're happy and you know it and you really want to
show it
If you're happy and you know it clap your hands
(clap clap)
Other verses I use are ‘stamp your feet’, ‘scratch your ear’, ‘shout hooray’ and finally ‘do all four’.
For the latter, I usually talk people through the fact that after saying it we will clap our hands, stamp our feet, scratch our ears and finally shout hooray.
Other people use different items to do and you can also let the children think of things to shout.
3.
Head shoulders knees and toes, knees and toes
Head shoulders knees and toes, knees and toes
Eyes and ears and mouth and nose
Head shoulders knees and toes
Knees and toes
This is sung to the old folk song of ‘Tavern in the Town’.
For the second verse you stop singing ‘head’ and hum instead.
However, you still touch your head.
In the next verse you hum instead of singing ‘shoulders’ until in the fourth verse you are humming all the way to the last two lines.
I then sing everything again and finish by singing everything really fast, and asking everyone who had won.
4.
The wheels on the bus go round and round (move
hands in a circle)
Round and round, round and round
The wheels on the bus go round and round
All day long
Other verses are:
The babies on the bus go ‘Wah wah wah’,
The wipers on the bus go swish swish swish (rotate
forearms back and forth)
The conductor on the bus gives out tickets (pretend to
issue tickets)
The horn on the bus goes beep, beep, beep (press
horn while beeping)
The people on the bus go up and down (bob up and
down)
5.
I learned the next song from my four-year-old son Russell whose teacher had adapted it from an older song to help with subtraction.
On the farmer's apple tree
Five red apples I can see
Four for you and one for me
Eat one apple from the tree
this goes down each time until finally
On the farmer's apple tree
One red apple I can see
None for you and one for me
Eat that apple from the tree
6.
Two other counting songs are:
One little finger one little finger one little finger tap tap
tap (tap fingers together)
Point to the ceiling point to the floor and put it in your
lap
The song then builds up to‘five little fingers’.
Each time the noise from the ‘tap tap’ obviously increases until it is more a ‘clap clap’.
Five fat sausages frying in the pan, sizzle sizzle sizzle
and one went bang
(Actions are to hold up five fingers until at ‘sizzle’ the fingers begin waving.
The actions for ‘one went bang’ are to point one finger and then clap hands once.
The song reduces until only one sausage is left and ‘it went bang’.)
7.
Here we go round the mulberry bush
Mulberry bush, mulberry bush
Here we go round the mulberry bush
On a cold and frosty morning
This is the way we jump out of bed
jump out of bed
jump out of bed
This is the way we jump out of bed
On a cold and frosty morning
Other verses are: This is the way we dress ourselves, clean our teeth and brush our hair.
8.
First you clap your hands I learned this song in my first year as a Butlin's redcoat and slightly changed the words.
It is a nonsense song which asks responses from the audience.
First you clap your hands
Then you stamp your feet
Sing hey diddle diddle ‘Hey diddle diddle’
Right in the middle ‘Right in the middle’
Then you shout tweet tweet ‘tweet tweet’
Then you shout hello ‘hello’
With a nod nod of your head
Sing hail and hearty, let's have a party
Just like uncle Fred
For the last two lines I usually get everyone to clap and at the end to raise their hands and shout ‘Oi’
ACTION SONGS FOR OLDER CHILDREN
9.
The Hokey Cokey is popular.
The main problem is with children diving on the floor which can lead to someone getting hurt.
It is therefore useful to get a few adults to help calm down the too lively children.
10.
The damper song This comes from the time when old fires had dampers attached to control the fire.
Everyone puts one fist in the air and sings
You push the damper in and you pull the damper out
And the smoke goes up the chimney just the same
You push the damper in and you pull the damper out
And the smoke goes up the chimney just the same.
We were only playing leapfrog
We were only playing leapfrog
We were only playing leapfrog
And the smoke goes up the chimney just the same
If there is sufficient space it is possible to choose some people to play leapfrog during the chorus.
I unashamedly admit that I sometimes use this song as a form of social control.
I have found it particularly useful if adults are talking and disrupting the show.
I then say ‘If anyone does not join in I will get them out to help’.
This usually produces great merriment and after I have three adults in a line with me, most of the conversations have ended and people are helping out.
After singing through the song once or twice I then say.
‘I am in a crazy mood today so let's all do the verse without the words’.
So if you are lucky you have a person who was not at all interested in what was happening out in front of the group of children miming and doing the actions to a song they may well not have known before.
11.
One finger, one thumb, keep moving This song builds up with the appropriate actions so the second verse is: ‘One finger one thumb one arm keep moving.
One finger one thumb one arm keep moving, one finger one thumb one arm keep moving.
We'll all be merry and bright.’
I usually make the last verse.
‘One finger one thumb one arm one leg, one nod of the head jump up sit down keep moving.
(Sing this three times) We'll all be merry and bright.’
However, it is possible to think of other things to add in such as‘one shake of the elbow’ but it is a matter of choice.
12.
Climb up sunshine mountain I first learned this song about three years ago when I was doing a show for some of London's police at  Faringdon's restaurant in London.
It is an expanding song in that at the end of each round all the singers point to others who then join in and sing.
At Faringdon's, the singers stood on chairs but I do not usually do this if I sing the song with children.
The words are:
Climb climb up sunshine mountain where the wild
winds blow (participants do a marching on the spot
movement until the end of the line when they raise
their hands to their cheeks and say ‘beep, beep’.)
Climb climb up sunshine mountain faces all aglow
(marching on the spot until the end of the line when
participants raise their hands to their cheeks)
Turn turn your back on sorrow (turn round)
Hold your hands up high
Climb climb up sunshine mountains — you and I. (It is
at the end of this line that the pointing occurs.)
13.
My bonny lies over the ocean The words are well known but I worked out some actions I use as follows:
My bonny lies over the ocean (Put arms together as if 
holding a baby then wave one hand for ocean)
My bonny lies over the sea (Point to self, do baby bit,
put both arms out in front in the air and wave fingers)
Oh bring back my bonny to me (on word ‘back’, bring
arms to body; on word ‘my’, point to self and do baby
bit and on word ‘to’, put one finger up on each hand
and point to self)
You continue in this manner for the chorus.
These songs are available on ‘Colin the Clown's Party Tape’, available from  price £4.95.
14.
Add a name songs This was an idea I had to personalize songs by adding in a child's name.
Here are three I wrote with the children.
Clap your hands everybody sing
Carla's sitting on a swing
She is looking rather neat
Swings her legs and points her feet
Here is another my children liked.
It actually has twelve verses but here I have shortened it.
Six of William's friends going down a slide
Up and down up and down having a very good ride
One was frightened by a bee escaping from a hive
He ran to tell his father so there were only five
Five of William's friends playing with a cat
It was having lots of fun with Aunty's woollen hat
It came a-looking and banged upon the door
One of the girls ran off so there were only four
Four of William's friends playing a game of cricket
With a bright tennis ball and a bucket for the wicket
One of the boys tripped over and crashed into a tree
He had to put on some plaster so there were only three
Three of William's friends had a picnic by a lake
They bought flasks of tea and sandwiches and cake
Then they all went off for a visit to the zoo
One didn't like the lions so there were only two
Two of William's friends with a ping pong bat
Playing hit the ball and catch it in the hat
Two of William's friends having lots of fun
One took the hat and went home, so there was only one
One of William's friends skated with him on a path
They crashed into each other and then began to laugh
It was getting late so then the friend went home
Leaving poor old William skating on his own
William went inside to talk to his Mum
He was very tired but had had lots of fun
He said he needed rest but it was very plain
He'd jump up in the morning to see his friends again
15.
Here is one I used with a see saw
The see saw it goes up and down
The see saw doesn't go round and round
Up and down for Russell and me
We'll come back after tea
16.
Rock my soul This is a song which is popular in both Britain and the United States.
The words are:
Rock my soul in the bosom of Abraham,
Rock my soul  in the bosom of Abraham
Rock my soul in the bosom of Abraham
Hey rock my soul
So high you can't get over it
So low you can't get under it
So wide you can't get round it
You've got to go through the door
This is a good song because it not only has actions but can also be sung by two groups at the same time.
I usually teach the whole song at first.
To the first verse everyone claps in time with the music.
For the second verse at ‘so high’ the hands are clasped together and raised above the head, on ‘so low’they are lowered to knee level and on ‘so wide’they are stretched out sideways as far as possible.
For the last line the motions are made to open a door.
Once the whole company have learned the words they are divided into two groups with one side of the room singing and doing the actions to the first verse and the other doing the same for the second.
After one or two attempts they can change over until all join together for a big finish.
17.
I'm a little teapot 
I'm a little teapot short and stout
Here's my handle (put right hand on hip)
And here's my spout (Put left hand out as if spout)
When the tea is ready hear me shout
Tip me up and pour me out (bend at the waist in a tipping motion)
18.
Alouette This is a really good song for older children who know a little French.
It is a build-up song and each person sings a verse with everybody joining in the relevant parts.
When Dr Denis Calandra, a US based drama teacher, led this song he persuaded every one to sing their part in a different style which the rest would follow.
Sometimes all would sing with a French accent, sometimes opera style, sometimes with a falsetto voice and so on.
The first verse is  
The song builds up with each person adding a verse until ending with
POPULAR SONGS
19.
Ain't Going to Grieve my Lord This is a very popular song amongst British Girl Guides (Scouts).
It is very easy to make up new words in order to personalise the song.
It usually opens with the chorus
I aina goin a grieve my Lord, I aina goin a grieve My
Lord
I aina goin a grieve my Lord no more
The chorus is taken by people one at a time in a round
with everybody joining in:


Guide one Oh you'll never get to heaven
Chorus Oh you'll never get to heaven
Guide one In an old Ford car
Chorus In an old Ford car
Guide one Cos an old Ford car
Chorus Cos an old Ford car
Guide one Won't get that far
Chorus Won't get that far
All Oh you'll never get to heaven in an old Ford Car,
cos an old Ford Car won't get that far.
You then sing the chorus before the next person leads
a verse
Examples of other verses are
You'll never get to heaven with a fat girl guide
Cos the pearly gates just ain't that wide
Oh you'll never get to heaven on…'s bike
Cos you'll get half way and you'll have to hike
You'll never get to heaven if you're newly wed
For the Lord don't have no double bed
You'll never get to heaven with stoker Joe
For he is booked for down below
There are three things you must not do
You must not smoke nor drink nor chew
If you get there before I do
Just bore a hole and pull me through
Oh you'll never get to heaven on roller skates
Cos you'll roll right past those pearly gates
20.
John Brown 
John Brown's body lies a mouldering in the grave
John Brown's body lies a mouldering in the grave
But his soul goes marching on
21.
Old MacDonald had a farm 
Old MacDonald had a farm eei eei Oh
And on this farm he had some ducks eei eei Oh
With a quack quack here and a quack quack there
Here a quack, there a quack, everywhere a quack
quack
Old MacDonald had a farm eei eei Oh


Other verses go
On this farm he had a horse, eei eei Oh
With a neigh neigh here, a neigh neigh there
Here a neigh, there a neigh, everywhere a neigh neigh
Old MacDonald had a farm
Eei eei Oh
There are two main ways of singing the songs after the first verse.
One possibility is to build the song up by making the list of animal noises longer.
So after the ‘neigh neigh's’ you would then sing ‘quack quack’.
Other possible verses are a cow that moos, a dog that barks, a cat that miaows, sheep that baa, a cock that crows and a car that honks.
22.
Nellie the Elephant 
Nellie the elephant packed her trunk and said
goodbye to the circus
Off she went with a trumpety trump, trump trump
trump
The head of the herd was calling far far away
She said goodnight in the silvery light
On the road to Mandalay
Oh Nellie the elephant packed her trunk and said
goodbye to the circus
Off she went with a trumpety trump, trump, trump, trump
Amaze Your Child
In this chapter, I describe some of the tricks you can perform at a party to increase interest, particularly if you do not have an entertainer.
They usually entail a little preparation or practice but the surprise is even greater because of this.
1.
Glass of water This is a simple trick.
Place a glass of water or beer on your head and lay down flat on the floor and then stand up.
About one in three adults can do this the first time they try it.
The important thing is to steady yourself as much as possible and reach for the ground with one hand.
Then place your other hand down and sit.
The easiest way to lay down is to slide out your hands sideways until you are more or less flat.
Take care not to relax your concentration on the way up.
2.
Mind reading At one of my first-ever children shows, the father told me of this mind reading trick which we found worked well with the children.
I left the room while the father remained as an article was chosen.
After it had been selected, I re-entered and told the audience to think about the article in question.
My partner  then called out a number of articles and asked if they were the chosen one.
I said ‘NO’ to them all except the right one.
The secret we used was to make the correct article immediately follow after one with four legs or corners.
So the correct article would follow a table, chair, the dog or cat or other relevant object in the room such as piano stool.
So the conversation went something like ‘Is it the curtains, is it a book, is it the window, is it sandwiches, is it a table.
The answer to all these is ‘NO’.
He then said ‘Is it an apple?’, and the answer was ‘Yes’ as this followed table.
When, inevitably, we were asked to do it again, we altered it to make it the third article after the four-legged item and kept varying first and third.
This made our system very difficult to detect.
If they do guess, it does not matter too much.
When I was a child we used to play this slightly differently in that the key was ‘glass’.
The correct item was the one following either a photo frame, a vase or a window.
Another idea, suggested by Nic Picot, is that you say that you are going to predict under which of five cups the audience is going to leave a coin.
You leave the room and the people make their choice.
When you return you are able to detect under which cup the coin is placed.
The secret is that you have an accomplice who places the handle of the mug containing the coin in a predetermined position, such as with the handle at three o'clock.
3.
The M and M I didn't like This trick I obtained from Paul Daniels, and my sister the Amazing Avril uses it in her children's shows.
She puts six different coloured M and M's, or Smarties, in a line with the yellow one in third position.
She continues to say that there is one kind she does not like and that she is going to convey what it is by a process of thought transfer.
She then puts a wand to the head of a volunteer and says ‘Choose any number between one and six’.
The number the volunteer chooses indicates that it is the yellow one that she does not like.
A pack of Smarties is then opened and poured out when to everyone's surprise they are all yellow as ‘all the rest have been eaten.’
Secret The crucial part of this trick is to arrive at the yellow sweet whatever number is called.
This is done as follows: If the number ‘one’ is called she spells out the letters O N E to land on the yellow smartie.
The same happens with two but for three she counts out ‘1, 2, 3’.
For four and five she spells from the other end and for six she again spells the letters.
So, whatever number is called, the third position will be selected.
4.
The fastest mathematician Select one of your children and one other, and explain that you are going to show that you are one of the world's best mathematicians.
Not only can you find out the results of addition quickly after all the figures have been written down, you can also predict the results of adding together three rows of figures after only one has been written down.
Ask your child to set down a row of four figures.
It could be more, but that will do.
For the sake of this example, say she writes 1978 which is the year of my daughter's birth.
As soon as these figures are written down, you will know that the answer to the addition of the three rows of figures will be 11977.
So you write this on a piece of paper and give it to your daughter or son.
You then ask the second child to write down any figures for the second row and you immediately write the third row.
The children are then asked to look at the paper and will be amazed to discover that your prediction is correct.
Secret As soon as the first four figures — 1978 are written down, you obtain the final result by subtracting one from the right hand figure and adding it to the front.
So the eight becomes a seven and the result will be 11977.
Now, whatever is written by the second child you write under it the figure which will make the sum of both up to nine.
So if the second child writes 1234 you write 8765 and you can see that it works:
SIMPLE MAGIC TRICKS
5.
Two little birds.
This is one of the oldest tricks for children and it is very effective, yet I am surprised at the number of parents who do not know it.
To start, place a piece of tissue, plasticine or blue tack on a finger of both hands.
I usually put one piece on the index finger of the left hand and the other piece on the second finger of the right hand.
Then you recite a little poem:
Two little birdies sitting on a wall
One named Peter and one named Paul
Fly away Peter Fly away Paul
Come back Peter come back Paul
As you say ‘fly away’ you lift your hands behind your ears and switch your fingers, so hiding the piece of paper.
So, with ‘fly away Peter’ you lift up your left hand and, as your fingers go out of sight behind your ears, you put away your index finger and bring out the second finger.
For the right hand the process is reversed.
You then bring your hands down and show that the birds have flown.
By alternating the process you can then bring them back to complete the song.
Children usually think you have somehow knocked off the birds on your ear, and are amazed when you are able to bring them back.
6.
Turn the card over .
Invite the children to choose a card from the pack and to remember it.
Then return their cards to the pack.
Tell the children that each one can turn over their card by magic.
Each is then invited to hit the top of the cards with the flat of their hand in order to turn their card over.
The cards are now flicked through and, sure enough, each of the cards has turned over, and they are given to the children to hold before being collected.
Secret When the children are looking at their cards tell them to take one last look.
As they do this, take a card from the top, deftly place it on the bottom and turn the pack over.
You now have the cards with all of them facing upwards except the top one.
The children place their cards in the pack face downwards.
Talk to the children again to distract them, and, with your  hands covering the cards, you turn them back the right way up.
All the children now hit the top of the pack to ‘turn their card over’.
When this is done, you simply look through the pack for each of them to find their card.
If you want to be more popular, be ready with a small prize for each child who has succeeded in doing
7.
The four beds .
This is a self-working trick if you do it just as described.
Select from the pack the four kings, queens, aces and jacks.
The story is that four kings were on a journey to their coronation when, on the way, they wanted to stay at a hotel.
The hotelier said ‘I have four beds so you can have one each.
However, if anyone else comes along I will have to put them in bed with you.’
The kings all went to bed and so you place the cards all face upwards and continue with the story.
After a little while, four jacks came along and they all wanted a bed for the night.
The hotelier told them, ‘I'm afraid I only have four beds and there are already four kings in them, however, if you don't mind you can get in the same bed.’
Well, the jacks thought i– would be a bit crowded but they all jumped into the beds.
After a further period four queens and then four aces came along and they got in the beds too.
So each bed had four of each.
At this point you say that in the night they all wanted to have a party so they got up.
Now turn over the cards so that their backs are showing and get some of the onlookers to cut the cards.
Then say that they all returned to bed, and deal out the cards into four piles face downwards,making sure that you keep the order of the piles the same .
You then say that when the hotelier went to wake up everyone for breakfast he had a big surprise, for in one bed was all the kings, in another was all the queens, in another all the aces and in the other all the jacks.
They all went on their way and the kings were crowned.
8.
How many matches?
I shall tell this trick in the way I saw our illustrator Ali Bongo perform it on television.
He showed a box of matches, shook them and asked a volunteer to guess how many were in the box.
On opening it was seen to be empty.
Then Ali ‘explained’ how the trick was performed.
He said the secret was to hide a second box.
of matches under the sleeve and showed one secured by an elastic band which clearly one expected to be the cause of the rattling noise.
Then, however, came the surprise, for he opened the second box and that, too was empty.
You might try the first part.
TRICKS FOR ALL
9.
Standing matchbox Place a matchbox on your hand and, by just opening your hand, it gradually rises until ending in an upright position.
The secret of this is to open the end of the matchbox and, when closing it, pinch a little skin in between the base and the outside.
By slowly moving your fingers downwards, the box will be made to stand up.
10.
Predict the card .
Give a child a piece of paper to hold and say that he is to be sure not to let anyone interfere with it.
Then place a nearly-full pack of cards out on a table or, if you are performing this for a number of children, on a board with the cards lightly attached to it with scotch tape.
Then say to the children ‘Would anyone like to point to a row across?’
Then to another ‘would you like to point to a row down?’
When they do, you remove cards from the table.
You then ask a series of other  questions such as do they prefer hearts or spades, red or black suits, or number or picture cards.
In the end all the cards are removed except for one.
You tell them that this is the card that they have freely chosen.
You did not have any influence at all over what they said.
However, when you ask the first child to look at the card written on the piece of paper, it is the correct one.
Secret The solution to this trick lies in the fact that, while the children can point to which lines they like or say which colour cards they like the best, you decide which cards to take away.
To prevent this being noticed, all you have to do is to be careful in your use of words.
Say such things as ‘Point to a line’ 'tell me your favourite suit'.
Say, for example, that your chosen card was the king of diamonds.
You place this somewhere in the middle of the lines.
Now, when you say to the first person ‘point to a row across’ if they point to a row without a king you say ‘You pointed to this I will take it away’.
If they point to a row with the king in it you say ‘You pointed to this row so this is the one I'll keep.’
You then remove all the other rows.
A similar thing happens with the row down.
After a couple of goes, rearrange the cards a little.
After a while when most of the cards are removed you can say ‘Do you prefer red or black cards.
If they say ‘Red cards’ You say good so I will take the red cards away.’
If they say black cards you say ‘Good, so I will keep them and take the red cards away’.
For extra effect you can say ‘Are you sure you would not like to change your mind’ or ‘I want you to be sure that you can point to whichever line you like.’
This is a trick which I have found really amazes children and indeed will work on adults too.
It is crucial not to repeat it for the surprise will be gone and all the children will be looking for is the method.
No, you quickly pass on to another trick.
11.
Three circles of paper .
Prepare three large rings of paper.
Then get two children and show them the way to cut the rings down the middle.
You finish cutting your ring and find, as would be expected, that you  have two separate half-width rings.
The second child, however, finds that she is left with one large ring and the third finds to everyone's surprise, he has two linking rings.
The secret of this trick is in the preparation of the rings by cutting and resticking them.
The first is prepared without any twists.
The second has one twist placed in it and the third has two twists in it.
12.
Right-way-up-cups .
Place three cups on a table, one upwards and two downwards, and say to everyone the game is to turn over two cups at once so that cups the right way up are turned upside down and vice versa.
The object is to have all three cups facing upwards after three turns.
You accomplish this and set up the cups again.
However, try as they might no one else can do it.
You show it again and again.
Secret You set up the cups as in the diagram: and turn A and B over to get the second position.
You then turn over 2 A and C to get the third position and 3 then turn over A and B to end the right 4 way up.
Now you reset the glasses and invite others to accomplish your feat.
They will not be able to because, when you restart, you do not place one cup face upwards.
Instead this time you place two cups face upwards and one face downwards.
This looks easier in that you are nearer the solution but in fact it makes the task impossible.
Surprisingly, people become so involved in the task that they rarely notice that you are setting up in a different way.
13.
The magic T .
I learned this trick and ‘The nine points’ from psychologists.
Show your child or a small group of children a ‘T’ set out as shown.
Now break it up as it is cut along the dotted lines and the object is to see how long it takes for it to be reassembled.
It is surprising how difficult it is.
14.
Disappearing coin .
For this trick all you need is a small coin such as a fifty-pence piece or a half dollar.
Place your left hand on the side of your neck and place the coin in your right hand.
Then vigorously rub the right hand into your left elbow saying that you are going to rub the coin away.
After a few rubs, you then take the hand away, look at it and say ‘Has it gone yet?’
The child will say ‘No’.
So you try again.
After the second time the coin is still there.
However, on the third occasion the coin is seen to have disappeared.
Secret There are two ways of doing this trick.
One is that, on the second occasion, you drop the coin on the floor.
You then pick it up with your left hand and pretend to put it into your right.
However, you secretly retain it and, when your hand goes up to your neck, you hide the coin in your collar.
The method I prefer, however, is just to make a play of looking at the coin after each few rubs on the elbow.
You toss the coin from hand to hand to show it is not gone.
It is then a relatively simply matter to pretend to put the coin in the right hand but secretly retain it to put in the collar.
You then make the coin return by saying to the child that you think it is coming back in her ear.
You rub your right hand on your left elbow and then move the hand to her ear to see if the coin has come back yet.
It does not come for a couple of times.
On the third occasion you feel for it with both hands momentarily.
Out of sight of the child you pass the coin from the left to right hand and continue rubbing with the right hand  only saying ‘I think I can feel it coming’ until eventually you say: ‘There it is, it's come back!’
15.
The jumping rubber band .
Place a rubber band over your first and second fingers and hold your right hand facing downwards.
Then flick the elastic band a couple of times.
As you do it the third time, bend your fingers down and place them all under the band.
As you straighten your hand the band will jump from the first two fingers on to the third and fourth ones.
This is a surprising effect, as you will find out when you try it.
16.
What's the number?
Assemble a collection of long objects (or any objects will do) in a pile and say they represent a number, e.g. four.
Then change the arrangement of the pile and ask what is the new number.
People then guess and you say the new number is, for example, ‘five’.
This is repeated with people trying to guess the method.
The magician who taught me this commented ‘I saw this done with chopsticks and patter about a Chinese system of numerals.
It was very entertaining; people keep trying to fathom the system’.
The secret is that when you point to the pile you rest a hand on the table with the appropriate number of fingers extended.
The hand does not have to be on the table; it could, for example, be resting on your chin.
17.
The nine points .
The object of this is to draw four straight lines through nine points without taking your pen off the paper.
This is impossible to do by staying within the lines, although it is easy to get close to success.
The solution is as follows:
18.
Mysterious hand .
This is a little trick with which my daughter Carla amazed both my elder son and myself the first time I saw it.
The effect was for her to wave both her arms out in front of her holding her hands together, then surprisingly a seeming third hand was under her jumper and was moving up and down.
It then appeared out of the top.
The secret was that she had slipped one of her arms out of her jumper.
She placed the hand of her other arm inside the empty jumper sleeve and waved her hand up and down creating the illusion that both her arms were inside the sleeves as normal.
Once this appearance had been established, the introduction of the other arm is very surprising.
19.
Magic Month .
Below is the calendar for June 1988.
Tell your audience of children (or adults) that you are going to do an act combining mind reading with great mathematical ability.
You are blindfolded and you ask your audience to choose a day from each of the five weeks in the month on the calendar.
Say, for example, they choose Friday, Saturday, Sunday, Monday and Tuesday for successive weeks and ringed them on the calendar.
You then say immediately that the total of the days added are 74.
They add them up and find that you are correct.
Secret To do this trick you need to choose a month with five Wednesdays in it.
First, add together the dates for all the Wednesdays.
This comes to 75.
Now  when your audience tells you a day you add one for a Thursday, two for a Friday, and three for a Saturday.
So after the first two calls you are up to eighty.
For Sunday you subtract three, Monday you subtract two and Tuesday you subtract one.
Anyone calling a Wednesday will mean you neither add nor subtract.
In this case you subtract a total of six from the eighty to give you the correct total of 74.
20.
Escape from the ropes .
This is a relatively old mystifier.
The diagram represents two people each with a loop of rope tied round their wrists and linked together.
It seems that it is impossible to free these people without untying the ropes.
However, once you have the hang of it, you will find that you are able to free yourself in a matter of seconds and still leave the ropes tied round your own and an accomplice's wrists.
The ropes should be around three to four feet long and first get your helper to tie it around your wrists.
Then tie the rope around her wrists.
In order to free yourselves, with the fingers of the right hand grasp the loop of the rope tied to your friends' wrists.
Bring this loop up to your left wrist and tuck it under the rope tied to that wrist at the point marked B. Once you have pushed a little through, grasp it and place it over your left hand and you will be free once more.
In order to disguise what you are doing from your spectators it is best if you stand with your left side to the audience as the crucial move occurs on the inside of the left hand.
While you are doing this trick it's a good idea to invent a little patter.
For instance, two people had become attached to each other and wanted a little space.
They had found it difficult to part but, as things were getting desperate, they turned to magic and said ‘Abracadabra, one, two, three, say the magic words and now we're free’.
At this point you show that you have completed the trick.
This is a good trick for audience participation.
What you can do is make some exaggerated moves such as lying on the floor, climbing through each other 's arms or whatever.
When your wrists are momentarily out of sight you can easily slip off the ropes in the manner described.
Then ask people to try to copy  what you did.
This can produce a great deal of hilarity as people get in a tangle together.
21.
Mind reading with hands on head You as the mind reader leave the room and the other people choose a number between one and ten.
You come back and place your hands on various people's foreheads until eventually you say the right number.
The solution is that you have a confederate who, when you put your hands on her head, clenches her teeth a number of times.
So if you feel six pulses or vibrations it indicates the chosen number is six.
This is a very good trick, because it is almost impossible to discover the method.
22.
Find the cards .
This is an old magic trick which entails some preparation.
Unlike the other tricks it cannot be picked up quickly.
However, it is one that, if you take the trouble to learn properly, will stand you in good stead.
Here is what you must memorise: These words are Latin and they form the basis of the secret to this trick.
They consist of twenty letters, two M's, two U's, two T's, two S's, two N's, two O's, two E's, two C's, two I's, two D's.
So there are ten pairs of letters.
What you must now do is commit the words to memory and take twenty cards from the pack.
Deal them face upwards on the table in groups of two but so that each card can be clearly seen.
Then ask one or two people to think of any cards, to remember them, but not tell you which two they are.
When they have chosen the cards you then say: ‘You have chosen the cards and I cannot possibly know which two they are.
However, I am going to tell you the names of the cards you are now thinking about.
Then say that you are  going to pick up the cards in any order, which you do keeping the pairs together.
Then pretend to lay the cards randomly back down on the table.
However, when you lay them down the first card is laid on the M of mutus and the second on the m of nomen.
The third card is placed on the u of mutus and the fourth card is placed on the second u in mutus.
The fifth card is placed on the t of mutus and the sixth on the t  of dedit.
The seventh card is put on the s of mutus and the eighth on the s of cocis.
This process continues until all the cards are laid out.
Ask your volunteers to tell you in which two lines their cards appear.
If one says that they are both in the second row you will know they are on the two n's of nomen.
If the second person says that his cards are in the first and last row you know that they are at the t in mutus and the t in dedit.
And so on.
23.
Colin the Clown's pairs game .
Set down ten pairs of cards, pick them up in a pack and give them to onlookers to cut a few times.
Then take back the cards and set them out in an apparently random fashion and challenge a person to play you at pairs.
The rules of the game are that each person is allowed to turn over two cards and, if they are the same, to withdraw them and place them by their side.
Every time they choose the correct pair they are allowed another turn.
This game is popular with children and is a test of memory when played straight.
However, on this occasion you are not quite playing straight.
Your opponent is allowed the first turn, and will almost always begin by picking up two different cards, say an ace and a six.
It is then your turn.
The first card you turn over is the matching ace, so it seems that you have had the first strike of luck for you can clearly get the first pair.
The second card you turn over is the matching six and you have two pairs.
Then you proceed to get all the other pairs to win the game ten pairs to none.
Once in nineteen times your opponent will get the first pair correct, so you will only win nine to one, but the main point is that, as soon as you begin your turn, you play faultlessly.
Secret This trick is a development of ‘Find the cards’[p.87].
When the children have stopped cutting the cards, quickly glance at the top and bottom ones to  make sure that they are different.
If they are the same say something like ‘I think this is going to be a fun game’ and at the same time smoothly slide a card from the top to the bottom.
I have never had any trouble doing this unobserved.
Then place the cards face down in the position for ‘Find the cards’ and immediately know where to find each of the matching pairs.
It is a good touch to have the first two cards the ones your ‘opponent’ turned over.
24.
Gambler's card This is a trick which completely baffles people.
Give the cards to someone to shuffle and then ask another to cut the cards.
Then split the cards face down into three different piles and take a card from the middle pile and place it on one side of the outside piles.
Then take a second card from the middle pile and place it on the other outside pile.
This leaves the third pile.
Then say to the audience ‘What I would like you to do as soon as I leave the room is to turn over the card on the top of this pile and look at it.’
After they have done this, tell them to return all the cards to the pack and to shuffle them together so that you cannot possibly know where they were.
After this is done, start to look through the pack for the chosen card.
You pass the chosen card and then finger another as if you feel it is going to be the right one and then say ‘How much do you bet me that the next card I turn over is the chosen one?’
You will get some interesting gambles as people think you have missed the selected card.
Then ignore the card you are fingering, leaf back through the pack and turn over the correct card.
Secret After the person has shuffled the cards, begin to explain what you are going to do.
As you do this, silently count three cards from the top of the pack, place them together and slightly indent them so you can see the comer of the third card just enough to know its value.
Then take two cuts of the cards off the bottom of the pack and place them at each end before placing the rest in the middle.
After placing the top two cards on the other piles, the third card from the top will appear when you are out of the room.
25.
Magic spelling .
Tell your audience that you are going to spell out the names of a complete suit of cards and, each time you spell out a letter, you are  going to take the top card and place it on the bottom.
After you have spelt each word that very card will be on the top and you take it out and place it aside.
So you will spell A C E and the fourth card will be an ace and so on until you only have the king left in your hand.
Method This clearly depends on the order and the cards should be set up as follows: Once you have this order the trick is self-working.
26.
Walking through a postcard .
Ask the children if they think they can walk through a postcard.
They will usually think it impossible and you then show them the way to do it.
You fold the postcard in half, cut along the lines as in the first drawing.
Once this is done, the postcard will open out and you can cut down the centre as in the second diagram enabling you to walk through it.
27.
Win the match game Nim .
Set out four rows of matches.
In the first row there are seven, in the second there are five, in the third there are three and in the fourth there is one.
The rules of the game are that each person goes alternately and must take at least one match from one line.
You can take all in the line or as many as you like but you cannot take from more than one line.
You are the winner of the game if you leave your opponent with the last match.
A few simple rules will ensure that you win pretty consistently.
The first is that you leave your opponent with a structure of one in one line, two in the second line and three in the third.
Or you leave your opponent with equal numbers in a row.
You win if you leave your opponent
a
one, two and three or 
b
an even number or
c
Four lines with two sets of equal numbers
28.
Amaze your child with juggling .
One of the simplest juggling tricks to learn is plate spinning.
These can be obtained relatively cheaply from the Oddball Juggling Company,.
What you do is hold the end of the stick and keep the arm more or less still.
The wrist moves to get the plate spinning and when it is going fast enough you stop the stick and, because of the hollow in the plate, the stick goes to the middle After practice you can try tossing it in the air and catching it or passing it behind your back.
The most important thing to remember about juggling is that, if you throw the ball well, the catch will look after itself, except for those one in ten people who have great difficulty in holding on to the ball.
Assuming you are part of the majority I will explain below how to learn what the jugglers call ‘the cascade’, which is the most basic movement.
To learn to juggle, take one ball and practise tossing it from hand to hand in an easy arc.
The ball should be thrown from about waist high to the top of your head and the hands should make an inward scooping action for the throw.
This will result in the balls from either hand having a different trajectory so that they will not ‘kiss’ in the air.
Once you have one ball moving smoothly, you can try two.
You hold one ball in each hand.
As it reaches its peak throw the second ball underneath it towards your left hand.
You catch both balls and repeat until you have a very smooth action when you will be ready to insert the third ball.
Hold two balls in your right hand and one in your left.
Toss the first ball in your right hand towards your left one and as it peaks throw the ball in the left hand towards the right and catch the first ball in your left.
As the second ball peaks, throw the final ball from your right hand before catching the second ball in your right hand.
Once you can keep this up a few times, then you are juggling.
For those who would like to try more advanced moves you can try the book Juggling for All (David & Charles) written by Charlie Holland and myself.
Stunts for a Party
The stunts in this chapter are well-tried ones which can liven a party and produce surprises.
Most of them work equally well with adults.
FALSE OBSTACLES
Choose a number of the children to leave the room and tell them they are going to be in a competition.
Bring them in one at a time and show them a series of articles such as a pot, a plate, a flask and a small stool.
Tell them that the competition is to see who can go through the obstacles blindfold without touching them.
They have to go very steady and to the right of the first, to the left of the second and over the top of the last.
To help them through, the organizer is going to give instructions as to what to do.
As soon as the blindfold is applied, remove the obstacles and watch the children going over imaginary items.
SIGN IT WITH A DOT
This is a game for older children and adults.
Everyone sits quietly in the room and the leader draws an imaginary circle with a finger and says ‘Here I have the wonderful magic circle and I sign it with a dot.
If anyone has the inspiration will they kindly leave the room’.
As soon as the first person speaks, your confederate leaves the room and says ‘I have received the inspiration’.
The leader then touches someone and the confederate returns and touches the same person.
The game is for the players to find out the system that is used.
It is the first person to speak after the circle is signed with the dot.
Extroverted noisy people get selected more than the others, and this game can produce a great deal of fun as people struggle to eliminate all possible clues.
An alternative is for people to be selected by the person pointed to by the organizer's foot.
MARCHING BAND
People appreciate this if there is a great deal of noise.
Divide the children up into groups for a game and then tell them that you are going to form a marching band.
You choose a tune such as‘Yellow submarine’ or ‘I love to go a-wandering’and go round the different groups getting them to practise their parts.
One group for example mimes to playing the drums, another to the trumpet and a third to the piano.
You then get them all to play together and then march out into the garden, down the street or wherever with the band following behind.
It helps to detail one or two of the other adults to ensure you do not lose anyone on the way but this is a fun activity if the conditions are right and the weather reasonable.
THE COIN THAT STICKS
Tell a child, preferably anyone who is giving grief, that you will stick a twenty-pence piece on their head.
The object of the game is to see who can shake it off in the shortest time without using their hands, but they can move their head in any direction they wish.
Take the coin and wet it with water, and then press it against the victim's head for a short time ‘to get it to stick’.
After pressing for about twenty seconds you remove your hand and, as you do so, you remove the coin but take it upwards so it cannot be seen, look at the forehead as if the coin is still there and start everyone counting.
Although the coin is removed it will feel like it's still there and the victim will shake as hard as they can to the encouragement of the observers with such calls as ‘Shake it off’.
THE BIG NOISE
This is a stunt for older more self-confident children.
One child volunteers to leave the room where she is to touch an article agreed upon by the other players.
There should be complete silence except that the leader should say ‘No’ quietly to everything she touches until she touches the chosen object when everybody shouts ‘Yes’.
This, in the exceptional quiet, produces the great noise.
HUMAN DOMINOES
Arrange a number of children in a line behind you and say that you are going to play a game of ‘follow the leader’.
Then do various things, like putting your hands in the air, jumping up and down and going round in a circle, until eventually you go back in line.
Then get everyone to turn sidewards and say ‘now all squat down’.
Finish by saying ‘now all fall over’ and, as you do it, you lean in to the person next to you and everyone will fall over like a row of dominoes.
As everyone is close to the ground anyway  they will not hurt themselves, except possibly the last one who could fall on the floor.
So it is best to have a confederate in the final position who will be prepared.
THE BLACK FACE
Offer a challenge to someone to do the same as you.
Pick up two plates and say to the person ‘you must copy my exact gestures’ and all the time look you in the eyes.
You wave your hand about and they copy.
You pick up the plate, touch your nose and then you touch the bottom of the plate and then stroke your cheek and nose.
The fun comes from the fact that you have previously sooted the underside of their plate by holding it over a candle.
This means their face gets very black without them realising it.
With this trick you have to be sure you have chosen the right person and moment!
DO NOT SAY SIXTEEN
This is another of Nic Picot's tricks which he tried on me in the pub outside the Magic Circle.
I shall repeat it as he works it for adults and then suggest how it might be adapted for children.
The leader says put something of value down such as a five pound note and then matches it.
He then continues to say ‘This is a game to see if I can make you say ‘sixteen’ within sixty seconds'.
The leader then continues in a series along the lines what is two times ten, what is ten times three, what is ten times four, what is five times ten, what is six times ten?
When in response to the last question the reply is ‘sixty’ the leader grabs hold of the five pound note and says ‘There we are’.
In the ensuing melee the victim will say something along the lines ‘You.
said I was not to say sixteen not sixty’ and in so doing will have lost the game.
What happens to the five pound note is I suppose a matter of negotiation.
With children this can be played with an apple or a small cake as the prize for the winner.
TYING A KNOT IN A PIECE OF STRING WITHOUT LETTING GO OF THE ENDS
This is strictly speaking an impossibility, in that it is impossible to do and have what we recognise as a knot without at some point letting go of the rope.
However, one way of doing it is to first fold your arms as in the diagram.
Then, when they are unfolded, you will find you have a knot.
PULL THE MYSTERIOUS LOAD
You need a stage and a long rope.
You are seen to be pulling a large load across the stage.
You may have everybody shouting out ‘heave, heave’.
Everyone will be wondering what is the load you are carrying.
You keep shouting as you move offstage still pulling the load.
Then as the rope finally reaches towards the end the load is then seen by the audience and it is — You.
Hopefully the audience will dissolve into fits of laughter.
Clearly what you need are at least two helpers.
The first one will keep the rope taut as you move offstage and run round the back and take over from the second helper who has been keeping the ‘load’ end taut.
THE HUMAN PUZZLE
Invite a member of the audience onto the stage or platform and show a rope tied together in a loop.
This should be at least six feet in length.
Place the loop of the rope on your volunteer's right arm and tell him to place an arm in his pocket.
Then tell him that the problem is for him to free the rope without taking his hand out of his pocket or untying the rope.
The way to do it is as follows.
It entails a little body contact so do not choose someone who is too uptight and of course they must be wearing a jacket.
Put your hand inside their pocket and push the rope up the sleeve as far as you can.
Then put your other arm right down in his sleeve from the top as far as you can until you can grasp the rope.
You are then able to pull the rope up as revealed in the diagram.
Now get to work on his left sleeve.
Push the loop down his left sleeve with your left hand while you reach up the sleeve with your right hand to grasp it.
When you have drawn the end of the loop out of the left sleeve, pass it over the volunteer's left hand and draw the loop up the sleeve again.
The loop will now be round the person's body and all you have to do is to pull it down and ask the volunteer to step out of it.
The well-known magician Robert Harbin comments ‘This is great fun as a party trick but you can make it even more fun with a little more showmanship.
Pretend that this is a genuine scientific experiment to demonstrate that ‘What goes up must come down’— or something equally absurd.
Carry the demonstration through with a straight face, too, and remonstrate with your volunteer if he laughs, which he is sure to do.
WALKING ON BOTTLES
For many years this has been a favourite game in my circle of friends.
The participants stand with their feet behind a line with two sturdy bottles in their hands.
They then lean forward and ‘walk’ on the bottles.
When they have moved forwards as far as they feel they want to go they then leave one of the bottles, place both their hands on the other and have to get back without touching the the floor with any part of their body.