

Expensive injustice ROBBIE'S RESCUE COSTS £17.000 Plus SHOW LISTINGS — DATES & VENUES Rescue Dog of the Year begins PARTY POLITICAL ANIMALS General election round-up IS YOURS A MODEL DOG?
Register your pets for free PLUS…
HOW TO BECOME A PAT DOG BOOT FROM THE PERISHERS JAPANESE AKITAS AS PETS NEVILLE GETS AGGRESSIVE CLASSICAL SINGING DOGS CONTEST OF CHAMPIONS ANTI-DOG EXPERT QUIZZED…
AND MORE!
CAPTION COMPETITION
Can you think of a suitable caption for this picture?
To win a prize, send your captions, as well as any photos you think could feature in this section, to:.
Entries to be received by May 1st 1992  
The best caption wins vouchers for 24 tins of Pedigree Chum, a 3.5kg bag of Mixer, a sack of Pedigree Formula, and four packets of treats.
Five runners-up will receive vouchers for 24 tins of Chum and a bag of Mixer.
CAPTION COMPETITION WINNERS
COVER DOG BALLOT WINNERS
JANUARY CROSSWORD WINNERS
News Hound
PARTY POOPER
Bob the English Springer Spaniel is barking mad as well as being a member of the Monster Raving Loony Party.
He's very annoyed because his lack of education has prevented him from becoming a candidate for Swansea West in the general election.
His owner Dick Knowles told Dogs Today : ‘There's nothing in the constitution that says you have to be human to be an MP!
If Bob can learn to sign his name he'll be able to complete all the necessary paperwork.’
If Bob succeeds in making his mark he will campaign for heated lampposts, the lifting of beach and park bans, and European Community passports for all dogs.
MILKING THE PROFITS
Milkman Phil Bridges could not understand why he was getting complaints from customers on his round in Ackworth, West Yorkshire, saying that their milk had been stolen.
It was only when nine bottles disappeared in one morning that he decided to lie in wait for the thief.
Phil was amazed to watch a cross-breed Labrador remove the top off a bottle, turn it on its side, gulp down the milk and run off, licking his lips!
The kind milkman is now looking after the stray dog, which must have consumed more than 100 pints of milk, until a home can be found for him.
PIT BULL REPRIEVE
A ten-month-old American Pit Bull Terrier has been saved from destruction after a spectacular court reprieve.
Magistrates at Bootle decided that the dog should be released from RSPCA kennels and returned to her owners in Lydiate, Merseyside, despite the fact that she had been found wandering outside her home without a muzzle.
Under the new Dangerous Dogs Act, Cleo could have been put down, but the court accepted her owner's plea that she had been deliberately and maliciously let out of a shed, and set a new precedent by allowing the dog to go back to her family.
VICTIMS OF LAW
Meanwhile, Wood Green Animal shelters who are responsible for the national registration of American Pit Bull Terriers, report that 8,200 dogs are now officially on their books.
However, many of these dogs have not complied with other sections of the law, such as neutering, and more than 600 are no longer alive — including over 100 puppies which were conceived before the Dangerous Dogs Act came into force, but which were not allowed to be sold or given away after the legislation was introduced.
TECHNICOLOUR DREAM-COAT
Toddler Ryan Hunt from Hereford, decided that his black Labrador didn't quite go with his newly decorated bedroom, so he painted the dog a matching colour!
Ryan was just putting the final touches of white emulsion to Tosh's paws when his father came back, having had a quick break from painting the two-year-old's room.
It then took more than an hour of bathing and shampooing to get Tosh back to his natural ebony colour!
WORSE THAN ITS BITE
A Kettering firm has just launched a new range of security devices for the home, and has launched ‘Bonzo the Barking Dog’ in its recommendations.
Express Services say that the device — a speaker which is sensitive to sound and movement — is ideal for those people who want the deterrent of a loud bark, but do not have the time or space for a real guard dog.
At £54.95, it is also cheaper than keeping a pet, and needs a great deal less walking!
MONKEY BUSINESS
An unlikely partnership has been formed between a tiny rhesus monkey and Meg, a Bull Terrier.
Mandy didn't have a very good start in life when she was rejected by her mother only minutes after birth.
Keepers discovered her desperately fighting for life at the West Midlands Safari Park where she had to be hand-reared before being transferred to the Kingsley wildlife sanctuary, Cheshire, where she takes every opportunity to hitch a ride from the resident Bull Terrier bitch.
SPECIAL DELIVERY
Lady, a Jack Russell from Hampshire, loves travelling in her owner's van so much that she decided to transform it into the perfect den to have her puppies.
Two-year-old Lady would not be coaxed away from Jimmy Seymour's van, so he had to keep the engine ticking over with the heaters full-on for eight hours while the bitch gave birth to eight healthy pups.
RUSSIAN STARVELINGS
The food shortages suffered by people in Russia have been well publicised, but the effects of this on the country's pets have been even more dramatic.
Dog bone vouchers were stopped last November, and St Petersburg's 360,000 cats and dogs are trying to survive on scraps from their owners' tables.
However, a German vet has now started an international aid project, and the UK division of Hills Pet Products has already sent 20 tons of food, making a total of 49 tons ready to be distributed by the city's three main dog clubs.
SNAP HAPPY
Nearly everyone has a snapshot of their dog caught at some amusing moment, and now is your chance to have it distributed nationwide in a leaflet or on a greeting card.
Black & white or colour photos, preferably with negatives or transparencies, will be considered and the Positive Management Group will pay for any used in their promotional literature.
Send your photos (with a SAE) to .
KENNEL HUNT
Dogs Today revealed the problem of finding a good boarding kennel in our December issue.
But it is now possible to find a kennel or cattery, using the Recommended Kennel and Cattery Guide , which lists the country's top boarding establishments, supported by comments from satisfied customers.
For a copy, send a SAE to:.
EVENTS
PET SHOW
Earls Court, London is the venue for the first Pet Show, May 2nd–4th.
The show is organised by the same people who put on the Clothes Show and will have stands and information about all kinds of pet animals.
Ticket prices are £6 for adults and £4 for children.
Call the Earls Court Box Office on  for further ticket information.
MACMILLAN MILE APPEAL
Walk your dog and raise money for the Macmillan nurse appeal at the same time.
Macmillan nurses offer care and support for cancer patients and their families.
From June 6th–14th the charity hopes one million people will walk one mile and each raise £1 for the appeal.
SHORT LEADS
BODIES BEAUTIFUL
A new range of shampoos, scents and perfumed oils for pampered pets has just been launched in America.
The Californian company guarantees that all the products have been thoroughly tested — on humans!
DIAL-A-BONE
It'll Be All Right on the Night host Dennis Norden searched for his cordless telephone, only to discover that his pet dog had buried it in the garden of his London home.
NAME THAT TUNE…
A man who stole a guitar worth £100 from a Dublin music store left a vital clue to his identity at the scene of the crime — his pet dog.
The 28-year-old thief was arrested when he returned to collect his dog which he had left tied up outside the shop during the raid.
REAL HOWLERS
Canadian songwriter, Nancy Simmonds has now written and recorded over 60 different songs for all breed of dog.
The artist researches each breed's history, country of origin and characteristics as a basis for her lyrics.
Recent titles include Boogie-woogie Beagle Boy and Good Golly Miss Collie!
FOGLE'S FILES
Fireside tonics
According to recent surveys, owning a dog not only brings abundant pleasure, but actually reduces stress and promotes relaxation and good health
James Serpell directs the Cambridge Companion Animal Research Group.
He has written a scientific paper in the journal of the Royal Society of Medicine that says you are likely to have significant long-term reductions in minor health problems if you acquire a dog.
Not a cat, mind you, just dogs.
In case you wonder what ‘minor health problems’ are, they include such nasties as headaches, sleeping difficulties, general fatigue, colds and flu, indigestion, bladder problems, even difficulty concentrating and the tendency to worry over every little thing.
HEALTHY DISTRACTION
With help from Wood Green Animal Shelters, Serpell made contact with people who had not had pets for some time but who were now about to get a dog or cat.
He had a control group of people who were not acquiring pets, all of whom were interviewed at home and completed self-report questionnaires that measure physical and psychological health.
When these people completed similar questionnaires a month later, both dog and cat acquirers showed decreases in minor health problems.
This improvement in health could possibly be attributed to the novelty value of having a new puppy or kitten in the house.
If your mind is on the new member of the family you're probably less likely to concentrate on your own aches and pains, regardless of whether they are physical or psychological.
Five months later, these people were questioned again.
The cat owners' assessment of their health had returned to what they reported just before acquiring a feline friend, but dog owners continued to report improvements in their health and well being.
Four months later they filled in further questionnaires.
Once more, the owners of new canine companions consistently reported continuing reductions in all kinds of minor health problems.
Dr Serpell's study suggests that acquiring a dog can somehow result in long-term improvements in human health and behaviour.
But why?
One answer, and perhaps the most important, is obvious to any dog owner.
In snow or rain, wind or sleet, we're out there walking our pooches.
And don't underestimate the benefit walking has on your health.
James Serpell's dog owners reported increases in the amount of daily physical exercise they took after acquiring dogs.
MINDS AT EASE
To mention but two known effects, regular walking is associated with a reduced incidence of hip fractures in the elderly and beneficial changes in the concentrations of the type of cholesterol associated with heart disease.
Dr Serpell concluded that while walking your dog can be good for your physical and mental health, it isn't the only reason for the health benefits reported by dog owners.
An even more recent survey carried out by the Society for Companion Animal Studies, and based on interviews with 10,500 households, revealed a surprisingly high 70 per cent of the general population and 84 per cent of dog owners think that dogs help us relax and reduce stress.
That's the important clue.
It seems that for the vast majority of dog owners, the very presence of canine company simply makes us feel good.
And a sense of well being can only be good for our general health.
The MOST EXPENSIVE DOG in the world?
No one could have imagined that the simple kindness of two individuals and a rescue society would call the British judicial system into question — and cost so much
STEPH FREEMAN
In December 1987 two stray Rough Collies, a bitch of about 15 months old and a dog of about 18 months, were picked up and taken to a police station near Oxford.
They were transferred to kennels to wait the statutory seven days for their owner to reclaim them.
The dogs were never collected, so Friends of Rough Collie Rescue (FRCR) at Marlow, Buckinghamshire, were asked to take them for rehoming.
Some days before the rescue centre collected the dogs, a lady enquired at the Oxford police station about two missing Rough Collies.
She was informed that they were being boarded by the police, but she was never heard from again.
Mrs Brenda Plumridge, FRCR Field Officer, described how events began to get complicated.
‘I had a friend, Mrs Sally Roper, who took the female we named Sophie.
A few days later, Grace McNeil, who had just lost a much-loved Rough Collie and had been sent to us by her vet, came and took the young male, Robbie.
It seemed perfect — finding loving homes for both dogs — but the problems were just about to begin.’
On December 21st Brenda was called by the head of FRCR, and informed that a man named Mr Sharma had contacted her, demanding his dogs back.
He had lost them less than 24 hours before Robbie and Sophie were picked up, but he lived about 40 miles away from where they were found.
It seemed highly unlikely that they were the same animals, and the verbal description of them did not fit that of the two rehomed dogs.
Mr Sharma's dogs were just nine months old, and they had ‘full white collars’.
The male was described as having a white star on his head.
The ages and looks of the dogs were all wrong.
Robbie had no star on his head and only a half white collar, as did Sophie.
Brenda explained, ‘Mr Sharma wanted to see the dogs, so I said that he certainly could if he would provide a written statement first.
Obviously, I wanted to ensure he couldn't claim them if they weren't his.
He said that he had a video which he would bring round, but when he arrived he claimed to have lost it and still didn't provide a written description, so I wouldn't tell him where the dogs were.
‘However, he did show me his dogs' pedigrees, so I rang the breeder and asked her to send a description of the puppies which she had sold.
She remembered the Sharmas and the two dogs well.
The description that she gave matched the one later provided in writing by the Sharmas.’
For the next couple of weeks, Brenda had phone calls from various people claiming the dogs belonged to the Sharmas and was even visited by the local police, although they were quite happy that her request for a description was reasonable.
Furthermore, the Sharmas had contacted Mr Frank Mitchell of the Yorkshire Collie Rescue who phoned Brenda and told her that if the dogs were not returned to the Sharmas she would be banned from showing her dogs at London Collie Club shows.
Brenda, sure that she was in the right, held out — and was, indeed, banned.
PRIVATE EYES
By this time, the Sharmas had tracked down Sophie and Mrs Roper through private investigators, and in January 1988 Brenda received a letter from the  Sharmas' solicitor stating that if the dogs were not handed over immediately she would be sued.
The first court case took place in June, and Brenda was forced to reveal Robbie's whereabouts.
The court demanded a written description of the animals from the Sharmas, to be submitted within 14 days.
An inspection of the dogs then took place.
The dogs warden who had originally transferred the dogs from Oxford to the police kennels confirmed that Robbie and Sophie were  the dogs he had taken, and Mrs Sumner — breeder of the Sharmas' dogs — stated that they were certainly not the dogs she had sold.
Pretty conclusive evidence you might think, but the Sharmas would not give up.
A further solicitor's letter informed Brenda that the Sharmas believed Robbie to be their dog (they claimed his fur had been dyed!), and that their bitch had been exchanged with another before the inspection.
SERIOUS LOSS OF SUPPORT
‘We heard nothing until March 1989 when we were told we were to be taken to court — myself, Mrs Roper and Mrs McNeil.
Mrs Roper and I were entitled to legal aid, but unfortunately Mrs McNeil wasn't, and that proved disastrous.
At this point Friends of Rough Collie Rescue refused any further involvement, so we had to set up our own organisation called ‘Rough Collie Rescue’(London and South East).
This loss of support was very serious because the methods by which the Sharmas won the case were very  tentative indeed.
‘It was said in court that the dogs looked different and the breeder again stated that she had not bred them.
One of the Sharmas' own witnesses even admitted on the stand that the dogs couldn't be the ones they claimed.
Two independent vets explained how difficult it is to determine the age of a dog after it is a year old.
They also agreed that a breeder could recognise her own stock.
‘The vital information — that a woman had contacted the Oxford police looking for two dogs which fitted the description of Robbie and Sophie — was, for some reason, inadmissible in court.
But frankly we thought our case was pretty water-tight.
We were wrong!
‘The trial lasted six days and in his summing up, the judge said that it was too difficult to determine the age of the dogs and that he did not believe a breeder would know her own stock — so basically the ‘coincidence’ was too strong.
The Sharmas had lost two Rough Collies and two were found, therefore they must be the same dogs!
Ridiculous — we just couldn't believe it!’
The judge also said that Brenda had no protection from the 1906 Dog Act which allows the police to destroy or sell a dog after seven days.
Friends of Rough Collie rescue had, in fact, donated £15 when the dogs were collected from the police kennels, but they had not obtained a receipt and now refused to get one on Brenda's behalf.
That receipt would have acted as a bill of sale for the dogs, but without it ‘Title of Ownership’ had not been passed for Sophie and Robbie.
The final horror of this was yet to come — because Grace McNeil was not entitled to legal aid, she was required to pay over £10,000 court costs!
Needless to say, an appeal took place in the summer of 1991 and it came to light that although the Sharmas had been entitled to take Sophie and Robbie, they had never done so.
In fact, they had bought two new Rough Collies within six months of theirs going missing.
The appeal judges ruled that the dogs should remain where they were, but that the Sharmas should receive compensation from the new owners of about £290 each.
Court costs were also altered.
Brenda was ordered to pay half and Mrs Roper a quarter, both, of course, through legal aid.
Mrs McNeil also had to pay a quarter.
That is £17,000 and this money may well have to come from the sale or re-mortgage of her house, unless you can help.
HELP THE ‘ROBBIE FUND’
Rough Collie Rescue (London and South East) started an appeal, with £200 of their own money, named the ‘Robbie Fund’ to help Grace McNeil afford the court costs she should never have been liable for in the first place.
At the time of writing the appeal total stands at nearly £3,000 but that still means another £14,000 is needed.
Grace commented, ‘Robbie is a lovely dog and I couldn't give him up now, but I would never have dreamt that rescuing a dog could cause me to lose my home.
We really are relying on people's generosity.
If Dogs Today can help at all it would be marvellous!’
This case is bizarre in the extreme.
The evidence seemed irrefutable, yet Brenda Plumridge found herself without the support of her rescue society, and was subjected to nothing short of blackmail, while two caring citizens who rescued a pair of stray dogs have been harassed — one to the point of near bankruptcy.
The whole thing has taken four years of heartache and worry.
Let's hope that nothing like it ever occurs again.
If you can contribute, please send cheques or postal orders made payable to the ‘Robbie Fund’,
Top to…tail
A guide to home maintenance for your dog by Sam Evans
CARING FOR A WIRE-HAIRED DACHSHUND
Dachshunds are popular, lively little pets.
Due to the nature of the coat, the Wire-haired Dachshund requires more coat care than the other two varieties, and should be fully stripped-out twice a year.
Unless you ask for the specialist guidance of a groomer or breeder of these dogs, I do not suggest you rush out and buy a stripping knife and start pulling!
However, there are a number of things you can do at home to keep the coat healthy and to minimise your trips to the salon.
1.
After brushing thoroughly, it is important to concentrate on specific areas that get particularly dirty.
The Wire-haired Dachshund has a distinctive ‘beard’ which needs combing out on a daily basis.
If necessary, wash it gently in some warm soapy water to remove dirt and food particles.
2.
Leg furnishings are also best groomed daily with a metal comb, using downward strokes at an angle of 90 degrees to the leg.
Hold rear legs gently backwards and comb down towards the foot.
These areas can also be sponged with warm water if necessary.
This is preferable to bathing the whole dog, as constant bathing softens the coat, making it difficult to hand-strip and untypical of the breeds.
3.
Due to the conformation of the breed (big feet on short legs!) it is vital to remove some of the hair under and between the pads, and under the ‘thumb’ pad on the forelegs.
Lie your dog on his back and, holding one paw at at time, carefully trim away the excess hair with sharp, but round-ended scissor held flat against the pads.
Then clean out the pastern area between the back of the foot and the ‘thumb’ pad in the same way.
4.
Because the breed is so low to the ground, the areas around the hind legs, tummy, and front armpits should also be trimmed to help prevent knots and matts forming.
With your dog once again lying on his back, gently trim the inside of each leg, then carefully around the tummy and penis areas.
Do not cut off the hair on the end of the penis, as this helps stop dirt getting into the urinary tract.
As you can see, it is important to accustom your dog to lying quietly on his back and being brushed before you attempt to get close with the scissors.
Dog Stars
BY JACK RUSSELL GRANT
STAR OF THE MONTH
Aries (March 21-April 20)
A boring time is ahead, so you'll need to think out some ideas for keeping yourself amused.
So long as you keep things above board your schemes will be tolerated, perhaps even appreciated, but don't over-stretch your imagination as the results could border on the bizarre.
Owner's Tip: Keep your brain ticking over too.
Taurus (April 21-May 21)
You're full of the joys of spring at the moment, so make the most of this harmonious period and get out and about to share your buoyant mood.
A black-and-white terrier-type will be coming into your life, which could suggest a more interesting, even hilarious, life-style.
Gemini (May 22-June 21)
A happy mood is upon you, so don't get your tonsils in a twist.
It could be that your owner might consider replacing you with a Basenji if you don't quieten down, and your nose will be properly put out of joint.
You really need to calm down and take life more stoically to reinforce your position.
Cancer (June 22-July 23)
There are opportunities ahead where your intelligence and natural assets will be tested to the extreme.
You'll need to be on the alert for any unusual eventuality, as your behaviour during this arduous time will govern future happenings.
Leo (July 24-August 23)
A dog with sable and black markings is about to be introduced to you, either socially or by mistake.
Cultivating this hound's friendship will bring unexpected enjoyment and a chance for companionship but not without certain challenges which may arise, so be alert.
Virgo (August 24-September 23)
Concentrate on winning your owner's affection and stop your whining.
Putting your hackles up at everyone you dislike and being grumpy won't help to enamour you with either the locals or strangers.
Snapping out of this disagreeable mood will release tensions in everyone.
Libra (September 24-October 22)
In true Libran fashion you will be going all out to cultivate new friendships, but take care that you're not  led astray (into a field of cow-pats for instance).
You need your owner's support and wisdom so try to keep to heel and do as you're told.
Scorpio (October 23-November 22)
You're feeling decidedly neurotic and this might well lead to frustration where the fur may fly.
So keep out of arguments with other canines, stop your grousing and growling and behave in a mature manner.
New opportunities are opening up in the near future which you must be calm enough to accept.
Sagittarius (November 23-December 21)
Happy times are ahead, with perks aplenty, but don't let it go to your head.
Over this pleasant period you'll come up trumps in whatever you tackle, especially when you're allowed to compete in those events which test your endurance or intelligence.
Capricorn (December 22-January 20)
A certain amount of travel is on the cards so you must be ready for eventualities which erupt sooner than you expect.
Since you're more than a little accident prone at this time, exercise caution and be careful not to lead your owner into trouble.
Aquarius (January 21-February 19)
You're in for a quiet relaxing time, giving you a welcome chance to appreciate a mood where you dream of past successes either in the competitive line or in social relationships.
However, forward thinking will create new exciting plans for the future if you can get on the right side of your owner.
Pisces (February 20-March 20)
You have an urge to taste freedom and desert your owner for the excitement of the wild.
But curb these desires and try to enjoy the gentle domesticity of your life.
Romantically you stand to gain if you stay near home.
HENRY'S HIGH LIFE
He started down under but he definitely prefers up top.
Henry's star quality should take him even higher
BRIAN KELLY
Henry hails from hard country.
He's from rural New South Wales, where a working dog really works.
It's where shaving's for weddings, ties are for funerals and tea is brewed in a billy, then swung overhead to settle the leaves (or to scare the spiders away, depending on who's pulling your leg).
It's probably where the expression ‘work like a dog’ was born; no wonder they shuffle under the shearing sheds and grab as much sleep as they can when they're not clambering over  sheep's backs or kicking up the fine, red dust.
Now Henry lives near Henley, and while he would sneer at the Hooray Henries crowding that town's regatta (in true, no-frills, Aussie style), he's become quite a showman himself.
Predominantly Australian Cattle Dog, with a touch of Kelpie to lengthen his stride and narrow his frame, Henry goes through a great range of stunts.
Ever eager to please, he'll fetch anything owner Robert Langton chooses — especially if it means he can climb a ladder to get there.
Hang on — wasn't this very magazine making several strong points about dogs on ladders just last month?
Indeed, it was.
The difference between the RAF's dubious agility display at Crufts and this motley rogue's lumbering up and down the rungs with a portable phone in his mouth is that Henry is a natural — he loves it.
He has no fear of heights.
Robert can see Henry's star quality and has already aligned him with an animal talent agency (Satch's Animals), although his one date with the cameras so far — for a Lucozade commercial — wasn't exactly a smash.
Firstly, the makers wanted to make Henry blacker, but nothing would stick to his wiry, go-anywhere, wash-it-and-leave-it coat.
Then, he became a little fractious, as take after  take was made of him standing on a street corner with an exuberant human leaping over his head a few dozen times.
‘Beside all that,’ Robert said, ‘I had to take him into the city, and he wasn't real keen — I'm sure he prefers Sydney to London.’
‘Anyway, if the TV career doesn't work out, he's still my dog, and I think he's great.’
Born in Germany and raised around the Chiltern Hills, Robert is no ‘fair dinkum’ Aussie, but holds dual citizenship after about 10 years down under.
He and Henry met at Yarramalong (ask Robert the population, and he just laughs)— a sparse town north-west of Sydney, 40 minutes from the coast and not too far from the Hunter Valley (prime wine-making country).
Robert doesn't want too much made of Henry's early days, but the fact is, he saved the six-month-old pup' life.
Being grafted onto a teenaged farrier's somewhat wayward lifestyle was doing Henry no good, and he was destined to be ‘lost’ in the bush on a trip to Tamworth (further north) until Robert stepped in and adopted him.
SPECIAL STOCK
‘Both his parents were Cattle Dogs, but they were the red variety.
His father was a very nuggety type, and would work all day even at ten years old,’ Robert said.
‘I realised Henry could direct his instincts when I was out one day, riding one horse and leading another.
The horse under me got upset and started bucking, and there were suddenly sheep everywhere, but he calmly rounded them up, put them in a corner and sat watching them.’
‘I couldn't have left him there — no way,’ he said.
‘I reckon he would have pined to death — that's what happened to his father.
His owner left, and the dog just pined.
One day, he went berserk, ripped a car's interior to shreds, and died.’
‘Someone could offer me a million quid for Henry, but there would be no sale.
Okay, so it cost a lot to get him half way across the world, but money doesn't mean much if you can't use it wisely.’
ENERGETIC FUN
‘I sent him ahead of me for the six-month quarantine, and the day he got out was one of the best days of my life.’
Henry would have you think he's a real no-nonsense type — more the rugged Bryan Brown than a glamorous Mel Gibson — but upon entering Robert's car, I had my chin joyfully slurped by the rising star himself.
Maybe I'd set him at ease by saying ‘g'day’, but he looked like he'd known me all his eight years, and leant quite steadily on me for the drive to Robert's parents' cottage, where we arranged photos.
Three hundred yards or so from the cottage, we stopped, opened the door, and Henry was off.
Talk about stretching your legs — no rabbit within miles was safe.
Upon arrival, he met us with a hefty stick he had dragged from somewhere, plonked it down, nosed it toward me and waited, tail shifting like a black snake.
He never stopped.
Henry loves involvement, doing things, being asked.
Even when he'd roared full-blooded into a spiny bush in pursuit of a tennis ball, he'd ignore our gasps and head back for more.
But when the yakka (work) is over, the kip begins.
And it lasts.
Henry won't care who wins cricket's World Cup, unlike many ex-pat Aussies; he probably just notices how much colder it is here.
Dashing up ladders or terrorising rabbits, he's just happy, and much loved.
And he'll never know how lucky he's been.
DOGGIE POST BAG
We love reading your letters and we'll try to publish as many as possible.
Our STAR letter wins a Good Boy hamper full of doggie goodies, and every letter published will win a special Golden Bone Award.
The editor reserves the right to edit letters.
Please write to this address:
BAD DOG OWNERS
Dear Dogs Today 
I am absolutely sick to death of irresponsible dog owners who allow their dogs to foul public footpaths.
This is the major reason why a very anti-dog attitude has developed.
These dirty, uncaring individuals daily supply undeniable ammunition for the anti-dog brigade, leading to hysteria surrounding toxocariasis based on prejudice rather than fact.
Every day one hears of more and more calls to ban dogs from parks because owners will not clean up after them — thus denying the responsible owners the pleasure of walking their dogs in pleasant surroundings.
Irresponsible owners should be made to see the threat they cause not only to dogs, but to the responsible dog owner.
All owners should respond positively when our pets are so much under the magnifying glass.
name and address withheld
Next month marks the first Scoop the Poop week.
In our next issue we will be examining why some people still resist the pressure to pick up after their dogs.
POETRY IN PRINT
Dear Dogs Today 
I am hoping to compile a short book of poems on dogs — I was wondering if any readers might like to send me any?
I'm hoping for both amusing and sad items.
I have no funds to be able to pay for such material, so people would have to realise that no payment could be made — their only reward would be possibly seeing their work in print.
A dog is part of God's creation and should be treated as such.
The following quotation has always stuck in my mind: ‘In life the firmest friend, the first to welcome, foremost to defend.’
HELP IN DISTRESS
Dear Dogs Today 
We have two Golden Retrievers called Ben and Sam.
Ben is almost 10 and Sam is almost 18 months old.
Last November we had the distressing experience of seeing Sam suffer an epileptic fit.
We didn't know what was happening at the time, we thought he was choking.
We phoned the vet and they talked us through what was happening.
We were told to turn off the lights, turn off anything making a noise and talk to him quietly.
The vet checked Sam over and said all was well, and as it was a first fit there was no need to start him on the tablets, yet.
We would have to wait and see if another fit occurred.
On 23rd January Sam had another fit.
We knew what to expect, but it was still upsetting.
He is now on tablets for life.
Perhaps you might like to investigate epilepsy in dogs and do an article on the subject.
I'm sure it would help lots of people in the same situation.
We will look at this subject in depth in a future issue.
In the meantime you may find some help from the Canine Epilepsy Support Group — featured in our November News Hound .
Write to .
RACING CERTAINTY
Dear Dogs Today 
My husband and I own six dogs, three Rough Collies and three Greyhounds.
The Greyhounds are all ex-racing dogs.
They are such loving, wonderful dogs and I am writing to encourage anyone thinking of a rescue dog to give a Greyhound a home.
Obviously, they take time to adjust to being someone's pet, but the love they will give is worth any effort put in.
If anyone out there is considering rescuing one of those lovely animals and would like to talk to me or even come and see our dogs at home, I would be delighted to oblige.
I'm sure once people realise what smashing dogs they are, lots more Greyhounds would be assured a happy retirement — instead of being abandoned, exported or used for experimentation.
TAILWAGGERS TALES
Dear Dogs Today 
I was very interested in the letter from Mrs Elizabeth Watson in February's Doggie Post Bag .
As a young girl I volunteered to knock on doors and enrol pets in the Tailwaggers Club.
The aim was to save animals who bolted during the blitz — it promised to return any lost animal to its owner.
I registered every dog we had right up to 1969.
My dog won a lead for having his picture in the magazine about 1971.
We thoroughly enjoy Dogs Today and try to pass on all the right things to do to our present scallywag, Monty, but he's not impressed.
He's got us wrapped round his paw!
Enclosed his picture — no prizes for guessing his breed.
Dear Dogs Today 
I read with interest in the February issue, Elizabeth Watson's memories of the Tailwaggers magazine.
It was a coincidence that the previous weekend I had been sorting through an old trunk of mine full of memorabilia at my  parents' home, and came across my membership certificate for the Tailwaggers Club, along with Tailwagger medallion.
The certificate is now framed along with the collar, and has pride of place on my wall.
Needless to say, I too was an avid reader of the magazine and there can be no doubt that my passionate interest in dogs (I now have five) was founded in those early Tailwagger days.
Perhaps Dogs Today could stimulate a similar interest among children by including a special page and possibly offer a badge or medallion for their dogs.
Who knows, in 40 years time some present five-year-old may be writing a similar letter!
Great idea.
We'll try to work on something!
Dear Dogs Today 
I thought this photograph might be of interest to you.
Filming  the BBC1 ‘Cluff’ series stopped while Cluff's Border Collie, Clive, was made an Honorary Life Member of the Tailwagger Club.
Leslie Sands, who played Cluff, presented Clive (otherwise called ‘Tuck’, and owned by myself — right, on the photo) with his Tailwagger medallion.
Tuck's award was made as a tribute to his intelligence and obedience.
The Cluff series ran for 21 episodes and was extremely popular.
Tuck had many other film and TV roles including ‘Postman's Knock’ with Spike Milligan which has recently been shown on TV.
We have received so many wonderful letters on Tailwaggers but I'm afraid we haven't room to print them all here.
We really enjoyed them.
STAR LETTER
GOOD BOY
PRESS-SHY KENNEL CLUB
Dear Dogs Today 
You're right.
The Kennel Club is the doziest organisation I have ever come across in initiating communication to the outside world.
Despite writing a pet column for the Daily Telegraph for more than four years, I have been given no information at all about Crufts over the past two years.
The only press release I have received since 1990 is a boring one about a scheme for breeder insurance.
Nor does the Kennel Club tell me about its achievements.
One of its most important decisions for dog welfare — changes in litter registration to make puppy farming more difficult — I only found out about by chance!
Once I contact them, everybody at the Kennel Club is charming and helpful.
But it doesn't seem to occur to them to contact me when something interesting is happening!
TOP DOG
Dear Dogs Today 
I am, to my owner, the best Cavalier King Charles alive today in London.
My name is Scruff and I am a very good dog but I'm awfully expensive to keep because I needed two operations and I am still not fully recovered.
I've got tummie trouble as well, but that's not as bad.
My grandfather is a famous champion so maybe some day I'll be one, too.
I won fifth place in my first show last year, my owner was really proud.
FOOD FOR THOUGHT
Dear Dogs Today 
I was wondering if your readers could help me as I'm doing a study on how food  affects dogs' behaviour.
I'd be interested in any reader's experiences.
Please let me know the sex, age and breed of the dog, what sort of food caused a behaviour change (and what that change was) and enclose, if possible, an ingredient label from the food.
SORE SUBJECT
Dear Dogs Today 
Can anyone help my four-year-old male German Shepherd Dog?
He suffers much of the time with sore feet (furunculosis) which unfortunately makes him lame.
Interdigital cysts have also occurred.
He has been seen by many vets, and a dermatologist, who have prescribed a range of treatments including antibiotics and anti-inflammatories.
However, all too frequently the problem returns and is also becoming more difficult and expensive to treat.
In every other respect he is a fit and healthy dog.
If anyone can offer any advice, I would be very grateful.
TEETHING TROUBLES
Dear Dogs Today 
We're Jazz and Dixie.
First of all, we'd like to say we love reading your magazine, but we have a bit of a problem which we thought might worry other humans.
We sent away for a Plaque Attacker from an advert in your magazine.
When we received it we thought it was great, but after chewing on them for a while, mum got a bit worried as the pieces we were chewing off looked like hard plastic.
Well her being human, she thought it might damage our digestive system.
We told her that if it was dangerous the makers would not be allowed to sell it.
So please put her mind at rest and tell her it's not plastic, but some other product that's not a danger to us, because we'd love to have them back please!
I've spoken to Nylabone — the manufacturers of the Plaque Attacker and they have reassured us that small pieces are intended to break off when you chew vigorously.
If you do happen to swallow any bits they should pass straight through without any ill effects.
The Plaque Attacker is made of  polypropylene — a strong flexible substance which is inert.
The Nylabone people say that if your mum is still concerned she can write to them and they will put her mind at rest.
I hope you get your Plaque Attacker back soon!
The address to write to is:
GUARDING RESEARCH
Dear Dogs Today 
I am researching the way that dogs behave with their possessions.
In particular, I am interested in food guarding, whether it be against people or other dogs.
If anyone has any experience of this, perhaps they could write to me with fullest details (breed or type, number of dogs in household, when the guarding started etc).
Many thanks for your help.
ANTI-DOG EXPERT to the media
Veronica Lynch's prejudice is understandable — her daughter was killed by dogs.
We invited her to explain her controversial aims
NICK MAYS
In April 1989, the world was shocked by the death of a Scottish girl, 11-year-old Kelly Lynch.
She was savaged by two normally perfectly behaved Rottweilers.
Kelly and a friend had enjoyed taking the dogs for walks on every day of their holiday in Dunoon.
The dogs were hotel owner Brian Simpson's pets.
Kelly's family were devastated.
Brian Simpson was also deeply affected by the incident — he committed suicide the following year.
The two dogs were destroyed.
Since then, Kelly's mother, Veronica, has campaigned to have all Rottweilers banned from private ownership.
A small hooligan element of dog owners sent threatening letters to her, made obscene phone calls and smashed her windows.
She even received a newspaper cutting for Kelly's photograph with ‘Ha Ha Ha’, scrawled over her face.
Kelly's grave was also desecrated.
Responsible dog owners were horrified by these attacks and publicly said so.
Undeterred, Veronica Lynch fought on, lobbying to include Rottweilers in the Dangerous Dogs Act and forming ‘PANDA’— Parents Against Needless Dog Attacks, which seeks to bring strict controls against all dogs.
I do not agree with all Veronica Lynch's arguments, nor those of PANDA and, undoubtedly, few readers will empathise with her views, but it is in the interest of all responsible dog people everywhere to know them.
Q: What form of dog control do you support?
A: In all honesty, I favour a total ban on Rottweilers, because they're much too powerful for ordinary people to handle.
However, at the moment the only way to stop attacks is to have all dogs muzzled in public.
I'm sure there are lots of responsible Rottweiler owners, but they tend to put dogs before children.
They have the attitude that Kelly did something to cause her own death — that's something I'll never accept.
It hasn't endeared Rottweiler owners to me, nor I to them.
Q: Apart from Rottweilers, do you think that any other breeds should have been included in the Dangerous Dog Act?
A: Obviously, I have personal feelings against Rottweilers, but I'm calling for a total ban or muzzling in public places which should be extended to Dobermans and German Shepherds.
A Scottish scientist named six breeds which are so powerful they can kill in seconds, including other breeds which I can't remember off-hand.
Clearly, there are many breeds which we should not have as pets.
I am a dog owner myself, so I'm not anti-dog.
Before Kelly's death I didn't even know what a Rottweiler looked like — that's how ignorant I was.
I knew nothing about anything.
Q: After the attacks in England, restrictions on American Pit Bull Terriers were quickly introduced, while Rottweilers were not included.
You stated that the government did not care about what had happened to Kelly because she was Scottish.
A: When Kelly died the government did nothing .
Nobody even made a simple statement.
Yet when Ruksana Khan was attacked, the Home Secretary visited her in hospital and everything.
Can you imagine how that felt?
Your child is nothing — she's dead, she's gone, forget it.
Yet when another child is attacked, they sit up and take notice.
I'm angry about that, very angry.
The dog attacks in England came at a time when the government were losing their grip — becoming very unpopular.
They had to be seen to be doing something positive, something caring.
This may sound terrible, but I see it as vote-catching.
Q: How did you become involved with PANDA?
A: After appearing on TV, I was contacted by Terry Moseley who had been following my story since Kelly was killed, and Jeanette Thompson, whose child had been attacked by her own dog.
They thought we should unite as parents to get something done.
Obviously, the government won't do anything, so we needed to create a pressure group.
The main aim of the group is to see that every dog is muzzled in public.
Even Chihuahuas are capable of inflicting a nasty bite.
If all dogs were muzzled, there would never be another dog attack in public.
Q: Statistics show that 80 per cent of dog attacks take place in the home — how would muzzling in public prevent this?
A: This is the parent's responsibility.
Why is the dog attacking?
Is the dog jealous?
I really have never heard that 80 per cent of dog attacks take place in the owner's home.
Too many people treat dogs like humans.
My parents have a Yorkshire Terrier, and a more obnoxious little dog I have never met!
It's treated like a child and gets so jealous.
Whenever it come round to my house, it gets locked in the bedroom — I just won't have it running around my house.
When jealousy exists in a dog, there's a greater risk it will bite someone.
Q: Would you submit your own dog to muzzling?
A: Oh yes.
I've got a muzzle for my dog.
She doesn't wear her muzzle all the time — it depends where we're going for a walk.
But you have to admit, it's for the dog's own protection to wear muzzle, as they can pick up all sorts of things in the street which can poison them.
I did hear a rumour that the type of muzzle I have for my dog doesn't meet safety standards.
However, I fail to see that myself, as the muzzle is a sturdy, comfortable thing for the dog to wear.
I did also hear that the person who is putting the rumour about is trying to push his own design.
I'm not naming names here though!
Q: Does PANDA have any other stated aims?
A: We want a law that states young people under 16 years old don't ever take dogs out.
A 10-year-old could never control a dog if a fight started.
If parents want to leave a child in the garden with a dog, it's their responsibility, but anywhere else, even down to the local shop, children should never take a dog out.
Q: What about at dog shows where lots of youngsters handle dogs?
A: It's absolutely dreadful that dog shows have got classes where a 10-year-old can handle a Rottweiler.
How utterly awful!
I really think that's terrible.
OK, educate the child, educate the dog, but I could never let a child of mine walk around a ring with a big, powerful dog like that, because it is a big, powerful vicious beast.
I don't agree with children showing dogs, I really don't.
Q: Has PANDA got a lot of support at present?
A: I work nights at the moment, so I don't have much free time.
However, I'm leaving work soon to take up fostering teenagers, so this should leave me more time to devote to campaigning.
PANDA is gaining support slowly but surely.
Q: Have you ever made any contact with responsible dog owner's?
A: There's always contact in everyday life.
I think people point me out and say, ‘There's that woman,’ and I feel their hostility towards me.
After one TV show, a woman came up to me and cried her eyes out, not for my daughter, but because her dog was being ignored.
Her husband had to come and take her away from me, which was really quite fortunate.
She was sobbing hysterically because her children's friends were refusing to play with them when they were out with her Rottweilers.
This was just after Kelly had been killed, so everybody was aware of the danger.
The headmaster at the school gave a talk to all the children and issued a warning to them to beware of the Rottweiler breed in particular.
This woman complained to school and everything, and there she was, crying her eyes out, because her dog is suffering as a result of my campaign — with my daughter lying buried in Scotland!
How dare she!
Q: How do you feel towards dog breeders and exhibitors?
A: There's too much made of the whole dog show business.
Having said that, I've met some very nice people who are terribly pro-dog and anti my campaign, but not anti-me.
For instance, Mr Bill Edmond of the Kennel Club.
Originally, I felt quite negative towards him — until I met him face to face and thought, ‘Oh, he's quite a nice man.’
Q: Would you like to see PANDA work together with the Kennel Club?
A: Well, I suppose I would — that would be the ideal situation, but I think you've got to face up to the reality of the whole thing.
The Kennel Club and all other dog organisations are opposed to muzzling unless the dog is proved to be dangerous, but by then it's too late.
It wasn't their daughter who died.
RESCUE DOG OF THE YEAR
Do you have a rescue dog?
You now have a chance to compete in a national competition that gives second-chance dogs all the glamour and media attention usually reserved for supreme champions and singing dogs.
Regional heats of the Eukanuba Dogs Today Rescue Dog of the Year competition start here.
If you've never experienced an exemption show before, this is the perfect excuse to have a go.
You don't have to enter in advance and your dog needn't be registered with the Kennel Club — you just turn up, pays your money and takes your chance!
They're not at all like ‘normal’ dog shows.
The emphasis is on fun and raising money for charity.
Your dog could have come to you through a large or small dog charity, breed rescue or a private exchange — if you have given your dog its second (or third…) home, we want you to take part.
It's best to ring the organisers for start times, directions and more detailed information.
Good luck!
We hope to see you at the grand final in London.
You can enter the competition as often as you like.
The first three in each heat will qualify for a regional semi-final in September.
RESCUE DOG OF THE YEAR 92 EUKANUBA DOGS
Question Mark
Mark Evans is a small-animal vet.
As co-presenter of BBC1's Wildbunch and director of the Animal Information Bureau, he is used to answering all types of questions.
If you have any queries of a veterinary nature, you can be sure of the best advice
TUMMY BUMPS
Q: I have had my seven-month-old Shih Tzu since he was seven weeks old.
Soon after I got him I noticed a lump under his tummy, so I took him for a thorough check-up.
Within seconds, the vet announced that the lump was a large umbilical hernia which would need to be operated on, and that he should be castrated as these hernias are hereditary.
The breeder's vet says they are not hereditary.
I am confused!
What is this hernia?
Will I be able to show him?
A An umbilical hernia is simply a hole between the tummy muscle at the  navel .
In some puppies, the hole which allowed blood to flow through the umbilical cord is bigger than it needs to be; once the cord shrivels up, the hole is left open and if it is too big, a small piece of fat may be able to pop through.
The result is a lump under the tummy — an umbilical hernia.
Small ones rarely cause problems, but if the hole is large enough for intestine to drop through, things could become more serious.
The hole stays the same size as the dog grows, but few of them disappear altogether and are usually operated on at some stage.
Most umbilical hernias are present at birth.
Although no one is completely sure how, they are thought to be hereditary.
I always stress that it would be irresponsible to breed from dogs with this condition.
They are then much better off neutered — male or female.
As for the possibility of showing him, you will have to speak to the Kennel Club to ask for their permission.
They state that neutered dogs may be exhibited, but if he has his hernia repaired, your vet may insist on informing the Kennel Club.
Your experience highlights the importance of taking all puppies for a veterinary check-up as soon as possible after they are collected.
DIET DISCIPLINE
Q My 15-month-old Belgian Shepherd was put on Hills Science Prescription Diet owing to crystals in his urine.
After a month the crystals cleared and my vet advised me to keep him on Hills Science Diet CD.
I'm not very happy about this diet — for one thing, I think it contains too much protein.
What should I do?
A Crystals are found in the urine of dogs suffering from urolithiasis.
There are many different types of crystal — often they build up to form bladder stones which can be the size of a tennis ball!
Urolithiasis is a very complicated disease; diet, drinking water, exercise management, infection, liver and kidney function, and even certain cancers can all play a part.
Some dogs are thought to be genetically susceptible to it, but diet always seems to get the blame.
A mistaken view.
However, very precise adjustments to the diet can have a dramatic effect on helping to control the disease.
The make-up of the urine is directly affected by what the dog eats, as you have found.
It is even possible to dissolve certain types of crystal if the foods used are special diets, carefully chosen by vets.
It is foolhardy for you to play around with your dog's diet when he is known to have had urolithiasis.
Your vet will choose the right food for him, so please take his advice and if you are concerned, ask questions!
Incidentally, Hill's Prescription Diet and Science Diet are two different types of food; prescription diets are called by letters such as‘c/d’, diets have names like ‘Senior’.
‘Science Diet CD’ doesn't exist, nor does ‘Science Prescription Diet’!
You are right to be concerned about protein levels, but without a very thorough understanding of canine nutritional science, you will end up tying yourself in knots.
You may find Dog and Cat Nutrition , published by Pergamon Press, useful.
HORMONE CHANGES
Q My two-year-old mongrel bitch was spayed after her first season — when she was about six months old.
Since then she has become aggressive toward strange dogs.
She is her normal loveable self with the family.
Can spaying change a bitch's temperament, and could this aggression  be treated?
A Dogs are naturally social animals and it is very important that from birth every puppy learns how to fit in with its own family and other animals it lives with.
So, its brain is ‘pre-wired’ with a whole range of behaviour circuits, and as the puppy grows all kinds of things will influence which circuits are used — for example, the action of the body's sex hormones.
A bitch will alter depending on whether she is in season, in false pregnancy or waiting to come on heat.
Although the underlying reasons are not fully understood, it does appear that certain female sex hormones are able to damp down the dominant urge.
It is thought that bitches of breed with a tendency to be dominant will often become worse after they are spayed.
This may appear as a sudden change in behaviour because the more subtle signs were not noticed before the operation.
The first step is for you and your family to be in complete control of your dog, then you can start acclimatising your bitch to other dogs.
However, before any behaviour therapy, you must get your vet to give your bitch a thorough check-up.
Once all the reasons behind her aggressive behaviour are worked out, your vet may put together a therapy plan, or even arrange a consultation with a behaviour therapist.
DIGESTION TROUBLE
Q Our Doberman has been diagnosed as having pancreas deficiency, based on tested specimens of his stool.
The prescribed treatment is six capsules of Tryplase each day.
Please could you tell us more about this complaint and whether any other treatment is available.
A Your dog would appear to be suffering from a deficiency of pancreatic enzymes which help to digest protein, fat and sugars.
This condition is called Exocrine Pancreatic Insufficiency, occurring when the pancreas is put out of action by the body's own immune system which is supposed to protect it — a possible autoimmune disorder (see Dogs Today October issue).
The signs of EPI can look like many other digestive problems, so it is crucial that the condition is confirmed by tests.
There is now a specific blood test which is far more reliable than stool tests.
The Tryplase capsules provide your dog with a supply of pig pancreas enzymes to substitute those he can no longer make for himself and, as you have seen, they work well.
But, just as important is providing your dog with a suitable diet — preferably a highly digestible/low residue diet.
The best way is to use a prepared prescription diet from your vet, such a Hill's Prescription i/d.
Feed him small quantities at regular intervals — at least three meals a day.
Remember that he will need Tryplase capsules with each meal, and resist giving him any titbits.
The damage to your dog's pancreas is permanent, so it is likely that you will have to continue with the capsules for life, but with the right sort of diet, you may well be able to reduce the number he needs.
Your dog will need a check-up every six months but once EPI has been confirmed, he shouldn't need any more tests.
If you have any problems or questions about the health of your pet, write to:.
Mark regrets he will only be able to reply through this page.
HARDENED Hearts
Put to the test by people's ignorance and cruelty, breed rescuers have to be tolerant but firm.
Rescue Personality of the Year saw their effects rewarded
BRIAN KELLY
In the ignorance stakes, this was Mount Everest.
The local council had suddenly decreed that unless the school caretaker got rid of his dog, he would lose his job and the house that came with it.
The bitch had grown up alongside the children, and was all the more charming for it, but bureaucracy had spoken.
Had the dog been a Retriever or a Setter, no problem.
It was big, it was black, and virtually overnight, the breed's name had become poison.
The Rottweiler had to go.
And it went — to Gillian Woodward's boarding kennel in nearby Hutton Henry, Cleveland.
As a prominent figure in Rottweiler rescue, she's stubbed her toe on more unfair bullying and downright idiocy than most.
Her work was recognised at Crufts when she won the breed rescue section of the Rescue Personality Of The Year Award, put together by Pet Plan and Dog World .
You might think anybody involved with caring for animals would be soft to the core, but in Gillian's case, you'd have to get through a tough layer first.
When irresponsible people pepper your day with their various shortcomings, you really have to put your foot down — sometimes.
‘When instinct tells me a dog would be better off with me than people who might just leave it on the motorway, I have to bite my tongue, but I'm noted for being blunt.
I've no words of wisdom, but there are certain people who drive me to distraction,’ she said.
‘As far as the anti-Rottie thing goes, I think you just get hardened to it.
You can't weaken.
‘With any breed, there's going to be a rotten apple in the barrel, but it's stupid people not acting in the dog's best interest.
People come here looking for a Rottweiler as a guard dog — I tell them to go and buy a burglar alarm.
They don't want a dog, really.
They just want something that runs about and barks at the right times.
They don't know what a dog is.’
Actually, Gillian does have a serious Rottweiler problem — she can't get enough bed space.
She has nine Rotties, of which seven live in the house an six share the bed.
When the breed became man's worst enemy (and the tabloids' best friend) about three years ago, Gillian's kennel joined forces with the Northern Rottweiler Club, but her site remains primarily a boarding kennel.
WORTHY OF MERIT
She certainly has her fans — she drew 2,181 votes in the poll to win the award's first prize £500 (going into NRC funds).
And what became of the caretaker's bitch?
She was rehomed, but the story made the front page of the local Sunday paper.
Loads of people didn't half tell the council how cruel it was.
Gillian Harwood from Lincolnshire, who runs Britain's only rescue kennels for Old English Sheepdogs, was second and won £200.
Happy endings for homeless Rotties stories isn't the only thing that Gillian shares with Mary Kister, winner of the poll's all breed/mongrel section.
Those who know no better probably reckon they can put one over Mary, passing her off as a cups-of-tea, rustic East Country accent, down-home, fund-raising type.
She's probably a softie underneath, but, like Gillian, doesn't suffer fools.
‘I can't help it sometimes, I just  give them what for!
There has to be a limit to what you can do.’
she said.
‘If someone comes in with a litter of four-month-old puppies and I take them in, would you believe they just come back six months later with the bitch's next log!
‘When they realise there's work and money involved — when you refuse to take their problem — the penny suddenly drops and they might just consider spaying.
‘The message might be getting through.
There's a woman nearby I've known about 30 years who rescues cats and we agree there are less unwanted cats about.’
The Tavistock Animal Shelter, which Mary runs with partner Dorice Hicks, has been a menagerie in its decade, housing 413 dogs, 198 cats, goats, sheep, rabbits — even a show-standard rat.
LACK OF SCRUPLES
Many's the time Mary has seen litters of Yorkshire Terriers and Bichon Frise crated up at Plymouth railway station — puppies from farms being shipped to France, and an uncertain fate.
‘Like Wales, Cornwall is a poorer, semi-rural area where puppies are farmed.
It's quite legal, but not knowing exactly where you are sending a pup is a disgrace.
I know a championship show judge who has no qualms about doing it.’
The shelter sees many dogs which have just been dumped on Dartmoor — a favourite spot for ‘losing’ pets, as the wilderness has few witnesses.
‘We had a Greyhound come down from the moor once.
He was a poor old soul — obviously an old racer been abandoned.
He was about 10, and we decided to keep him to see out his days.
That was five years ago — he's still about!’
Mary sees her task as sorting the wheat from the chaff — the genuine cases from the cruel and careless.
‘We had a nine-month-old Rottweiler to rehome once.
I put ads in the dog press, and a chap from the Isle of Wight showed interest as he'd just lost his.
A Rottweiler club member checked him out and okayed him, and he drove over to collect the dog.
We've just had a christmas card from him saying how happy the dog has made him.
Those stories make it all worthwhile.’
Second place in all breed/mongrels section went to Kathy Bird from Gateshead.
Kathy manages the Northern Counties Animal Protection Society.
Mon amour, Emile
It may not have been love at first sight — winged ears and gangly legs have limited appeal — but their relationship was meant to be
ROBERT HERRINGTON
I was sitting outside a little café in Avignon enjoying a quiet glass of Pernod when I first saw Emily.
At first glance I thought I was looking at a cross between a gibbon and a goat.
Closing my eyes, thinking that it might be either the sun or the Pernod, I waited a few seconds and chanced another look.
Sure enough, she was still there, sitting on her haunches eyeing me thoughtfully.
Without warning, she suspended her scrutiny to locate a flea which was causing her some bother.
Having settled her differences, she gave my hand a tentative lick.
My next action was fatal — I patted her silly-looking head.
She was still with me when I arrived at Cannes two days later.
I had set out on my walking tour of France in search of  tranquillity .
I certainly didn't count on having a bizarre looking pooch as a companion — I just couldn't get rid of her.
I gave up.
Giving her the name Emily, I decided to adopt her, bought a packet of flea powder and that was that.
I first discovered Emily's dubious devotion to duty in Cannes, when a French Moroccan chap caught hold of my arm in an attempt to sell me a lurid rug.
Maybe she suspected I was being attacked…anyway, she nipped me first and then the dragoman.
With ear-shattering shrieks echoing around the square, I decided it would be wise to wonder elsewhere.
Calling Emily, I legged it to the youth hostel two miles away.
The warden and his wife, being owners of a Siamese cat, were not overjoyed to see Emily but they reluctantly fed her a saucer of milk, saying that she could stay for one night.
Meanwhile the warden's cat, who had been enjoying a light snack in the dustbin, saw Emily, saw the milk, and that is all I can remember, it happened so quickly.
A second later the cat was drinking the milk, and Emily was sitting dejectedly in the corner trying to lick a scratch on the end of her nose, and going cross-eyed in the attempt.
A born poseur, she would take great pleasure in performing tricks to admiring audiences along the ritzy Avenue de la Croisette in Cannes.
Her most popular trick was to jump in the air and land on her stupid head — using my rucksack as a landing pad!
Any titbits would be humbly placed at my feet.
Two months later we pushed off to Paris and, except for one little episode, the journey went well.
We were both feeling a bit peckish and there was nothing to eat — well, it was a third-class French train.
Then she saw the sausage.
Wrapped in a serviette it was lying on the lap of a fat, snoozing gentleman.
Where Emily had learned to thieve so skilfully I'll never know — perhaps she'd taught herself — but it was the niftiest piece of pilfering I'd ever witnessed.
She gently eased it off his lap, gave it a few licks and pushed it over to me for first bite.
I promptly eased it back onto the lap and desperately tried to imitate someone who has been asleep for hours, with his arm wrapped fiercely round his dog.
When we reached Dieppe I emptied my kit into another bad and popped Emily into my rucksack.
All went smoothly until we reached the British customs.
Full of good intentions I declared quite sincerely that I had a dog in my rucksack.
Chuckling indulgently at the idea of an impoverished journalist keeping a dog in a back sack, the customs officer inscribed the ‘OK’ chalk mark on my bags.
And then it happened — Emily sneezed.
Six months later I collected her from quarantine.
As I approached her kennel I paused a moment.
There she was, sitting forlornly in a corner and, unlike all the other dogs, making no noise, just gazing at the floor in a philosophical way.
My eyes started to blink and a lump stuck in my throat…if you have ever seen a dog barking in French, wagging not only its rudder but its complete hind quarters, and trying to punch you in your chest at the same time — there you have Emily's welcome in a nut-shell.
Emily's home-coming was something of a triumph.
She was idolised and soon settled down to life with a British family.
Her main occupations seemed to be divided between gazing with admiration at herself in a mirror for hours on end, and persuading whoever was available to take her walkies.
She gave us all so much love.
Emily had many happy years and grew old quite gracefully.
Then the inevitable happened.
She took to her basket and ‘popped her cloggs’ quite peacefully, without any fuss.
She wouldn't have wanted to have grown too old and survived her dignity.
But I did miss her.
Suddenly I realised what Tennyson had in his heart when he said:
‘Oh, for the touch of a vanished paw and the sound of a bark that is still.’
ROBERT KILLICK'S Short Story
Like father, like son
Toby the Welsh Terrier is undeterred by any challenge.
With family honour at stake, his inquisitive nature just gets the better of him…
My famous dog Oggie, who has alternately made me hate and love him for 12 years, has passed his tendency for being naughty on to his children.
Genetics is a big mystery to me.
I have discovered that not only do they pass their shape and colour, but behavioural patterns as well.
For instance, Oggie puts one or both feet into his water bowl when he drinks.
His puppies do the same thing — and it's not as if they can copy him, because they never see him.
He doesn't like his children, so we have to keep them apart, which isn't a bad idea when you consider it.
One of Oggie's sons, Toby, or not Toby (well, I thought it was funny at the time…never mind…) is very disobedient.
He thinks it's fun to hang onto the back of my coat with a grip of iron, so that I have to take my coat off and pry him loose.
Whenever I go into his kennel it's a toss-up whether he escapes or not; he wins about one in fifteen times.
Once when he got out, I cleaned his kennel, stupidly thinking he would come back.
I called, shouted, whistled and banged his food bowl.
He didn't come back.
(A few weeks prior to this we had some special wrought iron gates made.
She-who-Pulls-the-Strings said the bars were to far apart and the dogs would get stuck in them.
With usual confidence, I told her not to be ridiculous, the possibility was infinitesimal — and not very big either!)
I had been frantically searching the garden for Toby, and found him, his head stuck through the bars unable to move.
Don't worry folks, I knew what to do — smear some butter around the head and neck.
He snarled, growled and snapped.
Half-an-hour and half-a-pound of best Irish butter later, I had not only not succeeded, but somehow I'd got him further through.
He was now stuck just behind the shoulder blades.
I phoned the fire brigade, but as the station officer's wife was having a baby in the fire engine on the way to hospital, rescuing dogs was not too high on their list of priorities.
So I tried the RSPCA inspector, but it seemed he was more concerned with a cow wandering about in a shopping mall in Carmarthen.
A passing farmer said he was strong enough to prise open the bars with his bare hands.
Bracing his feet against the gate post, he applied his full strength to the bar and pulled the gate off it's hinges!
The shock of it surprised the dog, when then bit the farmer (modestly forbids me to mention where, but do give it some thought).
I then had the problem of having to stand, holding the gate up so that it wouldn't fall on the dog and by now there were three tractors and four cars blocking the road.
Suggestions ranged from hacksawing to blow-torches.
The a mini drew up and a young woman in a mini-skirt got out.
‘No problem!’ she said and fetched a little scissor jack.
A few deft strokes with a metal bar and Toby was free!
It was now six in the evening and drinks were served — it turned into quite a party.
You'll never believe this.
The following afternoon, I was in the lounge making a dog's travel box.
Toby had been washed and was running about, drying.
Welsh Terriers have an inquisitive nature — they like to help with little household jobs.
To get a closer look at what I was doing he jumped onto the table, knocking eight woodscrews onto the floor.
He jumped down and grabbed one, I ran after him, trod on the screws, fell, hurting my gouty foot and breaking the blue vase Auntie Dolly gave us for christmas.
Crawling across the floor I trapped him behind the settee.
He graciously let me prise his mouth open, but there was no sign of the screw!
Now the great question, where was it?
Had he swallowed it?
We searched that room for two hours — three of us on hands and knees vacuumed, and sorted through the bag.
Nothing.
He'd swallowed it.
Phone the vet!
Would you know it, the area's one and only X-ray machine was on loan to a tyre salesman (don't ask!).
‘Feed him cotton wool sandwiches and wait at the other end!’ said the vet.
Try doing that!
All night we watched, waited and walked.
At 7am he finally performed.
No screw.
At 10 o'clock I hobbled around the kennels while the kennel girl watched Toby.
I went back into the lounge and there, glittering against the brown carpet, was that damned screw!
CHAMPION of CHAMPIONS
Why hasn't anyone done it before?
Some ideas just seem so good, you can't understand why on one else thought of them first.
This new date on the canine calendar will be the highlight
BEVERLEY CUDDY
It's an unbeatable recipe.
Take all the ingredients of Crufts, trim off the fat, hold it over one day in a London venue, reduce the stuffiness and pour the money raised into deserving dog charities.
We'll certainly be going back for seconds!
If you missed the Contest of Champions this year, make sure you don't in 1993.
If you can only get to go to one doggie event, this is the one that has it all.
The contest used to be a smaller affair, held in the evening at a smart hotel.
Dog show people looked forward to it — but people in the outside world just didn't know it existed.
The committee of the Canine Supporters Charity crossed their fingers tightly when they took the brave step of hiring the Wembley Exhibition Centre.
Their aim was two-fold; to raise much needed funds, and to introduce the public to an event they could understand and get involved in.
Previously, only the top forty or so top-winning show dogs were invited to compete.
This year, the top dog and bitch in each breed were invited.
This gave a unique opportunity to spectators.
If you were to try to see a top specimen of every breed at Crufts you would have to attend on all four days and walk a good couple of miles!
At Wembley, Nova Scotia Duck Tolling Retrievers rubbed noses with Cesky Terriers, Affenpinschers and Afghans were benched side-by-side.
And you could be sure that every dog you saw was an excellent example of their breed — they had to be the most consistent winners throughout the year before they could qualify for an invite.
Judging was quick and exciting.
Unlike the usual show format, the contest was run along the lines of Wimbledon.
The one-on-one competition was fun and quick to watch.
Next year I hope they bring in a seeding system as many of the top winning dogs clashed very early on.
Only one of this year's Crufts group winners made it through to the last forty!
A relaxation of Kennel Club rules enabled a fun dimension to the show — a competition for the best decorated bench.
Visitors to Crufts and other shows will know that these metal-sided stalls are usually left very plain.
Only a simple white card of very precise dimensions is allowed — and even then, only to advertise the kennel's name and address.
At Wembley all this changed.
Talented dog owners turned their benching areas into diverse grottos.
The doll's house for a Chihuahua was a favourite — as was the Bulldog bench proclaiming ‘You can't beat a bit of Bully’ equipped with a dart board.
People just didn't take themselves quite so seriously as they do at Crufts.
As judging was speedy, everyone had plenty of time to mingle.
There were a great many breed club and rescue scheme stands — so there was every opportunity for potential dog owners to seek expert advice, to chat and to pat.
Talent was represented as well as beauty.
All day long there were exciting displays of agility, flyball, Bernese Mountain Dog cart-pulling, Whippet obedience, drug detection…and endless list.
Dogs Today's most talented dog star, Emma, impressed the crowd with her routine of tricks, and as for the singing dogs — read about that elsewhere!
The final rounds of the judging took place at the charity ball that evening.
Over 600 people attended, and again, it's an event we can recommend.
Tickets for the excellent dinner were realistically priced and the spectacle of watching the top dogs compete on a raised catwalk was dramatic, but not without its moments!
Showing a large dog when you're wearing an evening dress is not always easy.
There were some interesting compromises…my favourite was the lady with the Rottweiler.
She wore a yellow taffeta ball gown with black pumps and matching bum bag for her liver treats!
A playful harlequin Great Dane had the whole of Wembley holding its breath.
He started to walk slowly backwards — and off the catwalk, narrowly avoiding demolishing all the cut-glass crystal trophies!
In the end, the form books were correct — the tip winning dog of the year won the Champion of Champions title.
This beautiful Old English Sheepdog hadn't been able to compete at Crufts this year because his co-owner had been judging.
The dog seemed just as delighted as his owner.
He stood up in his back legs, put his front paws on her shoulders and attempted to remove her make-up with a single lick!
A good day, a good night and all in a good cause.
Classic PERFORMANCE
Pav-a-Rotties, Opera Springers, Tame Kiri Chihuahuas and Labra-dormas — we're looking for you.
Send us a tape (audio or video) of your dog singing to classical music and your dog might become the Nigel Kennedy of the nineties.
We know there are plenty of you howlers out there — so send us an example of your most tuneful work, as soon as possible.
The classical singing dog launch at the Contest of Champions was a howling success.
Last year's soap theme winner — Kim showed his versatility with a wonderful rendition of ‘Nessun Dorma’.
He's obviously the dog to beat.
After last year's success he has appeared on TV and radio all over the world and has been signed up by three advertising agencies.
MODEL DOGS
Another attraction at the Contest was the opening of our model dog register.
We're always on the look-out for a well-behaved dog to pose for our cover shots — and we often get enquiries from other media, too.
We're looking for all types of dog — well-known and exotic breeds of dog, crossbreeds, mixtures, dogs that can do tricks…you name it.
If you would like to put your dog on our register simply send us a stamped addressed envelope and we'll send you a form.
Write in for this free service to:
WILD POPPY blossoms
Frightened and starving, the pitifully thin dog desperately needed help — if only they could catch her first.
by JANICE DARK
The pathetic, skinny dog was scratching around the dustbin searching for the slightest bit of food, until she took one look at me and shot off with her tail between her legs.
Stockley Park near Heathrow is the site of a huge new golf course, where I work from a small mobile office.
Workmen on the site had tried to catch the under-nourished dog, but hadn't managed to get anywhere near her — they all thought that she must have been very badly abused because she was so terrified of people.
That was the start of my determination to catch her.
I rang the RSPCA who said that they weren't allowed to catch stray dogs in an unconfined area, unless the dog was being ill treated or was hurt.
The local council didn't have a dog warden either, an no one else seemed able to help me.
After work the same evening, my husband and I walked all over the golf course and were eventually rewarded by spotting the dog in the distance, although we failed to coax her towards us.
To get her into a routine, I started leaving food out at the same time and place every day, always whistling the same tune, so that she would associate it with being fed.
Eventually, after about a week, her little head would pop up over the hill and watch me put out her food as I whistled, but she wouldn't come down for it until she felt the coast was clear.
She was obviously very hungry because she always gulped her food down like there was no tomorrow.
In the meantime I asked my vet whether he would let me have some sedatives to put into her food.
He wasn't particularly happy with the idea, but kindly decided to let me try after an RSPCA inspector had seen the condition of the dog, and had judged how much she weighed, so we could give the correct dosage.
So, on a rainy Sunday in June, my husband, sister, brother-in-law and father all attempted to catch the little waif.
Armed with walkie-talkies so we could trail her progress at a distance, we waited until noon when she nervously approached and then eagerly ate all her dinner, with the added sedatives.
Off she plodded.
We didn't sight of her once, even though the vet had told me it could be an hour before the drug took effect.
Three hours later we were still trailing her!
The tablets didn't seem to have had even the slightest effect.
By this time we were all soaked to the skin, so we gave up, knowing that she would go off somewhere and have a good sleep.
We knew she wouldn't go near the road because she was so frightened of people and movement that she always stuck to the security and space of the golf course.
Poppy, as we were now calling her, began to get used to me, but would still not come close.
I even tried laying trails of cheese that led to my feet, which she scoffed up, but she didn't trust me enough to take the cheese from my hand.
EXHAUSTED SURRENDER
Convinced that an increased dose of sedatives would be the answer, we went through the same procedure once again.
After trailing her for over two hours Poppy flopped down, but when I approached her she just got up and dived off through a hole in the fence.
This time we really thought we had lost her, but some time later we saw her crawl underneath my Portakabin.
It was then we realised that, ironically, of all places she could have chosen to make her home, Poppy had decided to live under my office.
In the meantime I tried to find a home for Poppy to go to when (or if) we eventually caught her.
Sadly, as much as we wanted to keep her, we were out at work all day, and lived  in a flat without a garden.
Eventually, I found out about the Dog Welfare and Rescue Society in Stokenchurch and spoke to the kennel manager who said just what I had been longing to hear.
He assured me they never put dogs down and they would try to help her build up trust in humans again before finding her a home.
Much heartened, I continued.
SLOW PROGRESS
Gradually, I moved all Poppy's bowls near the entrance to her den under the office, and fed her twice a day.
I also wormed her over a course of three weeks, and watched her slowly put on weight.
Now on two cans of food a day plus biscuits and marrowbones, her coat became shiny and she seemed to have grown taller.
Poppy had managed to gather quite a collection of workmen's boots, so I went to the pet shop and bought her some toys, which she loved playing with.
By this time, my husband decided to build his own dog trap.
After much midnight hammering, a large wooden frame, covered in chicken wire with a drop down door was constructed.
We placed it by the spot were she went in and out, and every day I moved her food nearer to the cage until, eventually, she had to go right in to eat.
By the end of a fortnight she went in and out quite happily.
Finally, after three months of effort, we caught Poppy in the trap.
She was as good as gold, not making a sound all the way to the dog's home.
I really had thought she would go berserk, but she just trembled from head to toe, and was only calmed slightly by the sound of my voice.
Poppy dissolved into a quivering heap when staff tried to lead her out of the cage, so they suggested that I tried.
I was a bit nervous, because I thought she might go for me, but I crawled into the cage and put a slip lead on her.
However, she didn't even growl — she was so frightened.
I left Poppy at  the home surrounded by lots of new toys.
We had every confidence in the staff, they seemed so caring and understanding.
We decided to pay for Poppy's upkeep at the kennels, and visited her each week.
We were delighted when she was kennelled with another dog, John, whom she absolutely idolised.
Their devotion was apparent when we took them both out for a walk.
She stuck to him like glue.
Poppy seemed so much happier — the staff at the home had obviously helped to build her trust in people, although she still cowered if someone bent down to make a fuss of her.
Several weeks later, John was lucky enough to find a home, but Poppy didn't have to cope alone for long.
Her new owners came along soon after.
HAPPY ENDINGS
We are in contact with Poppy's new owners, who have re-named her Dusty.
We are thrilled that she is living happily with a sweet Jack Russell Terrier, several cats, rabbits, and even a horse!
Her rehabilitation is now almost complete, and thanks to the special care of the Stokenchurch dog's home and the patience of her new owners, she can only go from strength to strength.
Stokenchurch Dog Rescue and Welfare Society is always looking for voluntary dog walkers, blankets, towels and newspaper, as well as much needed finance so that they can continue to care for the other 70 dogs they have in their kennels at present.
If you would like to help, please contact the kennel manager,.
Poppy visiting the feeding station, set up to get her used to a routine.
Eventually, Poppy decided to make her home directly under Janice's office.
A trap was made near the entrance, and after three months of patience, she was finally caught
Janice covering the trap over to keep Poppy calm — before her trip to Stokenchurch
Perish THE THOUGHT!
Maurice Dodd's famous cartoon strip The Perishers just wouldn't have been the same without Boot
MAURICE DODD
For 14 years we owned a large hairy dog.
He was on the payroll as an inspiration generator for ‘Boot’— a canine character I'd invented for my cartoon strip,The Perishers .
The character is based on an Old English Sheepdog, so this was what I sought.
It is a fairly large and considerably hairy breed as a rule, but my eventual acquisition turned out to be playing the dog game by his own rules and was larger and hairier than any I've seen before or since.
He weighed 196lb and, when wishing to indulge in a man-to-man talk (I say man-to-man because I became convinced he didn't believe he was a dog at all) he would rear up and rest his forepaws on my shoulders and look down into my eyes, which are a rather attractive dark brown and reside about five feet two inches above sea level.
He was chosen from an advertisement in a superior doggie magazine, much perused by the Barbour wax-coated set, rather in the manner of a mail-order bride.
I imagine many a western pioneer got the same sort of surprise as I did when the bride eventually arrived; except that I didn't marry the dog — there's nothing peculiar about me.
I ordered him from a kennel in Norfolk, arranging a price and delivery by train.
Just to show I'm nobody's fool I contacted a veterinary surgeon and asked him to examine the dog (who was a year old) to make sure it wasn't sickly, had a leg on each corner, wouldn't keep toppling over, and had a head fixed on the right end.
With Old English Sheepdogs it's sometimes difficult to tell — but who wants a dog that walks backwards?
There were times, subsequently, when I felt I should have hired a second vet to check the location and fitting of my own cranium.
Within a day the vet phoned me with the news that the dog had two intact testicles (a matter I'd hardly been musing upon) and was suffering from a bit of diarrhoea — but had been put on a milk diet which would soon clear it up.
I phoned the kennel owner to inform her that British Rail insisted the dog wear a muzzle and that I would pay her back if she'd buy one.
I then issued the command to dispatch the dog, all systems go, circle the waggons…geronimo!
The day came to collect the dog.
My wife, Daphne, volunteered to stay and man — sorry, woman — the ramparts at home; thus proving, not for the first time, she was far too bright to have married me in the first place.
However, thought she, it would be right to take the children, which I did — thus proving, not for the first the last time, I'd be wasting my time applying for the Mensa test.
Off we set, in the estate car, for Liverpool Street station, London.
Myself, three daughter,— Frances, Rosemary and Catherine — and one son, Michael (plus a length of clothes-line to serve as a lead until I could decide what kind of proper lead I'd need).
Their ages, in ascending order as above, were four, seven, ten and fourteen.
I can't quite recall the age of the clothes-line.
SPECIAL DELIVERY
One more piece of information you should possess before the tale unfolds is that Michael was encased in two leg callipers as a result of polio — contracted when one year old — and walked, or rather surges about with the aid of two crutches.
He had surmounted his handicap by developing a method of locomotion, when haste was required, of progressing by prodigious leaps at astonishing speeds, using the crutches in a pole-vault manner.
Since he regarded the crutches as extensions of his arms he had the habit of windmilling them about in moments of excitement.
At that time (and I've no idea how things stand now — I haven't been back since), Liverpool Street station had no parking space.
There was a horseshoe put-down and pick-up point between an ascending and descending ramp but parking there was prohibited.
More than half a sweaty hour touring the environs of the station, revealed there wasn't space to park even a roller-skate, so I adopted a to-hell-with-it attitude and parked in a corner of the horseshoe — well out of everybody's way.
Off we set into the station proper, aware we were already late for the train's arrival.
The station was filled with hissing steam engines (well, it was some time back) and one decided to belch, steam and whistle just as we passed, thus managing to blow the youngest daughter's mind, who demanded to be carried on the spot — and at frequent intervals during the rest of the adventure.
We found, and searched, a by-now passengerless train and eventually located a luggage van containing an enormous, hairy, and  morose dog in one corner and a small morose guard in the other.
the reason for the dog's sadness was the tightly wound wire netting the stupid kennel woman had wrapped around his jaws as a makeshift muzzle.
The guard's sorrow had been caused by the vet's mistaken optimism as to the dog's ailment.
A large portion of diarrhoea twixt guard and dog proved how sadly mistaken the vet had been.
The children surged dogwards, with mingled shrieks of condolence and joy, only to be hurled back by my even higher-decibel commands not to venture o'er the noisome swamp, which I gallantly traversed to unwind the stupid restrainer from the poor dog's jaws, wondering the while if he'd take a justified revenge on the human race by biting me; which he didn't.
A clinging-to-the-van-sides return joined us in one jostling clamorous mob as we disgorged onto the platform, at which point the jaundiced guard spoke his first and only words.
Just the hint of a vengeful smile accompanied the massage that we couldn't just walk off with that there dog — we'd have to take him to the parcels office and sign for him.
The parcels office was on a walkway, about one storey high, approached by iron lattice-work stairs.
Upon our arrival at the foot of the stairs the dog made it plain that stairs were an innovation he'd not encountered before, by staging the first of many sit-down strikes.
The stairs were a formidable obstacle to son Michael, also, since we lived in a bungalow.
But he began to struggle manfully upwards, gaining mastery over one step before getting a crutch trapped in the lattice.
The dog refused to budge, so, instructing the two older girls to hold tight to the younger, I heaved up the 196lb of stubborn fur and staggered to the railing I went down to extricate my struggling son and carried him upwards followed by shrieking pleas of, ‘Daddy, don't leave us’ and ‘I want a carry’, from the frantic tadpole in charge of two red-faced little girls who were now starting to show signs of stain and filling tear-ducts.
Once on the walkway the gallant band of adventurers proceeded with some difficulty, since the hairiest one was feeling far from gallant or adventurous.
The walkway was about the width of a large luggage trolley.
Upon the approach of a porter from the opposite direction, the dog proved he could match the dimensions of a trolley by laying flat with all available limbs akimbo; a heaving mountain of furiously barking hair the sensible porter declined to try and pass.
More railway staff arrived and showed similar lack of resolution until the clotted ranks resembled those of Tuscany when Horatio held the bridge.
As one man, which included several honorary woman, they stumbled backwards as we managed to heave the dog into a sitting position and slide him on his backside the last 20ft to the parcels' office.
The torpid staff inside showed no inclination to outpace your average snail until I mentioned that the dog could contain a considerable volume of food and was suffering from a severe dose of Delhi Belly.
This incantation transformed snails into jet-propelled gastropoda and the family, with the duly signed-for latest member, mad a clamorous exit.
We proceeded in the manner of what's known in film terms as a romp, though I was feeling far from rompish.
We cascaded down the stairs as the dog decided he could take going downstairs in his stride — and seethed across the station into the sunshine of the great outdoors; where I observed two large policemen surrounding my estate car, notebooks in hand — and under the obvious impression that they were abut to make an easy collar.
CHAOTIC CLIMAX
What they saw was a milling mob mixed ages, dimensions and dispositions.
One was making astonishing leaps and alternately waving crutches in the manner of a vertical Boadicea.
The centre-piece was a perspiring bloke who was plainly at the end of his tether and at the other end of the tatty tether was a huge hairy bundle who'd decided he was now one of the family and acting in a suitably demented manner; noise effects included whoops, cheers, shrieks, curses, admonitions and deep explosive barks which provided punctuation in the manner of the cannon fire in the 1812 Overture.
I could see various expressions pass over the faces of the waiting constabulary.
One of the first to pass was the possibility of an easy collar, or any other kind of collar.
As I approached, one of them spoke with weary resignation: ‘Would you please get this vehicle out of here as quickly as possible, sir’.
‘Certainly,’ I replied, as I loaded the assembled personnel.
‘Er…would you mind giving me a lift-up with the dog?’
COMPETITION
AN ITCHY SUBJECT
Here's a quiz that will get you scratching your head — all the prizes for this competition relate to fleas!
The first five correct entries out of the sack will be rewarded with a signed copy of Pat Quinn's book —The Greatest Dog Show on Earth .
A delightfully illustrated story of a flea's eye-view of Crufts!
The first 50 winning postcards will be sent a Sherleys flea collar.
One size fits all, as they can be trimmed to fit almost any type of dog.
So jump to it and send off your entries.
Mark your postcard or sealed-down envelope Fleas,
Entries close May 4th 1992
Solve the clues in both circles and match them up to form seven breeds of dog
Name of oboe:…anglais
Lowest form of music
Needles and…?
Meat roasting rod
Red fluid
Chemical Symbol for Boron
Evergreen hedge shrub
French ‘&’
King of the sky
U.S Soldier
Sonny and…?
Elizabeth Regina
Pursue
26th letter in alphabet 
CAREERS with dogs Part 16: DOG MESS DISPOSAL
Toxocariasis scaremongering has made dogs increasingly unwelcome in public areas, and dog mess disposal a major problem.
Sanipet's novel door-to-door collection service offers the perfect green solution
NICK MAYS
Doggy mess may not be the most savoury topic for discussion, but it is becoming an increasingly important one!
For a start, there is growing public concern about the effects of toxocariasis, the disease transmitted by the roundworm Toxocara canis, carried in the faeces of un-wormed dogs.
Much unnecessary anxiety about the disease has been caused by media hysteria and misinformation.
Several local authorities have provided special bins and ‘pooper scooper’ in parks, but unfortunately there are many dog owner who simply can't be bothered to clear up after their dogs.
As a result many councils have taken an increasingly anti-dog stance in the form of prohibitive legislation.
Parks, recreation grounds, beaches and even some town centres are fast becoming ‘no-go’ areas for dogs.
SIMPLY EFFECTIVE
This backlash has meant many dog owners having to confine their pets to their own gardens for exercise and toilet use which, of course, leads to the problem of how to dispose of the dogs' faeces.
Certainly, dog loos are an option, but many are extremely expensive, or not 100 per cent safe, containing chemicals which can be toxic to people, pets and soil.
Burying the faeces is another option, but how many holes can you dig in your garden?
It is illegal to put large quantities of animal faeces in household waste for collection, so that idea is ruled out.
A big problem, indeed!
This precise dilemma led Shaun Mason from Doncaster, South Yorkshire to come up with a tremendous brain-wave.
Like the best ideas, it is stunningly simple.
Together with his wife, Lynne, Shaun formed a company called Sanipet billed by the Masons, quite correctly, as ‘Britain's most unique environment service’.
Each week, Shaun collects dog waste from people's houses.
Sanipet provide the householder with a 12-litre sealed plastic container, together with a handy scoop and spatula set.
The householder drops the collected dog mess into the container, which holds a mixture of non-toxic chemicals and a simple perfume.
The chemicals break down the faeces and obviously kill any bacteria present.
After a week, Shaun calls back for the full container and drops off a new one.
The full ones are taken back to Sanipet's processing area — a rented building on a farm in nearby Hatfield Woodhouse — where they are emptied into a hopper.
The contents are then sucked into a large tank on a trailer, which is taken to a local refuse treatment works, where it is emptied and thoroughly cleaned.
The dog mess is ultimately disposed of in the correct manner as prescribed by the authorities.
Shaun explained how Sanipet originally came about.
‘We've got two dogs of our own, and I'd like to think we're responsible owners who clean up after our dogs.
But I know from personal experience that gardens can get a bit messy — you can't take a dog for a walk every time it wants to ‘go’, even with the best will in the world.
I was also getting very concerned about the anti-dog stance of many local councils.
One council were looking at enforcing a total ban on dogs in all parks in their area.
So people were increasingly being faced with the problem of lots more dog mess close to home and how to dispose of it!
EFFICIENT & CHEAP
‘We thought up the collection idea and checked into all the legalities.
As a business, it seemed viable enough.
It took a bit of time to get all the necessary planning permission, simply because none of the authorities involved had ever had to deal with anything like Sanipet before!
It took a bit of doing — for instance, the disposal site had to check out 100 per cent .
Anyway, we finally started up in September last year.’
And had the idea of door-to-door disposal caught on with the public?
‘Again, being something so totally new and different, it took a while for people to fall in with it,’ Shaun explained, ‘but we've built up a very strong client base in Doncaster and the district.
We're not expensive, we provide a good service, and people have responded well to that.
We charge £2.50 a week per container, which usually works out at about £10 a month.
Any extra containers cost around £1.50 each.
Currently, we're extending our service into commercial kennels — I reckon we could service a kennel of, say 50 dogs for around £20 a week.’
Sanipet has also been winning clean-up contracts for various dog shows, and show committees have been pleased with the results.
Dog exhibitors, too, have responded favourably to the service.
As support and demand grows, were there any plans for expansion?
‘Well, I'm a great believer in learning to walk before you can run,’ said Shaun, wisely, ‘but I'm not ruling out expansion.
If there is enough demand for our services in areas further afield, then we will attempt to meet it.
We could possibly arrange sub-contractors if anyone was interested in taking up the job in a given area.
I definitely think we've found a niche, not just in a business sense, but in the sense of providing a much needed service to dog owners, and I think we all need some helpful service nowadays, rather than being told to go elsewhere.’
Sanipet certainly seem to have a promising future ahead of them.
It just goes to prove the old Yorkshire saying: ‘Where there's muck, there's brass!’
For further information about Sanipet, contact .
True Case Histories
Wars of the Roses
Peter Neville is a consultant in animal behaviour and Honorary Secretary of the Association of Pet Behaviour Counsellors 
He is also author of the best-selling book Do Dogs Need Shrinks?
Dear Peter
Originally we owned one lovely Yorkie call Stan.
He's always been a gentle little soul, very loving and friendly with everyone, but as he had to spend 3–4 hours every day on his own at home, we thought we would get another dog as company for him.
A breed book advised us to get another Yorkie of the same sex, and so we acquired Ollie as a young puppy.
He immediately proved to be a very different character to Stan, exuding confidence, highly extrovert, but just as affectionate and sociable.
Ollie always wanted to play with Stan who, up to a point, would join in.
Gradually, however, the games became a bit to rough for Stan and he would retire after a while.
But, generally, Ollie seemed to have been good for him and brought his character out a lot.
Then, when Ollie reached about 18 months of age, out of the blue, they had their first serious fight.
It was over a titbit on the floor and occurred after a period when they growled at each other at feeding time.
So, naturally we started to feed them separately and became more careful when giving them titbits.
But then they started to fight over other things, and sometimes for no reason at all.
They now fight on a daily basis and invariably without so much as a warning growl.
They simply seem to charge into battle, and would probably  to fight to the death unless we separated them.
They wear muzzles at all times when they are together at home, and we put them in separate rooms whenever they are left on their own.
But they continue to fight like a pair of miniature canine Kendo warriors.
We've tried to love both dogs equally, and simply separate them for a cooling-off period after a fight, rather than telling them off in any way.
However, Melanie has recently been bitten on the arm through diving between them to break up a fight.
Though neither dog would ever deliberately turn on us, we are increasingly wary of having to get between two sets of flashing teeth — they may be small, but their teeth still hurt!
Please can you help us before our dogs really inflict serious injury on each other, or one of us gets bitten even more painfully.
Melanie, John and Ryan Cameron
I have deliberately not covered problems involving canine aggression in previous True Case Histories because diagnosis and treatment tends to be more difficult than with other problems.
Also, because teeth are on display, treatment usually contains an element of risk and — especially where a dog is aggressive towards its owners or third parties — it must be individually tailored to the family, taking careful account of how the dog is behaving at all times.
Such individuals counselling is not very suitable for covering in this feature because advice which may apply to one case of aggression may not apply to another…and so could even make matters worse, or put owners at risk.
However, in the case of the Camerons' battling Yorkies, diagnosis is more clear-cut and the initial stages of treatment, at least, can be applied to similar cases with a good chance of producing improvements.
If you do find yourself in the same position, however, please seek professional help from a member of the Association of Pet Behaviour Counsellors without delay, as well as implementing the suggestions outlined here.
APBC members only work on referral from veterinary surgeons, so please discuss your case first with your vet and ask to be referred to the local APBC practitioner.
The case of Stan and Ollie was far less amusing then Laurel and Hardy.
The early slapstick of their competitiveness had given way to outright savage aggression.
Individually, both dogs were perfect pets, though Stan was more retiring then the effervescent Ollie.
For instance, I was able to witness the dogs' problems first-hand as Melanie muzzled them and brought them together into the living room.
For a while they settled down, with Ollie curled up behind Melanie on the sofa, while Stan nestled between the two sleeping cats.
After a while Ollie jumped down and sat a few feet away.
Stan then moved closer to Melanie, and a major fight erupted without further ado.
It was typical — there was a very short moment of seething, but no outward warning before Ollie struck, aiming bites around Stan's neck and face, with Stan doing his best to fight back.
Thankfully, they were muzzled and Melanie could safely break up the fight.
It happened three times while I was there, each in very similar circumstances.
Peace prevailed only as long as Ollie had undisputed access to Melanie or, if she wasn't around, to John or 10-year-old Ryan.
Stan tried to avoid causing trouble, but sometimes he wasn't aware that he had posed a challenge to Ollie, and a single initiating gesture would cause trouble.
Ollie was simply seeking to put him back in his place and enforce his right to control relations, situations and possessions.
Once attacked, even gentle Stan defended himself with the utmost terrier vigour, although afterwards he would shake and look very upset, while Ollie paraded, as confident as ever.
NEVER LEAVE THEM TO FIGHT IT OUT
Many old-fashioned dog trainers used to believe that if dogs were left to fight it out, one would ultimately emerge victorious and remain dominant.
This is never true.
A pair of such evenly matched dogs can never develop a stable order through fighting.
All that will happen is that one or both dogs may become seriously injured.
Perhaps in the wild, after many battles, there would be a victory, but the loser would then be ejected from the pack or left behind, injured, and perhaps dying.
In the human family, even a bloodied loser will be kept in the pack and so the conflict remains — and can become more intensive and more frequent.
NO DEMOCRACY
The Camerons had to accept that there can be no such thing as democracy between male dogs fighting over status in the human pack.
Although Stan was older and previously dominant, by virtue of being the only dog, he had not turned out to be the natural leader of he pair.
While Ollie remained young and non-competitive, there had been no trouble.
But once Ollie had started to mature socially, his male hormone output enhanced his urge to gain a higher social level.
Suddenly, rough tumbles with Stan were not games but real trials of strength, with Ollie highly motivated to win.
Stan however, already had an established place in the order — just beneath the human pack leaders — and wasn't about to relinquish the privileges that went with this position.
The dogs clearly needed help in defining a stable hierarchy between themselves, which usually prevents such dangerous conflict.
Ideally, the second dog should have been a bitch, as one of each sex usually get along fine; but now, loving both dogs equally, all the family wanted to do was get Stan and Ollie to live together with them in peace.
DON'T CASTRATE TOO SOON, & DON'T CASTRATE THE WRONG DOG!
In many such cases, vets often castrate the apparent aggressor, but this invariably makes matter a lot worse.
Instead, the social distance between the two dogs needs to be accentuated.
So, if either dog is to be castrated, it is always the under-dog, making him less challenging to his higher ranking packmate.
However, in Stan and Ollie's case I was reluctant to suggest that Stan be castrated immediately because Ollie was still maturing.
I felt that we might be able to establish peace by other means until he had grown up and become more readily identifiable as top dog by Stan.
Pegging back Stan's hormonal status was an essential part of treatment, and after discussing the case with the Cameron's vet, an anti-male hormone injection was given to him.
This would last about 2–3 weeks, during which time I asked the family to make great efforts with the treatment plan.
DISTANCING BOTH DOGS & ESTABLISHING ORDER IN THE RANKS
Both dogs had acquired some of the privileges of a higher rank in the Cameron family pack that they had not really earned.
Neither was a dominant dog, but Ollie was an opportunist who used his appeal to  maintain certain rights that Melanie, especially, had given him.
He used his nimbleness to make sure he got onto the sofa first, and to be first upstairs at bedtime to claim his sleeping place.
Ollie had then built up the impression that he actually had a right to all these advantages and was, therefore, a very important dog in the pack — not important enough to challenge the humans, but able to get their attention when he wanted it, and to defend his position against Stan.
Both dogs' perception of their status therefore had to be redefined.
This is not done by the owners challenging them, or punishing them physically, but simply by making them earn all their privileges.
I advised the Camerons to ensure that both dogs always moved towards them to receive any affection, and preferably sat on command before receiving it.
A similar approach was adopted when feeding them and putting their leads on to go out.
I also suggested that they off Ollie his own warm secure bed downstairs, or at least out of the bedroom, to avoid giving him the ultimate rank-defining liberty of sleeping with the real top dogs.
Stan, more mindful of his place in life, was already happy to sleep downstairs.
For the time being, the dogs were still to be kept separate at night, when left at home alone, or unsupervised.
Whenever either dog attempted to exert their own will on the family, they were to be ignored.
The dominance reduction programme was set for about a four week period, although many of the suggestion do have to be carried out longer term — or even permanently — for best results with pairs of fighting male dogs.
As the family had to accept that Ollie was top dog, there could be no equal treatment for the gentler and older Stan — Ollie had to be favoured in all things.
Attention would only be conditionally offered to Ollie if Stan was in the room, and if the family were enjoying a quiet cuddle with Stan, he would have to be rejected in favour of Ollie if he appeared.
In short, Ollie would have first pickings — and sometimes sole pickings — from anything on offer.
Melanie was worried that this would upset Stan, but he was already giving clear signs that he just wanted to avoid conflict.
He was content just to be a part of the pack, and Ollie was prepared to allow this, providing he didn't get too close to the family.
With all privileges less available to either dog, the family would generally become much less of a focus for competition.
A TOUCH OF HUMAN PSYCHOLOGY
Encouraging owner to ‘switch-off’ in relations with their dogs for a while is extremely difficult.
Owners naturally forget or feel sorry for the underdog, but experience has shown that dog/owner relations are all important if treatment is to be successful.
Motivating very loving owners to adopt a ‘nothing in life is free’ policy can be tough, but a good way is to each place a money box on the mantelpiece.
Whenever one of the family is seen responding to their dog's demands, he or she must pay 10p (or 50p if you really want to see motivation at work!) into the other's boxes.
Human behaviour tends to be reshaped very quickly with this method…and usually we find that it's dad who ends up parting with most money!
THE IMPORTANCE OF GETTING OFF TERRITORY
Typically, Stan and Ollie never fought when out on walks away from home.
Dominance struggles are always enacted in the den where the symbols of rank — proximity to owners, food, toys and access to warm resting areas — are to be found.
Off-territory, the dogs behave more as a socially cohesive group.
After all, exercise excursions are actually hunting trips in their minds and success depends on an organised and co-ordinated approach.
It is therefore helpful to develop those interdependent bonds by taking battling males out as much as possible, even if only for short, on-lead walks.
Care must be exercised on returning home, and ideally the dogs should be separated while they have their leads taken off and their muzzles fitted.
Owners have to be especially vigilant in the first few moments when the dogs are brought back together, and while they settle down to rest.
Of course, a safety-first policy is vital while change are made, and I advised the family to continue with their present separation and muzzling policy, until thing seemed much calmer.
We also had to wait and see what effect the anti-male injection had.
If matters improved but then worsened again as the injection wore off, it would perhaps indicate that the problems could be controlled with longer-term hormonal management, or even castration for Stan.
At the time of writing, the situation had become a lot calmer, though it had only been a couple of weeks since Stan received his first injection.
We will be reporting back in a few weeks' time about this case and whether we have achieved a lasting and muzzle-free peace treaty between the battling Yorkies!
One thing to be grateful about from my point of view…that Yorkies aren't the size of Rottweilers!
COPING WITH PET LOSS
BY LAURA LEE
A final act of love
Ending the suffering of a much loved pet requires acceptance, compassion and a great deal of courage
It is never easy to come to terms with death — it brings with it a surfeit of emotions; disbelief, anger, guilt, resentment and remorse.
Humane destruction is not easy to face and even if your pet drifts off peacefully in your arms, you can still be left with a feeling of guilt.
After being responsible for your pet's welfare for many years you may feel that you are repaying your pet's love and loyalty by arranging for their death.
Reconciling yourself to making the final decision can take a long time and be very painful.
Although an owner may feel guilty about having to make this decision, guilt should not be confused with responsibility.
When the pet can no longer enjoy a good quality of life or is suffering, your responsibility then is to free him from aches, pains and indignities, to let him die peacefully and with dignity.
Facing the prospect of having your pet put down can be daunting, especially as people often don't know what to expect.
Most dogs are humanely destroyed by an intravenous injection of a powerful barbiturate or a mixture of a barbiturate and other drugs.
The vet usually shaves part of the foreleg and cleanses the skin with surgical spirit before the injection, while a nurse helps the owner to hold the dog.
Most dogs will become sleepy and relaxed while the injection is being made and will be completely unconscious before it is completed.
After the dog loses consciousness it rapidly stops breathing and its heart stops beating.
Apart from the insertion of the needle the animal should not experience any pain or distress.
The whole process only takes a few minutes, although to the distraught owners it can seem like hours.
Many people believe they owe it to their pet to be there at the end and, in retrospect, are glad that they were, yet you may feel you can't cope with witnessing this very sad event.
There is no correct answer — you must simply do what you feel is right for you and your pet.
Most vets are able to carry out humane destruction either at the surgery or at your home.
The home environment is private, you don't have to drive back from the vets when you are upset and your pet is likely to be more relaxed because his is in familiar surroundings with the people he loves.
However, it is possible that the vet may not be able to come to your home immediately, and it can be extremely traumatic to have to wait a whole day until the vet is free to leave the surgery.
PRACTICAL PROBLEMS
Problems also occasionally arise when all does not go well, and this may cause deep and lasting distress.
One lady positively adored her little Chihuahua, Poco, for 15 years, but the time came when he was persistently ill and she knew that she had to save him from further suffering.
Unfortunately everything seemed to go wrong.
Poco hated needles and his screams drove first his owner, and then her husband, out of the room.
Practically, problems can arise when administering the intravenous injection.
Holding a dog properly to enable a vet to make the injection requires skill and, on some occasions, a veterinary nurse may not be there to help.
Sick dogs often have very poor blood pressure and their veins may be fragile, which may also create difficulties.
REDUCING DISTRESS
Many people have also been distressed when a few minutes after their dog was pronounced dead, it started to make a series of gasping movements.
This gasping is not a sign of returning life but is an automatic reflex caused by a fall in blood oxygen.
The distress this causes can usually be avoided if your vet warns you in advance.
The majority of people who have difficulty coming to terms with the death of a pet cannot cope with the fact that the pet is actually dead.
Anger is common reaction, and one way to help overcome this distress is to go and discuss what happened with your vet.
Wail until you have calmed down enough so that you can voice your concerns and listen to his replies.
If you are faced with the prospect of humane destruction, try to prepare yourself and discuss the options open to you with your vet.
Advance consideration will not prevent the inevitable pain you will experience on losing a loyal and loving companion, but being aware and in control of the situation can reduce your distress and can be comforting in retrospect.
Humane destruction is not easy to face, but fear of the unknown is often far worse than facing the truth.
If you would like to write to Laura about any bereavement problem, enclose a SAE and mark your letters Coping,.
Robert Killick's FIDO FACTS
JAPANESE AKITA
Sumo style
Eye-catching and elegant, the Japanese Akita is affectionate, loyal — and a force to be reckoned with
JOHN RICHARDSON
The first show quality Akitas came to Britain in about 1980 and no one then could have predicted just how quickly the breed would gain popularity.
Gerald and Kath Mitchell are recognised as the pioneers of the breed in the UK but 10 years on they are still not totally happy with the breed's progress.
‘The quality of show dogs here is very mixed.
In Japan there were two distinct types of Akita, and it was the ‘Dewa’ type which was exported.
This type was heavier than the other, and had more of an Alsatian-type head.
In Japan the breed is finer and leggier,’ explained Kath.
Akitas here are now what the Japanese would call the ‘old’ type, with more variety in colour than would be accepted in its homeland.
In Japan ‘Grand Champions’ are so highly prized that they are officially made wards of court, and cannot be exported from the country.
Akitas are a Spitz breed, with a typical curly tail, and a double coat, although it is actually much closer to the original wolf-like dog than most other breeds.
MAJESTIC STRENGTH
‘When breeding Akitas you almost have to aim for exaggeration, otherwise you revert towards nature and a more mongrel-looking breed is produced.’
explained Kath.
Akitas are majestic in both appearance and outlook — an adult weighing over eight stone is not a breed to be taken on lightly.
They are very single-minded, refuse to be dominated by other dogs and will gladly dominate their owners, too, if given the opportunity!
They are supremely intelligent and although quick to learn, they tire of new tricks easily.
It is said among devotees that 100 per cent mental or physical control of an Akitas is quite impossible — they respond only to rapport and never to bullying.
WILFUL ‘ANGEL’
‘The easiest way to work with an Akita is to learn what he wants and then fit in without losing control,’ said Kath.
Although heavy in frame, an Akita moves with surprising speed and power, and is difficult to stop if determined in his actions.
Yet this is a very people-orientated breed.
Akitas crave family attention and need a great deal of mental stimulation.
In fact, the first one in America belonged to the famous blind teacher Helen Keller, who referred to her own as ‘an angel in fur’.
In this country the Mitchells have sold two to a family with deaf children.
Like the wild dog, the Akita tends to respond more to body language than words.
They are not a breed that can be kept in flats, although they do not need endless exercise as long as they have space for freedom of mind.
Twice a year they have a heavy coat moult which is fairly dramatic, but although they are a big, active breed they eat surprisingly little.
SPECIALIST CHOICE
Marcus Starling owns an Akita as a family pet and he emphasises the need for careful training right from the start.
‘This is definitely not the breed for everyone as you often have a battle of wills to keep control.
My dog is, however, scrupulously clean and wonderful with my two young children.
He is not over fond of strangers, but he will allow people into the house, although he monitors their movements the whole time.’
Marcus's male Akita is castrated, to lower is dominance level, and he has taken his dog to obedience training classes since puppyhood.
Yet in eye-to-eye contact his dog will not avert his gaze from yours and he looks comfortable with confrontation.
Before buying an Akita you can never have enough advice from as many sources as possible.
This is a majestic breed indeed, but one perhaps best left to the experts.
Comfort AT A STROKE
Thanks to PAT (Pets As Therapy) dogs, tail-wagging visitors bring laughter and health into wards and homes where the pleasure of canine company is much missed — as Liz Jay and her team of Beardies have discovered…
It all started by chance, as these things often do.
I received a phone call from the voluntary services co-ordinator of a local hospital, asking whether our dog training club would be willing to do an obedience display as part of their summer gala.
It was an opportunity for people to see the positive side of dog ownership, and we readily agreed to produce a team.
After all, as Yvonne said, everybody likes dogs.
‘Come and rehearse in our grounds if you like,’ she added, ‘the patients would love to see the dogs.’
The display was planned for several weeks ahead and we began practising.
In the meantime, almost as an afterthought, I visited the hospital to meet Yvonne and see the area where our team was to perform.
‘Can you bring a dog — or two?’ she asked enthusiastically.
‘You can meet some of the staff and patients.’
I surveyed my family of Bearded Collies thoughtfully.
Zephyr was a definite yes, a dog I was proud to own, obedient, gentle, one I could take anywhere.
The others had potential, but I bathed and groomed her as if for Crufts and made my way to the hospital.
VISITING ANGEL
First impressions were rather forbidding.
Clifton Hospital is vast, set in well-tended grounds with beautiful lawns, but I spotted notices everywhere telling me sternly ‘No Dogs’.
I found the parking area in front of the gloomy, if majestic, main building, and keeping my little angel on a strangle-tight lead, prepared for disapproval.
Despite Yvonne's cheering words, I wasn't totally convinced that everybody liked dogs!
She came to meet me and was ecstatic when she saw Zephyr, telling me she was absolutely gorgeous and everybody would love her.
‘Did you only bring one?
I thought you had lots of dogs?
Why didn't you bring them all?’
I realised that our visit was a big event when staff started pouring into the entrance foyer, all intent on making Zephyr's acquaintance.
She wagged dutifully but I could sense she was somewhat overwhelmed — and that was only the staff!
The next couple of hours passed in a whirl of activity as was followed Yvonne from ward to ward receiving warm welcomes everywhere we went.
I was introduced to all the staff and all the patients in a dizzying blur and answered question after question about Zephyr.
Eventually we slowed down and stopped on Troutsdale Ward, a homely wing with about a dozen dear old ladies variously ambling around, or dozing in armchairs.
They came to attention when we joined them.
Martha, the nurse on duty, proved to be a real dog-lover and insisted that Zephyr could go of her lead and make herself at home.
This suited Zephyr; she immediately checked out the kitchen area.
Blushing, guiltily, I chastised her and prepared to re-attach the lead.
There was an outcry of ‘shame’ and ‘poor dog’.
Smirking slightly, Zephyr accepted half a dozen biscuits and a bowl of milky tea, then rolled on the carpet to remove the crumbs from her whiskers.
The patients loved it and several laughed out loud at her antics, while Martha and Yvonne exchanged looks of glee.
She nearly brought the house down when I scrounged another biscuit and put her through her repertoire of tricks.
We realised how quickly the evening had passed when the night staff arrived.
Yvonne spirited me back to her office and we held a quick post-mortem, agreeing the evening had been a roaring success and discussing ways to improve our performance.
We both felt we had over-reached by trying to visit the whole hospital and next time would just concentrate on two or three wards.
For, without doubt, there was to be another visit — and many more to come.
We also felt that Zephyr had been under pressure due to her immense popularity and had been given little opportunity to show off the gentle side of her nature — in the same way the more extrovert patients had dominated the evening while those of shy and retiring nature had slightly missed out.
Our next visit the following week set an ideal pattern.
Razzle, Zephyr's mother, came along as well and her outgoing nature provided the balance.
She was able to take centre stage, providing comic relief while Zephyr shared intimate moments with her special friends.
Sadly Zephyr is no longer with us and old age has caught up on Razzle, but my new team do their best to continue in their pawprint.
Hospital visiting is a way of life now, sharing with those to whom this pleasure is largely denied.
Do you have a friendly dog, and an hour or so spare each week?
If so, please send a SAE for full details of Pets As Therapy to:.
The PAT dogs article by Alan Combes (Dogs Today , February) had caused some concern for a few owners.
Only a small number of PAT dogs work on units for the mentally ill, and such work can be most rewarding for dog and patient alike.
Visiting psychiatric wards demands a special approach, and Pets As Therapy does not advise the inexperienced to attempt it.
A one-to-one visit is best, with a single patient at a time being given the opportunity to stroke the PAT dog.
In some situations it is also necessary for the owner of the animal to be accompanied by a nurse, but careful planning should ensure that neither the volunteer nor the PAT dog is put at risk.
With over 5,700 dogs, plus a few cats and rabbits, this scheme is now the largest community service in the United Kingdom where animals give pleasure and benefit to people.
Party Political Animals
How would your dog vote in the general election?
Do you have a Conservative Corgi, a Labour-ite Lab or a Dandie Dinmont Liberal Democrat?
NICK MAYS
One in four households in Britain contains a dog.
During the general election the doggie vote could hold the balance of power.
We've asked the three major political parties to tell us their dog ifestos.
If dogs were the only issue in the general election which of the following would get your dog's vote?
CONSERVATIVE
‘The 1991 Dangerous Dog Bill already gives the Secretary of State a reserve power to impose muzzling or leashing on other types of dogs when they are considered to present a serious danger to the public.
Possession of those types of dog would not, however, become unlawful.
Restrictions would not take place until a process of consultation with representative of various relevant bodies — including animal welfare groups — had taken place.
Any further restrictions would require the specific approval of Parliament through an affirmative resolution.’
‘We only think it is necessary to have an index of exempted dangerous dogs.
A dog register does nothing to help control dangerous dogs — we do not want to create unnecessary bureaucracy.
A national register would have to cater for some seven million dogs.
There would be a massive evasion, leaving the bulk of a dog registration scheme to fall on the tax-payer.’
LABOUR
‘If present government fails to heed the views of the RSPCA, the House of Lords and the vast majority of public opinion then the next Labour government will introduce a mandatory dog registration scheme.
Registration is an essential part of any programme to reduce dog wardens.
And registration will also help control the growing menace of dangerous dogs.
But, in addition, we shall consider introducing further legislation — such as compulsory muzzling where appropriate — to deal with this problem.’
LIBERAL DEMOCRATS
Liberal Democrats plan to introduce a system of compulsory identification and registration of dogs and a licensing scheme of owners, coupled with a local enforcement system using the microchip method of identification.
Liberal Democrats support the introduction of a properly financed and organised dog warden scheme as part of a national dog registration scheme.
The Liberal Democrats are opposed to keeping dogs in high rise housing ‘except on exceptional human welfare grounds’.
They aim to ratify the Council of Europe Convention for the Protection of Pet Animals which ‘prohibits tail docking, ear cropping and other mutilations unless necessary for therapeutic reasons’.
They are concerned about the shortcomings of the Breeding of Dogs Act 1991.
They will ‘Legislate to limit the number and frequency of litters for brood bitches’.
‘Liberal Democrats in association with other relevant organisations and bodies, will publicise the benefits of neutering and give encouragement to low-cost neutering schemes.’
However, ‘Liberal Democrats do not support the idea of a national network of local authority neutering clinics’.
WHO GETS YOUR VOTE?
Conservative
Labour
Liberal Democrats
Results will be published in a future issue of Dogs Today .
Call cost 36p per minute cheap rate and 48p per minute at all other times (including VAT).
MEMOIRS OF A DOG SHRINK
CARTOONIST RUSSELL JONES TAKES A RAMBLE THROUGH PETER NEVILLE'S FILES
Love on the rocks
For Ned and his pal there were no other pebbles on the beach.
Their relationship was rock solid
It was love at first sight for young Ned the German Shepherd.
Strolling with his owner through a field littered with pebbles and stones, he suddenly spotted one in the crowd that really took his fancy.
A small, shapely lump of granite, a little smaller than a hen's egg.
Their eyes met and in the distance a romantic gypsy began playing — Ned knew that from that moment on he couldn't live without her!
Picking her up gently in his mouth he carried her back home, sweeping her flamboyantly over the threshold and into their new abode — his cosy old basket in the corner of the kitchen!
As the days passed it became clear to Ned's family that he was drifting away from them and his strange affair with the stone was fast turning into a deep and meaningful relationship!
The two were inseparable as they trailed around the neighbourhood, never leaving each other 's side.
As days turned into weeks, Ned's owner began thinking that his dog had developed an unhealthy obsession with his lump of rock.
True, she was shapely, in a geological sort of way, and quite intelligent as stones go but, nevertheless, the family was fast becoming alarmed at Ned's deteriorating mental and physical condition.
All attempts at forced separation were met with fierce growling and threatening behaviour from the dog and a marked reluctance on the part of the stone to be ejected from the basket in which she was so blissfully happy!
The love-sick dog went completely off his food, finding his loveable lump more appetising than a bowl of doggy chunks in gravy and soon he was reduced to skin and bone, a mere shadow of the beast his family had grown to know and love.
As a last resort they tried introducing Ned to other stones in an attempt to distract his interest — blondes, brunettes and the occasional hard-to-find red-head but all to no avail.
Ned continued to lose weight, and it was clear something had to be done.
His owner decided to call in Peter Neville to attempt to sort out Ned's problems.
Peter found him in his basket canoodling with his other half.
Ned appeared to be whispering sweet nothings in her ear but his attentions were being met with a stony silence!
Peter's first thoughts were to call for a vicar to make an honest couple out of them, but after a lengthy investigation he suggested the family consult a veterinary surgeon.
This they did and on her advice the dog's diet was changed to one of chicken and rice together with a vitamin supplement.
By the following weekend, Ned had begun to lose interest in his lover and within two weeks, much to her distress, he began leaving her alone for long periods of time while he chased after a very attractive Border Collie who had just moved into a neighbouring street.
One evening, three weeks later, things finally came to a head when Ned booted the former love of his life out of the basket onto the kitchen floor.
Before the stone had come to a halt it was pounced upon by the entire family who gleefully heaved the unfortunate lump of granite out through the back door and out of their lives!
It was never to be seen again!
CROSS QUESTION
Can you guess which breeds Coffee's parents are?
She is a first cross between two well-known breeds.
The first correct entry drawn on May 1st 1992 will win a pot of 500 EfaCoat capsules (containing evening primrose oil and vitamin E), worth over £20.
If your dog is an unusual first cross, please send us a photo and all the relevant details so we can include him or her in a future issue.
Send your answer to April Cross-question,
FEBRUARY SOLUTION
Jessica's parents were a Miniature Smooth-haired Dachshund and a Whippet.
The first correct entry came from  who wins 500 EfaCoat capsules        
HELPING HANDS
Why is it that so many people who are kind enough to give a home to an abandoned dog, then resent advice on how best to integrate this traumatised pooch into the family?
At Battersea Dogs Home, this is the job of the home visitors.
They are very experienced and certainly well-meaning, but they're so often greeted with growls and scowls — and that's not from the dogs!
The trouble is, it's usually the family which has never owned a dog before that reacts with hostility to would-be helping hands.
But this attitude is also typical of those who believe that a dog is just a dog — that a harsh voice and a hard hand will train each and every one of them.
This approach is more likely to damage a rescuee for good, especially one who still has to learn the basic rules.
It's understanding the whys and wherefores of a dog's behaviour that really pays dividends.
For instance, can you recognise a dog with a sweet temperament who will, however, snap out of fear?
Do you know that it is far better to train by reward than by punishment?
Learning to understand how your dog's mind works makes things much easier, so why can't we welcome someone — like a home visitor — prepared to explain the quickest way to do this?
There will nearly always be problems when taking on a rescued dog, but with determination and good will on both sides, there are very few that can't be solved.
Katie's PROBLEM PAGE
If you've a question about dogs, this is your page.
Katie Boyle is here to help.
Britain's foremost agony aunt has, in common with the rest of us, a real and genuine love of dogs.
Remember to listen out for Katie and friends on Radio 2
BREAKING BONDS
I have a mongrel bitch who I brought from Battersea Dogs Home just over two years ago.
She was undernourished, with scabs in her ears and lumps on her body.
I am glad to say she is now beautiful but, even after all this time, she is still having nightmares (though not often) and is extremely nervous.
I find this very distressing and would like to be able to do more to ease her — but what?
She is never left on her own as my mother stays at home when I go out, but she just waits on my bed and won't eat for food until I come back.
The only time she will sit with my mother is if she is called into the living room and the door closed behind her.
Occasionally she has behaved like this when I am with her, and my mother out.
What can I do to help her?
It sounds to me as though you've allowed your Battersea belle to become too closely bonded to you, which is never a good idea because she will only suffer when you are out of sight.
To begin with, your mother shouldn't oversympathise with her when you go out, as the dog will regard this as approval of her nervous behaviour.
Her tone — and yours — should be more matter-of-fact, positive and encouraging.
You and your mother must show her that you are a similar importance in her life.
Try to make sure that the three of you go for walks together, taking it in turns to hold her lead, and when you set off on your own, avoid any big ‘goodbye’ fussing.
By doing this you will enlarge her family circle, and by ignoring her nervousness — but praising her when she shows independence — she will broaden her horizons.
When she cries in her sleep, try not to fuss her, and don't worry about her eating trouble — as soon as she begins to realise that you are a family unit her tum will never let her starve!
ROTTIE RAPTURE
I thought you might like to know about my four-year-old rescued Rottweiler, Penny.
She is as gentle as a lamb and while most people are cautious when meeting her, they soon think she's wonderful.
When our daughter Heather was born, we were a little apprehensive about Penny and the baby, but one incident really put our minds at rest.
My wife was upstairs changing Heather, and Penny was asleep on the landing, when the phone rang downstairs.
In her haste to answer it, my wife didn't fasten the gate at the top of the stairs properly.
A few minutes later she heard Heather screaming and Penny barking.
Fearing the worst, she ran to find Penny standing between the stairs and Heather, who had started to crawl towards them.
By the teethmarks in Heather's T-shirt we knew Penny had pulled her back from the stairs — Heather's body didn't have a mark on it.
Now whenever my wife and Heather are together, Penny is always by the gate.
When we get home Penny goes to check on Heather and if she's asleep, lies down quietly by the cot and waits for her to wake up so she can come and tell us.
I hope this letter shows Rotties are not at all vicious but need a little bit of love and care.
They will reward you with their love.
I have know such gloriously gentle Rotties, especially bitches, and your wonderful story proves that when they are in the right family, they blossom to their full potential.
My warmest wishes to everyone in the family, and a special hug for Penny.
SETTLING NERVES
My husband and I own two Rough Collies — Goldie, who is nearly ten and a rescued Collie, Chloe Joe.
The problem is, Chloe Joe is so nervous.
She's terrified of children, she hates strangers and anything electrical — especially the washing machine, and the Hoover.
If anybody sneezes all hell breaks loose, she's petrified of traffic and when someone comes into the house she sits on the bed and shakes.
Is she just a very nervous bitch or will she grow out of it?
She and Goldie are inseparable.
Please help as we can't take her anywhere, she just goes mad!
Taking on a pooch from an animal shelter brings traumas of many kinds.
Chloe Joe has obviously had some terrifying experiences, and she certainly needs to be ‘de-sensitised’ to every sort of household noise, family and friends.
By making tape recording of the sounds that disturb her, and playing them back to her frequently, indoors, at increasing levels of volume, she should gradually learn to accept them.
It would be better to play them while Chloe is distracted (eating or playing) initially.
Alternatively, pre-recorded sound effects are available from 
The success you have in rehabilitating Chloe Joe depends on your sensitivity towards her and the infinite time an patience you are prepared to spend — remember, one lapse of patience could set her back by weeks.
If you have any problems or questions about your pet, write to .
HILIFE'S Quick Quiz
Answer the questions below for a chance to win 12 boxes of HILIFE Gourmet Complete Moist Dog food — Beef and Cheddar Cheese variety.
Each box contains the equivalent of standard cans of dog food with mixer.
Which breed?
1
My first letter's found in my deep BARKING sound,
2
My second's in BROWN COAT for which I'm renowned.
3
At the vets in an X-RAY shows up letter three,
4
Revealing LARGE STONES — there letter four be.
5
Then back home for DINNER, while it's still BRIGHT, both contain my last letter — have you guessed right?
Bruno and Ali, each give one more clue, I'm a champion, a star through and through!
fantastic facts
During the First World War, a mongrel called Prince missed his soldier owner so much that he hitched a lift across the channel and searched until he found his master in the trenches — a journey of several hundred miles.
For a free copy of Dog Facts send a SAE to the competition address 
Gyles Brandreth's PRIZE CROSSWORD
Do you know your dog facts?
Gyles Brandreth, editor of Puzzle World, tests your knowledge with his brain-teasing canine crossword.
Omega Pet Foods are offering the winner a 10kg bag of Omega Tasty and high-quality retractable lead.
Ten runners-up will receive a three kilo bag of Omega Tasty and a lead.
The deadline is April 10th 1992.
The solution will appear in the May issue.
tail ending