

The Problem
I Believe in Doubt
Sometimes I almost feel on fire with the immensity of this: each of us is a person, alive, growing and relating.
From the moment we wake to the moment we fall asleep we think, we feel, we choose, we speak, we act, not as isolated individuals but as persons among people.
And underneath everything lies trust.
From friendships of children to agreements among nations life depends on trust.
Counting on people is trust.
Enjoying people is trust.
Trust is the shared silence, the exchanged look, the expressive touch.
Crying for help is trust, shaking hands is trust, a kiss is trust.
The highest reaches of love and life depend on trust.
Are there any questions more important to each of us than, Whom can I trust?
How can I be sure?
This is why when trust goes and doubt comes in such a shadow is cast, such a wound is opened, such a hole is left.
God is a person too; and what is more, the person on whom personhood itself depends.
That is why to know him is to trust him, and to trust him is to begin to know ourselves.
That is why the chief end of man is to glorify God and enjoy him for ever.
It is also why doubting God is so devastating.
Some people who are approaching faith in God doubt God because they want to believe but dare not.
How would you feel if someone flew more than halfway around the world to say to you, ‘I am at a loss.
Life has no meaning unless God is there.
There is hardly anyone left whom I can trust.
Will you help me in my search?’
Just recently I was talking to a man who had crossed the world to see someone for this very reason.
How would you respond if you knew that after his previous failures to find answers he had cried out louder and more often, and that the scars of the razor blades were still on his wrists to show it?
What would you say?
How would you help him?
How would you introduce  him to God who would never let him down, especially since God is less certain to him than human beings who have let him down?
Other people who are backing away from faith in God doubt God because they do not want to believe but do.
I will never forget a girl who sat in the living-room of our home in Switzerland.
She argued, she cried, she pounded the floor.
Why should she trust God?
He was a monster, a hard, unyielding monarch, a Mafia boss whose power was everywhere, a merciless creditor who demanded his pound of flesh.
Hadn't she tried to obey?
But the more she saw God the more she feared, and the more she feared the more she became angry, and the more angry she became the more she hated, and the more she hated the more afraid of God she grew.
She knew she was caught in a vicious trap, sliding down a slippery spiral.
She was young, she was loved, she was successful.
But none of it made any difference.
She could not trust God, and in the bitterness of doubt her spirit was like darkness at noon.
The doubts of these two people were entirely different, but they were both doubting God for the same reason: they did not know God as he really is.
The man, however, knew that he did not know, while the girl thought that she did.
Her picture of God (which came from experiences in the past) was so distorted that without realizing it she was believing a grotesque caricature of God which for sanity's sake she was forced at the same time to doubt.
Fortunately, she is not in that position today.
She has come to know God as he is, she is able to trust him, and her whole life reflects the difference.
In later chapters (such as chapter six) we will examine doubts like these in depth to see how they arise and how they can be resolved.
They are only two types of doubt among many others, but they introduce us directly to the heart of our problem.
Doubt is not primarily an abstract philosophical or theological question, nor a state of morbid spiritual or psychological anguish.
At its most basic, doubt is a matter of truth, trust and trustworthiness.
Can we trust God?
Are we sure?
How can we be sure?
Do we trust him enough to rely on him utterly?
Are we trusting him enough to enjoy him?
Is the whole of living different for that trust?
A healthy understanding
Christianity places a premium on the absolute truthfulness and trustworthiness of God, so understanding doubt is extremely important to a Christian.
Of course, faith is much more than the absence of doubt, but to understand doubt is to have a key to a quiet heart and a quiet mind.
Anyone who believes anything will automatically know something about doubt.
But the person who knows why he believes is also in a position to discover why he doubts.
The Christian should be such a person.
Not only does a Christian believe; he is a person who ‘thinks in believing and believes in thinking’, as Augustine expressed it.
The world of Christian faith is not a fairy-tale, make-believe world, question-free and problem-proof, but a world where doubt is never far from faith's shoulder.
Consequently, a healthy understanding of doubt should go hand in hand with a healthy understanding of faith.
We ourselves are called in question if we have no answer to doubt.
If we constantly doubt what we believe and always believe-yet-doubt, we will be in danger of undermining our personal integrity, if not our stability.
But if ours is an examined faith, we should be unafraid to doubt.
If doubt is eventually justified, we were believing what clearly was not worth believing.
But if doubt is answered, our faith has gown stronger still.
It knows God more certainly and it can enjoy God more deeply.
Obviously then, each one of us should understand doubt for God's sake and for ours.
God is to be trusted yet people are doubting: that is justification enough for trying to understand doubt.
But an understanding of doubt will also bring two particular benefits to the church at large.
First, it will act as a safeguard against today's widespread and unnecessary breakdown of faith.
Christians are confronted by a situation which militates openly against faith.
The Christian foundations of Western culture have been torn up and discarded.
Our Christian past is in disrepute, and the very basis for any faith, Christian or otherwise, is held to be discredited.
Into the vacuum has sprung a bewildering variety of alternative philosophies, facing us with a post-Christian mosaic of confusing pluralism.
Many of us are smarting emotionally under the sting of reactions  to our belief and keenly aware of the deficiency in our response.
It is hardly surprising if at times we falter as believers in a disbelieving age.
This state of affairs has aggravated the already serious problem of doubt among Christians.
The loss of faith has not been staunched, and this has suggested that the Christian faith is a fragile, vulnerable belief with little intellectual integrity.
This suggestion, in its turn, lends support to the common rejection of Christianity among thinking people.
What is most damaging to Christianity is not that Christians doubt but that there seems to be so little open discussion and understanding of doubt.
This must be changed.
Second, an understanding of doubt helps us to prepare for the years of testing which, I think, are to come.
Faith at its truest is radical reliance on God.
It is a conviction born of understanding, grounded solidly in the truth of who God is and what he has said and done.
But what our faith ‘should be’ may be far removed from what our faith ‘is’.
In practice many of us have become Christians and are continuing to believe for less than the best reasons and clearest motives.
This may have serious consequences in the critical years ahead.
For example, one person's faith may be a genuine trust in God but also a trust in certain Christian friends, while another person has truly committed himself to God and also to the care of a Christian community.
Or again, someone may honestly put himself under the lordship of Christ yet at the same time adhere to a Christian lifestyle or espouse Christian values which by temperament or nationality he would be likely to appreciate anyway.
In each specific case it is impossible to determine the exact line of distinction between faith and faith plus, between our faith in God and our faith in other men.
Even where faith is weak or even wrongly based, it is not necessarily illegitimate.
(If our motives had to be completely pure, which of us would pass the test?)
But such faith is running a risk.
To the degree that other motives are also at work faith is not radical reliance on God alone.
Seen in this light, every test which shows us what we are really relying on can be constructive.
If testing shows that our attachment to Christian friends or to a particular lifestyle is stronger than our attachment to God himself, we  must ask whether these supports for faith are in danger of becoming substitutes.
What we need, then, is to be stopped short before the process of substitution is complete.
The ‘Square One Principle’
Jesus challenged the Jews of his day with a searching question: ‘How can you have faith so long as you receive honour from one another, and care nothing for the honour that comes from him who alone is God?’
Ostensibly their faith was solely in God, but that faith was only nominal.
In reality their faith was in each other.
More precisely, their nominal faith in God was supported and accredited by a closed system of mutual human honouring which made the need for any honour from God superfluous.
We should ask similar questions of ourselves, particularly those of us who are western Christians.
What sort of faith do we have?
How can we know how strong our faith really is so long as we are comparatively untroubled in a world of material affluence, social ease and spiritual privilege?
Or to reverse it, could it be that in the deepening turbulence of our generation God is not only judging a culture which has abandoned him but also, as it were, shaking up the bag and testing the foundations to see if we Christians are as ready as we think for the critical years ahead?
The coin has two sides.
Much of the breakdown of faith we are witnessing is a logical consequence, pure and simple, of the deep deficiency of faith today.
On the other hand, it may also be a sign of God's hidden control and wisdom preparing us for the future.
Long-standing supports are crumbling, and many of the accepted assumptions of normal Western life are being shaken — such as social stability and a reasonable prosperity.
We are forced to see the true foundations of our faith (that is, our practical rather than professed faith, our day-to-day trust, our matter-of-fact belief, our down-to-earth reliance).
Far better to be tested today and have the chance to put right what is shown to be wrong than to be tested tomorrow and be found wanting.
The issues we are facing in the present crisis of faith touch on what I call the Square One Principle.
Life can proceed with deceptive ease on the basis of a faith which was once vital but has become so taken for granted that it is no longer authentic.
At that stage any pressure may be such a test for faith that the believer is faced with a choice: Give up or go back to square one.
If we give up, then we abandon faith altogether.
But if we go back to square one (and so back to the roots, back to the foundations, back to the beginning), we will find a faith which is solid and secure.
The lesson of the Square One Principle is this: the person who has the courage to go back when necessary is the one who goes on in the end.
Seen this way, the collapse of Christendom is a blessing for Christianity, and the present crisis of faith may be the best opportunity in centuries, at least for Christians in the West.
To use this opportunity fully we must stop the severe haemorrhaging of faith among believers, we must work towards a clearly discernible Christian mind, and we must carefully answer the questions and objections of our contemporaries.
Developing a fresh understanding of the old problem of doubt will contribute to this.
Let God be God
What is faith?
And what is the misunderstanding or mistreatment of faith which causes doubt, and how can it be avoided?
And, above all, what does it mean to let faith be faith to such an extent that it will in turn let God be God?
These are the questions we will examine and that is our goal — to let God be God.
What will be our approach in this book?
In part one (chapters one to four) our objective is to examine the nature of doubt, setting it off clearly from three common misconceptions which cloud the issue today.
For some people chapters one and two will be sufficient for this purpose and they may wish to pass from there directly to chapter five, missing chapters three and four which are more theoretical.
Part two (chapters five to eleven) is the heart of our discussion.
The objective here is to examine the seven most common categories of doubt and to develop a framework in which we can understand and analyse all our specific doubts.
In part three (chapters twelve to fifteen) our objective is to examine what is involved in helping a person in doubt, and to see how this can be made practical and specific without being mechanical and stereotyped.
In part four (the last two chapters) we will look at two  specific types of doubt which are especially difficult and important today.
Getting to the heart of doubt is rather like peeling a chestnut: it's worthwhile in the end, but it entails getting through a prickly layer.
The prickles surrounding doubt are the various layers of misunderstanding which obscure what doubt actually is.
There are three basic misconceptions which are especially common: first, that doubt is wrong because it is the same thing as unbelief; second, that doubt is a problem which troubles faith but not knowledge; and third, that doubt is something to be ashamed of because it is dishonest to believe if you have doubts.
We will examine each of these misconceptions in turn, so that once we have torn away these layers of misunderstanding we can get to the kernel of doubt and see not only its dangers but its value.
Then, since there is no believing without some doubting and since believing is all the stronger for understanding and resolving doubt, we can say as Christians that if we doubt in believing it is also true that we believe in doubting.
In Two Minds
I once witnessed the proverbial sight of a peasant beating his donkey.
The peasant was walking behind, driving his donkey on.
Huge bales of firewood were strapped to its back, but the donkey forced its way up the steep little path that served as a village street.
Gradually it slowed, exhausted.
Spurred on again by a stream of oaths, it staggered a few paces further and sank to the ground, defeated.
It was then that the peasant beat it — and beat it and beat it and beat it again.
How many Christians treat faith like that?
Believe this!
Believe that!
Stop doubting and believe more firmly!
Admonitions and warnings are piled onto faith's back until it can take no more.
Cajolings then give way to threats and threats to the big stick until, undernourished and overloaded, their faith sinks to the ground and expires.
We might ask which is worse, the cruelty or the stupidity?
Which sadder, the plight of faith and the donkey or the plight of the man?
But this is not a book about donkeys or even about faith, at least not directly.
It is a book about doubt.
Yet what is doubt but faith suffering from mistreatment or malnutrition?
Concern for the prevention of doubt is automatically concern for the prevention of cruelty to faith.
The way to get the best out of something — whether faith or a donkey or anything else — is to find out what it is and treat it accordingly.
Mistake it for something else or push it beyond its limits and its purpose may be destroyed.
Ask it to do more than it can and it may not do what it should.
Donkeys have no objection to donkey work, but they cannot stand being taken for racehorses or tractors.
As soon as we ask what faith is and what sort of mistreatment of faith causes doubt, we are led to the first major misconception about doubt — the idea that doubt is the opposite of faith and the same thing as unbelief.
Implied in this is a  view of faith that is unrealistic and a view of doubt that is unfair.
Faith is the ass of the modern world.
Like the donkey it is despised by its enemies and mistreated by its friends, but only because it is bound to be treated unfairly when it is seen unrealistically.
The injustice is that the donkey is beaten until it collapses and then it is beaten for collapsing .
In the same way many Christians drive their faith unfairly when they believe, and then they flog their faith unmercifully when they doubt.
In both cases they have been led to believe that true faith is doubt-free and that doubt is the same thing (and just as sinful) as unbelief.
A divided heart
What is doubt?
And how is it related to faith and unbelief?
Our English word doubt comes from the Latin dubitare which is rooted in an Aryan word meaning ‘two’.
So we can start by defining our terms like this: to believe is to be ‘in one mind’ about accepting something as true; to disbelieve is to be ‘in one mind’about rejecting it.
To doubt is to waver between the two, to believe and disbelieve at once and so to be ‘in two minds’.
This two-ness or double-ness is the heart of doubt and the deepest dilemma it represents.
The heart of doubt is a divided heart .
This is not just a metaphor.
It is the essence of the Christian view of doubt, and human language and experience from all around the world also bear it out.
In English the double-ness of doubt is pictured in phrases such as‘having a foot in both camps’.
There are many equivalents in other languages.
The Chinese picture of irresolution is humorous as well as graphic.
They speak of a person ‘having a foot in two boats’.
In the Peruvian Andes the Huanuco Quechuas speak of ‘having two thoughts’ and the Shipibos further to the east have an expression, ‘thinking two things’.
In Guatemala the Kekchi language describes the doubter as a man ‘whose heart is made in two’, while the Navajo Indians in the southwestern United States use a similar term, ‘that which is two with him’.
The New Testament words which are translated into English as ‘doubt’ are equally fascinating.
Examining root meanings is not everybody's cup of tea, but in this case it is worthwhile since it sheds so much light on the nature of  doubt.
Notice that in each case there is an unmistakable emphasis on the ambivalence or double-mindedness of doubt.
One Greek word (dipsukos ) speaks of a man who is chronically doubleminded.
James in his letter describes such a doubter as ‘a heaving sea ruffled by the wind’.
A second word (diakrino ) is the stronger form of the word to sever or to separate .
This word can convey several meanings but one of them expresses an inner state of mind so torn between various options that it cannot make up its mind.
Jesus uses this word when he says to his disciples, ‘Have faith in God.
I tell you this: if anyone says to this mountain, ‘Be lifted from your place and hurled into the sea,’ and has no inward doubts , but believes that what he says is happening, it will be done for him’(Mark 11:23).
A third Greek word (meteorizomai ) means ‘to raise’ or ‘to suspend’when it is used literally (as it is in the root of our modern word meteor) or to raise a person's hopes when it is used figuratively.
When it is used figuratively, it can mean to soar or to lift oneself up, and so to be arrogant in spirit.
Or else, because one is lifted up in the air, to be unsettled and therefore restless, anxious, tense and doubtful.
It describes a state of mind which is the result of an awkward position.
Many modern expressions capture this ambivalence, such as being ‘up in the air’ or being ‘hung up’.
When Jesus says to his disciples, ‘You are not to set your mind on food or drink; you are not to worry’(Luke 12:29 — the only New Testament use of the word), he is saying that God's care for us as Father means that food and drink are not to be a hang-up, an occasion for doubt and anxiety which constantly keeps us up in the air.
A fourth word (dialogizomai ) is the root of our word dialogue .
Its own root is ‘thought’, and from that it has come to mean the inner debate of a person who is reasoning with himself.
The word is usually used in the New Testament of internal reasoning which is wrong or evil.
Jesus uses it when he confronts the disciples after his resurrection: ‘Why are you so perturbed?’ he asks.
‘Why do questionings arise in your minds?’
(Luke 24:38).
The word opens a window into the debate raging in their hearts as they doubted.
So long as there is doubt, the debate continues and the  arguments fly back and forth.
Only when the votes are cast is it clear whether faith's motion has been passed or defeated.
A fifth word (distazo ) means doubt in the sense of hanging back, hesitating or faltering.
It expresses what we mean when we say that we have our reservations or vacillate about something.
Matthew uses the word when he records that ‘Jesus at once reached out and caught hold of him, and said, ‘Why did you hesitate?
How little faith you have!’
(Matthew 14:31).
The same word is used of those who doubted the risen Christ: ‘When they saw him, they fell prostrate before him, though some were doubtful’(Matthew 28:17).
Genuine faith is unreserved in its commitment; doubt has reservations.
Faith steps forward; doubt hangs back.
Doubt holds itself open to all possibilities but is reluctant to close on any.
The combined force of all these phrases and words is surely inescapable.
If a person is ‘torn’ between opinions, unable to ‘make up’his mind, or if he is ‘up in the air’over something and unsure which side he should ‘come down on’, or if he is furiously ‘debating’with himself or ‘hanging back’, or weighing up his ‘reservations’, he is nothing if not ‘in two minds’.
This is the essence of doubt.
Doubt and unbelief
What follows from this is decisive for our whole discussion: doubt is not the opposite of faith, nor is it the same as unbelief.
Doubt is a state of mind in suspension between faith and unbelief so that it is neither of them wholly and it is each only partly.
This distinction is absolutely vital because it uncovers and deals with the first major misconception of doubt — the idea that in doubting a believer is betraying faith and surrendering to unbelief.
No misunderstanding causes more anxiety and brings such bondage to sensitive people in doubt.
The difference between doubt and unbelief is crucial.
The Bible makes a definite distinction between them, though the distinction is not hard and fast.
The word unbelief is usually used of a wilful refusal to believe or of a deliberate decision to disobey.
So, while doubt is a state of suspension between faith and unbelief, unbelief is a state of mind which is closed against God, an attitude of heart which disobeys  God as much as it disbelieves the truth.
It is the consequence of a settled choice.
Since it is a deliberate response to God's truth, unbelief is definitely held to be responsible.
There are times when the word unbelief is used to describe the doubts of those who are definitely believers but only when they are at a stage of doubting which is rationally inexcusable and well on the way to becoming fullgrown unbelief.
Thus the ambiguity in the biblical use of unbelief is a sign of psychological astuteness and not of theological confusion.
So it is definitely possible to distinguish between faith, doubt and unbelief in theory (to believe is to be in one mind, to disbelieve is to be in another and to doubt is to be in two minds).
But in practice the distinction is not always so clearcut, especially when doubt moves in the direction of unbelief and passes over that blurred transition between the open-ended uncertainty of doubt and the closed-minded certainty of unbelief.
But the over-all thrust of the biblical teaching on doubt is not ambiguous.
A great variety of words are used but the essential point is the same.
Doubt is a halfway stage.
To be in doubt is to be in two minds, to be caught between two worlds, to be suspended between a desire to affirm and a desire to negate.
So the idea of ‘total’ or ‘complete’doubt is a contradiction in terms; doubt that is total is no longer doubt, it is unbelief.
Of course, we may call our doubt ‘total doubt’ or charge it with being unbelief, but only if our purpose is to stop doubt short and see that it does not become unbelief.
When in Mark's gospel the father of the demented boy cried out, ‘I believe; help my unbelief!’, he was condemning his own doubt as unbelief.
But Jesus, who never responded to real unbelief, showed by answering his prayer and healing his son that he recognized it as doubt.
The distinction between doubt and unbelief, though not hard and fast, is valid and useful.
Its importance, however, is not that we know when doubt becomes unbelief (for only God knows this and human attempts to say so can be cruel), but that we should be clear about where doubt leads to as it grows into unbelief.
Soft or hard doubt?
The healthy combination of an analysis of the nature of doubt with an awareness of where it leads is the heart of the Christian view of doubt.
Curiously, it is also the reason why those who are ‘soft’ on doubt and those who are ‘hard’on doubt can both find biblical support for their views.
The former can point to the great difference between doubt and unbelief and the latter to the great similarity.
Each ignores the balancing emphasis of biblical teaching.
This balance was what set apart the New Testament view from its Greco-Roman surroundings.
The world of the first century was marked by a deep awareness of doubt, but usually doubt was traced back only to cultural irresolution or philosophical scepticism.
In the New Testament, however, faith is synonymous with the obedience of faith, so that faith involves both the understanding and the will.
Doubt is therefore tackled primarily at the point of action and not at the point of reflection.
The Old Testament had laid special stress against disobeying, rather than doubting, the Word of God.
But the New Testament is strongly against doubt itself and stronger still against unbelief.
Now that God has revealed himself so fully in Christ, the value of the stakes of salvation are higher, and there is less excuse for lack of faith.
This combined emphasis — that doubt is not the same as unbelief but can lead naturally to it — directs us to a mature handling of doubt that avoids the extremes of being too hard or too soft on doubt.
Those who forget the first point fall into the error of being too hard.
In virtually equating doubt and unbelief they make doubt the opposite of faith in a way that is true neither to the Bible nor to what we know of human knowledge.
To insist that only doubt-free faith can be counted as genuine faith is to misunderstand what knowledge and faith are.
The perfectionism in the demand is more destructive of genuine faith than the worst of doubts could ever be.
The true relationship of faith and doubt is closer to that of courage and fear.
Fear is not the opposite of courage, cowardice is.
Fear, in fact, need be no final threat to courage.
What courage cannot afford is recklessness.
Take a mountain climber, a Grand Prix racing-driver or a person  conquering a devastating handicap.
Each one has a courage which controls his fear and subdues his emotions so that risks are made responsible and commitments in the face of danger are carefully calculated.
It is the same with faith and doubt.
Doubt is not the opposite of faith, unbelief is.
Doubt does not necessarily or automatically mean the end of faith, for doubt is faith in two minds.
What destroys faith is the disobedience that hardens into unbelief.
This is the second Point that balances the first and safeguards it from the other extreme — being too soft on doubt.
Doubt is not always fatal but it is always serious.
Some people react so strongly against the morbid view of doubt that they treat doubt casually, even celebrate it.
The error here is to isolate doubt from faith and unbelief and consider it strictly by itself as a mere mechanism of human knowing.
The only question then asked is,How does doubt work?
And the answer, since it is only abstract, carries little sting.
But the question is not abstract in real life, so to the interesting questions of how must be added the urgent question of what.
As soon as this second question is asked (What is being doubted?), the price of doubt rises or falls immediately.
It is what we doubt and not how we doubt that sets the market value of doubting.
If the object of our faith were as elusive as the Loch Ness monster or as inconsequential as whether to have a third cup of afternoon tea, then doubt makes little difference.
But since the object of Christian faith is God, to believe or disbelieve is everything.
Thus the market value of doubt for the Christian is extremely high.
Find out how seriously a believer takes his doubts and you have the index of how seriously he takes his faith.
For the Christian, doubt is not the same as unbelief, but neither is it divorced from it.
Continued doubt loosens the believer's hold on the resources and privileges of faith and can be the prelude to the disasters of unbelief.
So doubt is never treated as trivial.
Seven deadly doubts
Those who are interested in doubt only from a practical standpoint may want to pass from this definition of doubt as doublemindedness directly to an examination of the categories of doubt in part two.
Thus they may prefer to skip the  next two chapters which are more theoretical.
What follows in part two is not meant to be a gloomy cataloguing of specific doubts but a look at seven of the most common ‘families’ of doubt.
It is not en exhaustive account of doubt.
To attempt such a thing would be herculean and quixotic.
What is more helpful is to gain a broad overview of some of the main types of doubt which Christians are likely to face.
These broad categories can give us an over-all perspective from which to view, handle and resolve our specific doubts.
But even with the field limited in this way, an exhaustive study is out of the question.
It would be wise for each of us to draw up our own list and carefully think through the issues involved in each.
Nor is it a completely objective evaluation.
That too is impossible.
A problem, after all, is only so if it is a problem to someone.
Problems strike us all differently.
What is trivial to one person may raise titanic questions for someone else.
Some people face doubt only if they find no answer; others trigger doubts merely by raising questions.
What puzzles a philosopher and taxes his mind to distraction may look completely irrelevant or quite obvious to a businessman.
The point is not to judge who is right, but to meet and resolve whatever doubt is a problem to a particular person.
At first it might appear simple to unravel a particular doubt by relating it to one of the seven broad categories, but first appearances are deceptive.
There are many possible variations within each category.
Some have their root causes in subjective factors, others in objective factors and others still are a mixture.
Some doubts are simple in origin, others complex.
Some doubts are as uncomplicated as a clean fracture of the leg — and just as damaging — while others present a tougher problem more like a compound fracture with the possible danger of gangrene.
In sickness and health
When people speak of doubt, sooner or later medical images pop up as doubt becomes seen as a sickness of faith.
This analogy can be helpful, particularly if it gives a visual dimension to our thinking.
But if it is pressed too far, medical imagery can lead to a sense of inevitability and passiveness which is inappropriate in resolving doubt.
The image, of course, centres around the fact that faith and doubt have something of the same curious relationship as health and sickness.
As faith is the opposite of unbelief, health is the opposite of death.
Both faith and health turn on the importance of wholeness, and both are much less obvious than one might imagine.
In fact it is possible to enjoy them most when one is aware of them least.
Since aspects of each can be understood better in the light of their absence, each may be noticed more when it is not there than when it is.
In telling us what health and faith are not , sickness and doubt also tell us something of what health and faith should be.
Doubts are like sicknesses in that the prevalent types vary from country to country and from culture to culture.
Every from country to country and from culture to culture.
Every believer is prone to doubt, but some are more prone to one kind and some to another.
This should not leave us  dispirited .
We all get sick, but we do not live in fear of catching every known disease.
If we did, what a miserable affair life would be!
Nor does leading a healthy life mean we must be vaccinated for every possible disease.
Still, if we travel in an infected area, we would be foolish not to take precautions.
In the same way assurance of faith depends on our grasp of God and his faithfulness and not on a mastery of all the doubts that are ever likely to assail us.
Otherwise faith could never be assured while one last doubt remained.
But the alert believer should be aware of the main tendencies to doubt prevalent at the time.
These will differ from generation to generation and from temperament to temperament, but it is wise to know the types of doubt to which we are most prone.
What is more, faith, like health, is best maintained by growth, nourishment and exercise and not by fighting sickness.
Sickness may be the absence of health, but health is more than the absence of sickness, so prevention is better than cure.
Equally, faith grows and flourishes when it is well nourished and exercised, so the best way to resist doubt is to build up faith rather than simply to fight against doubt.
In contrast, preoccupation with sickness is not recommended for anyone except those in the medical profession.
For others preoccupation with sickness may itself become a sickness.
No one would want to foster the doubter's  equivalent of a hypochondriac.
We must therefore resist any temptation to read a book on doubt like a medical dictionary, or before long we may convince ourselves that we are suffering from every variety of doubt.
God's part and ours
In resolving doubt, how much is God's part and how much is ours?
Two things need to be emphasized with equal force.
On the one hand,God is the answer to all doubt .
Emphatically and without any question this is so.
As Martin Luther said, in what must be the theological understatement of all time, ‘The Holy Spirit is not a sceptic.’
Through the creative agency of his Word and his Spirit God is the author and giver of faith; naturally he is the prime resolver of doubt.
Faith is a gracious gift of God and the resolution of doubt is a gracious gift of God.
This means that assurance of faith comes directly from knowing God and only indirectly from understanding doubt.
(This is probably why there are so few books written on doubt itself.)
More particularly, assurance of faith comes from knowledge of God, as objectively revealed in his Word and subjectively revealed by his Spirit.
Who is it who gives us a knowledge of our adoption into God's family?
Who is it that is God's seal in our hearts?
Who is God's down payment on the inheritance we will receive in the future?
Who is the firstfruit of a harvest of blessings to come?
The answer in each case is the Holy Spirit.
Without any hesitation we can say that God is the answer to all doubt and that the largest part of doubting comes simply from ignorance of what God has said and done.
On the other hand it must be emphasized that, while God is the answer to all doubt, theologically correct God-answers are not necessarily the answer.
A crucial mistake has often been made here.
People have forgotten that there are also spiritual, moral and especially psychological dimensions to doubt.
The plain fact of Christian experience is that many people have held a strong theology of assurance but have known no assurance themselves.
Are we to say that God's assurance is no more assured than the fluctuations of our feelings?
Or are we to insist that assurance of faith exists in a believer even when he is sure that such assurance does not exist?
To some the latter is paradoxical; to others it is nonsense.
But much of the problem dissolves immediately once we recognize that there is a confusion of categories at its root.
Some doubts are directly a matter of theology, others only indirectly, if at all.
This is a book on doubt and doubting; it is not a theology of insurance.
The two are not necessarily the same.
In fact, there are two types of people who in their doubt are particularly allergic to theological talk.
On the one hand are those who are insensitive to God's truth.
Their doubt is hardening into unbelief; merely to talk of God is to waste words, to pour water on a duck's back and watch it run off.
Certainly they need conviction too, but of a different kind.
On the other hand are those who are over-sensitive .
They fasten on theological truths as on an armoury of big sticks, and they rain down blows on their long-suffering faith, belabouring it for being substandard and for failing to believe what it should.
Theological answers, even though correct, can be unhelpful to both of these types, though in different ways.
Theological talk, as such, is only a verbal formula.
Like a prescription it needs to be taken to be a cure, like a recipe it needs to be cooked to be eaten, like a cheque it needs to be cashed to be spent.
To the insensitive, theological talk seems as redundant as a prescription to a man who thinks he is well or a recipe to a man who is overfed or another cheque to a billionaire.
To the over-sensitive, though, what matters is the cure, the meal and the money.
This is why answering doubt is not the same as dispensing theological prescriptions.
Our examination of each doubt will tell us two things: first, about the deficiency of faith which has caused the problem, and second, about the sufficiency of God which is needed as the answer.
But the two need to be carefully related.
God's grace can be as much misused when it is wrongly applied to those who are oversensitive as when it is completely forgotten by those who are insensitive.
So there are two reasons why we will concentrate heavily on the human side in resolving doubt.
First, many books already deal with doubt in terms of a theology of assurance.
Second, the deliberate stress on what we can and must do when we doubt is designed to fence off what we cannot and must never do.
All of the doubts we will discuss spring either from my own experience or from the experience of many who have shared their doubts with me.
These doubts are not examined for academic purposes, nor are they treated in a critical way.
Our aim is to understand doubt only in order to understand and to encourage faith.
We do it in the same spirit in which in Pilgrim's Progress John Bunyan's Christian and Hopeful erected a sign to keep other pilgrims from the hands of Giant Despair.
Over this stile is the way to Doubting Castle, which is kept by Giant Despair, who despiseth the king of the Celestial Country, and seeks to destroy his holy pilgrims.
Many therefore that followed after, read what was written, and escaped the danger.
Everybody's Problem
Why do some people think that faith is necessarily troubled by doubt but that knowledge is not?
Or how is it that faith and uncertainty are automatically associated with each other while knowledge is regarded as certain and therefore different?
These questions express the second misconception concerning doubt — the idea that doubt is a problem for faith but not for knowledge.
The word believe is commonly used very weakly today.
If I were to ask you if you could come to dinner tonight and you replied ‘Yes’ or ‘No’, my wife and I could plan accordingly.
But if you were to say ‘I believe so’ or ‘I doubt it’, we might not prepare the meal but we could hardly plan to go elsewhere until we had heard from you more definitely.
Yes and No imply certainty based on knowledge and choice.
But today when someone says ‘I believe so’, what he means is ‘Yes with-doubts’.
When he says ‘I doubt it’, what he means is ‘No-with-doubts’.
But this is the reverse of what a Christian means when he says ‘I believe’ in God.
The difference can be seen easily if we turn the Apostles' Creed into a series of questions (Do you believe in God, the Father Almighty? etc.) and then ask what reply is appropriate.
Christians are ‘believers’, but the appropriate Christian reply to such questions would not be ‘I believe so’ but ‘Yes!’
The modern understanding of belief suggests an uncertainty which is knowledge-minus; the Christian understanding of belief speaks of a certainty which is knowledge-plus.
Faith out in the cold
How is it that faith has been so divorced from knowledge?
Picture someone being treated as an odd man out — in a family, in an office or at a party.
Only rarely is such a person genuinely odd, at least in the beginning.
Usually he is  merely different.
The trouble is that his differences are different from other people's.
But since the majority sets the standards, the differences of the majority are considered normal, those of the minority odd.
In the end, the odd man out is excluded.
Where he is different from the rest, his differences are exaggerated; where he is the same, his similarities are ignored.
Imagine your own examples.
In a roomful of thin boys one fat boy is odd man out.
What is shared in common— boyishness — would be forgotten; fatness or thinness would then be all that mattered.
Or again, can the bias against left-handedness be explained apart from the fact that most people are right-handed?
‘Right-hand man’ is a complimentary description, whereas the Latin for left has become ‘sinister’, and the French for left has become ‘gauche’.
The suggestion is almost that since right is right, left (being the opposite of right) is wrong.
Faith is being treated in much the same way.
The suggestion almost made is that, since knowledge is certain and faith is not knowledge, faith is uncertain.
The way people talk about faith, you would think that rationality, inquiry, investigation, understanding and proof had all joined hands to form a circle of knowledge, leaving faith outside in the cold.
Faith is treated as the odd man out, the misfit, the black sheep.
It is commonly suggested that since faith depends on assumptions, it has nothing to do with knowledge, just as knowledge has no need of faith.
Faith is something which is merely believed, so it must always expect to be open to doubt.
But knowledge is something which has achieved the certainty of being known and proved, and therefore need never be doubted.
The issue at stake here is vital.
If faith has nothing to do with knowledge, then we Christians doubt because our faith is weaker than knowledge.
In this case our doubt would be only a local problem, a sign of the inferiority of our faith.
It would be solved at once if we were to abandon faith for something more solid which can be known.
On the other hand, if this distinction is wrong, if faith depends on knowledge and knowledge depends on faith, then doubt would be a challenge to both knowledge and faith and not just to faith.
In fact, the latter is the case.
Without faith there is no knowledge.
All true faith depends on knowledge.
Knowledge and faith are inseparable.
As soon as we see this our picture of doubt changes completely.
Doubt is not so much our problem as everybody's problem.
It is not primarily a Christian problem, but a human problem.
Merely to say it does not magically dissolve the particular trouble we face as Christians who doubt.
But it helps us to recognize that we are not alone in facing doubt.
The root of doubt is not in our faith but in our humanness.
What we doubt may undermine our faith, and even more so how we doubt or why we fail to deal with doubt.
But in no way is the fact that we doubt a negative reflection on our faith.
Blood brothers, not arch-enemies
How is this so?
In what sense are faith and doubt closely related to knowledge?
The answer lies in the part played by assumptions or presuppositions in knowledge.
Knowledge pretends it is completely different from faith and makes faith the odd man out by ignoring its own assumptions.
But the fact that assumptions are necessary for knowledge shows that knowledge and faith are not arch-enemies, as often supposed, but blood brothers.
Advance in human knowledge is closely and rightly tied to how we come to know.
This is why in most cases an eyewitness account is more reliable than rumour or hearsay, or why the conclusions of a scientific experiment are likely to be accepted above the claims of a spaced-out acid head.
A large part of coming to know lies in discovering the best ways of coming to know.
But even with the best understanding in the world some element of uncertainty is present in knowledge, for we can never know exhaustively how we come to know.
There are some things we have to assume in order to know anything.
Fortunately for our sanity, we can say that we know something without having to delve each time into how we know it.
If we could say ‘I know’ only when we could also say exhaustively how it is that we know, it would create just as much a problem for the sophisticated philosopher as for those of us who are simpler.
The problem, though, does not lie in what we know but how we know.
When we set out to  know something, we do not proceed by proving everything we know before we know it.
If we are to know anything, we must proceed on the basis of certain things which cannot be proved but which must be presupposed .
Could you know anything without first presupposing that you are there to know it and that there is something there to be known ?
Or could you prove the rules of logic without using the rules to do so?
We cannot even conclude that we do not exist without presupposing that we do.
Nor can we fundamentally question the rules of logic, for only when we assume them can we ask a question at all.
These are obvious, though complicated-sounding, examples of the sort of indispensable presuppositions or faith-assumptions which we cannot do without.
Put very simply, in order to know anything we must assume certain things in faith.
Without doing so we would know nothing at all.
This means that reason is never able to guarantee itself.
Rationality is part of our greatness, but it also serves to keep us humble because rationality itself must be assumed by faith.
An element of faith is indispensable to all human knowledge.
The situation with human knowledge is not what is often suggested — that faith begins when reason ends.
Rather, if faith does not begin, reason will not do so either.
There is always more to knowing than human knowledge will ever know .
As human beings we can choose to believe anything, but we must believe something.
We can believe nothing only if this too is made into a belief.
This is why all of us will doubt at some point, whatever it is that we believe.
The beggar in Ingmar Bergman's film Virgin Spring speaks for us all.
In a poignant soliloquy, watching smoke curl into the sky like an ethereal question mark, he exclaims, ‘Ah, human beings — they tremble and worry like a leaf in the storm because they know and because they don't know.’
What does this mean?
Simply that human beings know some things with certainty and other things with less certainty?
Of course, it is true that outside the small clearing of what we know lies the unexplored forest of what we do not know.
But that is not the point.
The deeper reason for our doubt — and faith — is that even what we know rests only on the foundations of what we do not know.
This means that one basic source of human doubt is  located within the very foundation structures of knowledge itself.
In a profound sense we doubt not only because we are ignorant of something but because we are absolutely certain of nothing.
The way we know at all as human beings means not only that none of us knows everything but that none of us knows absolutely why we know anything.
There is a grey area for all of us, a philosophical no-man's-land between what we know and what we do not know.
In his book Knots R. D. Laing captures the absurdity of our pretensions to absolutely certain knowledge in one of his mental ‘knots’.
If I don't know I don't know
I think I know
If I don't know I know
I think I don't know
This is a basic, though subtle, source of doubt, but it is not the only one.
Nor, as it happens, is it the most important.
But it helps to show Clearly that doubt is everybody's problem.
Any approach that makes doubt a problem of faith rather than a problem of knowledge is wrong.
Doubt is not primarily a question of particular faiths (Should I believe this one or that one?) or even of the strength of faith (Do I really believe this one or that one?).
Rather doubt is bound up with knowledge and faith themselves.
Martin Luther remarked, ‘The art of doubting is easy, for it is an ability that is born with us.’
Knowledge and doubt are inseparable to man.
The sole alternative to knowledge-with-doubt is no knowledge at all.
Only God and certain madmen have no doubts.
Testimony to this comes from the common agreement of many of the world's proverbs: ‘Who knows nothing doubts nothing’(French), ‘The wise are prone to doubt’(Greek), or ‘With great doubts come great understanding; with little doubts come little understanding’(Chinese).
Self-confidence and certainty
For human knowledge to be absolutely sure of itself is a contradiction in terms.
As Pascal observes in The Pensées , ‘Nothing strengthens the case of scepticism more than the fact that there are people who are not sceptic.
If they all were it would be wrong.’
Since our knowledge is finite, none of us can exclude the possibility of our being wrong.
Of course, we all know people who are supremely sure of themselves.
But self-confidence in the sense of psychological certitude is not the same things as absolute certainty in the philosophical sense.
One man completely self-assured (in the psychological sense) is not a contradiction of what we have just said any more than what we have just said about uncertainty (in the epistemological sense) reduces all men to the level of mumbling irresolution.
Cardinal Newman wrote in his Apologia pro vita sua , ‘From the time that I became a Catholic…
I never have had one doubt.’
But such a statement can be easily misunderstood if taken out of context.
Certainly it demonstrates a virile faith, which is an excellent example to every believer.
But it can also be misleading, for its strength is partly reinforced by the Cardinal's self-confidence and the place he had reached on his spiritual pilgrimage.
It is a personal testimony, not a claim made for Catholicism or even for Christianity.
He is not saying, ‘Become a Christian and you will never doubt.’
He is only saying that after a certain point in his life he himself did not doubt.
This conviction may be enviable, but not everyone is able to match it, and it would be dishonest to pretend otherwise.
The Cardinal himself never pretended otherwise, but people whose doubts are depressingly real can easily forget this and become discouraged by such a standard.
But their discouragement stems mainly from confusing self-confidence with certainty, so that quite unnecessarily they tend to despise their own much weaker faith.
Properly speaking, the force (and also the weakness) of a personal testimony is that it tells us as much about the person who believes as about the content of what he believes.
A testimony may be fascinating but at the same time quite irrelevant to the basic questions touching on faith and doubt.
Self-confidence is not the same thing as intellectual certainty or moral infallibility.
For every Cardinal Newman there are hundreds for whom such words might be better described as egotism or pig-headedness.
There are certainly many others who would see themselves reflected more accurately in Constantin Levin, Tolstoy's portrayal of himself in Anna Karenina .
‘On the very morning of his wedding Constantin was filled with a radiant happiness of love, but his doubting nature suddenly cast a shadow across his joy.
But do I know her  thoughts, her wishes, her feelings? a voice suddenly whispered.
The smile faded from his face, and he grew thoughtful.
And all at once a strange sensation came over him.
Fear and doubt possessed him, doubt of everything.’
The two faces of doubt
Doubt is human and universal.
But if we are speaking as Christians, we must quickly add that this situation is a problem only because of the Fall.
Did uncertainty play any part in man's knowledge before the Fall?
It would be impossible to do more than speculate.
On the one hand, before the Fall man could not have enjoyed exhaustive certainty, for he was still bound by the limitations of his finiteness, though not of his sinfulness.
On the other hand, after the Fall there is a spiritual and moral dimension to doubt which transcends the mere uncertainty concerning a theory of knowing.
Doubt now is much more than a matter of uncertainty.
It is an integral part of spiritual pride, moral evil, psychological alienation and intellectual confusion, each of which is a legacy of the Fall.
Most probably doubt comes from the new sting given by the Fall to the lack of total epistemological certainty which was there before.
At worst we can now doubt for reasons which are purely moral, spiritual or psychological, as in the case of someone who is incurably suspicious, a problem which has nothing at all to do with epistemology.
Although knowledge, faith and doubt are inseparable, there is a crucial difference in the nature of their relationship.
Knowledge and faith would always have been inseparable, even if there had been no Fall (like the healthy relationship of two twins).
Doubt and faith, though, are related only because of the nature of things after the Fall (like the unhealthy relationship of a leech clinging to a body).
But this does not mean that we swing to the opposite extreme and say that because doubt is a result of the Fall, all doubts are necessarily destructive, negative, even sinful.
This is not so.
Doubt is sometimes of great value.
The reason doubt is valuable lies in a distinctive peculiarity of reality after the Fall.
We are no longer in a world where everything is perfect, but neither are we in a world where everything is evil.
Instead, reality after the Fall has a curious ambiguity, a strange double-edged aspect.
Reality  now has two faces or two angles from which the same face can be viewed quite differently.
Everything can be taken either of two ways — creatively or destructively, for God or against God.
On one side there are some things, such as human creativity, which were once completely good by virtue of God's creation.
But now after the Fall, they are equivocal, ambivalent, with a potential which can be turned either way.
Think of various uses to which human creativity can be put, such as humour or technology.
We see immediately how easy it is to use them either positively or negatively, for beauty and life or for ugliness and death.
On the other side there are things which are now in a form which is entirely the result of the Fall.
They operate in a way which runs counter to the original purpose of creation.
Death is a prime example.
Yet, since they have this ambiguous, double-edged aspect too, even the latter are not totally evil but can be turned to some good.
Think of situations where death, which we should usually see as outrageous and abnormal, is welcomed, as in the dying of extreme sufferers or those whose continued existence is a threat to the lives of others.
(How many lives were saved by the deaths of Hitler or Stalin?)
This is the other face of death.
It is not our normal view of it, but it is no less real and cannot be dismissed from human experience.
Doubt is a part of this second group of double-edged realities.
We might call them ‘abnormal-normals’, things which appear normal from one perspective and abnormal from another.
Measured against the character of God and his original purposes in creation, these abnormal-normals are decidedly abnormal.
But measured against the abnormal situation which has been introduced by the Fall, they have an approximate normality.
This is an important qualification (that doubt is normal only in our abnormal situation), but it allows us to appreciate something of the positive side of doubt.
The value of doubt
The value of doubt is that it can be used to detect error.
We live in a fallen world.
All is not true, so not everything should be believed; some things ought to be doubted.
Jesus was not being poetic when he described the Evil One as ‘the  father of lies’.
The Devil's stock in trade is the world of half.
truths and half-lies where the half-lie masquerades as the whole truth.
But a sword like this will cut both ways.
If doubt can be turned destructively against truth so that it is dismissed as error, doubt can also be used constructively to prosecute error disguised as.
truth.
If the surrounding web of reality which we perceive is partly true and partly false, then in order to get closer to the truth some things need to be doubted so that others can properly be believed.
The original meaning of the Greek word skeptikos is, in fact, ‘inquirer’.
The inescapable presence of doubt is a constant reminder of our responsibility to truth in a twilight world of truth and half-truth.
Like a spur it challenges us to find out for ourselves.
It is precisely because all is not certain that we have to make certain.
Because there is always room for doubt, we are always left with room to inquire.
This is what keeps open a breathing-space for the spiritual and moral dimensions to the investigation of truth in a world whose natural bent is to exclude it.
Healthy scepticism is a sign of the knowing man's humility.
The constructive side to doubt has long been recognized.
The essayist Francis Bacon wrote, If a man will begin with certainties, he shall end in doubts; but if he will be content to begin with doubts, he shall end in certainties.’
Pascal, referring to doubt more specifically in relation to Christian faith, wrote, ‘One must know when it is right to doubt, to affirm, to submit.
Anyone who does otherwise does not understand the force of reason.’
Earlier still Augustine said, ‘I doubt, therefore truth is.’
Doubt may be ambiguous, an anomaly, an abnormal-normal, but the very kick-back in its double-edged nature prevents anyone from settling permanently in error.
Even if someone believes the most secure and pernicious lies, he will not be able to help himself from doubting them at some time.
Doubt acts as a sparring partner both to truth and error.
It keeps faith trim and helps to shed the paunchiness of false ideas.
Like a terrier, doubt worries at weak ideas until they escape reinvigorated or collapse exhausted.
It is the nature of doubt always to be questioning, challenging, inquiring, cross-examining.
Doubt is not inarticulate  though its questions may lie deeper than words.
To the mind that is morally and intellectually healthy this positive value of doubt can work to its advantage.
If there were no disease in the world, inoculation would be unnecessary.
If there were no lies and half-truths in the world, doubt would be superfluous for everything could be believed.
But just as a tiny dose of poison is sometimes the best antidote to complete poisoning (though too much kills), so a modest dose of doubt — limited, temporary and constructively used — can be an excellent preventative of unbelief (though excessive doubt is fatal here too).
This has never been better expressed, perhaps, than in the famous lines of Tennyson's In Memoriam :
He fought his doubts and gather'd strength,
He would not make his judgement blind,
He faced the spectres of the mind
And laid them: thus he came at length 
To find a stronger faith his own.
Of course, we must not exaggerate the value of doubt and forget its darker side.
If doubt can conjure up images of heroism (the David of Doubt standing up to the Goliath of Lies), it can just as easily represent what is most cowardly, indecisive and dictatorial in us all.
Like an amber light that changes to green or red, doubt may change to faith or to unbelief.
Pascal captures the negative side when he writes, ‘Doubt then is an unhappy state, but there is an indispensable duty to seek in doubt, and thus anyone who doubts and does not seek is at once unhappy and in the wrong.’
Doubt, then, is a problem for both faith and knowledge.
As long as the presence of doubt is detected anywhere, neither faith nor knowledge can ever be complacent.
But though doubt may be normal, it should only be temporary and it should always be resolved..
Wisely understood, resolutely faced, it need hold no fear for the Christian.
To a healthy faith doubt is a healthy challenge.
Hostage Unawares
What do most people do when they begin to doubt?
Do they bring the doubt out into the open to examine it or silence it and pretend it never happened?
Or do nothing, hoping the problem will go away?
The way people react to their doubts is an excellent indication of their attitude to doubt itself.
Christians today are not normally known for their candour about doubt or for their confident ability to resolve it.
Why is this?
If doubt is human and universal, why do so many Christians treat it as dark and unmentionable, a problem that gnaws at the mind like the suspicion of cancer or troubles the conscience like a guilty thought?
To some it is even the ultimate treason against faith, the unpardonable sin.
In this chapter we will examine a third misconception about doubt — the idea that doubt is something to be ashamed of because it is dishonest to believe if you have doubts.
This is another major reason for the inadequate views of doubt among Christians.
Unwittingly we have succumbed to twentieth-century views of doubt.
Particular twentieth-century objections to Christianity have certainly created doubts for some Christians.
One example is Freud's view that all beliefs are the result of instinctual desires and drives.
But although such objections pose serious problems for Christians, the heart of the danger lies deeper than that.
Christian thinking has been affected not so much by specific doubts as by the general concept of doubting which is entertained today.
Christians have stood firm against a flood of unbelief but have failed to notice its more subtle effects.
A consensus has welled up around the church and left as its high-water mark a distinctive view of doubt which is prejudicial to faith and quite illegitimate.
I am not saying that Christians subscribe openly to such a  view of doubt.
Not at all.
The great majority are not even aware of it, let alone able to give it a name.
Yet, like most faiths in the twentieth century, Christianity has come under the hypnotic spell of this modern attitude, and Christians are beguiled into behaving as it demands.
The irony is plain.
It is bad enough for a believer in any faith to have the content of his belief infiltrated by alien ideas.
But it displays an astonishing degree of intellectual captivity when the entire way he doubts what he believes is infiltrated too.
This is a double alienation and for the Christian a curious kind of worldliness of mind.
Reason's right-hand man
What is the modern view of doubt that does this damage?
It is often described as ‘critical’, ‘systematic’, ‘rational’ or ‘methodic’doubt.
As such it is part of the legacy of a long tradition of humanist thought which stretches back to fifth-century BC Greece when the first decisive steps towards modern secularism were taken.
This is not the place to attempt a critique of humanism.
But the point to notice is that a key part of humanist thought, from the early Greeks down to the twentieth century, is the attempt to justify man's knowledge by his reason alone, denying the necessity of faith in general and God's revelation in particular.
This rationalism (I use the word here in a much wider sense than suggested by ‘rationalism’ as opposed to‘empiricism’) attempts not only to use reason as a tool but to go further and make reason guarantee itself.
Doubt is seen as a complement to reason, and both reason and doubt are regarded as competent tools with which to discover truth.
The importance of reason in rationalism needs no further elaboration; our concern here is the equally important role assigned to doubt.
In the long, patient search for truth doubt has been slowly promoted until it is reason's junior partner or reason's right-hand man.
As a reward for its services doubt is distinguished as ‘critical’, ‘systematic’ and ‘rational’.
Doubt therefore becomes the acid test for truth, the best solvent for error, the Geiger counter for detecting falsehood, the sieve to catch unwanted lumps of irrationality.
All ‘mere beliefs’ are viewed as inferior since they are only accepted on trust or via authorities or tradition.
They have  to be subjected to a rigorous trial by doubt, and only those considered ‘indubitable’ or ‘certain beyond any shadow of doubt’are finally accepted as true.
The purpose of this process of doubting is to strain off the dross of uncertainty and to leave behind a residue of knowledge — objective, certain, universal.
Doubt everything that can be doubted is the aim of the exercise.
What is left, it is claimed, will be self-evident truths which can be accepted as such by all open minds.
René Descartes, who attempted to discover truth by doubting everything he could manage to doubt, described the first principle of his method like this in A Discourse on Method , ‘The first rule was never to accept anything for true which I did not clearly know to be such; that is to say…to comprise nothing more in my judgement than what was presented to my mind so clearly and distinctly as to exclude all ground of doubt.’
This method of Cartesian doubt was the process by which he reached his famous dictum:Cogito ergo sum (‘I think, therefore I am’).
The clarity and compelling power of this approach are plain.
At first it sounds the same as our earlier description of the positive value of doubt.
Actually, the basic differences are enormous.
Christians and humanists are not alone in agreeing that doubt can be an antidote to inauthentic faith or to error and falsehood.
But while the Christian sees doubt as useful only in the preliminary stages of exposing what he should not believe, some humanists go much further.
They almost suggest that, if applied correctly, critical doubt would rule out all answers other than their own and establish humanism as the only rational belief.
Bertrand Russell, for example, claimed in his book Sceptical Essays that rationalism, doubt and the millennium go hand in hand: ‘If only men could be brought into a tentatively agnostic frame of mind about these matters [religion and politics], nine-tenths of the evils of the modern world would be cured…
. Thus rational doubt alone, if it could be generated, would suffice to introduce the millennium.’
why stop there?
Even where it is not stated explicitly, it is often implied that the tenets of rationalism or humanism are indubitable and self-evident.
But there is a glaring fallacy, an unacceptable  extra step in the logic of this attitude.
It is an overstatement typical of the worst type of ‘leap of faith’ and cannot be allowed to pass.
If we listen carefully to the process of critical doubt and then examine just what it is that is pronounced indubitable, we must surely ask: but why stop here?
Why should the process end at that particular point?
Why is this so-called ‘indubitable’ itself exempted from doubt?
Take Lao-Tse's celebrated question: ‘If when I was asleep I was a man dreaming I was a butterfly, how do I know when I am awake that I am not a butterfly dreaming I am a man?’
Getting on with living is most people's answer to the question.
But, apart from the fact that we have to live anyway, could reason alone put a stop to the dizzying effect of the question?
The answer is no.
Even the proofs of science would be no help for they too are founded on pre-scientific presuppositions.
If we press this and insist on doubting what the humanist holds as indubitable, we uncover a hornet's nest of assumptions and presuppositions which are far from being rationally indubitable.
For example, why do we accept what we have always presupposed rather than proved?
Why do we not insist that presuppositions be proved too?
Why do we not query everything, even the act of querying itself?
Obviously, to take this to the end of the line is impossible and as pointless as a dog chasing its tail.
But that is the point.
Once we see the absurdity of doubting everything, including the tool of doubt itself, we can see the basic flaw in the use of critical doubt:No one can doubt everything: To live meaningfully each person must assume, or believe, something.
In fact, we can only doubt something if we believe something else.
So the place at which a person stops doubting is a matter of his private preference and with many people this is entirely arbitrary.
One person's point of believing may be another person's point of doubting; there is no one who does not have some faith.
Doubting can help to rule out possible faiths that will not do, but by itself it cannot establish the faith that will.
The problem with critical doubt is that it is not doubtful enough: it does not subject itself to its own criteria.
It is critical of others but less so of itself.
A doubt that is genuinely systematic would lead its advocate to a state beyond argument, beyond language and even beyond rationality to a  nirvana-like silence of nonconsciousness.
As Pascal warned, ‘No one can go that far, and I maintain that a perfectly genuine sceptic has never existed.
Nature backs up helpless reason and stops it going so wildly astray., How about that rare bird, the man who professes that he is a ‘complete sceptic’?
Listen to him carefully and you will soon find that his scepticism is far from complete.
He holds to it in a most unsceptical way — that is, with a fair degree of dogmatism.
Pascal pointed out that ‘sceptical arguments allow the positive to be positive.
Few…speak dubiously of scepticism’.
The fact that sceptics are not sceptical about scepticism is further evidence that to doubt anything we must believe something.
The person who is sceptical toward one faith or even most faiths will be the devoted adherent of another.
In fact, it is a measure of his poverty both that he is unaware of it and that he can define himself only in negative terms.
Some people claim otherwise and argue vociferously for complete scepticism.
But they disprove their own argument with every thought, every word, every point of logic that they use.
Every moment of shared communication speaks against their total scepticism.
Their very insistence of trying to make sense is eloquent testimony to assumptions that are powerful though silent.
The contradictions of this have been delightfully illustrated.
Catch the ‘complete sceptic’ in any situation where exclamations like ‘Look out for that car!’or ‘Your slip is showing!’or ‘Your fly is undone!’are appropriate.
The most sceptical of sceptics will immediately move much faster than his scepticism should allow.
Complete scepticism is impossible.
Limited scepticism is arbitrary.
Each person chooses what he is sceptical about and what he believes without scepticism.
To stress this is to labour the obvious, but it underlines the point that no one can know exhaustively how he knows what he knows.
If the only alternatives in knowing were the Scylla and Charybdis of pure objectivism or total scepticism, our choice would be a sorry one.
Pure objectivism is a myth and complete scepticism an impossibility.
The answer to this impasse lies in a third way of knowing, one which is based on presuppositions.
But if knowledge proceeds on what must be presupposed  before it is proved, the cover is blown on the pretensions of critical doubt.
Critical doubt depends on a myth, the idea that human knowledge is totally objective and neutral.
But no human knowledge is so certain that it needs no presuppositions.
It is impossible to doubt anything unless there is some thing we do not doubt — our own assumptions.
Even these can be criticized only upon the basis of other assumptions.
Like a man changing horses in midstream, someone can pass over in seconds from one set of assumptions to another.
But even during those few seconds when he is changing he is on one horse or the other.
There is no other place to be but the stream.
Presuppositions are the silent partners in thought, but their silence must not be mistaken for their absence.
What the ventriloquist's voice and the puppeteer's hands are to the puppet, presuppositions are to rational thought.
Without the man and the voice, there is only a limp doll.
Sometimes a person may fail to see his own assumptions and sometimes he will deliberately conceal them.
But systematic doubt is a handy weapon for dismissing our opponent's beliefs and establishing our own only if we ignore our own presuppositions.
It is time to identify and explode the powerful myth of critical doubt and dispel the clouds of defeatism which it lowers on Christian faith.
Critical doubt is incorrect and its prestige is exaggerated.
Doubt by itself is not the final test of truth.
Doubt alone is not the badge of objectivity.
It is not for doubt to deliver a certificate of certainty.
Being constantly self-critical provides no guarantee of truth nor necessarily any immunity from prejudice and error.
Doubt can have deep integrity, but it can also be lazy and dishonest.
Reduce its inflated prestige and doubt can be given its rightful place once more.
The strength of scepticism is not that it can be argued consistently but that it can be used effectively against unwarranted dogmatism.
The way of doubt is not itself the path to truth, but in sealing off mistaken approaches it provides an impetus to the search.
It can be a prelude to inquiry just as questions are a spur to searching.
As Kierkegaard remarked, the method which doubts in order to philosophize is little more suited to its purpose than  the notion of teaching a soldier to stand up straight by learning to lie down in a heap.
Like an unloaded pistol held at the believer's head, critical doubt is no more than an empty threat.
side-effects
How exactly does critical doubt affect a Christian's attitude towards doubting?
Like many errors, it catches us on the two horns of a false choice.
It suggests that when we have any doubts about our faith we should at once shelve our faith and doubt further.
Otherwise our faith would be inauthentic for stopping short.
This seems to leave us only two options: either to believe anyway (repressing our doubts and feeling guilty about those that remain) or to give up faith.
But this ignores two vital facts: first, that doubt itself is not the denial of faith, and second, that if they are pursued doubts may be resolved rather than deepened so that faith is confirmed and not denied.
We should be alert for the side-effects of critical doubt.
One example is the way Christians become tongue-tied when people define themselves by what they reject in Christianity.
This, the non-Christian thinks, is a sufficient rebuttal of faith.
(‘Well, no, I can't accept that.
You see, I'm an atheist/ agnostic/sceptic’.)
We should never be thrown off balance by this sort of reply, as if the discussion were ended.
In fact it has only begun.
All that the other person has said is what he does not believe.
This is important and it may be extremely interesting.
But it is a red herring because it begs the question: What does he believe?
That is where his weakness will lie.
Scepticism can be a lazy belief, and we should not allow our train of thinking to be shunted off into this old siding.
A second example is the uneasy suspicion that we Christians believe only because we are less sceptical and therefore more shallow in our thinking.
The truth is often the reverse.
The unthinking Christian may believe his faith as unthinkingly as the unthinking pagan.
But many Christians have come to believe because they were more sceptical than most.
They have suffered the extreme agony of first-order doubts, so they know that their subsequent faith in God is the only answer to that question which called everything in question.
Having doubted so deeply, such Christians are only  surprised that other people, whether pagan or Christian, have believed so easily.
Others may play with doubt by not doubting enough.
But they have gone through an experience of doubt which has purged them forever of the desire to doubt without finding an answer.
This is the scepticism that rules scepticism itself out of court and clears the way for legitimate faith.
Other practical expressions of critical doubt can easily be detected.
In fact, the currency of modern unbelief is largely drawn from the over-inflated value of rationalism, even if unbelievers are not themselves rationalists.
It lends its support to various disdainful dismissals of faith (Christian beliefs are ‘nonsense’, ‘mere opinions’, an ‘illusion’, ‘wish-fulfilment’ or an ‘opiate’).
In each case the damning innuendo is the same: Absolute Truth is inhibiting dogma, faith demands a high degree of auto-suggestion and repression, prayer is a sign of incompetence and irresolution, fellowship is a mark of dependency.
Ralph Waldo Emerson's remark stands as a typical example: ‘As men's prayers are a disease of the will, so are their creeds a disease of the intellect.’
What is suggested as the alternative to faith?
Rich and powerful connotations are poured into the vocabulary describing reason and doubt.
The way of doubt is the way of ‘the critical question’, ‘the demanding investigation’.
‘the bold inquiry’, ‘the courageous challenge’, ‘the open mind’, ‘the uninhibited pursuit of truth’, ‘the indubitable proof’, the ‘self-evident conclusion’.
The ‘free thinker’ is the glorious ideal.
By contrast, the believer is the unfortunate repository of everything that is dogmatic, inhibited, reactionary and repressive.
Much of this is as amusing as it is absurd.
Often it is itself only an inherited prejudice, just as G. K. Chesterton caricatured it in his little poem ‘The New Free Thinker’.
John Grubby, who was short and stout
And troubled with religious doubt,
Refused about the age of three
To sit upon the curate's knee.
If the liberal humanist wishes to criticize a Christian or a Buddhist or a Marxist, that is his right.
But what he must not pretend is that he was led to this solely by his ‘rational doubt’ when in fact he was led to it by his faith, that is, his humanism.
Or let him acknowledge that while it is rational doubt for him as a liberal humanist to criticize the Buddhist, the Marxist or the Christian, it might equally be a rational doubt for the Marxist to criticize him as a humanist.
If there is no faith, there can be no doubt.
There is no faith which cannot choose to cast doubt on some other faith.
Hostage
The menacing threat of critical doubt is empty, though of course if the victim thinks that the pistol is loaded, the threat is real enough for him.
That is precisely the explanation for the inadequate view of doubt evidenced by many Christians: they are unwittingly the hostage of surrounding intellectual ideas.
Are things really as bad as that?
Or have I fallen into the trap of seeing a dozen cases of doubt and declaring a universal epidemic?
Judge for yourself from your own experience.
How common is it to find Christians who have thought through the problem of doubt as a whole, rather than thinking through doubt piecemeal?
How common is it to find churches which encourage a person to be open and honest about his doubting?
Let me stress again that the shame is not that people have doubts, but that they are ashamed of them.
Our problem is not that we have the wrong answers to particular doubts but that we do not have the right attitude to doubt in general.
In talking with people in doubt I have been struck repeatedly by one thing.
Sometimes it is not so much specific answers to specific doubts that bring relief but rather that doubts can be discussed at all.
There are two extremes to watch for among current attitudes to doubt.
On the one hand, some Christians treat doubt as a matter of guilt and secrecy, in much the same way as the Victorians treated sex.
Doubt is fenced off as taboo.
It is an unmentionable subject, a terrible way of letting the side down.
On the other hand, other Christians talk constantly about their doubts.
But if we listen to them carefully, it is evident that they parade their doubts not so much to resolve them as to evoke public sympathy and to gain that sense of identity which comes from subconsciously defining themselves by  their problems.
They disparage themselves for doubting and in the same breath defend their doubt like a treasured possession which nothing could persuade them to give up.
These two extremes are not so contradictory as they might seem.
Both indicate the same unhealthy view of doubt.
Only when doubt is regarded as sufficiently dire does the profession of doubt become a way for a person to define himself.
So the second attitude can flourish only in a climate where the first is general.
The influence of such attitudes is wide.
Even when it is near its best, the call to faith in modern preaching can often border on idealism.
The Scriptures may be quoted, the heroes of Christian history may be recalled, but somehow there is a loss of biblical realism.
Instead of being human and down-to-earth, faith becomes a fragrant, concentrated essence.
The heroism is distilled and all the impurities of doubt, discouragement and despair are removed so the final product is exclusive — and also profoundly discouraging.
Too often we forget that the great men of faith reached the heights they did only by going through the depths.
The exquisite fragrance we like to remember is a product of the ripened maturity of their faith and not of its earlier stages.
At its worst, the life of faith is portrayed in a way that it is tantamount to spiritual repression.
Faith is pictured as the absence of doubt and the man of faith as the man with no doubts.
If there is doubt and unbelief to be overcome, it is outside of us, and like St George we must venture out of the camp and slay the dragons for the honour of faith.
But what we are not allowed to admit is that there are dragons inside the camp, let alone in our hearts.
‘No dragons allowed in the camp’ then becomes ‘There are no dragons in the camp’which is turn becomes ‘Down, dragon!
Down!’
Why not call repression by its name?
The insight that we are what we keep secret about ourselves works out here to mean that we are our guilty secrets.
The damage this does to our Christian life is incalculable.
‘Do you have a doubt?
Pray about it.’
…‘Yes, that's a very terrible situation/difficult question, but if you get things right with the Lord, it will all work out.’
Because of such answers and their euphemistic vocabulary doubt is called everything but doubt, and the basic dilemma is not brought into the open.
When we deny our doubts, repression takes its toll in personal integrity, faith, worship and witness.
It also contributes to the leakage of faith among thinking people.
Perhaps the most celebrated ‘deserter by doubt’ lost to Christianity in the twentieth century has been Bertrand Russell.
He was better known as a spirited champion of atheism, so many people do not realize that he believed in God until he was eighteen.
There were certainly other reasons for his rejection of belief at that age.
Unfortunately, for example, he believed certain things which were wrong (such as the tenets of Unitarianism), and he believed them for the wrong reasons (such as the theistic proofs).
But one important reason why he turned away from belief in God was that he was forced to adopt an unhealthy attitude towards his own questions and serious doubts.
Looking back on the period when he was seriously searching as a fourteen-year-old (and for a man with a mind of Russell's breadth this was no ‘mere adolescence’), he described it like this:
I became exceedingly religious and consequently anxious to know whether there was any good ground for supposing religion to be true.
For the next four years a great part of my time was spent in secret meditation upon this subject, I could not speak to anybody about it for fear of giving pain.
I suffered acutely, both from the gradual loss of faith and from the necessity of silence.
The impression he was given he mistook for the truth, and his life-long opposition to the Christian faith was the consequence.
Lord Russell will one day answer to God for his own choice, and our place is not to prejudge the issue.
But the lesson of his tragic anti-testimony should be written on our hearts.
By God's grace the church must not continue this way.
It is an old maxim that the safest way to victimize a man is to help him to victimize himself.
Once he himself believes what others believe about him, he is doubly enslaved.
He is not only a prisoner but is conditioned to be his own jailer too.
Just as any oppressed man is most enslaved when he becomes shameful in his own eyes, so the Christian is deepest in captivity when not only in his believing but in his doubting  too he dances to the tune of his culture's parody of his faith.
This attitude to doubt it a part of our Christian shame today.
Families of doubt
Forgetting to remember
Doubt from ingratitude
Start a job badly and at once it is that much harder to finish it well.
Whether it's making a bed, building a skyscraper or landing a man on the moon, the lesson is the same.
Leave some initial thing undone, and it will be a handicap later, if not a factor in eventual failure.
The same is true of Christian faith.
Many people doubt because they have left out something important in the way they have come to believe.
Believe in God for wrong reasons or for no reason at all and you cannot expect to be free from doubt.
The seven families of doubt illustrate this well.
The first four are the direct result of deficiencies of faith in coming to believe and the last three the result of deficiencies of faith in continuing to believe.
We have seen that there is always more to knowing than human knowing will ever know.
This should make us wary of superficial descriptions of knowledge and faith.
But there are at least four levels of understanding clearly discernible in a biblical view of faith and each of the first four categories of doubt runs parallel to one of these levels.
Not everyone who becomes a Christian does so by consciously thinking through these four levels, but, consciously or unconsciously, the four levels must be built into any healthy faith.
Notice that I am deliberately speaking of ‘levels of understanding’ in believing, rather than‘stages in believing’.
The stress is not only on the idea of progression (from lower to higher) but also on unbroken continuity.
Basic to the idea of a level is the implication that a higher level goes beyond a lower level by including it, gathering it up and building on it.
Just so, there are certain levels of understanding in coming to believe that Christianity is true, and these may bear no relation to the ‘stages’ by which we have come to faith.
But a healthy faith should include them all, and it should  have each of them in its proper place.
To confuse the order of these levels or to omit one or more of them is dangerous — not because our faith is then invalid but because it does not rest on the strongest available foundations.
The ‘once and might have been’
Becoming critically aware of one's dilemma in life without God is the first level of understanding necessary in coming to faith.
For the searcher who goes on and comes to believe, this is the only possible starting point — a sense of need which may range from a mild discomfort to a deep conviction, but which spurs him to look for a solution beyond himself.
Think back to your own conversion and how you began to search for God, however vaguely.
Until that point, did you ever take the gospel seriously as ‘good news’?
Probably not.
The reason was that you had little or no awareness of what a bad situation you were in.
At least that was the case with me.
Only when I began to realize what my situation was really like did I see the gospel for what it was — extremely good news for people in extremely bad situations.
I don't know about you, but for me that discovery was an overwhelming experience which brought tears.
This does not mean that a Christian believes in God because of his needs.
What he does is to disbelieve in his previous world view because of needs which his previous world view can no longer answer.
This is part of what makes his eventual faith in God (which he reaches for other reasons) a radical reliance on God alone.
Other points of reliance are ruled out from the start.
Christianity thus begins where all other faiths leave off.
‘How blest are those who know their need of God,’ Jesus exclaims in the Sermon on the Mount, and as he opened the door to the kingdom of heaven his listeners must have gasped.
The lintel is so low that the only man who can enter is the man who is down on his knees.
The Prodigal Son becomes the pattern for us all; he became so hungry that he was prepared to swallow his own pride.
That was the point at which he took his first step towards home.
Without this first step there is no beginning, and every subsequent step in the search takes one further but always in the same direction.
So when the searcher eventually believes and becomes a Christian (I am ignoring for the moment the  other levels of understanding which are involved), he is nothing if not a man with a memory and a man of special gratitude: Whatever he becomes, wherever he goes, whatever he does, he should never be unaware of what once was, what might have been and what could well be again.
For the believer who understands this, ‘By God's grace I am what I am’ is never pious rhetoric: ‘There but for the grace of God go I’is as realistic a statement as any we ever make.
This awareness of need is the first level of understanding in coming to faith, and if there is any deficiency at this fundamental level, doubt will strike later on.
What happens is that we begin well as Christians as we remember our past clearly.
But then time passes, the memory fades and opportunities to doubt begin to come.
As we fail to remember our previous situation, a slow and subtle change of heart takes place.
What emerges is an attitude of resourcefulness that eventually grows into a mood of self-sufficiency and then into independence.
The effect is that what God has done fades slowly out of the picture, and we focus increasingly on what we ourselves seem well able to do.
That is, we continue to work with God, or maybe even without him, but the thought of self-sufficiency is not expressed so boldly: Finally, we reach a stage at which, whatever our external life is saying, our internal attitude is one of complete autonomy and arrogant self-sufficiency, though this may not be evident, especially to ourselves.
Press release of ingratitude
At this point there is no need of a major crisis or a profound tragedy to precipitate doubt.
All that it takes is a little push, some minor inconvenience, a trifling price to pay for faith, some obligation or embarrassment involved in being a Christian, and suddenly a trail of doubts bubbles to the surface: ‘Maybe after all…
‘, ‘Perhaps I took it all a little too seriously…
‘, ‘Surely God can hardly expect me to…
‘, ‘Probably I was a little overwrought, but I've weathered the crisis now…
’ Such doubts vary in intensity but bear united witness to a complacence or a disgruntled grumbling at any need for God and for his handling of our affairs.
The magic word that justifies those doubts is ‘phase’ or  ‘period’, as if a stage has been reached where God is no longer necessary: But the key motif in them all is ingratitude, a moral, spiritual and emotional insensitivity to the reality of what we once were and would be now apart from God.
We become insensitive to what we might call the ‘once and might have been’ of faith.
The fact that this was the chosen approach of the Evil One in tempting Eve should give us a healthy respect for its subtlety and danger: ‘Did God say…?’ he asked: His innocent-sounding questions about the facts of the case were designed to open up the deeper issue of God's goodness.
Why did God say this?
Could it possibly be that his knowledge is power over you?
Is God really as good as you have trusted him to be?
Are you really as free as you would wish?
Are you sure?
The questions bore in on Eve, and a different light is shed on the picture, the first shadows on the familiar sunlit world of trust.
Slowly the picture changes, and doubt is conceived at the first moment when ‘thank you’ is superfluous.
This is always the way: the oldest temptation is also the most contemporary: Writing in his Notes from Underground Dostoevsky says of man, ‘If he is not stupid, he is monstrously ungrateful!
Phenomenally ungrateful.
In fact, I believe that the best definition of man is the ungrateful biped.’
Notice that this doubt is not purely spiritual, nor purely intellectual, nor purely emotional but a question of a subtle though complete change of heart.
The transformation is made up of spiritual, intellectual and emotional elements which grow together into an autonomous state of mind: Sooner or later this attitude of autonomy expresses itself in doubt.
It has to in order to evade the challenge to its existence posed by the existence of God.
If I am to be autonomous, God must go.
The apostle Paul in his letter to Rome described the autonomous man: ‘Knowing God, they have refused to honour him as God, or to render him thanks.’
His words are a sober reminder that rebellion against God does not begin with the clenched fist of atheism but with the self-satisfied heart of the one for whom ‘thank you’ is redundant.
The bankruptcy of his previous position is forgotten, the sting of his former dilemma fades, a sense of God's conviction wears off, and his acknowledgement of God's grace becomes routine and matter-of-fact.
But this process may be well under way before it becomes apparent.
In fact, sometimes it is only when doubts are expressed that we have the first clue that things are no longer the same.
Doubts of this kind can be expressed in many ways, but they are usually notable for one important feature — their lack of urgency.
There is no pain of loss in this doubt, no agonizing uncertainty, no straining desire for a solution: The desired goal is not recovery of faith but a respectable cover for retreat from faith.
If anyone shows deep concern that he is doubting in this way, it is a sure sign that he is not.
This doubt is one of unconcern: It is insensitive, not over-sensitive.
Have you ever heard a husband on the verge of asking for a divorce finding fault with his wife, picking a quarrel or blackening her name to others?
What he is doing is laying the groundwork for the decisive moment and preparing his getaway.
Hate, like love, picks up every shred of evidence to justify itself.
Listen to the doubts of ingratitude in its terminal stage.
It is not what it pretends to be.
It is a backhanded note of dismissal, an explanation that is really an excuse.
But not for ever.
At a certain point there is no need for an alias or disguise.
The ingratitude comes out into the open and sets as hard as marble.
Not only is ‘thank you’ superfluous, God is dismissed altogether.
A computer would do better
Failure to remember is much more serious, of course, than a simple lapse of memory.
The human mind is more than a computer: Computers have dull and exact memories — what went in can come out again, exactly as it went in.
But the human mind selects as well as stores.
It not only receives, it picks and chooses and processes all it receives.
So its own spiritual, moral and psychological characteristics affect what it remembers.
Forgetfulness proves deadly because it strikes deep into the delicate area where conscience registers sin and where each person is most attuned to the nuances of relationship.
With this area desensitized, it is only a matter of time before the sensitivity of faith's communication is also numbed.
A spiritual movement of independence gathers force underground  and comes out into the open, using doubt as its prime organ of propaganda.
The theme of remembering, with its twin truth of giving thanks, has tremendous emphasis in the Bible, The man or woman of faith is the one who remembers, and the one who remembers is the one who gives thanks.
Unbelief, on the other hand, has a short and ungrateful memory.
This is true for whole nations as well as for individuals, as Israel's his tory proved.
Again and again as the nation prepared to cross the River Jordan and enter the Promised Land, Moses solemnly charged them: ‘Remember!’
No one knew better than he their stubbornness and volatile fickleness, demonstrated repeatedly after the Exodus from Egypt.
When the people were in Egypt, they cried out for freedom, but when they were free, they cried out to go back.
If there was a lack of water, they complained, and if there was water, they complained that there was no meat.
There was always something else, the next thing, always ‘if only….’
At the root of all their recalcitrance lay ingratitude and a failure to remember.
So, to prevent the disastrous consequences he foresaw, Moses drove home the lesson: ‘Remember!’
They were to remember where they came from: ‘Remember that you were slaves in Egypt and the Lord your God brought you out with a strong hand and an outstretched arm.’
They were to remember how they had come: ‘You must remember all that road by which the Lord your God has led you these forty years in the wilderness.’
And they were warned that even in prosperity and success they were not to forget: ‘When you eat your fill there, be careful not to forget the Lord who brought you out of Egypt.’
Their festivals were to be a commemoration of God's acts and even some of their clothes were to carry a reminder: ‘Into this tassel you shall work a violet thread, and whenever you see this in the tassel, you shall remember all the Lord's commands and obey them.’
But the lesson was not learned, and the chequered pattern of independence and ingratitude was repeated.
In the dark days during and after the Exile the lesson was reiterated with the added weight of still more history.
‘Our fathers in Egypt took no account of thy marvels, they did not remember thy many acts of faithful love,’ wrote the Psalmist.
‘They  quickly forgot all he had done.’
Or, as Nehemiah vividly expressed it, ‘They ate and were satisfied and grew fat and found delight in thy great goodness.
But they were defiant and rebelled against thee.’
This ingratitude in ‘forgetting to remember’ is the key to the tragic failure of the chosen people.
Speaking through Hosea, God himself sums up the lesson of Israel's failure: ‘They were filled, and, being filled, grew proud; and so they forgot me.’
What was possible for the nation under the Old Covenant is no less possible for the church under the New.
‘What do you possess that was not given you?’
Paul asked the Corinthians, and the unanswerable logic of his question was designed to cut decisively at the root of ingratitude.
When this was remembered, one mark of the exuberant joy of the early Christians and a secret of their costly praise was an overwhelming sense of God's grace behind the whole of life.
Focusing more particularly on forgiveness, Jesus defended the woman who had poured myrrh over his feet by pointing to the same reason: ‘Her great love proves that her many sins have been forgiven; where little has been forgiven, little love is shown.’
The point is not that some have been forgiven a greater number of sins than others or that some are ‘worse sinners’ than others but that some see their need of forgiveness and others do not.
The point also is that some, more than others, remember the sins they have been forgiven and are therefore more consciously grateful.
Where it is forgotten that we have been forgiven, little love is shown.
This possibility is never far away.
Ten lepers were healed by Jesus; only one returned to express his thanks.
When the Prodigal came home and the elder brother became jealous and self-righteous, the antidote for his sour-grapes was a refresher course for his memory: ‘My boy,’ said the father, ‘you are always with me, and everything I have is yours.’
In the parable, the King's servant, forgiven a crippling debt of millions, refused to forgive his fellow servant the debt of a few coins.
By demanding payment on a trifling amount, he is remembering what he should have forgotten and forgetting what he should have remembered — that he himself has just been forgiven.
Only such forgetfulness could allow such unforgivingness.
The same lesson has been appreciated through the history  of the church.
Augustine recognized that Paul's words touched everything: there was nothing he had which he had not received.
If this was so, then all was of grace.
His description of the Christian as ‘a hallelujah from head to foot’, is a thumb-nail sketch of the joy and gratitude of a redeemed memory.
‘Let me not tire of thanking you,’ he wrote, ‘for your mercy in rescuing me from all my wicked ways.’
The same grace was a marvel to John Newton centuries later.
He was a Christian for many years but quite unable to forget that he had once been ‘an infidel and libertine, a servant of slaves in Africa’.
Out of this deep sense of the ‘once and might have been’, which threw the wonder of salvation into sharp relief, he wrote the hymn, ‘Amazing Grace’.
Keeping the lines open
Clearly, memory for a Christian is far more profound than merely having a mental skill or a better-than-average ability to recall.
The redeemed memory, as it works under God's Spirit, keeps the living awareness of the present in line with a living awareness of the past.
Thus our thanksgiving, which is spurred by a knowledge of the past, is linked to our faith and hope, which engage the present and look towards the future.
This gives continuity and wholeness to the life of faith which are indispensable to its growth and maturity.
Titian has captured this in his painting ‘An allegory of Prudence’, which is in the National Gallery, London.
Prudence has three heads, a youth's which looks towards the future, a mature man's which looks at the present, and an old man's which looks back on the past with the wisdom of experience.
Titian has written over their heads Ex Praeterito Praesens Prudenter Agit Ni Futura Actione Deturpit (‘From the [example of]the past the man of the present acts prudently so as not to imperil the future’).
The Christian life turns carefully on the interface between the present and the past.
Faith is thoroughly existential, but the moment-by-moment experience is never autonomous, nor is it awash in time, for memory serves to link it to the past.
But faith is also reflective, though mere memories are never allowed to become nostalgia or remorse.
The good past is joyfully remembered and the bad past is freely forgiven.
An old Russian proverb runs, ‘Dwell in the past and you'll lose an eye.
Forget the past and you'll lose both eyes.’
When we lose this balance, each of us has a tendency to consider the present moment not only as unique but as autonomous.
It therefore becomes a little universe of independent reality in revolt from God and the rest of time, and able to fence itself off from the lessons of the past and the demands of the future.
The redeemed memory, closely allied with truth, does not allow this to happen.
Rather, it acts to keep open a line of communication right through the vital terrain of the past, an important sector of the battlefield for faith.
If this line is not kept open, rebellion against God is much easier.
Both self-sufficiency and its chief agent of propaganda — doubt — depend on a strictly censored, closely monitored view of reality.
Wider reality would threaten their existence.
A dull memory is their ally and a keen memory is disastrous to their cause.
In keeping open the lines with the past, the redeemed memory carries encouragement and conveys warnings and lessons to faith as faith is engaged in fighting at that front line of the battle which is the present moment.
A peculiarly Protestant doubt
This first variety of doubt is a rationalization.
Contrary to what it is saying the problem is not in the belief but in the believer, not in the insufficiency of truth but in the self-sufficiency of the truster.
In essence this doubt holds nothing against truth except that it is inconvenient.
It may express itself extremely vocally and raise a wide range of objections to the truth, but these are not genuine doubts.
They are part of the propaganda exercise of doubt itself.
The real bone or contention is that truth is unnecessary and unwelcome rather than untrustworthy.
Whenever a Christian community becomes a cocoon or Christian education becomes a well-insulated pipeline from the cradle to the grave, a special danger arises.
Christians escape not only the world but the healthy tension of living within it.
Without the constant reminder of the ‘once and might have been’, a blasé attitude of complacency is harder to resist.
Many students in Christian colleges have an idea of the difference which God makes that is little more than verbal.
The world beyond is a matter of hearsay.
This is not entirely their fault.
But it means that when they doubt what they often need is not another sermon but more experience, not another answer but deeper questions.
Their doubt is a result of too little involvement in the world rather than too much.
In a way this first category is a peculiarly Protestant doubt which is best understood as a misrepresentation and abuse of freedom.
The genius of the Reformation lay in the fact that man was made free under God.
Justification ‘by faith alone’ cut away the bureaucratic jungle of human authorities and subservience.
But where this liberty was not balanced by responsibility the Reformation made man so free under God that it was only a short step to his being free from God.
We might say that the despair of existentialism is simply the logic of atheism, but this is true only in so far as atheism itself is the logic of ungrateful Protestantism.
By rejecting the excessive ‘form’ of the medieval church, the Reformation provided a strong impetus to liberty.
But in swinging almost immediately towards the opposite pole, the heirs of the Reformation indulged the West in an excessive ‘freedom’ from which its culture has yet to recover.
Only a Christian discipleship of biblical calibre can be expected to handle spiritual freedom with responsibility.
An indispensable secret of such maturity is the willingness to remember.
Not that the leaders of the Reformation were blind to this.
Instinctively, Martin Luther laid stress on the old Latin proverb, ‘Nothing ages more quickly than gratitude.’
At times he would brood gloomily as he thought of the future course of the Reformation.
‘The ingratitude and the irreverence of the world terrify me.
Therefore I fear that this light will not long endure.’
Fortunately for us the spiritual and cultural vitality of the Reformation outlived his pessimistic estimate, but his point should not be ignored.
Why is it that no movement of spiritual renewal has ever lasted longer than the third generation?
Is it not partly because men forget so soon?
Can it be that without the accompanying ‘form’ of the lessons of the past, of which memory is a vital part, ‘freedom’can never be more than a fragile short-lived luxury?
Remembering to remember
At first the remedy for this doubt may seem all too simple.
The doubt may be a result of forgetting, but is the remedy only a matter of remembering?
In terms of what happens, yes, it is just that simple.
Remember honestly, remember fully and the present moment will be so vividly contrasted with the ‘once and might have been’ that a hard heart will be melted and sealed lips broken open by praise.
But in terms of how it happens, it is not that simple.
For doubt, full grown, is not a lapse of memory but a wilful refusal to remember.
How can it be made to do what it will not do?
When a person's doubt is well-developed, it needs a special confrontation, one that is designed to disturb complacency and strike a blow at self-sufficiency.
Doubts of this type are a form of games-playing which must stop.
The person in doubt can choose, but his choice must be made in the full light of knowing what he is doing — disbelieving, not doubting.
Gently and skilfully he must be challenged to think back and think deeply.
Who is God and what difference does it make if God is not there?
Where was he before he believed in God?
Where would he be now apart from God?
Is he merely discarding a belief or is he grieving a person?
The burden of this challenge is heavy, but the style must not be.
If doubt is a moral refusal to remember, ‘mere reminders’ will be tiresome.
The doubter will never remember unless God works in his heart bringing a conviction of sin.
So pray for him as much as you talk to him; raise questions rather than make statements; use the rapier and not the sledgehammer; care for him rather than judge him.
If you lecture someone with a series of reminders, his defences will be in place.
But if you jog his memory, he will see your point before he can help it.
This is an example of where theological answers may be unwise because the doubter is insensitive.
But whose ministry is it to bring things to mind and to convict?
The Holy Spirit's, of course.
But it is one thing for us to know that a person needs God's conviction and another thing to say so to him.
Praying and saying little is just as much a way of counting on God as preaching and saying too much.
When doubt is less developed, remembering comes as  prevention rather than cure.
Keeping alive a grateful memory is a spiritual art.
Leave it to those moments which are spontaneous and it will tend to be as transient as it is spontaneous.
But structure it too heavily and the gain in increased remembering will be at the expense of a diminishing sense of personal involvement at any particular moment when we do remember.
Ideally the ministry of remembering should be a bright thread running through all our Christian living — individually, corporately, publicly, privately; in the quiet moment of intimate prayer as well as in the open statements of public thanksgiving; for single people, for couples, for families, for churches, for communities and for nations.
A lively memory is not the same thing as a colourful retelling of spiritual experiences.
The latter can become a point of pride and end in denying what it set out to affirm.
The redeemed memory loses all value if it is only a formal, public rehearsal.
What matters is the heart and its secret whispers before God.
King David shows us the way when he says, ‘It is good to give thanks to the Lord…and make thy praise our pride.’
So long as‘God's praise…our pride’ is the attitude of our hearts, there will be no place for this kind of doubt.
But as soon as we forget, just as soon as‘no praise’ describes the situation in our hearts, ‘No praise…self pride’will be the result.
The doubt that inevitably follows will be the ‘press release’ of self-sufficiency taking over and settling in.
Part of the moulding-power of the modern world is its ability to leave us all blasé.
It makes us accustomed to the efficient, the routine and the expected.
It encourages in us an arrogance which takes everything for granted.
This is true of the world of science and technology where the spirit of secularism has triumphed, and it is no different in the area of faith.
We would do well today to see that times to remember are consciously worked into the pattern of our lives.
Do you take stock at the end of a day, a week or a year?
Do you keep some record of God's goodness to help you commemorate and celebrate?
Not necessarily a diary, but perhaps a note of particular answers to prayer, special acts of guidance, amazing experiences of provision?
Do you fully enter into festivals and services for remembering — the Lord's Supper, Harvest Festival, New Year's Eve?
Do you pause from time to time to thank God for the hundred and one tiny joys that make up each day?
There must be endless possibilities for specific ways and moments of remembering, for lifting our hearts in praise to God.
Have you considered it carefully?
The prophet Samuel raised a monument to God in the hour of Israel's victory and publicly declared, ‘to this point the Lord has helped us’.
In the same way the moment of remembering, the time taken out for thanks, the pause for praise, will stand before God and man as a statement of declared trust, of radical reliance, of faith that will admit no turning back, in short, a decisive no to self-sufficiency and doubt, and an emphatic yes to God.
Faith out of focus
Doubt from a faulty view of God
Have you ever had the experience of being met at an airport or a station by someone who didn't know you?
Usually it is not too hard to spot the person by his broad welcoming smile or the eager, slightly nervous way he scans the arriving passengers.
But once when I arrived in Boston I was at a loss.
No one stepped forward, no one seemed to be on the lookout for a stranger and the other passengers quickly dispersed.
Then, just when I was wondering if there had been some mistake, a man came up full of apologies, ‘I'm so sorry,’ he said.
‘I completely missed you.
I was expecting someone quite different!’
Pictures and presuppositions
The idea we have of people always affects the way we see them.
Sometimes our pictures are so inaccurate that we see a person wrongly or miss him altogether.
Imagine, for a moment, a rather different ending to my experience.
What if the official welcomer had stuck to his preconceptions to the point of concluding that I had not arrived?
In one sense he would be right — the person he had in mind had not arrived.
But in a more important sense he would be wrong, for there is no such person as he had in mind and I would have been there all the time.
When we speak of ‘the idea we have of people’, we are referring to a kind of picture of them we carry in our minds.
When this picture is true, the picture and the person are one, and we are hardly conscious of the picture as something separate from him.
The picture does its job by ‘introducing’ us to the person and helping us relate to him.
But when an idea or the picture is false, we are more conscious of it as a separate thing, for we can clearly see it as a preconception or a prejudice.
Since the picture comes between us and the  person, false ideas hinder relationships rather than help them.
The pictures we have of people act as assumptions.
We expect the people to be like them and presuppose it in dealing with the people themselves.
This means that our pictures can affect the relationships.
To an important degree our assumptions can even determine our relationships, just as our relationships may demonstrate our assumptions.
For example, if I assume a man is honest when in fact he is a rogue, he may cheat me when I trust him.
But if I assume he is a rogue when in fact he is honest, I cheat myself when I do not trust him.
Trust is betrayed in each case.
While the two reasons may sound opposite, they both come from the same cause — a faulty assumption.
The person is different from my picture of him.
The second category of doubt is just like this.
For some reason or other a believer gets into his head such a wrong idea of God that it comes between him and God or between him and his trusting God.
Since he does not recognize what he is doing, he blames God rather than his faulty picture, little realizing that God is not like that at all.
Unable to see God as he is, he cannot trust him as he should, and doubt is the result.
Doubt of this variety stems from a deficiency at the second level of understanding, the level at which Christian presuppositions enter for the first time.
The first level is reached when a person becomes aware of his need.
That is when searching properly begins.
From then on life is marked by the search for an answer which will meet the need and prove trustworthy.
Knowing his need, the searcher asks two basic questions of anyone or anything which claims to be ‘an answer’.
Does it really provide the answer?
And if it does, how can it be known to be true?
A searcher reaches the second level of understanding when he is satisfied that Christianity answers the first of these questions.
Having examined Christianity, he recognizes that if it is true (as it claims to be and as the third level promises to show how it can be seen to be),it does provide the necessary answer.
Obviously I am not thinking of ‘answers’ as something necessarily conceptual or purely verbal, as if a Christian answer was a string of words beginning ‘Christianity says  that….’
A nineteenth-century drunkard sobbing at the penitents' bench found no less an ‘answer’ in the cross of Christ than the twentieth-century philosopher with his carefully articulated questions.
Whether the need is articulated clearly and the answer given is conceptual is not our concern here.
What matters at this level is that the searcher clearly understands that if Christianity is true, his need, whatever it is, is met.
Do you see how presuppositions come in?
A searcher is like a man going to buy a suit.
He doesn't buy the suit and then ask later if it fits and if it is what he wants.
First he looks for the one that he likes or that matches his needs, then he sees if it fits.
Last of all he pays for it.
In the same way Christianity is presupposed by a searcher before it is proved.
In fact it is presupposed to see if it is worth proving.
The searcher says to himself, ‘If Christianity is true, what difference would it make?’
And when he asks that question he is presupposing it provisionally.
Not until the third level of understanding is reached are Christian presuppositions seen as certain (the suit ‘fits’); and not until the fourth level are they accepted as final and chosen as personal (the suit is paid for; it belongs).
Christian presuppositions are simply Christian-truths. presupposed.
We could insert ‘Christian truths’(or doctrines or promises) for ‘Christian presuppositions’, but I prefer to speak this way to focus attention on what a presupposition does rather than on what it is.
If we said ‘truths’, it would be easy to think of their content only.
But when we say ‘presuppositions’, the stress is not on truth's content but on truth being counted on.
But, of course, they must never remain purely abstract.
Christian presuppositions are nothing less than the whole truth of who God is and what he has done for us.
We are speaking here of presuppositions, but just as easily we could spell them out in terms of specific things, such as God's holiness or justice or love, or simply that ‘Jesus loves me’.
From this second level onwards, the element of presupposing will always be a part of faith.
This means that presuppositions are not just a part of coming to believe but the heart of continuing to believe.
A man may try on a suit in the fitting-room, but a suit is bought to be worn.
So when presuppositions are seen to fit, they are to be ‘assumed’, that is, to be put on and worn.
What matters is not the shop but the street outside.
To change the picture; presuppositions are not a booster rocket to get faith off the ground — to be jettisoned as soon as faith is in orbit — but are as vital to faith as an engine to an aeroplane.
What falls away when we believe, which distinguishes coming to faith from continuing to believe, is the ‘if-ness’ or trial-run quality of the early use of presuppositions.
Knowledge is always presuppositional, but at a certain point it is no longer provisional.
Once presuppositions have been tested, found to be true and adopted, they can be counted on.
Our picture of God
To believe in God is to ‘let God be God’.
This is the chief business of faith.
As we believe, we are allowing God to be in our lives what he already is in himself.
In trusting God we are living out our assumptions, putting into practice all that we say he is in theory, so that who God is and what he has done can make the difference in every part of our lives.
This means that the accuracy of our picture of God is not shown in the orthodoxy of our creeds or testimonies but in the truths which we assume and count on in the concrete situation; those moments when the heat is on, the chips are down and reality seems to be breathing down our necks.
What we presuppose then is the real picture we have of God, and this may be very different from what we profess to believe about God.
Presuppositions, therefore, are vital to faith.
They affect the picture of reality we hold in our minds, and if they are sharply or poorly focussed, reality will be correspondingly clear, blurred or distorted.
As with a pair of glasses, presuppositions determine what we see and how we see it, but they do not necessarily determine what there is to be seen.
The same is true of faith in God.
If we presuppose in practice what is true in fact, then our faith in God is focussed clearly and our picture of God is true — that is, it allows God to be God.
But if our picture of God is wrong, then our whole presupposition of what it is possible for God to be or do is correspondingly altered.
When the presuppositions are wrong, the picture is wrong.
Faith is out of focus, God is not seen as he is, and in this field of badly focussed vision, with  its dangerous loss of clarity or completeness, doubt is encouraged to grow.
Such doubts are directly the result of a faulty picture of God.
Notice exactly where the problem lies.
This doubt is not a matter of doubting the right presuppositions but of believing the wrong ones.
This is an important difference.
If our presuppositions were right but we could not believe them, the problem would lie elsewhere (as we will see in chapters eight and eleven).
The problem arises here when we still believe our presuppositions even though they are wrong.
Give yourself a simple test.
Think back to some crisis (a moment of shock or time of stress or failure).
What did your attitudes then show you of your real view of God?
Or think back over some deep personal concern and the way it was brought to God in prayer.
In situations like those we see our real views of God.
What faith is asking always reveals what it is assuming.
What faith says in a situation is an expression of what it sees behind the situation.
If it asks confidently, it is because it assumes correctly.
Other motivations may pull out of line this relationship between assuming and asking; but at its purest, faith is strong or weak, advances or retreats in direct proportion to what it assumes.
If we say we believe God is there and that he loves us but live as if he were dead or couldn't care less about us, then the beliefs we presuppose in practice are out of line with the beliefs we profess in theory, and we are bound to doubt God eventually.
This is why living faith is better tested in crisis than in creeds.
Sometimes the way we act shows up our beliefs as little better than the hazy notions of an unbeliever.
One minute we are reciting the most orthodox creed and the next minute we are practising a pathetic view of God which would do no credit to a pagan.
A Trojan horse
There are two main ways in which a Christian's mind can be affected by faulty presuppositions.
The first is by allowing pre-Christian presuppositions to remain.
Instead of rooting them out and replacing them, we can leave them undisturbed until they are intermingled with the new presuppositions of Christian truth which should be the sole foundation of the Christian's mind.
Often this passes unnoticed because changes in other areas, such as lifestyle, seem  so drastic and appear so obvious.
A new broom has swept through everything, but the basic furnishings of the old  presuppositions go untouched.
The result is a sorry compromise in which the old assumptions neutralize the new ones and act as a Trojan horse in the mind.
Finally the point is reached where our minds are not renewed so much as patched up.
Or worse, the old presuppositions completely usurp the place of the new.
No army would advance into enemy territory and carelessly leave behind it important pockets of resistance.
If it did, it would find that temporary gain in speed of advance would be more than offset by eventual loss.
Likewise, the Christian mind will make little progress in any direction unless its presuppositions are completely and consistently renewed by being brought into line with the whole of God's truth.
God's warning to the Israelites as they embarked on their conquest of the Promised Land can be applied easily to the renewal of mind which each of us should experience.
‘If you do not drive out the inhabitants of the land as you advance, any whom you leave in possession will become like a barbed hook in your eye and a thorn in your side.
They shall continually dispute your possession of the land.’
The renewed mind is nothing less than the mind of Christ in the believer, a mind so under his authority that its presuppositions are entirely influenced and informed by the truth of God.
Anything less or anything other than this is not only untrue but alien and unhelpful, and if it is not dealt with it will inevitably create doubts.
The second main way in which a Christian's mind can be affected is by allowing alien presuppositions to enter and dominate afterwards.
Usually infiltration of this sort is not too obvious, or the mind would instinctively reject it.
(A frog dropped into hot water will jump out instantly in a reflex action of escape.)
But if the alien premises are as subtle as they are pervasive, they can filter in and overpower the mind before it is even aware of their presence, let alone their danger.
(A frog can be boiled alive in water that is brought to boil slowly.)
A good example of this is the way that some Christians have all but taken over, or perhaps been taken in by, the complete relativism in the modern concept of truth.
Whether this comes from the apparent tolerance in the Eastern religions or from the Western dismissal of absolutes, the relativism of modern truth has a strongly corrosive effect on historic Christian conviction.
On one side of the church we have the pull of a misguided liberalism which dissipates the truth, and on the other side the pull of an equally misguided conservatism which stifles it.
The one reduces theology to the Christian's ‘way of looking at things’, makes evangelism just an open-ended dialogue and articulates faith in a way which previous generations would have seen as a denial of the faith, in need of an answer itself.
The other, instinctively realizing the danger, swiftly retreats in a reflex movement of social and theological withdrawal, but all that it does from then on is marked by a deepening social and intellectual insecurity.
One leads to an alienated theology and the other to an alienated lifestyle.
Historic Christianity is thus shorn of its unique strength — the conviction of its claim to be the truth.
The result is a significant number of Christians, as bewildered as they are faithful, who are left to struggle bravely with the doubts which the situation creates.
Considering the relativism eating into faith today, it is hard to know which is more surprising — that so many people lose their faith or that more people do not.
Perhaps the reason why more do not is that most people are protected by their lifestyles from the uncomfortable logic of the deficiency in their faith.
But this is dangerous.
The subtlety of the wrap-around influence of alien presuppositions is that they do their work before they are noticed.
Whether it is a Christian student surrounded by relativism on a university campus or a Christian family surrounded by the influence of the mass media, too few are awake to the danger.
And when they do wake up to the situation, they find that the combat against relativism is not a clean, hand-to-hand fight but a wearing war of nerves against an enemy who is everywhere and nowhere, friendly but deadly at the same time.
Whether the problem is the result of old presuppositions which have not been rooted out or of alien presuppositions which have filtered in, the effect is the same.
The presuppositions are wrong, so the picture of God is wrong too.
Faith is out of focus, not seeing God as he is, and temptation  to doubt is inevitable.
When such temptation comes, it should be seen as an amber light to warn of the worldliness of mind into which we are slipping.
Notice that if God really were like our picture of him, then the doubt would be valid.
But it is our picture of God, not God, which is at fault, and the doubt is fuelled solely by misunderstanding.
Sometimes when I listen to people who say they have lost their faith, it strikes me as less surprising thin they suggest.
If their view of God is what they say, then it is more surprising that they did not reject it much earlier.
Other people have a concept of God so fundamentally false that it would be better for them to doubt than to remain devout.
The more devout they are, the uglier their faith will become since it is based on a lie.
Doubt in such a case is not only highly understandable, it is even a mark of spiritual and intellectual sensitivity to error; for their picture is not of God but an idol.
This second variety of doubt indicates that faith is suffering from a confusion of systems, a mixture of Christian and non-Christian presuppositions which have produced a disintegrated frame of mind.
Doubts like this crystallize at one or two points, either where the presuppositions are so mixed and unsatisfactory that they are inaccurate, or where the presuppositions are true as far as they go but do not go far enough and so are incomplete.
Although true, in the sense that they are not in error, the latter are not the whole truth and this is their problem.
In the first instance the picture of God is at fault because it is all wrong, and in the second because it is too small.
A God all wrong
A biblical example of the first problem can be seen in the hopeless compromise of faith which resulted from religious syncretism in the ninth century B.C. On entering the Promised Land, the Israelites found that every piece of the land had its own deity, its own ‘Baal’(meaning ‘lord’ or ‘possessor’).
Probably in all innocence they began to use the word Baal to describe the Lord God.
But by the ninth century this had degenerated into gross confusion, under cover of which the worship of Baal-Melqart, the official god of Tyre, had crept in and was widely corrupting faith in God.
The prophet Elijah's approach to this was direct:
Confront the people and clarify the issues.
Was he, Elijah, the cause of the problem or was Ahab?
Was Baal truly sovereign or was the Lord?
The people were commanded to assemble and were faced with a simple choice: ‘Elijah stepped forward and said to the people, ‘How long will you sit on the fence?
If the Lord is God, follow him; but if Baal, then follow him.’
There was to be no limping between two opinions.
They were not to serve two masters.
They were not to be in two minds.
They were to choose and they were to live with the consequences of their choice.
A parallel situation exists today, though with different details.
Faith is a drab and joyless affair to many Christians because what they presuppose is a sorry mixture of Christian and non-Christian ideas.
They are half-hearted because they are double-minded.
They want the best of both worlds, but they find the best of neither and the worst of each.
If they are less than complete in rejecting Christianity, they are less than complete in believing it.
One person is a Christian but carries over his previous attitude to race and wealth.
Another person believes in God but still subscribes to his naturalistic view of science.
With some the problem of premises is theoretical; with others it is practical.
None of us, for example, would subscribe to belief in strict materialism in theory, but a searching look at our homes and our lifestyles might tell a different story.
In each case the foreign presuppositions bring their own problems with them.
Believe in naturalism and you weaken your view of prayer.
Believe in relativism and you won't see Christian truth as unique.
Believe in dialectical materialism and the class struggle will be more important to you than the kingdom of God.
Carry over the assumptions of psychological determinism and the new nature of the Christian will be reduced to a figure of speech.
Carry over the assumptions of philosophical positivism and the basic notions of revelation will become nonsense.
Carry over any presupposition which is not in accord with Christian truth and doubts are bound to arise.
What is the answer to this?
We must see how this doubt develops and be careful to presuppose only what we know to be true and to commit ourselves consciously to the consequences of these suppositions.
Once it is decided that certain assumptions are true, it only makes sense to demonstrate  this by counting on them in practice.
Equally, if we conclude that other presuppositions are not true, we can be sure that in the long run they will not prove satisfactory either, and we should root them out.
Centuries before Elijah, Joshua glimpsed the same syncretistic tendencies in Israel and delivered an ultimatum to the people: ‘If it does not please you to worship the Lord, choose here and now whom you will worship: the gods whom your forefathers  worshipped beside the Euphrates, or the gods of the Amorites in whose land you are living.
But I and my family, we will worship the Lord.’
Once it has developed, the best way to deal with this doubt is to bring it to a head.
At the point where the Christian and the non-Christian premises are intermingled the issues are often confused.
But to clarify things locate the questionable premises and follow them through to their logical conclusion so that the person in doubt can see it himself.
Don't be sidetracked into answering a surface problem or comforting the person in doubt if the alien presuppositions are left unchallenged.
The way this kind of doubt is expressed is only a symptom of the deeper problem of premises, and there is no final remedy unless the root cause is dealt with.
Pascal's approach shows us the way: ‘The hypothesis that the apostles were knaves is quite absurd.
Follow it out to the end.’
This is the thinking believer's equivalent of Christ's statement, ‘You will recognize them by their fruits.’
What the seed is to the fruit, the premise is to the conclusion.
Many of us might never be able to distinguish one variety of seed from another, but we have no trouble in telling an apple from a pear, or a cauliflower from a cabbage.
The same is true of presuppositions and conclusions.
Find out what the person in doubt is believing wrongly and help him to follow the logic of these presuppositions to their necessary conclusion.
Challenge him to check the full-blown consequences of his ideas to see where they lead.
He will then see that his views are both wrong and unchristian.
Nothing is more nourishing to doubt than hazy mists of vagueness; but clear thinking disperses them and leaves a clear-cut choice either to believe or to disbelieve.
A God too small
The second problem of having inadequate — as distinct from inaccurate — presuppositions is a little different though just as dangerous.
The weakness here is not that the assumptions are incorrect but that they are incomplete.
But the effect is the same.
In the long run they are incorrect to the degree that they are incomplete.
Part of the purpose of presuppositions is to provide a coherent explanation of the whole circle of life and reality which we perceive.
So if we adopt presuppositions which are too small to handle the range of reality we are facing, their rationality and coherence will be severely limited and any conceptions they give rise to may be equally confined and distorted.
If we believe in God yet at the same time presuppose a picture of God which is less than he really is, our faith is bound to suffer.
Our conception of God will be pinched and uncomfortable.
The false idea of God will act like a tight collar on faith, cramping its style, confining its movements, throttling the full freedom of the wider truth.
Could some.
one expect to be comfortable if he is wearing a belt two inches too tight or a pair of shoes two sizes too small?
Is it different for faith?
Confronted with a shrunken picture of God, faith has no room to be itself and doubt is the expression of its discomfort.
In Genesis, Sarah's reaction to the news that she would give birth to a son in her old age is a good example.
She knew that her husband was well past it and that she herself was beyond the age of childbearing, so her first reaction was to laugh.
But God confronted her about that laugh — not because she laughed in God's presence but because her laughter expressed a limiting view of God which was a denial of his power and an incitement to doubt.
‘The Lord said to Abraham, ‘Why did Sarah laugh and say ‘Shall I indeed bear a child when I am old?’
Is anything impossible for the Lord?’.’
She laughed at the very thought of it because she doubted it was possible because her conception of God was too small.
The same problem of faith that sees God as too small shows up in the attitudes of those who approached Jesus for help.
Very few came to him with a complete understanding  of who he was and what he had come to do, so their faith was correspondingly weak.
A leper begged Jesus for help: ‘If only you will,’ said the man, ‘you can cleanse me.’
The father of the demented son pleaded, ‘But if it is at all possible for you, take pity upon us and help us.’
Notice the difference in each appeal.
The leper saw no problem in trusting the power of Jesus — it was the compassion of Jesus he was unsure of.
His appeal could be expressed, ‘I know you could if you would, but you probably won't.’
The father, on the other hand, was unsure of the power of Jesus, and it is almost as if he says, ‘I know you would if you could, but you probably can't.’
The response of Jesus to each of them is fascinating.
To the leper, who sensed his power but not his love, ‘Jesus stretched out his hand [and]touched him.’
But to the father who had little sense of his divine power, he replied, ‘If it is possible!…
Everything is possible to one who has faith.’
Each had an incomplete faith because the aspect of truth he sensed was only a part of the full truth of who Jesus is.
So Jesus concentrated on that part which needed filling out if faith was to have a chance of being itself.
What is the answer to this second error in this type of doubt?
Simply to correct the presuppositions.
They need stretching and filling out so that they reflect the fullness and adequacy of who God is.
This is not a theoretical or mechanical exercise.
It must be personal and it must be specific.
We must do the work, and we must do it where it is needed .
If I see God's power clearly but not his wisdom, then it is no use my finding out about his justice or faithfulness.
What I need to know is his wisdom, and this means wrestling with the truth of it until I can count on it myself.
This is not our work alone.
God has revealed himself through his Spirit in his Word, and he continues to do so.
Moreover, God is bigger to us than our small ideas of him, and more gracious to us than our mean views of who he is.
He is more eager and able to expand our faith than we are to have it done.
We are all more shortsighted than we realize, so there is no one who need not count on the illuminating, mind-expanding power of the Holy Spirit.
Putting it this simply does not make light of the doubt but takes it very seriously.
It shows that on these given presuppositions it is little wonder that there is some doubt, and  this is only the beginning of it.
But again, the presuppositions which produce such doubts do not describe who God is for the god they describe is not God .
How often we confine faith and insult God by entertaining puny conceptions of him!
How many times God must be saying to us what he said in anticipating Israel's doubts after the exile: ‘Even if it may seem impossible to the survivors of this nation on that day, will it also seem impossible to me?’
Simple and compound
This is a useful place to illustrate two things which are also true of many of the other categories of doubt.
First, notice that this type of doubt can easily be part of a ‘compound’ doubt.
The cause most immediately apparent may be presuppositions which are inaccurate or inadequate, but this is not necessarily the root of the problem.
How did these faulty presuppositions get there in the first place?
Trace the answer to that and it may lead into much deeper waters.
Take, for example, two people who have a problem in realizing that God really loves them — so that mention of God's holiness inspires only terror or guilt.
For both of them their doubt has become a protective reflex against the unhealthy responses they feel forced to make to such a God.
But why do they see God like that?
That is the real question.
For one of them the reason may lie no deeper than an ignorance of who God is, with all his Father's love as the Bible and Jesus reveal him.
Whereas for the other his faulty picture may go back to badly tangled family relationships which have left him unable to see any authority as good or loving.
Both of them carry over this faulty picture into their relationship with God, though for different reasons.
The first because he has been wrongly taught and the second because he has been wrongly treated.
This means that for the first one the doubt is ‘simple’ and can be cleared up in a straightforward way, but for the second it is ‘compound’and needs much greater care.
Any help which tackles only the surface expression of the doubt lacks compassion and is bound to fail.
Second, notice that as with the remedy for most doubts, there are two parts to approaching it.
The short-term need is to deal with the roots of the doubt — in this case a matter  of incompleteness of the picture of God — while the long-term need is to train a habit of faith which will close the door to this type of doubt in the future.
In terms of the doubt we are discussing, the long-term habit of faith is particularly necessary because the constant drive of our fallen natures is toward idolatry.
The principle of sin leads to the perspective of sin.
The claim to the right to myself leads to an insistence on viewing all reality from my viewpoint alone.
Sin therefore reduces God to man's image, scales him down to man's size and substitutes man's view of God for God himself.
Once this happens, it is no longer God who is over us, judging us by his Word, but we who are over God, using our god-concepts to justify what we are doing and to make judgements on what he should be doing.
‘Let God be God’ and we find ourselves on the path of discipleship.
But let smaller pictures of God satisfy us and squeeze him out, and we are back on the easier road to cheap grace and nominal faith.
The latter is the respectable man's introduction to idolatry.
We love our idols because we made them.
God's truth, however, is much less comfortable, and the habit of being stretched by its demands is challenging.
But the rewards are incomparable, for we have the joy of getting to know God for himself, with the attached strings of lesser motives cut away.
What picture of God do you show in your beliefs?
Is it sharp and clear or blurred and ill-defined?
Is it something you have dreamed up?
Or stuck together from various descriptions like an identikit picture?
Or is it the picture God has given us of himself?
Is it complete and whole?
Or is part of it missing so that you trust what you know but wonder what the rest is like?
If we make sure of the right answer to these questions we will develop the full, clear picture of God that he himself has given us in his revelation.
If we content ourselves with anything less, we can only expect to doubt.
No Reason Why Not
Doubt from weak foundations
I remember a student who dropped into our home two years ago on his way around Europe.
Almost immediately he began to share with us the intense enthusiasm of his Christian faith.
After listening for some time, I began to grow uneasy, feeling increasingly suspicious that his faith, though enthusiastic, was almost entirely groundless.
Eventually I asked him how he had become a Christian and why he had believed, and then asked him how he would answer some of the questions that his visit to a French university was bound to raise.
Finally, with considerable reluctance, I suggested that his faith seemed to have very little foundation and that without more understanding to match his enthusiasm he was in danger of being tripped by the questions of life — let alone by those of his fellow students.
He listened politely, and if he showed no concern at least he took no offence and we parted on good terms.
Just over a week later I received a letter, short and to the point.
‘I am writing to tell you that I no longer believe in God or consider myself a Christian.’
And then after a brief explanation, ‘The only reason I write to you is that you warned me this would happen.’
This is a clear example of the third basic kind of doubt, a kind so common that it qualifies as the twentieth-century doubt par excellence .
For every person who experiences what this student did (and this experience is far from rare) count.
less others are potentially as vulnerable.
It is only their sheltered lives which keep them from facing the same problem.
Faith and reason
The third type of doubt stems from a simple but basic deficiency in understanding why Christianity is true.
This is the issue which is at stake in the third level of understanding.
The importance of this level can hardly be exaggerated today.
As we have stressed repeatedly, the understanding Christian knows not only what he believes but why he believes.
He is able to say that what he believes is true, and behind such a statement he has sure and sufficient reasons of which he is fully persuaded.
So as soon as someone has faced the critical nature of his dilemma without God (the first level) and has come to recognize that if God's revelation is true he does have a meaningful answer to his dilemma (the second level), then, logically, the next urgent question is, But how may I know that God's revelation is true ?
If no answer is given or if the question is not encouraged (or still worse, not allowed), then the searcher may become a believer, but he will be constantly at the mercy of the potential doubt that his faith is only make-believe.
He will never be certain that it is not a form of psychological wish-fulfilment and that his belief in God is not purely a result of his need for God.
This doubt is far from new, but today's intellectual climate provides an ideal breeding-ground and it has come into its own again.
It is a very damaging doubt and needs to be blocked firmly by a decisive reaffirmation of what it means for Christianity to be true.
Christianity is not true because it works.
It works because it is true.
No issue is so fundamental both to the searcher and to the believer as the question of truth.
The uniqueness and trustworthiness of Christianity rest entirely on its claim to be the truth.
God, who is the Father of Jesus Christ, is either there or he is not there.
Either he has spoken or he has not spoken.
What his revelation claims is either true or false.
There are no two ways about it.
This stubborn insistence on truth is the only thing which lifts Christianity out of the common pool of completely personal, relativistic, subjective beliefs.
As a young Christian exclaimed to me on realizing for the first time the titanic implications of this claim, ‘I always knew Christianity was true, but I never realized it was this true!’
Naturally the stronger the claims to truth which are made for Christianity, the stronger the substantiation must be.
Christianity is not true because it makes its claims more boldly or more loudly than anything else (or belief would be  taken over by bravado).
If it claims to be true, it must be willing to show the areas in which the evidence for its claims can be examined and found to be true.
At this point Christianity is not only willing, it is eager.
Nonetheless, exactly how this is done is a question which would take us beyond our immediate purpose.
What matters at this point is to see the importance for faith and doubt which this claim implies.
This much should be clear: Christianity invites people to an examined faith.
Although a Christian should believe simply, he should not ‘simply believe’.
The pale brand of modern faith which lapses into ‘easy believism’ has little in common with the virile attitude of understanding plus commitment which is the biblical notion of faith.
Part of the Christian's responsibility is to understand and be able to express what and why he believes or, as the apostle Peter expressed it, ‘Be always ready with your defence whenever you are called to account for the hope that is in you.’
If you hear someone claiming to believe something but even after listening carefully it never becomes clear exactly what he believes or why, you are surely entitled to wonder if his belief is valid at all.
Unless a Christian's faith includes this level of understanding, he is short-changing himself.
Two qualifications should be quickly added.
I am not saying that someone who does not understand his faith has no faith.
Large numbers of people become Christians for all sorts of reasons other than the fact that they fully understand why Christianity is true.
Undeniably their faith is genuine, but the weakness is that their faith is developed at the expense of their understanding.
This may be preferable to the opposite mistake (where someone's understanding is far stronger than his faith), but a better way is to develop both faith and understanding together.
A person can become a Christian for all sorts of reasons, but it is vital for Christianity if it is true, that he think through his faith afterwards to the point where he understands why he believes — at least to the level at which his mind demands satisfaction in understanding other areas of life.
A second qualification must be added.
A person may have sure and sufficient reasons for coming to believe, but he will not always have similar substantiation in every field at every moment.
Christianity is rational partly because it is a faith  with a foundation of sure and sufficient reasons.
But it is one thing to have sufficient understanding in coming to believe and another to have it in every area of continuing to believe.
Some people misunderstand what the rationality of faith means.
They imagine that they have believed in God because faith is rational — which it is — but they then expect every aspect of faith to be equally open to rational investigation — which it isn't.
So when they come across the first element of mystery which they cannot understand, they conclude that Christianity is not rational after all.
God has led them to believe it was rational, but now apparently he has cheated them by unfairly slipping in a mystery.
What they forget is that rationality is opposed to absurdity, not to mystery.
The rationality of faith goes hand in hand with the mystery of faith.
It isn't that God has hoodwinked us into believing, as if rationality were the bait and mystery the hook.
Far from it.
The fact is that the greatest mystery of all — the Incarnation — comes at the very beginning and is the central reason why we believe in God.
We cannot explain it: there is the beginning of the mystery of faith.
But because of the evidence neither can we explain it away: there is the beginning of the rationality of faith.
So there are times (as we shall see in chapter sixteen) when the rationality of faith must go hand in hand with the mystery of faith.
But the person with sufficient reason for his faith can avoid the otherwise powerful down-tow toward nonsense and absurdity.
Again, rationality is the alternative to absurdity, but it has no quarrel with mystery.
Mystery is beyond human reason, but it is not against reason.
It is a mystery only to man and not to God.
Where God has spoken and spoken clearly, rationality comes into its own; where God has not spoken, or for his own reasons has not spoken clearly, there is the area of mystery.
An area of mystery is rational to God, but faith must suspend judgement and not press human reason to answer questions when it has insufficient information.
In parenthesis I should say that I am passing quickly over the significance of these four levels of understanding.
What matters here are their implications for doubt.
But if you are reflecting more deeply on them, you will see how the second and third levels, which centre on presuppositions and evidences, are closely related.
They can be distinguished  logically, as we are doing here, but they should never be separated in practice.
The mutual relationship between presuppositions and evidences could be expressed like this.
Premises without evidences are unsupported and weak; evidences without premises are meaningless.
The premises provide the framework of thought and so satisfy creative reason; the evidences provide the facts within the framework and so satisfy critical reason.
The role of premises is to throw light on a subject; the role of evidences is to give weight to it.
It is the purpose of premises to make sense of something and the purpose of evidences to make solid sense of it.
Thus their relationship is reciprocal: each one not only presupposes the other, it accredits the other.
Life is not long enough for a faith without meaning.
Nor is it stable enough for a faith without foundations.
These are questions to which premises and evidences speak.
an uneasy limbo
This third category of doubt strikes just at the point where the Christian is strong in faith but weak in faith's foundations.
What his faith assumes may be correct, but it is unsupported.
He believes all the right things but for no reasons at all or even for the wrong reasons.
What happens then is that faith runs up against an awkward question or a scornful dismissal, and suddenly everything that had seemed so unmistakably certain, meaningful, true, collapses like a balloon leaving the remnants of faith limp and deflated.
The cause is easy to see — faith had no sure and sufficient reasons.
The believer is not at all certain why he believed.
If there is ‘no reason why’ in terms of faith, there will certainly be ‘no reason why not’in terms of doubt.
Here precisely is the rub.
As the flaw is exposed and the doubt sweeps in with its impressive academic credentials and powerful, emotional threat, the doubt is unanswerable, because there is no reason why not .
This doubt is especially prevalent today since religious faith is often viewed as anything but a matter of truth.
In the discussion of more faith the question of truth is not even on the agenda.
It is the forgotten issue.
Instead of presenting a strong, clear answer to this misconception, many Christians show that their defences are down at the very place where  modern unbelief is most devastating.
Failure to understand the significance of truth is the Achilles' heel of many Christians.
The real wonder is not that some who profess to believe fall away after continuing so long but that some last as long as they do with as little as they have.
Any Christian who is in touch with thinking people out.
side Christian circles must surely be deeply saddened by the large numbers of people who were once professing Christians but who now claim to have ‘lost their faith’.
In my experience a great number of these are people who lacked little in terms of orthodox belief or depth of experience but who have never understood why their faith is true.
Caught with neither a foundation, nor a thought-through framework for their faith, they find university-level questions puncturing their Sunday-school-level faith.
Overtaxed by questions they are discouraged from facing, they escape the impossible tension by ‘graduating’ from such a faith.
For many Christians the world of faith is suspended in an uneasy limbo between complete ignorance (which is no longer possible) and sufficient understanding (which is not yet attained).
If there are those on the fringes of the church who do not really believe but have no idea why they disbelieve, there are others inside the church who do not really disbelieve but have no idea why they believe.
When not pressed too hard, the former prefer to disbelieve rather than believe and the latter to believe rather than disbelieve; but both feel extremely uncomfortable if their tested.
Tolstoy's Levin in Anna Karenina is a perfect e ample of the former:
Like the majority of his contemporaries, Levin found himself in the vaguest position in regard to religion.
Believe he could not, and at the same time he had no firm conviction that all was untrue.
And so, unable either to believe in the significance of what he was doing or to regard it with indifference as an empty formality, all the time he was preparing for the sacrament he was conscious of a feeling of discomfort and shame in taking part in something he did not understand, which was therefore, an inner voice told him, deceitful and wrong of him.
Many Christians are examples of the latter.
In each case it  is the lack of understanding which constitutes the inauthenticity of either the faith or the doubt.
Each of us should examine the foundations of our own faith.
Why do we believe God is there?
Why do we believe God is good?
How do we know Jesus ever lived?
How do we know Jesus rose from the dead?
Why do we trust the authority of the Bible?
How do we understand that Christianity is true?
How would we answer a modern philosopher, a Freudian psychologist, a follower of Guru Maharaj Ji, each of whom denies the truth of Christianity in a different way?
Answers to such questions are no substitute for faith.
But without the answers to such questions faith may be no match for doubt.
Different aspects of basic understanding are needed in different areas of the world.
People in Western Europe, for example, rarely dispute that Jesus lived, but in Eastern Europe the denial of his historical existence is almost a canon of Marxist dogma.
Different stages of our lives need different levels of comprehension to match our growth and maturity.
How sad it is when a believer in his forties or fifties is merely an absentee landlord, living idly off the intellectual rent from the thinking of his student days!
The challenges to faith will go on and must go on being answered.
As we face the issues and questions which are before each of us now , do we know why we believe?
Are we able to relate and apply faith to life without suppressing questions and without unnerving our security?
Flying blind
This sense of knowing for sure is a central element of biblical faith.
It has been an unmistakable part of the testimony of Christian believers throughout history.
But the same cannot be said of twentieth-century Christianity, which is why the type of doubt we are now considering is so prevalent.
Modern faith suffers from a severe shortage of understanding in its basic diet, a deficiency which can be detected at many points.
One example is the place given to irrationality in faith.
Take a sampling of modern preaching, for example a minister who is culturally aware or an evangelist in the classic nineteenth-century tradition.
Both in their different ways will give impressive witness to the importance of faith, but  both may have a careless disregard for the foundations of faith.
Faith's value, some even suggest, grows in direct proportion to its lack of a rational basis.
Whether it is one side's cry of the ‘radical uncertainty’ of authentic faith or the other side's reiteration of the ‘leap of faith’, we are offered an imposing edifice of faith with little or no mention of foundations.
A whole armoury of biblical interpretation accompanies this mentality — one side often majoring on the sacrifice of Isaac in Genesis 22 and the other side of Thomas's doubt in John 20.
But the best answer to the unwarranted interpretations wrested from these texts is a closer look at the very biblical passages in question.
Abraham's story is widely used to justify the irrationality of faith.
Certainly his trust in God despite the opposing evidence of immediate reality was such that his faith was ‘counted…to him as righteousness’.
But to conclude from this that the quality of his faith lay in the fact that he trusted God for no reason whatever is quite illegitimate.
Certainly, as Abraham set out to offer Isaac as a sacrifice in the way God had commanded him, his faith was flying blind in its implicit obedience, just as it had when he set out from Ur for a country which he had never seen.
But as to why he knew God and obeyed him at all, his faith was not the least blind.
Quite the contrary.
It is precisely because he knew who God was that he knew he could trust God in the dark.
More precisely still, it was because he was not in the dark about God that he could walk in the dark about Isaac.
Faith was against sight, but it was not against reason.
In terms of the immediate situation he did not know why, but in terms of the ultimate context of his life he knew why he trusted God who knew why .
Knowing God as he did, his faith was a trust in the face of mystery but not in the face of absurdity.
Significantly, after the mention that his faith had been counted by God as righteousness, Abraham's first recorded words were ‘O Lord God, how can I be sure?’
God answers this question without any hint of rebuke in a covenant promise which speaks to this question directly: ‘Know this for certain….’
Abraham's faith went far beyond the reach of understanding, but it is a travesty of the facts to ignore the elements of understanding which enabled him to do so.
Another passage which is often misrepresented is the account of Christ's rebuke to Thomas: ‘Because you have seen me you have found faith.
Happy are they who never saw me and yet have found faith.’
Certainly Thomas was rebuked, but the question is why.
He was not rebuked because he refused to believe without enough reasons but because he refused to believe with more than enough reasons.
For three years he had been with Jesus and heard his teaching — that he was bound to suffer, to die and to be raised from the dead.
So his lack of faith was not a matter of failing to straddle an impossible credibility gap, but of baulking at a simple step of trust on the evidence of inescapable reasons.
For him to demand repeated empirical evidence at that stage was doubly unnecessary, for not only had he heard the words of Christ, he had listened to the eye-witness accounts of his fellow disciples.
Yet still he refused to believe.
Those who misinterpret this in the interests of encouraging a ‘leap of faith’ also ignore the fact that Jesus still invited him to touch and see, unnecessary as it was.
If this was what it would take for Thomas to believe, then even this was possible.
Fortunately for Thomas' self-respect the sheer excess of grace as well as evidence made further proof unnecessary.
The biblical view of knowledge has many dimensions, some of which go far beyond a knowing which is solely related to reasons, but ‘reason-able’ knowledge is a basic part of knowing in the Bible.
Biblically, much of what is knowable can be checked, verified, substantiated and confirmed.
The Gospel of John tells of the royal officer who returns home to discover that his son has recovered: ‘The father noted [knew]that this was the exact time when Jesus had said to him, ‘Your son will live’, and he and all his household became believers.’
He believed in Jesus, and an essential part of his coming to faith rested on the exact correspondence he observed between what Jesus had said and what in fact had happened.
In Acts, when he describes the reaction of the Jews at Berea as they heard the gospel for the first time, Luke brings out this same point.
‘They received the message with great eagerness, studying the scriptures every day to see whether it was as they said.
Many of them therefore became believers.
And the same point is put beyond dispute in the careful declaration of purpose in John's Gospel, expressly written  about the evidence of Christ's signs: ‘There were indeed many other signs that Jesus performed in the presence of his disciples, which are not recorded in this book.
Those here written have been recorded in order that you may hold the faith [or, that you may come to believe]that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God.’
The force of this evidence should be plain.
Faith is an act of the whole man, not of his understanding alone.
But it is precisely because it is an act of the whole man that it includes the understanding.
As we go on in our faith, we may be led into areas ‘beyond reason’, but what we mean by this is beyond humanly discernible reasons and not in any sense against reason.
So the Christian who glories in a non-rational basis for his faith leaves himself vulnerable to a particularly lethal blow which strikes at the very foundation of faith.
The only comfort is to remember that it is usually foreseeable and quite unnecessary.
A second place where today's deficiency of understanding can be witnessed is in the improper place given to experience at the expense of understanding.
Many Christians are afraid of rationalism and rightly suspicious of a purely intellectual faith.
What they forget, though, is that if knowledge-without-experience is a product of rationalism, so also is experience-without-knowledge.
Yet they reject the first and welcome the second.
Knowledge-without-experience is only the reverse side of the coin of experience-without-knowledge.
Both are born of rationalism, and both are equally wrong and finally destructive of true faith.
To come to faith on the basis of experience alone is unwise, though not so foolish as to reject faith altogether because of lack of experience.
The biblical relationship of understanding to experience is quite different.
Knowledge and experience are not opposed but related, and there is a profound spiritual logic in the relationship.
Experience does not generate itself.
Nor is it self-justifying and self-sustaining.
Instead, the quality of a Christian's experience depends on the quality of his faith, just as the quality of his faith depends in turn on the quality of his understanding of God's truth.
Genuine understanding generates genuine faith, and genuine faith in turn generates genuine experience.
Without genuine faith, experience can be easily counterfeited by emotionalism.
Without genuine understanding, what passes  for faith can be a counterfeit confidence of purely human origins (such as the power of positive thinking).
So understanding is integral to faith, just as faith and understanding are both integral to experience.
In short, to deny and stifle the understanding unnecessarily is to sow a crop of future doubts.
We may efface the intellect in our teaching or in our practice, but we cannot escape the uneasy conscience of a good mind trying to adapt to a bid faith.
Such a mind may become so restless and frustrated with repression that sooner or later it will tear itself on some nail of its own making.
Where God has given us sure and sufficient reasons for believing or the possibility of profound understanding in our believing, it is perverse to insist on having less than what he offers.
It is one thing to realize that our faith will always be weaker than we would like it to be, but it is quite another to insist that our faith must be weaker than it can afford to be.
Reasons for faith
What is the remedy for this type of doubt?
First, to diagnose it correctly, second to locate exactly where the weakness in understanding is and third to do the necessary homework on it — that is to examine the matter to see what the truth of the situation is.
Are the foundations of faith so shaky that nothing of any weight can be built on them?
Or is it that because of ignorance and haste crucial parts of the foundations have been left out?
This is the crux of it: Are there good and sufficient reasons to believe what we need to believe or is faith on shaky ground?
This straightforward approach is the natural response to a situation of uncertainty, and it is also the biblical one.
The attitude of the Bereans is a pattern for us all.
They studied ‘to see whether it was as they said’.
When we are not sure, it is time to make sure — to see if the things which we believe are in fact true.
When the disciples first heard from the women that Jesus had risen, they were incredulous: ‘The story appeared to them to be nonsense, and they would not believe them.’
But they did not stop there.
Doubt was only their first reaction.
It is characteristic of faith that it cannot remain in two minds; it cannot leave things in the air.
Luke's next words are typical  of faith's inherent drive for resolution: ‘Peter, however, got up and ran to the tomb, and, peering in, saw the wrappings.’
Faith may not always know, but it always wants to know what it may.
It cannot be sure of everything, but it will always be as sure as it can be.
Where it is not certain, it will always seek to ascertain.
Faith does not feed on thin air but on facts.
Its instinct is to root itself in truth, to earth itself in reality, and it is this which distinguishes faith from fantasy, the object of faith from a figment of the imagination.
In those places where there is a delay in substantiation, faith is prepared to wait for a long time at the bar of history.
But the verdict it looks for is always the judgement of truth, the verdict handed down by reality.
Luke writes of the natural hesitancy of the Jewish believers over the unprecedented inclusion of Gentiles in the early church.
But he points out that what decided the issue was Peter's laying the irrefutable facts of the matter before them so that‘when they heard this their doubts were silenced’.
This is always the way.
This type of doubt is silenced by facts, answered by truth and reassured by understanding.
This insistence on knowing for sure and examining the facts of the matter is particularly important in dealing with the doubts which arise because of the many misrepresentations of Christianity today.
Every generation is apt to see Christ in its own image and produce its own ‘plastic Christ’, a picture of Jesus pressed through the sieve of its own assumptions and set solidly in the mould of its own values.
But it is ironic that a generation that is so impatient with the cultural adaptations of other generations has been so adept at setting up its own.
Our generation dismisses the penitential Jesus of the Middle Ages or the gentlemanly Jesus of the Victorian drawing-rooms, but the selection of ‘Christs’ which is offered today is worthy of the supermarket age — Jesus the Liberator, Jesus the Soul Man, Jesus the Blessed Master, Jesus the revolutionary, Jesus the archetypal poor man, Jesus the Great Prophet.
The array is bewildering and the effect is numbing.
After all, how do we know that our own picture of Jesus is necessarily right, especially when we realize that we too bring  assumptions to faith?
Perhaps we are more shortsighted than we think?
Perhaps what we believe today is no better than the Sunday-school notions we were forced to discard yesterday and is different to us only because we are believing it today?
Will today's faith look as embarrassing if we look back on it tomorrow?
The train of thought that begins like this is as slippery as an eel, and the only effective way to catch it is to examine the truth of the matter.
This is the only test — to unleash doubt on doubts, to examine the matter and to see where the truth lies.
The trouble with most of the ‘modern Christs’ is not that they are anti-Christian but that they are unhistorical.
Our basic quarrel with them is not that they are unappealing (for unquestionably, some of them are) but that they are untrue.
Do the Dead Sea Scrolls explain away the uniqueness of Jesus?
Was Jesus really only a psychedelic mushroom?
Is Pasolini's The Gospel According to St Matthew closer to the original than the Jesus of Christianity?
Was Jesus speaking of the Tat Tvam Asi (Thou art That) of the Hindus when he said, ‘The kingdom of God is within you’?
Why is it that Jesus Christ Superstar leaves a Christian feeling so sad and angry?
Truth is the only sufficient answer faith can give doubt, for it is the truth of the matter, the facts of the case which give faith its solid foundation.
If it is caught without the credentials which truth alone supplies, faith knows it will be mistaken for fantasy or for wish-fulfillment.
It may even be tempted to wonder itself.
Some people think that having reasons for faith is an insult to God, as if we were desperately grubbing around for make-shift reasons to believe in him.
But the opposite is the case.
Verification is only one aspect of Christian truth.
Verification itself ‘depends on the unchanging authority and stability of the Word of God.
We are not insulting God but bringing glory to him by taking his Word as the stable, authoritative truth it is.
Theological answers are necessary and entirely appropriate to this doubt.
But they must be specific.
If someone is doubting the resurrection, it is irrelevant to assure him of Christ's promise never to leave him — Christ never was with him if he has not risen.
Equally, if someone has lost his sense  of Christ's presence, he will need more than bare historical facts with which to rediscover it.
The assurance and inner witness of the Holy Spirit are what he needs.
Here then is the third category; doubt that is caused by an unnecessary lack of understanding of what our faith is grounded on.
If there is ‘no reason why’ for faith, the time may come when there is ‘no reason why not’for doubt.
And the best remedy for this doubt is to know the sure and sufficient reasons God has given us, to know why we can know God is there, to know why we can trust his revelation as true, to know why we can be sure of his love and his goodness, and to stand firm in our understanding of these truths.
Notice two things in conclusion.
First, just as with the previous two categories, a doubt of this kind may well be simple or compound.
For example, someone can have a specific doubt about God which is caused by an unnecessary lack of understanding.
If the doubt is simple, it can be cleared up, as I have suggested, by supplying the necessary understanding.
But if the doubt is compound, you will find that although a doubter can understand the answer, he may be reluctant to accept it.
(We will deal with this in chapter eleven.)
He may even refuse to search for any answer at all, though expressing the deepest need for one.
This indicates a far deeper problem and the surface doubts are only a symptom of this.
I think of some people who keenly desire a rational faith.
You can almost see them hold their breath when it dawns on them that they understand that Christianity is true.
But then they hesitate in doubt, not because they spot a new snag about believing but because they remember a previous experience.
Once before they went ahead and believed, but it was a leap of faith with no questions asked and they fell and were hurt.
This time around it is a case of ‘once bitten, twice shy’ and their doubt is not simple but compound.
A compound doubt must be approached with special sensitivity.
To the person with a simple doubt, a helpful discussion, a suggested book or a more detailed explanation may be enough to show him the way along which he can eagerly search for himself.
But to the person with the compound doubt, an answer which would satisfy his surface doubt alone may put even more pressure on the deeper problem and twist the knife in his hidden wound.
Providing an answer  only for the surface doubt answers neither doubt in the long run.
Second, of all the families of doubt this is probably the one best helped by reading.
Not all doubts are helped in this way.
Some are made worse.
But there is nothing like a carefully chosen book to stimulate the examination and reflection which deals with this doubt.
The question ‘Have you thought through the basis of your faith?’ is for many people almost inseparable from the best books they have read dealing with the heart of faith and understanding.
Are you building up a small library of essential books?
Do you read as widely in the great classics of the faith as among modern authors?
Naturally your selection will reflect your own pilgrimage, your own struggles and interests.
But this will make it richer and more real when you recommend books to others who are questioning and searching.
I need add little recommendation to some of the books in my own library.
Their well-thumbed, much-handled appearance says it all.
Scores of people have been through them and their marginal jottings and exclamations are reminders of those who searched and those who found.
Like the faith for which they argue, the best books are there not to collect dust but to stretch minds and to shed light.
An Unsigned Contract
Doubt from lack of commitment
Is it possible for a person to move smoothly through the first three levels of understanding and still leave out something essential?
In other words, is it possible for a person to know his need, to know that if Christianity is true it provides an answer, to know on the basis of sufficient evidence that it is in fact true, and yet believe inadequately?
A friend told me recently that she no longer called herself a Christian.
She wasn't at all defensive.
She had no quarrel with Christianity or the church, and she expressed no particular doubts except that Christian things generally were rather unreal to her.
After a while she shrugged her shoulders and said, ‘You know, I don't think I ever was really committed to Christianity.’
My reply was simple: ‘But do you think you have ever been really committed to anything?’
In this case my comment was not a stab in the back or a shot in the dark; I knew her well.
If there is a recurring weakness in her life it centres on her fear to commit herself.
Because of this she rarely enjoys anything in depth or sticks at anything for very long.
This is an example of doubt which comes from a deficiency at the fourth level of understanding, the only one which actually overlaps with the experience of becoming a Christian.
This level centres on the question of commitment.
A searcher becomes a believer when he chooses and commits himself to the consequences of his choice.
This commitment is not a separate, independent stage but a higher level which builds logically on the implications of the previous levels.
Like cement an understanding commitment transforms mere beliefs into solid convictions.
By conviction I am not suggesting the idea of ‘conviction of sin’ but of ‘the courage of one's convictions’.
The goal of this chapter is to examine the importance of commitment and conviction and to analyse the doubt which  grows out of a deficiency at the threshold of conversion.
Christian conversion is rich in multi-dimensional truths and can be viewed from many angles.
The modern tendency to reduce it to simplistic, stereotyped formulas is an insult to the creativity of God and the integrity of man.
Christ is the only way to God, but there are as many ways to Christ as there are people who come to him.
Conversion may be gradual or sudden, quiet or dramatic, unmistakably evident to others or almost unnoticed.
The variations are infinite.
Nonetheless, certain things are always required in an adequate understanding of conversion, and it is in ignoring these that we leave openings for later doubts.
The individual's responsibility in conversion is to repent and believe; God's initiative and response are his gift of forgiveness and his gift of the Holy Spirit; and the church's role is to welcome the new believer into fellowship, symbolizing this publicly in the act of baptism.
Each of these aspects has its place as a foundation for faith, though the church's part is not so much essential to faith as an expression of faith.
A weakness in any of them does not mean that faith is illegitimate but that it is an easy prey for doubt, as later testing may show.
a contract and a signature
The good news of the Christian gospel is a covenant agreement, a contract which God offers to us.
The gift of the Holy Spirit is the seal of his part of the contract; by committing ourselves to him we put our name to it too.
It is not enough for us only to see the need of the contract (the essence of level one) or even the attractiveness and reliability of the terms (levels two and three).
What is needed to make the contract binding and valid is our signature, a commitment of faith.
Without this signature, however excellent the terms are, the contract is only a piece of paper.
Personal knowledge always implies some degree of personal commitment to truth.
Human thinking and language would dissolve into a topsy-turvy jumble of uncertainty if we were to use the word know as if it were interchangeable with words like guess or dream , or if we were to say right when we really meant wrong .
The reason that knowing is different from guessing or dreaming is that knowledge implies an unspoken submission to what is real or thought to be real.
I  can legitimately say, ‘I know’, and add in the same breath, ‘but I am open to being shown I am wrong’.
But if knowledge is to have any substantial meaning, what I must never say is, ‘I know’, and then add, ‘but I am sure I am wrong.
If we say we know something, a personal and responsible commitment to what we know is assumed in our claim.
It is not that once we know something we commit ourselves to it but that knowing something is itself a commitment.
Knowledge is an acknowledgement of what is true.
Knowing is a response to something beyond us, so it is more than subjective.
But it is also our response to something beyond us, so it is more than objective too.
When you say, ‘I know this is true’, you are really saying, ‘This is what I am convinced is the truth of the matter.’
What is true for all personal knowledge is also true for the knowledge assumed in faith.
Hence, there is no true know.
ledge of God without some personal conviction, and the idea of a healthy faith that has no personal commitment is a contradiction in terms.
This means that, however objectively true something may or may not be, if I am not personally convinced of it, then for me personally it is not true.
That is, objectively it may be true, but subjectively I refuse to accept it.
This shows the important difference between subjectivism in faith and in doubt.
The former says that because something is true for me it is necessarily true, while the latter says that because something is not true for me it is not true.
Both notions are mistaken, but their respective dangers lead in opposite directions.
Subjectivism in faith makes something out of nothing and turns fiction into fact.
Subjectivism in doubt, on the other hand, turns something into nothing and makes fact into fiction.
Notice again: this type of doubt has nothing whatever to do with the truth.
The weakness is not in truth as the object of belief; the weakness is in the believer since he is failing to enter into the essential obligations of believing.
When a person suffers from this lack of personal commitment, the problem is not that he cannot genuinely believe something but that he will not genuinely believe anything .
If he appears to believe, it is only because his underlying lack of conviction is covered by other supports for faith, such as the encouragement of fellow believers, so that the weakness is not exposed.
But take away the healthy assurance which grows from personal conviction and every pressure is likely to bear down on the weakened commitment and raise tremors of uncertainty which grow into doubt.
Without commitment faith seems to cost more than we bargained for.
Apart from conviction each new voice of authority appears to have the same weight as the one we believe, and every moment of unreality calls in question the reality of all past experience.
We are then inclined to think, ‘Perhaps it isn't true after all.’
But in all honesty that should be translated, ‘I never really believed this anyway.’
For what has been lacking is not the terms of the contract but the signature of the believer.
Seen from a purely theoretical standpoint, the leap of faith which produces this kind of doubt completely bypasses the question of truth.
Someone believes because he needs to believe, and that is that.
He doesn't ask for reasons to believe and he doesn't inquire into what is involved.
So when he experiences doubt, it is he, not his belief, that has been weighed and found wanting.
From a practical standpoint, however, this distinction makes little difference.
The person who no longer believes will blame what he believed rather than the way he believed, and the rationalization this involves means that the chances of his reconsidering belief in the future are greatly diminished.
His mind and heart are burnt-over ground.
Fashion and change
Two features of the present cultural climate make this element of conviction all the more necessary.
First, there is the prevailing relativism, the unchallenged assumption of much modern thought.
It cuts the ground from under conviction and precipitates a crisis of authority.
The basic consideration ‘Is it true?’ has been replaced by ‘Does it work?’or ‘How will it sell?’
And the effect has been to reduce truth to timeliness, morality to usefulness and personal faith to a matter of what is fashionable.
On the one hand, the loss of conviction means that minds are unsettled, directions are changed and loyalties are switched, all as if convictions were nothing but custom or fashion.
The problem is not that people change but the ease and rapidity with which they change.
On the other hand, where there is commitment, it is often only for its own sake, and conviction has been replaced by passionate intensity.
So a dangerous tolerance of error and a specious attitude of humility towards truth has arisen.
Since nothing is a matter of conviction, everything can be taken with equal seriousness or lack of seriousness.
All is allowed because little can be done.
G. K. Chesterton gave an early warning: ‘What we suffer from today is humility in the wrong place.
Modesty has moved from the organ of ambition.
Modesty has settled on the organ of conviction; where it was never meant to be.
A man was meant to be doubtful about himself but undoubting about the truth.
This has been exactly reversed.’
The second feature which makes personal conviction more necessary than ever is the tendency towards group thinking.
For both good and bad reasons the emphasis on man's individuality which has dominated the West since the close of the Middle Ages is now being discouraged in favour of emphasizing community.
Man's individuality is now viewed against wider frames of unity such as the state, the balance of nature, the progress of evolution and the historical process.
The merits of individuality are being lumped together with the dangers and both are being dismissed as ‘individualism’.
The advantages of unity over diversity, or collectivism over individualism, are assumed to be self-evident and the obvious totalitarian overtones are ignored.
People in groups are now apt to think in ways that a more independently-minded age would have rejected.
The obvious checks to this are a sense of individual identity, a willingness to assume responsibility, a mature morality and a developed sense of integrity.
But these have been so badly eroded that the controlling guards of critical thought are down.
Large groups of people are unthinkingly accepting what is sometimes harmless nonsense but can just as easily be fraudulent propaganda or dangerous ideological evil.
In its most obvious form, this is the problem that silent majorities pose for democracy, but the same pressures operate in groups and whole subcultures at many lower and less obvious levels.
The problem for many people today is not that it is too difficult to believe but that it is too easy.
It is hard for them not to believe, for they slip in and out of belief caressed by  the changing breezes of cultural fashion.
Almost anything goes in the permissive climate, anything, that is, except those beliefs (like Christianity) which take truth and personal conviction seriously.
The problem this creates for Christianity is that a part of the turning to faith in our generation may be only a reflection of the psychological and sociological undercurrents of our time.
One person may become a Christian because to believe in Jesus is ‘where it's at’.
Another may refuse because in his circles it is not ‘where it's at’.
Neither asks if it is true.
Both simply reflect what is fashionable for them.
When the group or the fashion changes, such people change too.
Without the anchor of personal conviction they are at the mercy of every ebb and flow of opinion.
This throws a more realistic light on the spectacular statistics and glowing reports of widespread conversions, and it should make us wary of the forced professions and the hot-house wonders of superficial evangelistic movements.
There is no iron in the new faith because it lacks personal conviction.
Commitment and responsibility
Choice is one of the root ideas in the word believe , and this element of responsibility and commitment is the key to the ‘obedience of faith’ which is the heart of Christian discipleship.
Stress obedience apart from faith and you produce legalism.
Stress faith apart from obedience and you produce cheap grace.
For the person who becomes a Christian the moment of comprehension leads to one conclusion only — commitment.
At that point the cost has been counted, a shoulder has been put to the yoke, a hand to the plough, and a contract for discipleship has been signed.
The decision is irreversible.
It is not faith going a second mile; it is faith making its first full step and there is no going back.
The responsible commitment which is assumed in a small way in all personal knowledge comes into its own in the Christian faith.
In Christianity it is not only assumed, it is required.
Faith is ‘obedience to the truth’.
Discipleship is an undertaking which grows out of an understanding.
What faith has seen, obedience is prepared to sign.
This is the obedience of faith to which personal conviction leads.
A conviction is nothing if it is not our own.
Other things may play their part in helping us to understand, but nothing  can take its place.
Unless each of us wrestles with the truth for ourselves, we will end up with opinions rather than convictions.
Pascal warned that ‘hearsay is so far from being a criterion of belief that you should not believe anything until you have put yourself into the same state as if you had never heard it.’
No conviction is truly our own unless we are prepared to hold it even if all men are against it.
A very elementary test of whether we have thought some.
thing through in this way and are ready to speak of being convinced of it is to see whether we can express it.
A good argument can usually be expressed in a sentence or two.
It provides a healthy challenge to the virility of a believer's conviction to see if he can say succinctly just why it is that he believes Christianity is true.
The note of conviction is evident in biblical faith.
‘Choose here and now whom you will worship,’ Joshua challenged the people of Israel but did not pause for a reply: ‘But I and my family, we will worship the Lord.’
‘We have no need to answer you on this matter,’ is the calm response of Shadrach, Mesach and Abed-nego to Nebuchadnezzar's threat.
‘If there is a god who is able to save us from the blazing furnace, it is our God whom we serve, and he will save us from your power, O king; but if not, be it known to your majesty that we will neither serve your god nor worship the golden image that you have set up.’
‘I know the one whom I have trusted,’ writes Paul from his prison cell, ‘and am confident of his power to keep safe what he has put into my charge until the great day.’
The same note is equally clear in the testimony of Christian history.
Polycarp, the second-century Christian leader in Smyrna, faced a hostile mob and quietly refused to go back on his faith in Christ: ‘Eighty and six years have I served him, and he hath done me no wrong; how then can I blaspheme my King who saved me?’
Martin Luther, excommunicated by the Pope and defending himself before the Emperor, closes his statement with the celebrated words: ‘My conscience is taken captive by God's word, I cannot and will not recant anything.
On this I take my stand.
I can do no other.
So help me God.’
‘the witness of history is a stirring as it is unmistakable.
The examples that we know are but the heroic and visible tip of the great hidden iceberg of faith which is Christian conviction through the centuries.
Certain opponents of Christianity have disliked it.
‘Their pertinacity and inflexible obstinacy should certainly be punished,’ wrote the Younger Pliny to the Emperor Trajan, about AD 112.
Others, like the modern thinker, Alan Watts, have grudgingly admired it: ‘Without any disrespect it must be said that Christianity is pre-eminently the gamblers’ religion.
In no other religion are the stakes so high and the choice so momentous.’
But both the ancient emperor and the modern mystic observe the same thing — the obedience of faith and the stamp of personal conviction which are hallmarks of Christian discipleship.
Without such commitment there is no real faith.
Speaking personally
Let me be personal here, for coming to grips with this has been an important milestone in my own life as a Christian.
I can see this now, yet it was not until nearly ten years after I became a Christian that I finally faced the issue that whatever other influences had been involved in my conversion (such as my family and friends and the work of God in my life) there was a sense in which the decision to believe was entirely my responsibility.
I am not saying that my trusting God was ‘all up to me’, but that I had to see that all of me was involved in trusting God.
The decision to believe was one for which I at least was fully responsible.
Up until then I had found that when difficulties came or doubts arose in my Christian life, I could always escape their force by not holding myself answerable for my own faith.
This meant I could blame the problems on other people or on situations outside myself.
The irresponsibility of this helped me to escape the force of the problems, but at the same time I was constantly troubled by suspicion.
I had entered fully into the shared joys of Christian experience, but I had never quite gained the satisfaction that other Christians seemed to have.
I was on the inside of Christian faith, yet in my mind I was also on the outside looking in.
I was not prepared to commit myself completely in every situation, as I found myself as the actor and the spectator at the same time.
At times, in fact, there was a sense of hollowness about much of my faith.
This came home to me when I was travelling alone in the Far East for some months.
I knew almost  no one, and because of the language barrier I could speak freely with few people.
The surrounding culture was fascinating but not my own.
Slowly the pressures of its differences bore down on my thinking and decisions, prying open my defences and forcing me to face questions I had not been conscious of before.
Why did I do things this way rather than that?
How did I know that such-and-such a principle was right, especially when no one there shared it?
How did I really know?
And how had I chosen what was ‘right’ and what was ‘wrong’?
Were my beliefs my own or were they merely the product of my culture, my country, my education or a legacy from my parents?
When I was separated from all these early influences, my choices became simple.
For once in my life there was no need to believe as I did or act as I chose for any reasons other than that I was personally convinced it was right.
Familiar people and influences were distant.
They would never know or be affected.
Existentially, they did not touch me at that moment.
If I was to believe something or to choose to do something, the decision was one which I had to make myself and make before God alone .
It wasn't that I was doubting my faith or denying the reality of my becoming a Christian, but rather that, though I had genuinely believed ten years earlier, my commitment had been intertwined with the emotional comfort of sharing the beliefs and way of life of my family and certain friends.
I had not only come to faith.
I had also, as it were, ‘fallen in line’ again, so that although I believed, my faith had been marked by a continuing lack of personal conviction.
I was convinced of it, but I was not staked on it.
Partly I bad believed for reasons which were extraneous, and I had used the emotional commitment I had found in this to cover for a lack of genuine commitment.
I had been both committed and non-committal.
It was only after the resolution which this experience brought that I could say with a new reality, ‘This God is my God.’
The decisiveness and fresh conviction it brought made no difference to my theology and very little difference to my choices and values seen from the outside.
The difference it made was internal.
Now the choices and values are not only what I trust are right choices and correct beliefs; they are my choices, my beliefs, my convictions 
Of course they are always more than my choice, but they are never less than my choice.
A cancer of unreality
The type of doubt which is generated by a weak sense of personal conviction is not always immediately apparent.
It is not in the nature of this doubt to cry out in pain or groan in anguish.
It has little intellectual sharpness. and its theology is often impeccable.
It appears baffling because it seems to call no attention to itself.
It is not so much doubtful about Christianity as diffident about itself, and at first sight this looks appealing.
Its defining feature is that it has none except, as time goes on, a growing sense of unreality.
Here is the heart of it.
While a person in this situation professes to believe the truth, he nonetheless has no serious engagement with truth, and without this the doubt is allowed to act like a cancer of unreality on faith.
Or, to change the metaphor, a weak conviction acts on faith like a slipping clutch.
The driver is experienced, the car is powerful, the engine is tuned, but the clutch will not engage.
It can be the same with faith.
A good mind and a warm heart can be made impotent if there is no commitment.
This sense of unreality marks only the opening stage of this doubt.
It is quickly followed by a second stage, chiefly characterized by guilt.
The doubter knows that his beliefs are true, but they are still unreal to him.
So he grows ashamed of harbouring a doubt to which he knows the answer himself, and he keeps it to himself, a fugitive thought, locked away from the light of open discussion.
This is doubt's incubation period, and the dark aura of guilty secrecy is an ideal womb.
Finally it bursts out in a different form in its third stage of development.
Here it is most true to itself.
Weak all along in terms of commitment, doubt now shows its colours and acts true to form by refusing to shoulder any responsibility for the unreality it has caused.
It shifts the blame to belief.
This is the moment when bad theology enters, not — notice this carefully — as a reason for doubt but as a rationale for the doubting which has already been going on.
The doubt which was originally a result of an uncommitted belief becomes a rationale for committed unbelief.
Through a clever about-turn, the evasion of responsibility is concealed.
Though the  doubt is really an expression of not-being-committed, it passes itself off as an excuse for not-committing.
Stages of doubt
The remedy for this doubt must begin with a careful discernment of which stage the doubt is in and what the root of the lack of conviction is.
Only when the cause of the doubt has been understood and dealt with can faith be re-engaged and personal conviction encouraged.
There are many reasons why people have a diminished sense of personal conviction.
On a level which is not hard to discern or to deal with, there are some who have almost ‘grown into faith’ through their family or their church) so that they have never become aware of the need for their own convictions.
This is a common feature of faith in countries where there is an established or state church — faith is almost inherited.
Others have become Christians at a particular moment in their lives but have believed for good reasons which have had mixed in with them other less solid motives for believing, so that their faith was never based on a strong, established conviction.
With these people the remedy lies in pointing out the responsibility that faith requires.
Their problem is not that they could not take on this responsibility before but that they were not asked to.
There might be some question now as to whether they will, but there is no question that they can if they want to.
But there are still others who have no sense of conviction because of problems on a far deeper level, such as a crisis of identity.
It takes someone to know something.
If conviction in belief is like the authorizing signature on a contract or a cheque, then the person who has no sense of himself will have no ‘name’ to sign to what he believes.
The contract may be good or the cheque generous, but it lacks the binding authorization of a signature.
Imagine a millionaire who has decided to donate to a charity.
He writes out a generous cheque and sends it off.
Later he has second thoughts.
He gets cold feet and phones his bank manager asking him to stop the cheque.
But then, just as he is halfway through explaining it, the secretary of the charity organization is shown in, wreathed in smiles and eager to thank him for his generosity.
So he is caught between  the two of them, embarrassed to welcome his guest and unable to say more on the phone.
There are doubters who are like this.
Their weakness is not that they will not commit themselves to God but that they do not commit themselves to anything.
Nothing terrifies them more than the responsibility of choosing.
They do anything to avoid choosing, and if events force them to make a choice, they question it by raking over the ashes of the decision until it is dead and cold.
Even when they make the right choice, they don't let the choice go through.
They write out a cheque but it never gets cashed for it's taken back at once.
They are  paralysed and embarrassed by the dilemmas they create for themselves.
As a Spanish proverb puts it, ‘Among the safest of courses, the safest of all is to doubt.’
The remedy for these people begins when they see where the problem lies — with them, not with God.
It isn't that God is unreal; lack of commitment his made everything unreal.
The shadow is not over God more than it is over anything else.
What they must do is relearn to choose and commit themselves to the consequences of their choice.
As they do this, trusting in God's help, inching forward like a baby taking its first steps, a sense of reality will return to their faith as well as their lives.
The early choices will be painful, of course, but in much the same way that ‘pins and needles’ are painful when your leg has gone to sleep.
Pins and needles can even hurt so much that we would almost prefer to let the leg sleep on.
But not really.
Better pins and needles than no leg at all.
This type of doubt is already aggravated by the contemporary crisis of identity, but it may grow even more serious wherever there is a hardening of society's attitudes towards Christianity.
It takes conviction to stand firm when there is a price to pay, when a strong authority is openly hostile or when the surrounding consensus considers belief ridiculous, harmful or unpatriotic.
This is already the position of many Christians in the world today, and those of us with more freedom now may well experience it before the end of this century.
If this is the case, the ones most likely to buckle under the heat of the pressure will be those Christians who lack personal conviction.
The difference between an enduring faith and a nominal faith is largely at this point.
It is none too soon to be aware of the tests we may face, but our defence will not lie in brilliant, far-sighted anticipation of specific pressures and persecutions.
For one thing it is for the Holy Spirit to tell us in that hour what we are to say, and for another thing the people we prove to be in that hour will be determined, not by our thinking about that hour, but by our thinking and living in this hour.
We will measure up to tomorrow's requirements only by measuring up to today's.
Five minutes of limelight may win a reputation, but character is built in the unseen succession of little obediences and little acts of faith.
‘As now, so then’ applies also to conviction.
Examine yourself honestly to see whether your convictions are truly your own or merely inherited beliefs or shared opinions.
It is not that God is testing us to see whether we believe or not.
God does not need to find out whether we will stand or fall.
He knows that already.
It is we who do not know, and like Peter we can be too sure of ourselves for our own good.
As C. S. Lewis warned in his book A Grief Observed , ‘Your bid will not be serious if nothing much is staked on it.
And you will never discover how serious it was until the stakes are raised horribly high; until you find that you are playing not for counters or sixpences but for every penny you have in the world.
Nothing less will shake a man — or at any rate a man like me — out of his merely verbal thinking and his merely notional beliefs.
He his to be knocked silly before he comes to his senses.
Only torture will bring out the truth.’
C. S. Lewis was writing after a deep personal crisis in his own life, but his words apply equally soberly to the crises of faith which persecution would mean for Christians.
As the apostle John was told by the third angel who described the pressure of crises on faith, during his vision recounted in the book of Revelation, ‘This is where the fortitude of God's people has its place — in keeping God's commands and remaining loyal to Jesus.’
Martin Luther, whose own convictions had been tempered and proved like the finest steel, knew well that in the hour of trial each man must have his own convictions, or he will find himself with none.
His warning should put the importance of conviction in faith beyond all question: ‘Bear in mind, then, that when you face death or persecution, I cannot be with you, or you with me.
Every man must then fight for himself.’