

Bereavement and widowhood
Bereavement and the sorrow it brings is the price most of us have to pay sooner or later for the joy of loving, and it is a bill that the elderly have usually had presented to them several times in their lives in one form or another.
They have lost parents, often a close relative or two and some of their oldest friends.
Then comes the greatest loss of all: that of their marriage partner.
Many men escape this, for most of them predecease their wives, but the majority of women have to face the crushing blow of widowhood.
And so it will be mainly the plight of widows that we shall be considering here, although, of course, many of their difficulties are shared by widowers, some of whose slightly different problems will be examined later.
If you are caring for an elderly parent who is at some stage of grieving for a lost partner, whether she is experiencing the shattering despair that follows soon after bereavement, or the long sad loneliness and feeling of deprivation characteristic of its later stages, her deepest need will be for your practical and emotional support during her period of sorrow and adjustment.
If this is your first experience in the role of main helper to someone close to you who has suffered a major loss, and if you have not yet suffered one yourself, you may find the strange variety and intensity of her emotions and her need for long-term support rather daunting.
If it is your own mother who is bereaved, the fact that you are grieving too will probably help you both a good deal, as you will be able to share your sorrow and comfort each other ; though in some families shared sorrow occasionally leads to friction and unreasonable apportioning of blame for trivial or imagined omissions in the course of the terminal illness of the deceased.
But when such rifts occur, they are not necessarily  evidence of lack of love; they are more often due to the temporary emotional instability of the mourners, and usually heal swiftly, family unity being restored as the grief is worked through.
If the bereaved is your mother-in-law you have the problem of trying to help someone with whose personality and reactions you may not be entirely familiar; but you will have the advantage of being able to remain a little more detached from the throbbing centre of her pain and therefore freer to be objective in the help you give her, without in any way reducing the flow of sympathy and affection she will hope to receive from you.
The thought of entering the disaster area of an elderly widow's grief and shouldering some of the responsibility for helping her to bear it, and to rebuild what is left of her life, is enough to create feelings of anxiety in anyone; and admittedly this can be a very difficult assignment, for not only will you be well aware that you are unable to give her the one thing she really wants — the return of her husband — but you will feel, as we all do when faced with the bereaved, that their personality seems suddenly to have been crushed like a flower under the heel of a vandal, showing it to be so fragile and vulnerable that almost any attempt to revive it would seem to be doomed to failure.
This is no time to hesitate, though, for however dazed, withdrawn, emotional, restless, irritable or distant she may seem, she is as urgently in need of help as someone who has just been badly injured in a road accident.
She has, in fact, just been knocked down emotionally.
She is in shock and in pain and requires an immediate transfusion of love and an injection of strength in the form of your quiet sympathy and understanding, and practical help with all the arrangements she has to make, as well as assistance with the simple routines of daily living; for even these may be too much for her to cope with alone while she is engaged in the important and necessary task of grieving.
You may feel inadequate at this point, because whatever you do for her will not seem to lift the cloud of her despair, but by being willing simply to be there and available in the background, accepting uncritically her inevitable mood-swings, and allowing her to talk, weep, or remain silent just as she wishes, you will be proving your concern for her; and loving concern and the right  to grieve in their own way is what the bereaved need most of all.
If you lack confidence in your ability to give her the right kind of help and comfort, but really want to do so, you have nothing to fear, because this probably means that you are much better equipped for the task than you imagine.
It indicates that you are unlikely to be a person who thinks she knows all the answers and would tend to overwhelm her with advice and urge her to ‘dry your eyes and try not to think about it too much’; and best of all, you care .
This gives you a head start, and if you are sensitive to her changing needs as she goes through the grief experience you will learn your role and recognise your cues as you go along.
It is important to have some clear basic understanding of the nature of bereavement and the grief that follows it.
There are many people, though, who cannot bear to delve too deeply into this vast and painful subject, although they are anxious to know enough about it to enable them to act wisely when called upon to support and console a relative who has suffered a major loss.
If you are one of them, do not worry, or fear that you will be handicapped as a helper and comforter.
Just accept it, remembering that an ability to show some sympathy and the courage to ‘stay the course’ with the bereaved, as they go through their sorrow and their search for a new identity, are the most important qualifications.
If you possess these, you will not find it difficult to bring yourself to learn the simple arithmetic of grief, its common pattern and some of its variations, and you will find that as your knowledge increases your fears will decrease.
You will become more objective and in control of the situation, and in time you will gain sufficient confidence to begin to understand and deal with some of its more complex problems as they arise.
Begin by listening carefully to how the bereaved speak about their loss.
Many of them so often quite rightly describe what has happened to them as a deep wound resulting from the blow they have received.
Some of them say, ‘It has been a terrible blow’, or ‘It's like a gaping wound’, or ‘I feel torn apart.
It's as though I'm bleeding inside’.
This gaping wound that bereavement inflicts on the emotions will react, and should be treated, very much like a Physical wound.
There will be shock — usually the haemorrhage of tears, followed by temporary loss of normal function  because of depression; then, if all goes well, and the wound is ‘nursed’ with care and patience, it will finally heal, the severed edges uniting to produce a strong and healthy scar.
But as with physical wounds, it can sometimes run into complications caused by careless handling or the existence of unfavourable external or internal conditions which may delay recovery; so the main concern of those caring for the bereaved should be to try to create the best possible conditions in which healing can take place, in which they feel loved and safe, and are permitted to take their time to absorb the fact of their loss and come to terms with it.
Understanding bereavement
There is no set pattern for grieving, for just as no two people love in the same way, no two people grieve in the same way.
But there are certain feelings and reactions in bereavement that are common to much of the animal kingdom, including the human race, and all who are caring for the bereaved need to be aware of them, as well as being ready to accept the tremendous range of responses that people can produce from time to time in their efforts to deal with their painful situation.
Strange as it may sound, there is such a thing as ‘successful’ grieving.
This is the normal way of gradually and painfully realising fully that a loved companion has gone, never to return: recognising what has happened and letting them go.
Not rejecting them, not ceasing to love them, but slowly building up a new role and identity which no longer depends upon their presence for its satisfactory functioning.
And finally, it is the ability to open the arms of memory to welcome them back as a valued part of the whole life experience, with which it is possible to live at peace, without pain, and with a sense of completeness at last; and when this has been accomplished the bereaved are ready to embrace life again.
There are those, of course, who for various reasons become ‘stuck’ at some point in the grieving period and become chronically depressed, sometimes for years.
This is often the result of lack of ability or opportunity to express their sorrow, or avoidance of the realisation of their loss.
Such people can be a great trial and anxiety to their family and friends, but they suffer very  badly and may need psychiatric help before recovery takes place.
Fortunately, though, they are very much in the minority.
Most bereaved people soon begin to discover that grief does not settle in their life like a gravestone, permanent and immovable: it lives, moves and changes, like all great emotions, and they finally emerge from it not crippled, but stronger in many ways than they were before, in spite of their loss.
It is a hard road to tread, though, for major loss means a frightening separation from that which gives life meaning, satisfaction and purpose, and it often brings other losses in its train that continue to bludgeon the spirit and create feelings of anxiety and insecurity.
Your elderly widowed parent may not only be losing her close companion, friend and confidant (and, if she is still sexually active, as some woman are, well into the sixties and beyond, her lover), but also the one she depended upon for financial advice, physical protection in an increasingly violent society, and transport if she does not drive herself or can no longer afford to run a car.
Unless she is very fit, able to care for the garden and do decorating and other jobs of that kind around the house, she will miss his support in this way too.
Relatively unimportant as these smaller losses may seem compared with the main one, together they may add up to a total picture of her life which she feels has been shattered overnight by a single blow.
She may also have to face a serious reduction in income, which might necessitate the sale of her house and the loss of her settled way of life by a move to another neighbourhood and to a smaller home, or into yours if that is to be the arrangement you both decide upon.
The change of status, too, from ‘wife, to ‘widow’ is felt very keenly by most women as a loss of considerable significance, which indeed it is; for without a partner, a woman who has been married for some years may, unless she already has well developed interests outside her home, find that her social life is suddenly transformed in a very disturbing way.
To begin with, it is a sad but true fact that society as a whole does not welcome the widow, however sorry they feel for her.
One reason for this is that many people have a fear which they cannot conceal of anything or anybody who reminds them of death; knowing that  contact with a grieving widow will exacerbate these fears they tend, after expressing their sympathy by word or letter, and sending flowers to the funeral, to withdraw to a safe distance ‘to give her time to get over it’ just when she needs them most.
Subtle changes take place, too, in the attitudes of some of her friends to whose circle she belonged when her husband was alive, which may lead her to feel rejected at a time when she needs to be accepted in her new role and to have her self-esteem strengthened.
Some of her married friends will still invite her to their homes, but her ties with others will be weakened.
They begin to feel that ‘three's a crowd’, and finally so does she.
She has to look for new friends amongst the ranks of the unattached like herself; and until she has recovered sufficiently to become interested in organising her social life to the best advantage, her opportunities to continue to enjoy the pleasures of mixed company may be very limited.
Grief is not only a reaction, though, it is a process, so your bereaved parent will need your help through all its various stages of numbness, yearning, quiet or vocal distress, anxiety, depression and adjustment to her new situation; and the way she behaves during the grief process will depend very much on her personality type, her previous life experiences and the strength of the tie that has been severed, as well as the amount of support you can give her.
No one is ever fully prepared for bereavement, and even if her husband's terminal illness was one from which she had known he could not hope to recover, his death will still have come as a shock to her which may create a feeling of numbness and unreality:.
a difficulty in ‘taking in’ what has happened.
This defence may last for days or for weeks, but usually the funeral begins to make it all real to her.
She may start to release her emotions fully during or after the service, or she may go through all the ritual connected with it in a daze, but sooner or later it can be expected that the flood-gates of her grief will open and she will then begin to work her way through the multiplicity of problems that lie ahead of her.
If she has always been an outgoing person, her grief will probably be expressed in painful episodes of weeping, punctuated  by the need to ‘talk it all out’ over and over again in great detail to you and to other sympathetic relatives and friends, and you will help her a great deal if you are a patient listener.
The fact that you will find it difficult to know what to say to her, except that you understand how she must feel, will not matter at all.
If you are a shoulder to cry on without fear of being shrugged off, that is all she will want from you at that stage.
Do not be surprised though if, following one of these episodes, she suddenly picks herself up temporarily and shows a marked increase of physical activity and busyness, which may include such things as arranging to have some redecorations done in her home or changing all the furniture around.
This should not be interpreted as lack of real feeling or a sign that the end of her grieving is in sight.
It will all be a part of it, her way of coping and trying to damp down her feelings of despair.
If, however, she is a more inward-looking person, she may show few of the usual signs of distress connected with bereavement, but she will be dealing with it internally and suffering just as much.
As she may not be a particularly gregarious person she will experience great loneliness after her husband's death, and her need will be for the company of her family and a few special friends to see her through this difficult period.
If her personality tends to be an obsessive one — if she is excessively devoted to tidiness and perfect order in every part of her life and home, a great maker of ‘lists’ for everything and a habitual ‘double-checker’in all her activities — you may find that although she is grieving deeply, she may throw herself with remarkable zeal into the business of ‘tidying up’her husband's financial affairs and concentrating even more strongly on getting everything in the house cleaned and polished; for this is the method used by most people who are inclined to be obsessional, to control their anxiety.
They feel that the more control they can exercise over their surroundings, the safer life will be for them.
If she reacts in this way, it will be best not to try to interfere or worry about her tiring herself out with too much activity, as this may be even more disturbing for her.
She will be working out her problems in her own fashion and should be allowed to do so.
It is the anxious and emotionally immature women who suffer most in widowhood, and if your elderly parent falls into this category her reaction to her loss may be very trying for you.
Often such women have been married to strong, protective men who accepted and possibly even fostered their childish and dependent attitudes to everything in life, and when this support is suddenly withdrawn they feel completely lost.
The temptation to put some kindly pressure on them to become more responsible and independent as quickly as possible is always great, but it has to be remembered that the habits of a lifetime in a basically anxious personality cannot be changed overnight.
If she is ever going to learn to stand on her own feet finally, when her grieving is over, she will need your acceptance, for the time being, that what she is experiencing now is something like the intense suffering of a child separated from the security of its mother's presence, with all the feelings of fear and panic that brings.
Her best hope of surviving it successfully lies in your maturity and willingness to act as a temporary crutch for her and as a quiet stabilising influence until she learns how to walk alone and unaided.
There will, of course, be reasons why she has never ‘grown up’ emotionally, and most of them will be no fault of her own.
If you can bear this in mind and be gentle in your judgement and handling of her, you will find you will be under much less strain yourself in what may be a very stressful situation.
Those who are caring for the bereaved need to be prepared to expect all kinds of strange reactions and uncharacteristic behaviour from them occasionally.
They should try not to worry too much about it, knowing that it will pass.
Some widows, for instance, show signs of bitterness and anger, particularly during the first year of bereavement.
These may be triggered off by someone who tries unwisely to hurry the widow into the full realisation of her loss before she is ready to accept it.
She may experience a crisis of disbelief in her religious faith, or direct her anger towards the medical or nursing staff who cared for her husband, for failing to save his life; or she may blame family or friends and have feelings of guilt and anger against herself for things that were done or not done during his lifetime.
She needs to find someone or something to blame for the catastrophe that  has overtaken her, so she looks for reasons, because she may not yet be ready to face up to the extremely anxiety-provoking fact that life itself is unpredictable and the world is an insecure place.
She finds it easier to say to herself, ‘He might never have died, if only…’.
This is not cowardice, but a part of the grief experience for some people, which should be understood and dealt with patiently.
It is equally possible though that she will show no signs whatever of anger in her grief and instead may become apathetic and drained of all energy and normal drive for a time.
She will almost certainly have some kind of disturbance of her normal health during the early months of mourning.
There may be loss of sleep, nightmares, loss of appetite and consequent weight loss.
Aches and pains of various kinds may occur, some of which may mimic the symptoms of her husband's last illness, and her general health may deteriorate, because at first she will be so absorbed in grieving and a kind of mental ‘searching’ for what she has lost that she may tend to neglect her bodily needs.
Some widows become so restless and panic-stricken in the early months of bereavement that they fear they may be going mad, and you may find yourself having to give your parent strong reassurance on this point, to help her to deal with this common anxiety.
Finally, you may expect her to go through a period of depression when she is ceasing to try to avoid the reality of her loss.
This will be painful for her to endure, and for you to witness, but under normal circumstances it will pass.
She will gradually adjust to her new role and begin to feel that life may still have something worth while to offer her.
The widow whose marriage was unhappy
If your widowed parent had an unhappy married life, you will have a rather different problem on your hands, for hers will be a special kind of bereavement which will need great understanding and respect for its reality, which sometimes such widows do not receive.
Some of her family and friends who knew that her marriage was unsuccessful may assume that her feelings about her husband's death could only be those of relief that their life together is over at last and that she is now free to seek a better future  for herself; not realising that if a woman has lived with a man for many years, unless he has treated her with extreme cruelty, and shown her no love at all throughout the whole of their marriage, some kind of bond is bound to have existed between them, and that even if he left her with only a handful of good memories of times they spent together, it is likely that she may want to hold on to them, cherish them, and even build upon them.
Friends may refrain from expressing any sympathy because they feel that it might be inappropriate and embarrassing for her, and she may be feeling that people will regard her as a hypocrite if she gives way and weeps, although she may need to do this for a variety of reasons, one of them being not so much for what she has lost, but for what she never had.
You may need to allow her to feel very free to express mixed feelings of grief and anger too within the safety of your confidential relationship.
She may know that she is not going to recover from the blow of widowhood any sooner than other women do, many of whom at least have a large legacy of happy memories upon which to draw in the years ahead of them.
To her it may seem that not only was she robbed of happiness during her marriage, but that she is now also being denied the right to grieve as well, for there will be those who will be expecting her mourning to be nothing more than a brief bow to convention, followed by a fairly speedy rise in spirits and return to normality.
This may make her feel that society regards her as a second-class widow, and you may need to help those who come into contact with her to understand how important it is going to be for her future adjustment for them to treat her just as they would any other bereaved person.
Her grief will be particularly hard to ‘work through’, for to some extent it may always be open-ended.
She may, for years, have nursed the hope that one day her relationship with her husband would improve.
Now that hope will have been taken from her, leaving her feeling that they have unfinished business, which (unless she believes in life after death) will remain unfinished for ever.
Nor will she be able to look forward to that sense of completeness when her grieving is over which is experienced by the widow whose marriage was happy, and she  will have some difficult emotional adjustments to make in order to come to terms with her situation, in which both love and life seem to have betrayed her.
If she discusses feelings of this kind with you, perhaps the best you can offer her, apart from a sympathetic ear, is to try to assure her that love freely given is never pointless and never lost.
It may be rejected or abused but it cannot be devalued, and if she can bring herself to look ahead without bitterness it can still bear fruit in her own life.
It will be important too to let her see that you understand her special kind of grief and respect it.
You will realise that words of comfort like this can solve no problems for her; they can do no more than bathe the wound she has sustained, but she will be badly in need of something to cling on to and because they are spoken by someone who loves her they may be exactly what she wants to hear when she is trying to reassemble herself and face the future.
In time she will find her own way of dealing with her pain.
She may even do this by denying the bad experiences in her marriage to herself and to others, remembering only the good times, however few they were, and concentrating her thoughts on the positive aspects of her husband's personality.
Some widows in this position transform their lost husband in their minds into the man they wish he had been, and finally live at peace with a dream instead of in conflict with reality.
Who is to say that they are wrong, if it helps them to live out the rest of their lives in a happier frame of mind?
This is always a surprising development from the point of view of those close to her, but if you are faced with this reaction in your elderly parent, or any other that seems strange but harmless, tread softly, and accept the fact that she must be allowed to grieve and to adjust in her own way.
The widower
Broadly speaking, a man's experience of grief when he loses his life-partner is similar to a woman's; but there are one or two important differences worth bearing in mind if you are caring for an elderly parent who has become a widower.
Although the effects of loss vary from one individual to another, on the whole it seems that men tend to fare a little better in bereavement than  women, and fewer of them are found to be in need of psychiatric treatment for chronic grief and depression.
There are several reasons for this.
Clearly many men are as capable of deep love and attachment as women, but usually more of their emotional energy is invested in their world of work outside the home, and unless a woman also has an outside career role and some interests separate from his, she relies much more on her husband for her happiness and fulfilment than he does on her.
Byron may have been exaggerating a little when he wrote, ‘Man's love is of man's life a thing apart, 'TIS woman's whole existence’, but obviously there is more than a grain of truth in it, and not necessarily a painful or unacceptable one either.
In a strange way it can actually contribute to the success of many marriages, for not every woman wants to spend her life with an eternal Romeo.
Society in general is kinder too in its attitude to the widower, and is prepared to draw closer to him to give him help and support as he does his grief-work.
It sees the widow as the creator of life who has suddenly become the symbol of death, and who also, as an unsupported woman, may be an expensive burden on the rest of the ‘tribe’ for the remaining years of her life.
The widower strikes no such fear into the heart, even though, in reality, he may turn out to be just as big a responsibility.
But these are primitive feelings and run very deep.
Fortunately for him, he is more often seen as the ‘little boy lost’(which is often just how he feels, so his suffering is considerable), for apart from his obvious grief and loneliness, who now will cook his meals and iron his shirts?
Usually it is not long before the female members of his family, and the wives of his friends and neighbours, come to his rescue to ‘mother’ him through the period of his grieving and depression, and some, whose children have grown up and left home, will find great pleasure in doing so.
A widower can become something of a ‘cause’ to those living in the same street or block of flats, whereas a widow, although not shunned, may be to some extent avoided by all but the most caring individuals in the early days of her bereavement.
The widower will receive many more invitations out to meals in other people's homes in the early days too, and he will have the advantage of never having to feel trapped in the isolation of an  empty house in the evenings; for if his emotional condition after his wife's death is reasonably steady and he feels the need of company, he can always stroll out to the local pub for a drink, where he can remain in complete control of the amount of conversation he wants, or can endure, and can head for home again just when he feels like it.
In fact social life in the evenings will be easier in every way for him to find than it is for a widow, who cannot go out alone at night without some feeling of apprehension, and who would generally anyway feel out of place sitting on her own in a saloon bar.
There are other places she could go to, of course, but so many of them would be clubs in which she would be expected to communicate and contribute at a time when all she wants is occasionally simply to be ‘with’ people and to be able to depart when she wishes without giving offence or disturbing the gathering.
Special clubs for widows can sometimes be a great help, but not to everyone.
One of the big problems the widower does have is that he does not feel so free to express his grief to others by weeping when he talks of his wife, their life together and the events that led up to her death.
He may need to do all this, and to ventilate his fears of a future without her; but he has probably been told since he was three years old that ‘boys don't cry’, and that men must always show courage and maintain the stiff upper lip, so he may deny himself the relief of lowering his defences and ‘letting go’ which society expects the widow to do quite naturally.
This is an important area in which you can help him a great deal if you can make him feel that with you open grieving is permissible.
Although he may receive more help in the first few months than the widow usually does, he may find that his sudden change in life-style is a considerable shock.
For her, there is some slight security in the continuity of attending to all the basic daily household tasks as she has done for many years, but when his ‘first wave’ of helpers begins to depart he will have to learn to do much more for himself to keep his home going, which will be an added burden to those he is already carrying.
So unless he is coming to live with you, this will be the time for you to begin to show him how to cope alone.
This will have to be done very tactfully, though, for men find it much harder than women to admit how  dependent they have become on their partner.
Their instinct is to try to hide this for fear of being thought weak or inadequate, and this, in part, contributes to the fact that although their overall experience of the distress of bereavement may be slightly less than that of widows, many men take longer to recover fully.
It should be remembered that generalisation about bereavement or any deep experience in life can be dangerous if carried to extremes, and if you are caring for an elderly parent of either sex who has lost his or her partner, you will have no idea of just how painful their sorrow is for them, so it will be wise simply to assume, whatever their reaction may be, that they are going through a very bad time indeed.
Every scrap of understanding you can glean about the dynamics of bereavement will, of course, be valuable; but never try simply to ‘play it by the book’— this or any other, for in the long run it will be the way you use your heart, not your head, that will count most.
Their overriding need will not be for advice, but for love and support, and if you provide this you will not fail them.
Ways of helping the bereaved
IMMEDIATE SUPPORT
You will probably have been giving your elderly parent emotional support all the way through the anxiety of her husband's terminal illness, unless his death was sudden and unexpected.
But when it actually occurs, whether her reaction is one of numbness and shock, or of anguish more openly expressed through episodes of weeping and talking freely about her feelings, you will need to brace yourself to catch her as she falls into what will seem to her to be the bottomless pit of her sorrow.
Yours will most probably be the arms she needs at this point, and the best thing you can do for her is to show that you share her grief, and that as far as possible you are going to be the rock on which she can lean while the sands of her life are shifting so frighteningly beneath her feet.
How you do this will depend upon your own personality and your relationship with her, but however it is done, the message she will be hoping to receive through your words and actions will be that you care, you sympathise, and that you are going to  stand by her and give her all the help and comfort you can in the months that lie ahead.
Having done this, you can begin by making sure that she is not left alone at all at first in her emotionally collapsed condition, unless she clearly indicates that she wants a period of solitude.
In this case you should make sure she has all she needs, including easy access to you by phone, and you should keep in daily contact with her.
She will probably welcome your offer of help with such matters as the registration of the death, notifying distant friends, putting an announcement of death in local or national newspapers if she wants this, and dealing with kindly enquiries from neighbours in a tactful way, so that they understand that she may not be feeling like having too many callers at first but will greatly appreciate their help and sympathy in a few days' (or weeks,) time; and making arrangements for the funeral and any family gathering that is to take place afterwards.
If she wants to do any or all of these things herself, though, she should be allowed to, and her own wishes in everything at this time should be respected.
THE FUNERAL
The funeral itself will be a painful but important occasion for her, as this, and all the ritual connected with it, will be her first big step forward into the grieving process which is to lead on to final recovery.
It will begin to ‘make real’ the fact of her husband's death and permanent departure from her life, so everything possible should be done to give the occasion dignity, beauty, and a feeling of thanksgiving for his life; for this is a memory she will carry with her always, and it is one from which most widows can draw some comfort if it has been an uplifting experience shared with her family and friends.
This does not necessarily mean spending a great deal of money on it, but careful and considerate planning of the whole day.
If she has a religious faith which enables her to believe that death is not the end and that she and her husband will be re-united one day, she should be supported and encouraged in this, as it is something really positive on which she can begin to rebuild the rest of her life.
Although the whole family will be mourning, this should be  regarded very much as ‘her’ day, and her wishes should come first.
If she dislikes all outward signs of mourning, wanting people to wear their normal clothes and for the proceedings to be very quiet and simple, that should be for her to decide, but if she is of the old school, who prefer mourners to dress rather sombrely, you should try to persuade the rest of the family to do so whatever their personal opinions may be; although care must be taken not to cause friction over this or anything else which may sour the family gathering.
The form of service and the choice of hymns, if any, should be your parent's, and if she is hoping to see her husband's coffin surrounded by flowers on its last journey, nobody should suggest to her that she should instead consider asking relatives and friends to send donations to a suitable charity, for this may upset her deeply, and if she gives in to it, it may become a burning resentment in her later on.
Many people now regard the sending of flowers to a funeral as an inexcusable waste of money, arguing that since they cannot possibly help the deceased, it is better to help the living.
But they forget that flowers are sent not only as a mark of respect for the dead, but also as a gesture of sympathy to the living, suffering widow, to bring some of the hopeful beauty of nature to soften the bleakness of one of the saddest days of her life, and to show her how much the one she loved was also loved by others.
If she would like the family and close friends to gather together for a meal or light refreshments after the service and committal, you will of course have prepared for this beforehand.
Many widows like to stay in the home of a family member for a few days or weeks afterwards, but if she is going to return to her own home at some time, this should not be delayed for too long.
When she does so, you or another relative could suggest staying there with her for a day or two until she is ready to face the loneliness she has to learn to live with.
If she is to come to live with you, or someone else in the family, consideration should be given to arranging this along the lines mentioned in Chapter 3.
SAFEGUARDING HER HEALTH
The bereaved often show signs of ill-health, which is not surprising since they usually feel quite ill in their minds and crushed  by the burden of their sorrow.
You should, as far as possible, make sure that the widow is having a nourishing, if light, diet and proper exercise, and seeing her doctor if she has any special problems.
If she is severely disturbed emotionally, above the level normally expected in bereavement, and if she cannot sleep, he may prescribe tranquillisers and a night sedative; but this will usually be only for a limited period to help her over a particularly bad patch, as he will not want her to become addicted to these drugs, which if taken for too long may delay the normal grieving process which she will need to experience if she is to make a satisfactory recovery.
Some widows who have been moderate social drinkers begin to drink more during bereavement, in order to take the edge off their emotional pain; but this of course creates more problems than it ever solves, so you should never encourage your elderly parent to start taking ‘tonic’ wine for her ‘nerves’or a tot of whisky at night to help her to sleep, for you may be helping her to establish a habit that can easily get out of control and become very hard to break.
Your aim should be to see that she does not suffer long periods of loneliness and that she feels so well cared for that she can manage to endure her period of sorrow without too many crutches, until life becomes worth living again.
PRACTICAL HELP
You will no doubt have been assisting her in basic matters connected with the running of her home while she is still in a state of shock following her husband's death, for at this point even the most capable women sometimes find day-to-day planning and decision-making very hard to cope with and need to be eased gently back into their normal routine.
She may welcome your help with some of the business matters she has to deal with, too.
The first essential is to see that she has a good solicitor to advise her and sort out her husband's affairs, making sure beforehand what his fee will be for the work he is going to do for her.
She may wish you to accompany her to his office or to be present if he is to visit her in her home, and he will be pleased to have your co-operation.
Apart from dealing with the matter of the will if one was  made, it may be agreed, if your parent wishes, that he should also take on the responsibility for contacting various persons and organisations: the bank, to arrange for money to be available to her pending the settlement of her husband's affairs; her husband's employer and Trade Union branch secretary, or the secretary of any professional association to which he belonged; his insurance company; the Department of Health and Social Security, to obtain forms for claiming the death grant and the widow's pension; the Inland Revenue, if her husband was still paying income tax; the Building Society, the mortgagor (or landlord if she and her husband lived in rented property) and any other person or organisation concerned.
He may suggest that you might like to undertake some of the less complicated tasks on your parent's behalf if she wishes.
If so, he will advise you what to do, but you may also find it helpful to obtain a copy of a booklet entitled Caring for the widow and her family , published by CRUSE (The National Organisation for Widows and their Children, Cruse House, 126 Sheen Road, Richmond, Surrey TW9 1UR), which gives a great deal of useful information on all these subjects and many others connected with widowhood.
In all your efforts to help her at this crucial time the most important thing to remember is to try to reduce her anxiety by being as relaxed and quietly optimistic about her future as you can, and to restrain her from making any major decisions hastily, regarding such matters as the disposal of property or moving house, as she may regret this later on when she is feeling less depressed.
When she feels ready to contemplate it she may also want your help in the sad business of disposing of her husband's clothing.
She may like to give this to the WRVS or Oxfam, who would be happy to collect it if necessary, as would ‘Help the Aged’ and many other organisations.
He may also have had expensive tools or special equipment of some kind, or a car or boat which has to be sold.
Here you can do much to protect her interests at a time when she is very vulnerable by making sure that they are first valued by an expert before being advertised, for widows are often ‘conned’ into selling their husband's valuable possessions very cheaply to unscrupulous people, simply because they are  feeling too low in spirits to resist any offer to have them removed speedily and without fuss.
You may find that she will need to lean on you a little for several months to speak and act for her in matters she cannot give her full attention to, because she will be quite rightly absorbed for the time being in grieving, which is mentally and emotionally very hard work indeed.
You have no need to worry, though, that this situation will be a permanent one, for as she recovers she will gradually want to take over the reins of her own life again.
EMOTIONAL SUPPORT
Practical help and emotional support of the bereaved are of course interwoven, but from the purely emotional standpoint it could be said that their greatest needs are for loving concern, good listening and patient understanding of their need to work through their grief in their own way at their own pace.
Ideally the support of the bereaved should be a team effort, and the choice of captain of that team should be left to the widow herself, for she will need one special person to whom she can turn with confidence in any circumstance.
This will most probably be you, but try not to feel hurt if she chooses someone else.
You will still have a very important part to play.
Each member of her family and each of her close friends will have different strengths upon which she will need to draw, and together you should try to form a bridge over which she can gradually cross from the barren wasteland of her sorrow back into society where her new role awaits her.
It will be a slow journey, in which progress will be seen to be made in stages rather than continuously.
In the early months of her grief, you and her other helpers may need to listen endlessly and give her quiet comfort during her episodes of extreme anguish and emotional excursions into the past.
You will also have to be prepared to overlook sudden flashes of anger or periods of irritability which may seem to be aimed at you but which are much more likely to be an expression of her natural resentment of the disaster that has befallen her.
She will, at this point, be a very disturbed person indeed, but it is a condition that will pass, so you should show generosity in your acceptance of any unusual behaviour within reason.
When she has, through the process of grieving, faced the reality of her loss, you will need to be very patient with her through the period of depression that will follow, in which she may feel slowed up and extremely lethargic because, for a while, life will appear to her to have no further meaning or purpose.
She may find it difficult to concentrate or interest herself much in anything or anybody.
She may appear to become quite self= centred, and those who have been doing all they can to help her may become exasperated and tempted to hint that it is time she tried to ‘pull herself together’, for by then they too will be feeling the strain.
On the other hand, she may show signs of a kind of restless agitation which can be equally hard to handle.
But if she is allowed to go at her own pace, without criticism, while she is dealing with the chaos within, you will find that her mood will gradually become more optimistic and her feelings of despair less frequent.
A time will come when you will know that she is no longer saying to herself, ‘If I can't have him, I don't want anything’.
She will be preparing to face the future, having come to terms to some extent with the loss of her previous expectations concerning it.
This may be a good moment to indicate to her very gently that she has grieved well and long, and that if she is beginning to feel that her period of mourning is nearing its end (even though you appreciate that she will always carry the scars of her sorrow), you are ready to give her any help she needs to adjust to her new and different life.
If she responds favourably to this (which, if you are wise, you will have conveyed more through your attitudes than your actual words), you and her other helpers should try to create various circumstances or events which may stand a chance of helping her to break the habit of mourning: an interesting holiday, perhaps, or some new and mildly challenging experience which calls for her to look beyond herself to someone else in trouble, who will make her feel ‘needed’.
These or other events in her life at this time, even the sad ones like the passing of the first anniversary of her husband's death, may be the key that will open the door for her to freedom from the prison of grief where she has finished the hard labour of bereavement.
But remember that these stages on her journey to the position where  she can love and remember her husband without pain, and without being emotionally tied to him, will only be acceptable to her when she is really ready for them.
Her recovery could take anything up to around two years to be complete, according to her personality and the strength of the bond that existed.
Helping an elderly woman to adjust and to find a new identity is never easy, but it can nearly always be achieved if she is shown that she is still loved and needed, by her family and friends.
Contact also with organisations for the assistance of widows can be useful to some women, and one of these, CRUSE, which has already been mentioned, runs groups and an excellent counselling service.
They tend to cater mainly for the under-sixties, although they are always willing to do everything they can to help the older widow too.
But the best form of support for her is of course to be found in the framework of an affectionate and united family who will make sure that she is not too lonely and can help her to rebuild her social life.
If you have a really warm relationship with your elderly parent and the two of you communicate well, you may also be able to help her a good deal by occasional discussions on attitudes generally in bereavement and the more positive aspects of what has been such a tragic and painful experience for her; steering her tenderly towards the realisation that what she now has is not only what Dylan Thomas's wife described as ‘left-over life to kill’, but left-over love to give , which is a very different thing.
When at times she is feeling particularly low and bereft, you might also remind her gently that although it seems that love has departed from her life altogether with the loss of her husband, this is not so.
Since she was capable of loving so deeply, she can still, if she chooses, remain in the business of giving and receiving love for as long as she lives, for although she may feel that she is no longer everything to anyone, she can still mean a great deal to a number of people.
She may also be helped to understand that if she is willing to try to spread the love she once gave to one person around to others who may be badly in need of it, she will move into an entirely different dimension emotionally: one that will provide her with new satisfactions and in which she will discover that the lovers of this world are not only those who enjoy a close  and exclusive relationship.
They are to be found everywhere, even among the old, the disabled, the celibate, the deserted and the bereaved -in fact, all those who have learned to value and use left-over love.
So she can still be one of them.
If she is very apprehensive about how she is going to manage her role in society as a woman on her own, you could remind her of something she has probably completely forgotten: that she coped with life quite adequately as a single woman, before she met her husband, so there is no reason to suppose that she cannot do so again, and possibly even better now because of the love they shared and her greater maturity.
If your timing is right, Positive ideas of this kind may well give her hope and encouragement, but they should not be introduced too early in the grieving process, or she may regard them almost as an insult to the depth of her sorrow at a time when she is not yet ready to look to the future.
So choose your moment carefully.
Even if she is not someone who could easily enter into discussions of this nature, in which her feelings are explored, it is possible that she could benefit considerably from advice and comfort delivered to her in a less personal way through the pages of a book.
Amongst the many excellent and well researched books that have been written on the subject of bereavement the following are outstanding in their capacity to help those who have suffered a major loss:Grief and how to live with it by Sarah Morris (published in 1971 by George Allen and Unwin);A grief observed by C. S. Lewis (published in 1961 by Faber and Faber)— of particular interest to widowers — and Bereavement.
Studies of grief in adult life by Colin Murray Parkes, MD, DPM (published in 1972 by Tavistock Publications).
If, of course, her grief becomes prolonged and it seems that she is making no headway towards adjustment, it will be advisable for her to see her doctor, but this rarely happens.
Helping an elderly parent through her sorrow can be a long, hard haul, but very rewarding in the end — not only in terms of her recovery, but also because, if you find yourself in the same position in later years, you will look back on this experience you shared with her and find that it has left you with a far deeper understanding of grief, and a greater confidence in the healing  power of time to see you through your own period of adjustment to loss.
Bereavement is the one battle in which people dice with a death that has already occurred in order to survive all the dangers of the loss and deprivation it brings, and it takes courage to stand shoulder to shoulder with someone who is in the thick of it.
But fortunately the dice are almost always loaded in their favour, and if we decide to fight with them the end result, for them and for us, can be that ‘Out of this nettle, danger, we pluck this flower, safety’.
On their own
‘I'd rather stay under my own roof.
When I leave here it will be feet first!
A courageous and independent elderly woman once said this to me, and I understood and respected her feelings; for few elderly people want to give up their own home and go to live with relatives.
Some years later, when her health and strength failed her, she found that she had to; but when that day came, she packed her courage as well as her clothes into her suitcase.
She knew that she would inevitably be just exchanging one set of problems for another when she moved in with her daughter and son-in-law and the grandchildren, but she had taken her time and come to the decision in her own way, and finally managed to make a very good adjustment to an entirely different life in a busy household.
She was one of the lucky ones.
Elderly people should never be persuaded against their will to move out of their own home, unless their mental or physical health or living conditions are so deplorable that they are a danger to their own or other people's safety.
An elderly parent living alone invariably has problems to cope with, though, in some area of life, and ideally the people to help them should be members of their own family; people who know their character and understand their needs, those they do not have to make an effort to relate to and trust, and who can move around freely in their homes, to sort through the various ‘pockets’ of their anxiety more easily than any stranger can do.
If everyone could look after their own, there would be far fewer people like social workers running around looking after other people's own.
Unfortunately, in modern society, our ‘own’ are rarely living in the same town or even in the same county as us, which makes the ideal situation very difficult to achieve.
The  large extended family, with its reliable supporting cast of aunts, uncles and cousins, as well as sons and daughters, all willing to help older members to remain happily in their own homes for as long as possible, is a thing of the past.
The responsibility now usually rests heavily on the shoulders of one or, with luck, perhaps two relatives, and they will often need all the help they can get from the local social, medical, nursing and voluntary services.
Some people are ‘naturals’ when it comes to helping the elderly, because they are affectionate, imaginative and capable.
Others, who are just as willing, have great difficulties in trying to understand them and meet their needs without appearing to intrude, or deprive them of their independence.
The mere fact of having been cast in the role of daughter, daughter-in-law, son or son-in-law does not automatically endow any of us with the ability to play that part to perfection, particularly when it begins to need more than smiles and pleasantries at family gatherings, and demands qualities of patience, perseverance and insight, and the regular visiting of a lonely and possibly disabled old person.
Those who do their best but, for reasons for which they may not be to blame, are not temperamentally suited to deep involvement in the special problems of the elderly, may have other talents for caring.
They may, for instance, be capable of rising magnificently to the occasion when a neighbour's sick, deprived, or even delinquent child needs help, or they may be wonderful wives, husbands or parents and do much useful voluntary work in the community, and yet lack the particular type of emotional muscle required to support old people.
If the challenge comes, though, they will usually do what they can, however inadequate and apprehensive they feel.
What they need, apart from encouragement, is a little practical know-how about the job they are taking on, to enable them to tackle it with confidence.
The first thing to do, if you are embarking on helping an elderly parent who lives alone, is to make sure that she (or he) knows that you have a genuine desire to assist her in every way possible; and then respect her right to make either a positive or negative response to your overtures.
It is always best to dip a toe in the water first, rather than plunging in with a programme of hopefully helpful ideas for the improvement of her life and  comfort.
The need for independence, linked with the need for love, are amongst the last treasures of old age, and should be treated with great delicacy.
Obviously, not all elderly parents who live alone are in need of a great deal of assistance: they just like to know that it would be available if they wanted it.
If they are still in good health and spirits, they are often busy helping other people — including their own families — and living a full and satisfying life, continuing to manage and run their home and all their affairs quite efficiently.
There are also those who have been rather self-sufficient all their lives, who really like living alone, enjoying their own company and quiet pursuits.
No two old people will react the same way, so no standard procedure can be recommended.
However, most of them do need our help in various ways when the going gets rough, and it is their needs that we are mainly examining here.
Most elderly parents who are living alone will be widows or widowers, and the understanding of their feelings of loss, and ways of helping them to cope with bereavement, were discussed in Chapter 2.
Visiting
Visiting should be tailored not only to the needs of the elderly person but also the amount of time you can reasonably spare from other family responsibilities.
It is important to make a definite decision about this right from the start, without letting her feel in any way that she is being given a weekly or monthly ‘ration’ of her family's free time, as a duty rather than a pleasure.
Some elderly people who have always been very flexible like being ‘popped in on’ without prior warning, but most people as they grow older much prefer all the events in their lives to be regular and predictable.
Old people are, of course, entitled to the same social courtesies as we are, and it can be very irritating for them if they are made to feel that they are regarded as has-beens who have nothing better to do than to sit around waiting to be visited at our convenience.
Even though they are no longer working or bringing up children, their time is as precious to them as ours is to us.
It may, according to circumstances and the personalities involved, be best to fix a regular mutually agreeable day for  visiting, so that it is something to be looked forward to and prepared for.
Alternatively, if they are on the telephone, a call, well beforehand, to ask if it is convenient is usually appreciated.
You need to remind yourself that a visit paid to an elderly relative living alone is a very important occasion, although of course the atmosphere should be relaxed and happy.
If you are really fond of her, then you know that you will both give each other pleasure simply by being together for a while, but you must be prepared to give much more of yourself to the conduct of those few hours than you probably would in other social circumstances.
She will be able to give you a great deal too, if you are prepared to open your mind to her memories and experience of life, realising the significance of her ‘past’ to your ‘present’; and when you understand that the old are by no means always on the receiving end of their relationships, then you are ready to assemble the love, time, patience and energy you have to offer, and decide on the best way of presenting them.
Even love itself is better for being carefully ‘gift-wrapped’ sometimes, when the recipient is elderly, and fearful of the slightest hint of patronage or pity.
Preparing yourself for a visit to an elderly parent who may not be exactly on your list of favourite people is quite another matter.
If you are sure she wants to see you and you feel that you should go, your only hope of making the visit a success is not to drag yourself with a reluctant sense of duty to her front door, groaning inwardly at the thought of it.
You will find it much easier if you can bring yourself to take the very positive attitude that today the two of you are going to share just a few hours of life together: time that can never come again.
So you are going to give all you have got, and try to make something good out of it.
If your elderly parent is, by nature, affectionate and demonstrative, always kiss her warmly on arrival, and when you leave; for many old people are greatly deprived of essential physical contact.
If she lives on her own and poor health has robbed her of a normal social life, it is to be expected that her loneliness may have created such a build-up of unexpressed thoughts, feelings and  opinions that she may need to talk herself to a standstill before she is ready to converse with you, and interest herself in anything you have to say.
You just have to be patient and allow her all the time she wants in which to ‘say her piece’.
Bearing in mind that the elderly often most enjoy visits that are on a one-to-one basis, during which they can ventilate their anxieties and have the undivided attention of a sympathetic listener, it is not always a good idea to arrive with several young children in tow, if they can be happily parked elsewhere.
Most old people love children, but usually in much smaller doses than their parents realise, and more often in your home, where spills, sticky fingers and noise are more easily dealt with, than in theirs.
The most popular visitors to old people are the good listeners, who concentrate with interest on what they are saying, making the occasional encouraging comment.
It is unfortunately very easy sometimes to let the eyes wander — and the mind as well— if an elderly person is running the gamut of a whole list of troubles, some of which may seem more like minor irritations.
Sometimes, too, it is possible to make the mistake of thinking that she is expecting us to come up with all the answers when, often, all she wants is the opportunity to state the problem to someone who understands and will not criticise her.
This is not mere grumbling or sourness, but a perfectly normal reaction to her circumstances.
She needs to unburden, and good listening is not only good therapy, it is probably the most important contribution anyone can make to the happiness of the elderly who live alone.
You do not have to be clever, or to know all the right psychological approaches; you just need to be kind, and to care, to become a sanity-saving safety-valve in someone else's life.
Many elderly people have a wide range of interests, maintain them — if only through reading — right on into old age, and still enjoy the cut and thrust of discussion and debate; but we have to accept the fact that for some, the main topics of conversation will be their own and other people's health, past reminiscences, and family matters.
When this is so, a visit will always go well if they are allowed to make the running.
Health matters will usually come first, and then talk either of family news or of their past lives.
This is a topic that some who visit the elderly find  extremely boring, just as others find it fascinating.
But those who hate the nostalgia of the elderly should remember that one of the reasons why they want to talk so much about the past may be that, for them, the present is unbearable, and the future unthinkable.
An understanding of this can do much to damp down the fires of impatience, and kindle those of tolerance in younger people, for ‘Granny's old stories’.
To show enthusiasm for a glance with them through the pages of old photograph albums, can often give immense pleasure; and half an hour spent like this can mean more to them than a whole evening of television, for they are warmed by memories of happier days.
It is naturally important to them that their children and grandchildren should know what life was like when they were young, and although younger people may not realise it at the time, a knowledge of their own family history and the characters that made it can be valuable to them, too, if they are to understand themselves and their own lives.
When passing on to them family news, which they are usually anxious to hear, remember that the time for leaning on them with your more serious troubles is now past; so unless there is some inescapable reason for giving them bad news, try to protect them from it, for they will probably be worrying about it in isolation until your next visit.
It is much better only to tell them of the happier events in your life: the progress the children are making and the amusing things they say, descriptions of family outings and news of old friends and neighbours.
An effort should be made, however, to make them feel that they still have a strong role to play in your life, and that their opinions are still valued and respected.
This can be done by making a point of asking their advice on small matters, which cannot create any anxiety in them.
Some elderly persons are very inward-looking and completely uninterested in the lives of others, even those of their close family.
They have usually been inclined to be rather self= centred all their lives in a quiet way, and this tendency has become overt and accentuated in old age.
If so, it is really useless to try to change them, however maddening their attitude may be.
It is far better, for the sake of peace and quiet, to ‘give them  their head’ within reason, without allowing them to get a total stranglehold on your time.
If, on the other hand, your elderly parent shows a quite uncharacteristic withdrawal from her normal concern for you and for others and is totally obsessed in an agitated fashion with herself and her own troubles, over a long period, you should begin to wonder if, in fact, she is suffering from a true depressive illness and may be in need of medical help.
It should be remembered, however, that all old people tend to become a little more self-centred as the years go by.
They need to be, in order to survive.
Their bodies require more careful maintenance to keep functioning, and to some extent they have to protect themselves from too deep an involvement in the problems of others as their own emotions become more frail.
When you are visiting an elderly parent you will probably notice that there are times when they do not feel particularly like either talking or listening.
This will often be just after a meal, when they are feeling drowsy.
But this, of course, does not mean that they are not enjoying your company, if you show that you are quite happy just to sit quietly with them, looking through a newspaper or reading a book; for silence is for sharing too on the right occasions.
Most elderly people like to make a cup of tea for a visitor, and this should always be accepted with pleasure; for eating and drinking with somebody else is another of life's important shared experiences, of which they are deprived if they live alone.
Also it is something they can do for you and gives the visit a sense of occasion.
Some visitors never learn how to come and go with grace, and clock-watching, when the time for departure is drawing near, should be carefully avoided.
Old people are no fools, and can easily be hurt; so however many things you have on your mind to be done when you get home, never leave them feeling that you have given them time that you have grudgingly spared.
Never greet them with ‘Hello, how are you?
I'm afraid I can't stop long’, or leave them with ‘Well, I must go; I've got such a lot to do,.
Both may be statements of truth, but they are bad statements because they can make an elderly person feel how  unimportant she is in your life, even though you may not mean to convey this.
If you are under pressure in your own life, with heavy business or family responsibilities, and find that, much as you would like to do so, you cannot spend a whole day, or even a whole evening with your parent, there are several ways of coping with this, according to your circumstances.
One is to telephone, or write to her beforehand, saying that things have been so hectic at your end recently that it seemed at one point that you might have to postpone your visit for a week or two, but that you are so keen to see her that you are absolutely determined to ‘make it’ somehow, even if it has to be just a ‘flying visit’.
Another is to ease her gently into the awareness that your visit will be shorter than usual, doing so some time after you have greeted her affectionately on your arrival and listened patiently to her news, views or troubles.
Then give her a definite reason for the necessity of an early departure (not just general ‘busyness’).
It may be an appointment to meet a business colleague, or a promise to collect the children from a party so that they do not have to walk home in the dark.
If you are being honest with yourself and with her and you really are terribly pressed for time, you will never be short of concrete reasons to give, and she will find these much more acceptable and less hurtful than vague excuses, provided, of course, that your overall treatment of her is one of care and not neglect.
A very clinging and demanding elderly parent presents a much greater problem.
If you are faced with this, the only thing to do is to refuse to be drawn into any fruitless arguments, but stand firm in your resolve to leave when you feel you must, assuring her of your affection and concern for her and your intention to visit her again as soon as you can.
Obviously there are no simple solutions to a difficult relationship with a demanding parent, but it can often be kept ticking over on a mixture of kindness and firmness and a refusal on your part to come out of your corner for a fight every time she chooses to ring the bell.
It is clearly very important to make sure that at learn some of your visits are completely unhurried and timed to suit her  convenience, for to many elderly people a few hours relaxing in the company of a son or daughter they love can be an oasis in the desert of their week if they live alone.
Gifts
It is never difficult to think of suitable gifts to take to elderly people who live alone, but apart from the obvious ones it is worth remembering that things like home-made cakes, biscuits, jam or marmalade which they may no longer bother to make for themselves are particularly appreciated.
They have the added advantage too of being evidence of the kind of affection that is willing to spend time and energy as well as money.
Fresh fruit is valuable also for its high vitamin C content, but plums should be avoided unless they are made into jam, as they sometimes tend to cause diarrhoea in the elderly if too many are eaten in one day.
Birthdays
Old people either dislike having a great fuss made of their birthdays or they love every minute of it.
If your elderly parent is in the second category, this event always provides a valuable opportunity for the family to make every kind of affectionate and celebratory gesture that says, ‘We're glad you're still around’.
Social life
The possibilities for an active social life for those living alone will obviously vary according to age, health, personality and mobility.
Many elderly people are quite capable of maintaining old friendships, making new ones and keeping themselves interested and involved in life around them without any help from their children.
Others, particularly the bereaved (whose special needs were examined in Chapter 2) may require a little tactful help and encouragement when they are ready to face life again.
Those who are newly bereaved and naturally dread the loneliness of returning to an empty house should be visited frequently in their own homes; and when you are able to persuade them to get out of their own four walls as much as possible for fresh air and  exercise and to meet others and visit relatives, it can be a considerable help if you can bring them home and go in with them for a cup of tea or a chat, even if it is only just for a quarter of an hour.
Some elderly people can find pleasure in joining with others in their age group in various kinds of purposeful activity or service to the community.
Alternatively, membership of one of the many different kinds of clubs that exist to suit all interests, or attendance at a Day Centre may be the answer for them, and we shall be examining some of these possibilities in detail later.
If there is a marked resistance on the part of a lonely, but fit and mobile elderly person to consider any ideas for the possible improvement of her social life, and if gentle persuasion is of no avail, you may be justified in suspecting a condition of hidden depression.
In this event, she should never be nagged or criticised.
She has a right to do what she chooses with her time, and interference often makes matters worse.
Your best course is to keep visiting her, if she will have you, with patience and understanding and watch how the situation develops.
If she shows signs, after a while, of sliding into a depressive illness, it may be wise to have a quiet word with her doctor.
Even if they are not visibly disabled, some elderly people reach a stage in their lives when slight muscular weakness and general frailty, combined with a natural anxiety about crossing roads or being jostled off their feet in crowded places, makes going out difficult for them.
Many of them struggle on bravely and still manage to take a limited amount of daily exercise, but sometimes a point is reached when they are no longer able to go out alone at all to enjoy any kind of social life.
If they also happen to be living alone, we can make all the difference to the monotony of their existence by arranging to take them out regularly.
When this is suggested, the invitation should always be along the lines of: ‘I'd love you to come out for a run in the car with me some time.
Will you?’ rather than, ‘Would you like me to take you out for a run in the car some time?’
The first is a request for the pleasure of their company while the second implies slight patronage, and highlights their inability to go out on their own and their need now to be ‘taken’.
Where you take them should, within reason, be left entirely to them.
Many elderly people still enjoy a visit to the cinema, the theatre or a concert.
Some just long for a slow mooch around a department store.
Others love a day by the sea or an afternoon in the country; and many most enjoy being taken to the homes of relatives or friends for a meal.
Wherever you take them, though, try, if it is possible and the weather is good, to arrange for them to spend some of the time out of doors — for the housebound elderly are often short of vitamin D, which most of us get from natural sunlight (as well as certain foods) and this deficiency can lead to the painful condition of osteomalacia, in which there is rarefaction of the bones.
If they are churchgoers, but unable to go out alone, it is usually possible to organise lifts for them in the cars of other church members to Sunday services as well as week-day activities.
Other ways of making life more interesting for the housebound are the occasional holidays in the homes of various members of the family; also offering to help them to entertain their friends in their own home to more than just a cup of tea, by arranging to take a pre-cooked, easily served meal round to them beforehand.
Domestic chores
Many elderly people can remain in their own homes even if they are living alone, provided that they can get adequate help with some of the heavier and more awkward chores: cleaning high up, or low down, under furniture or in corners which have become inaccessible to them.
jobs which involve using heavy domestic equipment, or climbing steps and taking down curtains can be a real problem, and the thorough spring-clean they always used to do becomes a complete impossibility if they happen to suffer from one of the common disorders of old age, such as arthritis or heart trouble.
So they worry, and look back with longing to the good old, bad old days, when there always seemed to be a kind and sturdy neighbour nearby who was willing to pop in to lend a hand to the elderly and disabled, in the closer-knit communities of their youth.
The maintenance of proper standards of cleanliness in their  homes is very important to most mentally unimpaired old people.
If the home starts ‘going to pot’ they often feel that it appears that they are ‘going to pot, with it.
Much anxiety may be avoided for your elderly parents if you can organise yourself and other members of the family to help them regularly with the jobs they cannot cope with — anticipating their needs rather than waiting to be asked.
Many old people tell their elderly friends, in confidence, that although they worry sometimes about various things in the house that need attention and are beyond their capabilities, they don't like to keep mentioning ‘this and that’ to their children when they visit, as they are only too delighted to see them and feel it is a bit hard to put them to work as soon as they arrive.
This is why it is so valuable to arrange with them that certain visits will be regularly earmarked for ‘odd jobbing’.
You can arrive wearing suitable clothing, on a day when you have not tired yourself out cleaning right through your own home.
They can have all the cleaning equipment ready for you, tidying and moving any light objects, as necessary, as their contribution to the exercise before your arrival, and then when the work is completed they will usually be very pleased if you have allowed time to sit down and have a cup of tea or a drink with them for a while before you leave.
If for some reason it is impossible for you to give them the help in the house they need, a Home Help can be provided by the local authority social services department.
These are usually strong, friendly, competent women, employed to undertake a variety of household tasks, including some shopping, washing and ironing if necessary.
Unless there is exceptional need they only work from Monday to Friday, and as the service is very short-staffed in many areas most people can only receive a few hours' help a week; although in special cases daily help can be arranged.
Elderly people pay for this according to their income, which has to be declared in full, but those on very small incomes may have nothing to pay at all .
It is possible for them (or for you on their behalf) to make application direct to the social services department.
It may be done through their general practitioner, or, if they are being  discharged from hospital and obviously need help in the home, it may be arranged by the hospital social worker.
The Home Help Supervisor will then call to see what type and amount of help is required, and assist them if necessary to complete the forms on which the assessment for payment will be made.
This is usually a very pleasant and reassuring interview for a worried old person, who can be helped to feel that much of the anxiety about her heavy housework is going to be taken off her hands; and the supervisor then tries, as far as possible, to choose just the right member of her staff to suit the needs of the applicant.
Many Home Helps become very fond of the elderly people they visit, often doing all kinds of extra jobs for them when they have the time, and the moral support they give to lonely old people is invaluable.
Most social workers who are in touch with the elderly disabled living alone hear the praises of their Home Helps sung time and time again: ‘She's like a daughter to me’, and ‘I don't know what I'd do without her’.
These women, often with family responsibilities of their own, do a heavy and demanding job with great generosity of spirit.
Domiciliary medical and social services
The most important person employed by the State to supervise the health and care of the elderly at home is the general practitioner.
A good general practitioner keeps an eye on the health of his elderly patients, knows the score, and can conduct the whole orchestra of welfare on their behalf when they need it.
He is the one with the knowledge and power to bring in the right instruments at the right time, of ten just by raising a hand to reach for his telephone.
He should never be regarded as someone only to be approached when a prescription is required or when some serious breakdown in health occurs.
The emphasis with the old, as with any other age-group, should be on prevention before the need for cure arises, and some elderly people suffer quite unnecessarily from the ‘silent’ types of illness which show no dramatic symptoms in their early stages (such as anaemia), and which might well be diagnosed if they visited their doctor at six-monthly intervals when feeling at all‘off colour’.
Even if they 
feel quite well, an annual check-up after the age of sixty is a sensible idea.
If your elderly relative is unfortunate enough to be registered with a doctor who is impatient with the older patients on his list and not particularly interested in geriatric medicine, the best thing to do is to try to get her transferred to the list of another doctor in the area whose attitude towards his elderly patients is known to be more sympathetic and thorough.
Advice on whom to choose can usually be obtained through the local grape-vine of elderly neighbours and old people's clubs and organisations.
Instructions as to how to change one's doctor will be found on your elderly parent's medical card and the procedure is simple.
No reason has to be given either to her present doctor or to the one to whom she wishes to change, but undoubtedly it can facilitate the change-over and make the new doctor more likely to be willing to accept her if she has some sensible but low-key reason ready should there be any query.
This could perhaps be that the new doctor's surgery is nearer, or easier for her to get to, has less steps to climb to the front door, or that she has a neighbour on his list who would accompany her to the surgery.
Of course if her doctor has been guilty of serious neglect, you and your parent may decide that you should lodge a complaint with the local Community Health Council, whose job is to represent to the Area Health Authority the interests of the public in the district in which it operates.
However, if it is just a matter of not liking the doctor, or of finding his attitude casual, there would be no point in exposing your elderly parent to the trauma of a ‘post-mortem’ on the death of their doctor/patient relationship.
The main thing to aim for is simply a change of doctor as soon as possible.
In the meantime, until this can be achieved, if you are worried that your parent is not receiving proper medical attention you should start to make a polite nuisance of yourself by frequent visits to the surgery to impress upon the doctor the fact that you consider there is real cause for concern about the state of her health and ask if he could arrange for a ‘second opinion’.
Very few doctors will resist constant requests for this from close relatives.
Fortunately most old people do get a satisfactory service from  their general practitioner, finding that he will go to great trouble to see that they get all the medical and social help that is available to them.
This can include district home nurses if the need arises, the vital service of chiropody and even a visit from a National Health Service dentist in certain circumstances if they are ill and housebound.
He will also be in touch with all the local voluntary services for the elderly and disabled, whose help he can raise.
Most important of all, he will have good liaison with the local social services department, who can draw all the threads together and link his elderly patients with the organisations that can best meet their needs.
Regular visits from a social worker can be of immense value to old people living alone, particularly if their family lives some distance away and cannot do all that they would wish for them.
The social worker will be like a skilled ‘friend’ to them, who can help them in many areas of their life, perhaps by suggesting ways of overcoming loneliness by putting them in contact with the type of activity, club, Day Centre or workshop that would interest them, and arranging suitable transport for this; or, if they are not particularly keen on group social activities, sometimes by finding individual volunteers to visit them and take them out; although it should be remembered that no social worker or voluntary visitor can ever be a real substitute for care from their own family.
The social worker can, also, in co-operation with the social services occupational therapist and physiotherapist, arrange for them to be supplied with any special aids they need for safety and mobility, and adaptations to their home.
Elderly people can turn to the social worker as well for advice on their financial problems and welfare rights.
The social worker can give them emotional support too, strengthening any network of support that already exists from relatives, friends and neighbours, or trying to form one for them if they are in a position of isolation.
The modern social worker's role is an enabling one, helping elderly people to make the best use of their own inner resources as well as the many social services available, and to retain some independence for as long as possible.
Elderly people and their families who wish to ‘go it alone, so  far as obtaining outside help is concerned are, of course, quite at liberty to do so, and four of the large organisations who can give advice on a great variety of problems are:
The National Council of Social Service, 26, Bedford Square, London WC1B 3HU.
Age Concern, 60, Pitcairn Road, Mitcham, Surrey CR4 3LL.
The National Association of Citizens’ Advice Bureaux, 26 Bedford Square, London WC1B 3HU.
Help The Aged, 8–10, Denman Street, London W1A 2AP.
All these agencies have local offices in many areas of the country, the addresses of which can be found in the telephone directory or the local public library.
There are many other groups and councils which provide services and information for elderly people throughout the country.
Details of their activities can be found in the Social Services Year Book in public libraries.
Reliable young people who belong to local groups of Community Service Volunteers can often also be very helpful to elderly people who have no one to assist them with gardening, heavy house-cleaning and decorating.
A phone call to the local authority social services department should produce the right contacts for this, if there is such a group functioning near them.
Errands
Many elderly housebound people living alone feel the loss of their independence very keenly and fear becoming a burden to others.
Some of them are reluctant to ask visiting relatives, who may already be doing shopping for them, to run extra errands, such as taking prescriptions to the chemist or clothes to the launderette or dry cleaners, changing their library books and collecting their pension; so it is always as well to check to make sure that you are meeting these needs, or arranging for someone else to do so.
Diet
Cooking for one can sometimes be a dreary business, and many elderly people on their own do not eat the right types of food to maintain health.
If they are frail or disabled and housebound they often become members of the tea-toast-and-tinned-soup brigade, and develop various kinds of vitamin-deficiency diseases.
If you find this happening to your elderly parent, try to help her to reorganise her eating habits.
This is never easy, and she will only respond if she feels that your suggestions spring from real affection and concern for her and are not just an attempt to dominate or to ‘bully’ her into a new regime.
A change in diet, like any other change in the lives of the elderly, has to be introduced gradually to succeed.
Sometimes the Women's Royal Voluntary Service ‘Meals-on-wheels’ service can help if old people cannot prepare food for themselves and are unable to get to one of the many luncheon clubs they run.
A good hot meal is delivered to their home (the number of meals per week depending on the staff and resources in each area) and a modest charge is made for them.
They should eat a proper breakfast and supper as well, though, since the meals have to be kept hot en route to the recipients and some of their original vitamin content can be lost.
If the frail or housebound are to eat properly, it is essential to see that they have help with their shopping, for carrying or pushing heavy baskets soon becomes an impossibility and very few shops now deliver goods.
Once that problem is solved, the next hurdle is to put forward some practical suggestions on how they might improve their diet.
These should be few and simple, and must certainly not involve them in any anxiety, or a sharp increase in effort or expenditure.
A plan that sometimes works very well — after their kitchen equipment (which should include a refrigerator) has been checked — is to start them off with a ‘gift’ for their larder of a small box-full of a variety of inexpensive sauces, seasonings and flavourings, which can be used to add interest to very simple meals.
These can be packed, almost as an afterthought, beneath a nicely arranged selection of fresh fruit, which is presented ostensibly as the main part of the gift.
These will probably be things that they would  have kept as a matter of course in their store cupboard in earlier days, but have gradually dropped off their shopping list as they grew older and only had themselves to cook for; so there is no question of giving them new ideas —only trying to revive old ones, which may tempt them to prepare more varied and nourishing meals to achieve a balanced diet.
The delicious and time-consuming dishes and sauces they used to make may no longer be possible for them, for many reasons, so there should be no hesitation in trying to interest them in some of the tinned and packet products which may be just as good for them if fresh milk has to be added.
Unless your elderly parent is known to be both very slow to take offence, and also to be a great lover of ‘lists’ for everything in life, it would be useless and irritating to her to be presented with a series of sensible menus to follow.
But if you are tactful in your approach in this touchy area, you may be able, slowly and Patiently, to build up for her a picture of a sample programme of meals for a seven-day period that would be low in cost and effort but reasonably tasty and nutritionally adequate.
Ideas for this may be found in Chapter 4.
A firm, but not frightening, explanation of what dietary deficiency can do to the health of old people can often work wonders in stirring them into action, too.
Another point worth remembering is that it is important to make sure that your parent's larder is well stocked with the right kind of non-perishable foods to deal with any emergency such as extreme weather conditions, or times when you may be unable to visit her because of illness or holidays, unless a neighbour is doing her shopping for her.
You should also make certain that she has a good tin-opener which she can use without difficulty.
Financial problems
Some elderly people who are living on reduced incomes have good reason to worry about money, particularly when they live alone.
But even those who are reasonably secure financially often experience more anxiety over money matters in old age than at any other time in their life.
They feel that the ‘rainy day’ for which they have worked and saved for so long has now arrived, and they fear that they may, at any time, have to dip into whatever  nest-egg they have tucked away for emergencies.
Retaining this nest-egg of savings untouched, however small it is, is of the greatest importance to the elderly.
Many have a dread of something happening that will plunge them suddenly into a situation of near-poverty, and a few also unconsciously use their financial problems as pegs on which to hang their much deeper fears concerning their health and their future, which they may find hard to face.
In all this, as in everything else in their lives, you can help them best by listening with patience and sympathy, never dismissing their anxieties — however unreasonable they may seem to be — simply by telling them not to worry because you will always see that they are all right.
This can be comforting to them to some extent, but what they really want to hear is that you will not only see that they are cared for properly for the rest of their days, but that you will help them to remain in control of their own finances and to be as independent as possible.
The next step is to ensure that they are receiving all the State benefits to which they are entitled (a subject we shall be examining in more detail later in Chapter 5) and that any capital they have is being invested wisely and safely.
Communication
To be alone is one thing, but to be alone and to have no means at all of shattering the shell of silence around you to summon the comforting sound of a human voice is quite another.
To have no line of communication to your own kind available can turn a tolerable solitude into a state of intolerable isolation; and yet thousands of elderly people, who live on their own and are too frail to go out, are in this position.
Fortunately, many of them know that their relatives and friends will be calling in to see them from time to time; but ‘from time to time ’ does not take care of those long days and nights in between , when, apart from their often desperate need for company, they feel frighteningly cut off from the world of people who would come to their aid at once if they fell ill, if only they had the means of contacting them.
Of course, there is always the milkman: one of society's front-line social workers, who has saved the lives of countless elderly  people by noticing that there is something amiss and alerting neighbours or the police.
Sometimes his willingness to raise the alarm is literally the only thing that stands between an old person and the possibility of a lonely and lingering death following a fall or sudden illness.
One would think that an old person would have to be living in an isolated cottage, in the heart of the countryside, to be so out of touch with the world; but sadly we know from the frequent reports in the newspapers that such tragic loneliness can exist right in the heart of our towns and cities, and that the old have sometimes remained undiscovered for weeks and months after they have died in their own homes.
Obviously one of the most important lines of communication for the elderly is the telephone.
If they cannot afford to have one installed, this should be regarded as a first priority and paid for by their children if they can afford it, which is often quite possible if there is a willingness on their part to make some small economy in their own spending each month.
However, if your elderly parent has no telephone and neither of you can pay for one, you should contact the local authority social services department, who are empowered to provide assistance towards the cost or, in some cases, free telephones for disabled housebound elderly people and others, under the Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act 1970, although the extent of need is determined by the local authority in the light of resources.
This, in reality, may mean very long delays before an instrument is installed, if at all.
All social services departments are being hit by inflation and are short of cash and staff with which to meet the many urgent requests for help from all sections of the community.
Most of them do all they can for the elderly with their limited resources, but if your parent is badly in need of a telephone and there is no way of your managing to install it for her, you should bring every possible pressure to bear to produce some speedy action on his or her behalf; for sudden illness, and the need for medical attention, does not wait for lengthy negotiations and committee work to rumble on indefinitely before it puts in an appearance.With very few exceptions, blaming individual social workers for delay in providing any particular service is usually an unfair and useless exercise, for they are only part of a large organisation and if things  go wrong an approach to the local Director of Social Services is the best course of action.
The bedside table is usually the best place for the telephone if the bedroom is properly heated.
An extension in the living room is useful too, but an expensive extra.
When a telephone is installed, it is possible to have a very long flex put on for very little extra cost, and it can then be carried to any room, but you should consider the advantages and disadvantages of this carefully before coming to a decision to have it done, as it has been known to be the cause of accidents to some old people.
If they are arthritic, their sight is poor, or they are subject to dizzy spells they may trip over the flex.
Also many frail but not necessarily disabled elderly people feel the need to steady themselves by touching various pieces of furniture with one hand as they move around their homes, and for them, carrying a telephone and manoeuvring the flex from one room to another may have its hazards.
For the younger and fitter elderly person, though, the long flex is a very good idea.
Telephoning the elderly who live alone needs even more care and tact than talking with them in the course of a visit.
To you, the phone call may be just one of many activities packed into a busy day; whereas to them it might be the main event.
When you replace the receiver after calling them, you get caught up at once by all the other pressing demands on your time, while they, in some cases, may be left sitting in a silent room, turning over everything you have said, and sifting it eagerly for confirmation of your real affection and concern for them.
The old and lonely are very vulnerable, and if you have sounded detached, preoccupied, or hurried during the conversation they can easily feel hurt and rejected; and that hurt can be like an emotional graze that will remain painful until you are able to see them again and heal it.
The most welcome caller is not the one who rings up with a carefully arranged bouquet of words delivered ‘at the double’; it is the one who calls to enquire, to listen, and to sympathise when necessary, leaving the elderly person feeling warmed and cared for.
There is a tendency of course for some old people to expect to have long telephone calls of even an hour or more with their 
children at very inconvenient times, both at home and at their place of work, and this can be a big problem.
If your elderly parent is in the habit of doing this, the only way around it is to tell her quite frankly, as kindly as possible (even at the risk of giving some offence), that there are certain times of the day when it is very difficult for you to make or receive phone calls except in an emergency.
So far as shortening or terminating a conversation is concerned, your ability to do this without upsetting her will depend very much on both your personalities, the warmth of your relationship, and the extent of her tolerance and sense of humour.
One woman with this problem, whose rather self-absorbed elderly mother used to keep her on the telephone for hours with doom-laden conversations, solved it by telling her that she had developed migraine which was always triggered off by holding a phone to her ear for more than a quarter of an hour at a time!
Another, a business woman, often under considerable pressure, managed to come to an arrangement with her voluble but good-humoured mother, that she could terminate any of their telephone conversations speedily if necessary, without giving offence, simply by saying, ‘Well, I'm afraid it's all action stations here now, so I'll have to say goodbye’; and it worked remarkably well.
She had found a good quick way of conveying the fact that something had arisen suddenly at her end that must claim her immediate attention; a summons to go to the boss s office, the arrival of someone with whom she had an appointment, or letters to be signed to catch the afternoon post.
Sometimes, of course, all that had arisen was a lump of anxiety in her throat at being interrupted for so long in the middle of work which required a high degree of concentration and often had to be done to a deadline.
Her mother never knew this, though, and because she had agreed to accept that the words ‘action stations’ meant that there was an urgent and valid reason for the conversation to be terminated she felt no sense of rejection.
This arrangement was kept going very nicely by her daughter (who had a real affection for her) reminding her occasionally that although she sometimes had to cut their conversations short, she never cut her out of her thoughts when she put the phone down.
Visits from a local authority social worker can also do much to  open up other lines of communication for the old and lonely; and it can be helpful too for any elderly person who is housebound and not within easy calling or tapping distance of her neighbours, to have a large clear HELP notice to put in her window, and a loud bell to ring in an emergency if there is no telephone.
The elderly and their animals
The company of a dog or cat can mean more to an elderly person than perhaps we can possibly imagine.
It may be a poor substitute for human companionship, but the fact that it is a living creature who needs her and responds to her affectionate care brings a great deal of pleasure and interest into her life.
Owning an animal also makes it easier for her to make new friends and contacts, particularly children.
Many elderly people become so deeply attached to their animals, however, that when they lose them they go through a very real and depressing bereavement experience; so every effort should be made to help them to keep their animals properly fed, groomed and exercised when they begin to find this difficult to cope with themselves.
Improvements and alterations to the home
It is rare to find an elderly person's home that could not be made much more comfortable, convenient and secure for her by a few carefully planned improvements and adaptations.
The extent of the work that could be undertaken would depend not only upon her willingness to consider it, but also on the finance available from the elderly person herself, her family, or the local authority, who are able to make grants for this purpose in suitable cases.
In order to avoid disappointment and the frustration of delays, it should be clearly understood from the outset that obtaining grants from local authorities is by no means an overnight business.
Many conditions have to be fulfilled and eligibility established, which can take a considerable time; so if you can improve the living conditions of your elderly parent yourself, without undue hardship, you would be well advised to do so.
If, however you are going to help her to seek a grant for home improvements, a visit to the local authority environmental health department can be useful, as you and she can receive there an explanation of all  the different forms which may need to be completed, and your queries can be answered.
A Department of the Environment leaflet called Your Guide to House Renovation Grants can also be obtained from the local council offices, or Citizens' Advice Bureau.
This should be read carefully before making an application, and no work should be started until an application for a grant has been approved.
Local authority grants for improving homes to a good standard are at the authority's discretion, but houses built after 1961 are not normally considered unless the applicant is disabled.
The applicant must be a freeholder or have a lease with five years or more to run, and will be required to sign a form to say that she intends to live in that dwelling as her only or main place of residence for at least five years after the work has been completed.
This does not mean that the applicant cannot let the house, but if she sells it, or simply uses it as a second home, she may have to pay back the whole or part of the grant with interest.
Usually the grant is paid to the applicant when the work is finished to the satisfaction of the council's inspector, but sometimes it is agreed that the council will pay for it in instalments.
Occasionally the local authority will be willing to do the work and then charge the applicant for the cost of it, less the amount of the grant.
Another point to be taken into consideration is that grants are only made to applicants whose homes are below a certain rateable value, which varies in different areas of the country, and that, when the work is completed, the home must be regarded as a suitable dwelling for occupation for at least another thirty years.
The types of work for which grants may be given are: the provision of a damp-proofing course, dealing with dry or wet rot, repairs or renewal of faulty floors, ceilings or roof, installing a hot and cold water supply, adding or installing a bathroom if one does not exist in the house, installing an inside lavatory with proper drainage, extending a very small kitchen, improving the heating system (with in some cases a grant towards the cost of installing central heating), and roof insulation.
Improvement grants may also be given towards the conversion of a house into flats.
Intermediate grants may be given on which there is no rateable  value restriction, for any missing standard basic amenities such as a bath, shower, wash-basin, lavatory, sink and hot and cold water supply.
Grants of any kind are usually only given for a proportion of the cost of the work to be done, but when necessary, local authorities can make loans for the balance, on which interest has to be paid.
If an old person is also disabled and requires special adaptations or improvements to her home, careful study of a booklet entitled Housing Grants and Allowances for Disabled People (from The Central Council for the Disabled, 34 Eccleston Square, London SW1V 1PE) can be very helpful, as it goes into great detail on the subject.
But anyone wishing to apply for any type of house renovation grant should be sure to consult the local council at the outset for advice.
It is clear, though, that if you decide to help your elderly parent or parents to apply for local authority grants, you are probably going to need to have great determination and infinite patience, and in the meantime there is a great deal you could do yourself to improve their comfort and living conditions in small but important ways.
Remembering that the elderly often become quite anxious and upset at the prospect of any change or disturbance of their normal routine, however pleasing the end-result promises to be, you will need to take anything they may regard as an ‘upheaval’ very slowly.
In fact, before you even begin to discuss the possibilities, it will be better to make a private room-by-room list of things that might be done to increase their comfort and safety.
Then you can begin to introduce new ideas gradually, one by one, being willing at the same time to take ‘no’ for an answer if they are definitely opposed to change of any kind, since this is their right and must be respected.
Tactful handling of the matter rarely provokes outright opposition, though, particularly when their advice is sought, their choices accepted all along the line, and assurances given that any alterations will be carried out quietly, with a minimum of fuss and disruption.
The main areas for consideration should be: security measures against intruders, insulation, heating, lighting, safety of floor  coverings, the easy moving of furniture, improvements and adaptations to the kitchen, improvements and adaptations to the bathroom and lavatory, the safety of halls and stairways, the safety and functioning of all equipment, improvement in garden planning.
This could form the basis for a more detailed check-list which might read as follows:
SECURITY MEASURES AGAINST INTRUDERS
Front and back doors should be of heavy quality.
Both fitted with a five-lever mortice dead-lock, a bolt at the top and three-quarters of the way down, a strong door-chain and a ‘visitor viewer’ spy-hole.
All windows should be fitted with locks.
INSULATION
Homes, like teapots, can be kept much warmer by the addition of a ‘cosy’ and heating bills can be greatly reduced by installing efficient insulation.
A good deal of heat is lost through the roof of a house, a bungalow, or a top flat in a block, so this should be insulated by a layer of not less than three inches of insulating material.
This can be done by a handyman, although if the roof is a flat one and not already insulated, special insulating tiles should be fixed inside, which will usually need to be done by a professional.
A thick lagging jacket should be put on to the hot water tank.
The thin, cheaper ones are a poor economy.
Thick fitted carpets with a good underlay are ideal, but if these cannot be afforded, plenty of newspaper under the carpet will help to insulate the floors.
Unused fireplaces should be blocked off, but the material used must have a number of good sized holes in it for ventilation.
Copper or plastic draught-strip (which requires no maintenance) should be fixed permanently round the front and back doors and, if necessary, plastic foam strips around draughty windows.
Heavy lined curtains are also an excellent way of retaining heat in a room, although double-glazing is the most effective way of cutting out draughts.
It also reduces a certain amount of heat loss, as well as cutting down traffic noise.
Unless you intend to fit double-glazing yourself (and even ‘Cling-film’ can be very effective), it is best to get brochures and free estimates from several of the largest and longest-established firms in this field before making any decision, as there are numerous small firms selling sub-standard products at high prices.
Small reliable local firms whose work you may have seen in other people's homes are of course worth considering.
Some of the best-known big firms have special discount offers for those who are willing to purchase their double-glazing during the summer months.
Wall cavity insulation can also reduce heat loss and could be considered, but only after expert advice has first been taken from an independent builder or surveyor as to the suitability for the type of home occupied by your elderly parent.
Then, if you decide that it would be a good idea, here again it is safer to approach several of the largest firms for free estimates.
HEATING
Central heating which provides safe, controllable background heat, plus a well guarded electric or gas fire which gives some form of instant extra heat when required is ideal if it can be afforded.
If central heating is to be newly installed, it should be borne in mind that people who have two different forms of heating are at an advantage during a power failure or power cut if there is a strike, also that gas- or oil-fired central heating depend upon an electric pump.
Some elderly people still prefer (or have to make do with) an open fire, but this often presents problems if they have no one to carry coal for them and help to clear out the grate if it is of the old-fashioned type.
If an open fire is to be used, you should see that it has a good fire-guard.
By law, all gas and electric fires have now to be fitted with a fire-guard by the manufacturers, and when helping an elderly Person to choose one it is wise to encourage her to buy one with the on/off control switch on the top or high up on the side, to avoid unnecessary bending.
Paraffin oil heaters, although now much improved in design for safety and ease of filling, can be a hazard for some of the frail elderly, and should not be used by them if any other form of heating is available.
It is important for the elderly to have heating in their bedroom  because of the risk of hypothermia, and it is also essential to make sure that they are living in a home that is well ventilated as well as warm.
There must be some movement of fresh air for their health's sake and to prevent condensation, which can create a damp atmosphere and in some cases wall fungus.
LIGHTING
Poor lighting is poor planning when it leads to accidents.
Halls and stairways in particular should be well lit; and these are just the areas in which many old people feel that they should economise.
Each room should have a centre light which can be switched on before entering it, as well as table lamps, and there should be no trailing wires or flex that the elderly person could trip over.
Power points should be raised to waist-level by a qualified electrician, as this makes plugging in lamps, vacuum cleaner and other equipment much easier.
Finally, an emergency lighting kit should always be ready in an accessible place, in case of a sudden power failure.
This should include a torch (the batteries of which should be checked regularly for deterioration), a box of nightlights, which are safer for the elderly than candles, and a box of safety matches.
SAFETY OF FLOOR COVERINGS
Serious accidents amongst elderly people in the home are often caused by worn carpets or small rugs or mats.
Many of them wear slippers around the house, and if they tend to shuffle a little as their joints stiffen, rugs become dangerous obstacles to their safe movement from room to room.
Loose or worn stair carpets are another common cause of falls.
If the money is available fitted carpets are a good investment, particularly those that are patterned in a mid-shade of the colour most favoured by the elderly person, as this will not show either marks or dust so much as a plain light- or dark-coloured carpet does.
Their other advantages are warmth and ease of cleaning with a carpet sweeper or vacuum cleaner.
Kitchen, bathroom and lavatory floors should be covered with one of the easily cleaned vinyl-type floor coverings, preferably  patterned in a mid-shade of the chosen colour.
Fitted carpets, though warm, are not a good idea for the bathroom and lavatory of an elderly person who may have minor ‘mishaps’ and spillages which they cannot easily deal with as they advance into old age.
THE EASY MOVING OF FURNITURE
The elderly heart and spine should never be subjected to the tremendous effort required to move heavy furniture and equipment in order to clean under and behind them.
Mini-castors, which can be bought at all good hardware stores, should be fitted to every piece of furniture that will take them except chairs, which can be fitted with small metal domes so that they slide gently and slowly.
Sets of bars and rollers can be bought from hardware stores for the heaviest furniture and kitchen equipment.
IMPROVEMENTS AND ADAPTATIONS IN THE KITCHEN
Kitchen equipment — cooker, refrigerator, washing-machine and spin-drier — should all be checked to see that they are functioning well and safely.
Many elderly people who suffer from backache and stiff joints find bending and stretching difficult, so it is important that the cooker, sink and work-tops should be at the correct height for them, and that cupboards and larder shelves that are in daily use should not be too high or too low for them to reach without strain.
The use of steps or step-stools by elderly people living alone is dangerous and should be discouraged if possible, as their grip and balance are often impaired; but a one-step, non-slip footstool, with four legs and a chrome-plated tubular steel handrail at the front to hold on to, is very safe and stable.
It can also be very useful for an elderly person to keep an aid called a ‘helping hand’(long length) in the kitchen.
This is a stick-like instrument, light in weight, with an end designed to pick up light objects and a magnet for very small objects as well.
It will also lightly grip a cleaning cloth for wiping out difficult corners in the kitchen or other rooms.
To have one standing in the corner of every room in the house is a tremendous help to an old person who cannot bend; although, of course, one will suffice, as it can be carried  from one room to another when it is needed.
(Details of these aids will be found in Chapter 12.)
Kitchen curtains which need to be washed fairly frequently can often be hard for an elderly person to reach to take down and to re-hang; so one of the easily wiped vinyl-coated roller blinds is an excellent idea.
They can be bought at most large hardware stores and fixed by a handyman.
If they are purchased through a large department store, the shop will send an expert to fix them for a small extra charge.
The kitchen should be well ventilated, and an extractor fan is an efficient way of doing this without creating draughts.
IMPROVEMENTS AND ADAPTATIONS IN THE BATHROOM AND LAVATORY
For the elderly who have some form of infirmity, the normal daily routine of keeping the body clean and disposing of its waste products can be exhausting, hazardous, and, in some cases even painful when the back must be bent and the limbs slowly manipulated into the appropriate positions to get in and out of the bath, and down and up from the lavatory seat.
There are many ways of solving these problems for them, though, by quite a small initial outlay (which the local authority social services department may meet in some cases).
A good non-slip rubber bathmat with suction caps underneath it is the first essential.
A bath safety-rail made of chromium-plated tubular steel makes getting in and out of the bath much easier and safer; and a bath seat with a back support eliminates the need to sit right down in the bath (see Chapter 12).
Chromium-plated hand-grips which are an integral part of some modern baths also help the elderly to rise more easily.
For those who cannot get down into a bath at all(as is the case with many back-sufferers and arthritics), a shower fitment at one end of the bath, with nylon shower-proof curtains to pull round inside the bath, is one of the best answers.
A shower that is thermostatically controlled is ideal, but the reliable and efficient ones can be expensive to buy and to install, and a mixer system working off one large hot and cold mixer with two tap controls can be very satisfactory for all but the very severely disabled.
These are adjusted by the user to obtain a flow of water at the desired heat before stepping into the bath, and the shower can be started as soon as the curtains are pulled round.
A separate shower cabinet may be more convenient to step into for those with much arthritis in the hip and knee joints, but the cabinets of superior quality, which are not too small, are the only ones really worth considering for a disabled person, and they are fairly expensive.
Here again, if any particular type of equipment is absolutely essential in the bathroom, and finance is a problem, the social services department of the local authority may be able to help, and it is worth approaching them before anything is purchased or installed.
Some old people living alone, who are very frail, are unable to expend all the energy required to take a bath or shower unattended every day, and if their standards of personal hygiene have always been good this can be a real worry to them.
Their problem can be partly solved by the use of a portable plastic bidet that can be filled at the washbasin, placed over the lavatory and emptied into it after use (see Chapter 12).
The feet can be washed in an oblong, straight-sided plastic household bucket filled with about six inches of warm water and a few drops of mild disinfectant, while sitting on a bathroom stool (or using the lavatory as a seat).
An Addis plastic linen-box with solid sides, and a lid with top ventilation, in which to store both bucket and bidet out of sight, can be kept in the bathroom.
The bidet can be ordered through any local chemist selling medical and nursing aids and the plastic bucket can, of course, be purchased from a hardware store.
If the lavatory is too low for an elderly person, a raised polypropylene toilet seat which fits over it, but is easy to remove and to wash, can be very useful, and a chromium-plated hand-grip fixed very securely to the wall at the side of the lavatory can also be helpful.
(Further details of these and other aids will be found in Chapter 12).
THE SAFETY OF HALLS AND STAIRWAYS
Having accepted the fact that good lighting, unworn carpeting (fitted if possible) or non-slip vinyl floor-covering and an absence  of rugs and odd mats is essential, a check should be made on the positioning and stability of the handrail the elderly person will depend upon for going up and down stairs.
The hall should have only a minimum of furniture in it, and nothing too near to the bottom of the stairs which could increase her injuries if she fell.
THE SAFETY AND FUNCTIONING OF ALL EQUIPMENT
All gas and electrical equipment and appliances, wiring, lamp holders, power points and plugs, and particularly electric blankets should be checked for safety and efficiency, and taps, pipes and tanks should be looked at also to see if they are in need of attention.
IMPROVEMENT IN GARDEN PLANNING
If the upkeep of a garden is getting too much for an elderly person, and finance and willing helpers can be found, a suggestion that it should be paved, with a few easily managed tubs of flowers and shrubs at a convenient height, is often an acceptable idea.
Otherwise arrangements can sometimes be made with a reliable local resident, who has no garden of his own, to grow flowers and vegetables in it and share the produce with her.
This can work very well in many instances, for it is not only means a supply of fresh vegetables, but a friendly link with the family of the man growing them.
Preparation for possible urgent admission to hospital
If sudden illness overtakes an elderly person living alone and she needs to be admitted to hospital, she sometimes becomes very agitated and distressed.
This can be reduced a little if she goes in with all she needs for the first few days: a clean dressing-gown, slippers, a change of night clothes and bedjacket and all the toilet articles and other small items she is likely to want.
This avoids the extra worry of having to give friends or relatives last-minute instructions about where to find everything in a hurry.
A sensible way for her to prepare for such an eventuality is to keep a small case already packed and labelled with her name and address in her wardrobe or in a corner of her bedroom where it can be got at easily (see Chapter 13).
This has to be suggested to her  with some care, without giving her the impression that you think her sudden collapse into illness is in any way imminent or inevitable; and it should not be suggested at all if it is felt that it might upset or frighten her.
Fortunately most old people are all in favour of precautions of any kind, and if, in addition, you can tell her truthfully that you have just such a ‘hospital case’ packed for yourself at home, for an emergency, she will probably go along with the idea very willingly.
Most people try to do all they can to help and support their elderly parents and other relatives who live alone.
If they are what one might call the ‘young’ elderly, who are still keeping afloat very happily in the mainstream of life and enjoying their independence, the problems are few.
In fact, they may be helping you with yours!
But for those in the older age-groups, whose health and strength may be failing, things are very different.
Unless they, and you, wish to join forces under the same roof, you may often be very conscious that their biggest problem, that of loneliness, is beyond your reach.
You come and go with your offerings of help and affection, knowing that what they really need is a constant presence, and sometimes this knowledge can be as painful for you as it is for them.
If you know they have always enjoyed close companionship until they finally had to live alone, it is not difficult to imagine what it must be like for them to have no one to share their life with any longer, and no hand to hold as their step becomes less sure.
Yet many of them come to terms with it magnificently, trying so hard not to add their pain to that of their children, in a situation that sometimes neither of them can alter.
Nutrition
It is not the intention here to go into great detail on the subject of nutrition, but rather to give a simple guide that may be useful to those who want to make sure that the elderly parent in their care is being properly nourished.
An adequate, well-balanced diet is one of the most important factors in the maintenance of health in older people, and the lack of it is responsible for many preventable illnesses.
Many more of the elderly population are under-nourished than their relatives realise, and there are several reasons for this:
The ageing body does not absorb and distribute food as efficiently as it used to do.
In some cases, a low income is not keeping pace with the rising cost of food.
Physical disability makes shopping difficult, and sometimes forces the elderly to rely entirely on the good but fairly limited range of foods that can be delivered to their door by the milkman.
Sometimes there is apathy and lack of incentive to prepare varied meals to be eaten alone, particularly when age has blunted the taste-buds.
Some old people have ill-fitting dentures which make them change to a ‘soft’ diet of bread, jam, cakes, biscuits, tinned puddings, and other convenience foods which do not supply all their dietary requirements.
Depression, which is a very common cause of loss of appetite, often reduces old people who are living alone to a tea-and-toast-type diet, on which they soon become ill.
The basic constituents of food
The basic constituents of food: water, proteins, carbohydrates, fats, minerals and vitamins, all play an important part in the ‘upkeep’ of the body and we should make very sure that our elderly relatives are not missing out on any of them in their diet.
PROTEINS
Protein is found mainly in meat, fish, chicken, rabbit, cheese, eggs, dried beans, peas and lentils, baked beans and milk, and in smaller quantities in other types of food.
An elderly person should try to eat approximately half a pound of protein in some form in her diet every day.
This could be made up, for example, of 4 oz. of lean meat, fish, chicken or rabbit, plus 2 oz. of cheese and one pint of milk OR 3 oz. of cheese, 3 oz. of beans, one egg and one pint of milk.
CARBOHYDRATES
Carbohydrates are found in flour, bread, cereals, cakes, biscuits and most sugary foods.
Since these are fairly cheap to buy and easy to prepare, the elderly rarely go short of them.
The problem more often is to see that they do not come to rely upon them almost exclusively, as a high intake of carbohydrates can lead to obesity.
FATS
Fats exist in certain quantities in many of the foods normally eaten by the elderly, apart from the obvious ones of butter, margarine, milk and cheese, so most old people on a varied diet are consuming adequate amounts.
MINERALS
Iron is the most important mineral to be concerned about in an elderly person's diet.
It is found mainly in meat, eggs and vegetables.
Some elderly people suffer from iron deficiency due to a very slight, and sometimes unrecognisable, blood loss from such conditions as piles, diverticulitis, hiatus hernia — and occasionally bleeding from the stomach, if they have been taking aspirin for rheumatism daily for long periods, and this may cause anaemia.
Calcium, which is found in cheese and milk, is also vital for an elderly person, for a lack of it can cause bone troubles and a type of ‘old age rickets’, and this can be one of the causes of severe backache in later life.
VITAMINS
Vitamin A This vitamin is found in fruit, lettuce, carrots and green vegetables.
Vitamin B Vitamins of the B complex are found in cheese, fish, eggs, wheat-germ, meat, liver, lentils, beans and peas.
Vitamin C This vitamin is present in fresh fruit, particularly orange and grapefruit, and vegetables, including new potatoes, but it can be rendered useless by long storage or over-cooking.
It should be taken in some form every day.
Vitamin D This vitamin is found in margarine and butter (although margarine is a richer source).
It is also present in milk and eggs, and the body takes it in from exposure to sunshine as well, which is one reason why it is so important for the elderly to take outdoor exercise.
Vitamin deficiency Vitamin deficiency can only be properly diagnosed and treated by a doctor, but there are certain fairly obvious signs which should be noted, bearing in mind that an old person who is obese can still be suffering from malnutrition and vitamin deficiency through eating the wrong kinds of food.
The corners of the mouth may be cracked and sore and the tongue unusually red.
There may be diarrhoea, tingling in the feet and hands, swelling of the abdomen, legs and ankles, and breathlessness.
Small bruises may appear for no apparent reason under the skin, and the skin itself can become hard and have a tendency to crack.
There is no need to become over-anxious about the subject of diet for the elderly.We simply need to keep a careful eye on  things, to see that they are eating a good variety of food which includes plenty of protein, dairy products and fresh fruit and vegetables, together with some roughage, which is often best taken in the form of a bran cereal, and which will, in many cases, completely eliminate the problem of constipation and ease that of piles.
Sometimes, if elderly relatives are living at a distance, it is not possible to be certain, in spite of advice from us, and help from neighbours with the shopping, that they are eating properly, but if they can only be persuaded to drink a pint of milk every day and eat some fresh citrus fruit, wholemeal bread, cheese or eggs, margarine or butter and a bowl of bran cereal, we shall know that they cannot come to any serious harm from a dietary point of view, even though a much more varied diet would be more suitable.
They should be reminded too that canned baked beans in tomato sauce are highly nutritious and can be a quick and convenient addition to many main meals or can even make quite a good meal on their own if they are served on buttered toast.
The question of diet generally for elderly people has already been mentioned in Chapter 3, and all who are trying to ensure that an elderly parent (particularly one who is living alone) is eating sensibly know what a difficult problem this is.
Most of them have managed their own homes and catered for their families efficiently for many years, and even elderly men know a little more about cooking than their fathers did.
Understandably, women in particular resent advice on how to feed themselves in their old age; but there are some women (and even more men) who will welcome help in this respect if it is given tactfully.
They want to feel that they are eating the kind of food which will add to the chances of their remaining in good health, but often they cannot see how they can do so if their income has been drastically reduced.
Also many of them have little inclination to cook much for themselves when they usually have to eat alone, and they prefer to use the smallest possible number of cooking utensils, pans and dishes which have to be washed up afterwards.
Bearing all this in mind, it may be helpful to those who are still open to suggestions to try to work out with them some very simple menus for a seven-day period; meals which will suit their pocket, entail little expenditure of energy, but at the same time cover all their basic dietary requirements, and which can be made tasty and interesting by the addition of some of the sauces, seasonings, and flavourings will which you can supply them.
Something along the following lines may be worth considering, and of course many other simple dishes could be introduced according to their taste, provided each day's food is well balanced from the point of view of the nourishment elderly people require.
As well as their daily pint of fresh milk taken in one form or another, if they can be encouraged to cook themselves some fresh green and root vegetables several times a week, so much the better, but these menus are designed primarily for old people who dislike spending much time on the preparation of their food and are unlikely to be persuaded past a certain point of effort.
MONDAY
Breakfast Bowl of cereal (preferably All-Bran for roughage) with milk.
Wholemeal toast with Flora margarine or butter and marmalade or honey.
Tea or coffee.
Lunch Two slices of toasted wholemeal bread spread thinly with Flora margarine and topped with 2 oz. grated cheddar cheese.
Browned under the grill and served with mustard, chutney, or a bottled brown or tomato sauce.
Followed by one fresh orange.
Tea or coffee.
Tea/supper Half of an 8-oz. tin of shoulder ham (or corned beef), the other half to be put into the refrigerator for the next day.
Two tomatoes cut in half and sprinkled with a little castor sugar.
Mayonnaise.
Mustard.
Two cream crackers with Flora margarine, followed by one fresh apple diced and eaten with the skin on if possible after it has been well washed.
Tea.
Evening drink Cup of Complan (flavoured or plain), Cocoa, Ovaltine or malted milk.
TUESDAY
Breakfast As Monday.
Lunch Half of the 8-oz. tin of shoulder ham or corned beef left over from Monday.
Lettuce or watercress.
One tomato.
Mayonnaise.
A portion of instant potato (the type with added vitamin  C) creamed with a small knob of Flora margarine and salt and black pepper.
Followed by a small tin of creamed rice (hot or cold) with a teaspoonful of strawberry jam.
Tea or coffee.
Tea/supper Boiled egg with wholemeal bread and margarine or butter.
(It is not necessary to avoid butter completely because of the connection between high levels of cholesterol and heart disease, but merely to cut down on it.)
Fresh grapefruit.
Tea.
Evening drink As Monday.
WEDNESDAY
Breakfast As Monday.
Lunch 8 oz. minced beef cooked slowly and thoroughly in a small saucepan with a level dessertspoonful of dried onion, a little black pepper and a Swiss Knorr beef stock cube, dissolved in a quarter of a pint of hot water from the kettle.
Thicken towards the end of cooking if necessary with plain flour mixed with a little water and a few drops of bottled gravy browning.
Transfer mince to a small warmed ovenproof casserole dish.
Top with instant mashed potato and brown under the grill.
Serve with tomato sauce.
Followed by one fresh orange.
Tea or coffee.
Tea/supper 1 oz. of cheese with lettuce (left over from Tuesday's lunch).
Wholemeal bread with Flora margarine or butter.
Followed by one grated apple.
Tea.
Evening drink As Monday.
THURSDAY
Breakfast As Monday.
Lunch Three pork sausages (out of five bought from a butcher who will sell small quantities.
Cook all five of them and keep two in the refrigerator to have cold for Friday's supper).
Small tin of spaghetti or baked beans in tomato sauce.
Followed by one grated fresh apple topped with a quarter of a pint of vanilla-flavoured custard (make half a pint of custard, adding a little extra sugar and a few drops of vanilla essence, and save half of it in the refrigerator for Friday).
Tea or coffee.
Tea/supper Scrambled egg on wholemeal toast.
One apple, orange, or pear.
Tea.
Evening drink As Monday.
FRIDAY
Breakfast As Monday.
Lunch Small packet of frozen fish fingers (grill for 4–5 minutes each side).
Serve with bottled tartare sauce or a squeeze from a plastic lemon.
Potato crisps or sticks and one slice of wholemeal bread with Flora margarine or butter.
Followed by one fresh orange, peeled, sliced and served topped with a quarter of a pint of vanilla custard (left over from Thursday).
Tea.
Tea/supper Wholemeal bread spread with Flora margarine and a small jar of ham paste and topped with two sliced cold Pork sausages (left over from Thursday) with mustard.
Followed by one fresh apple.
Tea.
Evening drink As Monday.
SATURDAY
Breakfast As Monday.
Lunch Belly of pork.
Four thick slices cooked slowly in the oven in a small covered pyrex casserole with salt and black pepper.
Sage and onion stuffing.
Mix half a packet of stuffing as directed but adding a little extra dried sage and dried onion and a good pinch of salt.
Remove lid from casserole when pork is cooked; grease it lightly with Flora margarine and use it to cook the sage and onion stuffing.
Increase oven heat to crisp the pork and cook the stuffing for about twenty minutes.
Cook a 4-oz. pack of frozen peas or runner beans and serve with an uncooked grated sharp-tasting eating apple to save the trouble of making apple sauce.
Followed by a fresh grapefruit.
Tea or coffee.
Tea/supper Wholemeal bread spread with a small jar of anchovy paste and topped with a chopped hard-boiled egg.
Followed by a sliced banana in banana-flavoured instant whip.
Tea.
Evening drink As Monday.
SUNDAY
Breakfast As Monday.
Lunch Roast leg of chicken.
Parsley and thyme stuffing.
Bread sauce.
Potato crisps.
Small tin of garden peas.
Loosen the skin from the flesh of the chicken by gently inserting a finger between them.
Push slivers of Flora margarine under the skin so that the  flesh is prevented from drying out as it cooks.
Also rub a little Flora margarine over the outside of the skin and sprinkle with salt and pepper.Wrap loosely in foil and place the leg on a flat enamel pie plate and cook in a pre-heated moderately hot oven.
Mix half a packet of parsley and thyme stuffing as directed, but also adding a good squeeze of lemon juice from a plastic lemon and an extra sprinkling of dried thyme.
When the chicken leg is cooked, cook the stuffing by the side of it on the same plate, according to the instructions on the packet.
Ten minutes before the end of the cooking time, open the foil covering the chicken to allow the skin to brown, while you are making a small quantity of (packet) bread sauce in a small saucepan, and heating the tinned peas in another.
Serve with potato crisps.
(In this way, the washing up for this modest roast dinner can be kept down to the absolute minimum.)
Followed by one fresh orange.
Tea or coffee.
Tea/supper 1 oz. of diced cheddar cheese mixed with one diced fresh apple.
Wholemeal bread and Flora margarine or butter.
Tea.
Evening drink As Monday.
Not exactly Cordon bleu!— but easy, adequate, and not too expensive, and no doubt you and your elderly parent would be able between you to work out many alternatives to these suggestions.
If however a special diet has been recommended by the doctor, you should of course see that it is possible for her to adhere strictly to this, and if she is amongst those who enjoy various products from Health Food shops she should not be criticised for having fads.
The only important thing is to see that she is eating wisely.
Make sure, for example, that if she does not eat meat, she gets sufficient iron through other foods such as eggs, lentils and a variety of vegetables, so that anaemia is avoided.
When you are considering the problem of diet for an elderly parent it would also be helpful to have a copy of Easy Cooking for One or Two (published by Penguin), by Louise Davies, who is a dietician.
Elderly people should be invited to eat meals with other members of their family as often as possible, for not only will they enjoy their meals more, but this is a mark of their continuing membership of, and acceptance by, the ‘tribe’.
There are, however, several small points worth remembering when eating either at home or in a restaurant with older people.
Most of them prefer to sit with their backs to the light.
They sometimes have problems with the control of their dentures when eating certain types of food, and some have slight difficulties with swallowing as the muscles get weaker (or if they have at some time suffered a small stroke), so they dislike being watched.
We should also try to eat at their pace, not ours, and not allow them to feel that they are holding us up.
The elderly do not always want to be on the receiving end, and any gift of food they offer us, whether it is a meal or just a pot of home-made jam, should be accepted with appreciation, for all such gifts are a part of the pattern of love in which they still wish to be involved.
Financial problems of the elderly
Money matters  a great deal to the elderly.
They know that it is not as important as good health, a contented mind, or that gift that the poet Ruth Pitter said was the one she would choose, above all others, to bestow upon a child at birth —‘love in old age’.
But money matters because it enables the elderly to continue to retain the power of choice in many areas of their lives, to defend themselves to some extent against the ‘slings and arrows of outrageous fortune’ and to enjoy a well earned retirement with dignity.
Unfortunately, most elderly people have to suffer a considerable drop in their income after retirement, and careful planning and budgeting is required to maintain a reasonable standard of living.
Usually they are quite capable of doing this for themselves, but if your elderly parent turns to you for advice on financial matters your main aims should be: I. To make sure that she is receiving all the State benefits and pensions to which she may be entitled.
2.
To see that she is receiving the correct amount of occupational pension (if any) that is due to her.
3.
To ensure that any capital she may have is being invested wisely.
4.
To see that she is being taxed correctly by the Inland Revenue.
5.
To see that her financial affairs as a whole are being managed properly for her, according to the law, if she is mentally incapable.
The financial problems of the elderly differ from one person to another as widely as do their health problems, so it is not possible to lay down any hard and fast rules, or to produce any magical solutions.
Each case is different, and it will be for you to decide upon what action you should take to try to improve your parent's situation in the light of your knowledge of her circumstances.
Since the rates of State benefits and income from various types of investments change so frequently, there is little point in quoting figures, but it will be important for you to know how to gather the up-to-date, accurate information.
Many people know very little about the benefits that can be claimed by the elderly and those who are looking after them, or the free services to which they are entitled, so they often fail to claim something that is their right.
State pensions and benefits
Anyone who is caring for an elderly mother or father would be well advised to visit the local office of the Department of Health and Social Security and ask for a complete set of leaflets on this subject which will explain what financial help is available, apart from the State Retirement Pension, both for their parent and for themselves.
These should include the following: NP27, ‘Looking after someone at home’.
NI106, ‘Current rates of all benefits’.
SB1, ‘Supplementary benefits.
NI212, ‘Invalid care allowance,.
NI205,, Attendance allowance’.
NI13, ‘Widow's benefits’.
NI9, ‘How a stay in hospital can affect your social security benefit’.
HB1, ‘Help for handicapped people’(which gives detailed information about other benefits and services which may help your elderly parent).
NI211, ‘Mobility allowance,(but this at present is not payable after pension age, i.e. 65 for men, 60 for women), and Ni49, ‘National insurance death grant’.
In these leaflets the benefits available to both men and women are clearly explained.
They can be studied at home and if you feel you need clarification on any of the points in them, the Enquiry Clerk in the same office is available to answer questions and give guidance.
DETAILS OF SOME OF THE STATE BENEFITS OF MAJOR IMPORTANCE TO THE ELDERLY AND THEIR CARING RELATIVES
The supplementary pension A weekly supplement which can be added to the basic State retirement pension for those in financial need (see leaflet SB1).
The supplementary allowance A weekly allowance that can be made to those in financial need who are not in receipt of a State  retirement pension (see leaflet SB1).
All people of pensionable age have a right, under the Supplementary Benefits Act 1966, to a guaranteed income.
This is not an income that allows for any luxuries.
It is simply a figure calculated by the government to meet the basic needs of rent, food, clothing, heating and day-today expenses, plus, when necessary, payments for what are called ‘exceptional needs’, such as the renewal of bedding, furniture or household equipment, and payments for ‘special expenses’, such as extra heating, special diet, or essential domestic help (see leaflet SB1 for details of current scale rates laid down by parliament, and other information).
Although supplementary pensions and allowances ensure that basic needs are met, those who are entirely dependent upon them certainly suffer some degree of hardship compared with the standard of living of the majority of citizens, and strenuous efforts are being made to raise the level of the government's ‘guaranteed income’.
Those whose entitlement is established, however, will find that not only the first few pounds of some other form of income they have may be disregarded, but the value of a house they own or occupy is not counted as part of their income.
Capital of less than £1,250 (and any income it produces) is also ignored when the amount of the supplementary pension or allowance to be granted is worked out by the Department of Health and Social Security.
Many elderly people who are in need fail to apply for a supplementary pension or allowance, because they are inclined to regard it as some kind of charity (a much maligned word)— which of course it is not, and there should be no loss of pride or dignity for those who apply for it.
To do so is simple.
Leaflet SB1, which is obtainable not only from the Department of Health and Social Security but also from the Post Office, incorporates an application form, and there is also an application form in the back of every State retirement pension book.
Applications should be sent to the local office of the Department of Health and Social Security.
The form allows applicants to state their choice between going to the local office of the department for interview, or having one of their officers call on them at home.
A home interview for this is usually preferable and more  convenient for the elderly, as they can feel more comfortable and relaxed in their own surroundings, and there they will be sure to have all the papers connected with their financial affairs to hand.
The purpose of this interview will be to assess the elderly person's financial needs, the income she has from all sources, and her capital (if any), and to establish whether she is entitled to receive a supplementary pension or allowance.
Most elderly people find that the visiting officers are friendly, patient, and helpful, and although it is not necessary for a relative to be present, no objection will be raised to this if the elderly person wishes it.
She will need to have certain documents available for the officer to see, such as a rent book and details of any savings, but she can be sure that the information she gives will be treated in strict confidence.
She will be notified of the decision on her claim as soon as possible, and if by any chance she is not satisfied with it she has the right of appeal to an independent Appeal Tribunal, by writing to the Social Security Office within twenty-one days of its receipt.
If the claim goes through satisfactorily, the supplementary pension or allowance that has been granted can then be drawn weekly at the Post Office.
The Department of Health and Social Security are concerned that all elderly people who are in need should receive the appropriate help to which they are entitled, and the visiting officers are always pleased to explain what other benefits a successful claimant may have automatically, but even if a supplementary pension or allowance is not granted, if their income is below a certain level some of the extra benefits such as free dentures, spectacles, hospital fares, and rate rebates (this last is not usually granted to those on supplementary pensions) may be available to them.
Attendance allowance For full details see leaflet NI205.
Attendance allowance is a tax-free cash benefit for people who are severely disabled physically or mentally and who need a lot of care.
For those who require attendance both by day and night there is a higher rate allowance.
For those who require attendance either by day or night there is a lower rate allowance.
Before the allowance can become payable the requirements must be satisfied for a period of at least six months (this can include periods in hospital).
The medical requirements are:By day : frequent attention throughout the day in connection with bodily functions or continual supervision throughout the day in order to avoid substantial danger to the disabled person or others.
At night : prolonged or repeated attention during the night in connection with bodily functions;or continual supervision throughout the night in order to avoid substantial danger to the disabled person or others.
The higher rate can be paid if one of the day requirements and one of the night requirements are satisfied.
The lower rate can be paid if any one of the requirements is satisfied either by day or at night.
Claims should be made by completing the claim form at the back of leaflet NI205.
If your parent receives this allowance it can only continue for up to four weeks after admission to a National Health Service hospital (unless he or she is a private patient).
No member of the family has to give up work before the allowance can be claimed and this extra income can sometimes enable a caring daughter to continue in her job if it is used to pay for help at home.
Invalid care allowance For full details see leaflet NI212.
Invalid care allowance is for people of working age who cannot work because they are staying at home to care for a severely disabled relative.
The benefit counts as taxable income, but it is not means-tested and there are no National Insurance contribution conditions.
In general, married women cannot qualify for the allowance, but there are some exceptions to this rule, so if in doubt enquire at the Department of Health and Social Security.
The allowance carries with it a Class 1 contribution credit for the recipient's National Insurance record, and if there are serious financial difficulties the recipient may also be entitled to supplementary benefit allowance.
Those who give up their employment to care for a disabled relative may also have their pension rights protected by the Home Responsibilities Protection Regulations which came into effect in April 1978.
Claims should be made by completing the claim form at the back of leaflet NI212.
If you are admitted to hospital for in-patient treatment, your allowance can continue for up to twelve weeks.
If your invalid  parent is admitted, however, and payments of the attendance allowance is withdrawn, your invalid care allowance will have to be withdrawn at the same time, and you should immediately notify the Invalid Care Allowance Unit, Department of Health and Social Security, North Fylde Central Offices, Norcross, Blackpool FY5 3TA.
Benefits affected by admission to hospital For details see leaflet NI9. (f your elderly parent is admitted to hospital or an old people's home under the National Health Service, there may be a reduction in, or a withdrawal of, certain State benefits (but this will not apply if she enters a charitable home or has treatment as a private patient).
It will be very important for you to study the leaflet mentioned above carefully to discover exactly what your parent's position will be, and if you are in any doubt, ask for an interview with the Medical Social Worker at the hospital or see the Enquiry Clerk at the local Social Security Office.
The Department of Health and Social Security should be notified immediately of your parent's admission to hospital so that the appropriate adjustment to his or her State pension or other State benefits or allowances can be made, but the pension book should be retained.
The pension can be drawn in full for the first eight weeks in hospital, after which your parent will be notified that it will be reduced by a few pounds (for the exact amount of the reduction see the current issue of leaflet NI9).
The pension book must then be returned to the Department of Health and Social Security, where it will be adjusted and then sent back.
After a year in hospital the pension may be reduced still further, but if your parent is treated as having a dependant this will be taken into account.
Supplementary benefit or supplementary pension or allowance may be affected immediately on admission or after eight weeks, according to circumstances, and widow's pension and some other State pensions and benefits also after eight weeks.
Attendance allowances will be withdrawn after four weeks.
If your parent's pension or benefits are reduced and she is worried because she has rent, mortgages, or other commitments to meet, special allowances can be given in the form of supplementary benefit, and you should discuss this with the hospital's  Medical Social Worker or the Enquiry Clerk at the Department of Health and Social Security.
If this help is given it will be for three months in the first instance and the position will be reviewed from time to time after that.
If your parent is allowed home from hospital (or other National Health Service accommodation) for a few days occasionally you should notify the Department of Health and Social Security, as she may be entitled to her pension, benefits or allowances at the full rate for that period.
If your parent is  incapable of acting for herself, discuss this with the hospital Medical Social Worker or the Enquiry Clerk at the Department of Health and Social Security, and arrangements may be made for you or some other relative to be appointed to act on her behalf and to receive payment of the benefit or pension.
If no relative or other person is willing to be appointed, the benefit is payable to the hospital authorities to be used for the patient's comfort and enjoyment.
Immediately an expected date of discharge from hospital is known, inform the Department of Health and Social Security so that any pensions, benefits and allowances to which your parent is entitled may be restored to the normal level as soon as possible.
Death of the parent
If your parent dies no further orders should be cashed from the pension book.
It should be sent (or preferably taken) as soon as possible, together with the free death certificate (Form BD8) which you will have been given by the Registrar of Births and Deaths, to the local Social Security Office, and as in most cases there is an entitlement to a National Insurance death grant, application can be made for this at the same time.
Full details of this and the documents that will be required can be found in leaflet NI49.
If at this distressing time, however, you feel unable to study this, simply take the death certificate and the pension book to the Social Security Office and one of their officers will be glad to help and advise you.
If your father dies and you are helping your widowed mother with these matters, you can assure her that not only will she not lose her own retirement pension, but that it may be paid at an increased rate after her husband's  death.
She need not send in her own pension book, but should have it with her if she is able to go with you to the Social Security Office.
If this visit is not possible, she should fill in section B or C (as well as section A) on the back of the death certificate (Form BD8) issued by the Registrar and send it to her local Social Security Office without delay, and they will send her a claim form; or she may just write to the local office asking for a claim form for widow's benefit.
If your mother dies and your father needs your help, you should see that he returns her pension book together with the free death certificate (Form BD8) to the local Social Security Office and assist him to apply for the death grant.
There will, of course, be no change in the amount of his retirement pension.
The value of visiting rather than just corresponding with the Social Security Office when a relative dies cannot be emphasised too strongly, as this enables any problems to be discussed and dealt with speedily.
Occupational pensions
It is very rare for government departments, the armed services, or commercial or industrial undertakings to make errors in calculating the pension of a retiring worker.
If, however, your parent thinks that some mistake has been made and cannot sort it out, you can easily contact the pension fund headquarters on his or her behalf and ask for details of how the amount has been arrived at.
If you are not satisfied with the reply, the trade union or professional association to which your parent belongs may be able to go into the matter further.
Failing this, a local solicitor operating under the Legal Aid Scheme could be asked to advise if your parent's income is low.
Income tax
The Board of Inland Revenue issue a very helpful free booklet entitled Income Tax and the Elderly , which can be obtained from any Inland Revenue office.
It should also be remembered that the Inland Revenue officers are always willing to give advice, and even to assist an elderly person with the completion of their income-tax return if necessary.
A few of the main points worth bearing in mind when discussing the subject of income tax with your elderly parents are as follows:
TAX POSITION ON THE NATIONAL INSURANCE RETIREMENT PENSION
Tax is not deducted from National Insurance retirement pensions, but they are taken into account when deciding how much tax is to be paid on the elderly person's income as a whole.
However, the basic National Insurance retirement pension by itself is not enough to bring her above the point where tax begins to be charged, so if she has no other income apart from this, she will not be asked to pay tax.
But she may be liable for some tax, if, in addition to the basic retirement pension, she is getting a graduated pension, or an additional pension for working past retirement age.
(A supplementary pension payable under the Supplementary Benefits scheme is not taxable, nor are voluntary payments made to her by you or other relatives, for which you can claim tax-free allowance.
See section on ‘Other forms of income’ later in this chapter.)
TAX PAYABLE ON OCCUPATIONAL PENSIONS
The elderly person's former employer will deduct tax from her occupational pension under Pay As You Earn (as he did from her salary or wages) if her income from pension and other sources is big enough to make her liable for tax.
TAX CODES
If; when your parents begin to draw a National Insurance retirement pension, they go on working, or their former employer is paying them a pension, their code will need to be changed so as to take into account the National Insurance pension.
The right code can only be issued to them if the tax inspector knows about their National Insurance pension; so it is very important for your parents to let the Tax Office know in advance if they are going to receive a National Insurance retirement pension.
If they delay they may fall into arrears with their tax and later be faced with having to pay tax for past years.
TAX PAYABLE BY A WIFE WHO ALSO HAS A PENSION
A wife's pension is liable to tax and, like any other income she has, it is added to her husband's in arriving at their total income.
But there may not be any tax to pay on it if the pension comes from a former employer of hers, and if she has a National Insurance retirement pension from her own contributions the special ‘wife's earned income allowance’ will be due.
If she exceptionally draws a pension by virtue of her husband's insurance in place of a smaller one by virtue of her own insurance, the special allowance will be due on the smaller amount.
TAXING AN ANNUITY
If an elderly person buys an annuity out of her own capital, part of it will be treated as a repayment of capital, and so not liable to tax.
The remainder will be treated as investment income, which is liable to tax.
The amount of the annuity that will be taxable will depend mainly on her age when she buys the annuity.
There are rules for deciding how much is taxable, and these should be explained to her by the insurance company with which she is dealing.
HOUSE TAX
Although the elderly do not have to pay income tax on the value of a house which they own and occupy, if they let any Part of it, furnished or unfurnished, the income they receive from the letting must be included in their tax return.
SAVINGS INVESTED WITH A LOCAL AUTHORITY
If your parent has savings invested with a local authority, from which tax is deducted at the basic rate, she can only get some of this tax back if the tax, together with any other tax that is paid (e.g. under Pay As Your Earn), comes to more than the proper tax on her total income.
Normally if tax is paid under Pay As You Earn, the tax deducted at the basic rate will be correct.
If she thinks she has a claim on this account, though, she should get in touch with the Inspector of Taxes.
TAX ON THE INTEREST ON MONEY IN A BUILDING SOCIETY
Building society interest is taxed under a special arrangement, and basic-rate tax does not have to be paid on it, but a tax refund cannot be claimed.
The interest is, however, taken into account when determining liability at rates in excess of the basic rate; also when calculating total income for the purposes of the special allowance for the elderly (see below).
The amount of building-society interest actually received is regarded as what is left after tax at the basic rate has been deducted from a larger amount.
It is this larger amount that is taken into account for tax purposes.
When filling in the income-tax return, building society interest must be included by entering the amount actually paid or credited.
OTHER FORMS OF INCOME
There are Special arrangements for taxing the dividends on shares, war widow's pensions, ordinary deposits in the National Savings Bank, and deposits in the ordinary department of a Trustee Savings Bank, all of which are discussed in detail in the Inland Revenue booklet,Income Tax and the Elderly , which needs to be studied carefully for each individual.
Some forms of income, however, are not liable to any tax at all.
These include: attendance allowances payable by the Department of Health and Social Security, wounds and disability pensions of former members of the forces, and disablement pensions under the National Insurance (Industrial Injuries) Acts.
No tax is payable on the interest on National Savings Certificates, nor on the bonuses payable on Save As Your Earn contracts and index-linked Retirement Certificates.
Nor are voluntary payments made to the elderly by relatives liable to tax.
SPECIAL ALLOWANCE FOR PERSONS AGED 65 OR OVER
There is a special allowance for people aged 65 or over with modest incomes.
This is given in place of the ordinary single or married allowance, and is called ‘Age Allowance’.
It is designed to help the less well-off, and details of the scheme are covered in depth in the Inland Revenue booklet Income Tax and the Elderly .
This also gives information and current figures for other types of allowances which elderly people may be able to claim, such as those for the registered blind, allowances for the cost of a resident housekeeper (relative or non-relative), and allowances for elderly people who are maintaining a daughter who has to live with them to care for them because of their age or infirmity.
Rent and rates rebates
Before considering making an application to the local council for a rent or rate rebate, an elderly person who is hard pressed financially should consider first whether her income is so low that she might do better to make an application for a supplementary pension, which brings with it other benefits (previously described).
If in doubt, an interview with an officer from the local social security office would help her to make the most advantageous decision.
If she is sure that she would not qualify for a supplementary pension and wishes to apply for a rent rebate or allowance, an application form, and the information leaflet There's Money off your Rent , can be obtained from the local authority Housing Department.
For a rate rebate, an application form may be obtained from the local authority Treasurer's Department, together with the information leaflet How to Pay Less Rates .
Assistance with rent and rates for people on a low income is available not only to council tenants, but also to tenants or private landlords, those who live in housing association accommodation and owner occupiers.
The safe investment of capital
If your elderly parent has a family solicitor who knows her and her circumstances well, he will be the best person to give expert advice on the investment of her capital, but if she prefers to rely solely upon your advice you should encourage her to put safety first in this matter, for unless someone is very wealthy, and can afford to lose money occasionally, playing the stock market is a foolish and risky game in later life.
One of the best things she can do is to invest as much as possible, up to the maximum of £500, in the government's index-linked Retirement Certificates, which can be purchased  at the Post Office, where information leaflets are available.
These protect the purchasing power of savings in a way that no other completely safe investment can do, and they are free of United Kingdom income tax and capital gains tax.
This is the best ‘bargain offer’ pensioners have ever had, and any woman over 60 or man over 65 should take advantage of it if possible.
Other safe forms of investment which could then be considered for any capital your parent may have could also include the building societies, local authority bonds (if she is prepared to leave her money untouched for a year or two), National Savings Certificates, Post Office Savings, the National Savings Bank and Trustee Savings Bank.
The most obvious choice for most elderly people of modest means is the index-linked certificates, with the rest of their small capital in a building society, but the decision must be tailored to their requirements.
For some elderly people who have no family or who (quite reasonably) do not feel that they need to hang on to capital to pass on to relatives who are themselves well provided for, the purchase of an annuity can be an advantage.
Very careful thought is needed, though, before taking the big step of spending a large sum of money to purchase a regular income, for there can be snags, and it is wise to get quotations from several of the major insurance companies, and the advice of a solicitor, before proceeding.
The purchasing of an annuity may certainly be an excellent idea for some elderly people (and the older they are, the better will be the terms offered to them), but independent expert advice should always be sought first.
The management of the finances of the seriously ill
If the occasion arises that your parent is seriously ill and wishes you (or some other relative or close friend) to act for her and have access to some of her money so that you can pay her bills and buy her anything she needs, she can grant what is known as ‘Power of Attorney’.
This should be done through a solicitor on a form drawn up, signed, registered and stamped.
Your sick parent must be mentally fit to make this decision of her own free will, and it does not rob her of the right to make her own decisions as to the spending of her money or her free access to it.
She may also cancel the arrangement whenever she wishes.
If, however, your parent is so seriously ill physically or mentally that she is no longer capable of dealing with her own financial affairs at any level, arrangements can be made by her solicitor for these to be dealt with by a government department known as the Court of Protection, and you should discuss this matter with the solicitor.
In everything you do and say connected with helping your elderly parent with her financial problems, your aim should be, as far as possible, to advise tactfully but allow the actual decisions to remain hers.
Bringing and elderly parent to live with you
The big decision
When people of different generations decide to live together, because the older of the two is in need of care, they are making one of the major decisions of their lives.
To give or receive help, perhaps over a long period, which inevitably involves some self-sacrifice on the one hand and some loss of independence on the other, is a very big step.
It should never be taken hastily or immediately a crisis arises in the life of an elderly person, such as bereavement or a sudden illness or depression, for grief usually passes to some extent after a period of supported mourning.
A cause and a cure can be found for some of the illnesses of old age, and depression often responds to suitable treatment and sympathetic handling.
If elderly people are persuaded to uproot themselves in a hurry at the first sign of trouble, making major decisions at a time when they are not emotionally stable enough to think them through, like selling their homes and moving away from old friends and familiar surroundings into the different world and routine of a younger household, they sometimes regret it, and much unhappiness ensues for everyone.
It can be equally disastrous for them and for others if they make a permanent arrangement on impulse and encourage a relative or friend to give up their own home and move in with them because they are under stress and feel that they may not be able to continue to live alone.
If your elderly parent is faced with this problem, the most sensible first step towards a solution will be for her to spend a longish ‘holiday’ in your home before making a final decision, or for you to make an extended ‘visit’to her if you are thinking of going to live in her home.
This can meet her need temporarily when she is at some crisis point, providing, for all concerned, a trial period of living under the same roof, in this tactful guise of a holiday — without commitment on either side.
During this period, both she and you need to consider very carefully all the possible gains and losses of a decision to live together permanently.
You have to ask yourselves some searching questions, particularly about the quality of your relationship prior to the present state of emergency.
Has it been a happy one that augurs well for the ‘marriage’ of your two households?
Or has it been difficult and full of ‘needle’ and misunderstanding?
Most important of all, are you able to accept each other as equal, mature individuals, or has the parent/child relationship never been outgrown, so that one of you may feel the need to dominate, and the other will begin to lose confidence?
The fact of being ‘family’ is no guarantee that people can live together happily on a long-term basis, and almost any other good ‘care’arrangement that can be made for an elderly person is better than a cat-and-dog life with relatives, where there is no common ground for agreement, and constant quarrels make home life a misery.
But if the decision is made to share the same house, and it looks like a viable proposition, then planning should begin optimistically and without fuss, having due regard for the needs of all parties.
Living with an elderly parent in their own home
A daughter (or more rarely a son) who has never left the parental home, or who has returned after widowhood or divorce to stay on indefinitely to care for an elderly parent or parents, does not make this choice automatically.
Some families take it for granted that the elderly are the natural responsibility of the unattached, but this is not so.
The daughter at home has her moment of decision to face too: when she has to make the choice between committing herself, or taking flight, which in these more liberated times is almost always possible.
Such is the remarkable sense of loyalty of millions of these women, though, that they usually decide to stay and see it through.
It is always dangerously easy to write superficially about human relationships, particularly this one of the mother and daughter living together in old age, picturing them enjoying endless winter evenings by the fire, with never a cross word, and long summer afternoons in a garden of roses, sitting in deckchairs on a lawn that never needs mowing.
But they deserve more honest treatment, and who wants fairy stories?
Certainly not the mature women who are caring courageously, and quite alone, for the elderly.
They know the truth: that life with an aged parent can be a strange mixture of joy and sorrow, and all they ask is for that fact to be accepted, not glossed over by their family and society, and then to be offered some practical ideas on how to make the best of a good job, which they consider to be well worth doing.
Some of the information in other chapters on nutrition, health, financial problems, and coping with stress may be useful for the daughter at home, but if you are such a daughter there is something else you need too — a healthy determination to protect your own right to a reasonable way of life, while striving to improve that of your parent.
There are very few ‘angel’ daughters or ‘monster’mothers around: just millions of women, both young and old, living and giving, to the best of their ability, under the same roof, sometimes beset by problems of herculean proportions which are none of their making.
This is not to say that there are not many households where there is peace and contentment, when the old person is fortunate enough to keep well in mind and body even when she becomes frail, and where the daughter prefers to remain at home, and is able to make a satisfying life for herself.
But these cases do tend to be the exception rather than the rule, so it is sensible to consider, briefly, some of the negative aspects that can sometimes be a part of the ‘caring’ situation.
To face every possibility, however remote, is the surest way of arriving finally at a position of strength, with the ability to cope, come what may.
Any emotional pain, sense of frustration, or loss of freedom cuts both ways in this relationship, as it does in many others.
A mother who loves her daughter can experience real anguish on her behalf if she becomes totally dependent upon her, and recognises the limitations this imposes on her social  life and activities.
And however much she loves her mother, the daughter who has undertaken to care for her in her old age is, in some instances, taking on one of the toughest and loneliest jobs on earth.
If, at first, she is able to continue with her career, she is in some respects in the same position as the working wife and mother, who has the strain of two heavy areas of responsibility: her home and her job, but with several important differences.
She is not operating within a hopeful situation of growth and development, in which she will see the fruits of her work in terms of certain ambitions fulfilled for herself and her family, with the love and companionship of a husband to support her.
For her, apart from the rewards of her job (which she may plan to give up anyway when her parent becomes more dependent), her life is centred on a household where she knows she may have to deal with a slow decline in the health and strength of her relative, with all that implies for both of them in the future.
When she arrives home in the evening, she knows she will have no stimulating exchange of news to look forward to with a husband and family.
Unless she is very lucky, she will be the one who will be expected to provide the stimulation, for her elderly parent may have been alone since breakfast-time, and will be waiting to be ‘cheered up’ by stories of all she has been doing during the day.
Only they will probably both know that these must not include anything too worrying or controversial, which could create the type of tension and anxiety that can so easily build up in the elderly, particularly in the many who suffer from circulatory troubles, or who have a naturally anxious personality which has become even more vulnerable with age.
So there is none of the relief of a true unburdening, and the discussion of problems that characterises the homecoming of someone to a companion who is close in age as well as relationship.
Even where deep affection remains unaltered, the gap between them often becomes a chasm as years go by.
So she learns to give all her stories happy endings and take her troubles to bed with her — after she has cooked, cleaned, washed and ironed and prepared for another day.
This is the way life is for thousands of working women living with elderly relatives, running a home that the parent is  no longer able to manage, as well as giving her care and emotional support, and often feeling too exhausted to be able to organise any reasonable social lives for themselves.
They hold down their jobs somehow for a certain length of time, if they have good family back-up, kindly neighbours to ‘pop in’, and various types of help from voluntary and statutory social services in their locality.
But when their parent can no longer be left alone and they decide, as many of them do, to leave work in order to care for her full time, their major problems begin.
Some will be connected with the parent's needs, but others will be personal to them; psychological, social and financial.
A daughter who has given up her career will undoubtedly feel the loss of her previous role in the working world.
She will no longer be Miss, Mrs or Ms Jones, secretary, teacher, nurse, or producer or seller of merchandise.
She will have become one of that great army of ‘daughters at home’ who have to fight hard to establish an identity for themselves other than that of ‘head cook and bottle washer’.
Her new role may, in fact, call for a much wider range of skills, both mental and physical, than did her previous one; but however well she develops them, they will go largely unnoticed by society.
The work she does will be taken for granted by nearly everyone, except the relative she is caring for, and there will be no prospect of promotion either, unless it be from housekeeper to nurse.
She may look back with longing to the coffee-breaks and lunch hours she used to share with colleagues at work, which may seem in retrospect to have been so full of interest- and best of all, laughter, forgetting any strains that existed in her job.
She will try to accept the fact, as she takes her mother's ‘elevenses’ in to her, that any attempt she may make to start a discussion of something that might not be of immediate interest to her mother may be turned off suddenly like a switch, and will plunge her temporarily into an emotional darkness in which she will feel very much alone.
She may understand that this habit is one that develops in many otherwise unselfish old people when their powers of concentration begin to weaken slightly, just as a child tosses an unwanted toy out of its pram, and that no hurt is intended.
But it will hurt, and each time it happens, it will feel  like a shock, and a sad renewal of the realisation that a loved companion is beginning to drift away from her, and that there is nothing either of them can do about it.
People will say, kindly, ‘What a good thing you have each other’— assuming that the single, widowed or divorced daughter would be very lonely on her own; and of course , if it is a loving relationship, these words will find a genuine echo in her mind.
She will dread the thought of that final parting, which must come in time.
But she will probably already be experiencing more loneliness than they imagine, for much as she may enjoy her parent's company, she will also have a need for other friendships and contacts with the world outside the home, and these may be very difficult for her to achieve.
Whenever she wants to go out, she may have to arrange for someone to come and ‘sit in’ if her parent cannot be left alone; and suitable ‘mother-sitters’are always much harder to find than ‘baby-sitters,.
If you have embarked on this decision, entertaining friends at home may became increasingly difficult too, for your parent may look forward always to being present on these occasions, without realising for one moment that her daughter needs the opportunity sometimes to be able to relate to her friends alone, so that she can project her personality freely and share confidences and opinions with people of her own generation.
In some cases another problem can arise.
Elderly parents may begin to feel tense and unsure of their previous social skills and ability to sustain long conversations with visitors, or may tire very quickly, which may lead them to start placing obstacles of one kind and another to people coming to the house at all.
The fact that any extra emotional effort makes them anxious and exhausted is often too painful to admit, even to themselves, and their pride prevents them from beating a perfectly acceptable retreat to their own room for ‘a rest’ when visitors are expected.
Consequently the daughter is left to pick up the pieces of the havoc caused by the strain of raised blood-pressure and general anxiety the next day.
A gradual reversal of the parent/child roles may have to be adjusted to, as the elderly parent moves further on into old age  and becomes more dependent in every way, and sometimes the inner fears and insecurities of an old person express themselves in jealousy, possessiveness and resentment of the daughter's contacts with other family members or friends, which can create many embarrassing situations, and the need for small deceptions to keep the peace.
Many daughters who are caring full-time for a parent or parents at home have financial worries too.
Loss of earnings and career prospects can be a serious matter for someone who knows that she is going to have to support herself for many years after her parents have gone; and unless the home in which they are living is owned by them, and left to her in their will, she is also going to have to provide accommodation for herself when they die.
This rather gloomy picture of the troubles of the daughter at home obviously does not apply in every case.
There are many parents who remain in good health both mentally and physically to the day of their death, even if their physical strength is reduced, and it becomes no longer desirable for them to live alone; and there are many daughters who share their homes in an atmosphere of personal freedom, happiness and fulfilment, enjoying their companionship right to the end.
They can look back on the last years they spent together as some of the best in their whole lives.
But the fact has to be faced that these are a minority, for the trials of old age can have a crippling effect on some relationships, and it is the various problems of the majority that we are examining here.
So how can you as a daughter find a way through the maze of difficulties that confronts you when you undertake the care of an elderly parent?
What practical steps can you take to ensure that you can carry out the task you have undertaken with advantage to your parent and without damage to yourself?
And what kind of attitudes can you learn to adopt that are likely to make this possible?
A good starting-point would be for you to get in touch with The National Council for the Single Woman and her Dependants, 29, Chilworth Mews, London W2 3RG, by writing (with a stamped addressed envelope enclosed) for one of their information leaflets.
There are just over 300,000 single women in Britain living  with elderly parents, and this organisation, which has branches in many parts of the country, can be extremely helpful to them.
It can give moral support and advice on numerous problems connected with your and your parent's rights to various types of State benefits and services, the support that may be available to you from voluntary bodies, and help in planning ahead for accommodation if this proves necessary when your parent dies.
They will also be able to supply you with a list of suitable short-term homes for the elderly in your area, to which your parent might consider going for a few weeks each year in order that you may have a holiday, if there is no other member of the family who could take over your responsibilities in your absence.
The way you manage to cope with all the problems that life with an elderly parent may present will depend not only upon their magnitude, or the help you receive from others, but also on your attitude towards them, and your determination to live life just a day at a time, thus breaking your stress up into smaller and more manageable ‘sections’.
The most valuable resolve anyone who has decided to care for an elderly relative can make is to give her all the love and loyalty you can but without becoming a martyr in the process, for martyrdom in such circumstances often breeds repressed resentment, which eventually boils over into words and actions that are later bitterly regretted.
You have to be determined to pay attention to your own needs as well as those of your parent.
If you don't, your emotional strength will gradually be sapped, to the point when you will no longer be able to give her the support she requires, and the whole arrangement may collapse around you.
Sometimes this means taking a very definite stand on certain issues, but it has to be done for both your sakes.
It helps if you can bring yourself to take a very positive line of thinking about each problem as it comes along, being as practical and objective as possible, for sometimes the limitations of home life with an old and possibly infirm parent may seem to close round you like a prison.
If this happens, you can respond in one of three ways.
You can become resigned to the monotony of captivity and give up the struggle to maintain your own interests and identity.
You can revolt against it by a  breakdown in health or morale, going what the Americans call stir-crazy'; or you can accept it calmly, as just a temporary ‘pause’ in your normal way of life from which you intend to extract some good for yourself and others, keeping active, keeping your eyes on the world beyond the bars, and planning and preparing yourself for your ultimate return to it.
Like all prisoners of circumstance, you will probably reflect a good deal on the whole subject of ‘time’ and of its strange habits of hanging, dragging, or running out too quickly, but if you decide to use and dominate it, instead of allowing it to dominate you, you will inevitably come to the conclusion that it is only wasted if it is thrown away, never when it is offered freely, as a gift of love.
In considering ways of keeping emotionally fit enough to continue to give your parent the care she needs, try to maintain and, if necessary, improve the quality of your own life.
To this end it can be quite a good idea to sit down and make a list of all the social activities you would like to enjoy if you were free to do so -such as visiting and entertaining friends, going to the theatre, cinema, concerts, evening classes, study groups, church activities and special interest clubs, as well as the occasional holiday.
Then decide what positive action you could take to achieve at least some of these goals, without neglecting home responsibilities.
If visiting or entertaining friends is difficult, this is the first and most important problem to be tackled, because maintaining (or restoring) this particular activity will do more than almost anything else to keep life in balance.
It may mean some gentle but very straight talking, if your parent does not realise your need to have time alone with your friends, but if you cannot bring yourself to establish this right, you will have precious little hope of organising any other social activities that will give you a break from daily routine.
If the bedroom you occupy is large enough to be turned into a comfortable bed-sitting-room, or if you have your own private sitting-room in the house, you can avoid trouble and confrontation by entertaining friends there, and that will be the end of it; but if not, after a tactful explanation of your needs to your parent, you should get to the point of suggesting clearly that she might  agree to retire to her room for a few hours sometimes when your friends come to the home (after you have all shared a meal together first, if she wishes).
You should also have set an example for this beforehand, by sometimes making yourself scarce when your parent's friends come, without being in any way unsociable or unwilling to prepare food and drink for them.
You may have to face up to a display of feelings of hurt or rejection; but if your parent is a naturally unselfish person (and not mentally impaired) who had simply failed to realise your need for this degree of privacy and emotional ‘living-space’, she will probably be only too anxious to co-operate.
If not, you may have to steel yourself to deal with surprise and indignation from her.
If that is the case, and she becomes upset, you could be very tempted to drop the whole issue, feeling that it is just ‘not worth the candle’.
But this is one candle you cannot possibly afford to extinguish in your life, for without it you may lose much of the valuable to-and-fro of friendship, which can protect you from isolation, and act as a safety-valve when you are under strain.
Your parent's agreement should be obtained too, if possible, for arrangements to be made for someone suitable to come and spend a day or evening with her regularly so that you can go out.
Once this has been settled and accepted, the next question is — how do you find such people?
Obviously if you have family living near enough, they would be the first to turn to for help of this kind.
Failing this, a fit elderly neighbour may be willing to come, either voluntarily or for a small payment, which would be useful to them if they are living on a small pension.
If they would be offended by an offer of money, the occasional (money-saving) gift to them might be very welcome.
Younger neighbours may be glad to ‘sit in’ for one evening a week too, if you can give them some service in return, such as looking after their child for a morning while they go shopping, although of course there are people who will help with no expectation of reward, if you make your need known to them-perhaps more of them than you imagine.
Volunteers can also be contacted sometimes through the local authority social services department, and the local branches of the Women's Royal Voluntary Services, the National Council of  Social Services, Age Concern (Old People's Welfare) and the National Council for the Single Woman and her Dependants, whose addresses can all be found in the telephone directory or at the Public library.
When someone has been found, if they are strangers, it is sensible to invite them first to drop in for a cup of tea, to make sure that they can establish a good rapport with your parent, and that the two will get along well together.
A break from the cares of caring is essential sometimes, if you are to keep going year in and year out.
At least two holidays a year, of a fortnight each should be planned if possible, when you can get away on your own, or with friends.
You will find little pleasure and relaxation in it, though, unless you are sure that your parent is happy and in safe hands.
The ideal solution is for her to go to stay with other members of the family to be cared for in their home, or for a relative to come to take over in your absence.
If this is not possible, your parent might be willing to consider going for a temporary period into one of the short-term homes for the elderly known to the National Council for the Single Woman and her Dependants, or into a home for the elderly run by the social services department of the local authority, while you are away.
If she needs nursing care, arrangements can sometimes be made for her to be admitted for a few weeks to the local hospital on medical recommendation.
Private nursing homes are another possibility, but these should be ones that are known to your general practitioner as being reliable, and fees are usually fairly high.
A living-in housekeeper or nurse can also be arranged in some circumstances, and lists of suitable agencies can be obtained from the Elderly Invalid's Fund (Old People's Information Service), 10 Fleet Street, London EC4Y 1BB.
But here again the cost may be considerable.
Financial problems can become an added burden and anxiety to the daughter at home.
If you have worries of this kind a visit to the local office of the Department of health and Social Security, plus an interview with a social worker at the local authority social services department, is a very wise move.
In these two offices all your rights, and those of your elderly parent, to State benefits, pensions and special concessions and allowances can be explained, as well as ways in which you may apply for grants and other  forms of help in some circumstances from various voluntary organisations.
Although the range of benefits to which the elderly and those caring for them are entitled is still inadequate to meet every need, it is wider than some realise.
Many people are not aware of the existence of some of them or of their own eligibility to make a claim, so are not taking them up; and you may find that you are one of them.
Sparing the time to make these two visits may show ways of substantially increasing the household income, and reducing its outgoings on rent, rates, prescription charges and many other expenses for which you may not have realised there is help available.
Financial problems are examined more fully in Chapter 5 but as each individual case is different the visits suggested above should be carefully considered.
If there are likely to be difficulties about accommodation for yourself as the daughter at home, after your parent's death, contact should be made well before this event is imminent with the Housing Manager of the local council for advice, and you might write also to the Housing Corporation Head Office, Maple House, 149 Tottenham Court Road, London W1P 0BN, who will send a free directory of registered Housing Associations and other housing schemes in the area of your choice, so that you can begin forward planning.
The enclosure of a large stamped addressed envelope will of course be appreciated by any of the organisations you may wish to write to for information, booklets or advice on your own problems or those of your parent.
Anyone who is carrying someone she loves, who can no longer walk unaided through the minefields of old age, knows that there are times when she comes close to losing her nerve — and times when it shows.
When you are feeling particularly tired, you may occasionally become very irritated and verbalise your frustration, but if you care enough to want to keep going, the one you are supporting will know it, and forgive you, as you must forgive yourself.
Inviting the elderly to live with you
If inviting an elderly parent to come to live with you in your own home seems to be the best way of helping her in her last years, the first overtures you make to her on this subject need to be very tactful, bearing all the hallmarks of a really welcoming invitation.
The right approach might possibly be along the lines of: ‘How about the family closing ranks and getting together now that you need a little help?’ or ‘Give us the pleasure of doing something for you for a change.’
These are warm and positive.
The wrong approach would be something like: ‘Obviously you can't look after yourself any longer.
You'd better let us look after you now,’ or ‘We've talked it over, and we've decided to offer you a home with us.’
This is cold, negative and grudging, but unfortunately not altogether uncommon.
It treats the elderly relative like a stray domestic animal, to be ‘looked after’ rather than‘cared for’, and ‘offered a home’rather than a share in the life of the family, as someone who has something important to contribute.
MAKING PLANS
If an elderly parent is giving up her home to move into yours it can be a very traumatic experience for her, even though you are ‘family’ and she wants to be with you.
So each step has to be planned patiently with her, so that this big change in her life can take place as smoothly as possible.
She may have a house to sell, or a tenancy to terminate, and she should be made aware of your willingness to help her with this, if she wishes, and with everything else connected with the move.
There will be many things for her to think about and remember, at a time when she may be feeling quite disturbed emotionally, and you can do much to ease the strain of it all for her.
Arrangements will have to be made with a suitable removal firm if she is going to bring some of her furniture with her, and she may need help in finding the best dealers or auctioneers to take the items she wants to dispose of.
Then there will be many people and organisations she will need to notify of her date of removal and her new address, such as the Gas and Electricity Boards; the Department of Health and Social Security, for the transfer of the drawing of her pension to the post office near your home; the local rates office, income tax office, and television rental office; the bank manager, and building society or other  places where she may have invested her savings; her insurance agent, the headquarters of any pension fund to which she may belong, the telephone manager, and the post office for the redirection of her letters (for which a form has to be completed and a fee paid).
Her milk and newspapers will have to be cancelled as will any services she is receiving, such as home help, meals-on-wheels, or visits from social workers or home nurses.
You may also need to help her to transfer to the list of your own general practitioner, if she and he are both agreeable to this; and of course she must be assured that you, or some other member of the family will be with her on the actual day of the move or, if she wishes, take the responsibility of it off her shoulders completely.
You should both know exactly where you stand on all the major issues of planning, right from the start, so that mutually acceptable decisions can be made well ahead of time.
What type of accommodation will you be able to offer her?
Is it to be the often ideal arrangement of a ‘granny-flat’ extension to your house, in which she will have her own bed-sitter with kitchen, bathroom and lavatory?
If so, this may take some time and finance to organise, and planning permission may have to be obtained from the local authority.
Or is it to be a bed-sitting room, or just her own bedroom?
Will she need to have any adaptations made if she is infirm, or special aids installed?
If so, all this should be done before she moves in, and her room or rooms redecorated in colours of her own choice if possible.
If, as is the case in most households, only one room can be spared for her, it will be greatly to everyone's advantage if it is big enough to take her bed, wardrobe and dressing-table, and other necessary items of furniture plus two comfortable armchairs and a television set and radio, so that she can be on her own when she likes, with her favourite programmes (which may not always be yours) and able to entertain a friend in the privacy of her own small domain when she wants to, with familiar things around her which help her to preserve her identity and links with the past.
Some people who have an elderly parent to live with them are heard to say, ‘We're very fond of her of course, but the trouble with Mother is that she's always there!’
Yet they may have made  no effort to give her anywhere she can go to, having allocated a large bedroom to one of their small children and relegated her to the tiniest bedroom in the house, to which she can never withdraw unless she actually gets into bed.
So everyone is unhappy and, what is worse still, the children are being brought up to believe that the old should always be given second best and be prepared to shrink into the smallest ‘shell’ that is offered to them.
Broad agreement has to be reached, too, on how she will be able to fit in happily with your particular routine of family life, and this can only be decided after very frank discussion of her needs and yours.
This is no time for pretending that all will automatically be sweetness and light, just because you have a deep affection for each other.
Living under the same roof permanently will need working at, and sacrifices will have to be made on both sides if it is to succeed.
The likeliest battleground will be the kitchen.
If she is very advanced in years and no longer interested in cooking, she may well be happy to stay out of it completely, apart from making the odd cup of tea or coffee, and be pleased to have her meals prepared for her.
If so, there is no problem.
But if she wants to get her own food, or offers her help to you with the family cooking, all this will have to be sorted out very carefully.
It would be heartless to deny her the pleasure of feeling that she is making a useful contribution to the preparation of meals, but it would be equally unkind not to make it clear to her from the beginning just who will be in charge and wearing the chef's hat!
Usually a compromise can be reached when there is good will and honesty on both sides.
Sometimes very small things can help to preserve an elderly person's feeling of value and self-esteem, like encouraging her to make some special dish or cake (for which she has long been praised in the family circle) once a week, or on birthdays.
In some families, of course, where the mother is working all day outside the home, a willing and efficient granny in the kitchen, who loves cooking, can be a real advantage, and then you have to be very careful not to exploit her good nature and allow her to work too hard — which she may tend to do.
For some families breakfast can be a time when they are on a very short fuse and tensions abound, so if you can persuade her  to have hers on a tray in bed, many problems may be avoided.
Again, in the evening, times of meals and who is to share them should be decided before she moves in.
The need for a husband and wife to have some part of the evening alone should be discussed openly and accepted as being important, for this is another ‘danger’ period when tensions can build up between in-laws.
The company of some elderly relatives can only be enjoyed for a limited period at the end of a busy day, and long evenings — every evening — spent together can be a strain on all concerned in different ways.
One woman whose mother was coming to live with her and her husband solved her problem by saying quite firmly beforehand, ‘Now Tom and I like to eat supper alone and have a couple of hours’ quiet talk together in the evening before we settle down to watch television, Mother.
I'm sure you and Father probably felt just the same, so you'll understand, won't you?’— blunt perhaps, but honest.
Fortunately ‘Mother’ did understand.
She had her own meal early, around six, then watched some television on the set she had in her room, and came down later for a chat with the family when everyone was feeling relaxed.
Things do not always work out as simply as that, of course, but knowing the rules and drawing clear lines before the game starts are essential if misunderstandings are to be avoided.
The question of annual holidays will also have to be raised.
Will she be going away with you?
Or will she stay with relatives or friends, or take a holiday away with them?
If none of these ideas is possible, would she be willing to spend a few weeks each year in a home for the elderly or, if she is infirm, in a nursing home or a local National Health Service hospital?
Many elderly people do this each year if it is not suitable for them to go away with their family, and they understand the need those who are caring for them have for a complete break.
Often their own need for a change is equally strong too, and if the arrangement is made through a social worker from the local authority social services department in whom they have confidence, they go with no fear of not being allowed to return when the holiday period is over.
Financial arrangements have to be discussed as well, and the  matter of her contribution to the household expenses has to be agreed upon, making sure that she is left with enough money each month for her clothing, personal expenses and pocket money.
It should also be remembered that anyone, married or single, who is maintaining or accommodating a dependent relative over 65 (or a mother or mother-in-law on her own) is entitled to claim a tax allowance.
Settling in
The departure from her old home and her arrival in her new one will be a tremendous double adjustment for her to make, so you should try to give it a sense of occasion.
You will also need to realise that she will be particularly sensitive and watchful at this point for any signs of rejection by her in-laws, whose home she may feel she is ‘invading’.
If you have children, it will be sensible to tell them how lucky they are to have Granny coming to live with them, and they should be encouraged to give her a warm welcome.
Small gestures will help too, like flowers in her room and a special, but quiet celebration meal on the day of her arrival, with the whole family present.
It will be a time for you to use all the imagination of which you are capable, to try to think how you would be feeling if you were in her shoes, and to handle her fragile emotions very gently.
According to her personality type, she can be expected to react on this first day with anything from brave smiles to tension and tears, but this will be quite normal.
You must not worry too much if she seems a bit depressed during the first few months, instead of being a ‘sweet and grateful granny’.
You have to accept the fact that she will not be feeling she has too much to be grateful about, when she ruminates on the loss of her home and some of her previous complete independence.
She will need time to grieve inwardly a little over these losses and gradually come to terms with them in her own way, so you should not assume that any moods of depression or irritability she has in those early months are a reflection on the efforts you are making to help her to feel ‘at home’.
Unless there is some other underlying reason or hidden illness it will pass in time, as she adjusts to the change.
In the meantime, you should quietly do all you can to help her to feel a part of the life of your local community.
She should be introduced with an air of pride and affection to your friends and neighbours if she does not know them already, accompanied to all the places locally which will be of special interest to her in the future: the public library, the shopping centre, the best places to go for morning coffee, and any small parks where she might like to walk or sit in the fine weather.
If she is a regular churchgoer her previous vicar, minister, priest or rabbi will probably have put her in touch with a place of worship near to your home, and whether you are churchgoers or not you should make every effort to enable her to remain active in church life and enjoy all the organisations connected with it, in which she will make friends.
Tasteless ridicule of her religion should be absolutely forbidden in the family circle; not only has she a right to her own beliefs, but an attack on them would be an attack on something that gives her strength and comfort and, best of all, hope as she nears the end of her life.
You should make it clear that she is welcome to entertain any of her friends at home at reasonable times, and help her to cater for this if necessary.
She should also be encouraged to have as many outside interests as possible.
If she is fond of animals, providing her with a cat or a small dog of her own, if she can look after it (and if your household as a whole would find its presence acceptable), may make a tremendous difference to her life.
It will give her something of her own to love and care for which will return her love, and help to reduce any feelings she may have of being ‘odd man out’ in the home.
You should be prepared for the fact that some of her views and opinions will be rather different from your own, remembering that they were formed in an entirely different social climate.
If you find it difficult to understand some of the feelings she expresses, you have to realise that she has reached a stage in life's journey of which, as yet, you know nothing at all , and until you stand where she is standing now you are in no position to pass any judgement on her attitudes.
A classic example of this is the need some elderly people have  to talk about death — often their own death in particular, even to the point of wanting to discuss very freely the kind of arrangements they would like to be made for their funeral: how it should be conducted, what hymns should be chosen, and who should be invited to it and to the family gathering afterwards.
Sometimes younger people consider this to be nothing more than morbid indulgence, and refuse to listen, mainly because it is a subject they do not care to think about.
They fail to appreciate that all elderly people are constantly aware that they are approaching the last great event in their lives: their own death.
And just as those who are young feel the need to talk about and prepare for earlier important events, such as their wedding, or their children's christenings, it is quite normal and not at all macabre for some old people to want to look ahead and plan for the ritual and display of family love and unity that will take place on the day of their departure from this world.
Life with mother (or mother-in-law)
If we apply the yardstick of affection and respect to all our dealings with the elderly and they feel this in everything we say to them, most of the small problems which are bound to arise when we are living together stand a reasonable chance of solution.
Provided they are not mentally impaired, and we are able to exercise tact, the truth, spoken in love, will always achieve more than saying nothing in order to ‘keep the peace’, and harbouring resentments which fester in the mind and inevitably make us bad-tempered towards them for reasons they do not understand.
Even if, in the end, we have to agree to differ on some matters, grievances should be discussed, not camouflaged.
If the elderly relative is your own mother, frank discussion of problems is usually (but not always) easier than it is with an in-law.
Even if tempers do get frayed occasionally and harsh words are exchanged, if there is love and close kinship ‘making up’ is not difficult when you have both cooled down, and the memory of such little ‘spats’is quickly erased.
On the other hand, your patterns of behaviour and response to one another will have deep roots reaching right back into your childhood, and you may both have to work very hard now at becoming adult  ‘friends’, respecting each other 's status and individuality.
She may find it difficult not to regard you still as the child who would do her bidding without question; and you have to learn to see her, not just as your mother, but as a ‘person’ too, with good and bad traits in her  character just like everyone else — not expecting silver-haired sainthood from her simply because she gave birth to you.
If you can get this right, the maturing of your relationship will be an interesting voyage of discovery.
If she has any problems in her relationship with the man you married, she should feel able to talk about these privately with you, knowing that because you love them both you are prepared to accept her negative feelings, and to try to help her to understand his personality and attitudes better, in the light of your knowledge of him, his family, his upbringing, and the events that have shaped his life.
If it is your mother-in-law who has come to live with you, even greater efforts will usually be required on both sides if there is to be peaceful co-existence, for this is always a challenging relationship (there are not too many Ruths and Naomis around).
But some in-laws do manage to get along remarkably well together, even when they have to spend a great deal of time in each other 's company.
When this happens, sometimes it is because they are fortunate enough to have similar interests and standards of behaviour, plus warm, easy-going personalities, with a good tolerance of other people's ways and opinions.
Occasionally it can be achieved by two very different people who may not see eye to eye on a lot of things, but who are determined to try to respect and understand each other for the sake of the man they both love.
If you are the daughter-in-law in this situation, you need to accept the fact that most of the problems that arise have their roots in hidden jealousy (including your own).
Since jealousy has its roots in emotional insecurity it is these feelings, so often experienced but not recognised, that you must try to treat with sympathy and imagination; remembering that you, one day, may feel just as your mother-in-law does.
As ‘number-one woman’ in your husband's life you are in a strong position, and can afford to be very generous to her, especially in the all important matter of  making sure that she is often able to spend time quite alone with her son.
Many mothers of sons never see them to talk to on their own from the day they marry, because their daughters-in-law always expect to be present on every conceivable occasion, and this is something that can build up a very understandable resentment.
They never have the opportunity, with their son, to learn to make the transition to the valuable relationship of ‘adult friends’ and explore each other 's personalities in maturity, as they can so easily do with their married daughters.
So it is up to you to see that this does not happen, by creating circumstances in which they can continue to develop their relationship ‘which his mother has every right to expect to be an on-going one, even in her old age.
Too many women have been brain-washed for centuries in to accepting the old saying: 'A son's a son till he gets him a wife, but a daughter's a daughter all her life.’
If you consider yourself to be in any way progressive, and really want to play your part in demolishing the old legend of natural antagonism between mother-in-law and daughter-in-law, replacing it with the hope of friendship, then this is your chance.
Unless you have married a man who is unusually attached to his mother (which is another matter altogether), it will be unlikely to occur to your husband that he needs to do anything more to make his mother happy than to be a kind and dutiful son, who has given her sanctuary in his own home in her later years; but if he is a man of feeling, it will not be difficult to persuade him of her need for his company: her need to be taken out for a run in the car with him alone sometimes, to be kissed when he kisses you when he gets home in the evening, and occasionally to be brought a bunch of flowers instead of you.
All are such small things, but they can be surprisingly effective in stopping the rot of jealousy from setting in and spoiling family life, and can make her much more contented and secure.
If, on the other hand you are married to a man who, on the surface at least, appears to be more attentive to his mother's needs than to yours, try not to become upset and regard her as a threat or a rival, and avoid jumping to the conclusion that your marriage is a failure and that you are unloved.
Look for the reasons for his behaviour.
There can be a great variety of these; one of the most common is the death, absence, or emotional withdrawal of his father during the formative years of his childhood, which made him draw closer to his mother than he would otherwise have done.
Bide your time.
It may be that one strand of his personality has not yet matured, and even if it never does, that does not mean that he does not love you.
Ride along with it as philosophically as you can, and try not to take your own hurt feelings or sense of irritation out on your mother-in-law, as this will only lead to unhappiness for you all.
You cannot expect her to agree wholeheartedly with everything connected with the way you run your home and raise your family, but you must not tolerate any interference in matters that are your concern -just as you must resist the temptation to try to tell her how she should run any part of her life.
If she is wise, she will soon get the message, and think to herself ‘Oh well, so long as they're happy, that's all that matters’— an attitude that has been the saving grace of many mother-in-law/daughter-in-law relationships.
If you are unlucky enough to find yourself living with someone who seems to you to be an ‘impossible’ mother-in-law, it does no harm first to take a good look at yourself and your handling of her, just in case you happen to be one of the original ‘impossible’daughters-in-law!
You may realise that neither of these labels could apply, and that there are just some bad faults on both sides that need putting right, through frank discussion, backed by a genuine desire to make the relationship work.
You should never attempt to dominate her simply because she is living in your home, for when you invited her to come to live with you it became her home too — the only home she has now, and she must be allowed to remain her own woman.
On the other hand, if she is someone who has been used to dominating those around her, you should quietly refuse to be included in her ‘managing’ tactics.
Realising that it is far too late in her life to expect her to do more than make an effort to modify this trait in her character, you should see if you can direct it away from the home.
This can sometimes be done very successfully by helping her to channel her energy and abilities into some local club or voluntary service organisation where her talent for management can be put to good  use, as well as meeting her own need to be a little bit of a ‘bossy-boots’.
For what may be ‘bossiness’ in the home can turn out to be a valuable contribution of efficiency and ‘drive’in a different setting, working with a team of strangers, where the usual social restraints keep it under reasonable control.
All in all, you will find that your chances of happiness together under the same roof will depend very largely upon your ability to respect and accept her individuality, to see that she gets her share of family affection, to make it possible for her to keep usefully occupied (within her limitations) in the home, and to engage as far as she can in all the outside interests she has always enjoyed.
When it comes to the mother-in-law/son-in-law relationship, this is often a little less complicated, in spite of all those mother-in-law jokes that depict it as a continuous battle between a slightly hen-pecked, but still spirited little man, and his wife's fierce, ugly, overweight mother.
The truth is that most women want to be fond and proud of their son-in-law, and most of them are.
They naturally find it much easier to take to an in-law of the opposite sex.
If he treats her from the beginning like a woman, elderly perhaps, but still entitled to every courtesy and consideration and some of his undivided attention, and if she treats him with affection and interest, voicing her pride in his achievements, and turning to him for advice on various matters, their relationship is usually off to a good start.
If we feel that someone has a high opinion of us we tend to want to live up to it, but few of us bother to make much effort with anyone we know who gives us a low rating, and this is very much the case between mothers-in-law and sons-in-law.
When there is failure to establish this good relationship there can be many reasons for it, which the wife, who loves them both, and is the best person to act as intermediary, should try to understand.
In some cases, a mother-in-law may openly draw unfavourable comparisons between her son-in-law and her husband (who may be deceased and perhaps over-idealised in her memory).
She expects her son-in-law to be just the same kind of husband and father, with all the same values and priorities, and finds it difficult to accept him as a man with a different set of strengths  and weaknesses, however happy he makes her daughter, and this may need to be pointed out to her.
Sometimes problems arise from the fact that his relationship with his own mother has been unsatisfactory, and he is faced with the hard task of learning from scratch how to relate successfully to a woman of the older generation who has joined his household.
She exacerbates all his old anxieties and feelings of ambivalence towards ‘mothers’, and because he cannot cope, he defends himself by ignoring her as far as possible.
She, in her turn, interprets this as some kind of hatred of her.
She begins to feel like an unwanted post-menopausal monster in his home.
His apparent rejection of her seems like the rejection of all mankind.
It cuts the ground from under her, and depresses her, at a time when she is fully aware that she is no longer sexually desirable, but is trying to build a new and satisfying image as an elegant, wise, elderly woman who is still interesting as a person.
These, and many other problems, have to be worked through patiently with the help of the wife, and fortunately they can often be resolved successfully.
This is a relationship that always carries more seeds of hope in it than many others that break down (or never get started on the right foot).
Sometimes a family crisis such as the wife's admission to hospital for an operation, or confinement, when mother-in-law comes to the rescue and willingly takes over the housekeeping, will draw them together, and help them to value each other as people for the first time; but more often it is a gradual process, the slow demolition of long-held prejudices.
An elderly person's relationship with his or her grandchildren can be one of the most rewarding experiences of their lives, and the old and the young usually find that they can share a rather special private world together.
When Granny (or Grandpa) comes to live with the family in old age, it will be to everyone's advantage to encourage the close bond between them and the children, since it always contributes much to their enjoyment of life, and consequently to the happiness of the whole household.
For grandparents, a grandchild is a continuing dividend from their original investment of love, as well as a stake in the future: a part of them that will be living on, long after they are gone.
They  know the grandchildren will grow up with a mixture of character traits collected from way back, on both sides of the family, but they like to think that something of theirs, some good trait or talent, will be packed somewhere in their grandchildren's psychological ‘baggage’ when they set out on their journey into adult life.