

Introduction
Over the past years, many claims have been made suggesting that the inclusion of some particular food in a slimming diet would specifically help overweight people to shed weight more quickly and effectively.
Grapefruit was a classic example.
Grapefruit diets were popular for years.
More recently, in an American bestseller, pineapple was invested with those magical weight-shedding properties.
Sadly,all these claims in the past were based on fiction rather than fact — certainly not on any established medical fact!
Apart from caffeine (which does have a small effect in speeding up the metabolism) no substance we eat or drink was proved by scientific methods to have any realistic effect in speeding away our surplus fat.
Weight loss depended entirely on the calories we didn't eat.
Now, for the first time in the history of medical science, a substance has been isolated about which it is possible to say: ‘If you base your slimming diet on this food you should shed weight more quickly and easily than on a diet based on the same quantity of any other foods.’
The substance is dietary fibre.
This is what the F-Plan is all about.
The F-Plan shows you how to cut your calorie intake and at the same time increase your intake of dietary fibre from the unrefined cereal foods and the fruits and vegetables which provide it.
When you follow the F-Plan you should:
1.
Find slimming easier than ever before, because your diet will be considerably more satisfying and filling than any diet you have ever followed;
2.
Lose weight more quickly than ever before, because a larger proportion of the calories you consume will remain undigested;
3.
Gain all the well-established health advantages of eating meals high in dietary fibre content.
Who says so?
Not some earnest, eager and ignorant lady running a slimming clinic in Slough.
Not some dubious doctor (all professions have their black sheep!) cashing in on some personal theory totally unsupported by scientific evidence.
Who — or rather what — says so is a very large and growing body of evidence produced from medical research conducted by leading doctors and scientists of the Western world: experts whose  reputation is beyond question and who have no cash benefit to gain from their findings.
This is what makes the F-Plan unique.
Quote: ‘It seems likely that a diet in which sugars and starches are taken in natural fibre-rich form would contribute to the control of obesity by encouraging satiety at a lower level of energy intake, and to a lesser extent by increasing the amount of potential energy lost in the faeces .’
What that means, in simple English, is that if you follow a high-fibre diet you will find that you feel more satisfied on fewer calories.
And more of the calories that go into your mouth will, to put it bluntly, go straight through and down the lavatory.
Of course, the fewer calories the body uses from food the more it must draw from your surplus body fat, so this adds up to faster weight loss.
Another simple definition which will appeal to everyone who has ever tried to slim: More weight loss for less willpower!
Even more dramatic:who made the statement quoted above?
The answer is that august, eminent and necessarily highly conservative body, the Royal College of Physicians.
This statement is drawn from a special report they have compiled on the medical aspects of dietary fibre.
The members of the Royal College need a very large quantity of scientific evidence indeed, drawn from many sources, before they will commit themselves so far.
If they feel it likely that a high-fibre diet, which also reduces sugar and fat, will be particularly beneficial to slimmers — as they do — we need hardly say more.
The F-Plan is the first slimming diet which enables you to follow this formula.
These discoveries are relatively recent for a particular reason: medical scientists only started seriously investigating the benefits of high-fibre little more than a decade ago.
Before that time, only a minority of ‘cranks’ insisted on eating wholemeal bread, extolling the virtues of bran, and complaining of the ill-effects of a Western diet rich in refined carbohydrates.
When the authentic medical researchers started to get involved, they were looking for dietary answers to serious illnesses prevalent in Western societies but extremely rare in many less sophisticated communities in the developing world.
Why was it that so many diseases, like cancer and other disorders of the bowel, heart disease and diabetes, were occurring frequently here, but not there?
What were these people  doing that we weren't doing, and vice versa?
One of the answers which emerged was that they were eating diets high in natural fibre — while we, in the West, were stripping this cell-wall material from our day-to-day diet by refining our cereal foods and sugar.
In recent years the evidence for the health benefits of fibre, or ‘roughage’ as it used to be called, has grown so strong that it has filtered through from the medical journals and is now well known to the British and American public.
These days it isn't just those health-food cranks who are scurrying off to buy their brown wholemeal loaves.
Sales of this typical high-fibre food have hugely increased in recent years.
The health connection was the motivation for the research that led to keen medical interest and the endorsement of the benefits of dietary fibre.
The slimming connection emerged more recently, almost as an accidental byproduct of this research.
In addition to being relatively free from many major diseases, those people in developing countries, eating their high-fibre diets, were found to escape another major scourge of Western civilization — obesity.
Even where food is plentiful, societies accustomed to a diet containing a high percentage of cereal foods, fruit and vegetables, all rich in natural fibre, do not become overweight.
This intriguing finding from the surveys led medical researchers to investigations into a whole new aspect of dietary fibre.
Why were those high-fibre eaters keeping slim even when they were eating their fill?
Could it be that the calories supplied by a diet high in natural fibre were being digested and utilized in a different way by the human body?
The remarkable answer, revealed by many recent scientific experiments, is undoubtedly: YES.
However, today's enlightened experts realize that there is little point in discovering important diet guidelines unless these can be presented to the public in a form which makes them realistic and easy to incorporate into daily eating.
On this principle, Dr Elizabeth Evans has worked most diligently in supervising research, and Derek Miller, the distinguished nutritional expert, has made research information and facilities available to us at London University.
At the Food Research Institute Dr David Southgate, who has made a special study of dietary fibre and whose research is the source of the scientific textbook fibre figures, has provided analytical values for the dietary fibre in a range of usefully fibre-rich  canned and packaged foods, so that for the first time these products, which form such a major part of modern eating, can be realistically assessed and used for health value.
Another expert in the work on dietary fibre, Dr Martin Eastwood of Edinburgh's Western General Hospital, has generously given his advice and guidance, and Joyce Hughes, who lectures in nutrition at Croydon College, has compiled the F-Plan calorie and fibre charts.
There can be no doubt about the authenticity of the F-Plan and its claim that dietary fibre will help you slim.
But on the basis that ‘there has to be a snag’, those who haven't taken much interest in the dietary fibre health factor to date may well become a little alarmed about what type of foods they will be required to eat on this diet.
Somehow the words ‘dietary fibre’ do tend to conjure up an image of being put out to graze on food that has all the comfort and flavour of that consumed by a sheep or a cow.
When we tell you that baked beans on toast (as long as the toast is made with wholemeal bread) is one of the best high-fibre meals you can eat, it should give great reassurance to those who enjoy the more homely delights of the table.
A quick glance at the recipes in this book should delight the gastronomically adventurous.
Dietary fibre is provided by a wide selection of easily available and palatable foods.
The F-Plan will provide you with a wonderfully easy formula for boosting your intake to between 35g and 50g of fibre a day — at least twice most people's normal consumption — without sacrificing any pleasure in meals.
Those readers who are now sufficiently convinced that the F-Plan is the first realistically helpful medical advance in slimming, as indeed it is, may if they wish turn to page 91 of this book, where they will find all the rules for following the plan, followed by recipes, menus and charts.
The F-Plan calorie and fibre charts are the first charts to make it possible to keep to the correct number of calories and, at the same time, to choose the foods which will be of most help in making slimming both easier and speedier.
For the health-conscious person, as well as those concerned about weight, they are a unique guide, making it possible to follow that major modern nutritional recommendation made by all leading medical authorities in the Western world: increase your intake of dietary fibre.
You will find three food charts in this book (in addition to a calorie chart of drinks) to make it triply easy to follow the new high-fibre low-calorie method of eating reduction and health benefit.
The first makes it easy to see which foods are low in calories and which are high in dietary fibre by listing the calorie and fibre content of average or easily recognizable portions of all the basic foods.
You will see at a glance the number of calories and the quantity of dietary fibre (when present) in a whole average-sized eating apple, or a carrot, or a rasher of bacon.
We call this chart the ‘Instant Calorie and Fibre Guide’.
Our next chart, the ‘Calorie and Fibre Guide to Packaged Foods’, makes high-fibre low-calorie eating even easier.
In this we reveal the number of calories and the quantity of dietary fibre present in the useful canned and packaged foods.
The use of convenience foods need be no crime in health and weight control if the correct ones are chosen: in fact they can be a great asset.
Here is the guide you need.
‘Your Basic Calorie and Fibre Chart’, reveals the calorie and fibre content (where present) of all those basic everyday foods on a per ounce basis.
However, we hope that you will take time to read the chapters that precede the recipes, menus and diet charts.
Because if you do, you cannot fail to be deeply impressed by the very many ways in which high-fibre foods can help you to slim, and to come to the conclusion that the F-Plan is that major slimming breakthrough everyone has been seeking for so long.
What (and where) is dietary fibre?
Dietary fibre is a substance obtained from plant foods, as distinct from animal foods.
All cereals, fruits and vegetables contain some dietary fibre, but, just as the calorie content of different foods varies to a great degree, so does the fibre content of different plant foods.
Some are excellent sources, while the quantity contained in an average serving of others would be negligible.
With cereal-based foods, fibre value depends to a large degree on how much has been stripped away in the milling and refining processes.
Fruits and vegetables, even in their raw, unprocessed state, differ so much that you certainly can't say that all of them are useful sources of fibre.
But precisely what is dietary fibre?
Well, it could be loosely defined as the cell-wall material of plants but only loosely, because it also consists of substances associated with these cell walls.
Dietary fibre can also be described as the carbohydrate material in plant foods (mainly derived from the cell walls) which is not digested by man.
Note that phrase ‘not digested by man’, because it gives you your first clue to the slimming advantages of dietary fibre.
Food which is not digested cannot be used to provide body fat or calories!
All plants and animals, ourselves included, are made up of cells, but the cell walls of plants are of a more rigid structure.
This performs the function of enclosing cell contents, trapping water, stiffening the plant and conducting sap.
It is tempting to think of dietary fibre as the tough stuff which holds the plant together, and this is true to a degree, but it can be misleading when it comes to locating high-fibre plants by guesswork.
Cell walls are made up of a variety of substances of which only one, cellulose, is truly fibrous in the sense of being filamentous or threadlike.
Hence if you were to take a guess at selecting a high-fibre vegetable you might well think of something like celery, which seems to reveal its fibre content unmistakably.
Yet peas, extolled by advertisers for their tenderness, in fact contain more than four times the fibre of celery, weight for weight.
Generally, however, high-fibre foods do require more chewing, which gives them yet another slimming advantage, as you will learn later in this book.
By far the richest source of dietary fibre is bran.
This consists largely of cell-wall material from grain and contains between 40 and 50 per cent dietary fibre — a much greater percentage than any other food.
Bran is a byproduct of the milling process used in making white and other extracted flours.
It is largely because the bran is stripped from white flour that our Western diet has become low in natural fibre content.
White flour, the basis of so many foods, is fibre-depleted flour.
Similarly, sugar, as we use it, is sugar cane or beet totally divested of all its dietary fibre.
However, the F-Plan does not require you to obtain your dietary fibre from bran alone.
Yesterday's message of ‘bran alone’ is now outdated and for some very good reasons.
For one thing, bran is a bulky substance and it isn't easy to consume sufficient fibre from it without making your diet unpalatable.
If you have tried sprinkling it on breakfast cereal and weighed the quantity, you will have discovered that you get a large volume for a quarter of an ounce — just about as much as you can palatably add to a single portion of breakfast cereal, without beginning to think that you are eating a bowl of sawdust!
Most people would only eat bran with breakfast cereal.
Yes, there are enthusiasts who scatter it on to their scallops, mash it into their spinach and, quite possibly, stir it into their tea.
But in the F-Plan we use bran only where it is palatable.
No one ever goes on eating anything they don't like for long.
There are, however, other important reasons why your dietary fibre should be obtained from fruit and vegetables as well as cereals.
Dietary fibre differs in some degree from plant to plant.
It is a complex substance and there is still much to be learned about it.
Medical researchers are becoming increasingly aware of the health and weight-control benefits of dietary fibre in general— but the indications are that different forms of fibre may perform different beneficial functions.
Fresh fruit, for instance, being mainly water, provides only a dilute form of dietary fibre.
Weight for weight it does not compare favourably with foods like cereals and nuts in fibre content, although it works out well when you take into account how much fibre you get for a modest number of calories.
However, there is a substance called  pectin, which is part of the fibre of fruit, which is not found in other plant foods.
Medical experiments indicate that the presence of an appreciable quantity of pectin in the diet tends to increase the number of calories excreted in the stools in the form of fat.
Obviously, the more calories you excrete the more calories the body is deprived of, and the more speedily you force it to shed weight.
For this and other known and yet to be investigated reasons, it is obviously a good plan to boost daily fibre intake — for health and slimming benefit — from a variety of cereal, fruit and vegetable sources, and this is what you do on the F-Plan.
Although the benefits of dietary fibre are still in the process of scientific investigation, we want to make sure that you don't miss out on any of the advantages, both those which are known and those still to be fully revealed.
Although generally aware that bran, wholemeal bread (which has less of its fibre stripped away in the milling process than white bread) and muesli-type mixtures are rich sources of fibre, most people used to find it difficult to know where to locate that healthy high-fibre food.
There is a good reason for this difficulty.
Before the F-Plan was published it was impossible to find a really helpful and realistic guide to the sources of fibre in everyday foods.
Scientific textbooks reveal the percentage of fibre in various cereal foods, fruits and vegetables.
But this is only part of the story and can be very misleading.
To assess, realistically, how much fibre a particular food is likely to contribute to a daily menu, it is important to estimate what quantity of that particular food you are likely to eat.
This varies a great deal from food to food.
Let us consider watercress as a typical example of how easy it is to be deceived.
If you were to consult fibre charts, you would see that watercress (33 per cent fibre) appears to be quite a good source.
It contains a higher percentage of fibre than cabbage, for instance, and more than twice as much as apples on a weight-for-weight basis.
However, if you were to help yourself to a reasonably generous helping of watercress as part of a salad meal, it is unlikely that your portion would weigh more than half an ounce.
You get plenty of watercress for half an ounce, but the quantity of dietary fibre in that weight is really too small to make any realistic contribution to your daily fibre intake.
It provides you with just half a gram of fibre.
If you were to  serve yourself an average helping of cabbage, though, it would usually weigh at least two ounces if you were eating it raw as part of a portion of coleslaw, for example, or four ounces if you were serving boiled cabbage.
If you were to pick up and weigh that apple you are about to eat, you would find it weighed about five ounces.
So both these foods are useful sources of dietary fibre because, unlike watercress, they tend to be consumed in reasonably weighty quantities.
The apple would provide more than two grams of fibre, and the cooked cabbage nearly three.
Why we eat what we do and how much we eat of any particular food is a fascinating subject.
It depends a good deal on the bulk and ‘fillability’ of the food, of course.
Hence many of the fibre-rich foods have inbuilt quantity controls because of their sheer bulk — fruit and vegetables in particular.
But there are many other factors involved.
We tend to serve and finish off complete units of food as provided for us by manufacturers.
If you are wondering, for instance, why The Instant Calorie and Fibre Chart lists only three quarters of an ounce of shredded wheat and then an ounce or more of other cereals, ask yourself whether you have ever seen anyone eat one and a quarter, or perhaps one and one third, shredded wheats…
There are those who eat one shredded wheat and those who eat two.
The world is precisely divided between those two groups with no grey areas in between.
Similarly, with potato crisps, have you ever known anyone not finish a packet they started?
There are even some (not you, of course!) who have been known to lick the first finger of the right hand and dip it into the bottom of the packet, so that those tiny remaining crumbs of crisp can be finished off.
Nature does a neat packaging job with many foods, of course, and this also influences the quantity we normally consume.
Where one unit is usually sufficient to satisfy the appetite and desire, we tend to keep to just one unit — one apple, one pear, one orange.
Where mother nature has been meaner in her packaged quantity, with plums for instance, one unit does not have an inbuilt stop mechanism, so we often end up eating a good deal more than we would with a larger fruit.
This has been taken into account in compiling The Instant Calorie and Fibre Chart, too.
How we buy food also has an influence on how much we eat of it at  any one meal.
If we buy half a pound we tend to eat either half a pound — or half that quantity.
The size of the dish or plate we use affects quantity as well, and this mainly accounts for the variation in quantities of breakfast cereals.
Where a cereal is very light, like cornflakes, an ounce will comfortably fill the usual breakfast bowl.
With Puffed Wheat an ounce would actually overflow in many bowls, so people tend to serve less than an ounce.
Bran cereals and muesli are rather more weighty, so here people tend to serve out more than an ounce just so that it looks sufficient.
Price is another factor which influences quantity with some foods — mainly those we think of as protein foods.
For example, most people will be quite content with a two-ounce portion of prawns, because they have become accustomed to eating a modest quantity of an expensive food, while with many fish — cod, for instance — six ounces would be a more usual serving.
This factor applies less with foods rich in dietary fibre, because these foods — happily — tend to be inexpensive.
But it might influence the quantities of grapes or strawberries consumed, for instance.
The amount of work we have to do in consuming any particular food influences the quantity too — both chewing (where high-fibre foods score so well) and manual work.
Scientists discovered, in an experiment with overweight people, that when allowed to eat as much as they wanted, they ate considerably fewer peanuts in the shell than peanuts provided ready-shelled.
On the whole, the bulky form of foods rich in dietary fibre has a wonderful restraining effect on the quantity consumed — one of the great advantages of the F-Plan.
But use self-control in relation to nuts (it's a good idea to buy them in shells) and take care with dried fruit we have observed that some slimmers make frequent sorties into the pantry to nibble a handful of dried fruit.
This way rather a lot of calories can be consumed; the chart gives the number of calories per ounce of dried fruit.
Dried fruit has been processed, of course, to some degree.
It is interesting to note how often foods only become fattening when man has had a hand in processing them in some way.
The foods which are consumed very much in the way they were grown — many of the fibre-rich foods — are rarely potentially fattening.
It would appear that God did not intend us to be fat.
The best sources of all are those foods which have a high percentage of fibre and tend also to be consumed in reasonably large quantities…without providing too many calories, if you are slimming!
This is where, for instance, the good old baked bean in tomato sauce is unbeatable.
These beans consist of more than seven per cent dietary fibre and most people would eat the contents of an 8 oz can.
This means that an average serving would contribute more than 16g of fibre to the diet, which is more than half the quantity that the average Briton consumes in a day on his fibre-depleted diet.
At the other end of the scale, one of the poorer vegetable sources of fibre is cucumber, which contains only 0.4 per cent of dietary fibre and tends to be consumed in modest servings.
It has a low fibre content and a low portion weight, so its fibre contribution to the average diet is negligible.
Taking this essential ‘how much is normally eaten’ factor into account we have compiled the guide starting on page 213.
This gives a truly realistic and helpful guide to the fibre content of foods.
Based on average portions, it shows you a whole range of foods, from those which are enormously helpful to those which are virtually useless in boosting the fibre content of your diet.
The vital calorie factor
By including sufficient high-fibre foods in your diet you will actually help your body to shed surplus fat.
But this doesn't mean that you can forget about calories.
The strength of the F-Plan lies in the way it affects the calories you consume.
Never let anyone, or any diet, convince you that calories don't count in achieving weight loss.
They do.
They are what slimming is all about.
Calories are units of energy, the energy we need to keep going.
We consume these calories in the form of food and use them up in maintaining the body's functions and movements.
All foods supply calories, but in widely varying quantities on an ounce-for-ounce basis.
Sometimes — often, in fact — in the Western world, people consume more calories than they need to fuel the body with energy.
A percentage of these surplus calories is then stored as body fat, and this is what makes people overweight.
The only way in which to reverse this situation and become slim again is to supply the body with fewer calories than it needs for its daily energy requirements, so that it has to draw on the emergency store of calories in its own fat.
When you are slimming you are really eating your own body — eating away the part of it you don't want, that surplus fat!
Apart from becoming highly energetic and making the body burn up many more calories daily — a possible but usually very slow method of shedding weight — there is no other way of losing weight than by depriving the body of calories.
All slimming diets which can possibly work are based on calorie reduction, but it is easy to see why people become confused about this.
So many diets appear to have no connection with calories.
An example is the once highly popular low-carbohydrate method of slimming.
Dieters were told that they only had to ration carbohydrates and then they could eat as much as they liked of other foods.
These diets are now frowned upon by many medical experts because of their low fibre content.
However, it is true that many people have succeeded in shedding weight on them in the past.
(These diets could be said to  have been half-right, in that they did cut out refined carbohydrates, but unfortunately without adding fibre-rich carbohydrate foods which we now know to be of such help to slimmers.)
The reason for weight loss, though, was calorie reduction.
Because so many people in the West eat such a large proportion of their daily calories in the form of refined sugary and starchy foods, it was found that, when these foods were strictly rationed, daily calorie intake usually automatically dropped sufficiently to achieve weight loss.
Although people were allowed to eat other foods freely, in fact when they were deprived of their refined carbohydrates they tended not to increase their intake of these alternative foods very much — not enough to make up for the calories they were saving.
Then there are those modern diets which tell you to ration only fats.
Fats supply the most calories of all, very many more, weight for weight, than all other foods.
All high-calorie foods are fatty, and all high calorie meals are fatty.
So by rationing these foods you cut calorie intake.
You are on a low-calorie diet.
But since the foods allowed are still refined foods, the fibre content may not be high enough to meet present recommended levels.
Ah, but what about this remarkable new diet formula from America which tells you that you can eat vast quantities of melon and chicken, or spinach and prunes, or pineapple, or whatever, as long as you keep to this one food, or this combination of two foods, for the whole day?
You may have actually heard people raving about the miracle weight losses they have achieved and attributed to these magical foods.
Poor souls, all they were doing was cutting calorie intake — the hard way.
You could say their success was based on the ‘throw-up factor’.
There is a limit to the quantity of any one particular food you can eat, and continue to eat without other foods, before beginning to feel bored with it and then almost sick at the thought of it.
More scientifically, variety has been found to be a factor in influencing the quantity of food we desire.
It is partly because our Western diets are varied (and healthily so, because this ensures a wide range of necessary vitamins and minerals) that we are tempted to overeat.
It's amazing how easy and tempting it is to eat a little more when we are offered food of a different flavour and texture — the dessert after a savoury meal, for instance.
Interestingly enough, even hens and rats have been found to consume more calories when they are  offered a varied diet than when they are fed ‘the same old thing’ all the time.
People eating ‘the same old thing’ eat fewer calories.
Restrict a person to any one food and — even if that food is chocolate — they will almost certainly shed weight.
But these diets are, by their nature, eventually self-defeating.
After a certain time the very sight of the food allowed becomes off-putting and even repellent.
Many people have experience of this from gorging sessions in childhood.
My own son, as a small boy, allowed to graze freely on a strawberry field during a ‘pick your own’ expedition and aware that he, unlike our basket, would not be weighed and charged, once achieved a mammoth strawberry-eating feat.
That was five years ago, and he hasn't been able to face a strawberry since!
So ALL diets, even those which come complete with generally useless injections and pills, achieve weight loss only by reducing calorie intake.
The F-Plan also reduces your calorie intake in order to allow you to shed weight at sufficient speed.
But the radical difference between this and previous dieting methods is that it makes the food you consume more filling and also renders some of the calories it supplies non-fattening, as you will begin to learn in the next chapter.
The calorie-fibre connection
The most dramatic thing about the recent dietary fibre research is that it has, to a degree, altered the basis on which experts have been calculating potential weight loss over the past half century or so…the period during which overweight people have been begging diet doctors and dieticians to help them shed that surplus fat.
It is never possible to predict weight loss precisely.
Even on the same diet, this will vary from person to person depending on many individual factors, including the amount of excess weight (the heavier you are the faster you tend to shed weight) and the degree of energy expended in physical activity.
Nevertheless, there was a simple weight-loss equation on which it was possible to estimate the maximum amount of weight likely to be lost each week on any specific calorie allowance.
This was based on subtracting the calories consumed in food from the calories required to keep the body going.
Let us assume that you are a woman of medium height, doing a job like housework, which requires a moderate amount of physical activity, and that you are about one stone overweight and just about to embark on trying to lose it.
In these circumstances, it should be roughly assumed that you would be burning up around 2,000 calories a day.
If we were to put you on a slimming diet providing you with 1,500 calories a day, you would be 500 calories short of your requirement and these would have to be taken from your body fat.
It has been scientifically estimated that a pound of your own body fat provides approximately 3,500 calories.
So during a week you would be likely to shed one pound of surplus fat.
Obviously, if you followed a stricter diet, allowing you only 1,000 calories a day, you would draw an additional 500 calories a day from your body fat.
So with a daily deficit of 1,000 calories you could expect to shed around two pounds a week.
As you see, expected rate of fat loss has always been estimated simply by counting the calories consumed in the form of food, any food, and subtracting them from the number the body requires for energy.
The recent findings about fibre introduce a new factor into this weight-loss equation.
As you read in the introduction to this book, when people eat high-fibre diets they excrete more calories in their stools (faeces).
In several experiments, scientists have undertaken the task of analysing the stools of those following high-fibre diets and have found that the calories excreted are measurably greater in number than the calories excreted by those on the normal, varied Western diets, rich in refined carbohydrate foods — or, indeed, on any other pattern of eating.
Tests indicate that the increased calorie content of the faeces amounts to nearly ten per cent when people follow high-fibre diets.
Obviously, those calories which are being flushed away are not being used by the body…which means that the body is having to use more of its own surplus fat to make up for them.
So on a 1,000 calorie high-fibre diet the body is going to shed weight more quickly than on a normal 1,000 calorie diet of varied food — or on any other 1,000 calorie diet.
Before the fascinating high-fibre research findings it was assumed that weight loss depended entirely on the number of calories consumed compared with the number expended by the body.
Now we have to add another factor to this simple statement.
Weight loss depends on the number and the source of calories consumed.
The rate of weight loss will be influenced not only by the quantity you eat, in terms of calories, but also by which foods you choose to make up that calorie intake.
This is a great asset in favour of high-fibre dieting, but is very far from being the only advantage you gain when you follow the F-Plan slimming method.
The benefit of this revolutionary diet is based not on just one advantage over other diets but on many factors which add up to faster, easier, more effective slimming.
The fact is that from the moment you put fibre-rich food into your mouth it starts to give both physical and psychological advantages in filling you, satisfying you, protecting you from feeling hungry again soon, and speeding your weight loss.
The slimming benefits of the F-Plan diet start in the mouth, continue in the stomach, extend to the blood and reach a grand finale with that final flush!
So let's start with the first mouthful and work our way down the whole digestive tract, to explain fully the marvellous benefits of this new slimming method.
How fibre helps — in your mouth
Even before the foods which are rich in dietary fibre start to pass down your throat, they perform a multiplicity of functions which help to reduce the quantity of food you want to eat and they start to send helpful satiety signals to the brain.
A whole range of slimming benefits, both physiological and psychological, come into play right there in your mouth.
One of these benefits is in slowing down your eating.
This may not, at first glance, seem to be a major factor but in fact it is a crucial element in weight control.
The rate at which you eat not only strongly influences how much you want to eat but — more surprisingly — it influences the length of time elapsing before you feel the desire to eat again.
One of the most fascinating scientific experiments of recent years showed that when people ate meals at a rapid rate they became hungry again more quickly than when they ate precisely the same size of meal at a slower rate.
Why this happens isn't fully understood.
But it is well endorsed by general observation.
Never underestimate the role of eating-speed in slimming and weight control.
It is very much more important than most people realize.
If a group of people sitting at a dining table had their entire bodies shrouded under some tent-like garment, there are two ways in which the expert observer of eating behaviour could differentiate the fat from the slim.
One of the things the expert would note would be that, however big the meal — and let us assume that over-large portions were served — some people would consume every morsel and leave an entirely clean plate.
These would almost certainly be the overweight people, and this is something you can observe for yourself in almost any restaurant.
Overweight people, particularly the heavily overweight, rarely stop eating until they have finished everything on the plate.
Slim people, in contrast, usually stop when they feel satisfied.
In the case of an over-large meal this would mean that the slim people would put down their knives and forks and leave some food.
Overweight people seem to lack a ‘stop mechanism’.
This appears to  be one of their basic problems.
Effortlessly slim people are governed by their body's requirement for food and are bullied by messages from the body —‘That's it, old chap, I've had enough’ at the appropriate time.
‘Honestly,’ they say, ‘I couldn't eat another morsel.’
And they really mean it.
In contrast, overweight people seem to get much less strong and effective stop signals from the body, and this is largely because of the other factor, the major clue, which our eating-behaviour expert would be using in his ‘guess who's overweight’ game.
The overweight people would eat more rapidly than the slim people.
This has been shown in several scientific experiments which invariably indicate that overweight people eat more quickly than slim people.
A recent experiment in America showed that people of normal weight might start eating at a reasonably rapid pace at the beginning of a meal, when their hunger is at a peak, but this eating rate will steadily slow down as the meal progresses.
The overweight people in this experiment, however, kept eating at the same fast pace throughout the meal.
Again, this is something you can observe for yourself in any public eating place.
The overweight people tend to eat in a non-stop motion.
As one mouthful of food is being chewed, the other is on the fork and on its way up — ready to be put in the mouth the second that the first mouthful starts on its way down the throat.
From my own observations, generally the greater the weight problem the faster the rate of eating.
America, where there appear to be more grossly obese people than in Britain (by which I mean those around double their desirable body weight, rather than just a couple of stones overweight), is an excellent place to observe this eating-speed phenomenon.
Once I sat with an American psychiatrist, a specialist in eating behaviour, and observed a hugely overweight couple (quite unaware that we were watching them) eating their restaurant breakfasts.
The quantity of food collected from the help-yourself buffet was enormous and the speed with which it was consumed was almost supersonic.
The husband not only forked food into his mouth with an almost non-stop movement of his right hand, but he also held a corn bun in his left hand so that food could be put into his mouth to fill the split second it took to reload the fork.
Chewing must have been absolutely minimal.
Needless to say, silence prevailed throughout the meal.
And at the end of it, after eating what must have been at least half-a-dozen scrambled eggs, plus bacon, sausages and several buns, the couple got up to reload their plates…
This is an extreme example.
But most of us who have any kind of weight problem, however small, can benefit from slowing down our eating, for some very sound scientific reasons.
After food is put into the mouth it takes a few minutes (usually around five) even to start having any physical effect in satisfying the hungry body.
At a fast eating pace and with a minimum amount of chewing — and very little chewing is usually required with refined sugary and starchy foods — an awful lot of calories can be consumed in five minutes.
As eating-time continues, the body sends out more and more satiety signals, but it is estimated that it takes about twenty minutes for a meal to have its full effect in filling our stomachs and sending out all the other physical signals of sufficiency.
That is why speedy eaters, who eat their fill in perhaps ten or fifteen minutes, often feel overfull some minutes after the meal.
Most of us, the slim as well as the overweight, have uttered that plaintive wail: ‘Oh, I shouldn't have done it!’, as we pat our far from comfortable stomachs after a particularly tempting feast, like Christmas dinner, and stagger off for the Rennies.
‘Slow down your eating’ is excellent classic advice for those with a weight problem — and many of those who have struggled long in the battle of the bulge have probably read it before, and even tried to follow it.
Quite probably they have failed, or given up trying after a time.
Why?
Because the rate of eating is a deeply established habit and all deeply established habits are very difficult to break.
If you were advised to speak more slowly it would probably take months of effort, repeated conscious effort, before you succeeded in altering the speed at which you spoke.
The same would apply to changing your accent.
Think of the effort that Professor Higgins had to put in with Eliza!
Slowing down a habitual eating rate isn't easy and tends to need prolonged effort.
And this is where a high-fibre diet starts to play its first function in helping you to eat less.
It automatically slows down the rate of eating for you!
And for a number of reasons not just one.
First of all, plant foods in their natural form, unstripped of natural  fibre in processing, tend to be bulky.
You get a large volume or bulk of food for a small or moderate number of calories, and that in itself is going to necessitate considerably more chewing and take considerably more time.
Take sugar and apples for comparison.
The average Briton consumes about five ounces of sugar in a day.
In the way it is grown and gathered, in cane or beet, sugar contains an appreciable content of dietary fibre, but this is stripped away completely in the refining process to leave no fibre at all in the sugar we buy in packets or consume in cakes, biscuits or drinks.
Many people consume a good deal of sugar in drinks.
It takes hardly any time at all to swoosh down a can of cola, and neither does this seem to have any effect in satisfying the appetite.
Most people find it easy to drink large quantities of calorific drinks, sweet or alcoholic, without in any way lessening or delaying their appetite for the next meal — and these drinks, and sugar itself, are perhaps the ultimate example of fibre-free calories.
By consuming calories without any dietary fibre at all, you can get down a very large number of calories, at a very fast rate, with very little effect in satisfying the appetite.
Even when refined sugar is combined with refined flour to make cakes or desserts, the chewing required tends to be minimal.
It is somewhat unrealistic to imagine people gnawing away at sugar cane or sugar beet, so as an example at the opposite extreme let us consider apples.
Apples are basically a mixture of water, sugar, dietary fibre and little else.
Only the sugar in them supplies calories.
You would have to eat about a dozen apples in order to obtain that average daily 5 oz of sugar from this source; you can imagine how long that would take and how difficult it would be to eat all the remainder of your daily food.
If the dietary fibre were removed, the apples would become apple juice.
This way, those apple sugar calories could be consumed very quickly without the appetite-satisfying effect.
So it is the dietary fibre which has the slowing down and filling up effect.
This principle is true of all foods.
Dietary fibre, which is calorie-free, has the general effect of adding bulk, slowing down eating and satisfying the appetite in this and many other ways.
But this isn't the only way in which dietary fibre slows down eating.
The texture as well as the bulk of fibre-rich foods helps to put on the brakes.
The pleasure of eating is largely the pleasure of taste.
In natural  fibre-rich foods the taste-evoking substances appear to remain intact within the cell walls which have not been stripped away by refining processes.
Therefore the taste of an unprocessed food is not fully appreciated unless it is chewed.
This may be one reason why fibre-rich foods are normally automatically chewed more thoroughly than processed foods.
There is yet another reason why many fibre-rich foods slow down eating and add to satisfaction.
Food is not swallowed with comfort unless, or until, it is soft and moist.
If it is dry and unyielding we automatically chew it until it becomes comfortable to swallow.
Many high-fibre fruits and vegetables, nuts and dry breakfast cereals (shredded wheat, for instance, as opposed to porridge) need a good deal of chewing before they can be comfortably swallowed.
Cooking, particularly boiling, reduces but does not wholly remove the firmness of food.
Scientists have done careful experiments to confirm the benefits of dietary fibre in slowing down eating.
Sensibly comparing two foods of a very similar nature, they monitored a group of people eating a ‘meal’ consisting entirely of wholemeal bread, which contains 8.5 per cent of dietary fibre, and compared them with a group eating a ‘meal’of white bread, which contains only 2.7 per cent dietary fibre.
The wholemeal bread took 11 minutes longer to consume (45 minutes) than the white bread (34 minutes).
Dietary fibre means that a food requires more chewing but it also requires more swallowing.
During prolonged chewing, more saliva is secreted and this adds to the volume of the food in the mouth.
That obviously necessitates more swallowing movements.
Although it takes a few minutes for the body to send out any strong signals of satiety it is probable that chewing and swallowing movements do begin to send messages to the brain.
All of us, the overweight as well as the slim, have some body controls which limit our eating capacity.
Otherwise, some people would indeed quite literally eat themselves to death — in fact there have been a few cases of disturbed people doing just that in recent years.
However, the vast majority of people have inbuilt controls and these seem to differ only in their degree of effectiveness between the overweight and the slim.
The major control mechanisms appear to be the state of fullness of the stomach, the level of sugar in the blood, and a  satiety centre in the brain known as the appestat.
In experiments with rats, increased electrical activity was recorded in the satiety centre of the brain during chewing and swallowing.
This indicates that chewing and swallowing at least start to bring our bodily eating controls into action by sending the first satiety signals to the brain — and that the more chewing and swallowing we do the more effective this is likely to be.
So far we have dealt only with the physical benefits of fibre-rich foods in the mouth.
The psychological benefits might well be just as great.
Chewing gives psychological satisfaction, and even in scientific experiments the chewing of gum has been found to help reduce tension.
Psychiatrists working in the area of weight control have discovered that we need our ‘psychological fill’ as well as our physical fill of food in order to feel content with what we have eaten.
When someone eats a snack while mentally absorbed in other things — perhaps a mother grabbing her own meal in between attempts to coax food down a baby, or a viewer eating a TV snack while totally involved in the latest beastly plots of ‘J.R.’
— it has been found that the food has little effect in satisfying hunger.
Often, for instance, after the baby has been put to sleep the mother will sit down and eat another meal.
We seem to need to get a sufficient daily quota of conscious relaxation and pleasure from our food, and obviously this occurs while the food is in the mouth.
Little wonder that a meal of mainly refined foods, gulped down in seconds, tends to lead to second helpings to extend the time of eating, or another meal or snack shortly afterwards to ‘bulk out’ the eating pleasure of the day.
In this chapter you have discovered many ways in which foods containing dietary fibre can make you feel more satisfied — and the food has not yet gone down the throat.
See what happens when high-fibre food reaches the stomach…
How fibre fills your stomach — and for longer
Dietary fibre is a sponge-like material which absorbs and holds water as it is chewed in the mouth and passes down the gastro-intestinal tract.
This means that fibre-rich foods swell to a greater bulk, to fill the stomach, than any other foods.
The state of fullness of the stomach is obviously going to influence your appetite.
A derivative of cellulose, one of the substances present in dietary fibre, has long been used as a ‘slimming aid’ for this reason.
Many of the pills and capsules which are sold to slimmers as appetite suppressants consist largely of methyl cellulose.
The only problem is that you can't get enough of this material in pills and capsules to provide enough bulk to have any realistically helpful effect in filling the stomach.
However, when scientists Derek Miller and Dr Elizabeth Evans conducted tests at London University, adding 20g of cellulose to people's daily diet, they found this did indeed automatically reduce calorie intake.
People consumed fewer calories without even trying to do so.
So a sufficient quantity of cellulose does help you to eat less.
This large bulk of material in the stomach on a high-fibre diet is just one of the factors which makes you feel more satisfied on less food.
Equally important is the fact that fibre-rich food stays in the stomach longer than fibre-depleted food.
Those gastric acids have a much tougher job to do when they have to fight their way through fibrous cell-wall material.
This produces two results — both beneficial in weight loss.
Food in a fibre-rich diet stays in the stomach longer; and it seems probable that the food is less efficiently digested as it goes through the digestive tract.
The second factor is less obviously helpful at first glance but what it adds up to is calorie saving!
The cell walls themselves are totally indigestible and do not provide calories.
This factor is taken into account in giving the calorie values of carbohydrate foods.
However, it seems highly likely that some of  the calorie-supplying substances associated with the cell walls are not digested either when a diet is high in natural fibre.
This would help to account for some of the extra calories expelled in the faeces of those consuming fibre-rich foods.
So when you eat your F-Plan fibre-rich diet you get a greater and more filling bulk of food in the stomach, the food stays there longer, and it is likely that fewer of those potentially fat-producing calories are digested.
Yet another advantage is the prevention of stomach discomfort, often the trigger for diet-breaking snacks.
Unless stomach acids have a job to do in digesting food they tend to cause discomfort, and dieters often find themselves turning to extra food to quell that unpleasant acidic feeling when the stomach is largely empty.
Fibre-rich foods keep the stomach acids under control for long periods because those acids have to work longer and harder at digestion processes.
It is only when the fibre-rich food leaves the stomach that it starts passing through the body at a faster pace, giving the well-documented health benefits.
It stays longer where you need it to stay — in the stomach — and moves more swiftly where you need it to move more swiftly, through the intestine and bowel.
But we are far from being at the end of the chain of slimming benefits that are achieved by a diet rich in natural fibre.
There is the blood factor, too, which can also provide a major benefit, as you will learn in the next chapter.
Rebound hunger — how fibre beats it
One of the major problems which gave carbohydrate foods in general the reputation of being fattening would be described by doctors as ‘rebound hypoglycaemia’.
The rest of us might put the same thing in much more simple terms by voicing that popular complaint, ‘When you've eaten a Chinese meal you feel hungry again in a couple of hours.’
This kind of comment might well follow a Chinese meal consisting largely of white processed rice.
Carbohydrate foods — it used to be thought all carbohydrate foods — do indeed have a tendency to produce a rebound hunger.
There is a scientific explanation.
One of the processes of digestion is to reduce food to a substance which can be absorbed in the bloodstream as sugar.
Blood sugar needs to be kept up to the correct level in order to allow both body and mind to function correctly, and the body is very clever at informing us of its requirements.
Hence when blood sugar drops below the required level the body sends out signals which are interpreted by the mind as ‘I am feeling hungry.’
Blood-sugar level is one of the major physical factors in determining the state of hunger.
Generally, when the blood-sugar level is high we don't feel hungry when it is low, we do.
All carbohydrates, sugars and starches are converted into blood sugar.
The only difference is that sugars and starches, in the form of refined carbohydrate foods, are more quickly converted into blood sugar.
After a meal consisting largely of refined carbohydrate food the blood-sugar level goes up very quickly, which would seem to be a good thing in satisfying the appetite.
But then comes the snag.
The body has to have control mechanisms to regulate all its functions.
Mechanisms to excrete an appropriate quantity of the water we drink, for instance; otherwise, since we tend to drink so much more than we require, we would eventually burst.
Similarly, mechanisms to excrete at least most of the excess salt that we eat, since most of us consume about ten times the amount necessary for our bodily needs.
Blood-sugar level goes up on the digestion of food.
But if it were to go up and up and up the blood would become absolutely saturated with sugar which would do us no good at all.
Therefore we have a  control mechanism to bring down blood-sugar level when it begins to reach unhealthy peaks.
This control mechanism involves the substance called insulin, secreted by the pancreas.
When the blood-sugar level shoots up rapidly, the pancreas hurries into action and secretes a large quantity of insulin to keep the situation under control.
Insulin in the bloodstream reduces the quantity of blood sugar.
All is well for an hour or so.
But after about two hours the excess amount of insulin in the blood tends to have an effect which isn't at all helpful to the person seeking to control hunger and food intake.
It suppresses the blood-sugar level — not just back to the level before the meal, but even lower than the pre-meal level.
This is what is known as rebound hypoglycaemia.
On the basis of this scientific fact you can readily understand why many doctors have for years discouraged overweight people from eating carbohydrate-rich foods.
However, during all those years of ‘cut your carbohydrates’ advice, which impressed itself so much on the British public that many people are still overwhelmed with guilt at the sight of a slice of bread or a potato, all high-carbohydrate foods were grouped together as culprits in causing this rebound hunger which led to excessive eating.
More recent research has shown that it is only some carbohydrate foods which cause this problem, not all of them.
No prizes for guessing that it is the refined sugary and starchy foods which cause this rebound hunger, and natural fibre-rich foods which do not.
The latter are more slowly converted into blood sugar, mainly because of the digestive processes described in the previous chapter.
This may well be the reason why the rebound hunger problem does not arise when carbohydrate foods are consumed in their natural fibre-rich form.
Whatever the reason, repeated tests have shown that the inclusion of sufficient dietary fibre in meals prevents the excessive output of insulin which so often leads to hunger and snack-eating on diets in which the carbohydrates are processed and refined.
…
Yet another reason why dietary fibre helps to control your hunger and your weight.
The fibre calorie saving
Once the residue of a meal rich in natural fibre leaves the stomach after its lengthy residence there, it speeds down the intestine at a faster pace.
In doing so it saves the dieter from the common curse of constipation, mainly caused by lack of bulk in normal slimming diets.
Medical research, which you will read about later in this book, indicates that this faster and more efficient transit may well be helpful in preventing many much more serious illnesses of the lower intestine and bowel, including cancer.
When the faeces are finally expelled, many studies have shown that this waste matter has a higher calorie content than that excreted by people following a normal Western diet containing refined carbohydrates.
Happily for most of us, who are inclined to overeat occasionally or frequently, all the calories consumed in food are not used by the body for energy or fat storage.
There is a natural wastage of at least five per cent on any diet.
But tests so far have clearly shown that dietary fibre increases the wastage and indicated that generally the higher the fibre content the higher the wastage of calories.
In one scientific experiment it was found that a daily increase of log of dietary fibre, by the addition of more fruit, vegetables and wholemeal bread to an ordinary Western diet, increased the number of calories excreted in a bowel movement by nearly go.
With still more additional dietary fibre, 32g a day, the stools were found to contain 210 calories on average.
However, it must be added that these subjects were consuming quite a large quantity of food and were not attempting to shed weight.
Just why there are more calories in the human excreta following the intake of a high-fibre diet is less than fully understood at the present stage of scientific research.
One source of these surplus calories excreted is obviously the non-digestible cell-wall material which forms much of the dietary fibre itself: This is taken into account when calorie figures are given for carbohydrate foods.
Scientific calorie charts, on which all those popular women's magazine  calorie charts are based, speak of ‘available carbohydrate calories’.
This means that the non-digestible calories in the plant cell walls, which will eventually be expelled in the faeces, have already been subtracted in order to give a realistic calorie figure for each carbohydrate food.
However, there are other, additional, calories in the faeces expelled after high-fibre eating, in the form of fat and protein.
These are not accounted for in the calorie figures.
Nor are they fully explained — although less efficient digestion in general is probably a reasonably accurate explanation.
But we have dwelt long enough on this final stage of the fibre slimming story.
Suffice it to say that if you are cutting calories in order to shed weight at a speedy pace, every calorie counts.
calorie that you don't make available to your body!
By following a normal mixed 1,000 calorie diet of protein, fat and refined carbohydrate foods you will be making most of those calories available to your body.
But you will still shed weight at a good pace.
By concentrating on the inclusion of a greater percentage of high-fibre vegetables, fruit and cereal foods in your diet you will be making less of those 1,000 calories available to your body.
So you should shed weight at an even faster rate.
The dual aim of most dieters is to become slimmer and fitter by following a diet.
No one wants to be slim and ill.
These days the principal dietary health recommendations of all major nutritional bodies in the Western world are: Eat less fat, less sugar and more dietary fibre.
That is precisely what you will do on the F-Plan.
Later on in the book we discuss the fitness factor in detail.
But now for your guide to losing weight the easy, speedy way — on the F-Plan.
How to get the calories right
If you are keeping strictly to 1,000 calories a day and not shedding surplus fat…then the chances are you are NOT keeping strictly to 1,000 calories a day.
This fact is not intended to hurt anyone's feelings, and still less, dear reader, to cast any aspersions on your honesty and integrity.
The truth is that most of us eat (and drink) more calories than we think we are eating (and drinking) in the course of a day.
What is more, it is very easy to make mistakes in counting calories.
Then there is also that nasty little disorder called ‘eating amnesia’ which afflicts us all from time to time.
Only recently I suffered a modest attack of it myself when recounting what I had eaten, or rather hadn't eaten, that day.
‘Mummy,’ my son observed after overhearing the conversation, ‘if you aren't careful your nose will grow very , very long.’
So it is on the basis of us all (EVEN I!) being human and fallible that I have to announce that it is scientifically almost impossible not to shed surplus body fat when calorie intake is strictly limited to 1,000 a day.
On the F-Plan it is even less possible because if you are consuming 1,000 calories a day in the form of fibre-rich meals a percentage of those calories is not digested, as explained in previous chapters.
Hence you are providing your body with less than 1,000 calories daily.
My confidence in making the opening statement of this chapter stems not only from scientific fact.
Once when I was young, innocent and unaware of eating amnesia, ‘weighers-wilt’(‘I'll just take a guess at this — looks like two ounces…!’) and other related disorders, I became so alarmed about all the people who couldn't seem to shed weight on 1,000 calories a day that I interviewed many of them, carefully selected a group of twenty of the most baffling and genuine cases, and incarcerated them in a health farm for a week.
Then (somewhat sneakily) I had them fed not 1,000 but 1,500 calories daily.
All but two of them shed weight.
The reassuring message from this cautionary tale is that if you are overweight and use the F-Plan calorie tables correctly, as instructed, you simply cannot fail to shed surplus body fat.
Health disorders  which prevent weight loss are very rare.
Almost certainly if you were suffering from such an illness you would have other symptoms to indicate that you were unwell.
The reason why people sometimes think they can't shed weight on a strict calorie ration of 1,000 daily is that they are guessing at the weight — and thus the calorie content — of their portions of food, or forgetting to add in the calories provided by little items like the butter spread on that bread, or the milk in all those cups of tea; or they fail to realize that innocent-looking things like that canned soft drink or glass of orange juice, or the mayonnaise coleslaw served in the office canteen ('Can't contain many calories — it's salad, isn't it! ') can add a sizeable number of calories to the daily total.
When people guess at the calorie content of a portion of food they tend to underestimate the calories in meat and cheese, mainly because there was such a deeply entrenched fallacy, persisting for so many years, that ‘protein foods’ like this could not possibly be fattening.
Most people also underestimate the calories provided by fatty foods and fat-containing sauces and dressings.
This is simply because the calorie content of these foods is so amazingly high.
All fats — butter, margarine, lard, and all the oils including vegetable oils — contain more than 200 calories an ounce.
An astronomic figure, when you consider that sugar, for instance, provides, weight for weight, only about half that number of calories, and that potatoes contain only 25 calories an ounce.
But again, schooled by the incorrect idea that it is the carbohydrate foods which are the most fattening, many people will very much underestimate the number of calories in the butter-based sauce on their slice of fish, which looks like such an innocent dish.
By the same token, many people over estimate the calories provided by potatoes (cooked without fat), cereal foods, and even fat-free sweet foods.
Most sweet foods like chocolate, biscuits, cakes and many puddings have a high fat content as well as a high sugar content, so their calorie cost is, indeed, extravagant.
However, when sugar is present without much fat or indeed with none, as in a packet of fruit pastilles or some light desserts like crème caramel, the calorie cost is often lower than people imagine.
Of comfort to those of lesser virtue is the fact that pub drinkers, guided only by guesswork, tend to overestimate the calories provided by alcoholic drinks, while innocent orange-juice drinkers, or saintly  souls who will ‘just stick to a bitter lemon, thanks’, often underestimate the number of calories they are consuming.
This based on the deeply entrenched conviction that if it looks naughty it must be very fattening, while if it looks innocent or healthy it cannot be.
This is not a totally dependable theory when it comes to calorie counting.
I make the distinction of ‘pub drinkers’ because home drinkers often pour much larger so-called singles and therefore consume at least as many calories as they think they are taking in — frequently even more.
This applies to spirits rather than wine, for obvious reasons.
And, of course, if the bitter-lemon drinker is insisting on one labelled ‘low calorie’, he or she is consuming hardly any calories at all and is to be congratulated.
From my own observations, made over many years, another great area of calorie error is cold food.
We all associate salads with slimming.
So if we are eating, for instance, a slice of calorie-crammed quiche surrounded by salad vegetable concoctions oozing with oily or mayonnaisey dressings we are still eating a salad, aren't we, so that can't be very fattening, can it?
YES IT CAN.
Most people very much underestimate the number of calories in cold salad meals served in restaurants, canteens and cafés.
As you will see from all these examples of overestimating and underestimating, guesswork is dangerous, on the whole, when it comes to calorie counting.
I use that qualifying phrase ‘on the whole’ because there are some foods which allow you to get away with it, some meals in restaurants where you can and indeed have to get away with it, and some people who can get away with it.
Let us deal with the people first.
The honest truth, never before revealed, is that there are two types of slimmer.
One type can get away with near murder, at least for a while, and still shed some weight.
The second type cannot get away with anything, and must keep very precisely to a set number of calories, weighing and measuring food carefully, in order to shed weight.
Obviously there must be a third type, hovering somewhere in the middle, but you will be able to work this out for yourself by considering the following characteristics of the two extremes.
The CAN-get-away-with-murder calorie counter : This dieter is heavily overweight (by several stones), large in height as well as bulk.
He or she has been eating a very large quantity of food and has recently embarked on a calorie-counting slimming programme.
Big people who weigh a lot and eat a lot tend to shed weight very easily and speedily when they start cutting down on calorie intake.
So even if they are inadvertently or wilfully slipping down a couple of hundred more calories than they intend in the course of a day, they might still find themselves clocking up a decent weight loss on the scales each week.
My message to them: Good luck, and as long as you are satisfied with your weekly weight loss by all means continue to do your own thing.
But do be aware that being a little easy-going in working out and rationing your calories can easily allow you to drift down the slippery slope towards being too easy-going to achieve weight loss.
Such is the frailty of most of our natures that once we take a toe off the straight and narrow we tend to slide off it altogether.
Also, be aware that this happy state of reward for only relative virtue will not continue indefinitely.
The body adjusts to lower caloric intake during prolonged periods of dieting, with the result that weight loss tends to slow down.
This means that, as we continue to diet, we must reduce calorie intake a little more in order to go on achieving a satisfactory rate of weight loss.
This in turn means being even more strict and exact in measuring out the food and counting up the calories.
So if your regular weigh-ins start to yield disappointing news, you know what to do.
The CAN' T-get-away-with-anything (darn it!) calorie counter : If you belong to this category you are probably a little person.
Things are very unfairly stacked against the short when it comes to slimming.
Not only do we display even two or three surplus pounds in the form of an enormous bulge-tall people can often carry a surplus stone without showing it — but we also tend to burn up fewer calories than people of larger height and frame.
That means we have to eat less than they do in order to shed weight.
Being only 5′ 2½″ tall myself I too feel very strongly about the unfairness of this, but there is absolutely nothing I can do about it except to warn you that in these circumstances you do need to be very accurate in counting calories in order to achieve a good rate of weight loss.
The same applies to anyone, tall or short, who has been dieting  for a lengthy period already, and generally to those who are only a few pounds overweight.
Weigh, rather than guess, is the general rule to follow in this situation.
Those referred to at the beginning of this chapter, the dieters who think they can't shed weight on 1,000 calories a day, almost invariably belong to the can't-get-away-with-anything group and are not following the essential rules of calorie counting sufficiently strictly.
So this is a timely moment to list those rules.
Even if you belong to the getting-away-with-murder group, the time will come when you have to follow the rules precisely in order to maintain a speedy weight loss.
So here we go:
1
Be aware that ALL foods, not just some foods, supply calories .
Every single food you see in every supermarket, butcher's, greengrocer's and fishmonger's in the land has calories lurking within.
Fibre-rich foods provide calories, too.
Because this book explains the many ways in which fibre-rich foods help you to shed weight, I don't want you to imagine that they are calorie-free.
In the bad old days of low-carbohydrate diets, many people did, indeed, imagine that those saintly ‘protein foods’ were calorie-free — I have even known poor souls pouring down vastly fattening cream under the mistaken impression that it was calorie-free because it lacked carbohydrate!
Let no similar mistake arise with the F-Plan.
The foods which supply you with fibre also supply you with calories.
Some of those calories are, in fact, wasted and won't add to your weight.
But as we don't yet know how many are wasted, be on the safe side: count the full number given in the F-Plan calorie and fibre charts, and reap the advantage in speed of weight loss.
2
Weigh your food .
Calories are worked out on a per ounce basis (or in grams, for the modern metric-minded), so how many calories you eat in a portion of food depends on the weight of the portion of food you arc eating.
WEIGH IT is the key phrase for the calorie-counter.
Not weighing it is the key crime.
It simply isn't possible to follow a calorie-counting method of slimming without owning some dependably accurate weighing scales ideally, dietary scales, because with some foods like fats you need to weigh out very small portions.
Most diet advisers sternly insist that you weigh every single thing  before putting it in your mouth (cigarettes and fingernails, only, excluded).
My own attitude, stemming from a kindly nature, is more permissive.
Frankly I think you would look pretty silly weighing out your lettuce when an ounce provides only THREE calories.
So what if you go berserk and eat an ounce more lettuce than you think you are eating!
Let us be adult about this and accept that, in view of the fact that even the very strictest diets suggest that you eat not much less than 1,000 calories daily, those three calories aren't going to make a jot of difference to your weight loss.
Sometimes the vegetables which are particularly low in calories are not particularly high in fibre.
This means they don't do you much good, but neither do they do you any harm.
Some vegetables, like cucumber, radishes and lettuce, are mainly water with the occasional vitamin floating around here and there.
Dieters have asked whether they can add these low-calorie vegetables to the meals in this book, and the answer is: Yes.
Eat the high-fibre vegetables for their value in health and weight control, but by all means add more variety and colour to your plate, if you wish, with these harmless foods which don't provide enough calories to slow your weight loss.
On the other hand and this is where many people go wrong that tiny bit of butter that you sneak onto a crispbread I s going to make a difference because there are such an enormous number of calories in such a very modest quantity of fat.
The best tip in using fats like butter, margarine or their lower-calorie alternatives such as Outline or St Ivel Gold is to weigh out half an ounce or an ounce each morning and make that your ready-calorie-counted ration for the day — saves a lot of fiddling around with small quantities.
Ditto for the milk you are going to use throughout the day in all those cups of tea and coffee.
However, I digress…
Earlier in this chapter I explained that with some foods you CAN get away with guesswork about quantity, and weighing is unnecessary.
Which foods these are will become clearly evident when you look through the Instant Calorie and Fibre Chart, showing average portions, which starts on page 217.
I suggest that where an average portion provides less than 20 calories you let yourself off the chore of weighing while following the F-Plan slimming method.
Apart from these, weigh all foods you eat when using the F-Plan calorie and fibre charts.
Listed in Chapter 13 are the meals you can calorie count by guesswork when eating out in restaurants.
3
Remember that many drinks supply calories, too .
These are every bit as fattening as the calories in solid food, and must be taken into account in reaching your daily total calorie intake.
Happily, many drinks are calorie-free or near enough not to matter, and you can drink as much as you like of these (see Chapter 11 and the Drinks Calorie Chart).
I mentioned earlier that it is nearly impossible not to shed surplus weight on a total calorie intake of 1,000 a day when you are following the F-Plan method.
I cited that 1,000-calorie total because, to my knowledge, all adults in normal health and circumstances burn up more than 1,000 calories daily.
Shedding surplus weight depends on providing your body with fewer calories than it needs to keep going.
This is the only way in which it can be forced to feed on its own surplus fat.
Never believe anything else, whatever silly things you may read or hear elsewhere.
Different bodies have differing calorie requirements to function and fuel their energy output.
Size, in both height and weight, is a major factor, and this largely explains why men use more calories than women.
The latest scientific investigations into how many calories the average Briton is burning up in this modern labour-saving, sedentary age are yielding somewhat depressing indications.
At one time I would have suggested that everyone would shed surplus fat on a ration of 1,500 calories daily.
However, some of my medical and scientific friends now suspect that some women burn up only 1,500 calories daily — so obviously, on this intake, they would maintain weight rather than reduce surplus fat.
However, I am not personally aware of any research revealing that adult British people of either sex or any size can live on 1,000 calories daily without shedding weight, whether they are aiming to do so or not.
For this reason 1,000 calories daily is a pretty safe, ‘can't fail’ figure.
This does not mean, though, that it is the ideal daily calorie quota for every F-Plan dieter.
In the next chapter you will find guidance on your own ideal daily calorie ration.
Exercise counts
In answer to a common question from those about to embark on the F-Plan: No, it is not necessary to exercise in order to shed weight.
The F-Plan method can make you slim without additional exercises.
However, having said that, I am very strongly in favour of increasing physical activity and am among those who suspect that its value in weight control has been much underestimated.
In my experience, the major mistake that dieters make lies in deciding that they will exercise once they get slim, rather than starting to increase their physical activity as they start to diet.
We had a typical example of this during the F-Plan trials at London University.
One attractive but heavily overweight young lady revealed that she spent most of her evenings chatting to friends in a wine bar while dieting.
She did intend to join a nearby sports club, where she could swim regularly, as soon as she was slim, but meanwhile shyly admitted to feeling too embarrassed to be seen in a swimsuit.
The situation arising from this all-too-common attitude was as follows: in the evening she was placing herself in a situation of maximum temptation as far as diet-breaking was concerned with time on her hands and food and drink all too readily available.
There is nothing quite as bad as watching other people eat and drink what you are trying to avoid.
Had she embarked on an evening swim instead, she would have achieved all these advantages in helping her to keep to her diet:
1
She would have been kept busy and occupied, and well away from the sight, smell and temptation of food.
2
She would have experienced the undoubted lift in spirits that results from physical exercise.
Depressed moods are the most difficult moods for dieting, and such is the mood-lifting effect of exercise that it is even being used medically as part of the treatment for depression.
3
She would have burned up extra calories, thus helping to speed her weight loss still more.
4
She would have experienced that glow of virtue which is so conducive to easy dieting.
When we feel pleased with our achievements we tend to feel inspired to achieve even more in the way of health and figure improvement.
I am very well aware of the sensitivity of anyone who is overweight.
It can often arise even when people are a mere few pounds overweight.
But if you are contemplating increasing physical activity for still further benefit to your health and figure, try to realize that those vast crowds of people who will scream with laughter at the sight of you in a swimsuit, or on seeing you jogging, skipping, enrolling at aerobics classes or even taking a brisk daily walk, exist only in your mind.
The best time to start exercising is at the start rather than at the end of a dieting campaign.
Calories: how low can you go?
Hunger is a problem that simply should not arise on the F-Plan, even though you are restricting the actual number of calories consumed each day.
This does not mean that you cannot possibly be tempted by the sight of a chocolate bar or the scent of a fish and chip shop, but you will more easily be able to resist.
Because the calories consumed are in the form of particularly bulky, filling and satisfying food your appetite will not be sharpened nor your willpower lowered by actual physical hunger.
We live in a world where food temptations flaunt themselves all around us.
They pop up in the commercials on the TV screen, on the usherette's tray at the cinema, in every other shop window.
In the Western world, unless you are sitting in a canoe in the middle of the Atlantic it is almost impossible to be far from the sight of food.
Even in that situation you would probably be rescued by a passing cruise ship, on board which they would stuff you endlessly with food to compensate for the boredom of the interminable view of the sea.
Food, in our society, is used for many reasons other than simply to satisfy hunger.
It is used for comfort, pleasure, socializing, celebrating, time-filling, seduction — to name just a few of the alternatives.
Obviously, the person who is not actually hungry is considerably less vulnerable to the temptations of our food-filled Western world.
Psychiatrists studying shopping behaviour have found — not surprisingly — that the hungry woman is much more inclined to succumb to impulse food buys.
She generally fills her supermarket trolley more fully when she shops just before a meal than if she shops shortly after one, when her hunger is fully satisfied.
Supermarket chiefs, always seeking new ways to cram more food down us, would be wise to offer a special shop-before-lunch discount!
When you are eating a fibre-rich diet there are restraining limits on how many calories you can actually manage to consume in a day — even if you aren't trying to shed weight.
This was illustrated most illuminatingly by a recent study in which a group of people were asked to eat more than a pound of potatoes each day (baked in their skins, not  fried) in addition to whatever other food they could manage to eat.
By adding these potatoes, a bulky food of reasonably high-fibre content, they actually lost some weight over a three-month period!
The potatoes were so filling that there wasn't a great deal of room left for all the other foods they usually ate.
This was impressive.
But it certainly wouldn't be fair to claim that all you need to do in order to shed surplus weight is to add sufficient fibre-rich foods to your diet or switch from refined carbohydrate foods to natural fibre-rich foods like wholemeal bread.
In the future, when you have become slim, the change from refined carbohydrate foods to their high-fibre alternatives should be sufficient to keep you that way.
Certainly it will do so if you also put some restraints on your intake of' fats.
This is clearly indicated by the natural slenderness of those among the Third World societies who live on plentiful supplies of foods high in fibre content.
So the F-Plan does have a great stay-slim bonus.
Food preferences are very much dictated by habit, and those who get into the habit of choosing the fibre-rich foods gradually come to prefer them.
However, most people aiming to shed surplus weight are also aiming to do so reasonably swiftly.
To be frank, the basic aim of most dieters is to shed two tons of weight by yesterday!
This attitude is understandable, and slimming experts who drearily continue to tell us to ‘be satisfied just to lose weight slowly: half a pound a week is enough’ have little or no understanding of human psychology.
The F-Plan requires less actual effort than any other slimming diet you have followed before.
But all slimming diets the F-Plan included require some degree of conscious effort and self-control.
In order to sustain effort, in this and all other areas of life, we need the feedback of reward ideally, short-term reward rather than some far distant pot of gold, way off at the end of the rainbow.
The essential reward for the dieter is that weekly weight loss.
There are few joys in life to compare with that of stepping on the scales and discovering that you weigh measurably less this week than you did last.
A miserable half pound is barely recordable.
Any seasoned dieter knows full well that she can ‘cheat’ that weight off the normal set of bathroom scales by shifting her stance a little or rushing off to empty the bladder, remove the dentures and so on.
Yes, don't think we weren't watching you…measurable weight loss needs to be at least in the region of 2 lb a week in order to provide that reward so essential to sustained effort.
You can't ‘cheat’ off 2 lb!
In slimming, success tends to breed success and vice versa.
Every slimming club leader knows that it is the member who registers a good weight loss at her weekly weigh-in who is most likely to keep up her dieting and return to the club next week, while the member who records a disappointingly low weight loss is the most likely to drop out.
In dieting, failure does not make us try harder.
Usually, it makes us give up.
On the F-Plan we are aiming for an average weekly weight loss in the region of 31b in order to keep spirits up as weight goes down.
The loss could well be considerably higher, particularly if you are male or heavily overweight; but over-high expectations can be just as demoralizing as very slow weight loss, so we are taking a restrained attitude.
On the F-Plan the calories will be consumed in food which is more filling, and your body will waste more of them than on other slimming diets.
However, we recommend that you keep to the usual recommended calorie intakes for weight loss, and reap the additional advantages in ease and speed, rather than try to eat even fewer calories than usually recommended in a diet.
Remember, most dieters fail to stay the course.
The F-Plan's extra filling power can most help you by getting you right to slim-weight target.
The ‘easy’ diet is the one that succeeds, because it is the one you continue to follow until you are slim.
Frankly, the only people I can think of who need to go as low as 850 calories a day in order to achieve a pacey weight loss on the F-Plan are small, rather sedentary women, only a few pounds overweight, and those struggling off the last few pounds of excess weight after a prolonged dieting campaign.
In these circumstances, increasing energy expenditure helps, too — by which I mean generally moving around as much as possible, doing a lot of brisk walking and speeding this up to running pace if you are young.
To shed surplus weight with the F-Plan, allow yourself a maximum of 1,500 calories a day and a minimum of 1,000 calories (or less only if medically supervised) a day.
You may choose to set your daily caloric intake anywhere between those two limits.
These recommendations will guide you to your own ideal daily calorie limits for successful weight loss.
Allow yourself 1,500 calories daily
If you are male, of at least medium height, and more than half a stone overweight.
Men have a greater daily calorie requirement than women, so they can shed weight on more generous slimming diets and generally record considerably larger weekly weight losses.
This is unfair, but something that even Women's Liberation cannot change.
Few men could fail to shed weight at a satisfactory rate on a daily allowance of 1,500 calories.
If you are female, more than two stones overweight, and just embarking on a weight-loss programme — as opposed to switching from another slimming diet on which you have already lost some of your surplus weight.
The more heavily overweight people are, the more swiftly they can shed surplus fat on a slimming diet.
This rate of loss tends to slow down as weight goes down and the metabolism adjusts, to some degree, to dieting.
So if you are starting out with a good deal of weight to shed, it is wise to allow scope for reducing calorie intake in the later stages of dieting.
Start on l, 500 calories daily, and work your way gradually down to 1,000 daily in order to maintain a good, encouraging rate of loss.
Set your daily calorie intake between 1,000 and 1,500 (if you wish) by taking into account the following:
These factors tend to increase speed of weekly weight loss on a diet 
Being male.
Being heavily overweight.
Being at the start of a slimming programme, rather than at a midway stage.
Being in the habit of eating a generous quantity of food — the more you have been eating the greater the initial weight loss impact when you switch to a slimming diet.
Being involved in a job which necessitates a good deal of physical  activity (housework, unfortunately, does not rate high in this way, in these days of mod. cons.), or taking part in a good deal of sport or walking (that ten-minute daily dozen doesn't really rate here, either).
Allow yourself 1,000 calories daily
If you are a small man, with only a few pounds of surplus weight, and are in a big hurry to lose it.
If you are female and less than one stone overweight.
If you are female and more than a stone overweight, but have already been dieting and have lost a stone or more on any other slimming method.
Reduce calorie intake to 850 if you must, but ONLY in these circumstances:
If you are just thinking in terms of an occasional day, maybe a couple of days a week.
Our desire for food tends to vary from day to day.
On some days it is easy to eat very little, on others it is difficult to keep to even the most generous diet.
It seems sensible to take advantage of the good days in order to make allowance for any excess eating on the difficult days, and dieting calorie intake can be averaged out on a weekly basis.
If you eat more on some days and less on others, you will shed weight just as successfully as if you stuck to the same number of calories each day.
If you are only planning to follow the F-Plan for a week or two to polish off a modest weight problem of just a few pounds.
If you have been following a normal varied British pattern of eating you have probably been consuming less dietary fibre than you need for health protection, but it is unlikely that you are deficient in minerals and vitamins.
In those circumstances, vitamin and mineral deficiencies do not crop up in a couple of weeks.
However, on a calorie intake of below 1,000 a day it is a reasonable idea to take a multi-vitamin pill with iron — just to keep your mother, and me, happy.
These factors tend to slow speed of weight loss on a diet
Being female.
Being only a few pounds overweight.
Being at the tail-end of a slimming campaign.
Those last few pounds can prove the most stubborn, but the F-Plan will help.
Having a naturally restrained appetite, which probably means that you are only a few pounds overweight and have gained this weight over a lengthy period.
We all think we eat less than we do!
Being a sedentary type of person.
This doesn't just mean doing a sedentary job but refers rather to the type of person (who could well be a housewife, doing a basically non-sedentary type of job) who calls the children to bring something from the next room rather than getting up herself, or who goes to great lengths to avoid journeys up and down stairs, or who will drive round for five minutes to find a parking spot near the exit of the car park rather than walk for two minutes…
The sum total of all those little movements makes a big difference to daily calorie expenditure and varies a good deal among individuals.
The people who move a good deal are often described as being ‘full of nervous energy’.
It is not the so-called ‘nervous’ aspect that burns up the calories, but the frequent physical movement.
These always-on-the-move people are usually slim.
Fibre: how high can you go?
Although statistics on dietary fibre intake were not recorded until 1919, the Royal College of Physicians thinks it probable that it has halved in Britain since the middle of the last century.
Today, the average intake of 20g a day puts us among the lowest fibre-consumers in the world.
Indeed, it is quite difficult to find nations who eat less dietary fibre than the British, apart from the Swedes (14g daily) and Masai warriors, who are thought to eat practically none!
U.S. citizens score a little higher than we do, with an average intake of 27g daily.
But this is still modest compared with the quantity thought to have been consumed by our ancestors and the quantity being consumed, today, by societies in the underdeveloped world.
Surveys of these societies sometimes reveal remarkably high intake figures — 130g a day among the Kikuyu of Kenya and a staggering 150g daily among the Buganda of Uganda, for instance.
Generally, however, people of the poorer African and Asian countries consume two to three times our quantity of fibre.
Their intake of 40g to 60g daily is thought, by many medical experts and eminent medical authorities, to be highly significant in relation to the fact that major killers of the Western world, like cancer of the bowel and heart disease, are virtually unknown in these high fibre consuming societies.
And so is obesity!
Just because you are British you can't even assume you are eating your 20g a day.
This is an average figure.
Individual variations are great.
Surveys show that some Britons are consuming as little as 6g daily.
What is worse, if you are concerned about your excess weight you are likely to be among the lower consumers of dietary fibre.
Studies have indicated that the weight conscious, brainwashed by years of ‘cut out those carbohydrates’ advice, tend to avoid the bread and potatoes which supply a good deal of the fibre in most people's diets.
Dieting and nutritional fallacies die hard.
As you embark on the F-Plan you might have to work quite energetically to convince yourself that the supposed virtues of the old low-carbohydrate method of  dieting have been disproved by recent research.
Medical experts no longer approve of this method of dieting — largely because of the limits it places on the intake of cereals, fruit and root vegetables.
Bread (if it is wholemeal!) and potatoes are no longer considered the baddies in health and obesity.
Fats and sugars have revealed themselves as the real villains.
And, when you think about it, did you succeed in getting permanently slim by struggling to cut out carbohydrates for all those years?
When you follow the F-Plan menus you can hardly fail to increase daily dietary fibre intake considerably even if you don't bother to count the grams.
The average Briton's full daily intake of 20g is provided by the two pieces of fruit, and muesli-type mix called Fibre-Filler, which you are required to eat each day as part of this slimming plan.
ALL the meals, from which you can choose freely, have been specially devised to contain a good percentage of those foods which supply a significant quantity of dietary fibre.
You should find it easy to consume 35g of fibre daily, and we suggest this as the lower limit in order to achieve the slimming benefits described in the previous chapters.
Those keeping to a strict 1,000 calories a day allowance will usually find this to be a realistic target.
Obviously, if you are eating more fibre-rich food you are likely to cat more grams of fibre.
Those allowing themselves 1,500 calories daily might reach a fibre intake of 50g daily.
We advise this as the higher limit.
If, after reading the advice in Chapter 9, you decide to keep to a very strict calorie intake of just 850 to 1,000 calories daily, you will find it very difficult to achieve the upper levels of the fibre recommendation and might even find it difficult to consume 35 grams of fibre daily.
Don't worry.
In these circumstances 30 grams daily will suffice.
You are, you see, still consuming a very high percentage of dietary fibre.
The average Briton who is not attempting to shed weight is consuming between 2,000 and 3,000 calories daily and only around 15 to 20 grams of fibre.
So you will be taking in about twice as much dietary fibre in less than half as much food.
You are on a high-fibre diet even on 30 grams a day.
So the recommendations are a helpful guideline, not a biblical edict.
No need to get too fussed about the odd gram.
All the meals on the F-Plan menu are fibre-counted for you.
Don't worry about small day-to-day variations in intake, or aim for precise rounded figures — simply choose your menus to provide between 35g and 50g of dietary fibre each day.
What (and how much) to drink
On the F-Plan you are asked to drink a generous amount of calorie-free liquid, but only a very modest quantity of calorie-supplying liquid.
One liquid is obligatory.
You must have half a pint of skimmed milk each day.
This is to help ensure nutritional balance in your diet and, in particular, to supply calcium, because dietary fibre can hinder the absorption of calcium to some degree.
There is no evidence of health problems arising from this particular factor, but on this healthy diet we want to take extra care to ensure all essential nutrients.
You will also need to use at least part of this milk with your cereal breakfasts.
Doctors who prescribe high-fibre diets for health problems sometimes advocate a generous daily intake of fluid.
One of the aims and functions of a high-fibre diet is to sustain a large bulk of semi-fluid matter in the stomach, and to produce more soft and bulky faeces.
The fibre itself will ensure this but the extra fluid may help it a little— certainly the fluid has to come from somewhere, and it will do no harm if it is calorie-free.
Calorie-free fluids do not add to body fat, hinder weight loss or cause fluid retention in those of normal health.
The idea that they do so is one of the most persistent slimming myths of all.
Neither — to put another old fallacy to rest is drinking with meals ‘fattening’, if the drinks are calorie-free.
Drinking with meals the correct way can actually be ‘slimming’, in that it can helpfully add to the time it takes to consume high-fibre meals.
The right way is to put down knife and fork in order to take a sip of water (or other calorie-free liquid) after a mouthful of food has been chewed and swallowed.
The wrong, or ‘fattening’ way, to drink with meals is to use the drink to swill food down the throat before it has been swallowed, because then it will speed rather than slow the ingestion of food.
The reason why you are asked to be restrained in drinking calorific drinks is that these, even more than refined carbohydrate foods, have the opposite effect from fibre-rich foods in nearly all those steps in  the consumption process which influence your degree of hunger.
While fibre-rich foods are chewed slowly, calorific drinks require no chewing at all and go down the throat in a split second.
While fibre-rich foods fill the stomach for lengthy periods, calories supplied in fluid alone pass through more quickly than any digested from solid foods.
Observers of eating behaviour have noted that people can take in very large numbers of calories in the form of liquids without noticeably diminishing their appetite for food at all.
Please read the following very important instructions about drinking while you are following the F-Plan.
Daily milk allowance
Your daily half pint of milk must be skimmed milk.
This is essential.
Half a pint of skimmed milk provides just 100 calories, while other kinds of milk can provide twice this number.
Don't buy silver-top and skim off the cream yourself, because this doesn't provide an equivalent calorie saving.
These days most dairies will deliver skimmed milk, so ask the milkman if he can supply it.
Many supermarkets sell cartons of skimmed milk, sometimes sensibly labelled ‘for slimmers’.
You can also buy skimmed milk in powdered form; Marvel is one such product.
So skimmed milk is now easily available, since people have become more aware of the dangerously fattening potential of full-cream milk.
Calorie-free drinks
All the following drinks are calorie-free, or negligible in calories, so they can be consumed freely on the F-Plan: water; tea and black coffee (without sugar, of course, though you can add milk from your daily half-pint allowance); all bottled drinks like bitter lemon, Diet Pepsi and Tab which are specially labelled ‘low calorie’.
These days most major manufacturers of non-alcoholic beverages produce special drinks of negligible calorie content for the weight-conscious.
These include Canada Dry mixers, Energen one-calorie drinks, Hunt's  low-caloric mixers, Schweppes Slimline range, and Chekwate, Concorde, Safeway, Sunfresh, Tesco and Waitrose low-calorie drinks.
But do check for that low-calorie label.
Of course the fashionable mineral waters — Perrier, Evian, Vichy, Malvern, and so on— are calorie-free, and are becoming increasingly popular in smart restaurants.
So you can be chic as you get slim!
Bovril and Oxo do supply a few calories, but too few to be worth counting, and can provide a nice, hot, comforting drink on a dieting evening.
Real fruit juices
Fruit juices, other than lemon juice, are not allowed on the F-Plan.
This is one of the ways in which this new method differs from diets of the past.
The reason is that fruit juices are simply fruit stripped of its natural fibre content.
When you drink orange juice you are getting all the calories which are present in the orange in the form of sugar, but with none of the fibre filling power.
When you buy a small can of frozen concentrated orange juice you arc getting the fibre-free contents of a large quantity of oranges, at a cost of more than 200 calories per can.
Many people could easily consume a full can, diluted, during a thirsty summer day, and it would have little if any effect in reducing an appetite for solid food.
To consume the same quantity of' calories in the form of whole oranges you would have to eat about five of them.
Obviously this would have some realistic effect in satisfying the appetite.
Manufacturers arc doing the weight-prone no favour in removing fibre from fruits to make them into juices.
Scientific tests recorded a great reduction in satiety level when subjects were fed apple juice (apples with their fibre removed) compared with the same quantity of apples eaten whole.
The apple juice speeded the fibre-stripped apple through the mouth and stomach and also raised the blood-sugar level in a way which led to the rebound hunger factor described in a previous chapter.
The apples produced all the weight-control benefits of low ingestion, high bulk and a lengthy period in the stomach and they did not lead to rebound hunger.
By getting used to eating oranges rather than drinking orange juice, eating apples rather than drinking apple juice, and so on, you are establishing a good habit which will help to control your weight in the future.
Fruit-juice production is one of the ‘refining’ processes which can unfortunately help to increase our intake of calories on a modern Western diet.
Lemon juice, however, unlike other fruit juices, is virtually calorie-free, as it lacks the sugar present in the juice of other fruit.
Obviously you would need to sweeten this unless you have very eccentric taste buds — but saccharin sweeteners can do the job without calorie cost making it an acceptable drink.
Alcohol
As far as health, fitness and fast weight loss are concerned, it is obviously better to avoid alcohol while following the F-Plan or any other slimming diet.
However, those are all physical factors.
There are psychological factors to be taken into account, too.
If you feel deprived and miserable by not being allowed an early evening drink, or a glass of wine with your evening meal, it is usually better to allow yourself a little alcohol while dieting.
Otherwise it is unlikely that you are going to keep to the diet for very long.
However, here is the vital F-Plan rule:
If you are allowing yourself a daily ration of alcohol, allow these calories in addition to a minimum calories' worth of food and milk from the F-Plan menus.
First, allow loo calories from the half pint of skimmed milk, and another loo calories for your daily apple and orange.
Then make up a minimum of 650 calories (more, if you are allowing yourself between 1,000 and 1,500 a day) from Fibre-Filler (see page 65) and the meals on the F-Plan menus.
After that you can add the appropriate number of calories from alcohol.
Nearly everyone, female as well as male, can shed surplus fat at a good pace on 1,250 calories a day, and the vast majority of people will achieve a satisfactory weight loss on 1,500 calories a day.
So nearly everyone can afford to drink a little alcohol while they are dieting, if they wish.
Alcohol does not provide any useful nutrients or fibre; hence the reason for consuming all your daily calories from food and milk, to ensure good nutrition, before adding any ‘empty’ alcoholic calories.
If preferred, calories can be averaged out on a weekly rather than a daily basis.
For instance, as long as you average 8,750 calories a week you will shed weight just as quickly by having as many as 1,870 a day on Saturdays and Sundays, and only 1,000 each weekday, as you would by counting precisely 1,250 calories a day for all seven days of the week.
This fact can be used to advantage by those who drink alcohol occasionally perhaps only once or twice a week on social occasions, and not every day.
Obviously, in terms of calories you can afford to drink a greater quantity of alcohol if it is an occasional rather than a daily indulgence.
You will find that the Drinks Calorie Guide (page 278) provides a very realistic way of measuring the calories consumed in the form of alcoholic drinks.
Fibre-Filler, the F-Plan's inbuilt slimming aid
While following the F-Plan you will be able to choose from a wide variety of meals to suit your own taste, in selecting daily menus.
Nevertheless to make it really easy to reach your daily dietary fibre target of 30g plus, it is an excellent idea to have one regular, constant daily meal breakfast is ideal because we tend not to vary our breakfasts — to supply about half the requirement.
Add a couple of pieces of fruit each day as part of your menu, and after that it isn't at all difficult to include enough dietary fibre in your other two meals to succeed m your alms.
One of the great successes of the F-Plan method has been such a meal, a kind of home-made muesli, called Fibre-Filler.
We think you will be surprised at the remarkable effect this relatively modest-looking quantity of food will have in satisfying your appetite for really long periods.
Your daily portion of Fibre-Filler provides 15g of dietary fibre, which is more than many Britons normally consume in a day.
Most of this fibre is from cereal sources which are particularly recommended for their health value by some leading medical researchers.
But fibre from fruit and nut sources is included too, which adds health and slimming value.
To make your daily quantity of Fibre-Filler, mix together the following ingredients:
Obviously you will find it easier to multiply the ingredients and make several daily servings at one time.
But if you do, mix the ingredients well (the bran tends to filter down to the bottom, in its dry state), divide into daily quantities and store in separate plastic storage bags.
For eight days:
Your daily quantity of Fibre-Filler tastes surprisingly good once you have mixed it with milk.
If you like muesli-type cereals, you will find the taste pleasing.
What is more, although the quantity for the day looks relatively modest in dry state, once it is mixed with milk you will find that it provides two good and satisfying servings.
We recommend that one serving (half the daily quantity) should be used to provide breakfast and a highly satisfying start to the day.
This should keep you comfortably free of hunger right through to lunch.
The remaining half of the Fibre-Filler plays an equally helpful role in aiding willpower.
Save this to be eaten at any time during the day (in addition to your other meals) when you begin to feel hungry and vulnerable to eating temptations.
Many people will decide to save it until suppertime.
Evenings represent maximum temptation for most slimmers, although around four o'clock in the afternoon, when the children come home from school, can be the worst time for many mothers who may be waiting until mid evening to dine with their husbands.
In these circumstances, this might be the best time to eat the remaining portion.
Yet another way in which you might choose to use the second half of your daily Fibre-Filler is to divide it into two portions and eat one of these half an hour before each of the two main meals of the day.
This way it will act rather like an appetite suppressant pill — or, rather, in the way pills should act if they contained sufficient cellulose.
Fibre-Filler does contain a generous quantity of cellulose, so you will be feeling considerably less hungry when you start each meal; you will be able to eat more slowly and be very satisfied with a diet-restricted quantity of food.
The daily Fibre-Filler, made in the quantities given here, provides a total of 200 calories.
These should be subtracted from your total allowance of 850 to 1,500 calories for the day.
Milk used with Fibre-Filler should be taken from the daily half pint of skimmed milk.
You will find that only a small quantity of milk is necessary and that a quarter of a pint is quite sufficient to accompany the full daily Fibre-Filler allowance an eighth of a pint with each portion.
This will leave you a quarter of a pint of milk for tea and coffee through the day.
It is unlikely you will find Fibre-Filler unpalatable.
It is a most important and valuable part of' the F-Plan programme, so do include it.
However, for occasional days when you might find yourself caught out with no time or ingredients (try to plan ahead to avoid this: you can easily carry Fibre-Filler with you in a plastic bag in your handbag!) we have listed a few alternative very high-fibre breakfasts in The F-Plan Meals.
Ideally, breakfast on half your daily portion of Fibre-Filler or have it mid morning if you dislike eating early in the day.
Only when this is not possible should you have one of the alternative high-fibre breakfasts.
Eating out on the F-Plan
The F-Plan provides you with many easy-to-carry meals, like sandwiches, and, hopefully, you will take your lunch to work with you while dieting.
However, business lunches may crop up from time to time— and also evening invitations which involve dining at restaurants.
It is somewhat unrealistic to expect to retire completely from social life.
It is quite insane to imagine that you are going to sit in a restaurant adding up calories and grams of fibre.
This is also quite impossible nearly all restaurant meals are very low in fibre content and nearly every dish varies in calorie content from restaurant to restaurant.
So what are we to do?
The answer is simply to use the common-sense approach and avoid making the mistakes which cost the average slimmer so many unsuspected calories while eating out.
Forget about fibre while dining out.
With your stomach nicely fibre-full from other meals you should not, at least, arrive at the restaurant table like a ravenous wolf.
So this should help you in keeping the calorie intake low.
To do so follow two simple guidelines.
1
Keep to the low-fat dishes.
2
Keep to the very simple dishes.
The first guideline is very important, not only for reducing your weight now but for controlling it in the future.
The weight-conscious so often choose the most fattening dishes on the menu, in the mistaken idea that they were being virtuous.
No, no…they would not dream of having potatoes or a dessert.
But they will select dishes absolutely swimming in butter or choose cheese instead of dessert.
Fats are by far the most fattening foods of all.
Even those tiny little protein-packed escargots or that leafy garden-of-Eden innocent asparagus or artichoke can be calorie-packed because of the luscious lure of all that horrifically high-calorie butter.
The old, and now much condemned, low-carbohydrate method of dieting had much to answer for in making social eaters fat.
The idea  that ‘if it isn't sugary or starchy it can't be fattening’ has accounted for the eating of many excess calories in restaurants.
Now, thanks to the publicity of the past year or two, people are beginning to realize that fats are dieters' enemy number one.
Fats are more than twice as fattening as any other food.
F-Plan dieters know that high-fibre carbohydrate foods are dieters' friend number one they are the pioneers of a completely new and more effective attitude to food and weight control.
But those old ideas do take a long time to die.
The reason for guideline number two, ‘keep to the very simple dishes’, is that fats can lurk in disguise in all kinds of sauce-covered dishes or recipe dishes.
Did you know that taramasalata is crammed with fat?
Or that avocado is the only fat-containing fruit and that when you order it with an oily dressing, or with prawns in mayonnaise dressing, you are ordering one of the most fattening first courses of all?
With that, or taramasalata, or pâté (also usually high in fat content), you could well be packing down more than 400 calories before you even start your main course.
That nasty shock should emphasize the importance of low-fat simplicity in restaurant meals while dieting.
All sauces, mayonnaise and salad dressings, creamed soups and cheese-containing concoctions should be considered highly suspect sources of excess calories.
And Heaven knows the caloric mysteries of the East!
Do you know how many calories are in Mr Singh's curry or Mr Wong's sweet-and-sour?
Quite inscrutable, of course.
Better give exotic Eastern eating a miss, if you are aiming at shedding weight fast.
Keep to the safest, simplest dishes when eating in restaurants while you follow the F-Plan slimming diet.
Here is the regrettably modest list of best bets in each course.
Starters Maximum calorie total per serving
These are the only really dependably low-calorie choices: Consommé — any flavour (lovely and clear, so you can actually see that they have not sneaked in extra calories) 60
Oysters (for rich readers), each 5
Half a grapefruit (for poor readers) 20
A slice of melon, any kind 40
Any fresh fruit cocktail 60
Smoked salmon (if you can eat it ‘neat’ without buttered 80 bread)
Parma ham with melon (a little more calorie-costly — but they are usually providentially mean with the ham), don't eat the ham fat 150
Main courses Maximum calorie total per serving
Grilled Dover sole (not buttery), be assertive about any plain grilled white fish, tell the waiter that you do not want it served swimming with butter.
Send it back if it is 350
Grilled liver (waiter's instructions as above) 250
Lobster, without one of those rich sauces (again, we give sensitive consideration to the problems of rich readers) 200
Plain grilled steak (60z) with salad 300
Any seafood — crab, prawns, etc. — with salad (but be risqué!
Insist that the salad is served totally undressed.
If you add dressing, be very, very mean with it) 100
Omelettes (you cannot go too far wrong with an omelette, unless it is made with cheese, so no cheese, please)
Any vegetables can be ordered with these dishes, as long as you are sure they are not cooked or served with fat.
A baked potato is very permissible, of course.
But, without your low-calorie dressing to hand (you could smuggle it in a hip flask, perhaps), order a baked potato in restaurants only if you can resist that terribly high-calorie sour cream  or butter.
Be honest with yourself about this — rather than optimistic.
Desserts Maximum calorie total per serving
The choice here is very simple.
Ideally choose any fresh fruit raspberries (fibre-high as well as calorie-low), strawberries, fresh figs, fresh fruit salad, but all without the cream, please.
For those yearning for something just a little more sinful, the following are also dependably calorie-low:
Any fresh fruit sorbets 100
Crème caramel (when the waiter asks ‘with cream, madame?’ the answer is ‘No’) 200
Ice cream (but only if it is a simple, honest old-fashioned ice not one of those staggeringly exotic multi-storey jobs, rising with layer upon layer of heaven-knows-what and terminating with a big blob of shaving cream) 150
Do not have cheese instead of a dessert.
Most cheeses are crammed with fat and horribly high in calories.
The startling truth about US and THEM
Until very recently, the British, on the whole, were not all that keen on health.
Of course, we worried about good health if we didn't enjoy it.
But if we did appear to be reasonably well…well then, what is there to concern ourselves about?
The national worry quota was already more than filled to overflowing by football hooligans and all those disturbing goings-on in the soap operas.
To be fair, there were two groups of Britons who were very concerned about health maintenance.
The first, known as cranks, tended to swallow some extraordinary theories.
The second, known as hypochondriacs, tended to swallow a large number of useless potions purchased from over the chemist's counter.
But these were just two little subcultures, and in no way representative of Britain as a whole.
But how attitudes have changed, since the F-Plan diet was first published in 1982.
This was the first occasion in which Britons in their millions had read, and begun to digest, the thought that all was not well with our eating habits in this relatively well-fed world of ours.
The spate of major medical and nutritional reports published by governments and health authorities over the past few years has more than confirmed this suspicion.
Today, after a period of five short years, we are a health-conscious nation, exercising careful concern about our guests' cholesterol levels when we invite them round to supper, looking unconcerned as yet another jogger pounds us into the pavement as we take a stroll, and reacting with sheer open-eyed shock at the sight of a plate of bacon, eggs and bangers as we spoon down our own regular morning bran cereal — or dish of F-Pan Fibre-Filler.
Why has this major change in attitudes come about, and why all this concern about health in an affluent Western world where we can congratulate ourselves and count on our good fortune in having all the benefits of modern medicine to protect us unlike the peoples of the developing world?
Many of us are old enough to remember the days when to contract tuberculosis — which many British people did — was to be given a  virtual death sentence.
This was still the situation as recently as the 19405.
Now, TB is practically non-existent in the Western world, and something we tend to forget all about, except on the odd cultural occasion when we hear Mimi coughing herself so touchingly and melodically to death in La Bohème , or read the life of a Lakeland poet, or dwell on the saga of the Lady of the Camellias.
All the best people, it seemed, used to die of ‘consumption’— as it was then called.
And large numbers of ordinary people as well used to die of TB.
Until recently it was one of the greatest of all killer diseases.
If you are in your forties you can also flash your mind back to those dramatic posters: ‘Diphtheria is deadly — protect your child by immunization’, and probably recall some child at your school who contracted polio and was crippled for life.
One of the most marvellous happenings of the past few decades is the way in which infective diseases have been brought under control and even virtually abolished by modern drugs and vaccines, better hygiene, safe water supplies, modern sewage systems.
IN THE WESTERN WORLD…that is.
People in developing African and Asian countries do not have all our modern advantages and some infective diseases, which have become part of history here, remain rampant there.
As the charity organizations keep reminding us, millions of people continue to die in Africa and Asia from diseases which are both preventable and curable.
No wonder that poor people living in the traditional way in India and many African countries have a considerably shorter life expectancy than we — with our better living conditions and easily available medicine.
Or do they?
Prepare yourself for a major shock to your assumptions.
It is true that a comparison of the generally accepted life-expectancy figures between the West and the Third World countries, or a comparison between ourselves and our grandparents' generation, would show that modern Western man has a great advantage in average expectation of life.
But these figures are highly deceptive.
Largely the difference is accounted for by a dramatic decrease in child mortality in the modern Western world, due to vast improvements in hygiene, protection against infective disease and plentiful food.
In many Third World countries as many as three out of five children die before the age of five.
Wander around any English country churchyard and you will see that  here, too, child mortality was very common in the past, even at the start of the century.
When life-expectancy figures are calculated, everyone who has been born and died is taken into account in arriving at the average life-expectancy figures.
Obviously, the short lives of all those babies and children will have a great effect in bringing down the average figure as even the least mathematical of us will be able to understand.
Those who are born in the Third World have a considerably smaller chance of surviving childhood than those born here — and the same was true of those born in the West a hundred years ago.
There is an enormous difference in the child-mortality figures.
But what of the expectation of life of someone who has reached the age of forty?
It may surprise you to discover that the continued life expectancy of a forty-year-old man in Britain today has scarcely increased at all on that of a forty-year-old man living in Britain a century ago.
Having conquered the killer epidemics of infectious diseases it seems strange that we do not have a greater life expectancy in this sense too.
Considering the rifeness of disease, the poverty and the malnutrition prevalent there, and all the medical aid available here, it is even more surprising to discover that the continued life expectancy of a forty-year-old British or US citizen is not considerably greater than that of an Indian who has survived childhood and reached the age of forty.
This is true of the inhabitants of most of the developing Third World countries, in what might be described as ‘normal’ conditions, as opposed to the horrific periods of famine which have afflicted some African countries in recent years.
In the West the general pattern is that we arc rattling through merrily until our forties and fifties, and then…
The middle-aged are being afflicted by a great plague of modern Western illnesses, many of them fatal.
These illnesses are not caught from germs and viruses.
They seem to creep up on us gradually for reasons that medical science is only now beginning to understand.
They are known, collectively, as degenerative diseases.
Among the major degenerative diseases is coronary heart disease, the commonest cause of death in Western countries, killing about one man in four.
The second great destroyer is cancer cancer of the lung and cancer of the bowel being the most common fatal forms of cancer  in Britain.
As well as the two ‘big Cs’, coronaries and cancer, there is a whole group of other degenerative diseases like diabetes, diverticulosis and other disorders of the bowel — and less serious but still troublesome problems like varicose veins, haemorrhoids and constipation.
The big factor that all these illnesses and health problems have in common is that they are virtually non-existent among Third World communities, living on what-grows-naturally in age-old traditional ways.
However, when groups from such communities move to and settle in countries living and eating in Western style, and adopt Western habits, repeated surveys and studies have shown that, gradually, over the years, they too become equally prone to the ‘big Cs’ and all those other Western diseases.
It looks as if it must be something we are eating.
Or not eating…
Thou shalt
Perhaps the main reason why we British have not in the past been particularly enthusiastic about positive health maintenance is that sensible medical advice on the subject is mainly concerned with telling us not to do things.
Not doing things is, in general, considerably more difficult than actually doing things.
And much more dreary.
We are wisely told not to smoke, not to drink much alcohol, not to eat all that sugar or salt or fat.
All good advice, but all a matter of ‘thou shalt not’.
Until recently, the only medically based ‘thou shalt’ advice was on the subject of exercise.
Thou certainly shouldst do that.
The benefits in weight control are obvious, the benefits in physical health undoubted, and the benefits even in mental health becoming increasingly apparent.
Physical exercise is becoming known as a valuable tool in treating depression, and if you find that hard to believe just try forcing yourself into a vigorous half hour's sport, jogging or even just a brisk walk next time you feel low, and note the lift in your mood afterwards.
But, exercise apart, the medical profession has been mainly concerned with telling us not to do things, rather than to do things, and banning things rather than advocating them.
It takes a relatively modest amount of scientific evidence to have a substance banned.
There are many people, for instance, leading experts among them, who would argue that cyclamates, a useful calorie-free substitute for sugar, were banned on somewhat flimsy evidence involving massive overdosing of animals.
Many natural foods we have happily consumed for centuries would never be allowed to be sold in the shops today if they were subject to the same tests as modern drugs and edible substances.
This caution obviously arises from the need to minimize the risk of long-term side-effects caused by seemingly innocent new substances.
Conversely, it takes a quite massive amount of scientific evidence to have a substance positively recommended for health.
The general attitude of the medical profession is to be highly sceptical, question  the benefits, divide into camps and argue bitterly among themselves, and continue scientific testing, surveying and debating for years before becoming convinced.
So when a large body of medical opinion is convinced of the positive benefits of any substance you too can be sure that the evidence must be pretty…well, convincing!
This is so of dietary fibre.
Today, the medical establishment, in both Britain and America, is of the opinion that dietary fibre is of value in protecting us from the diseases of modern Western civilization.
Any list of nutritional recommendations from any eminent medical organization in the Western world will consist of an ‘Eat less of these’ list (fats, sugar, salt, calories) and a single ‘Eat more of this’item.
The foods which we are advised to eat in greater quantities arc those supplying dietary fibre.
It seems strange that this great surge of medical interest in dietary fibre should have occurred only in the past decade.
For very much longer nutritionists have been delving into the values and virtues of vitamins, minerals and the proteins necessary for growth and repair of body tissue.
But dietary fibre provides nothing of use in this way.
It can be viewed simply as the packaging that encloses these goodies and who gets excited about the packaging of anything, once it has performed its function of delivering and protecting the goods?
Perhaps this was why its importance was overlooked.
When it became known that people in many developing countries remained free of the major killer diseases of Western civilization, it was obvious that medical research into these illnesses should start by delving into the question of what these people were doing, or not doing.
One of the things they were doing, it transpires, involves one of man's most private functions — emptying the bowels.
Medical friends have told us that one very eminent medical researcher grows so enthusiastic when he shows colour slides of stools excreted by rural Africans that comments like ‘look — aren't they beautiful’ fly from his lips during his lecture.
Beauty is in the eye of the beholder, of course, and what he is seeing in his mind's eye, after years of study into world-wide distribution of disease in relation to diet, is the stool of someone unlikely to die from cancer of the bowel.
Third World communities who remain free of our degenerative diseases have been found to live on diets which contain a much higher  percentage of carbohydrate than ours — carbohydrate obtained from cereals which have not been stripped of their dietary fibre, fibre-rich vegetables (potatoes and other root vegetables), legumes and fruits.
The rural African or Asian, living on a diet like this, moves his bowels in a way which can only fill the constipated Western world with envy.
Effortlessly, and daily, he evacuates nearly one pound in weight of soft stool — the kind of stool which overwhelms our medical expert with its beauty.
In striking contrast the Westerner passes only a quarter of that weight in much firmer, harder stool daily…and often not daily…and often only with difficulty.
The transit time — the time taken for the food we put into our mouths to pass along the whole of the intestinal tract until the residue is excreted as stools — has also been found to differ enormously between us and them.
In rural Third World communities the average transit time is one and a half days; in Western countries it is about three days in young healthy adults; among the elderly it is often over two weeks.
But does this matter?
Only a few years ago, in their efforts to quell the excessive and unhealthy use of laxatives, many doctors were insisting that it did not matter.
‘Go when the good Lord moves you,’ was the general attitude.
‘Some people will move their bowels every day, others only once a week…just do what comes naturally.’
We know, from personal experience, that the British nanny and school matron were never really convinced by this argument.
It was their view, and that of many an old-fashioned Mum, that the good Lord required a regular daily bowel movement.
Come back matron, all is forgiven.
It seems that he does.
But not by straining, or discipline, or the use of laxatives.
When food is eaten in the way that the good Lord grew it, this daily task is accomplished effortlessly and even joyfully.
It is strange how attitudes have come the full circle.
People used to have an instinctive feeling that all that waste matter hanging around inside them could not be doing them any good.
Hence the popularity, at one time, of some strange practices like  collonic irrigation — and the excessive use of laxatives, which was, and still is, condemned on medical grounds.
Then, because of these questionable and unnatural methods, doctors began to insist that ‘regularity’ did not really matter.
Now modern research clearly indicates that a good speedy transit time and daily effortless evacuation of soft stool is indeed a vital protective factor in maintaining our health.
Dietary fibre is the substance which makes the waste matter from the food we eat pass through us and out of us at the desirable, speedy, natural rate.
This is one of the main reasons why it is now considered to be such an important protective factor in saving us from diseases of the bowel, like cancer.
Before you continue to discard ‘the packaging’ with Christmas morning abandon, eating those refined carbohydrate foods, read in the next chapter about the links that are emerging between dietary fibre — or the lack of it — and so many of our Western degenerative diseases and complaints.
Major illnesses linked with lack of fibre
In this chapter you will read about the links between intake of dietary fibre and the major Western degenerative diseases — links which connect the factors prevalent in those who fall victim to those illnesses, and in those who do not.
Most people are aware, for instance, that a major link between those who suffer heart attacks is that they tend to have a high level of cholesterol in the blood.
This does not necessarily mean that the cholesterol is the cause, or certainly not the sole cause, of heart attacks.
But the established association would clearly indicate, at this stage of research, that it isn't a good idea to have too much in your blood.
A diet rich in fibre tends also to be low in fat content because carbohydrate foods provide many of the calories.
So these two nutritional factors go together in societies free of our Western ailments — and also in the F-Plan diet.
The F-Plan is a low-fat, low-cholesterol diet, as well as being a high-fibre diet.
So it is also the diet to choose if you have sensibly taken to heart the well-established benefits of reducing fat intake.
Dietary fibre and cancer of the colon
There is a vast variation in the incidence of cancer of the colon in different countries throughout the world.
In America it is the most common fatal form of cancer, in Britain it is second only to cancer of the lung.
In many developing countries it is virtually unknown.
There is little doubt, in the view of even the most conservative members of the medical establishment, that the cause of large bowel cancer is environmental and that the factors involved are related to economic development.
The greater the degree of economic development, the greater the incidence of cancer of the colon.
No other form of cancer has been found to be more closely related to the Western way of life and the Western way of eating.
Research  is showing that diets which appear perfectly all right in other respects may lead to processes occurring within the gut that could increase the production or the concentration of cancer-inducing substances carcinogens.
There are various ways in which fibre-depleted foods are now thought to be linked with cancer of the large bowel.
Firstly, the small stools of Western man will have a higher concentration of these cancer-inducing substances than the large diluted stools of the fibre eater.
The slow transit rate of fibre-depleted diets is also thought to encourage the formation of these potentially dangerous substances within the body — and to leave them in contact with the gut for too long.
In short, the basic instinct which seemed to tell many people that they needed a good ‘clean out’, and that nasty things could happen while waste matter lingered around in the body, seems to have been largely correct.
It was only the unnatural methods they used in order to combat the problem which were wrong.
Bowel cancer is invariably rare in communities passing large stools, and stool volume is always small in communities with a high frequency of bowel cancer.
It is dietary fibre, of course, which affects this stool volume.
In rural Finns, for example, who consume a relatively high-fibre diet, cancer of the colon is rare.
They have been found to eat about twice as much dietary fibre as New Yorkers, among whom this form of cancer is rife.
Perhaps the most compelling evidence of all comes from studies of people who have moved from one country to another — Japanese who have emigrated to California, for instance— and adopted Western diets.
Large bowel cancer is uncommon among Japanese eating their traditional diet, but it was found that, within a generation, Japanese eating the American way had developed a risk of large bowel cancer equal to that of Americans.
This strongly endorses the ‘it-must-be-something-we-eat’ theory as against the theory of the genetic susceptibility to certain diseases of different races.
The strong dietary links emerge from studies of communities with high and low incidence of this form of cancer.
Those at high risk are eating a lot of fat and very little dietary fibre.
Those at low risk are doing just the reverse.
All the evidence available clearly suggests that excessive fat in the diet increases the risk of developing large bowel cancer and that fibre provides protection against it.
The Royal College  of Physicians has gone on record as stating that ‘there are reasonable grounds for the statement that, in genetically susceptible persons, large bowel cancer could be favoured by a fibre-depleted diet’.
Though they add, of course, that other explanations for the prevalence of this cancer in Westernized countries are possible.
This statement, from such a conservative and distinguished authority, certainly puts the idea that dietary fibre is beneficial well beyond the ‘crank threshold’.
For all sensible people it would clearly suggest that more thought should be given to the fibre content not only of their own diets, but of those of their children.
Dietary fibre and coronary heart disease
Coronary heart disease is essentially a modern Western disease and was rare, even in Western countries, until after the First World War.
Today it is the commonest cause of death in the West.
It remains almost unknown among rural Africans and is uncommon in most rural communities in Asia.
The evidence suggests that a variety of factors in our modern Western environment — cigarette smoking, diet, sedentary living, soft water, stress — may be involved.
In our diets, emphasis has for many years been laid on the intake of saturated fat as the major danger factor, but this is certainly not the whole explanation.
When a project researching into the cause of this disease carefully examined a group of men in London, recording their way of life and following their subsequent history for twenty years or until they died, the strongest risk factor for coronary heart disease was found to be smoking and the strongest protective factor the intake of cereal fibre.
The dietary fibre connection is not in any way as clear and direct as it is in the evidence concerning cancer of the colon.
But what evidence has emerged about dietary fibre certainly puts it among the ‘good guys’, helping to protect us from heart disease, as opposed to the ‘bad guys’ like animal fats and smoking.
The ‘good guys’ so far seem to consist of a team of two.
Bad guys (factors which are thought possibly to increase risk of coronary heart disease)
Being overweight; smoking; suffering from stress; eating too much animal fat; eating too much cholesterol-containing food (like eggs); eating too much salt; eating too much refined sugar; sedentary living.
Good guys (factors which are thought to help prevent coronary heart disease) Taking sufficient prolonged exercise; consuming sufficient dietary fibre.
One of the reasons for the beneficial effect of dietary fibre is that it reduces the absorption of cholesterol — but there are other ways, too, in which it would appear to perform useful functions in keeping the heart healthy.
The evidence in favour of dietary fibre as a preventative measure in heart disease is not strong enough to be conclusive at this stage, but is certainly strong enough to be thought-provoking.
Diverticular disease of the colon
This is another of those modern Western diseases that seems to have mushroomed up from nowhere over the past fifty years.
But only over here — not over there.
It is almost unknown in Africa and Asia, while in the West, from being relatively rare as recently as the 1920s, it has now become the commonest disorder of the large intestine.
It is said to be present, although usually without symptoms, in one in ten people over the age of forty, and in one in three over the age of sixty.
Constipation is now recognized as the underlying cause of this disease — and fibre-depleted diets are recognized as the major cause of constipation.
It is the effort and pressure which the bowel-wall muscle has to exert in propelling onward the firm faeces produced by a Western diet (rather than the soft and voluminous matter produced by fibre-rich diets) which has been found to be the cause of this illness.
In relation to diverticular disease the beneficial role of dietary fibre is very clear.
Today a fibre-rich diet, often including bran, is not only advocated as a preventative measure: it is also widely used in the  treatment of this disease.
Since the advent of treatment with bran, fewer patients have required surgery for the complications of diverticular disease.
Dietary fibre and diabetes
Having read earlier about the ‘rebound hunger’ factor involved in diets consisting of large quantities of refined carbohydrate foods, you will already have gained some clue to the role that dietary fibre can play in the prevention and control of adult-onset diabetes, particularly common among overweight people.
In Western populations a fairly large proportion of people develop difficulty in utilizing carbohydrates in their diets during middle age.
This difficulty is caused by a fault in the insulin production of the body.
Insulin, as we have already explained, is necessary to control excess blood sugar.
If blood-sugar level rises too high then sugar also appears in the urine and the person may be regarded as a diabetic.
As well as diabetics, there is a borderline group of people who are better classified as having ‘impaired glucose tolerance’ rather than being frank diabetics.
Though only a small proportion go on to develop diabetes, these subjects have an increased risk of death from cardiovascular disease.
As we have explained earlier in the book, insulin response to the carbohydrate foods we eat varies with the speed of absorption of the carbohydrate.
Any dietary factor which delays the absorption of carbohydrate may be regarded as beneficial — and here, once again, is where dietary fibre appears in a valuable preventative and protective role.
Carbohydrate foods rich in fibre are absorbed more slowly than those from which the fibre has been stripped.
It looks as if the adult-onset type of diabetes is most likely to appear among those who eat refined low-fibre foods.
Again, it has been found to be uncommon among those living on traditional unprocessed foods.
In the United States, it has been found that a diet very rich in unrefined high-fibre starch has caused remission of the disease in 85 per cent of the adult-onset diabetic patients on which it has been tested.
This change of diet should not, of course, be attempted by diabetics except under medical supervision, and so far no juvenile diabetics have been treated successfully using this type of diet.
However, more doctors are beginning to recommend more unrefined high-fibre starch foods in diabetic diets and once again it seems as if fibre points the way to a healthier future.
Little things that mean a lot
It is not the purpose of this book to provide a complete medical directory of all the illnesses that are attributed, at least in some measure, to lack of natural fibre in the Western diet.
We simply want to emphasize that the medical indications for the need of more of this substance in our diets are strong and impressive.
This is not simply a passing fad.
If you have not been impressed by the very positive connection between a lack of dietary fibre and the incidence of' cancer of' the colon, and the possible connections between fibre and heart disease, you are unlikely to rush off for a wholemeal loaf in order to prevent appendicitis or gall stones, just two of the other ailments being associated with our fibre-depleted modern diets.
However, little things which affect our vanity often influence us more strongly than major things which could affect our health.
Possibly because we don't take an ‘oh, that couldn't possibly happen to me’ attitude to the former.
In our view, the advertising award of the decade should go to the brain who thought up the series of anti-smoking television adverts which did not even mention lung cancer, but drew attention to the fact that smoking gives you bad breath.
Well done, sir!
Possibly an HM government warning about bad breath would be more effective than the present slogan.
Certainly, the enlightened medical-research award of the future should go to any researcher who has the wit to do further investigation into the connection between smoking and the complexion.
So far, one survey has clearly suggested that smoking makes the skin wrinkle sooner, but research seems to have stopped there.
How amazing.
How remarkable that it doesn't seem to have occurred to the medical profession that earlier wrinkles would be a motivation without parallel in encouraging the female half of the population (at least) to abandon the nasty habit.
However, it has occurred to us that to mention some of the unglamorous little things that can happen to you if you don't might be highly effective in getting you to eat up your dietary fibre.
For starters — varicose veins
We all know what varicose veins look like.
Those who haven't got them certainly don't want them, and those who have them already certainly don't want them to get worse.
Oddly enough, the initial cause of varicose veins is not fully understood, but there are some eminent medical researchers, like Dr Denis Burkitt, who believe that the major cause of varicose veins is increased abdominal pressure caused by straining to pass small, firm, Western-style stools.
Hurry off for the bran.
For male readers — haemorrhoids
There is simply no sex appeal in a haemorrhoid.
Surprisingly little sympathy too — considering the discomfort haemorrhoids can cause.
Wary sufferers will have learned to suffer silently lest they raise stifled giggles rather than sympathy.
Considering the nature of the ailment it will come as no surprise that one of the major causes is thought to be constipation and, again, the straining involved in evacuating a hard faecal mass.
In recent years it has been found that a high proportion of patients suffering from piles require no further treatment once they have switched to a high-fibre diet and as a result pass soft stools that can be evacuated with minimal straining.
For the kiddiwinks — bad teeth
Most children are probably sick of hearing about bad teeth, but the guardians of their dental health will be interested to note that the Royal College of Physicians quite firmly advocates a fibre-rich diet which ‘encourages mastication’ for the good of the teeth.
Those teeth were made to chew with.
If they are not used in the way nature intended they become more subject to dental disease and caries; chewing  fibre-rich foods helps to keep the teeth cleaner and free of plaque in a variety of different ways.
After years of medical doubt it is at last safe to say with conviction that an apple a day along with the other fibre-rich foods you will eat on the F-Plan does indeed keep the doctor away.
And also the dentist.
The ever-after fibre factor
Probably the most depressing words that have ever been pronounced about any slimming diet are those enthusiastic phrases from well-meaning medics on the lines of ‘This is a diet that you can follow for the rest of your life.’
Normal human beings will discard all thought of even starting any such diet — instantly!
Who on earth wants to think of following a slimming diet for ever.
Do not throw this book away.
We are most positively not going to say anything like that.
What we are going to say is simply that the parts of this diet which are easy and effortless and even enjoyable to you will become part of your normal eating in the future.
Quite probably you simply didn't realize that peas and beans and sweetcorn are such valuable vegetables, and you will now continue to eat them rather more frequently because you like them anyway.
Having tried bran flakes you might well find that you like them just as much as ordinary cornflakes.
There isn't much difference in the flavour.
And if you find that sprinkling on just a little bran in no way detracts from your bowl of breakfast cereal, then you will be tempted to continue to do so.
Preferences between wholemeal bread and white bread are largely a matter of habit.
Having become accustomed to wholemeal bread during your F-Plan slimming programme you might well find that, by the time you have got slim, you have actually grown to prefer it.
Once you have shed your surplus weight you will be able to increase your food intake, and on a normal quota of calories it isn't at all difficult to increase your dietary fibre intake to 40g a day just by becoming aware of the fibre-rich foods as you will during the following weeks.
It is considered that something in the region of 40g daily should be quite sufficient to protect your health in all the ways which have been described, and to make it much easier for you to control your weight in the future.
If you are a parent it is almost certain that your increased awareness of the value of dietary fibre will start to influence the foods you  provide for the family — and thus their habits and preferences in the future.
The major Western degenerative diseases don't happen in an instant — like infective diseases — but appear to creep up on us slowly as a result of years and years of bad eating.
Although you will never know it, it could be that the slimming diet you are about to embark on will prevent your own children from suffering from cancer of the colon, forty years from now.
Quite a bonus, when you think of it.
The F-Plan diet rules
Here are the essential rules to follow in order to shed your surplus weight on the F-Plan diet:
1
Determine your total daily calorie intake at a minimum figure of 850 and a maximum of 1,500.
Read Chapter 9 for guidance on your ideal dieting calorie total.
2
Choose your foods from the charts to ensure a daily intake of more than 30g of dietary fibre.
Between 35g and 50g is the F-Plan recommendation, but this could be lowered a little by those on very low-calorie, short-term slimming programmes.
3
Have half a pint of skimmed milk each day.
This supplies loo calories, which must be subtracted from your daily total.
4
Apart from milk, drink only those drinks which are negligible in calorie content.
These are listed in Chapter 11.
(If you find it difficult to diet without enjoying a moderate amount of alcohol, refer to Chapter 11 for advice and guidance on how this can be made possible.)
5
Have two whole fresh fruits each day, either an apple or a pear, and an orange.
No need to weigh these fruits; day-to-day variations will tend to balance out the calorie and fibre content.
Subtract another loo calories from your daily total for this fruit and add 5g to your fibre total.
6
Eat the daily quantity of Fibre-Filler — the ingredients and amounts are given on page 65.
Divide this into two portions, each mixed with milk from the daily half pint; have one of these for breakfast and the other at any time later in the day.
To account for the Fibre-Filler, subtract 200 from your daily calorie total and add 15g to your daily fibre total.
Have one of the breakfasts listed on the following pages only if you don't have Fibre-Filler.
7
To get maximum benefit in making your diet easy, speedy and healthy, obtain your dietary fibre from a wide range of cereal, fruit and vegetable foods rather than seeking to make up the total from just one or two very fibre-rich foods.
8
Choose freely from the calorie- and fibre-counted meals on the  following pages to make up the remainder of your daily calorie and fibre total.
As you get used to the F-Plan method you will probably want to plan your own high-fibre meals and can do so easily with the caloric and fibre charts in the middle of the book.
This is all much more simple than it might seem from the previous, necessarily precise, rules.
It works out this way.
Your daily milk, two pieces of fresh fruit and portion of Fibre-Filler add up to a total of 400 calories and 20g of fibre.
Subtract these calories from your total for the day and make up the rest from other meals.
Also, make up your additional 15g or more of dietary fibre from the meals — so that your total daily intake of dietary fibre is, ideally, between 35g and 50g.
If you are dieting on 850 calories a day, choose meals adding up to 450 calories a day.
If you are dieting on 1,000 calories a day, choose meals adding up to 600 calories a day.
If you are dieting on 1,250 calories a day, choose meals adding up to 850 calories a day.
If you are dieting on 1,500 calories a day, you can choose meals adding up to 1,100 calories a day.
When you eat and how often you eat is entirely up to you as long as you keep to the correct calorie total and aim for the right fibre total.
Some people prefer to save a large proportion of their calories for a big evening meal, and others prefer to eat small meals more frequently.
‘Do your own thing’ is excellent advice in dieting because ‘your own thing’tends to be the easiest thing for you, and the diet method that is easy is the one you will succeed in keeping to.
The F-Plan recipes, meal suggestions and charts on the following pages give you plenty of scope both for doing your own thing and eating your own thing, whether it is something as simple as beans on toast or a sandwich, or something considerably more adventurous.
A word about your weight loss
From the day you start F-Plan dieting you will start shedding surplus fat.
But, because you are eating fibre-rich food, it may be three or four days before the loss of that fat becomes apparent on the scales.
The reason is simply a minor fluctuation in the fluid content of your body.
Remember, fibre-rich food holds extra water, so two or three extra pounds of liquid retained inside you can easily obscure the same quantity of lost fat.
Be patient.
By the end of the first week's dieting the scales will start to reveal the true story of your excellent rate of' weight loss, and from then on it will be downhill all the way to your ideal weight!
One little ‘running yourself in’ problem may occur as you switch to this healthier pattern of eating.
Those who have become used to low-fibre food may suffer from a little flatulence for the first week or two.
This problem should soon resolve itself as you adjust to the diet.
If you do find this a particular problem during the early stages of F-Plan dieting, concentrate on the meals which do not have a high content of peas and beans until you have become accustomed to high-fibre
Important health note
If you are overweight but are otherwise in sound health, it would be unrealistic to ask you to get your doctor's permission to diet.
However, if you suffer from any health complications it would be wise to tell your doctor that you are planning to follow a high-fibre, low-calorie diet, and to ask his advice.
Happily, apart from patients with high-grade obstruction within the alimentary tract, or with coeliac disease, dietary fibre in its natural state in food has not been shown to cause or exacerbate any human disease in the Western population.
Its effect, as you will have read earlier in the book, is to protect you from ill-health rather than cause it.
THE F-PLAN MEALS
The quantities for most of the meals on the following pages are given for a single portion.
Experience shows that dieters very often prefer to eat alone rather than at the family table contrary to the exhortation ‘make this for the family too’ beloved by diet experts.
As you read of the great virtues of dietary fibre in the prevention of illness you will almost certainly want to introduce more fibre in the general family diet.
But it is generally more helpful to give meals for slimmers in single portions and it is very easy to multiply up the quantities, of course.
Where a fairly lengthy list of ingredients is involved, and a little more time, and where the recipe will free, e, we have given recipes for four portions.
This is to save you time in the kitchen, which is a very hazard-filled area for slimmers.
The less time spent there, the better.
When you make these dishes, or other obviously easily freezable recipes which you particularly like, it is a good idea to cook several portions at one time and then divide them into individual portions and store them in the freezer in bags.
A freezer well stocked with little bags, each containing a prepared calorie-counted and fibre-counted meal, provides excellent protection against temptation to break your diet simply because you haven't had time to shop for the right foods.
All these meals are grouped into sections based on the fibre-rich food which forms the main ingredient of the meal.
In each section the individual meals are listed in rising order of calorie value.
You will find the lowest calorie meals at the start of the section, the highest at the end.
Any four-portion recipes are listed at the end of the appropriate section.
We have rounded off calorie values of meals to make it easy for you to add together your 450 — 1,100 calories allowed for the day (in addition to your 400 from Fibre-Filler, fruit and milk); we have also rounded off metric ingredient figures for easy measuring.
The amount of fibre provided by each meal is given (in grams) beside the calorie count.
Again we have done a little rounding off of figures to avoid decimal points.
The meals themselves are designed to cater for all tastes.
They include some very simple meals as well as some more imaginative dishes.
We believe you will find it quite difficult not to find a large  number of meals which appeal to you, because no less than six cookery experts have combined their various tastes and talents to provide this selection of low-calorie, high-fibre meals.
The desserts can be consumed with an utterly clear conscience when you have calories to spare in your daily allowance.
They provide you with fibre and healthy nutrients in place of the usual surplus calories, tooth decay and guilt.
On pages 206 — 211 we give some sample ready-planned daily menus made up from these meals, to show you how easy it is to keep to your preferred eating pattern and daily dieting calorie allowance.
Note.
Where quantities are measured in spoonfuls we mean a level spoonful unless otherwise indicated.
We use the standard teaspoon of 5 ml, the standard tablespoon of 15 ml capacity.