

Editorial
Here's some advance warning of what's happening at this year's London Music Show, to be held at Wembley Conference Centre over the weekend of 28th and 29th November.
As you are no doubt aware, Guitarist Shows have been incorporated within the wider-ranging Music Maker Exhibitions.
By and large all the previous Guitarist Show exhibitors are still there but the remit of the event has been broadened to incorporate recording, hi-tech, drums and relevant musicians' services (including the Performing Right Society and the MU), so now you can bring the whole band along to visit.
Exhibitors will range from giants of the amplification world like Peavey, Marshall, Trace Elliot, MESA/Boogie, Ampeg, Crate and Hartke, and established guitar manufacturers such as Fender, Washburn, Aria, Martin, PRS, Jackson, Yamaha, Status etc., to some of the burgeoning makers like Patrick Eggle (guitars), Carlton (amps) and Decimax (bass systems).
Of course there will be hand makers there too, like Overwater, Manson, and Martin Petersen (Sei basses), and it's good to see Fingerbone guitars back in the fray, too.
The tuition schools were regular Guitarist Show exhibitors and they will also be in evidence in London.
Why not come and discuss your personal requirements with the tutors and, in many cases, the actual Directors of the various Institutes?
An important feature of past Guitarist Shows was the presence of dealers, and the fact that visitors could purchase equipment on the spot.
Nothing has changed.
Bring your cheque books, credit cards etc. and take advantage of the various deals that are bound to be on offer.
And look out for more news concerning the dedicated vintage section of the show, which promises to showcase a multitude of lustworthy collectables for the delectation of the curious and the cognoscenti.
In normal fashion we will be staging music in the Live Hall, and the weekend will see performances by some amazing artists.
Jennifer Batten has agreed to appear at London, demonstrating the amazing flair and technical ability that prompted Michael Jackson to hire Jennifer as his guitarist.
If jazz fusion is more your thing, why not come and enjoy the amazing Frank Gambale and see why he's rated as one of the world's top players?
(Incidentally, we're giving away the very guitar Frank will be playing!)
Anyone see Jan Cyrka at Manchester earlier this year?
I thought he was the highlight of that particular event and Jan has also impressed a certain Mr Satriani, who sang his praises in a Guitarist interview recently.
Also appearing are the up-and-coming Farenheit and Guitarist contributor Michael Fath, the latter repeating his performance at our recent Scottish Show.
Michael also has a record out on Music Maker Records, so catch Mr Fath in London and see what he means by ‘technique as a result of harmony…’
Naturally the whole Guitarist team will be there, so come and see us, buy a T-shirt, take out a subscription, get yourself a CD, sort out some back issues or just have a chat.
See you next month…
N.M .
LONDON MUSIC SHOW
WHAT'S NEW News & New Products A feast, nay, a veritable banquet of news, views and blatant rumours from the furthest-flung corners of the music industry…
FENDER BOOK
We haven't blagged a copy for review yet, but if ‘The Fender Book’ from the team of Tony Bacon and Paul Day is anything like their ‘Ultimate Guitar Book’, it'll be a real goodie.
It's a 96-page hardback containing information on all Fender guitars, from the 1950 Broadcaster to the 1992 SRV Strat.
As well as sixty specially commissioned photographs of choice instruments there'll be catalogue reprints, new interviews with former and present Fender employees, a unique listings system detailing over 150 different guitars and plenty of dating information.
‘The Fender Book’ costs £10.95, is published by Balafon and will soon be available through your local bookshop or via IMP on  
WOODCARVIN'
After a period of some confusion it seems that Carvin gear is going to get proper distribution in the UK.
ABC Music of Esher in Surrey will be bringing in Carvin electric guitars, basses, valve guitar combos and bass amplifiers as well as the new Quad X preamp.
All Carvin guitars are hand-finished and there's a wide choice of styles, from solid colours through to the natural koa-wood of the £675 DC-135 guitar shown here.
Delivery for custom finishes will be about eight weeks.
ABC aim to maintain the Carvin philosophy of value for money by cutting out the middleman and selling direct, either through their own stores or by mail order, which will keep prices down to a minimum.
For a full colour catalogue, contact  
BOX OF TRICKS
Yes, we realise this is Guitarist and not Woodglue Sniffers' Weekly,but things are hotting up; it seems our remarks a couple of months ago concerning a certain brand of custom-built guitar storage cabinet have not gone unnoticed by a rival chippie down in Eastbourne…
This lush little box was recently made for you-know-who to hold his Watkins Copicat Retro-Classic (Charlie Watkins has now reissued a modern, hand-built version of his famous valve-powered tape loop echo and preamp).
The box has a birdseye maple top edged in tulipwood and front, back and sides of burr walnut with boxwood edge-binding.
The guitar inlay — which, as the maker is at great pains to point out, has the pickups exactly right since this is the famous Peter Green Les Paul with the reversed neck pickup polepieces — has a flamed sycamore body, pickup surrounds of holly, volume and tone controls of harewood and mahogany, a real ebony fingerboard, frets and position markers of boxwood and real silver tailpiece, bridge, pickups, machines and Gibson logo.
Strings were apparently omitted since the small scale (the whole box is less than 16″x9″) made them look a bit stupid.
The makers have made a similar but National-adorned box for Mark Knopfler's Copicat, and they also include Paul McCartney among their discerning (ie. rich) customers.
Tempted?
Contact  
RECORD NEWS
Ry Cooder and David Lindley are featured on the self-titled debut album from Hawaiian-based band The Pahinui Brothers (on Private Music, through BMG).
The band (all sons of Gabby Pahinui, the late folk hero and master of Hawaiian slack-key guitar who contributed to Cooder's ‘Chicken Skin Music’ back in 1975) have put together a collection of traditional songs interspersed with some surprising covers, including Lennon's Jealous Guy and Steve Earle's My Old Friend The Blues .
Weird, but possibly wonderful.
Jimmie Vaughan is the featured twangman on ‘Boom Boom’, the millionth album from the everlastingly godlike John Lee Hooker .
Unlike the mega-successful guest-artiste LPs ‘The Healer’ and ‘Mr. Lucky’, ‘Boom Boom’is released on Pointblank records through Virgin and promises to be a much more stripped-down affair, featuring a regular band of Vaughan with various Robert Cray Band stalwarts.
Michael Schenker has called a final halt to MSG after a twelve-year run.
Guess what?
He's kicked his Vee under the bed and is currently engrossed in assembling an acoustic instrumental album called ‘Thank You’, which will be available initially only through the fan club.
Write to 2 Turnpike Cottages, London Road, Camberley, Surrey GU15 3UZ.
We are informed that the first 1,000 fans to order will find their names on the album cover.
The full glory of Chuck Prophet 's twisted Telecastering is definitely best savoured live, but the latest release from Green On Red sees the errant duo of Prophet and Dan Stuart re-writing the same old songs to the same good effect.
Entitled ‘Too Much Fun’, the album is out on China Records and the accompanying tour is due soon.
Recent Guitarist interviewee Michael Brook has just announced the release of a limited edition seven-track CD recorded live earlier this year at, would you believe, the Aquarium in London Zoo.
Costing £7.99 inc.
P&P, ‘Michael Brook Live At The Aquarium’ is available direct from 
Finally, ex-Guns N' Roses rhythm guitarist Izzy Stradlin has his first solo release, ‘Ju Ju Hounds’, out now on Geffen/MCA Records.
Those expecting a dose of suitably FM-friendly rawk'n'roll might be disappointed — as, it's rumoured, was the record company.
His first single?
A cover of Toots And The Maytals' reggae classic Pressure Drop …
WASH & GO
Thomas Logan was the fortunate geezer who entered a Radio Clyde competition and picked up a free Washburn guitar at our recent Scottish Show.
It's no ordinary guitar, either, since the prize was one of the first Washburn Custom Shop guitars in the UK, a handmade MG-104 model with a purple quilted maple top, custom-wound Seymour Duncans, a Schaller Floyd Rose and a list price of £1,150.
Who's a lucky boy then?
GUILDING THE LILY
Electro-acoustic technology being one of the main battlegrounds in the acoustic guitar war, respected US makers Guild have come up with an all-new pickup to accompany their all-new range of guitars.
The pickup features an exclusive transducer that Guild claim offers advanced sensitivity and dynamic range as well as low noise levels.
The control panel has a 4-band EQ including a brilliance control for extra sparkle and a phase reversal switch to match the guitar sound to the room it's being played in.
The preamp produces the buffered signal necessary for a flat-response direct input.
There are four models in the F Series electro-acoustic range: the F-4CE, the F-25CE, the F-30CE and the top-of-the-line F-65CE.
Bend the ear of Dixie's Music on .
LIFE'S A BEACH
Hard on the heels of Palm Bay Guitar Parts — necks, bodies and so on— comes a complete guitar, the Tidalwave.
It's an English-built rocker's tool finished in cellulose all over and powered by a combination of a Seymour Duncan SSL-1, a DiMarzio Fred and a DiMarzio PAF Pro.
It boasts a maple-topped Brazilian mahogany body and a satin-finished maple neck with a bound ebony fingerboard and a half maple/half mahogany headstock intended to help sustain.
Hardware is supplied by Gotoh, and includes a Floyd Rose licensed trem.
The basic price is £999 for a model with chrome or black hardware.
Gold hardware, a quilted top or a set of the new and extremely succulent Gotoh 510 machineheads will all cost you extra.
Contact .
ON THE NICKEL
Vintage-style guitars?
Definitely.
Vintage-style amplifiers?
Absolutely.
But vintage-style strings?
Either Gibson know something we don't, or they're one fret short of an octave…
Apparently it was Gibson Strings that pioneered such innovations as the ‘double lock twist ball’ and the use of alloys.
Now they've started making a set of strings with a Swedish steel core and a pure nickel wrap for, as they say, a longer lifespan, greater tuning stability and a more traditionally warm tonal response.
Luckily they've decided to modernise the gauges instead of going for full bailing-wire authenticity, and the Vintage Reissue Strings come in a sensible .010 to .039 size.
And you must admit the packets look nice.
Gibson have also announced some new instruments, including the first Gibson basses ever modelled on the ES-175 jazz guitar body.
The EB-650 features diamond-shaped, Trini Lopez-style soundholes, ‘TB Plus’ modernised Thunderbird pickups and comes in a choice of translucent blue, red, amber, black and purple; the EB-750 has traditional f-holes, a pair of active Bartolinis, gold hardware and either natural, ebony or vintage sunburst finishes.
Also new are the M4-S Standard and MS-4 Deluxe, both based on the Gibson M-III rock guitar but sporting hardware from Ned Steinberger: his banjo-style ‘gearless’ tuners, his efficiently wobbly ‘Knife Edge Knut’and his ‘Jam Trem’(a divebombing tool with the ability to lock into non-trem mode, rather like a Wilkinson).
Your local Gibbo dealer is sure to know more.
CALL ME AL
Al Di Meola is among the impressive list of people using Trace Elliot's Acoustic range.
He's just taken delivery of a TA200S 200-watt stereo combo, as have Andy Summers, Seal, Greg Lake and Suzanne Vega.
Jethro Tull have bought a selection of Trace Acoustic units, with Ian Anderson and Martin Barre choosing TA100s and bassist Dave Pegg opting for a TAB100–12 for double bass.
The well-known flash so-and-so Eric Johnson is so happy with his TA100R that he'll be appearing in Trace Acoustic adverts.
In the folk and country fields, Don Williams, Martin Carthy and James Taylor are also spending evenings in, all cuddling up to their TA100R's (Queensrÿche have a pair of the same amps, but they'd probably deny the cuddling bit).
For info on the whole Trace Acoustic range, contact .
STANDING OVATION
Dates have just come in for a series of Ovation guitar clinics, with Ian Aitken: Wed Oct 14th, Picton Music, Swansea; Thu 15th, Cranes Music, Cardiff; Mon 26th, Oasis Music, Ringwood, Hants; Tues 27th, Soundpad, Barnstaple; Thu 29th, Avalon Music, Sevenoaks; Wed 11th Nov, Music Inn, Nottingham; Thu 12th, Musical Exchange, Birmingham; Fri 13th, Foulds of Derby; Wed 18th, Rose Morris Music Store, London.
JAM TODAY…
Well, on Mon 30th November, actually.
Organised by the Musician's Institute of London to raise funds for the most deserving student, the line-up so far includes Frank Gambale, Phil Hilborne, Geoff Whitehorn, Lawrence Cottle, Jim Mullen, Mo Foster, Keith More, Tony Muschamp and Neal Wilkinson, which should guarantee some significant musical action.
It all happens at the George Robey, opposite Finsbury Park tube station, and the doors are open at 8pm.
STRING ‘EM UP
What's a wonder remedy for a tired old bass sound?
New amp?
Naah…new strings!
Works every time, too.
Rotosound have been experimenting with a new type of nickel plating which gives an exceptionally bright sound thanks to increased magnetic response.
These are now available in their ‘Xtra Bright’ Rotobass string range, at present in 4-string sets of regular, medium-light and hybrid, priced at £11.95 a bunch, with 5-string sets to follow soon.
THE ADAMS FAMILY Bryan Adams & Keith Scott Having spent what seemed like most of last year topping the UK charts Bryan Adams is now a fully fledged megastar.
However, at heart he's still a guitar playing singer, and someone who knows a thing or two about Vox AC30s…
Interview by Eddie Allen.
I've caught up with Bryan Adams on the Cardiff leg of his hugely popular ‘Waking Up The Neighbours’ jaunt, and frankly I'm a relieved man.
You see, a tour of this magnitude throws up a forest of red tape for the intrepid journo to fight through and you can spend practically a whole day being shuffled from one ‘no’ man to the next, understandably concerned to protect their baby from unofficial liggers and prowling hacks.
However, finally I'm cosily ensconced with the affable Mr. Adams and his excellent lead guitarist (linchpin of the Dudes of Leisure) Keith Scott, and the talk turns to tunes…
Well known as riff-writer extraordinaire and with a seemingly bottomless pit of catchy songs to draw from, Canadian Adams confides that his approach to songwriting and guitar playing is actually based upon a formula.
‘I've never actually analysed this before,’ he says, ‘but I suppose I think of the guitar as the medium which makes the voice work, and so my guitar parts are always written around the vocal.
I feel that they're an extension of the same thing — the voice and guitar being as one.’
Bryan's songs are undeniably guitar-orientated, but it's the sparseness of the instrument in the mix that creates some of the strongest riffs.
As Bryan points out, this has a lot to do with the fact that he's doing two jobs…
‘The reason that they're sparse is because when I'm singing it's kind of hard to be very rhythmic, so it's the voice first and the guitar parts fitting around that, with the whole thing being locked together by a pretty solid and very basic groove.’
Helping to create the solid feel which has become the hallmark of Adams' music is guitarist Keith Scott.
One of the trademarks of Keith's solo playing is his double stopping, based, as he says ‘on an old blues trick.’
Keith reckons it cuts through better, especially in the tail end of a song, ‘when all hell's breaking loose and there's infills and everybody is winding up.
Single line things tend to get lost a bit there.’
Doubling is also the key to the power behind the heavier Adams tracks.
‘There are only odd occasions when Keith's and my guitar parts are different,’ explains Bryan.
‘Mostly they just double each other.
Of course there are lines that Keith does in second verses, melodic lines which build up to the chorus, and then it all apexes at the solo, hopefully.’
When pushed for an influence on this ‘doubling’ approach, Adams has a very simple answer: ‘AC/DC!
Why complicate it?
If you get a good riff, double it with another guy playing the same exact thing.
Sometimes I drop out for the first verse of songs and let Keith do rhythm and then I come back in for the second verse; it brings the level of intensity right up.
‘I know I keep mentioning AC/DC but they're the king of groove guitar bands for me.
When you listen to their records they're always a lot slower than you perceive them to be.
It's because it locks better at that groove.
Listen to the ‘Highway To Hell’ album; those songs are incredibly well timed.
They're the classic example of a band that thinks with one brain, and if you took one component out it wouldn't happen.’
Adams' simple philosophy is also applied to the equipment he uses to get that gritty, hard edged sound.
Figuring prominently is his rack, which he designed with Pete Cornish.
‘I wanted something that was going to be failsafe, something that wouldn't, after two years of touring, collapse on me.
All I needed was a chorus pedal and a booster.
I designed it pretty much around the idea that it could be used in the studio and on the road.
But the technical side of it is only a means to an end, making sure it's a really clean sound, without going into too much extra cabling and everything.
‘I wanted a really good box that I could work from, or that someone could work for me — which is what happens nine times out of ten — and then run direct into the amplifier without losing any gain, without gaining any hum and without losing any of the real naturalness of the Fender Strat and the Vox amp.’
As Bryan says, his main guitar is a Strat, although in the early days he used a Les Paul…
‘The only reason I ever played Les Pauls was because Keith was playing a Strat and I thought we should have a different look, but from about 1985 on I've played Strats.
They're all old ones except two that Fender made in the Custom Shop in California.
‘I've always thought that an old instrument, particularly a Stratocaster, has an instant vibe.
It's got instant character, whereas a new guitar hasn't had the years of beating on it and fiddling with to give it the character.
So if you plug in an old Strat it will probably sound more like a Strat should sound.
How would you enlarge on that, Keith?’
‘Well, there's something about an aged guitar…the tone qualities…every older guitar that I've played seems to have settled down.
There's the odd exception where I've picked up a brand new one and it's worked right away.
I've had some success with Paul Reed Smith guitars, which you can virtually take out of the box, tune them up and they're ready to go.’
But does their agreement about guitars carry over to their individual sounds?
Keith: ‘I have to change from clean, sort of arpeggiated sounds, right over to solo sounds, which is a little more diverse than what Bryan has to do.
Because of that I have a stereo mix on stage and a monitor for my amps, which is basically two 4x12 cabs.
It doesn't necessarily mean it's going to work at front of house, so the sound man takes a direct feed, just a regular Marshall, dry, up to the house.
As for effects, sometimes there's none at all, depending on the reverberance of the room we're playing.
So he has control over what he wants to hear and I have my own mixer on stage.
That's basically the way it's split.’
By today's standards Keith's rig is fairly simple, but Bryan's is even more basic.
‘I have a mic on my Vox AC30 and a direct which goes out into a Hi-Watt head, and that goes into a speaker simulator, which goes to the desk out front.’
Why the Hi-Watt?
‘Well, I didn't have anywhere else to put it at home!’
‘And it hasn't blown up yet,’ Keith jokes.
‘Right, it hasn't blown up.
It's one of the first ones and it sounds really good.
It's a good rock-sounding amp.’
Bryan's enthusiasm for the old Hi-Watt is shared by Keith, who used to use Hi-Watts all the time.
‘I bought my first one in 1974 and I had it at least ten years.
I used it almost exclusively up until…
I could afford to buy another one!’
This liking for old gear means that they both spend a lot of time hunting it down, as Bryan explains…
‘We've become real flea market junkies for old equipment.
I collect old microphones and Keith collects vintage amplifiers.
We've really got into the ‘Olde Worlde’ things.
Not necessarily all of them work, but there's a vibe about them.
Sometimes they're just aesthetically pleasing things; some of the old Gretsch amplifiers and that kind of thing are kind of cool to look at.
‘It all stems from our curiosity about the past and our heroes, particularly guitar players like Ritchie Blackmore and Jimmy Page.
Those guys, for me, were and are the archetypical guitar players.
I remember spending hours looking at the cover of Deep Purple's ‘Machine Head’, looking at the little photos and thinking, ‘He's playing a Strat and he's standing on a Vox amp; right, that must be the sound.’
Those sorts of things inspired me, and the reason those records sound like they do is because they used that equipment.
You won't get that sound unless you use the original equipment.’
The reliability problems caused by taking old gear on the road adds to the pressure of touring, but Keith thinks they've got round that quite well.
‘You have to hire people that know how to work the equipment, who know how to repair things.
We've researched who are the right people to fix Marshalls, to fix Voxes and to fix Stratocasters.
You can take your guitar to a guitar shop and anyone can re-fret it, but to get it done the way you want it is very, very important.
I mean, the wrong guy can ruin a guitar.’
WHILE BRYAN AND KEITH are now enjoying the fruits of success, it hasn't always been easy.
For instance, even today they both use the same gauge guitar strings because in the old days it was cheaper to buy one gauge in bulk.
‘We could never afford things,’ recalls Bryan.
‘The reason Keith used his Hi-Watt for years and years was because he couldn't afford to buy another amplifier.
And the reason I use heavy gauge strings is because he was using a heavy gauge and we figured it was better and cheaper to buy strings all in one gauge.
Besides, if we're changing guitar strings every night, I might as well use the same strings as he does.’
‘And 12s to 50s lasted longer and stayed in tune better,’ chips in Keith, ‘so you didn't have to change them as often.
I'd heard Joe Walsh and Pete Townshend used them quite heavy, and I rather liked the tone they got, so I slowly built it up until I got up as high as I could be comfortable with, and I've been using that gauge ever since.’
Bryan agrees: ‘I've never been into that sort of high speed guitar playing, and if I was it would have to be something very melodic.
For instance, Ritchie Blackmore was a very fast player, but it was always based on a blues thing, never on ‘How many notes can I get in the scale?’
And that was much more appealing.
Again, it all comes down to the vocal thing.
If you listen to the way the voice comes in in relation to where the chords are, you'll see that the vocal fits exactly in the holes where the guitar isn't playing.
Those things are all built around vocal/rhythm arrangements.
Arrangements are very important in songwriting and in guitar playing, I think.’
Ask Bryan to elaborate on his playing and he replies, ‘I'm a professional busker.
I've no idea what I'm doing.
And if the tape recorder hadn't been rolling with me playing around on guitar, some of the songs would never have happened; I would never have remembered them.
‘The more I'm into music and the more I'm into guitar playing, I realise it isn't about how great a guitar player you are; it's about writing songs and it's about fitting guitar and voice together.
‘On this last record, and Keith will attest to this, we spent ages recording guitars; we had every guitar available to us and we went all out.
We used mostly vintage Strats, Les Pauls, Gretsches, and we would just say, ‘We've got to find a guitar solo for this, what do you fancy?’
‘Well, let's try the Strat again and play it through the Marshall and the Vox and add the…whatever…sound to it,’ and there were all these different combinations of sounds.
It would work for one part but the next part needed another sound to it, so maybe we'd use the Paul Reed Smith for the second half of the solo.
There were all kinds of things like that, weren't there Keith?’
‘Yeah, there are times, because certain guitars don't have a wangy bar, that you get a great solo for most of the song and right at the end you want to maybe slide down and you can't do it, so you'd have to find a guitar that would do that, and then blend it in.’
Of course, Bryan Adams' talents are not just confined to singing and playing.
The albums also showcase his production skills, although that's something which he would like to change.
‘I've produced six albums and I've had enough of producing,’ he says.
‘It's too hard.
I think after ‘Reckless’ I knew I wasn't going to do another full production because I was just driving everybody too hard, and becoming very miserable doing it.
We did put one more record together with Bob Clearmountain, ‘Into The Fire’, and that's when I said, ‘That's it, I don't really want to be hands-on any more.'’
‘I'd always wanted to work with Mutt Lange; I've actually tried to work with Mutt since 1984, but he was always busy on a project, but he wanted to do it and it was the right time for both of us.
He didn't want to produce and I didn't want to produce, so we ended up writing songs and making the record together.’
WITH THE STRONG GUITAR emphasis on all Bryan's albums, it's Keith who Bryan credits with getting the sounds.
As he says, ‘Keith's really good at being able to know where to focus in.
A lot of time we're just messing with the amp and getting it sounding pretty cool, and then the engineer will whack something on it and away you go.’
Keith takes this further: ‘We were a little limited when we were recording the guitars, limited by the size of the room and the fact that some of the gear wasn't working properly, so obstructive forces were at work and this is where compromise comes in; you're spending all this time when you know it could be a lot better.’
‘That's what the whole thing about the Pete Cornish involvement for me,’ continues Bryan, ‘because I was sick of coming in and plugging into an amp and going, ‘Oh, how do you get rid of that bloody hum?’
And ‘Why is this tube crackling, what's going on?’
And so I assembled an entourage of people — Pete Cornish, Dave Peterson, Lance Stadnyk — and I said ‘Right, we want to get this happening.’
And we did.’
If there's a simpler way of recording guitars, Bryan and Keith haven't found it yet.
‘Believe me,’ says Keith, ‘if we could plug into a box and get all these sounds, we'd be doing it, but it just doesn't work that way.
We have to spend a lot of time learning the limitations of the amplifier versus the guitar we're using, and the microphones and console…’
‘And microphone placement is very important,’ Bryan interjects, ‘because if you take a speaker, the difference between the centre of the cone and the outside can vary the sound so drastically that an inch can make the difference between a good and a shit guitar sound.
‘This is something we've been doing for years.
The engineer would have headphones on while Keith was blasting away; he'd move the mic around until we found the right place, then he'd bolt it in the stand where the speaker's sweet spot was, and there it would stay.
From there we'd work on the sound to develop it, maybe even including different amplifiers.
Very often, if you isolate a sound it's not that good, but with Keith and me playing the same thing, they combine and one complements the other.
I recently spent ten hours mixing this live broadcast that's coming out soon on the BBC, and as soon as I pulled either mine or Keith's amp out of the mix the vibe wasn't quite the same.
So the balance of the two is essential.
‘In my system you can plug in four or five amps at once, without losing any gain, without gaining any hum; you can put them all on parallel and they will all be in phase.
I use Vox AC30s, which are funny amps, I've got four of them and only two sound really good.
One of them is amazing but I don't take it on the road with me; I leave it at home.
‘If you compare the two AC30s I use on stage, the back-up one sounds like nothing compared with the other.
I can't explain it — the parts are exactly the same.
It's not the valves.
Maybe it's the capacitors.
Maybe it's the transformers, because they must have something to do with the sound.
Anyway, it's not a bad amp, but the one I've got at home is much better.
‘For those boffins who are looking for an old AC30, remember that Vox produced three versions with different frequency biases.
If you pull the chassis out, somewhere inside them will be a stamp saying ‘Treble’ or ‘Bass’, and the one to look for is ‘Treble’.
But don't confuse ‘Treble’ with ‘Treble Boost’.
‘Treble Boost’ are garbage; they're just not worth discussing.
‘You know, my life changed when I found the Vox amplifier.
I tell you, I've had Sound Citys, which were garbage, Marshall, which I found unreliable and kind of loud, Roland Jazz Chorus 120s — I've used those live with the distortion button turned on — and I had a Music Man amp for a while.
And then along came an old battered AC30, which Lance, my guitar tech, gave to me.
He said, ‘Man, look, this is the amp,’ and from that point on I didn't look back.
‘I drive them really hard, to the absolute max.
But here's another key tip for those Vox users out there: I only use one channel.
The reason why a lot of Vox amplifiers blow up is because, when you turn the amplifier on, all the preamp tubes and power tubes are powered up, but if you're only going to use one channel, plug the guitar in that one and take out the valves that you don't use from the other channels, so the amp isn't quite as hot.
The channel runs really hot, but the amp doesn't run as hot.
Pull everything out — you don't need the tremolo, you don't need the normal channel and all that other garbage.
Put it in a box in your guitar case and save it for a rainy day.
And that way your amp won't blow up.
You see the Vox is trying to be all things, but in fact it's only really good for one thing at a time.’
THE BRYAN ADAMS LIVE show calls for simple staging and a powerful sound, and to make things more intimate for the audience it involves the band disappearing from the main stage to reappear on a small podium set out in the audience.
There they play some old rock'n'roll numbers and pull members of the audience up on stage with them, causing nightmares for the security people.
But, as Bryan points out, ‘What do you do, nowadays?
I mean, everybody has seen everything.
But the idea of making the gig more intimate is something that appeals to me.’
Keith goes on: ‘We've been doing it for three or four months now and the only problem was when somebody tripped running to the B stage, fell down and scraped their elbow!’
A Bryan Adams song is almost guaranteed commercial success, and following the triumph of the record-breaking single (Everything I Do) I Do For You there must be even more pressure to maintain that tradition.
‘Man, I've been worrying about that for fifteen years!’ exclaims Bryan.
‘The album ‘Into The Fire’, was intentionally written so that the songs would go Top 40.
It was a good tour to do and I think we learned a lot from it.
‘We recorded the album in my house, in the living room.
I don't know if I'd do it again, though.
When I'm on tour I normally write little ideas down in my diary and hang on to them until it's writing time.
But touring takes up so much time that there's no real time to sit down and work out songs.
So now it's touring time and in September I'll be writing, then in October it's back touring again.
‘I'm not incredibly prolific,’ he admits.
‘I'll maybe write ten songs a year if I'm lucky.
I haven't written diddly this year, but maybe I'll have a surge of inspiration and write five in September.
But it's hard to write songs.
Well actually, it's easy to write songs; it's hard to write good ones.’
So which songs is Bryan really proud of?
‘On ‘Into The Fire’, for example, I'm really proud of Keith's playing, especially on Native Son — just a fantastic piece of guitar work.
All the solos in the actual song Into The Fire were recorded live; that's the way he works best.
Packing You In on ‘Waking Up The Neighbours’ is another example of where that happened.
I was trying to get Mutt to finish up because we were all leaving and had only four or five hours to finish the demo.
So I said, ‘Let's knock up a quick vocal and let's knock up Keith's guitar,’ and he just banged up a solo very quickly and it was great.’
Keith subscribes to the theory that it's more luck than judgement.
‘When you get it like that, it's definitely a fluke, because usually it's laborious.’
Still, Keith must be instinctively aware of what his bandleader requires.
After all, they've been friends for sixteen years, and have worked together for eleven of them…
‘Keith added a huge thing to the band,’ enthuses Bryan, ‘and he'd never recorded on an album before.
I remember I was going in to record ‘Cuts Like A Knife’ and I said, ‘I'm taking you guys into the studio,’because who I play with on stage, I want them in the studio with me; I like the idea of having one unit.’
Keith recalls, ‘I was pretty green then.
I had a lot of things to learn.’
‘You would never guess it listening to those records now,’ adds Bryan.
‘I remember we struggled on one solo on ‘Cuts Like A Knife’ and we actually spent days and days trying to think up what the solo was going to be.
In the end Keith said, ‘Just let's play the f***ing solo’!
And he played it, the bastard played it!
Sometimes the intimidation of other people in a recording studio can be very overwhelming.’
Keith on the other hand feels the pressure was more self-inflicted…
‘There's always a self-imposed pressure, especially when you're starting out —‘Shit, I've got to come through big-time on this’— but you just have to let it happen; if it doesn't happen today it'll happen tomorrow.
That's a great philosophy and fortunately we've got the luxury of having a little more time now than we had in the early days.
‘Naah, I say rush it!’ laughs Bryan; ‘I'd rather be sitting on a beach any day…’
TECH TALK Lance Stadnyk
Lance has been Bryan Adams' guitar tech for three years.
With the job goes the enormous responsibility of ensuring that the equipment is always on top form.
But what of the personal pressures of working for an artist like Bryan Adams…?
‘Bryan's fun.
At the very beginning I took it really personally when he yelled at me, ‘Get me that,’ but I quickly realised he has a lot on his mind during the show.
He's trying to concentrate on saying the right things and singing the songs.
All he says to me now is, ‘Just make sure you're there for me.’
I know what he means now; he wants to come on and know everything is just right.
And if I was a singer and a guitar player I'd want that too…
‘And I never take my eyes off him during the show.
One time I did and he was tapping me on the shoulder saying, ‘I've broken a string’.
God, I just looked away once and that was the minute!’
How fussy is he about his gear?
‘He's fussy in that he wants it right, but he doesn't mind if a guitar's action is a little higher or a little lower; he can basically play anything.’
How many guitars do you have to look after?
‘Bryan uses seven or eight Strats and a couple of Gretsches — a green one and we've just got the orange one.’
Compared to the Strats, how easy are the Gretsches to look after?
‘They don't like new strings.
They're hollow, and because of that they're hard to keep in tune.
What I've been doing is changing the bottom three one day and then the high ones the next; I never change them all at once because, even though you stretch them in, it still seems the bridge gets unstable.’
How many guitar changes do you have to make in an evening?
‘I don't count them, but there's a lot.
At these outside shows it depends on the weather.
We tend to play at the point of the evening when the temperature drops, so I tune up just before Bryan goes on and then after three or four songs they're all sharp, because the temperature has dropped.
Indoors is much easier; they put the air conditioning on in the morning and it's the same all day and night, except for the lights.
Indoors he can get through almost half a show with one guitar — but then I try and get him off that, so that we don't have the problem of breaking strings.’
What about Bryan's AC30s?
Do they cause you much trouble?
‘The old Vox amps are really temperamental; they're great-sounding amps but they do go through tubes.
The two he uses on stage have held up well, though; it's remarkable because they've never been rebuilt and they were made in 1959.
Mostly it's that they don't travel well, whatever flightcases you use.
‘I have to say that the backup from Vox is terrific — basically anything I want.
We run the amps at 110/120v, although Brian May told me he thinks they sound best at 220v.
I've thought of asking Bryan if we could change to that, but he seems to be happy with the sound.
I know when Brian went on the first Queen tour to America he hated it, so he had stabilisers made to give him 220v.
I've talked to the designer, Dick Denney, and Dick said that they were definitely made for this market, so I guess they probably perform better in the UK.’
Tell me about the pedal board I've seen on stage…
‘Bryan has a pedal board, but because he's trying to concentrate on singing and leading the band he can't be standing there trying to switch his pedals all night, so I usually run them from the side.’
‘The rack was built by Pete Cornish, and basically it's all the effects Bryan has liked over the years, but with switches so there are no actual pedals on it.
And it's all wired together so you can dial anything in that you want.
‘In the rack there are two Samson PT3 wireless units and a Hush unit, and I've got a Peterson rack tuner.
Then there's the Pete Cornish ‘brain' and a cable that goes out to Bryan's pedal board.
The board has the same switches on it as I have on the rack, so if Bryan presses the board they light up for me too, so I can see what he's got on.
He likes to change songs sometimes, so then he's got control of his own destiny and he runs the board.
Of course when I run it, he can also see what I'm putting on — chorus, overdrive, top boost…
‘Then there's a mute, which we use when we change wirelesses and guitars.
I mute them so that I can switch two wirelesses on at the same time, because if you have two on together they screech.
We also run a Hi-Watt 50 amp through a Marshall Emulator; that goes through the direct send in the rack to the desk, so the sound man out front gets that as well as the mics on Bryan's two Vox amps.
He can mix the Hi-Watt in for a cleaner sound, if that suits a song more.
‘Pete Cornish built the rack, but Bryan designed it.
People think he just sings, plays guitar and writes songs, but he knows exactly what he wants on stage…’
EA 
STYLE FILE Hilborne on Adams
Bryan Adams has a tremendous knack of writing very catchy and memorable guitar parts, and although he's not particularly known as a lead soloist his rhythm playing approach is well worth looking at.
In this Style File (perhaps we should have called it a Riff File) we will look at some of his best known parts, as taken from his extremely successful ‘Reckless’ and ‘Waking Up The Neighbours’LPs…
Performance Notes
Fig 1) The intro from Run To You is a music shop favourite.
Essentially it's a series of arpeggios phrased in two groups of three and one group of two eighth-notes per bar.
Provided you have a fair left hand reach it's possible to play this without a capo, although I have seen many people play it either with one at the 2nd fret, or without one by transposing the part down to E…
Figs 2–3) This is the solo/interlude from Run To You , an extremely simple, yet effective piece based around the arpeggios of F♯sus4-F♯, Esus4-E and Dsus4-D.
Fig 2 is the main part, played twice through, and Fig 3 is the thirds harmony that is played on the repeat.
Bear in mind that is is possible to play figs 2 and 3 together, on one guitar, as double stops!
Fig 4) This example contains the rhythm part which forms the intro/verse of Somebody .
This is a good example of Bryan's percussive strumming technique; as you play through this be sure to carefully follow all the pick-stroke indications and to mute the chords as indicated.
Also notice the G/E chord in bar 6; on the record Bryan just plays a G chord and the bass player supplies the low E.
Fig 5) These are the chords that Bryan plays during the bridge of Summer Of 69 .
Play them in order as per the record…
Fig 6) This intro is a pentatonic (Em) phrase played la Shakin All Over ,Back In Black etc…
This is followed by some very syncopated chord ‘stabs’.
Watch your timing as you play this and make sure that you cut each chord off at the correct time.
Fig 7) The intro from It's Only Love is one of my personal favourites (I'm a sucker for anything that uses the old White Room ploy!).
As you play through this you should notice how the D note is held on top of the first three chords, and also the subtle rhythmic variations which occur on the F chords in bars 3 and 4…
Fig 8) Another syncopated part; it's very simple, but it works!
Fig 9)Vanishing has some interesting chord voicings in the intro/verse.
Make sure you let the notes ring into each other where possible, to get the full harmonic effect.
Fig 10) These chord voicings form the intro of Do I Have To Say The Words .
Play them in order and make sure that your thumb, which holds down the root of the G chords, also deadens the A string…
SUPER BOWL ‘92 Ovation 1992-H What kind of year have you had?
If it's anything like the majority of the population it's been a bit hairy.
So why not celebrate the fact that it's rapidly coming to an end and invest in a poignant musical reminder of 1992…?
Review by Eddie Allen.
And what could be better than a guitar which is guaranteed to be one of a limited number produced this year?
The Ovation 1992-H Collectors’ Series is a remarkable-looking guitar and comes complete with a Certificate Of Authenticity, listing its serial number, which in this case is 1574, and the signature of the President of Ovation Instruments Inc, Mr. C. William Kaman II.
What makes the Collectors' Series really special is the fact that this combination of colours and features is unique to 1992 and will never be repeated.
I'm sure everyone's familiar with the roundback or bowl design pioneered by Ovation and successfully used by them in their electro-acoustic guitars.
The 1992-H has its shallow bowl in brown rather than the more common black, supporting a Tamo ash top with a single cutaway.
Tamo ash is apparently a very rare, highly figured wood found only in a small region of Japan.
It's been used for centuries in the crafting of Buddhist religious statues and the grain is absolutely spectacular.
Around the edge the ivoroid binding sports a fine reddish line matching part of the oakleaf epaulettes around the multiple mini sound holes which, love them or hate them, help give the 1992-H a distinctive appearance.
The electric side of this guitar is taken care of by six bridge-mounted piezo electric transducers and an OP-24 preamp.
The rotary volume pot and three (treble, middle and bass) tone sliders are housed in the top edge of the bowl.
A battery check button and light are included and the handbook says an alkaline battery should be good for around 2000 hours of continuous performance under normal use.
Replacing the battery isn't difficult, although it is fiddly and to accomplish this and to gain access to the truss rod a circular plate on the back of the guitar has to be removed.
This done it's possible to reach all the electrics and the truss rod adjuster.
The bridge itself is a straightforward design with the strings fixing through the back before passing over the bridge saddles.
It's made from walnut, matching the fingerboard and headstock veneer, and is glued and bolted to the top of the body so there should be no danger of it ever lifting.
The neck is a five-piece mahogany and maple laminate, featuring an oiled finish.
It has a width of 1th″ (4.23cm) at the nut and joins the body at the 14th fret.
The neck's profile is a fairly pronounced V shape, and with a fingerboard radius of 10″ the guitar is very comfortable to play without being too chunky.
Maple is the material for the Collector's inlays, and they're superbly done — especially the ‘1992’ at the twelfth fret and the Ovation logo on the headstock.
The natural finish contrasts nicely with the high gloss on the soundboard, and with the adjustable gold-plated Schaller machineheads adding the finishing touch the honey sunburst 1992-H Ovation is without doubt a stunner of an instrument.
IN USE
One of the things I really like about this Ovation is how it seems to be the ideal compromise, in terms of feel, between my ideal electric and acoustic guitars.
It's not only a working instrument but the kind of guitar that you feel like picking up and playing at any time; when it's not wowing the punters it will probably spend its time lying on the sofa permanently on call.
Its unamplified acoustic properties are really quite surprising.
It's fairly loud with good sound projection.
Tonally there's a lot more bottom end than I was expecting, and while it wouldn't pass for the finest of Martins, it's good enough to fit into any acoustic line-up and would certainly be bright enough to handle picking and single line solos.
Of course the bowl contributes to the slightly boxy quality of the sound, and hooking up to an amp or PA this will also come across.
However, the three-way tone section allows this to be EQ'd out and careful setting up of the guitar and amp or PA enables the 1992-H to put out a most convincing acoustic sound.
Of course if it's that modern, bright, electro-acoustic sound you're after (Extreme, Bon Jovi etc.), then this guitar is it.
It will give that tight West Coast strum with the bass strings becoming almost percussive.
It can also be made to sound so sharp that any movement of the fretting hand on the strings causes a loud squeak, but even set with this much top there's still quality to the tone.
Recording with this guitar is an absolute dream and with the EQ flat on both the guitar and the mixer the sound is remarkably close to that of a miked acoustic.
Adding in more tone from the guitar has the desired effect, but the Ovation's EQ is very sensitive and there's a fine line between improving or overdoing it.
CONCLUSION
While I confess that when it comes to Ovation roundback instruments I've never really seen what the fuss was about, I've always had a sneaking admiration for anyone who uses them.
The 1992-H has blown this antipathy completely away.
Not only do I love the way this guitar looks but I can get some great sounds out of it, too.
The quality of workmanship is what you'd expect on an instrument costing just under thirteen hundred pounds and even if it wasn't a limited edition I'd still say it was worth the money.
Towards the end of this review I put in a call to Ovation's distributors, Korg UK, to check on some details, and after raving on about what a great guitar I though it was I was told that Korg didn't want it back.
‘Great!’
I thought.
‘they're going to give it to me for being such a nice chap and because I want this guitar so badly.’
Unfortunately it's not me they want to love and cherish it.
Oh no, they want me to give it away to a Guitarist reader, and I suppose I can't argue with that.
So if you like the look of this guitar turn to page 114 and check out the simple competition I've devised.
RRP: £1269.00 inc VAT
For further information please contact 
HOME RUN?
Laney World Series Laney have launched the World Series amplifiers to celebrate their 25 years in the industry…
Review by David Mead.
The tale of Bob Thomas and Lyndon Laney's company has all the trappings of the classic British success story.
Manufacture started in 1967 in the Laney family's garden shed, and when the order book started to bulge this was promptly expanded to the lounge and dining room!
Eventually, a more suitable location was sought and the company has gone from strength to strength ever since.
Of late, the Laney range has focused on solid state technology to fuel its best-selling Linebacker range, resisting the current fetish for sticking a single valve into the preamp section in an attempt to provide the best of both worlds.
It is their experience in the field of solid state that they have poured into this anniversary model, at the same time dismissing the hybrid technology as a mere conjuring trick.
CONSTRUCTION
The World Series amps are very similar in outward appearance to their Linebacker cousins.
The 80R is essentially a twin channel, 80 watt amplifier with a few departures from the norm that are all its own.
The front panel starts with the guitar input and channel select button, and follows with the controls for channel one, the ‘clean’ channel.
These comprise the usual treble, middle and bass rotaries, but also there's a presence pot to further enhance treble response.
A pull pot marked ‘gain/crunch’ allows this channel's mean side to show itself.
Last in line for channel one is another pull pot, labelled ‘Master’, with the dual function of reverb level and volume control for this channel.
I must say at this point that all the controls have a nice, rubberised feel to them, although they may be slightly on the flimsy side for any serious, rough handling.
Between channels one and two we find an auxiliary socket, which can be used to input a second instrument.
In so doing, this overrides the channel selector, bringing both channels into play at once.
It's a useful feature, allowing you to practise with a drum machine or even another guitarist, saving the need for two amps.
The controls for the ‘High Gain' channel include five dual function pots.
The treble, middle and bass controls each have a secondary function to enhance their particular frequency ranges.
For example, the bass knob, when pulled, provides an extra dollop of low EQ so that playing at lesser volumes will sound more natural (having the same effect as the loudness control on a domestic hi-fi amp).
In a similar way, the mid-range can be filled out or the treble tweaked at the pull of the appropriate pot.
The channel's volume control — again marked ambiguously ‘Master’— pulls to double as a reverb on/off switch, while this channel's controls climax with a split personality gain pot; on one hand it invites you to just play dirty, but when pulled exhibits a character that is, Laney claim, positively psycho.
A push button switches in the amp's ‘Enhance’ circuitry, the effect of which is to condition the high order harmonics of the distorted sound, reputedly offering a less ‘fizzy’tone than one might expect from a transistor amp.
Master volume (haven't we already had two?) and reverb controls conclude the 80R's control panel, save for the jack insert for the footswitch.
The rear panel comprises the usual array of speaker jacks, a send and return facility, a DI output, and a headphone socket which does not automatically disconnect the speaker.
Laney suggest you simply remove the speaker jack when using headphones, but surely this is like saying it's okay to point an empty gun; forgetting to re-connect the speaker can prove disastrous on some amps, and inexperienced guitarists should be dissuaded from the habit from early on.
The overall weight of the amp is around 20kg.
The cabinet is constructed from chipboard and covered with tough black vinyl with heavy-duty plastic overriders at each edge.
The speaker is a ‘custom designed’ HH affair, housed behind a tough metal grille.
IN USE
The amp switches on with that disconcerting ‘plop’ that you get from most tranny machines and would certainly not expect from a hi-fi costing half as much.
The clean channel springs into life first, and with the absolute minimum of fuss and fiddling I had some sparkly clean sounds to play with.
I must admit that trannies do often score over valve amps here.
The clean sounds on this Laney have a very ‘DI'd’ nature to them, though the crunch control offers some dirtier, but very useful rhythm sounds.
However, I found that the EQ had to be spot on before things started sounding exactly how I wanted.
Changing over to channel two, I tried three different guitars and yet found great difficulty finding anything there that I liked.
I will admit that I am a total tube head when it comes to guitar amps, but at the same time sufficiently open-minded to have previously applauded other companies' efforts in solid state technology.
I just couldn't get past this amp's tendency toward a cold, smudgy type of overdrive and, what's more, nothing I could do — including employing the ‘Enhance’ circuit — could warm or smooth it up.
Everything was subject to a harsh, hard and broken edge which intruded in what I felt to be a very unmusical fashion.
CONCLUSION
It is probably going to be impossible to sum this amp up without re-introducing the age old arguments concerning transistor vs tube technology.
Laney go to great lengths in their literature to point out that, while the two different technologies remain mutually exclusive, each has its good points and there is no reason why both should not co-exist.
However, while the clean side of things is fine, the Laney's distorted sounds fail to come up to scratch.
I'm aware that we are in very subjective territory here and I have already confessed where my own preferences lie, but I'm not alone in my opinion that the 80R's channel two falls short of the mark, because every one of us here has come away with the same opinion.
Like I said, using a 1958 Strat, a £2,000 PRS and another Strat fitted with EMGs, we couldn't get the 80R to produce what we consider to be a good distortion sound.
The price of this combo is excellent for a twin channel amp, but its shortcomings in the lead department may keep it from playing in the World Series and confine it to the Junior League.
RRP: £279.90
For further information please contact 
TUBULAR BELLE Carvin Quad X-Amp Guitar Preamp With an overdrive sound freshly sprung from hell, Carvin promise to orchestrate your nightmares…
David Meadhides behind the sofa.
I think my first encounter with Carvin amplifiers was around 1983, when one of their adverts featured a very young and fresh-faced Steve Vai, announcing the fact that he was using Carvin X100B amps in Frank Zappa's band and was, basically, chuffed to bits with them.
At that time, Carvin were offering a ‘factory direct’ service in the USA — a sort of glitzy mail order affair which was almost unique in the music industry.
It guaranteed prices which were, from a retail point of view, very reasonable indeed.
Of course it made Carvin virtually unobtainable in this country, but now ABC Music have stepped into the breach to provide a UK retail outlet.
CONSTRUCTION
The Quad X is a rack-mountable, four-channel valve preamp.
It would occupy a fairly modest 2U of rack space, larger perhaps than a couple of its contemporaries, but it has the advantage of a distinctly uncluttered look about it.
Part of Carvin's design brief was to keep the controls as simple and as familiar-looking as possible and I think they have succeeded.
Most of the control layout is going to be obvious from the photograph, but to summarise: along the lower edge of the front panel are the controls for the four channels.
I say four, but to be precise, channels two and three are in fact combined.
Channel one is designated ‘clean’ and has Volume, Lo, Mid and Hi controls.
All the tone controls on this preamp are of the active variety, which offer a more discernible tonal colouring than their passive cousins.
Channels two and three share the same basic set of controls.
Two is set up to be a second clean channel, while three offers a ‘crunch rhythm’ facility and so an overdrive rotary joins the Lo and Hi EQ here.
The mysteriously titled ‘cloaking’ device can be brought into play, too, and what this is (in non-Star Trek terminology) is a bass cut control, to avoid the muddy lower mid-range syndrome which effects some amps at the onset of distortion.
Channel four is where the serious overdrive starts to happen and so Lo, Mid, Hi and overdrive controls are well to the fore.
The upper part of the Quad's front panel carries the controls which, apart from the ‘cloaking’ device, have an overall effect on the amp.
First in line is the guitar input, with a manual channel select button, offering a boost facility to pep up the input level by 10dB for guitars with weak pickups.
This shortfall in output can be detected by means of a five stage LED input level indicator; if your guitar fails to light the OdB neon, you need this extra input to ensure the preamp's maximum efficiency.
Other features along the top of the preamp include controls for the Quad's noise gate, cabinet voicing and separate volume rotaries for mono and stereo outputs.
This last feature is quite a nice touch, because it would enable control over a mono mix of your amp's signal for monitoring purposes.
The reverb on this preamp is worthy of mention.
On many spring driven reverbs, when you switch them off the reverb signal dies immediately.
But on the Carvin this is not so because they have set the on/off facility at such a point that only the ‘send’ side is affected, leaving your last reverb treated signal to die away naturally.
Simple, but what a difference.
The front panel is finished off by a five channel, switchable graphic.
The back panel looks very busy indeed, with inputs and outputs aplenty.
The Quad X has six separate effects loops, which at first glance may seem a little over the top, but in reality is not such a bad idea.
There is a mono loop provided for each channel, plus stereo loops for reverb and an overall master.
Doing things this way round certainly ensures the maximum individuality of each channel in the amplifier, without you having to resort to tap dancing lessons in order to switch channels and turn a couple of effects on or off simultaneously.
The Carvin has a panel of MIDI controls, which sounds like a hi-tech feature not in keeping with Carvin's ‘keep it simple’ philosophy, but in actual fact the MIDI side of the deal is pretty rudimentary.
These inserts are of the familiar jack plug variety and operate in the old-fashioned ‘contact closure’ way, very much in the manner of a regular, low tech ‘on/off’footswitch.
Why call it MIDI?
It's probably so that something like Rockman's Octopus can be used.
The Octopus is a device which plugs into MIDI processors and the like, but also plugs into switch sockets on amps like the Carvin; clever circuitry allows the Octopus to combine a patch change on the processor with basic switching on the amp.
I suppose you could access the switching of channels by means of lots of ordinary footswitches, to increase your remote control of the Quad, but with a dedicated footswitch at this price there seems little point.
The outputs for stereo and mono operation are separate, as I have already mentioned, but only the stereo side has been made available in both balanced and unbalanced forms; the mono is exclusively unbalanced, which compromises Carvin's ultra-flexibility stance somewhat.
It's not a glaring omission, but an odd one, you have to admit.
The rest of the back panel is concerned with a power input and headphone socket, plus another guitar input should you want to employ the Quad in an enclosed rack system.
I'll keep the technical details to a minimum, but I must say a word or two about Carvin's ‘Tube Cascade’ principle.
The Quad X contains no less than nine 12AX7 valves which have been coupled together to provide a more complex, hence richer, overdrive.
Other preamps have at least two coupled stages, but nine seems seriously over the top and promises something totally outrageous in the old fire and brimstone department.
FS-77 FOOTSWITCH
This unit really speaks for itself.
It is linked to the preamp by means of a lockable multi-pin connector, which is a very sensible idea, as anyone who has suffered from the lead-as-tripwire syndrome will no doubt agree.
Basically, the FS-77 offers control over the Quad X's main features in a very no-nonsense fashion.
It is clearly marked, easy to use and at £59.00 remarkably cheap.
IN USE
When you switch the Quad on, the only setting-up procedure that you have to follow is to set the memory function for the reverb, graphic and master effects loop.
This is a simple process of switching through the channels one by one and turning the reverb off where you don't need it.
Follow a similar path with the other two memory functions and the amp will remember the arrangement, enabling a fairly staggering amount of flexibility.
I tried the clean channel (channel 1) first and found that, good as its word, it remained clean, surviving all I could throw at it.
The tone controls really are sensitive and, being used to the somewhat reluctant EQ on my own amplifier, I found that I only had to move the X-Amp's a few degrees before the sound began to change radically.
The same applies to channel two.
This is a slightly warmer channel and allows access to the cloaking device if required.
The bass cut which this control provides has the effect of removing some of the boxiness that clutters up the lower mid-range at high volumes.
Switch through to channel three and things begin to get very dirty.
There is enough overdrive here to suit some people for a lead sound, let alone crunch rhythm.
Channel four is where the fun really starts and where the Cascade Gain situation has its most effect; the overdrive really is quite full and pokey.
With the power amp switched up in the test rack, floors shook dutifully, furniture shifted, ice caps melted and ocean levels rose…
This unit has a depth of sound that is difficult to describe, indicating that those nine 12AX7s must be cooking to very good effect indeed.
I tried inputting the X-Amp through a mixer straight to an ADAT using the amp's cabinet voicing facility.
With the minimum of EQ, the sound was quite good, although not as authentic as some I have tried recently.
Switching the cabinet voicing off, you realise just how much it is working to condition the sound ready for tape; because without it, you are straight back to the two gnats in a bottle sound, beloved of direct outputs on many amps.
One minor criticism is that the recording level can be effected by the master volume controls on the Carvin.
This is all well and good until you go looking for a sound that the Quad will deliver only when the output level is quite a way up — at which point your mixer has long since run out of headroom.
I must admit, I'm not a great fan of noise gates in general, but Carvin's system seems to work better than most.
You never really benefit from them at bedroom sound levels anyway, but turn up the wick and you begin to wonder how you ever managed without one.
The graphic EQ offers another range of tone control over the Carvin and, being switchable, could be seen as adding an extra channel.
CONCLUSION
I think that the Quad X-Amp is an amazing piece of gear, but it's unbelievably hard to sum up — one of the main reasons being the lack of any acceptable criteria for doing so.
Just what is an ideal guitar sound?
There must be a million different answers and as many ways of going about achieving that sound when you've defined it.
The amp manufacturers' answer to the dilemma is to provide sufficient flexibility to suit all tastes, and there are more than a few ways of going about that, too!
Some choose the programmable route, succeeding or failing on user-friendliness; others, like Carvin, have provided minimum programmability, but have kept the unit looking and responding like an ordinary amp, with multi-channel operation relied upon to provide the goods.
As far as sound quality and ease of use are concerned, the Carvin scores very highly indeed over its contemporaries.
In terms of price for what you get, it wins — game, set and match.
Quad X-Amp £495.00
FS-77 Footswitch £59.00
For further information please contact 
THE KING AND I Scotty Moore Along with DJ Fontana on drums and Bill Black on bass, Scotty Moore's innovative jazz/country guitar playing helped lay the foundations of modern popular music when the trio backed Elvis Presley on Sam Phillips' famous Sun sessions…
Interview by Neville Marten.
Although you might not know it, some of modern popular music's most cherished players have just returned to the States after a dismal British tour.
Scotty Moore, DJ Fontana and Elvis's original singers, The Jordanaires, teamed up for a unique tribute visit to the UK, originally to have been fronted by fellow Sun stablemate, Carl Perkins.
However, due to Perkins' poor health, illness on the part of the tour's organiser — and, I would hazard, a severe case of under-publicity afflicting the venues concerned — the gigs were poorly attended and the whole thing abandoned midway.
I had been badgering the tour's publicist for an interview with Scotty, who had apparently arrived toting his original Ray Butts amplifier with built-in tape echo, but things weren't looking too hopeful.
Scotty was weary, the gigs were far apart, he'd had a touch of the ‘flu and, at over 60, really didn't feel up to it.
But then the final few dates were dropped and Scotty phoned the office in person, to say he'd now love to talk to us.
So I dashed to a central London hotel and sat with both Scotty and his longtime friend, drummer DJ Fontana.
Over a whisky or two in the hotel's lounge Scotty recalled the days when perfect pop chemistry created music which — unless your ears are square, or closed altogether — you couldn't fail to find compelling and irresistible, even thirty five years on…
Winston ‘Scotty’ Moore grew up in Humbolt, Tennessee, around 80 miles from Memphis, and picked up guitar by listening to his father and three older brothers.
Moore's first decent instrument was a mid-wars Gibson ‘Kalamazoo’ which he played in the family group when aged only eight.
Later, Scotty formed a country band ‘The Starlight Wranglers’ with Bill Black on upright bass and DJ Fontana on drums, and it was this outfit which producer Sam Phillips put behind his new signing, a white boy with the sound and feel of a black artist.
Although Scotty is reputed to have recorded over 500 sides with Elvis, it's those early sessions which evoke the most passion: Phillips' Sun recordings where Presley was at his raw best and where the band was allowed to gel, with improvisation and vitality the order of the day.
Recording sessions in the '90s are well organised, with musicians having at least some idea of what's about to go down.
I asked Scotty whether this description suited those long gone days at Sun…
‘Oh no, it was all very informal.
We'd go in and maybe Elvis would have a couple of tunes he'd want to try, or maybe Sam would have some ideas, so we'd try different things and finally just lock into one of them.’
And everything was done in straight takes?
‘Oh yes, we had no overdubbing, no splicing.
What you hear is what we played.’
And when we hear Elvis slapping the back of the guitar on those records, it was simply his exuberance…
‘Yes.’
People talk about Sam Phillips the great producer.
What exactly was his input?
‘Sam had a lot of input, especially after the first record, because then he had a direction.
But he would dig through anything that he had published or recorded before, so a lot of those old things from other artists were re-done.’
Would they have been country and gospel-based songs?
‘Yes.
And then people started bringing material in: Stan Kentford for instance with You Forgot To Remember and I'm Left, You're Right , which were basically country songs.’
As a band, how much influence did you have over what came out on those recordings?
‘We had more or less a free hand.
Sam might say, ‘That was a little too busy,’ or whatever — just little comments like that — but as far as any kind of dictation to play a certain thing, there wasn't any.
In fact there never was, even later on in the Victor and RCA years.’
Did Elvis have good ideas about what he wanted to do, or was he basically the guy singing?
‘He was basically the guy singing.
He had ideas, sure, but not being musically trained, he didn't go round to each person and say, ‘Play this, play that.’
He just knew it when he heard it.
And we would go through a song and everybody would keep trying different things.
I don't remember any takes being identical; there would always be some little something different on each one.’
Did you do many takes for each song?
‘On some things we did.
I've seen it written, ‘They did seventy takes on this,’ but a lot of these might be the count-off between every start.
And back then they would slate each false start…’
Did you rehearse the music in the studio or did you learn the songs outside?
‘No, everything was done in the studio.’
What kind of studio was it?
It must have been very basic compared to now.
‘Oh yes.
You didn't have the baffling and separation then; everybody would get as close together as they could.
Back then musicians played off each other.
They didn't play loud; they played where they could hear each other in the studio, and that natural leakage — as I learned later when I got into engineering — actually helped to blend the tonal quality.’
It kept it human…
‘Right, exactly.’
Did you play for any of the other Sun artists?
Jerry Lee Lewis, Roy Orbison or Carl?
‘No, just Elvis.’
There were stories about the echo on those records being created by someone standing down the end of the corridor and playing.
Is that true?
‘Well, the first record we did for RCA, it was literally a long hallway.
Sam had been using tape echo, or slap-back, and whether he was doing it on purpose or not, he also treated Elvis's voice like another instrument.
The voice was real close to the rest of the music and most times back then, in country and pop, the vocal was always way out in front; even on RCA the voice was out more than we were used to.
But in Heartbreak Hotel , which has a real deep echo, they had a speaker set up at one end of this long hallway and a microphone at the other end, and a sign on the door saying ‘DON'T OPEN THE DOOR WHEN THE RED LIGHT IS ON’.
Room echo back then was virtually unheard of in recording, although they used it in motion pictures for sound effects.’
And people are doing it again now, in order to try and re-create those sounds.
They've got all this digital equipment and yet they're standing down the end of a corridor…
‘Yes, they're using bathrooms and stairwells.’
Your solos with Elvis are legendary.
Were they completely off the cuff or did you have some idea of what you were going to do?
‘No, they were all completely off the cuff.
I never sat down and played the same thing twice.
You might get a bass riff or something, as a hook for the song, but the solos were strictly ad lib.
Even now I'll go back and I can't play note for note what I played then; I can get the general feel of it but I can never go back and hit it note for note.
It just doesn't feel right.’
But you must be aware that lots of guitarists today are still trying to do exactly that…
‘Yes, there's a boy on this tour we just finished, plays every note I ever played — even the bad ones!
His name is Peter Davenport and it just amazed me to watch him.’
But is it flattering, or do you think it's silly?
‘No, I think it's flattering that somebody would take the time.
Especially with songs like Too Much , which was in an unusual key for us at the time.
It was in A flat, and we'd done two or three cuts on it, but on this particular cut I just got absolutely bonkers, just got lost, but somehow or other I came out of it and that's the one Elvis picked.
He said, ‘That thing felt good,’ because feel was what it was all about.
But anyway, this boy Peter would stand there and play that sucker note for note.’
You're so well known for the ES295 Gibson guitar that it became dubbed the ‘Scotty Moore’ model, but you didn't use that guitar all the time, did you?
‘No, actually I didn't use it for very long.
When I came out of the service I bought a Fender, but I just couldn't hold on to it; it was too small and the weight was wrong.
But then I got the ES295 and I used it through most of the Sun sessions.
Then I got a Gibson L5 and went from that to a Super 400, and I've stayed with 400s down through the years.’
Is the one you're using now an old one?
‘No, it's new.
When I decided to hang it up, I just sold everything off.
I never was one to collect a bunch of guitars like some people do.
But then I had to go out and buy another one…!’
If you had the old one now it would be worth thousands.
I don't know if you've heard of a guy called Danny Gatton.
He's an American guitarist from Washington and he told me he thinks he has your ES295.
‘No, a guy by the name of Jimmy Velvet has a museum; he has the original and the body's busted on it.
DJ here can tell you that he's travelled all these years and he says he's run into my guitars all over the world!’
The amplifier that you're using on this tour, is that the Ray Butts amp that you used on Elvis's ‘Comeback Special’?
‘Right, it's an amp I got in late 1954.
Ray Butts made the first one for his own guitar player, then he took it to Nashville and showed it to Chet Atkins and Chet bought one.
Then I heard Chet using his on some records and started investigating and found out how he was getting that sound.
So I drove up to Illinois, where Ray was living at the time, and got him to build me one.
And I've had it ever since.
In fact, Ray did a little work on it before we came over on this trip.’
What kind of power output has it?
‘It's 175 watts, through just one 12’ speaker, and it has a tape loop built into it.’
Did it transport here okay?
‘No, the airline just about destroyed it!
I had it in an Anvil case, and a shipping crate built for it which cost almost as much as the amp did originally, and it got thrown or dropped real badly, did quite a bit of damage to it.
I managed to get it working, but I'll have to have some extensive repairs done to it when I get back home.’
Is it correct that up until this tour you hadn't played, literally, for twenty years?
‘That's correct.
I did one record with Carl Perkins in ‘75, ‘EP Express’, and overdubbed a couple of things for Billy Swann.
But the last thing I did was for a guitar player in Nashville, Chip Young, who put together an album — which incidentally is getting released pretty soon — and he has ten tracks with ten different guests: local session players, myself, Chet's on one, Grady Martin, Jerry Reed, Jerry Kennedy, Wayne Moss and various other guys, but I think guitar players out there will like it.’
I know that if you don't play for a week, that can be great; sometimes you actually fire up and feel better and play differently.
But what's it like after twenty years?
‘It's rough!
Like you say, a couple of days off now and then, you seem to come back a little bit more fired up.
But no, if you hang it up that long it's hard work.
But I guess the bug bit.
Carl Perkins and myself, with DJ and everybody, got together and did an album in April.
It was something that he and I talked about over a two-year period, and then he got hit with throat cancer a little over a year ago.
But I called him up one day and asked him how he was doing and he said things were pretty good, so I asked if he still wanted to do that album.
We talked back and forth and eventually went back to the old Sun studio and did a few tracks down there.
And then we took a remote truck down to Carl's house and did a few things in his den.
We didn't go in to try to do a hit record, just a documentary, homecoming get-together with a bunch of friends.
We did some of the old songs and Carl wrote a few things that we did new.
‘But I bring that up because you were asking about how you get back into it after that length of time.
On the album I make the comment that somebody had asked me the same question and I said, ‘Yep, my left hand's doing good, right hand's doing alright, my mind's as sharp as a tack.
Now if I can get all three of them to work together, we'll be alright…!'’
When Elvis went into the Army, were you guys just left on the shelf?
‘Sure were.
We were left hanging out to dry!’
Were you simply salaried musicians?
‘Well, when he went into the Army the salary stopped.
That's basically when I got in with a guy in Memphis and we started Fernwood Records, and I got interested in the engineering side of it.
We had one hit record,Tragedy , a million seller, and spent all the money trying to get some more!
I did that until Elvis came out of the Army, and then we went back to work with him, went in and did the sessions, did an album in Nashville, got on a train, went to Miami and did the Frank Sinatra show.
Of course, not long after that he got into the movie thing.’
But you did quite a few of the movies, too, didn't you?
‘Yes, we did a lot of the soundtracks and we were in the first four or five.
It was interesting first time out, but after a couple of them I realised it wasn't my cup of tea.’
Was it Elvis's?
I don't know whether he was actually forced into it, but I think he did it well…
‘I think he really enjoyed the first few, then the stories and the music got so trite, but he'd go ahead and do them.
I guess the management, and the bottom line, won out.’
Do you think Elvis understood that you were people who needed to make a living on a day-to-day, month-to-month, year-to-year basis?
‘Well, management definitely didn't.
I think that's probably come down through the years and things are still that way for musicians: get them as cheap as you can and never give them the credit that they deserve.’
Were you thanked?
There are stories of Elvis being a very generous person, not just financially but on a personal basis…
‘Oh, he was very generous to all his friends, but we always seemed to be in the wrong line.’
So someone would come and clean his car and he'd give it to them, yet you would work your guts out for a fairly modest salary…
‘I honestly don't think he ever gave us anything.
I've never held it against him, but I've always wondered why.
I think he must have just looked at us as guys who could take care of themselves, no problem.’
Maybe it was a compliment, though I'm sure the odd Cadillac wouldn't have gone amiss.
Did the band actually split up?
Was it like, ‘Okay, it's all over…’?
‘Yes, Bill Black and I quit in the fifth year, just before Elvis went into the Army.
Basically, we struck for more money, that's all.
And we never did go back on the payroll after that.
We went back to do one tour, I guess about a month after we quit, around the actual time he went in the Army.’
So when he called you for the Comeback Special, was that something you did happily?
‘Yes, well there again, after he came out of the Army he was still doing a lot of movies, and I had a recording studio in Nashville; D.J here was living there, too, doing sessions.
So when he called us to do the — well, it wasn't the Comeback Special, it was the Christmas Show originally — it was fine, it really was.
He was just like he was in the very early days; he asked us to come out to his house and have dinner.
And for all his fans over here, I'd like to let them know that he called DJ and me aside then and asked us if we'd be interested in doing a European tour.
We told him we sure would, and he said, ‘Well, I really want to do one.’
Of course it never happened, but he definitely wanted to do it.
‘The only reason I can imagine is — again, going back to the management and the bottom line — that he went into the Vegas thing.
But I've heard him quoted as saying that one of the reasons he didn't come was because they didn't have a venue large enough, because people would want to come from all over Europe.
But I don't quite buy that.
I think something big could have been found — a cow pasture or something like that!’
Of your own playing with Elvis, what were your favourite, most memorable things?
‘Well, I don't really have a personal favourite.
There's so many things that after we recorded them we never played again.
And if I had to play them today, I'd have to get off in a room with a record player, probably for a couple of hours and learn them.’
But when you hear some of the songs, you must think, ‘That really worked; yes I'm glad that I had that bit of inspiration there’?
‘I suppose I've kind of been labelled with the Mystery Train riff…’
Did you invent that?
Was it just out of thin air?
‘Yes.
Of course it's faster than the Junior Parker version.
I never tried to copy those guitar players, but I tried to steal it and kind of change it a little bit.’
You play with thumb pick and fingers, don't you?
‘On a lot of the stuff.
But I was kind of forced into that because it was only bass and guitar and I was trying to do as much rhythm as I could, but stab a few notes in here and there to make it sound like there was more than there really was.
But the thumb and fingers was not where my head was at, really, even though I was a great Chet Atkins fan, and Merle Travis and all those guys.
But gosh, I was listening to everybody, jazz guitarists like Tal Farlow…’
I suppose your playing is kind of country, but with a jazz sound.
‘Well, I always thought I was just trying to be abstract, in some form or fashion, just trying to get something different.
I always looked for the sounds; whether it was musically correct or not didn't bother me, but it had to have a certain sound to it.’
Was Elvis appreciative of his musicians' work?
If you played something good would he say, ‘Hey, I really liked that, can you do that again?’?
‘Oh yes, sure.’
What about Elvis's own guitar playing?
He could strum a few chords, but the acoustic guitar on the records, is that him or is it you?
‘On the early things on Sun it's him, and then later on, on RCA, occasionally he would play or, like you mentioned before, he would turn the guitar over and just keep time on the back of it.’
Hank Garland came into the picture later on, and the band got bigger…
‘Yes, the band got bigger.
Hank came in and did a lot of recordings, which I was glad of because it gave me some relief.
And I was a great fan of Hank's.
He was a great player, and he was just beginning to get the notoriety that he really deserved when he had his terrible car accident.’
Do you think Elvis would have been a good character to have lived into his old age?
‘No, that's one thing I've always said, that with his vanity and with his looks, I don't think he could have grown gracefully into old age.
I don't think he'd have wanted to jump off a cliff or anything, but I think it bothered him — you know, the weight gain and things like that.’
As members of the band, were you, DJ and Bill idolised?
‘If we were, we didn't know it!’
Well, you would have been if you'd come here…
‘We've found that out in the last ten days.
We were talking just last night about how the people here seem to love us, and I said, ‘Well, I don't really take that personally — more that we were connected with a happening.’
That's the way I feel about it.’
But had it not been that actual set of people — Sam Phillips, the band, Elvis and The Jordanaires — the chemistry might not have been such that it worked.
And who knows, Elvis might not have become the phenomenon that he did…
‘It's quite possible.
I mean, it was a fluke that it all happened, because that kind of music was being played all through the South East — Louisiana, Arkansas, Mississippi, Tennessee.
And a good example is Carl Perkins: we didn't know it until years later, but Carl and I were born and raised within fourteen miles of each other, and I'm only about three, four months older than he is.
Carl and his brothers were playing up around Jackson, Tennessee, and we called it honky-tonk music.
There were very few groups that stayed together as a unit all the time; you just got together and played what were current country hits, current pop hits, with whatever instrumentation you had.
But you had to play them well enough for people to dance to, because that's what you were there for.’
Did you have any writing ability, and did you ever get any chance to write songs for Elvis?
‘No, I guess it just wasn't my thing.’
I bet you wish it had've been…
‘Well, there was a lot of money being made on the side, that's for sure.’
Even now I'll go back and I can't play note for note what I played then; I can get the general feel of it but I can never go back and hit it note for note
My left hand's doing good, right hand's doing alright, my mind's as sharp as a tack.
Now if I can get all three of them to work together, we'll be alright…!
Things are still that way for musicians: get them as cheap as you can and never give them the credit that they deserve
TOTALLY WIRED D'Addario Factory Tour
To most of us, guitar strings are like teeth — a constant factor of life that you completely ignore until (a) they break or (b) they get so grungy and horrible that you simply have to do something about it.
So you nip down to the shop, hand over six quid or so with bad grace, choose — somehow — one set from the enormous and multicoloured collection on offer, zoom home and spend a happy ten minutes snipping, cranking and generally trying to avoid poking your eye out.
Your guitar sounds great for a couple of hours, and then you forget about it — until the next time…
But we're all in the dark about guitar strings.
How do we choose which to buy?
How can you find out which is best for you and your guitar, when your guitar only carries one set at a time?
And is the old rumour true; are strings in reality all the same, but stuffed into different packages?
To an extent, they are.
Most string companies buy the plain steel wire for their top E, B and G strings and the hexagonal core wire for their wound strings from exactly the same sources.
Furthermore, there are literally only a handful of really big-time string manufacturers in the world, and a short burst of brain-power will lead you to the correct conclusion that there are a lot of companies buying strings in bulk from the big makers and putting their names on them.
It's no secret.
But if you're looking to me for a list of who really makes which strings, I've found that asking straight questions doesn't always get you straight answers.
The Long Island-based company D'Addario are one of the big manufacturers (not one that makes strings for other people, incidentally) and in the interests of shedding a hard journalistic light on a somewhat murky area we decided to pay them a visit.
Inside the modern D'Addario factory it's very busy and very, very loud.
There are storage areas with more wire than you'd dreamed existed; areas full of strain gauges and various items of test equipment.
And there's row upon row of the string-making machines themselves — rather like lightweight industrial lathes, but each one capable of turning out one or two wound strings in little more than ten seconds.
D'Addario are very keen on the hi-tech side and have developed robotic machines that practically take care of plain strings, adding ball-ends, coiling and all.
However, some processes still need the human touch — as in the case of Steinberger strings, loop-end strings and, believe it or not, the machine has yet to be invented that can put strings into their packets.
The factory runs from 8.30 in the morning until 10 at night, so you can imagine the quantity of strings these people are putting out.
And in the welcome peace of Jim D'Addario's office, I pose the obvious question: they're turning out strings literally by the mile, so how come they're so expensive?
‘They're not expensive,’ shoots back Jim.
‘Like a lot of things in the musical instrument industry, strings are much better value than they used to be.
How long have you been playing guitar?’
Since I was about fourteen, I think.
‘Right.
And how much were you paying for strings back then?’
Er, I can't remember…about two pounds?
One pound fifty?
‘Well, if you could remember, and you compared the prices, I think you'd be surprised at how little the price has gone up.’
D'Addario, 1: investigative journalist, 0.
Change of subject…
What kinds of research are D'Addario up to these days?
‘Quite a lot.
We do some in-house, and we've also got an outside researcher called Norman Pickering who has a home laboratory where he can do just about anything…
He's got fifteen computers, you name it.
The thing is that we can design a string, try it out and decide we like it, but Norman can actually take pictures of that sound so we can file it, compare it with the results from other strings and start to understand why we like that particular one.
‘We're also experimenting with taking the basic nickel-plated steel wire and having it made in various different tempers or levels of hardness: five per cent, ten per cent , fifty per cent harder.
We're going to make up identical sets of strings, play them, see which we like, and then analyse and compare the sound pictures.
And soon we're going to get to the point where we'll be producing strings, each one with consistently the same sound-picture — and if it's not, then we'll instantly know what part of the process or what inconsistency in the materials is causing the problem.
The ideal stage will be where we'll keep the combination of mathematics and intuition in designing the string, but we'll be duplicating that design digitally in production.
‘Right now we're concentrating a lot of experimentation on bass strings, and especially on producing low B strings for 5-string basses.
The low B is a very difficult string to make, since there's four windings on top of the core; the first one over, the second under, the third one over and the fourth under.
But with four wraps any mistakes just tend to snowball, so it's a very interesting problem and a good string for trying out the new technology.
We're also experimenting with gauges for low Bs, and the end result seems to be that bigger is very much better.
That means really big, .166 instead of .145, and the sound we've been getting has been unbelievable.
‘So what I've been doing today is working on the low B strings in conjunction with our latest invention, which is a device that uses a load cell to monitor the tension of the wrap wire as it's going on the string.
It constantly adjusts itself to the correct tension as the string is being wrapped.
Tomorrow we'll test the strings we've made, and see how they measure up against the old ones for reliability.
Mind you, we'll still make sets with the old gauge low Bs in them, because some players don't want to make the shift and some basses just aren't set up for strings that big.’
What do you use for test instruments?
‘For basses we mainly use Music Mans and Fenders.
Music Mans are our favourites because they're a little brighter than Fenders, and the sound spectrum seems to be broader.
We used to do a lot of testing with Precisions but we found we just couldn't hear the differences between different strings; Music Mans seem to almost accentuate the differences, which is what we want.
As for test guitars, we've got dozens — I wouldn't know where to begin.’
We've had some fairly exotic bass strings dangled in front of our wallets over the years — like the ones which were round-wound by the bridge and progressively smoother up towards the nut, and the others designed so that only the bare core passes over the bridge saddles — but Jim D'Addario is pretty scathing about them all.
‘Those round/flatwound strings were just a terrible idea, and the ones with the exposed core are almost as bad.
The intonation problems are horrendous.
The thing is this: when you play a note on any guitar, you create an overtone series, and those overtone series come about through the string vibrating in properly divided lengths.
You have to have an equal diameter mass from the nut to the bridge, because otherwise the vibrating mass is not equal and the string just won't divide equally and harmonically.
If your string is unequal in diameter along its length, then the overtones are guaranteed to be off.
The best strings for fretless fingerboards are simple half-round ones — like round-wounds, but ground to take the peaks off the wrap.
We invented the half-round string in 1978, and then other manufacturers came out with similar strings.
Sometimes they call them ‘half-ground’, sometimes ‘ground-wound’, but it's the same technique.’
Why isn't it possible to make a set of electric guitar strings that feel ‘even’ to bend all the way across?
‘People have done it, sure.
We've tried it ourselves, having the tension equal on all six strings, and believe me, they sounded like crap.
The really weird thing is that when all the strings have an equal tension, they don't feel like they're equally tensioned.
You see, the human perception is that the thicker string feels different to the thin one, and so a balanced set of strings actually feels completely out of balance.
Sometimes string makers print the tension of their strings on the packets, but it doesn't actually mean that much.
The best way to buy guitar strings is to find the ones that feel the best to you personally.’
But is a set of .009s from one manufacturer really all that different to a set of.009s from another?
‘Yes, they're different, but you're only going to have the variation on three of the strings; the three plain strings are going to feel pretty similar.
The tension on one of our .009 strings and one of Ernie Ball's is going to be exactly the same; it's the same wire.
It's when you get to the wound strings that the variables increase and the differences become more apparent.
‘Suppose you're making a D string, and you make it with various different ratios of core size and wrap size.
You could make them the same overall diameter, you could even get the tensions to be the same, but when you play those strings they're going to feel completely different because a string with a thin core and a heavy wrap is going to move more freely than one with a heavy core and a thin wrap.
The tension is going to be different too, because the specific gravity of the steel used for the core is higher than the alloy you use for the wrap.
For instance, Ernie Ball use an .017 core and we use an .016, and there's no question that the strings are different.
‘It's also all to do with stiffness.
If a wound string is designed to incorporate a very heavy core — which is easier to produce, since it's less likely to break during winding and a thin wrap goes onto the core much easier — then it's less likely to sound good, because it's too stiff.
We got the compromise right in the early days, and now everyone has copied our specifications.
You'll find that most good acoustic strings on the market use our core-to-wrap ratio.’
As Jim explains, D'Addario make three different kinds of acoustic strings: 80–20, 85–15 and phosphor bronze.
‘80–20 and 85–15 are the technical names for the different materials we use.
The ‘80’ means 80 per cent copper and the ‘20’means 20 per cent tin, and the same applies to the 85–15.
Actually, they both have about one per cent of other things in there designed to hold the alloy together…
I'd tell you, but I'm not a metallurgist!
To the player, the difference between the two is that the 80–20 is the brighter-sounding string, and — I think, anyway — the one with the fuller bottom sound.
More copper in the wire means it holds the core better and makes for a more ductile string, but while it's a great sounding string, it's the one with the shortest life.
‘Phosphor bronze is 92 per cent copper, 6 per cent phosphor and some other things as well.
We were the first to introduce phosphor bronze strings back in 1974, and they're our biggest-selling acoustic set.
Phosphor bronze strings are the longest-lasting of them all, because the phosphor makes it a very strong alloy.
They use it to make industrial bearings, and even springs.
‘There's another kind of acoustic string we make, one my father used to make under the D'Arco name before he sold the company to Martin, and that's a semi-polished acoustic string, halfway between a round-wound and a flat-wound; a lot of the old archtop guitar players used to use them for recording.
Now we've got the technology from the violin string department to wind the string and polish it all in one operation and we're getting a brighter-sounding string than before, so we've started marketing them again.
It's not a big seller, but there's a steady demand.’
How does stainless steel compare with the nickel-plated steel for electric guitar strings?
‘Well, the nickel-plated XL strings are still our most popular ones.
The stainless alloy we use is a ‘430’ type, which is just about as magnetic a stainless as you can find.
Stainless strings are comparable in diameter and tension to nickel strings, they're brighter-sounding and they last longer, but I don't think they have the fullness of sound that nickel-plated strings have — they're just that little bit thinner in the bass.’
D'Addario have led the way of late in the use of recycled paper for string packets.
They've also been recycling vinyl string pouches and have even decided to stop shining up their bronze strings by washing them in acid — still a common procedure for most string manufacturers.
What's next on the agenda?
‘We've had a very simple idea,’ says Jim enthusiastically, ‘and that's simply to put all six strings into one packet instead of having six individual packets all being thrown away.
‘Having shown these to a lot of players, I must admit we've had a mixed response.
On the one hand you've got guitar players who are very interested in the environment — after all, guitar players are artists, and artists tend to be more liberal and environmentally-minded than most — but on the other hand you have a lot of people who simply don't want to be bothered.
Some players also seem to be worried about how to identify which string is which and I can understand that, because it's no good breaking a string during a gig and not knowing which spare to grab.
It's actually very easy to tell strings apart, though, just by squeezing the coil in your hand before you unwrap it; the difference between an .009 and an .012 is pretty obvious.
‘But we've come to the conclusion that since not everybody's ready for it, we'd better start packaging some of our most popular strings both ways — individually in sixes, and collectively in one packet — and let players make up their own minds.
We'll still be doing spare strings in single packets, of course, so people can buy those and keep them in their guitar cases for breakages.
It's a matter of education, really, but I'll tell you this: in five years’ time, I bet that every string manufacturer will be packaging strings our way.'
The man himself, on the right, checking the new computerised tension adjuster
BOLD AS LOVE?
Mesa Boogie TriAxis Midi Preamp We might as well admit it, MIDI is ‘in’ for guitarists.
But Boogie's TriAxis has been a long time coming, and there are great expectations to live up to…
Review by Neville Marten.
The Marshall MIDI preamp which I reviewed last month represents one approach to this ‘new’ technology: hybrid construction (a couple of 12AX7/ECC83s), a simple layout, plus part push-button and part rotary controls.
The resulting sounds are superb, and the product is cheap to buy and easy to use.
Mesa Boogie attack the problem somewhat differently: the TriAxis is all-tube (five 12AX7s) and the controls are membrane switches (apart from the master outputs, which are run from one dual concentric rotary pot).
But while, like the JMP-1 the TriAxis is 1U high, it's about twice as deep, twice as heavy and three times the price!
It has to be said that of the two the TriAxis appears initially the most intimidating, but doubtless Boogie would argue that if you want the features you've got to learn how to use the machine.
And anyway, a few minutes studying the front panel should begin the information digestion process, and Boogie's operating manual has been written so simply as to lead even the most nervous neophyte through the mire unscathed.
The TriAxis offers three basic modes of operation (Rhythm, Lead 1 and Lead 2) and each of these is broken down into two or three sub-groups, making eight modes (or if you prefer, tonalities) in total.
When selected, a mode is accompanied by a different coloured LED on the front panel, and the way it all pans out is like this: Rhythm ‘Green’ gives you fat vintage; Rhythm ‘Yellow’is modern bright; Lead 1 ‘Green’is vintage lead (la Mark I Boogie); Lead 1 ‘Yellow’simulates old Marshalls etc.; Lead 1 ‘Red’is souped-up Brit-style lead; Lead 2 ‘Green’offers half-cranked Boogie lead; Lead 2 ‘Yellow’is classic Mark II-C or Mark IV Boogie lead; Lead 2 ‘Red’produces bright Boogie lead.
Simplified, you can view the Greens as vintage-style tones, the Yellows as representing more modern settings with higher gain, while Reds are bright, overdriven lead sounds.
Rather than knobs, Boogie have opted for increment/decrement ‘touch’ switching for the TriAxis, and although this might not seem particularly ‘rock'n'roll’, most of the functions are as familiar as those on your average stack.
For instance, we have gain, treble, middle and bass, drives for Lead 1 and 2 modes plus master volume and presence controls, and one other control called Dynamic Voice.
Dynamic Voice is neat because it simulates the classic ‘V’ of a graphic EQ and the V can be made deeper or more shallow by use of the preamp's up or down keys.
It can be included in the sound or not, just like the graphic on a regular Boogie combo.
Of course it's the Enter/Exit, Program/ Channel buttons, the LED windows, all those other LEDs and the unit's general knoblessness and facelessness (until turned on) which tells you the TriAxis is not your average bit of kit.
As with the Marshall, or indeed any MIDI preamp, you're expected to ‘dial’ in volume, gain and tone settings, mode selection (Lead 1, Lead 2, etc.) and even effects loop engagement.
These parameters are then saved or stored as patches, or presets.
The patches can then be located where you want them among the preamp's memory locations (or programs), and then called up by a MIDI pedal.
Obviously there are MIDI pedals to suit both requirement and pocket, and the unit recommended for the TriAxis is Boogie's own Abacus at a mighty £450.
My experience of such things is the simpler, the better, but your discretion, your needs and the fatness of your wallet will probably guide your decision here.
That said, should you purchase an Abacus with your TriAxis you'll get it for £325.
On powering up, the front panel breaks out into a mini light show, each window blazing out its particular setting in red, except for the program number window which reads out in green for easy identification on stage.
Additionally, the aforementioned bank of LEDs indicates which mode is selected, whether or not the TriAxis's effects loop is engaged and which of the preamp's outboard switches is activated.
Outboard switches?
Yes, well, these comprise a group of four jack sockets on the back, and constitute a clever move on Boogie's part.
They're basic open/close switch sockets and each can switch a piece of outboard gear.
For instance, you've decided to run the TriAxis through a couple of Boogie combos (sorry, I've just spent £4,500 for you!).
The outboard switches lend you the power to engage or disengage all of the combos' externally switchable options (eg. channel selection, graphic on/off and reverb on/off) direct from the TriAxis.
Simply program the required switch commands into a TriAxis patch and every time that preset is selected the combos will comply with its orders.
However, Mesa Engineering's prime motive for including these sockets is to enable the TriAxis to link up with one of their new Switch-Track power amps (eg. the Strategy 500, the Simul 395 Stereo or the Simul-Class 2.90).
These innovative power amps are themselves switchable, so that when you swap channels on your preamp, the power amp's tonality alters too, becoming darker and more overdriven for lead and cleaner and more sparkly for rhythm.
It's a fine idea.
Operating the TriAxis is pretty simple: some idea of the basics of processors and things digital will help, but it's really not essential.
Modifying patches is as simple as pressing whichever up or down buttons you fancy, waiting until you find a sound you like and then saving it using the usual ‘Enter’ button.
This flashes after you've pressed it once, giving you the chance to change your mind; press it again and you've overwritten whatever patch was in that memory previously.
But if you overwrite the first twenty factory patches, there's a procedure allowing you to call them up again anyway (as per most digital devices), so all's not lost.
You can also dump your data (your favourite patches, etc.) to computer disk, so that in the event of disaster the TriAxis can be completely reloaded with them.
It's all pretty standard stuff for the digitally-minded, and easy to get to grips with for the novice.
SOUNDS
Linking the TriAxis up to a Boogie Fifty/Fifty power amp and ART Multiverb Alpha to build a simple MIDI rig (the same setup as for last month's Marshall JMP-1 review), I set about organising myself a set of sounds.
Boogie detail the factory presets showing the user how they were composed (ie. the mode selected, the EQ ingredients and the status of the Dynamic Voice option, etc.).
The presets are actually very usable starting points but it's good to be able to play a note, press a button and listen to the sound changing until you're happy with it.
There's really an incredible amount of variety at your disposal here, with stunningly clean clean sounds and, at the other end of the scale, the filthiest of filth.
Of course, like Marshall, Boogie's reputation is built on tone, so it's good to see that at the centre of all this gain and distortion is a fundamentally great sound.
Boogie's descriptions of the sounds are very accurate, too; the ‘British’ settings really are very good indeed, and on occasion you could be forgiven for thinking you were indeed playing through a Bletchley-built stack.
One slight annoyance came when I tried to procure the sound of a valve amp just on the edge of distortion, like an AC30 or a Vibroverb just going into mild overload.
It didn't matter which lead mode I selected, when I'd pulled enough gain out of the system to create the required feel, the volume had all but gone, rendering the sound pretty unusable since it was way below that of my other patches.
I did get around this by approaching it from the other side: I added gain to the clean modes and it all came together well.
But this volume business worried me, so I spoke to Mesa Engineering's Dan Van Reizen on the subject.
Right off the bat Dan agreed, detailing this as the one criticism that had come back from American TriAxis users.
However, he's devised a simple mod which has addressed the problem; all new TriAxises will have it and those made before that date can be retro-fitted.
‘It's just a simple two minute job,’ Dan told me, ‘but it makes all the difference.’
As well as the four switch sockets on the back of the amp there are sockets for providing power to a foot controller, the usual MIDI in, thru and out, recording outputs for DI'ing into a desk, and the aforementioned FX loop.
Of course, there are also basic left and right outs to power amps and the like, and the single input into the TriAxis is round here too.
Now, I laid into the JMP-1 for having but a single input on the front, with no means of connection to the back of the unit; the TriAxis has the input to the rear, with no input on the front!
So who's right and who's wrong?
Well, personally I think they're both lacking.
Regarding the Marshall, I criticised the fact that you couldn't set it up in a rack with, say, a radio system and leave it rigged, because you'd have to unplug it every time you used it.
It's not a huge problem — just a bit of a pain.
With the TriAxis, you can leave it rigged okay, but if the battery dies in your transmitter you can't whip a jack straight into an overriding front panel socket, because there isn't one; you'd have to unplug the receiver from the rear input and plug your guitar cable in round the back.
Again, this is no big deal, but a rack system should provide the guitarist with total freedom and usability, and both these approaches offer a compromise.
Whether these compromises are acceptable or not will be up to those of us parting with our money!
CONCLUSION
Apart from the single input, any other shortcomings?
Well, I did keep pressing the Program/Channel button instead of the program decrement button, which puts the TriAxis into MIDI Channel mode and I couldn't immediately work out how to get back to Program mode.
But that's learner-pilot error on my part, and I'd soon over-come it with use.
Other than that, the TriAxis is great fun to play with, the sounds are top grade and there's a real sense of achievement when you've created a personalised bunch of presets.
Of course all the advantages of MIDI are here: instant switching of totally different sounds and the ability of the TriAxis to talk to other MIDI devices.
Okay, it's a Boogie and that means Boogie prices.
But if, say, a working semi-pro guitarist really wanted one of these machines he'd justify the outlay (about the same price as a PRS Custom) with the many user benefits that would accrue from it.
The really serious financial decisions come when you look at power amp and speaker combinations.
To put together a complete Boogie rig comprising the TriAxis (£1325), a 395 stereo power amp (£1420) and a pair of half-and-half (open top, closed bottom) Boogie cabs (£635 each) would just break the £3,000 barrier.
That's a massive outlay, and you could talk about relative values till the cows come home, but whatever your conclusions on that score, you'd have to concede that this would be a superb setup, and with the TriAxis at the heart of the system you'd be pumping out large quantities of excellent sounds…
RRP: TriAxis preamp £1325.00
For further information please contact 
THE ILLUSTRATED MAN…
Johnny Winter The Lazer-loving pale rider of slide blues sings in praise of his heroes, and suggests a novel use for plumber's pipe.
David Mead goes in search of that elusive ‘Texas Sound’.
Stevie Ray Vaughan, Albert Collins, Billy Gibbons, Johnny Winter…
The chances are, when you think about Texas blues guitarists, you'd be hard pushed to find a common denominator between them in terms of style.
Each flies the Blues flag in his own unique way, but all the while there's a perceptible epicentre, which nevertheless fights shy of any real definition…
‘There are so many different styles of Texas music,’ says Johnny Winter.
‘You would know immediately if you heard a Delta song.
And you know right away when you hear a Chicago blues song and you know if it's a New Orleans song.
But there are so many different styles in Texas and I think that's what I liked about growing up there; you could just hear so much stuff.’
Johnny Winter's in town to promote his new album ‘Hey, Where's Your Brother?’, so called after the eternal question hurled from the audience at gigs.
They're referring, of course, to his brother Edgar, with whom he has collaborated often in the past.
The most famous teaming up of the two brothers was in 1973, with the chart single Frankenstein , a testimony to Johnny's ability to adapt to a variety of different styles, an ability, in fact, which he insists was born out of necessity…
‘You had to be able to play a lot of different things in the clubs or you'd get killed!
You had to play Cajun music — the French Cajun two-steps — and in parts of Texas there was a lot of Mexican music, and of course there was the Louisiana and New Orleans stuff as well as jazz and country.
You can't get away from country.’
Visions of The Blues Brothers' rendition of Rawhide apart, this experience of running the gauntlet of various Texan styles seems to have benefited Winter…
‘All that stuff just kinda blends into blues, but it is real hard to compare someone like Blind Lemon Jefferson to Albert Collins.
Then there's people like Lightnin' Hopkins and T-Bone Walker; there's a lot of difference in the Texas musicians.
It's real hard to listen to someone and say, ‘Oh yeah, this guy's definitely playin' Texas music.’
But there are just so many different styles of music involved; you don't know what you're going to get with a Texas musician.
But it's usually going to be a pretty well-rounded thing.
I think that's probably the one thing: Texas music has just got more variety to it than the Delta stuff or Chicago or New Orleans.
But it sure was a great place to grow up — you heard all kinds of stuff on the radio…’
Johnny Winter was born in Beaumont, Texas in 1944 and began playing clarinet five years later.
Before long he had switched to ukulele, and graduated from there to guitar at the age of eleven.
His first group was a vocal duo with brother Edgar, very much in the Everly Brothers tradition.
By the time he'd reached his teens, Johnny had been exposed to rock'n'roll and put his first real band together,Johnny and the Jammers , still with Edgar at his side on piano.
Around this time, he cut his first record…
‘That was the most exciting time!
I was about fifteen; I made my first record and I started playing in nightclubs and I had my first drink.
It was a real exciting year; all the stuff was brand new and you could be driving to the gig and hear your record on the radio.
I was just a little kid, living at home and going to school — fifteen, but boy it was real exciting.
You're out there playing for people, you've got girls chasin' you and stuff…
Now that was real nice!’
During the sixties, Johnny played all the big clubs in Houston and Austin, while cutting yet more records for local labels.
His big break came when a Rolling Stone critic gave him a rave write-up and major record companies fell over themselves in an attempt to be the first to sign this new blues sensation.
‘That was when I signed with CBS and went to New York.
That was real exciting, too, but I don't think anything was as exciting as making that first record.’
‘Johnny Winter’ and ‘Johnny Winter And…’followed, each helping establish Winter as a formidable talent.
‘The first CBS record, ‘Johnny Winter’, is one of my favourites.
‘Progressive Blues Experiment’ was another.
I made a record with Sonny Terry, called ‘Whoopin', that I also like a lot.
There are a few others, but those records are the ones I enjoyed the most.’
Having seen you perform tonight, I would guess that you still enjoy playing live.
‘Oh yeah!
To me that is the most enjoyable thing: playing and having an audience involved in it.
Making records is a lot of fun, too, because you know that you have it there forever, and after you're dead, hopefully, people are still listening to it.
That's nice, but you still don't know what people think of it until you put it out.
So it's just not quite the same as playing for people, so I guess that is my first love.’
How about all the travelling.
Do you still enjoy that side of things?
‘Probably not as much as I did when I was a kid; the travelling part is hard.
I guess what I would really like is if I could get my own club and have everyone come to where I was!
It's still interesting, but not like those first few times outside the States when I'd go sightseeing — y'know, checking everything out.
Now I've been most places it's just like going to work and doing your gig.
Sometimes you don't know if you're in Philadelphia or in London or California or wherever; crowds don't really change that much.’
Do you think your style has changed much through the years?
‘Yeah, I think so.
Not a lot, but I keep changing.
Hopefully I also keep progressing, or really there's no reason to keep going.
In fact I'll change with the last record that I heard; if I hear someone I really like on a record, or even at a gig before I play, then the chances are I'll be playing some of his licks.
I've gotta be real careful about listening to tapes before I go out there, so I don't put on something too far out.’
Another aspect of Johnny's playing is his slide work.
Who were his early influences in this quarter?
‘Robert Johnson, Muddy Waters and Son House were the first people that I really heard.
When the ‘Robert Johnson, Father of the Delta Blues’ album came out, that was one of the main things that made me want to play slide.
Early Muddy Waters stuff: his stuff was the first slide that I heard and I didn't know what it was; I didn't know if someone was playing steel guitar; it sounded like they were fretting the guitar and slidin'.
I'd never heard anything like that before.
‘Eventually, just from listening to albums you could tell what tunings they were using, because a lot of them weren't using a regular tuning, most of them would tune to a particular chord.
There are so many good people now, but back then they were definitely the big three — although of course Elmore James was in there too.’
Your own slide guitar style is pretty unique; do you use glass or metal slides?
‘I use a metal slide.
It's a piece of pipe that I got at a plumbing supply place; I bought a twelve foot piece of pipe and had it cut into pieces a little over an inch long.
Even today I still can't find one in a music store which fits my finger.
I use it on my little finger and my fingers are real thin.
When I first started playing, there wasn't anything like that in the stores.
I tried a lot of things, like test tubes and lipstick holders and medicine bottles; I used the crystal in my wristwatch — all kinds of things.
Then a guy in Denver called up and told me that I should go to a plumbing supply place and try a piece of pipe, because that way you can find one that fits your finger, and I've been using the same slide ever since 1967, I believe.’
Have you ever tried the traditional approach of snapping off a bottle's neck?
‘Yeah, I've tried a few bottles.
They were always a little bit big and I just liked the metal a little bit better.
I just think you can get more sustain that way.
But I love the way Ry Cooder sounds, y'know; he uses bottles and just has a great sound.
But for me the metal is a little better for my playing style.’
During the late seventies, Johnny collaborated with and produced albums for the legendary Muddy Waters, and in so doing was almost single-handedly responsible for the great bluesman's comeback.
What are his most outstanding memories of Muddy…?
‘Just all real good memories.
Muddy was one of the nicest people I've ever met and yet you wouldn't guess that he would be such a sweet guy.
His records were so earthy and you can't imagine such a nice guy singing all this nasty music!
‘But a lot of times Muddy used to say, ‘You should have seen me when I was young, I was a real hellraiser!’
I'm sure he was, but the last few years when I knew him he'd gotten a lot of respect from people and he wasn't having to struggle any more, and I think he knew the people loved him and he liked that.
He was real glad that he was getting some acceptance.
I didn't see any of that crazy side that he always told me was there.
I was told stories about him and I know that he was pretty much a hellraiser, but when I knew him he was just a really nice guy.
He was also a very firm bandleader; he didn't take any shit.
If he didn't like something, he'd let the musicians know exactly what he wanted or expected from them.
But he was real good at being nice and diplomatic at the same time.
He didn't have to scream at people to get his way; he just told them and he knew that they knew they had better do it that way or there was gonna be trouble!’
You played with John Lee Hooker on his latest album.
Would you say there was a marked difference between him and Muddy?
‘Yeah.
Although they were both Mississippi bluesmen, with John Lee you'd never know when he was gonna change chords!
He'd sing until he got tired and he'd start playing guitar and then he'd do that until he got tired and then he'd sing again!
It wouldn't be what you might think of as being on metre, and so you really had to listen and be real careful, because John Lee was gonna play his stuff and you better fit into it because he wasn't gonna fit in with you!
But I was real familiar with his records and so I knew it was gonna be that way; in fact it was really kinda fun to have to take a guess at when he was gonna change.
But their music was really deep blues: Mississippi Delta stuff and so the feeling was the same, although they went about it differently…
They both had real distinctive styles.’
The eighties saw a change of label for Johnny, switching to Alligator Records and producing the album Guitar Slinger , the cover of which shows him playing the small, headless guitar he still uses today.
Listening to the album, you'd swear it was a Stratocaster…
‘It does; it sounds a lot like a Stratocaster,’ Johnny enthuses.
‘It's called a Lazer.
It's made by a guy from Texas called Mark Erlewine.
His main claim to fame was that he made the Chiquita guitar that Billy Gibbons endorsed about ten, fifteen years ago.
It was like a small practice guitar.
I originally bought it because it was easy to carry around and I figured that it would make a nice practice guitar.
In fact I had it for six months and I never did plug it into an amplifier; I just used it in the dressing room.’
‘But that guitar was on all my Alligator records.
On the first one, I was making the record and I broke a string on my Firebird and couldn't be bothered changing strings, and so I plugged the Lazer in and it sounded so good that I kept using it.
I think I made half the record with the Firebird and the other half with the Lazer.
I've been using the Lazer ever since, except for playing slide, when I still use the Firebird.’
What type of amplifiers do you use on stage?
‘They're Music Man amps from the time that Leo Fender ran the company.
They're closer to the way the older Fenders sounded than any other amp.
Muddy Waters was using them when I started working with him.
I liked the sound he was getting and so I got some and they are the ones I'm still using now.’
Moving right up to date, Johnny is now signed to Virgin's Point Blank label, and his first release — titled ‘Let Me In’— has already been nominated for a Grammy award.
The new album, which features brother Edgar on a couple of tracks, was recorded in Chicago earlier this year, using Johnny's regular live sidemen, Jeff Ganz on bass and Tom Compton on drums.
Johnny's albums are a mix of blues standards seasoned with few of his own tunes.
I wonder if he prefers arranging songs to writing them…
‘Yeah, I do.
But also I just don't like the songs I write as much, usually.
This new record has got five original songs on it and that's more than usual.
I just have a hard time writing songs; it's just not what I do real well.
If I felt like I could write enough songs for a record that were good, I would, but it's not where my real talent is.
I wish I was a better songwriter.’
What happens when it comes down to choosing the material you put on your albums?
Do you spend hours sifting through old blues records?
‘Yeah.
I get help from Dick Shurman, the co-producer; he's got a big record collection.
And we get songs that people send into the office and once in a while we'll come up with something that somebody just sends us.
But mostly it's either something I've written or something old.
Actually I'm trying to find more writers who are around now, but it's hard to find someone who doesn't use all the songs for themselves.’
Throughout your career you have veered away from the blues into other areas.
Are there any areas that you still want to explore, outside the blues framework?
‘Well, of course, I've played some rock'n'roll — stuff like that.
The only other thing that I've thought I might do one day is do a country album.
I've grown up hating and loving country music, too; sometimes you just didn't want it to be there 'cos it was the only thing you'd hear on the radio in Texas, before rock'n'roll.
But I think I could make a good country record.
Someday, if ever I found the right producer and a label were interested, I'd like to give that a shot.’
Is there anybody around now that you would like to play with, having had many and varied collaborators in the past?
‘Man, I'm sure there are…’ he says, thoughtfully.
‘But most of the people I've either played with already or they're dead now.
I'm always on the lookout for the guys who are around.
I guess the fifties was my favourite period for the blues and so the guys that were making records — most of the Chicago people who were playing in the fifties and who are still around — are the ones that I am always interested in playing with.’
Have you ever wanted to do anything other than play music?
Johnny laughs out loud.
‘I used to think that I wanted to be a lawyer when I was a little kid!’
The legal profession's loss is, without doubt, a significant gain for Texas Blues!
I tried a lot of things, like test tubes and lipstick holders and medicine bottles; I used the crystal in my wristwatch — all kinds of things
TEARDROP EXPLODES Vox Teardrop & Phantom XII Looking cool is something that rarely happens to me these days, but strapping on either of these reissued Vox guitars it's hard to tell if it's grey hairs or ice…
Review by Eddie Allen.
Those of you whose formative years encompassed the '60s can probably remember seeing Rolling Stone Brian Jones playing a Vox Teardrop guitar.
Throughout that decade Vox were one of the few British guitar ‘names’, and certain models from that era have become much sought-after by collectors.
The early Voxes were imported into the UK, having originated from various sources, but production switched to Britain before finally moving to Italy towards the end of the '60s.
Some Vox models were made in very limited numbers, like the cheap Apache, or the mains powered Guitar Organ — a Phantom-bodied guitar crossed with a Vox Continental organ!
This hi-tech theme was carried on with the Starstream XII which featured a semi-acoustic Teardrop body, built in tuner, distortion, treble and bass boost, percussion and a hand operated wah-wah device.
There was even a British-built bass called the Wyman, which became the Stinger IV when production moved to Italy.
An active version was also available.
While these amazing guitars were interesting, in common with the best American guitars it's generally the basic models which had the appeal then, and still do today.
Unfortunately, original Teardrops and Phantoms are exceptionally rare, but Vox Amplification have decided these guitars should make a comeback.
So three models have been launched, based on the original classics.
Two of these, the 92 VI-2 (two pickup) and 92 VI-3 (three pickup) are based on the Teardrop shape while the 12-string 92 XII has the coffin-like Phantom body shape.
Reviewed here are the prototype Phantom 92 XII and Teardrop 92 VI-3.
Designed in San Francisco by Paul Chandler, these guitars are faithful to their '60s roots.
However, today's guitarist is much more demanding, and aspects of the design have taken this into account.
TEARDROP 92 VI-3
Available in either black or white the first thing you notice about this guitar is that sitting down and playing it is practically impossible; it's worse than a Flying V in that respect.
Strapped on, the Teardrop is much more manageable although it does show a tendency towards neck heaviness.
The edges of the solid alder body are smoothly rounded at the front but squared off on the back, with no comfy contouring.
It's finished to a very high standard and the hardware is equally attractive — particularly the thick, clear scratchplate, printed on the underside in silver with the black Vox logo.
The scratchplate partly covers the pickup mounting rings but has been cut to allow full access to the adjusting screws.
These chrome surrounds match the covers of the three Chandler mini-humbuckers and their Telecaster-type control knobs; these offer single volume and tone, all controlled by a five-way pickup selector.
I don't go much on the positioning of the selector.
If the control knobs had been placed half an inch or so higher then the selector could be placed below them, thus bringing it nearer to the player's right hand.
That's my only gripe here and to counter it I have to give the Teardrop's tremolo system top marks for simplicity and ease of use.
It's a traditional vintage type, with individually adjustable saddles mounted on a plate which pivots on two height adjustable posts.
The feel is solid and with the help of the locking Sperzel machineheads the strings have no problem returning to pitch.
I did encounter a problem with the low E string, but I'll come to that in a while…
The Teardrop's neck is maple with what looks like a rosewood fingerboard.
I say ‘looks like’ because the spec for both the Teardrop and the Phantom says the fingerboards are ebony.
The Phantom's is obviously ebony but the Teardrop's looks more like rosewood.
Of course there are some woods in the ebony family which could pass for rosewood, and vice versa, and as this is a prototype instrument, anything's possible.
Body and neck are held together by four screws through a neckplate, and I'd suggest it might be worth Vox looking at using one of these screws to hold the strap button, which at the moment is screwed to the body about half way along the top of the plate.
This would help improve the balance of the instrument.
Set into the 16″ radius fingerboard are 22 jumbo frets with dot position markers; the frets are smooth and really well finished.
Overall, the neck has a slightly chunky feel, although not so big as to be restrictive for those who play with a more classical style.
The fingerboard is wide and again lends itself well to rock styles, although if you're into slinging guitars around your knees and just going for the chords there's plenty of meat to get hold of.
The large headstock is in keeping with traditional Vox styling, although this means truss rod adjustment is achieved from the other end of the neck.
Any adjustment means removing the neck to achieve it.
Incidentally, making the fact completely clear that this is an American guitar, the back of the headstock bears the legend: ‘Made in Italy…
Not!’
Where will these ‘Waynes World’ references end?!
I mentioned earlier that I encountered a problem with the bass E string, but it's something that can be easily rectified.
The problem is that the string jumps out of its nut slot under heavy strumming, because the post on the machinehead is too high to provide a break angle for the string over the nut.
It would work fine if the bass E head was changed for one with a shorter post, like that of the A string.
Alternatively Vox could of course use a full width string tree on the headstock side of the nut, but if it were my decision I'd opt for altering the machinehead; it's a lot neater and keeps the headstock looking authentic.
PLAYABILITY
I was pleasantly surprised by the Teardrop's feel and playability, taking into to account its shape and balance.
It's actually a very fast guitar and after half an hour of chords, runs and the odd quite musical moment, I found myself getting on really well with it.
The guitar has a fair amount of natural sustain and the three Chandler pickups emphasise this, as well as producing a warm tone with enough cut to sound through.
The pickup switching configuration is just like that of a Strat, but obviously with a fatter tone from the humbuckers.
Of the variety of amps I used with the Teardrop, the one which felt most compatible was, guess what, a Vox AC30.
Through that the sounds from the Chandler pickups exuded exactly the right character.
The neck pickup was warm and fat, the middle slightly brighter but still with lots of depth (ideal for clean rhythm playing), while the bridge unit was sharp enough to create a nice shimmer through an outboard chorus, but warm enough to solo with the amp overdriving slightly.
CONCLUSION
I can't say that the sound of the Vox Teardrop is straight out of the '60s.
Were this to be the case then its limited appeal would be even further reduced.
As it is, Vox have done a good job of producing a classic guitar with a '90s feel and sound.
As this is a prototype instrument I'll assume that the string fault I've mentioned has already been spotted and rectified, otherwise any criticism is a matter of personal preference.
PHANTOM 92 XII
As Henry Ford put it, ‘You can have any colour you like as long as it's black,’ and the same goes for Vox's coffin-bodied Phantom XII.
Of course it's not actually coffin-shaped, but that's how Tony Hicks of the Hollies, who used an original Phantom XII on a number of the band's hits (including Look Through Any Window and I Can't Let Go ) referred to the guitar when I spoke to him about his original guitar.
As with the Teardrop, the body is solid alder, although this time it's contoured on the back.
The front is almost totally covered by a three-ply white/black/white scratchplate, which carries the pickups, the five-way selector plus the tone and volume pots.
The pickups are three Chandler ‘Lipsticks’ with the same switching configuration as the Teardrop model.
All three have a very high quality sound which seems perfectly matched to a 12-string.
The bridge is interesting, too, with six fully adjustable knife-edge saddles, one for each pair of strings.
However, while the main strings are fixed through the body and pass over a roller on their way to the saddle, the octave strings affix to the back of the bridge.
This system works really well, with the Phantom boasting good sustain plus excellent tuning stability, essential on a 12-string.
The neck is fixed to the body exactly as on the Teardrop, and my comment about the strap button on that guitar also applies here; the Phantom is very neck heavy and needs all the help it can get to stay on an even keel.
On the plus side here is a superb neck joint, well finished frets and an unmistakably ebony fingerboard.
Coupled with the Phantom's one-piece maple neck, with the same radius as the Teardrop and a low action with wide string spacing, the feel is comfortable and friendly right up the neck, and barre chords above the twelfth fret are no trouble at all.
IN USE
Nostalgia aside, this guitar is eminently playable, although it has to be said the balance problem is a pain in the shoulder.
I was almost tempted to tie an old-fashioned strap around the headstock to alleviate the problem.
But learning to live with it is part of the fun and the Phantom's amplified sound is really strong and clean.
A good 12-string should jangle when chords are played, with the octave strings sounding almost as strong as the main ones when picked.
Here the Phantom scored top marks thanks to the Chandler pickups, which seem perfectly suited to this instrument.
The top end cuts through while the bass is not so fat as to mask the octave strings, but retains enough warmth to sound smooth and chunky on power chords.
Through the AC30 I found it possible to find some pretty convincing old Phantom sounds, ramming home to me the fact that if you can put up with the tuning hassles, a 12-string is still one of the best guitars to use for rhythm.
It's also interesting for the odd solo — listen to The Who's I Can't Explain to see what I mean.
Because this guitar is so strummable, but a pig to keep level, I'm tempted to suggest that maybe Paul Chandler should make another instrument with the same hardware, neck dimensions and action, but with a body that better counteracts the imbalance.
Now that really would be a great electric 12-string!
CONCLUSION
Regardless of the balance problem, the cool factor of a legendary look, combined with a great sound, makes the Phantom, along with the McGuinn Rickenbacker and Fender's ‘hockey-stick’ XII, one of the 12-strings to choose, regardless of musical taste.
Obviously the indie bands will love it, but any guitarist worth his salt couldn't fail to appreciate the merits of this guitar.
RRP:
Teardrop VI-2 £749.00 inc VAT
Teardrop VI-3 £799.00 inc VAT
Phantom XII £999.00 inc VAT
For further information please contact 
BLACK and BLUE 1956 Gibson Les Paul Custom Often nicknamed the ‘Black Beauty’ or the ‘Fretless Wonder’, the Les Paul Custom made its debut in 1954, two years after the original Les Paul Model.
Rick Bateyfinds his fingers running away with him…
The attention we pay today to every minute detail of a vintage guitar is rarely matched by the records kept at the time; as with many other guitars, the origins of the Les Paul Custom are still a subject for debate.
For instance, Les Paul himself has said that before production began in ‘52 he had always had two Les Paul models in mind.
One was to be gold, since no-one had made a gold guitar before and such an instrument would be a perfect attention-grabber, and the other was to be black, black because it looked smart and also because it was the best colour for showing off the hands of the guitarist — provided the guitarist were Caucasian, of course.
Perhaps that's why many great blues players, from John Lee Hooker to Muddy Waters’ sideman Pat Hare all played gold-tops…
On the other hand, Ted McCarty (Gibson's president, main designer and the man who did the most work on the nascent Les Paul) has said that the decision to make the Custom definitely came after the introduction of the gold-top.
According to him, Gibson felt they needed a more up-market sister instrument.
So they changed the chrome hardware to gold, the rosewood fingerboard to ebony, the ‘crown’ position markers to blocks and added some extra decoration — multiple binding around the back, front and head and a big pearl split-diamond inlay on the front of the headstock.
A similar haze lies over the woods used for the two different models.
Both the Gibson company and Les Paul seem to have discovered maple to be an excellent-sounding wood for solid guitars, and they both knew that a mahogany body with a thick maple top would be lighter and would sound just as good, if not better.
Les Paul had planned that the gold-top should have a mahogany body and the more expensive Custom should have the maple top, but in production this was actually reversed.
Ted McCarty claims it was intentional, since there seemed little point in covering an expensive maple top with black paint.
Whatever the truth, it's the all-mahogany Customs that have escaped the attentions of guitar-fakers, who often take a mid-'50s gold-top, strip the paint off, rout it for PAFs, refinish it sunburst and try to pass it off as a late-'50s Les Paul Standard.
This particular guitar comes from the first phase of the Les Paul Custom, the single-coil era of 1954 to 1957.
During the second phase, 1957 to 1960, Customs came with three humbuckers, and there are some very rare examples with just two humbuckers.
In 1961 Gibson reshaped the whole Les Paul line into SG form and the Custom became the white-finished, top-of-the-line model complete with a Gibson vibrola; Les Paul requested that his name be dropped soon afterwards.
Finally, in 1968, Gibson reintroduced the original black single-cutaway guitars — this time with humbuckers and maple tops, although a more original reissue came out in 1973 — and they've remained in production pretty much ever since.
Ours is a ‘56, with the yellow-stamped number 6 8083 on the rear of the headstock.
Despite the wear and tear of many a performance it's still a cracking guitar, with its classically timeless shape beautifully set off by the tobacco-yellowed binding.
Any fanatical guitar collector or dealer would find a fair few things to pick holes in (the excessive buckle-scratching on the back, the missing selector-switch surround, a semi-collapsed bridge causing severe buzzing on the middle strings, the advanced state of decay of the stop tailpiece, an unoriginal jack-plate and a number of modern screws) but despite its flaws the whole guitar still just reeks of class and character.
However, a ‘56 Custom is never going to be as desirable as a ‘58 Standard, for two reasons.
Its main practical limitation was its incredibly low frets, great for Les Paul's own style of speed-playing or for cocktail jazz, but just terrible for string-bending.
You'd really need to re-fret this guitar before you used it in anger.
And the second reason they're less popular is the pickups.
Customs manufactured before the humbucking age feature two sorts of pickup on the same guitar: a P90 by the bridge, and an Alnico by the neck — a really old-fashioned looking thing, with huge great rectangular polepieces.
But you want to try these pickups before you dismiss them out of hand.
The P90 might be rough and ready but it's mind-bogglingly powerful; the problem is not getting Billy Gibbons harmonics, but avoiding them.
And the Alnico pickup sounds huge, almost like a Stratocaster neck pickup on steroids and three steaks a day.
In fact it's very similar indeed to a Strat pickup, since each of the six polepieces is an individual Alnico-V magnet.
Interestingly, the middle switch position gives a much more low-powered, out-of-phase sound, the perfect amount of volume drop for clean, chorused rhythm parts.
Humbuckers or no humbuckers, Les Paul Customs are classic Les Pauls in every way; compared to sunburst Standards, they're not outrageously expensive either.
This one would flatter anyone's collection, and with some careful customisation (a new set of machines to replace the notoriously poor Kluson Sealfast tuners, a top-class refret with fractionally higher wire and perhaps a modern P100 humbucking pickup slotted beneath the original P90 cover) it would enhance anyone's working stable, too.
Thanks to John Coleman of JC's Guitar Workshop in Newcastle for entrusting his Black Beauty to our sticky and covetous fingers.
BLACK AND WHITE Hohner Rockwood Guitar & Bass The budget guitar market is teeming with brigands and ne'er-do-wells…
David Meadand Gibson Keddieaddress the jury.
LX200G GUITAR
My initial impression, on seeing this guitar for the first time, was that Rockwood have tried very hard to steer away from total Strat clone, whilst keeping all the essential ingredients pretty much to the fore.
The end result looks like a cross between a Fender and a Yamaha Pacifica, with a touch of Ibanez around the body.
Of course, all this is perfectly in order, especially when you consider that any serious deviation from accepted practices is looked upon as being positively avant garde by the guitar-buying majority.
CONSTRUCTION
The body is undoubtedly ply, which has a sort of push-me-pull-you reputation in this department — the benefits of low cost being set against the disadvantages of poorer tone-producing capabilities.
It's been contoured quite nicely in all the familiar places, though, and the finish, too, is fine.
The maple neck is matt lacquered, the profile having that modern sort of ‘shallow dish’ feel to it.
The fingerboard is a slab of rosewood, with twenty-one quite chunky frets.
Actually, the frets are already beginning to show marks left by the wound strings, an indication that a fairly soft wire has been used.
(Can companies really save money by using soft, as opposed to a harder-wearing fretwire…?)
At the headstock end we find one plastic string retainer, meaning the high E and B strings approach the nut at an appropriate angle, but consequently suffer from inhibited movement when tuning.
It's an age-old problem and nothing that a dab of string lubricant or Vaseline wouldn't cure.
The G and D strings, however, are left unfettered and the G in particular suffers from break-angle jangle as a result.
It's a swings and roundabouts situation which perhaps only a locking nut cures completely, but again cost enters the picture, as indeed does personal preference.
The nut on the Rockwood is made from bone-substitute plastic and is well cut to about the right height.
One thing I'd criticise is the way that the position markers don't seem to sit dead centre on the neck.
They give the appearance of a ‘setting sun’ under the D string and, as everything else appears to line up okay, I can only presume that the markers themselves are off-centre.
The tremolo is a vintage style, spring-loaded affair in the Fender tradition, with a thickish chrome bar.
Pickups tend toward the Strat camp, too, with the exception of a slanted humbucker at the bridge.
The humbucker is in fact two single coil pickups placed side by side and can be coil-tapped by means of a mini-switch between the master volume and tone controls, the latter being centre indented to give passive boost and cut, similar in effect to Fender's TBX system.
The action on this example has been set quite low and when combined with the almost flat radius of the fingerboard and the slim neck, feels very rock'n'roll indeed.
The intonation has been left unadjusted, though, and would need to be set before any serious playing could take place.
IN USE
Entry level electric guitars often suffer at the hands of cheap, toneless pickups.
Surprisingly, this doesn't seem to be the case with the Rockwood.
All the sounds are bright and punchy, the humbucker dishing out the appropriate amount of clean chunk or coil-tapped crunch when desired.
The five-way selector deals out all the sounds you would expect to find and the tone control really does add more sparkle, rather than(as is so often the case) rendering everything tinny and harsh.
When overdriven, the LX still delivers in the tone department.
So much so that I could easily believe I was dealing with a guitar that cost a lot more than this.
The tremolo would probably need setting up properly because it feels stiff and uneven in use.
But again, this is only to be expected on a cheap new instrument (and not unheard of on new guitars costing ten times as much) and easily fixed.
CONCLUSION
I like surprises.
It's nice when you pick up a guitar, knowing it to be a company's idea of what a first electric should be like, and finding that they've got it just about right.
There's a popular misconception that a beginner's instrument doesn't have to function in any way like a professional model, because much less is expected of it, and that is just not altogether true.
So many guitar students are put off by the handicap of having bought a guitar which doesn't do the business and so, from the point of view of playability alone, the Rockwood is a welcome addition to the marketplace.
If quality control is up to scratch and this kind of general finish is maintained throughout the range, then I would not hesitate in recommending a Rockwood to anyone looking for a good, all-round, budget guitar.
DM 
RRP: £159.99
LX300B BASS
I can't decide whether Rockwood isn't the most brilliant name for a guitar range ever, or just plain naff.
I guess the performance of the instruments will have to validate the name, because if these guitars err on the trashy side, that will have been a waste of rather a neat moniker…
CONSTRUCTION
First impressions via David Mead of the guitar seem promising.
But although at first the converse might appear to be true, I believe it's actually more difficult (and therefore expensive) to assemble a worthwhile bass that functions with pleasing efficiency — particularly in this cost-conscious area.
Visually, the LX bass incorporates a mixture of traditional features and modern styling.
The body, constructed from an unspecified laminate, has a distinctly stretched Fender look to it, with pleasantly comfortable, radiused edges, and contouring for both ribcage and forearm.
Pickups are represented by a centrally-situated P-bass type and a substantial-looking double-pole humbucker sat in front of the bridge, indicating perhaps the rock leanings of the instrument.
The bridge is a simple, chromed, face-mounted affair, with the strings located through the turned-up tail section.
The saddles are possessed of full three-way adjustment, so all that's required for setting up is there.
I'm not sure about the scratchplate shape, but at least it shows some originality.
The three knurled rotaries feel good, with just the right amount of damping.
They offer master volume, tone (which seemed to introduce a fair bit of interference into the signal as it was progressively turned) and a centre-notched pickup blend.
A well-fitted, four-bolt system holds the 21-fret neck in place.
This is topped with a pleasant flat-radiused rosewood fingerboard featuring straightforward plastic dot markers.
Allen key truss rod adjustment is located on the familiar, Fenderish headstock with its circular string retainer and elephant ear machineheads.
The LX comes in at the expected 34″ scale length.
The weight is about right, if compared to a similar Fender, and the slightly elongated top horn helps the bass to balance well, falling as it does in line with the twelfth fret.
IN USE
At 1⅝″ at the nut the neck is quite wide, with wide string spacing the result.
There are a few rattles here and there, but in general the fretwork is quite well finished.
Bass frets take a fair old hammering and, as David mentioned in the guitar review, we can't accurately gauge their potential life, so that side of it remains to be seen.
The bass sounds good, although lack of internal screening means that unwanted noise is sometimes a problem — less so on the humbucking back pickup — and generally it copes with styles from driving rock to funky, thumb rattling sounds and smoother, jazzy tones.
It's quite comfortable to wear, too, feeling good to play, with easy access via the lower cutaway, which sweeps neatly back under the upper frets.
The string retainer has been screwed down a little too low, resulting in quite a severe break angle over the nut, but if I'm talking about that as a problem, then you can see there's really not much wrong with the rest of the LX.
In general, everyone seems to like this bass.
It sounds good in a variety of styles, and at this price you really can't go wrong.
GK 
RRP: £185.00
For further information please contact 
Dr ROBERT Answers Your Queries This month the Doc tackles Tele bridges, Les Paul wiring and the vagaries of the DI box.
If you have an equipment problem write to:.
INJECTION DIRECTION
Dear Doctor
I'd like to ask your advice concerning sending my acoustic guitar signal through a PA and/or recording desk.
I've been lent a DI box, but I'm not sure how best to hook it up.
My guitar has an undersaddle Ashworth transducer.
The DI box is a DOD unit with jack socket inputs (or outputs) both labelled 50K ohms and a 3-pin socket marked 600 ohms.
Basically, what goes where?!?
There are also two ‘pad’ settings, one which puts the ground lift on or off and another which can be set at 40dB, 12dB or 0dB.
Furthermore, should the unit go in before or after my chorus and delay pedals?
Many thanks in advance for your help, which will ease a lot frustration for me.
→ DI stands for ‘direct inject’, a term applied to an electronic unit which provides a method of hooking up a variety of instruments and amplifiers to a mixing desk.
They are available in various formats (mono, stereo, multiple etc.) and are either passive (using a high quality audio transformer) or electronic.
They operate by converting a high impedance ‘unbalanced’ source into a low impedance ‘balanced’output, which eliminates earth loop and permits the use of longer cable lengths than would otherwise be possible.
The terms ‘Balanced’ and ‘Unbalanced’refer to the earthing method used.
In the unbalanced mode the earth or shield is connected to the negative side of the instrument's signal output and the cable used for connection is a standard shielded guitar lead.
In the balanced mode the earth/shield is separated from the negative part of the signal and the resultant output consists of three lines: Signal +ve, Signal -ve, Earth/shield.
The type of cable used in this case is a standard microphone cable fitted with 3 pin male/female connectors.
The DOD DI box is a mono unit with a high impedance jack socket input (with parallel wired output jack for connection to guitar amp or other high impedance monitoring device) and a 3 pin balanced output socket.
The correct order to connect your guitar and effects via the DI is as follows: Guitar — Delay — Chorus — Jack input of DI box — 3 pin output of DI box, via mic lead, to mixer input.
The Pad (gain) switch should be set so that maximum gain (try -40dB setting first) is achieved without distortion or, conversely, hiss.
Finally, the earth or ground switch should be left on when used with guitars, unless the effects units are mains driven, or unless earth loop hum is present.
SOMETHING GOOD ON THE TELE
Dear Doctor
I have a two year-old Squier Telecaster which I intend to customise.
I want to replace the stock bridge with a proper vintage Fender ‘strings through body’ bridge.
Can you advise me how to go about this and what bits I need.
Also I have read adverts where companies do scratchplates and bridges, necks etc. for Telecasters.
Would these fit a Squier?
→ There are a number of suppliers that can provide the correct style bridge and also the string ferrules for the back of the body — look in the classified section at the back of this issue.
The parts supplied by these companies should fit your Squier with little or no modification.
Once you have obtained the correct parts check to see whether the mounting screw holes line up with the old holes.
If they do not, refit the old bridge and draw round it in pencil, also measure the exact scale length from the nut to the top E saddle and keep note of it — this, along with the pencil outline, will give you the approximate position for the new bridge.
Now plug the old holes with the correct size dowels using a small amount of PVA wood glue.
Position the new bridge using the pencil outline as a guide and check to see if the previously measured scale length is obtainable at the top E saddle within the scope of the new bridge's intonation screws.
Reposition the bridge slightly if necessary.
Next, check the string alignment by holding a straight edge flat along the neck against the top E nut slot and top E bridge saddle.
Measure at the last fret position the distance from the rule to the edge of the neck.
Now repeat the procedure for the bottom E string.
Adjust the sideways bridge position as necessary and repeat until both measurements are identical.
This simply ensures that both E strings are equidistant from the edge of the fingerboard.
Double check ALL measurements again, just be sure, then carefully mark the position of the bridge mounting screws and the six holes for the strings.
Before proceeding any further, remove the pickups, scratchplate and control panel.
Drill guide holes for the bridge mounting screws, using a drill slightly less in diameter than the screws to be used.
Drill these holes no deeper than the length of the screws.
The drill size for the six string holes should be the same size as those in the actual bridge plate.
You will have to use a reasonably large drill press to make these holes through the body, otherwise they will not be parallel with each other.
An electric hand operated drill is not sufficient for this operation; you can find your holes out by ″ or more!
Now measure the diameter of the string ferrules and using a drill bit a fraction smaller, drill out the six holes from the back to the depth of the ferrules — again using the drillpress.
Tap the ferrules into place with a pin hammer and mount the pickup into the new bridge.
Rewire the pickups into the control plate and then fit the bridge.
Set the bridge saddles to the approximate height and intonation position using the old bridge as a guide.
Restring the guitar and set the desired action height, checking the intonation and string alignment; a certain amount of alignment correction is allowed by moving the neck laterally (slacken the four neck bolts slightly, move neck, retighten bolts).
If you are in any doubt as to whether you can carry out this modification, have it done for you by your local repairer, or at least seek more detailed instructions.
BALLING THE JACK (AND THE POTS)
Dear Doctor
I was recently given a Les Paul copy guitar, but unfortunately the electrics were faulty.
I wish to rewire it, but I'm not sure how to do this as the wiring is in a bit of a mess, with earth wires all over the place, some not joined to anywhere.
I would be pleased if you could give me details of how to rewire it, or a drawing of the wiring setup.
I also have a problem finding valves for my amp.
It is an old WEM Dominator.
If you can help, please let me know.
→ Here is the circuit diagram of a Les Paul Custom, Mr Torrie.
Use screened cables where possible and avoid dry joints by applying the solder to the iron and wire/components simultaneously.
Your old WEM Dominator uses ECC83 valves for the preamp and two EL84 valves for the power amp.
Any music shop can order these for you from various suppliers.
SHOPPING ALL OVER THE WORLD John Edwards Goes To Wapping…
After our day guitar shopping with the Senseless Things we figured the sensible thing was to do it again, but this time with a dedicated bass angle.
So we asked Status Quo 's John Edwards to lead Gibson Keddie through the minefield…
Their guide was the Bass Centre's Martin Gravestock.
A few ground rules were established from the outset: the gear had to be new and non-custom, effectively straight off the rack.
As ever, time constraints meant that we couldn't try absolutely everything, and so the Bass Centre's manager Martin Gravestock agreed to guide us through the popular models within our categories, and we chose random examples from there.
BASS AND AMP FOR £500?
John's first price limit is an imaginary £500, chosen to provide a working setup for the bass player who's started to practise with a band, and who hopes to go on to play small gigs…
John: ‘Looking at the display racks, there are a lot of basses around even in this price category, and I haven't got a clue about what's what, but I do want to try something that's Korean-made, just out of personal interest.’
We reckon that our cash ceiling should allow us a bass costing around £150–200, with the rest to be spent on a combo.
Martin informs us that the main sellers in this category are Squier's ‘Silver Series’ J and P basses, built in Japan and popular for obvious reasons.
But looking good on display is a sunburst Vester Jazz bass copy; we spot a ‘Made In Korea’ sticker on the back of the headstock and a suitable £169 price tag.
John picks a Crate B80XL combo to try the bass through.
‘Looking at the controls on the Crate — seven band graphic equaliser, limiter, pre-shape — you seem to get a lot for your dosh!’ £369 in this case…comments?
‘Okay, I suppose I'd better start rabbitting!
Actually I hate playing in shops.
It's like a mini-performance; you've got to be good to maintain your cred, but what do you play?
I should've given this some thought.
‘However, the bass feels pretty good, and it's obviously been well set up.
When I started out, you couldn't have bought a real Fender that played as well as this.
The controls seem a bit limited, though; they don't change the tone very much, although the basic sound is okay — maybe a bit lightweight.
The quality of the pickups and the controls is obviously one of the differences between budget gear and more expensive stuff, but there are no real problems that I can see.
‘The Crate combo looks rugged enough to chuck in and out of the back of the car and take some general punishment, so that's good.
In performance terms, having just given it some serious bottom end, it didn't cope at all well; the speaker was flapping.
I don't look at this end of the market very often, so it is a bit of an eye-opener for me regarding the amount of controls there are for changing the sound.
The headphones socket is a good idea.
It's obviously a reasonably-sized practice/small gig amp, but even so the limiter comes in really quickly — perhaps because my style is to hit the strings really hard.
But if you were playing with a drummer who liked to give it some wallop, you'd soon be lost in terms of volume, and that would piss you off a bit.
It'd probably be a good studio amp as it's got quite a rich sound, albeit at low volumes.
It sounds quite Jack Bruce-y in fact, with a pronounced ‘honky’ mid, which I actually quite like because it cuts through at a gig.’
Moving on, John plugs his Vester into one the Crate's natural rivals — the Peavey TKO 80 Scorpion-speakered combo, again with a power rating of 80 watts RMS.
The Peavey (retailing at £315) has a definite price advantage over the Crate, but has it any other advantages?
‘The Peavey has the graphic too,’ explains John, ‘but with shelving controls low and high, which is better than an actual tone control.
Plus it has an effects loop, and a preamp out for slaving up to other power amps, and so on.
Definitely better if you want to increase the power capacity.
‘I notice you can have the Black Widow speaker option on Peavey combos, at an extra £50.
Having said that, this Scorpion has an altogether better sound; it's tighter and more controlled.
But why do they give you a treble boost?
The ordinary treble is bright enough; it's the bass end that's important.
This is kind of a ‘rawk’ bass combo, whereas the Crate would suit a more funky style.’
£750–£800…
Moving up a price bracket, we reckon on a fictitious £500 for the amp and the remainder on the bass.
So what's good?
Martin puts on his saleman's hat: ‘Trace's new 715 combo is an obvious contender in this category, offering a seven-band graphic and 130 watts through a Kevlar speaker, for £465.
The most noticeable physical difference with the Kevlar-coned speakers is the dust cap in the middle; the new ones are really small compared to the older versions, meaning that there is greater air movement from the increased cone area.
No UV underlight though — that starts on the AH350 — and no DI facility — that's on the 200 watt version of the combo, which retails at £599.’
In order to explore a different style of bass, we opt for a Hohner, though traditional Fenders are still popular in this price range.
The Hohner's a B2/A 4-string ‘stick’ bass at £349, with switchable active treble and bass boosts, plus a detuning system built into the bridge.
All the hardware is American, licensed from Steinberger, so the quality is good.
This one's a funky deep red metallic colour — an extremely capable-looking instrument.
Session supremo Paul Westwood uses a passive 5-string Hohner Stick as his main bass, proving that these are definitely pro-standard instruments.
‘With the 715,’ John reflects, ‘Trace have gone for volume in a small box, with no hook-up opportunities — these seem to start on the next model up.
It'll be interesting to see how the Kevlar speaker performs.
Then there's the seven band graphic and the mid pre-shape control for changing the sound.
‘The Hohner gives you the best of both worlds with the passive/active selection.
But I would say that for recording I'd use the passive sound; it's warmer, more mellow, and would sound good — although I'd still prefer to gig with the Vester.
But this has an amazingly low action, very smooth and even.
The detuner is good — 350 quid and you're into the pro end.
It's a very comfortable guitar, almost more so than the Steinberger…’
As John struggles to find another plectrum, I mention that I'd always thought of him as a fingerstyle player…
‘Nah, not any more, due to my experiences with Quo.
Francis and Richard tend to play slightly ahead of the beat, and although it's more than likely psychological I always felt that playing fingerstyle meant a sort of delay between playing something and hearing it, which seemed to mess up the impact of the songs.
It's not an ‘instant’ way of playing, whereas, especially with units like the Trace Elliot here, using a plectrum tightens up the response time in terms of attack.
Playing with your fingers also means that your hands get tired quickly, and we all know what happens to your timing then.
Plus, after all those twelve-bar thrashes, my fingers were so blistered I could hardly bear to look at them.
I am to fingerstyle bass playing what Lemmy is to pick playing — we both give it fair amounts of welly!
‘What is advantageous about cheaper guitars is that they tend to have one sound, and when you plug 'em in you either like the sound or you don't.
Basses like this Hohner offer greater versatility, which may or may not always be a good thing — I suppose that depends on how you view your playing style.
Also, I'd like to come over all clichéd now and say that it seems that you do get what you pay for, and while the Hohner is a very capable bass I would personally bypass this mid-price level and put the money to something else.
Either save it and get something top-of-the-range or stay with the cheap one if it works.
What have you got to lose — apart from your wad?
‘I'm quite disappointed by the sound of the amp — it's just not there for me — although I would say that I've always thought Trace Elliot had a kind of soul-less sound.
I've tried their gear out with Quo a couple of times, and when you're setting it up it sounds good, then everybody starts and next thing they're all turning round to see what happened to the bass, because the sound has disappeared.
But it looks well designed, and this combo is obviously very portable.
You could probably get the drummer, bassist and guitarist and their gear all in the back of a Mini, which counts for nothing when you get to the gig and turn it up, of course.
It's never going to rumble through the floor in the way that a similarly priced 4x10 would, but they're obviously catering for a gap in the market which isn't being filled very successfully.
Again, I would bypass this type of gear because it's too much of a compromise for me.
The Vester is still a good find; I'd keep that!
‘There's nothing here that changes my opinions on combos.
What is disappointing is the way that the speakers in them can't seem to keep the sound together, even at low power ratings.
80 watts is nothing, yet their sound is breaking up.
I presume that's because the manufacturers, having spent money on giving you graphic EQs, low boost, top boost, limiters and so on, then cut corners with the cost and performance of the speaker, which is crazy.
They ought to spend it on the speaker — I would've thought that was obvious.
‘Mind you, I may not be the right person to be giving an opinion on this, because, as I said, I don't think ‘combo’ anyway.
If I was spending £500-ish on amplification, I'd be looking for good second-hand gear, and there's loads of that about.
‘Get some good speakers, that's the answer to bass sound.
When I'm off the road with Quo and doing pub gigs with mates, I use an old Marshall 4x10, powered by one of their little 200 watt solid-state amps, and what did that cost?
Nothing, compared to some of the prices going about in here!
‘While everyone wants to have a nice looking bass, I think you have to get your priorities in order.
A good amp and speakers can make a cheap bass sound really good, as we've heard, but even the best bass will never make crap amplification sound decent.’
£1500…
Taking a big step up price-wise puts us in real working musician territory, with a notional £1500 to spend.
Although the names looked at so far dip more than a toe into this price region, we feel like trying a different brand.
Martin recommends Ampeg's B1-R rackmount amp (recently reviewed in Guitarist ), a combination valve preamp and solid state power amp kicking out 150 watts.
This is duly hooked up to its stablemate, an Ampeg 1510 cab, containing one 15″ and one 10″ speaker with an attenuable horn to augment the higher frequencies.
With the B1-R retailing at £550 and the cab weighing in at £460, that leaves us £500 for a bass.
The Fender Lytes appear to be a popular option, as are the recently reviewed Bass Collection instruments.
However, John stumbles across a Yamaha BB1100S at a very competitive £435.
Again, this is a 4-string active/passive bass with a versatile on-board EQ (so versatile, in fact, that some Warwick owners have removed their EQ systems and had the Yamaha one installed).
‘I've always liked Ampeg gear,’ admits John, ‘and it's good to be able to try this amp out, because this kind of format is pretty new to me.
Talking of portability, this is really good, considering the power levels available.
The Yamaha bass looks very good, too, and feels very businesslike.
Although Martin has said that some bass players like to be able to significantly alter their sound while they are actually playing on stage, I've never seen the need to have all the gubbins on the bass to do that, then have lots more gubbins on the amp to do more of the same.
Surely you would want one or the other, which is why this rackmount Ampeg looks like a good match for the Yamaha bass; it has straightforward controls which are still exactly what you would want, and you can then modify the sound with the bass itself.
‘The Yamaha has a great sound, in either passive or active modes, and there are really no more controls than are necessary to change tones, so it's fairly user-friendly.
I've seen basses with ten switches together, coil taps, automatic tuning, alarm clock, holiday bookings, et cetera…
‘What's the finish on the back of the neck?
Satin…not my kind of thing.
It feels unfinished to me.
I prefer the feel of lacquer.
But I really like the bass; it feels as solid as a rock and represents a more worthwhile investment for not a lot more money.
If Yamaha wanted to give me one of these I wouldn't object!
‘I like the layout of this Ampeg amp — a minimum of bullshit, and you don't have to slave over a hot graphic to find a sound.
It's got that gutsy Ampeg overdrive, along with some serious floor-rumbling action.
You know that bass bit at the beginning of Van Halen's Running With The Devil ?
I know it's just distortion, but it sounds like it was definitely done on one of these!
I expect the cab weighs a ton, but the whole kit is still very portable, size-wise.
It really is amazing the difference the increase in investment has made.
This sounds so professional.’
Ask why John doesn't use traditional Fenders and he tells you he doesn't want to be limited in how he plays: ‘Like, an A has to be played there, a G there and so on.
Why do fretboards have that kind of uneven response?
But when you get someone who can really play them, they sure are a force to be reckoned with.
I've always preferred a Precision to a Jazz because of the way that a Precision plays.
But you play an open E and there's this huge rumbling noise, then you play E on the G string and…nothing!
‘I don't need that kind of restriction on my playing, and I've done it loads of times in the past when recording, always having to think, ‘Well, I can't play the F£ there; I'll have to go down and play it there.’
No thanks!
That's why I like the Status basses: they're very portable, and the response is always very even.
I don't have any modifications done to mine; they're just standard versions and they're great.’
While we're deciding what to look at next, I ask John what Quo are up to presently…
‘We're off the road for six weeks or so, until the tour starts at the end of October.
We just did the Radio One 25th Anniversary concert in Birmingham, and we recorded that, so we're putting out a live medley of hits from it.
Listening to the playback though, I can't believe how fast it is, even for Quo!
Loads of the old hits.
But it's quite weird; one minute you're playing the old Doors’ thing Roadhouse Blues , with that single note bass line duh-d-duh-d-duh-d-duhduhduh, and next you're swinging it through Marguerita Time !’
We've looked at various standards of equipment here, but what did you start on yourself?
‘A Höfner.
I went from that to a Gibson EB3, then to a Rickenbacker 4001, which I had for a long time.
I had the first one in Harlow!
Usual stuff…down the pub with it slung over the shoulder to show off — hero of the moment.
They're coming back in now, too, and I still think they're good-looking basses.
My favourite bass, though was a Hayman, which had that real graunchy sound, very middly, with hardly any bottom end.
That got burnt, otherwise I'd still have it today.
Then I splashed out and got my first Alembic — cost me £890 in 1980, serious cash.
I've got quite a nice little collection now.
‘I used the Alembic for years, until I tried a Status and really liked that, so I've stuck with them.
For amplification, my main amp in the studio is a Polytone Mini Brute with the velvet cover.
I've had that for years.
‘In some ways I'm not really the guy to be asking about all this, because Quo have such a one-off sound.
In fact, I don't get asked to do sessions any more, probably because people assume that playing in Status Quo you've got to be shit — a three-chord wonder — which is a really poor attitude on their part.
Some people are suss to the work that's involved in Quo though, so that's cool.’
THE SKY'S THE LIMIT…
Okay, we've just signed the 8 album deal for 150 squillion quid with the record company, and they're paying for the new gear.
What would we walk out of here with?
‘Ampwise,’ suggests Martin, ‘you'd be looking at the Ampeg SVT II head at £1595 and 8x10 cab at £880.
But as we've just done Ampeg, it's either SWR gear or the Boogie 400+ stack — all pretty formidable stuff.’
We opt to check out the Boogie rig, which consists of the 12 6L6-powered 400+ head at £1385, accompanied by a cab containing 2x15s, at £745.
Brutally effective!
For a review of this, check the March ‘91 issue of Guitarist .
‘For basses,’ says Martin, ‘you've now got the run of the shop.
There are Alembics, which are selling well; we had a dozen in stock, that's down to three now.
There's a second-hand Spector NS2A here at £1495, although we have new Spector four and fives coming in soon at £1995, which is pretty good considering they used to be £3000!
Ken Smith 4-strings are about two grand, but I don't have any in stock at the moment.
The new Pedullas are attracting a lot of interest; perhaps a 5-string Thunderbass at £1795…?
A confirmed five-string user, John agrees to try the Pedulla, adding that he's really no fan of Bartolini pickups, having tried them before and found them not to his taste.
But on the Thunderbass the Bartolinis are controlled by Michael Pedulla's own tone-shaping circuitry.
So maybe he'll be converted.
‘With this expensive equipment I'm in two minds,’ John ponders.
‘Without a doubt it sounds expensive, and maybe that's what counts.
But my opinion on this is really fairly redundant, because the people who are buying it are going to be pros — either that or seasoned bank robbers!
The sound reminds me of the bass sound on all those expensively-produced American AOR albums — smooth, almost too clean, but live there's an enormous amount of wallop available.’
But is the leap in money justified, John?
‘In these hard economic times, I don't know.
Looking at the bass, it seems as if people are still slapping a bit on the price for the name.
But look at someone like Jeff Beck; he plays a Strat through a fuzzbox into a Marshall 50 head, and you can't mistake the fact that it's him.
So I just don't think that lots of money will give you anything other than an empty wallet and a sound that's already there.
And it'll cost you a lot to find that out.
Players can be real snobs about names, too, so they are their own worst enemies.
But this is for the bass player who goes widdlywiddlywee…
‘I still rate the Alembics, though, and below that I would say carbon graphite models, in terms of longevity and playing consistency.
‘We haven't mentioned rack gear much, but I don't think there's much need.
We were doing a gig with Rod Stewart, and his bass player T. M. Stevens has the most amazing amount of rack gear — like two mini tower blocks!
He had a good sound, but it was completely out of hand.
‘The Boogie rig, though, is great.
It's tough, it'll take touring, and it's got such bollocks!
It'll go the distance — a real investment for anyone who wants to get on the gigging trail and means business.
It's much easier to get a good sound, too — far easier than on the smaller amps and combos at the lower end of the market.
What more do you need — none more powerful!’
VERDICT?
‘Bass-wise, the Vester is a bit of a star; I'm really tempted to buy one.
The Vester demonstrates what I was saying earlier about not needing an expensive bass, and the Ampeg also provides enough power for most gigs…’
A good amp and speakers can make a cheap bass sound really good, as we've heard, but even the best bass will never make crap amplification sound decen
competition Three of the best We've gone competition potty this month and any guitar here in the Guitaristoffice which hasn't been nailed down we've got up for grabs.
Three which weren't securely fastened include the stunning limited edition Ovation 1992 electro-acoustic with its great sound and gorgeous top.
Then there's the Chandler 555, a superb example of Paul Chandler's work and just crying out to be owned by a Guitarist reader.
Finally there's the ultra slim Ibanez FGM 100 Frank Gambale Signature model, which turns from a lightweight jazz/fusion guitar into a heavyweight rock monster at the tweak of a pot.
The Ibanez FGM 100 and the Chandler 555 will be presented to the lucky winners during the London Music Show ‘92 which is taking place at Wembley on November 28th and 29th.
To be eligible to win either of these guitars you (or a representative) must be available to attend the show on Sunday 29th for the presentation, but you were going to be there anyway, weren't you?
The Hotline phone number you need to enter the Chandler competition and/or the Ibanez competition is 0891 100733 .
Just state which competition you want to enter and leave your answers along with your name, address and daytime phone number .
If you want to enter both competitions just say ‘Both Competitions’ and leave your answers to both, again with your name, address and daytime phone number.
The prize draws will be held separately and the winners will be contacted by phone before the 26th November.
To enter the Ovation competition dial the Ovation Competition Hotline on 0891 100734 .
Leave your answers along with your name, address and daytime phone number.
If you're the first correct entry out of the hat we'll be straight on the phone to give you the good news and arrange the presentation.
Here are the competitions and good luck.
CHANDLER 555 COMPETITION
Finished in Butterscotch and sporting three Chandler ‘Firebird'-style pickups, this American original retails for around £800.
To get your hands on it all you need to do is correctly answer two questions and dial the hotline with your answers.
It couldn't be simpler, but be warned, the answers may not be as obvious as they might appear.
1)
In which American state are Chandler guitars made?
A)
Texas?
B)
California?
C)
Nevada?
2)
Which Ted Newman-Jones designed Chandler guitar does Keith Richards use on his latest ‘Expensive Winos’ album?
A)
The 555?
B)
Austin Special?
We forgot to mention that as an added bonus the winner will be presented with the 555 by Paul Chandler himself at the London Music Show ‘92, so get dialling and it could be you.
IBANEZ FGM 100 COMPETITION
Here's your chance to play the guitar the ‘Thunder From Down Under’ has put his name to.
Longtime Ibanez player Frank Gambale has his moniker on this new Ibanez FGM 100 and if you can answer two easy question it could be yours.
1)
Complete the following Frank Gambale album title: ‘Brave New…’.
2)
Who makes the ‘Dual Sound’ pickup Frank chose for the bridge position on the Ibanez FGM 100?
When you think you've got the answers phone the Chandler/Ibanez Competition Hotline on 0891 100733 and we'll see the two winners in London in November.
the small print
The Ibanez FGM 100 and the Chandler 555 competitions will close on November 25th 1992
All entrants/their seconds must be available to attend the presentations in London on the 29th November 1992.
The Editor's decision is final and no correspondence will be entered into.
OVATION 1992-H COMPETITION
Guitars don't come much more exclusive than this.
Rare woods, special inlays, great tone and the knowledge that you'll be the envy of everyone who hasn't got one, and by the end of the year they'll have missed their chance, too.
The Ovation 1992-H Collectors series will only ever materialise once, and so for that matter will this competition to win one.
All you have to do to win is answer the three questions correctly and phone us with your answers on the Ovation Competition Hotline (0891 100734).
1)
In what country is Tamo Ash found?
2)
Who is the President of Ovation Instruments Inc?
3)
Ovation made Bon Jovi guitarist Ritchie Sambora a very special multi-neck roundback guitar.
How many necks did it have?
Okay get that dialling digit busy, we're waiting for your call and we'll be onto the lucky winner as soon as the competition closes.
more small print
The Editor's decision is et cetera and no correspondence will be et cetera et cetera.
This competition closes on November 30th 1992.
All calls are charged at 36p per minute (cheap rate) and 48p (at all other times).
SWITCHMASTERS Fender Jerry Donahue Telecasters Forty-two years of abuse and the old Telecaster isn't dead yet.
Here's two new ones from Fender, but separated by several thousand miles and over a grand's worth of drinking vouchers…
Review by Rick Batey.
In the red corner, ladies and gentlemen, is our American contestant: nearly £1,600 worth of hand-built, gold-plated signature-model overkill designed by the Fender Custom Shop in conjunction with that master string-twister Jerry Donahue.
Now, Mr. Donahue is not, repeat not, the kind of guy who'd meet up with the Fender boffins over a coffee and casually say: ‘Hey, give it a kinda, uh, cool neck and some real hot pickups and paint it killer pink, and that'll be just great…’
No, he's more likely to have been driving the Custom Shop totally insane for about two years straight, telephoning at obscure hours to tell them about his change of heart concerning the exact height of the fret-wire.
He's a perfectionist, our Jerry, and why not?
If you're putting your name on a guitar, you want it perfect.
In the blue corner, we have the ‘JD Telecaster’, the Japanese-made version of the very same instrument, and one you can probably pick up for the very interesting price of £400 or less.
The idea behind the JD Tele is a similar to that behind the Squier Hank Marvin Strat, itself a cheapo version of a Custom Shop guitar.
Top marks to Fender for continuing to care for us, the poverty-stricken masses, but while the Squier Hank was a nice enough guitar, we felt that the pickups and hardware were not really up to the standard of an early-to-mid '80s Squier or Tokai.
For me, these brands of that particular period have yet to be surpassed for quality, character and value.
The JD Tele costs more than the Squier Hank, but will it prove to be better?
The Signature model has a body of basswood, covered, back and front, with birdseye maple veneer, while the JD has a three-piece alder body with the joins fairly randomly positioned.
Transparent red is the other colour option but both of ours are finished in a glossy three-tone sunburst, the Signature beautifully and the JD acceptably; indeed the JD's body is noticeably un-flat.
It's also double-bound in white plastic, which should tell you that Fender have simplified production by using the exact same bodies you'd find on the ‘62 rosewood-neck reissues.
Another indication of this is the position of the Strat-style neck pickups.
The Signature's pickup is rather oddly placed a long way from the end of the neck (obviously by request) while the JD's is in the normal position.
Old-style one-piece maple necks with walnut fillets around the back are the order of the day.
The Signature model breaks with tradition by having a moderately stupendous neck featuring both flaming and birdseye figuring (Leo Fender never approved of figured necks, since there'd never be enough to go round and he disliked any form of elitism) while the JD offers a dead plain, workmanlike affair.
Both guitars share Mr. Donahue's preferred neck profile, medium-deep and noticeably ‘V’ shaped, not unlike the ones Fender were turning out in late ‘56 and ‘57.
They're not real ‘boat’ necks (the kind so deep that the back of the neck is actually level with the back of the headstock and heel) but they're pretty deep all the same and they both feel just excellent.
The Signature neck is much more finely fashioned, smoother behind the nut and with a lovely steep swoop from the nut down to the face of the deliciously neat headstock.
The JD's neck has exactly the same depth, but it's been dressed away a touch more in the shoulders to give a more sharply peaked V, especially down near the nut.
Mr. D. has the right ideas when it comes to hardware.
Klusons are the prettiest machineheads Fender ever used, so that's what we've got.
The string retainers are the round '50s style ones, those best for bending-behind-the-nut techniques, and the bridges are the funky old ashtray types with three cylindrical brass saddles — yes, intonation is a compromise, but these saddles sound the best, no question.
Of course, the Signature is gold-plated throughout while the JD has to put up with chrome.
The glam of the Signature model reminds me very much of the 40th Anniversary Tele we reviewed two or three years ago, and personally speaking — I should be objective, of course, but I do take Teles personally — gold-plated, figured-wood Teles do strike me as being a bit of a contradiction in terms.
Surely the whole point about Telecasters is that they're tough, they're basic and they sound ace, and how can you really play a Tele if you're worried about scratching the thing?
But back in the real world, the Signature's bridge is a bit of a mess.
The areas around the rear corners are unbelievably rough and there's a sharp lump sticking out which is ideally placed for slicing the heel of your hand open.
The JD's baseplate is actually better finished, although when it arrived the guitar was lacking the low E grubscrew, rendering the guitar virtually unplayable.
The JD Tele wins out on knobs, since the Signature's volume control is horribly graunchy — again, not what you'd expect for this kind of money.
On the other hand, the Signature's switch is obviously better quality than the Japanese version.
Which leads us on to the big selling point of these guitars, since this is the first time a production Telecaster has been fitted with a five-way switch.
The intention is to give the player all the usual Tele sounds, but with a bit of extra variation; and this is how it works.
Position one is the Strat-style neck pickup wired straight through the volume control and out to the jack, while position two gives you the same pickup but this time through the tone circuit.
This is a great idea.
You might rarely want to roll the treble off the neck pickup, but you can take treble off the bridge pickup, if it's a little hairy for you, and still be sure of a full-treble sound on the neck pickup when you hit the switch hard left.
Position three, the middle one, is what you'd expect it to be — both pickups in parallel for that nice, middle-of-the-road tone — and position four is the new sound.
What it does is combine both pickups through a capacitor and a resistor with a certain amount of reverse phase, to echo the sound a Strat makes when you jam the switch between the middle and neck pickups.
Finally, the lead pickup alone is placed as usual at the end of the track, so you can still clobber the switch hard right and get back to the classic, hard-edged Telecaster tone.
These two guitars are very similar in feel.
The Signature's body is the more comfortable to hold, even though it's slightly heavier, since the JD's bound body means sharper edges.
The Signature's neck feels glossier, and the action at the bridge has been better set up so that the strings lie well above the ashtray's sides; otherwise both guitars are very playable, with good, low nuts and buzz-free actions.
Interestingly, they sound radically different, and different even before you plug them in.
The JD Tele is jangly and promisingly loud; the Signature model sounds subdued to the point of inertia, almost as if the basswood is sucking up the sound — not a good start.
With a Fender Princeton Reverb II as a test amp, the Signature model's custom-wound Seymours prove themselves to be all smooth power, full and solid, with plenty of mid-range.
But I had the amp set with the treble full on, the presence full on and the bright switch kicked in before I could get close to what I'd call a classically nasty Telecaster bridge pickup tone.
This is a very deep -sounding guitar.
As for the rhythm pickup, a Seymour SSL2 Vintage with flat polepieces, it's superb — much more full, balanced and usable than your average Tele neck pickup.
The Strat-sound position is classic Cray and Knopfler, highly convincing, and it really does add enormously to the range of the guitar.
To sum up, the Signature is an extremely posh-sounding thing but if you like your Teles truly spiteful,as I do, then I'd guess that this would be £1,600 not particularly well spent.
Swapping to the JD Tele means leaping swiftly across the room to knock out the amp's treble boost.
This one has the kind of treble output that makes the guitar sound gnarly even when it's clean, and it's got that lovely cheesy boiing sound to the bottom string — the kind of tone you know is guaranteed to cut across that poxy synthesiser.
To be critical, the JD's Japanese pickups are certainly less powerful than the Signature's and, overall, they err on the empty-sounding side — a hint of extra mid-range wouldn't go amiss.
If this guitar were mine, I'd be tempted to experiment, probably starting with Seymour Duncan Alnico Pro IIs, and then maybe I'd end up with a guitar that was a perfect cross between the JD and the Signature.
CONCLUSION
Is Jerry Donahue's idea of the perfect Telecaster a valid one?
I think so, definitely.
The combination of a deep V-shaped neck, the excellent five-position switch and all the ‘right’ old-fashioned bits (like Klusons, round string retainers and brass saddles) go towards making these two very nifty guitars.
As to which one is best — well, respect must go to the Custom Shop for keeping their standards high (pity about the bridge, though) but I'd take the JD Tele every time.
It's lighter, it's springier, it's livelier and it makes a lot less fuss about the whole business.
The pickups could be fuller-sounding, but they're certainly usable as they are.
As for the Signature model, it's certainly slick but I honestly don't know where all the money's gone; the JD Tele is infinitely better value for money and it makes the price tag on the US-made version look very questionable indeed.
Professionally set up, a JD would make as good a Tele as you'll ever need, so join the new age of guitar realism — be cheap and be proud.
RRP:
Jerry Donahue Telecaster £1,589
Japanese JD Telecaster £450
No left-handers available.
For further information please contact 
TRADING PLACES Reading Your Rights Mugged by mail order?
Fuming at faulty goods?
Write to Chris Roanat Trading Placesto find out where you stand…
REFUSED REFUND ON FAULTY AMP
I bought an amplifier from a mail order company only to find the unit was faulty (it crackled on the overdrive channel) when it arrived.
I returned the amp for repair but the company sent it back with the same fault as before.
This time I sent it back, asking for a refund.
The company refused, saying the fault was a fabrication by me just to get my money back.
Where do I stand?
→ This is a difficult one.
It seems the supplier is saying that there isn't a fault at all, leaving the onus on you to establish that there is.
So, first doublecheck that there's nothing you are doing or using the amp with or for that could be causing the fault.
It sounds like it was bought new, so you probably got a guarantee with it from the manufacturer.
Check the terms of your guarantee and see if the amp is covered under them.
If it is covered, and indeed faulty, you will have a claim against the manufacturer and this may save you having to take action against the supplier.
ERRATIC HARMONISER?
As a newcomer to the technology available for guitarists I opted, on the strength of good reviews, to purchase a certain processor, along with its foot-controller.
Once I had got to grips with how to work the machine I noticed that the harmoniser in the machine didn't appear to work properly: ie. if I set the interval to a major 3rd, the processor would intermittently switch between a major 3rd and a minor 3rd.
In fact, four of the factory presets using the harmoniser behaved in a similar way.
I assumed something was wrong with the unit, so I took it back from where I bought it and got another one.
This behaved in the same way as the first unit, so I took this one back and got a third…
And you can guess what happened!
I finally got in touch with the distributor and explained what was going on.
I was basically told that there was nothing they could do about it, and that if I wanted a harmoniser that worked I would have to buy a separate rack unit.
In other words I got what I paid for, considering the price.
Is this right?
If a manufacturer of a product says ‘It can do this and that’ then my expectation is that it will do exactly what the manufacturer says it can do.
It would have been nice to see a mention of this in Guitarist 's review of the same product.
→ If you buy something which says it will do a particular job then it must be fit for the purpose.
If it isn't, there has been a breach of contract and you are entitled to your money back from the business you bought the goods from — not the manufacturer.
It is up to your supplier to get his money back from the manufacturer.
However, in this instance you do the company a disservice, since the harmoniser patches you refer to are intended to work this way.
It's an ‘intelligent’ harmoniser and plays this way to follow the commonest chord sequences without any programming.
You can select other harmoniser patches within the unit which will respond in the way that you demand.
Customers: always make sure that a ‘fault’ is indeed a fault.
VINTAGE STRAT WAS NOT SO VINTAGE
I recently bought a second-hand guitar from a shop.
The guitar was described as a 1967 Fender Strat but I have since discovered that it was made in 1974 and that I therefore paid about £250 over the asking price.
However, I really like the guitar and have decided to keep it, but also asked the shop to pay the difference between the ‘67 and ‘74 model values.
Much to my distress the shop has refused.
What can I do?
→ When you buy goods or equipment you have a legal right to expect them to comply with any description applied: leather not plastic, solid wood and not veneer, or in this case a ‘67 and not a 1974 model.
It doesn't matter that the guitar was second-hand; the law talks about contracts for the sale of goods, and doesn't refer to first, second, third or even fourth hand.
Also, falsely describing goods can amount to a criminal offence under the Trades Description Act 1968.
Contact your local Trading Standards Department and they will enforce the Trades Description Act.
CHEQUE CASHED, NO PRODUCT RECEIVED
I sent away for a video instruction tape over two months ago; the cheque was cashed well over a month ago but as yet I have not received the tape.
I have phoned the company, but all I get is an ansaphone and no-one ever contacts me.
I have written letters explaining the problem, but as before I still haven't received any reply.
What can I do in this situation?
→ If the ansaphone is still working it seems to imply that the company is still in existence — a good sign.
If there's no reply on the phone or at the door and the business has simply disappeared, you can very often be putting more good money down the drain by chasing it up.
A call to your local Trading Standards Department may give you information about the state of the business and your next step.
INSTRUCTION TAPES: POOR QUALITY
I recently replied to an ad in your magazine for some tuition tapes at a cost of £16.50 inc p+p for three.
When I received them I was, to say the least, disappointed.
The sound quality on all three tapes is appaling; only two of the three accompanying booklets arrived and one of these, promising guitar secrets, is comprised almost totally of quotes taken from various magazines, including yours.
I appreciate that Guitarist cannot be held responsible for the extremely low quality of these tapes, but I feel that you should be made aware of the fact.
The originator of the tapes has clearly decided to make his tape deck pay for itself (although I think he could take a few hints on how to eliminate unwanted hum and noise) and the result can only be described as a rip off.
I will be writing to the company proprietor to request a refund and look forward to hearing your comments on the matter.
→ We all hate being ripped off and the law tries to recognise that.
When any goods are bought they should be of merchantable quality.
Fine words.
It means that they should be and do what we would reasonably expect of them.
If they are clearly being offered commercially — without any restricting statement — then we should get commercial quality.
If they are not up to standard then the supplier is in breach of his contract with you and you are entitled to your money back.
Your move to obtain a refund is the right one.
EXPENSIVE GUITAR: COSMETIC FLAW
In May I placed an order for an expensive acoustic guitar.
After waiting for eight weeks the guitar finally arrived.
You can imagine the excitement when I reached out to open the case.
The guitar was exceptionally beautiful, but the top has two scars, presumably caused during production.
The one on the bass side is almost an inch long and it really shows, especially under strong lighting.
I know that it does not affect the sound of the instrument, but when you pay the extra for cosmetic details, you expect it to be excellent, not scarred.
I have written to the company expressing my feeling over this matter, but have heard no reply.
→ Beauty is in the eye of the beholder.
We pay for that beauty as well as functionality in most goods.
Styling, colour and composition all determine which items we buy — just ask the marketing people!
Its appearance is part of its merchantability.
Write again, requesting a reply or explanation within ten days.
BLUE CONDITION Ibanez FGM 100 Gambale Signature Looking at the Thunder From Down Under's own personal bolt from the blue, David Meadholds the lightning conductor and waits…
Frank Gambale first ran across the Ibanez 540 S series in 1986.
In those days, the model was referred to as the Saber and boasted one of the thinnest necks around.
After a few modifications had been made, based on Frank's own playing requirements, this model emerged as a bastard offspring of the Saber — the family lineage basically intact, but with a wilder spirit and some distinctly antipodean overtones.
I'll admit from the start that my own attempt to arpeggiate the Gambale way sounds more like Sooty than Sweep picking, but I console myself by thinking that I shouldn't let a signature model impose another player's personality on my own style!
CONSTRUCTION
The body on this guitar is a wafer thin slice of mahogany, thickening up towards its centre but even then only to a fairly modest 1 inches.
The edges of the body have all been left square, with no contouring, lending the guitar a very sharply-defined profile.
It's actually too thin to be uncomfortable, funnily enough; none of the sharp edges even come close to being a nightmare for the rib cage.
The oil-finished neck is made from the customary maple, with the headstock scarfed on in what is rapidly becoming the ‘old-fashioned way’.
It certainly is thin: the neck profile is virtually flat on both sides.
And when you consider that it measures only 17mm in depth at the first fret, it's the closest yet to an invisible neck, from a purely tactile point of view.
The fingerboard is rosewood with the somewhat imposing lightning bolt inlays which share the blue livery chosen for this particular model.
Obviously, this is a very personal thing, but I've always suspected that inlays like these will turn out to have a very short lifespan in terms of popular appeal.
I think that in years to come they are bound to be looked back on as an aberration.
The edges of the neck and headstock have been bound to very good effect, with commendable attention to detail.
The frets are Jim Dunlop 6230 medium size and have been finished quite nicely, with no sharp edges protruding over the fingerboard, as has been the case on some Ibanez guitars in the past.
I must give Ibanez another brief round of applause for the positioning of the screws on the truss rod cover.
I know it's a small point, but how many times have you tried to access the truss rod on a guitar, only to find that the screws are located immediately under the strings and that inserting a screwdriver is nigh on impossible without de-tuning?
Here they have been positioned between the strings and it is attention to minor details like these which make companies like Ibanez worthy of the laurels heaped upon them.
The pickup configuration on the FGM is the redoubtable twin humbucker and single coil option, a sort of hybrid of Gibson and Fender's different pickup philosophies.
In actual fact, coil-tap notwithstanding, the sounds produced are a sort of sit-on-the-fence compromise between the two.
However, the bridge pickup is a DiMarzio Dual Sound (Mr Gambale's choice, of course) whereas the neck is the IBZ F1, itself the result of a collaboration between Ibanez and DiMarzio.
The single coil is another DiMarzio, this time an HS3.
The tremolo is an Ibanez Lo-Pro Edge system from the Floyd Rose school and, as licensed Floyds go, the Edge system has proved itself to be one of the best.
Originally, the adjustments Gambale made to the standard Saber design included even lower profiling of neck, pickups and trem.
So on the FGM all three have been countersunk by an extra few mm, meaning that the pickup mounting rings sit flush with the body, which doesn't look half as odd as you'd imagine.
The neck joint is of Ibanez's ‘All Access’ variety, which involves four recessed bolts and no bulky neck plate.
It feels good under the hand and as this kind of neck joint has been cropping up more and more frequently on other models, I get the impression that we're probably looking at another future industry standard.
From a purely aesthetic viewpoint, I must say that I dislike the design of the volume and tone pots intensely.
There is such a fine line between the distinctive and downright ugly and unfortunately these fall into the latter category.
They don't feel right and I've heard that the rubber grips on them have a tendency to rot after a short time.
Fender Strat-style knobs wouldn't look out of place and, if this guitar were mine, I would change them straight away.
The action on this model is on the low side of low, which should aid legato technique with or without the benefit of a tailwind.
IN USE
When inserted into the clean channel of an amplifier, the FGM exhibits a really nice, rich tone.
It almost seems a shame to mess things up with distortion, but that's rock'n'roll.
The pickup selection is of the automatic coil-tap variety, meaning that in positions two and four on the selector switch humbuckers are relegated to the single coil division in order that the great Strat-tone god can be invoked.
As I've mentioned, the clean side of the FGM's nature is a real treat.
Mahogany is a very warm wood as far as tone is concerned, but this body is so thin that the result is quite bright and snappy — great for jazz/fusion rhythm sounds and a perfect foil for sound processing.
The guitar's low profile, slight body and super-thin neck make for a very lightweight playing experience and I couldn't detect any balance problems, either.
Playing at volume, the FGM proves itself capable of dishing out the dirt, the Dual Sound humbucker retaining its tone and not thinning out to a tuneless buzz.
CONCLUSION
It was interesting to keep Gambale's own sound at the back of my mind while probing the capabilities of this guitar.
That way round the guitar's reputation literally speaks for itself.
Of course, I would be very guarded about allowing the Wizard from Oz's sound to be the sole influence in choosing an instrument, because it can't be said often enough that a player's style is almost as individual as his DNA.
But whatever your own criteria for buying an instrument, be assured that the FGM is a superbly well-made instrument and as signature models go, not too unreasonably priced.
RRP: £899.00
No left-handers available.
For further information please contact 
DYNAMIGHT Dynacord Bass Combo & Cabinet Contemporary technology married to traditional principles is fine, but should you buy something you can't hear…?
Sub-woofing by Gibson Keddie.
The German Dynacord company remain relatively unheralded within the modern music industry, even though they've been around for over forty years, in fact since the very inception of electronic amplification.
Their reputation now rests in the professional audio industry, and the ordinary muso might only be aware of Dynacord as providers of amps to the accordion players of Bavaria.
But the company's parent is the American Mark IV Audio group, whose brands include Electro-Voice and Gauss, so that should give you some idea of the league in which they really play.
Along with Carvin, Yamaha and Peavey, Dynacord are also involved in the manufacture of complete PA and audio recording systems, and have subsequently applied the expertise gained in such areas to the DSP 715 bass combo and DSP 715 ‘E’ extension speaker.
Dynacord's bass research has concentrated largely on speaker technology, and these units represent the company's answer to the relatively slow response characteristics of speakers in the low frequency range.
Dynacord have attempted to reduce these inefficiencies (and, as a consequence, physical dimensions) by using dynamic signal processing, or DSP, to compensate for such inherent delays and distortions.
They state that ‘decisive parts of the sound spectrum are analysed and dynamically pre-accelerated by the DSP technology’.
In addition, the DSP 715's ‘TBC’ circuitry simulates the thermal behaviour of loudspeaker voice coils, monitoring their actual temperature; any excess reading will result in a restricted voltage being fed to the speaker (but with imperceptible loss of sound quality) until an acceptable working temperature is regained.
Around the mid-seventies, Dynacord pioneered this type of processor-controlled amplification, and the DSP 715 obviously continues the tradition.
I particularly like the way the markedly understated look of the combo belies its facilities; I much prefer to be surprised by a product's performance.
With a power rating of 300 watts the DSP 715 is about as small as it could realistically be, standing at 507mm high, 464mm wide and 362mm deep; and at 77lbs in weight there's no real difficulty in heaving it up on stage.
The enclosed cab is covered in lightly-grained black Tolex with no corner pieces, while the front, which angles gently back towards the top, is more rock'n'roll than it looks.
What appears to be a light woven cloth speaker cover is in fact a fairly substantial fine-mesh metal grille, which offers some worthwhile protection to the mighty EVM 15B Proline woofer and the two mid/high frequency speakers sitting behind it.
The Dynacord's price tag is pretty high, not only because of the EVM speaker, but also on account of the high-grade circuitry used throughout.
The combo offers the ubiquitous passive and active inputs, accompanied by a red-topped input gain rotary control.
As comprehensive tone modification is a definite part of the 715's brief, a switchable 11-band graphic equaliser operates in conjunction with a sweepable voice filter and tuneable compressor, the switches and rotaries for which are situated near the graphic's sliders and the XLR studio-out jack.
An LED display in the top left corner of the front panel allows the user to check input gain and compression levels (there's up to 30dB available if selected), while another display in the opposite corner indicates output level, thus warning against possible power amp overload.
Also on the front panel are the effects send and return jacks, a master level pot, a headphones jack and of course the power-on push switch.
Around the back, a ground-lift switch sits beside the three-pin mains socket, while another socket allows connection of the extension sub-woofer cabinet by means of a rather unusual ‘Speakon’ socket/ connector, which resembles the flexible pipe for plumbing in a washing machine.
The remaining connectors and controls include a fine-tuning screw to control the ‘aux in’ level of any external signal, such as a drum machine or CD player.
When connected via the phono jacks, the signal level of these can be mixed in for playing along to some backing.
The curiously-named ‘master break’ jacks provide a feed to additional power amps etc., the return socket catering for an incoming signal which will bypass the DSP's preamp, to be fed straight to the power amp.
Two footswitch sockets allow for the connection of optional footswitches (you'll need two) to access EQ and compression.
IN USE
Powering up, the user is met with the sound of the on-board fan rising to speed.
However, musical silence reigns while the DSP operates a protective delay before coming to life.
Plugging in a 4-string bass the tone is generally tight, controlled and correct, much as you would expect at this price.
Below the sober exterior, though, one suspects that there's a bit of an animal lurking — and switching in the graphic equaliser and voice filter (after having connected up the sub-woofer extension cabinet) opens the cage door fairly wide.
At 507x464x362mm and 40lbs weight, the DSP's extension cab is relatively painless to cart around; plus, it's designed to have the combo sat on top of it.
Dynacord reckon that the extra 400 watt capacity gives the combo large hall ability, and this way the stack can be pushed towards its stated maximum output of 680 watts.
I couldn't summon up a double bass in the short time that I had this rig, which was a shame since, like Hughes & Kettner's BassBase, the unit is flexible enough to accommodate the idiosyncrasies of the instrument, the primary reason for the onboard notch filter.
A modern fretless semi presented no problems, though, the full 30dB of compression keeping things very much under control.
The shelving sliders at either end of the graphic's bands prove particularly useful when using 5 and 6-string basses, allowing straightforward boost or cut across a wide frequency range, and giving the bassist well-defined depth on the lower strings and bright treble at the top, but with a ‘cut mid’ to minimise that confusion of bass and lower mid frequencies.
‘Sub-woofer’ is one of the current buzz-terms in the audio world, extensively used by hi-fi salesmen intent on baffling the poor punter with tech-speak.
We've all come to terms now with ‘woofers’ and ‘tweeters’, but how much more ‘woof’can you use?
Well, Dynacord refer to the significant sound pressure levels (SPLs) afforded by the DSP's EVM equipment, and it is the maintenance of these SPLs which creates problems.
‘Transient Response’ in the case of a speaker refers to its ability to reproduce sounds across a wide frequency spectrum and while most speakers can efficiently deliver good low-mid range, most non-bass dedicated speakers can only imply low bass.
This is most effectively demonstrated in the case of Sony's Walkman, where the bass sound you hear is in effect a trick created by using cross-frequencies to ‘synthesise’ low bass in the mini-headphones; it sounds low, but out loud there would be no real impact because it doesn't actually exist!
With real low bass, speakers have to work very hard to produce enough of the relevant frequency to make the signal audible.
But since the lowest stated band on the DSP 715's graphic is 60Hz, I'm not really convinced by the sub-bass implications accompanying this unit.
Real sub-bass can't, by its very terminology, be heard — only felt.
30Hz is well into sub-harmonic (and potentially hazardous to health) territory; below 20Hz means you can't hear the sound that is rearranging your molecular structure, although you can sure feel it.
The impact of such SPLs from a unit as small as the DSP is pretty impressive, but it's difficult to determine what's merely loud and what's subbing its way into your psyche…
CONCLUSION
This scepticism apart, most bass amp manufacturers would opt for a similar system if they thought the market would stand it, but realising that it places significant extra financial strain on the consumer, most don't.
One's immediate tendency would be to question the cost, but the more experienced would appreciate the DSP's consistent flexibility and unfluttering performance, performance which allows easy change from 4- to 5- to 6-string basses with only minor modifications to suit.
More impressive yet is the fact that upright basses would present little problem to the 715 as its voicing filter can be moved to any desired ‘notch’ between 120 and 800 Hz, assisting with the elimination of intrusive resonant frequencies which would promote feedback.
Ultimately, the DSP 715 is a powerful stand-alone combo, designed to be used in a wide variety of professional situations, yet with the capability, via the 715 ‘E’ extension cabinet, of even greater volumes for large capacity gigs.
And not many units will cope so well with the transition from studio friendliness to instant big-gig compatibility.
The Dynacord is expensive, sure, and that's the stumbling block, because it demands to be taken seriously and won't be found wanting.
RRP:
DSP 715 Bass Combo £1574.50
DSP 715E Extension Cabinet £548.73
(Prices include VAT)
For further information please contact 
SOUTHERN FRIED SLIDE Sonny Landreth From way down in Louisiana comes the blinding slide guitar of Sonny Landreth, mixing blues with rock, cajun with zydeco, and passion with mind-boggling technique…
Interview by Rick Batey.
Just how good is Sonny Landreth?
Snail's Pace Slim,Guitarist contributor, lead Hamster and no slouch with a chunk of tubing himself, rates Landreth's recent showcase at the Borderline Club in London as the most astonishing display of bottleneck guitar he's ever seen.
‘Everybody was there,’ says Slim, ‘the whole London blues mafia, and jaws were just dropping all over the place.
Personally I'd rate him above Ry Cooder, Lowell George, Bonnie Raitt, all of them put together.’
Brave words, but maybe justified; and please don't assume that Sonny is just another twelve-bar merchant, since he's also a songwriter whose influences go from Dylan and Hendrix through to Cajun — the waltzes and the two-steps of the white settlers from Nova Scotia — and zydeco, the dynamic music form of black New Orleans.
Sonny's guitar style — taking in everything from evocative Dobro through to sizzling lead, with a neat line in unlikely techniques like harmonics from nowhere and playing between the slide and the nut — has been perfectly showcased on his three solo albums to date, ‘Blues Attack’, ‘Way Down In Louisiana’ and ‘Outward Bound’(the latter is highly recommended and is available in the UK on Zoo Records, through BMG).
You can also catch Landreth stepping into Ry Cooder's shoes on John Hiatt's ‘Slow Turning’ album from ‘87 and on John Mayall's 1990 release ‘A Sense Of Place’.
But his real secret weapon is an amazing talent for simultaneously combining slide with fretted notes.
Others have discovered that if you depress a note behind the slide, the string passes under it enabling it to sound; but no-one has taken the technique to the extent that this man has.
And bizarrely enough, the reason he began to take bottleneck seriously in the first place was due to a complete misunderstanding…
‘I went to see The Byrds play back in ‘68 or ‘69, with Clarence White on guitar,’ Sonny explains.
‘But from where I was out in the audience I couldn't properly see what he was doing to get that amazing sound — so of course I assumed he was playing bottleneck.
In fact he was using the Parsons-White string bender, the one where you pushed down the neck of the guitar and that moved a mechanism which raised the B-string by a tone, but I didn't have a clue about that.
I went home, got hold of the records and started trying to play bottleneck like Clarence White!
It wasn't until The Byrds’‘Untitled’ double album came out with the liner notes explaining all about the string-bender that I found out what a fool I'd been…
‘But somehow that mistake sort of propelled me into an approach which is still very significant to what I do.
It's weird how influences can come about in such indirect ways.
‘I actually started out by playing lap-slide.
I had a little Fender lap-steel guitar, and I'd heard bottleneck players and blues players and I kept trying to play like that and I just couldn't figure it out.
Then I figured I'd better try the same approach on guitar, so I put a really high nut on this old Gibson Melody Maker and I started using bottleneck on it.
At first I had the strings about an inch off the fingerboard, but I slowly started filing down the nut until I ended up with a lower action.
I was using mostly open G, A or E tunings around this time — mostly E, in fact, the old Vastopol tuning.
‘Robert Johnson was a really important influence on me.
I came across him when I was about 14 or 15, and although I'd played Chet Atkins-style fingerpicking before, it hadn't occurred to me to use the bottleneck in conjunction with fingerpicking.
And of course I listened to Elmore James, and all the Delta players — Tampa Red, Robert Pete Williams and Mississippi John Hurt.
‘And then there's George Harrison on ‘All Things Must Pass’, and The Stones; I was a massive Stones fan, and like a lot of white middle-class American kids, it was The Stones that led me back into listening to a lot of early blues.
I suddenly realised that there were all these great black players around in Louisiana, and that I'd missed them completely!
Actually, it wasn't that hard to miss them, because the real blues players were just getting no exposure at the time.
It's a weird phenomenon how the English bands turned us on to the music in our own part of the world — taught us to appreciate it.
So I started tracing back the roots, like a lot of kids at the time.
‘Around the same time I was lucky enough to catch BB King playing in this tiny bar, a little juke-joint.
Myself and a friend were the only white guys in the whole place, and it was great.
He was using just a small group — a sax player, a keyboard player, bass and drums, as I recall — and he was really wailing.
It was amazing.
But it was actually hearing Duane Allman that made me want to go for a powerful kind of electric sound.
I heard the Allman Brothers’ first album once and wasn't impressed; then I listened to it again, and wham — it got me!
‘And then I discovered Clifton Chenier (the late zydeco pioneer).
A friend said to me, ‘Listen, you've got to hear this guy; he plays blues on the accordion .’
And I said, ‘Blues on the accordion?
What the…?’
I couldn't even imagine it.
But we went out to this zydeco bar and it just completely blew me away.’
Sonny fulfilled a major ambition by becoming Clifton Chenier's guitar player some ten years later, and even now his guitar parts often imitate slurred, accented accordion rhythms.
Listen to Back To Bayou Teche on ‘Outward Bound’.
‘Yeah, I figure that playing with Clifton was the highlight of my musical career,’ says Sonny, in all seriousness.
‘It was great when he asked me to join his band.
It was an incredible education.
In fact, it's all been a bit of a downhill coast ever since!’
Modesty, modesty.
But what of the slide/fretting technique — how did that all begin?
‘Well, it's strange how it started,’ muses Sonny.
‘You know how sometimes you're really frustrated with your playing, and there's something there that's just out of your reach?
I'd been playing slide for years and I found myself in a blues band.
The thing was, they were playing blues in both major and minor keys, and I was feeling very tied down by the number of notes I could reach in my major open tunings.
‘Of course, there's a way you can work around playing a minor blues in a major tuning — in open G, for instance , you just play the top three strings at the third fret and that gives you a B flat major chord that you can use as a G minor — but it still felt pretty limiting.
‘But one day I was sitting at home, doodling around the 12th fret and trying to figure out how I could play in a minor key without having to retune the guitar.
So I was looking at the slide sitting on the strings, and looking at the major third on the fretboard, and then I said, ‘If only I could get this note here .’
And I pressed the minor third behind the slide, hit all the strings and I couldn't believe it — it worked!
And suddenly I realised that there was a whole lot more going on than I'd even thought of.
‘I play with the slide on my little finger, so I leave three fingers free to fret behind the slide.
You can actually do really big stretches, although I'm careful to warm up before I play and cool down slowly again afterwards, because I get tendonitis and I have to keep myself in shape.
In my, ahem, younger days — hang on a minute…’
Sonny grabs his Firebird to check.
‘Yeah, I used to be able to play with the slide at the 12th fret and reach all the way back to hit the top string at the seventh fret with my first finger.
I really have to watch how far I push myself these days, though.
‘The hardest part of the whole technique is building up the independence of the finger that holds the bottleneck.
That's the part that gives you sustain and that's the part that you don't want to depress to the point that it touches the fret, because otherwise the fretted strings don't have the clearance to run underneath the slide without touching it.
Once you've overcome that, then you can go even further.
For instance, it's possible to bend the strings behind the slide, using the end joint on your first finger like a kind of mechanical lever, while still keeping the slide and the vibrato completely in tune.
That's a good example of how much hearing Clarence White influenced me; it's pretty tough to do and it's rough on the fingers, but you can do it if you keep working at it.
‘Having the right action and the right gauges of strings is really critical for doing this kind of thing.
The intonation on your guitar has got to be perfect, because you're fretting strings behind the glass and that has to be just right.
I personally use a .013-.056 gauge on all the acoustics and all the electrics with the exception of the Firebird, which I use for regular flatpicking in standard Spanish tuning, and that one has much lighter strings on it — an .009 set but with an .011 on the top E.’
Sonny has a number of different slides he uses for different occasions.
He began with lipstick tubes, which were too light, and then moved on to sawing the ends off motorcycle handlebars.
These days, however, he uses exclusively glass slides.
‘When I started using glass it seemed so much smoother and warmer-feeling that I decided to stick with it,’ he says.
‘The only thing that glass doesn't do as well as metal is that metal generates some sound simply by moving up the string, and I really like that kind of character.
You hear the old Delta players with their metal slides and it's a great sound — I can totally go for that.
But I have different slides I use for different things.
I've got an old Coricidin bottle I keep for the Firebird, and I've got a beautiful one that I keep specially for ballads; it's a really nice hand-blown glass slide, very dense and very smooth, and it's great for recording subtle kinds of parts on acoustic guitar.’
Although his main tunings are the common ones (open E — EBEG£BE, open A — EAEAC£E and open G — DGDGBD) Sonny also has an armoury of more obscure minor, chromatic and combination tunings.
How does he decide which one to use?
‘Generally, if I'm playing on a track, I'll listen to the lyrics and then I'll try to come up with a guitar part that suits the song in terms of imagery.
After that's done, the tuning seems to suggest itself.
There's hundreds of variations you can come up with, but one thing that influenced me was learning piano in school.
I was always fascinated by the effect of the sustain pedal — you know, the way you can run one note into another, something like a harp sound.
So I've got some weird tunings that give that kind of feel — kind of chromatic open tunings with very close intervals between the strings.
Pedal steel players do much the same kind of thing, but they're lucky because they've got loads of strings to play around with; when you're a guitar player and you're down to six, you have to break it down and come up with some simpler versions.’
The main aim at the moment for Landreth and his two cohorts, bass-player David Ransom and drummer Ken Blevins, is to make the most of their first major-label release and to try to get a support slot with a suitable big name.
They plan to be back in Europe in October or November, and if their performances are anything like the last London one, you'll kick yourself for missing them.
‘But the sound was horrible!’ laughs Sonny.
‘The monitors were just killing us, and we ended up just turning them all off.
But we can't wait to come back over, because the response we've had over here has been just overwhelming.
There was a really genuine vibe from people and that's really special.
It's a big part of the reward.’
Sonny Landreth's Top 10 Albums
(in no particular order)
The Band ‘Music From The Big Pink’
Bob Dylan ‘Highway 61 Revisited’
Van Morrison ‘Astral Weeks’
Clifton Chenier ‘Red Hot Louisiana Band’
Jimi Hendrix ‘Electric Ladyland’
John Hiatt ‘Bring The Family’
Jackson Browne with David Lindley ‘Late For The Sky’
John Mayall ‘Bluesbreakers — with Eric Clapton’
Paul Simon ‘Graceland’
Robert Johnson ‘King Of The Delta Blues’
BEHIND THE SLIDE
As a man who bases his life around getting great tone, Sonny is more than happy to talk guitars and amps.
His trademark is his early-'60s reverse-body Gibson Firebird, a guitar acquired more by chance than design…
‘Before the Firebird I was using an old Gibson ES-175 up until about 1971,’ details Sonny.
‘It was great for doing Wes Montgomery, but at the same time I was playing Hendrix and Bloomfield and all kinds of stuff on this poor old hollowbody — and I was using Marshalls as well!
The sustain and the feedback was amazing, but boy, you had to be quick off the mark to damp the strings, or the whole thing would feed back unbelievably.
‘So I decided I needed a solid-body guitar for regular playing, and this friend of mine had this Firebird.
I didn't know what I was buying, and he didn't know what he was selling.
I got it from him for $125, and it's been my mainstay flatpicking electric guitar ever since.
‘It's weird, because Firebirds are now considered one of the best slide guitars; people really like the sharpness of those little pickups.
Actually, when I first bought it, I didn't like the amount of top-end in the sound so I used to roll the tone control way back and I ended up finding all these different tones in the guitar.
Those Alnico pickups can be really warm and dynamic; they clean up when you play soft, and they break up when you hit it.
It's a wonderful guitar and the neck is my favourite.
The banjo-style tuners are the coolest things too.
It always used to go out of tune and I thought it was the tuners, but in fact the trouble was with that old Gibson vibrola — a terrible thing, really cheap.
I took it off, put a Badass bridge on and I've had no trouble ever since.
‘I have two American Standard Strats that I've had for about four years, one with Lace Sensors, the other with DiMarzios.
I've also still got my old Gibson Melody Maker; I put humbuckers in it many years ago and it's got a really warm, big sound.
I've got a Martin D-28, plus a steel-bodied electric guitar made by James Tressart in Paris, and a metal-bodied Dobro from the early '70s.
I got that while I was playing with a band in Houston, Texas; I walked into a store, saw it on the wall and just flipped.
‘When it comes to amplifiers, I'm a tube guy.
My main amp is one built by James Demeter called the TGA-3.
Ry Cooder and David Lindley also use them — it's got a wonderful sound.
Then I've got an early '60s blackface Fender Deluxe Reverb, and an old ‘54 tweed Fender Deluxe, which is a sweetheart; I had it refurbished my Michael Sanders, who's a really great tech in Austin.
I've got a Seymour Duncan Convertible amp as well, and I know people say they've had trouble with reliability, but I've never travelled with mine so I wouldn't know!
‘I still use Marshalls and I've got a 100-watt head, although it's nowhere near as good as an early '60s 50-watt Marshall which I used for about nine years before it got stolen.
That amp had the best sound I ever heard — there's nothing to beat those old EL34s.
‘On the album I mostly used the Demeter head, the tweed Deluxe and an amazing 1950s 4x10’ Fender Bassman that I borrowed.
You can hear that one on Planet Cannonball and it had the most incredible effect; the voltage on it would sag so much when you cranked it up that it sounded like a volume swell pedal.
I've never heard anything like it.
I tried to buy it, but the guy wasn't interested.
And I don't blame him one bit…’
From where I was out in the audience I couldn't see what Clarence White was doing — so I assumed he was playing bottleneck
I'll try to come up with a part that suits the imagery of the song, and then the tuning seems to suggest itself
A friend of mine had this Firebird — I didn't know what I was buying, and he didn't know what he was sellin
FRET BUZZ
CRIS BONACCI A lead guitarist and sessioneer in a class of her own, Cris Bonacci tells tales out of‘School…
Gentlefolk of a quiet disposition should be aware that Girlschool are back with a new album and tour scheduled for the autumn.
‘The album was going to be called NO BOLLOCKS!,’ laughs Cris Bonacci, ‘but in the end we decided to call it simply Girlschool , because we realised we'd never used the name of the band as a title before…’
Ever since Girlschool's 1981 top five duet with Motörhead,Please Don't Touch , they've enjoyed semi-legendary status.
But what of Cris's pre-School activities?
Why did she start playing?
‘I grew up in Australia, and when I was about fourteen I saw a guitar and that was it: I just fell in love, just totally obsessed.
So I forced my Mum to buy me a guitar — it was just a crappy acoustic, with the strings about an inch away from the frets.’
The traditional first guitar.
‘Isn't it!
But I think that's the best way.
I teach guitar as well and a lot of kids want to learn straight away on electric and I think that's really bad for them.
I think it's better to learn on something that builds the muscles.
‘But this first guitar was just a $20 acoustic, and as soon as I could I bought an Ibanez SG, then that was stolen and I went to a Les Paul.
I found that really awkward at first, but I just got used to it and grew to love Les Pauls and just stuck with them from then on.’
Who were your early influences?
‘I fell in love with Jimi Hendrix, Black Sabbath, Jeff Beck.
That was when I was about fourteen and then I went through a stage of listening to Al Di Meola, people like that, just trying to be a better guitarist.
Then I went back to the basics again…but I think all guitarists go through that, don't they?’
How did you get into Girlschool in the first place?
‘I was in Australia, playing in a band called Sweet Jayne.
We were playing pubs and clubs and had a sort of underground following — we put out our own records and stuff.
Anyway, one day I had tickets to see Mike Oldfield and I was really upset because we had these gigs and so I had to sell them.
But as it turned out, we were playing this club in Sydney's red light district and he was in the audience!
I thought it was a joke when the bass player said, ‘Your hero is in the audience,’ but he actually was there.
It was a very small audience, only about forty people, and he came up to us in the break and told us he loved it and wanted a T-shirt.
Then a few months later we got a phone call from him asking myself and the singer to come out to Britain, and so we came out.
We were supposed to tour with him, but that never happened.
But it was great just to be asked to come out here.
It was the best thing that ever happened to me, really, to be asked by my hero.
I was really into Tubular Bells in a big way!
‘Soon I thought I might as well try to get into a band and so I answered a few ads in Melody Maker and joined a few bands.
I joined one band because they were playing at the Marquee, and at that gig I was spotted by Girlschool, who were looking for a guitarist.
Kelly Johnson had just left and so they asked me to join.
I had a week to learn the set and then we went off to Finland; we did some gigs with Lita Ford at the Midsummer Festival over there and it just went on from there.
‘Then I actually left Girlschool in 1989 because I got fed up with their attitude, although they've changed now — so they tell me!
But I've decided that I'll only be in the band as long as I'm doing other things as well as.
I think that's important; just playing E and A doesn't do you much good — it limited my playing so much…’
With Girlschool reconvened, and the arrival of Jackie Carrera on bass, they seem poised at the beginning of a newish era, but what have been the high spots of the band's history so far?
‘Touring with Deep Purple in America in 1985 was pretty amazing.
But I think we blew it in a big way.
We were playing to 25,000 people a night, but we had no album out or anything — it was a complete shambles.
But it wasn't entirely our fault; it was down to bad management.
‘We've also done other crazy things like the tour of India.
We were playing places like football stadiums and the Bombay Academy of Music.
It was an interesting experience, both musically and personally; it opened my mind to all that stuff, the poverty and everything.
I grew up in a big way over there.’
What equipment do you use with the band?
‘On stage I use my '70s Les Paul Goldtop.
I just love that guitar to death.
I use an ESP for whammy stuff and the usual 100 watt Marshall stacks — JCM 800s, they're great for the sort of stuff we play.
These ones are quite old and battered.
Like I said, I do quite a lot of other stuff as well and for that I use things like little Fender amps, and I've got a Peavey Profex which I use with a MIDI foot controller.
It depends who I'm working with, really.’
I hear you are going to work with Marc Almond.
How did that come about?
‘I got the work through the musical director Dave Clayton, who has done a lot of work with people like George Michael.
He knew of me at the time I was working with Betsy Cook, who used to work with Marc, and so that helped.
It's going to be very strange, but I love all that because it gives me so much more of a challenge.
I've got to play some flamenco and bass on a couple of songs and I get to do lots of weird effects and things.’
You also did the Anchor Butter commercial.
‘Yeah!
That came about through my agents, Session Connection.
They just put me up for it and I just happened to be about at the time.
I did the acoustic hillbilly guitar on it — you can really hear the guitar at the end.
It took about an hour and was really good experience.
‘Actually I've done loads of studio stuff; I also did the Pepsi ad for Canada.
I've worked with Toyah Wilcox as well and might do some recording with her in the future, and hopefully play on her next album.
Kim McAulisse and I have done some work with her before, as The Strange Girls.
‘But right now it's Marc Almond, then straight into rehearsals with Girlschool for our British tour in October.
Then we've got two weeks in Germany and then hopefully a three week tour of Japan…’
All in all, a hectic Autumn term for Girlschool…
DM 
SUEDE Ambition, glamour, sensitivity: Bernard Butler outlines his guitar philosophy as Suede go hell for leather…
Falling back onto the double bed which sits comfortably in his newly-acquired top-floor flat in Camden, Bernard Butler downs another mouthful of Evian and lets out a slightly tired sigh.
‘Yeah,’ he admits, almost reluctantly.
‘Yeah, you could class Suede as a really important band.’
Coming from the lead guitarist in a band who've only just released their second single, you'd expect such remarks to be taken with a hefty pinch of salt.
But in a year when a degree from the Muhammad Ali school of bragging seems essential if a new band are to create a stir, Suede's boastful assumptions are being taken seriously.
Bernard Butler knows this and he hardly seems surprised.
‘A lot of people don't want to be in the best band in the world because they don't give a shit about themselves,’ he remarks flatly, still playing with his half empty bottle of water.
‘I can't possibly understand that.
I want to be in the best band in the world, it's simple!
Suede don't admire obscure little indie bands; we admire the Stones and The Beatles, megastars who've written great records.’
Having cruelly ignored the band for two years as they dragged their own equipment between some of London's less than prestigious live dives, people are finally beginning to wake up to the idea of Suede.
Listening to their instantly infectious debut single, released to near-hysterical reviews earlier this summer, it's painfully obvious that Suede refuse to fit into the current indie rock scene.
Taking more than a passing interest in the glam rock movement of the '70s, Suede's debut — with it's thick pounding drum intro, drawled Bowie-like vocals and brash bursts of chugging guitar — was never likely to pass unnoticed.
Bernard claims that was exactly how it was planned.
‘I always loved bands who've had classic debut singles,’ he says.
‘We all knew it wasn't going anywhere (it peaked just outside the Top 40 ) but that wasn't an excuse to release any old rubbish.
The Drowners says quite a lot about Suede as a concept in that it showcases the way we work rhythms into a song, the aggressive bite of the guitar lines, the drawled vocals and the kind of things it talks about.’
While Bernard will gladly talk for hours about the ambiguous sexual imagery present in everything Suede do — from the photos on their record sleeves to their live performances — his real love, besides his guitar playing, is ultimately songwriting.
The lyrics are left solely to Brett, while the pair of them will spend hours together finely tuning Bernard's musical ideas.
But when it comes to discovering those original chord sequences, it's not all late night slaving over an acoustic guitar.
‘Quite often I write songs in my head,’ he claims, before getting up to answer a phone call from Brett, looking to arrange rehearsal times.
‘Metal Mickey was basically written in my head.
I started off with a rhythm idea inspired by Cher's Shoop, Shoop Song .
I just love the jumpy rhythm on that track and I'm not ashamed to say it!
I've always loved those '60s pop songs with the massive bass sound and that really inspired me to write Metal Mickey 's really stomping beat in a childish way.
With that beat I needed a really stomping guitar line to go with it so I worked it through in my head and then worked out the chords on the piano.
I decided early on that it should have the most ridiculous big chorus I could think of…’
Expressing his absolute contempt of bands who rely on ambient, effect-heavy swirling guitar sounds, Bernard insists his own playing will never take a back seat musically.
He's proud of his guitar style, he says, and he has every intention of showing it off.
‘The whole thing about Suede,’ he explains, ‘is that, if it's worth doing, it's worth doing well!
We try and make everything as good as it can be and I write guitar lines that will be heard.
With Metal Mickey the chorus has got a guitar line melody.
I do try and write guitar lines that could virtually be melodies for a vocal.
I'm not at all interested in just providing background noise.
If that was the case I'd play a synthesiser.’
As it is, Bernard has no intention of trading in his guitar for anything you might see in a Kraftwerk video.
Pulling a heavily ‘Suede'-stickered guitar case from under his bed, his eyes seem to light up when he opens it to reveal a cherry sunburst Les Paul.
This, he claims, is the only guitar he ever wanted.
‘I had to have this exact guitar,’ he claims.
‘It had to be this colour and everything.
I always wanted one because Johnny Marr from the Smiths had one.
I know that sounds quite sad and it's embarrassing that I copied him, but I can't help it because I thought it looked so great on him.
‘And Les Pauls are just beautiful guitars to play,’ he adds.
‘The sound is so rich and the pickups are so strong.
The workmanship is just classic as well.’
Both in the studio and on stage Bernard relies on his two early '60s Vox AC30s for the ‘aggressive growl’ they give his guitar sound.
But while his amps are always present at recording sessions, that's not always the case with his Les Paul.
Bernard's choice of guitar is decided by the kind of sound he's looking to achieve on a particular song.
‘It's good to get different guitar sounds,’ he insists.
‘If you're layering guitars onto a track, it's not good to layer a Gibson through a Vox over and over again.
It's OK if you're playing the same lines over and over again to thicken up the sound but if you're playing different lines within the song as overdubs I often use different guitars to achieve different effects.’
Having spent 7 years mastering the fine art of playing the violin, Bernard, feeling creatively stifled by ‘middle aged people telling me what I was doing wrong’, chose to change his instrument after hearing Johnny Marr on the first Smiths records.
‘I'd never really had a guitar hero before then.
I'd never been interested in guitarists as guitarists until I heard Johnny Marr.
I never really listened to The Beatles and looked out for the guitar, I'd just listen to the song as a whole.
But Johnny Marr really did something for me and he's virtually the reason I started playing the guitar.
‘The first time I saw him, I just thought he was unbelievably cool!
He had this mop-top and the shades and he looked great!
He had a classic Rickenbacker and you could really hear what he was playing.
It was maybe because in their early days The Smiths were so simple sound-wise, the guitar was so thin and the sound was fairly quiet and you could hear these intricate little lines which were really pretty to the ear.
The riff at the beginning of This Charming Man has just got to be one of the best guitar riffs ever!
It's ridiculously good.
When I heard it I just couldn't believe that someone had written it.
‘But I've never just listened to Johnny Marr,’ Bernard continues.
‘I would listen to bands like Joy Division as well and there was a stark difference between the guitar playing of those two bands.
I got into a band when I was 13 playing melodic punk.
I wrote all the songs and they were awful but that's the way you mature.
It wasn't until Suede that I started to forge my own identity.
‘After the Smiths I had been playing the guitar for a few years and I was listening to things like Aztec Camera and Orange Juice.
I used to love Roddy Frame's playing in Aztec Camera.
He was absolutely great and I couldn't believe he was only 16 when he wrote Oblivious .
I was completely pissed off that I was 16 and I hadn't done it yet.
It was about then I was trying to move towards some really simple guitar pop and even some slightly more outrageous playing.’
This more ‘outrageous’ guitar style involved coming to terms with the dreaded guitar solo.
Bernard leafs through the vast vinyl collection propped up against his bedroom wall, and pulls out a freshly-purchased copy of Television's ‘Marquee Moon’ to illustrate Tom Verlaine's mastery of the tasteful, moving solo.
If he were feeling particularly arrogant he could justifiably demonstrate his point by playing the heavy metal ballad-like solo on Suede's Where The Pigs Don't Fly or even the absolutely stunning Keith Richards-style solo on Metal Mickey .
So just where does Bernard stand on the great guitar solo debate?
Tasteful or tacky?
‘Well if a guitar solo is played right it can sound absolutely great, but 99 times out of a 100 they won't sound great and they're a waste of time.
I'm scared that sometimes I go over the top with too many solos in the one song, but I try and keep them as simple as I can.
I think I go for clichéd solos in a way.
One of our live tracks,Moving , has got a solo that's really a speed metal solo, but it actually sounds fine because it works.
The thing about the solo is that it should really be a chance for the guitar to take over from the vocalist and really hit you in the heart like vocals can, and I'm sorry but these heavy metal solos can never really hit you because it's just music by numbers.’
Before we go our separate ways, Bernard opens up his case and pulls out his Les Paul for one last time today.
He strokes it with care, removing a little fleck of dust from the scratchplate and leaves me with one of those great Suede quotes.
‘I love this guitar,’ he beams.
‘It looks as if it's been made out of a tree and it feels lovely.
I just can't see the point of trying to look good on stage if you've got a horrible piece of yellow plastic hanging around your neck.
I don't want to look good in photos…
I want to look absolutely great!’
Paul Rogers 
THE HIGH It never was a good year for the ‘Roses, maintains Andy Couzens, a guitarist who's finally found his niche…
‘Talk about being desperate to get back out on the road, but we were actually counting down the days between finishing the album and starting this tour,’ quoth guitarist Andy Couzens.
‘As usual, I was the last one to finish…
The others like to make me wait!’
The new album, ‘Hype’, is more guitar-based than The High's debut which, forged as it was in the wake of Manchester's nebulous ‘baggy’ explosion, suffered from rather inappropriate comparisons with the Stone Roses and Happy Mondays.
Is ‘Hype’ the kind of material they'd originally felt they wanted to do?
‘The band had only been together a couple of months before we started recording that album, so we didn't have time to think about it too much — we just went in and did it.
But it was a bit difficult for us, and perhaps it didn't really represent our sound.
I felt that we needed more energy on record.
Our first single from ‘Hype’ has got the feel that we wanted, with a really live guitar sound.
‘It's funny how it evolved, too.
When we got into the studio, I got Gibson to send a few guitars down for a try-out and I ended up using them the whole way through the album.
It was just one of those situations where you find just the sound you're looking for at that particular time.
Up till then I'd been using Rickenbackers, and a ‘65 Telecaster I'd bought which had been my main instrument for writing the material.
It's a great guitar, which I also used for most of the rhythm parts, but then the Les Pauls just took over!’
The CD single of Better Left Untold has two very different sounding tracks to back it up.
Hickory Smoke , for instance…
‘When you're writing stuff, these kinds of songs come out and you know you're never going to use them seriously, but we had such a laugh when we were playing about with that one, we decided to use it on the single.
The riff in it sounds like a hillbilly stomp, so it was a case of, ‘Anyone got a map of the States?’ then find as many town names as possible…’
As for Andy's obviously varied influences, his Dad is cited as being initially responsible…
‘When I was a kid, my Dad was into Pink Floyd and Led Zeppelin, so he tainted me with all that, then I got into the punk thing when that was going down.
I like a lot of old Atlantic Soul stuff, too — guitarists like Steve Cropper — but it is mainly guitar-oriented material.
‘Although I was interested in music, I didn't bother playing until I was about 17.
Even then I started out as a singer, until it struck me that I'd absolutely no chance of making it — something to do with having an absolutely diabolical voice, I think.
I always wanted to play the guitar, though, so I went the usual route: buy the guitar and play along to records.’
Rumour has it that The High had all been living separate musical lives — Andy in particular having just split with the Stone Roses — when they met in Manchester's Hacienda club, and decided to put a new band together…
But doesn't every band from that area maintain that they met in the Hacienda?
‘Sounds like the record company has been writing the stories again.
We all knew each other anyway — I've known Si the bass player and Chris the drummer for years — but it was one of those places where everyone was going at the time, where you could meet other musicians and bounce some ideas around.
The Hacienda wasn't the only place, but it became the best known, obviously.
‘When we met up, I didn't have any ideas at all— it just happened.
After the Stone Roses experience I wasn't going to do anything again, I was so sick of it all.
But I bumped into Chris who'd been doing some session work with Steve (Buzzcocks ) Diggle, who was looking for a guitar player to do a few gigs, and Chris kind of trapped me into that.
But I enjoyed it so much, I thought we should get something going.’
What was the main problem with the Roses as far as Andy was concerned?
‘I was just so fed up with all the internal politics.
I mean, I like playing, and they're the band that don't play…a situation which doesn't seem to have changed very much.
They've just painted themselves into a corner.
‘It's much healthier now in that the songs are all band compositions.
For the first set of songs, I had more to do with that side mainly because I'm the guitarist, and I sit down with the guitar for 3 or 4 hours every day, so there's always a riff there.
Because I hadn't been in a band for so long, there were plenty to choose from…
We just got in there and hammered them out!’
Since the release of ‘Somewhere Soon’, The High have shared stages with the likes of BB King and Robert Cray.
‘That was a complete accident,’ Andy volunteers, modestly.
‘We were offered a gig at a festival in Denmark, which we didn't know anything about, turned up with the gear, and we were on after BB King, and before Robert Cray, plus Bob Dylan was on later on — definitely not the worst billing we've ever been on.
We got on really well with Robert Cray especially.’
The High's record company remixed then re-released their first single Box Set Go to considerable success, even though they weren't exactly bowled over by the idea.
Given this history of production abuse, how did they find the right producer for ‘Hype’?
‘It was a really long-winded affair.
We started with Martin Hannett two years ago when we began writing, and of course Martin died.
After a gap of two or three months we moved on to Chris Kinsey, who's done the last six or seven Stones albums among other things.
We did six tracks with Chris, but we didn't gel with him at all, we needed someone who could offer more inspiration.
Steve Brown's name came up, and we thought we'd do one track with him, but we got on great, which solved that problem.
‘We feel much more confident about touring now, and the set is much ‘harder’ than previously.
When we toured with the Inspiral Carpets — which was good for us to do at that point — we'd only done 20 gigs as a band, and weren't experienced in the ‘problems’ of a support act like monitors being mysteriously unplugged during the performance, and an ever-shrinking stage, but we still did the business!
‘On this tour, we've got a lot more material to choose from, and we're sorting out the set as we go along.
I'm still playing tricks on the rest of the band by shouting out a number on stage that we haven't rehearsed!’
GK 
DAVE HOLE Australia's slide blues wizard on supporting Gary Moore and tasting worldwide success at the tender age of 42…
I always thought Australia's finest export came in a cold can — until I heard the incredible slide playing of ex-patriate Dave Hole.
Just like Walter Trout, 42 year-old Dave has been making his European debut courtesy of Dutch record label Provogue, and the album ‘Short Fuse Blues’ is receiving very favourable recognition with blues fans everywhere.
Gary Moore was so impressed he asked Dave to open his Midnight Blues tour earlier this year.
Dave's unusual over-the-neck slide technique took the audiences by storm, and Gary has extended the invite to his prestigious Albert Hall concert dates this October.
Over in Australia, Dave has played everywhere from the tough mining towns of the North to the blues clubs on his home turf of Perth.
He cites a whole list of musical influences from Elmore James, Son House and Robert Nighthawk to Stevie Ray Vaughan, Duke Robillard and Ronnie Earl.
America's Alligator Records are the latest label to recognise Dave's talents, so after 20 years on the Western Australian gig circuit, could 1992 be the start of something big for Dave Hole?
‘I was born in Cheshire but emigrated to Australia when I was only 4!’
Dave explains.
‘So I guess that makes me pretty much an Aussie!
I've always lived in the Western part and played guitar here since I was 16.
It's been a hectic schedule, because for the last 20 years I've been playing about 300 gigs a year, including trips to the Northern Territories and the South West.’
How does the blues appeal to Australian audiences?
‘It fits really well…sort of drinking music, which is almost the national pastime!
But seriously, there is something of a revival just like everywhere else at the moment, although blues has always had a strong following in Australia — that's why I've been able to make a living all these years.
‘In the early days it was really difficult to find records.
Back in the '60s, you could never find anything by Jimmy Reed or people like that.
I got together with a school friend when I was 12 — I'd just started playing guitar — and we played Beatles and Stones numbers, but then he got hold of a Muddy Waters album and that just blew us away!
From that point we searched and searched for blues music and eventually we evolved into a ‘blues band’.
It was so difficult in Australia to get that kind of music on record the ones we did get became very influential; in fact we wore the bloody things out!
‘American blues artists didn't tour Australia back then; it was only when I visited London in 1972 I saw BB King — that justtook me apart.
I'd never seen anything like it.
Things have changed now of course, but acts tend to tour just the Eastern side, so Western Australia still misses out because it's such a bloody hike from Adelaide to Perth.’
Tell us about your slide technique…
‘I'd been playing ‘normally’ for about 10 years, then in about 1975 I started to try slide.
It just grew and grew — I related to it more and found that the repertoire became more and more slide, so now the set is about 70% slide.
I'd read on the back of a record about open tunings, so the first thing I did was follow Elmore James and tune to D.
‘My style of playing over the top of the neck was just an accident.
When I was learning, I broke my little finger.
I had to have a cast on it and I couldn't play guitar at all in any fashion.
Eventually, I found I could hang the slide on my index finger and doodle around that way.
I amused myself for about a month doing that, but when I got the cast taken off I found it uncomfortable to play conventional style — so I've always felt right at home playing over the neck.
People who haven't seen me play, but have heard the album, say it sounds a little bit different.
‘It does have disadvantages, though.
When you want to fret notes or play chords, you have to duck back around the neck and you haven't got an index finger to use!
I've managed to overcome the problems and I get around quite quickly — but I've got chunks knocked out of the back of all my necks where the slide catches!’
Your main guitar isn't normally associated with slide playing…
‘It's a Gibson 345 Stereo, but I've rewired it mono.
I saw BB King use one when I was in London in 1972.
When I got back to Australia, I saw this one in a music store and just had to have it.
American guitars weren't always easy to obtain.
I remember there was a big; story in one of the newspapers because a guy had got hold of a Telecaster — they made a big feature of it!
Of course this was about 1965, and things have obviously changed, but there has been no kind of ‘vintage’ guitar market in Australia — except those bought in from America…
It's probably a similar situation in England.
‘I had to start off with a Japanese Top 40 guitar — inch high action!
Then I moved on to an Australian made Maton which was really playable.
Eventually I got hold of a Telecaster, but nowadays, apart from the 345, I use Strats and Duo Sonics with a metal slide rather than glass.
I like to have a fairly tough action, and for slide I'll string from a 16 gauge top to a 58 bottom.
For non-slide playing I prefer a light set: 11 to 52.
I have trouble finding the heavier strings because I prefer flatwounds.
For me the flatwound third strings only last a couple of gigs, and you can't buy them separately, so I'm buying a set of D'Addario Chromes…
It gets expensive!
For amps I'm using a THD (Tweed Fender Bassman 4x10 style ) and an old white Tolex Fender Bassman piggyback set up with a Marshall 4x12 cabinet.
I also use a Boogie and split the signal from a foot pedal to two amps usually.
I like to use an Ibanez Tube Screamer quite a bit; I have other pedals like EQ, delay and compressor, but I hardly use them.’
How does the future look?
‘Well I'm really looking forward to opening for Gary Moore at London's Albert Hall next month, and I'll be doing some club dates in the UK just before that.
America looks to be an exciting prospect now that Alligator Records have released my album over there, so after 20 years hard slog it's coming together at long last …’
MAKING TRACKS This month we look at an 8-track from Tascam, plus a rack-mountable tuner and the mysterously titled Power Tool…
PIECES OF EIGHT Tascam 238 Syncaset 8-Track Recorder
While 8-track cassette recorders aren't new, in some cases the amount of signal isolation between tracks is at best poor, and so they haven't really been regarded as the way to upgrade.
Tascam's 238S isn't immune from the problem, although it's certainly not bad.
In fact, I found it more than acceptable for demo and even semi-pro quality master tapes, and it's perfect for, say, making albums for selling at gigs.
The 238S takes standard cassettes — the shorter ones from C90 down are better because increased tape thickness gives better stability.
Where space is at a premium the 268S also scores highly because it's rack mounting and takes up only 3U of space — ideal if your home studio doubles as bedroom/study/broom cupboard.
The control layout is easy to understand and the tape transport system is microprocessor controlled to aid stability — it's one of the best around I think.
The 238S is also capable of handling MIDI/FSK sync tones and SMPTE time code for syncronising MIDI sequencers, and there's an optional remote control and footswitch for hands-free operation.
Tape speed is fixed to run at 3 ¾ips, which is twice normal cassette speed, but by engaging the tape speed select switch it can be altered to run up to 20% faster or slower, or take its speed from a SMPTE controller.
The cassette housing with the controls (rec, play, FF etc.) underneath is set out as you'd expect to find on any conventional 2-track recorder, except that additional control buttons will also come into play for recording, monitoring, rehearsing, dropping in etc.
These controls are Counter Reset and TRT (tape run time) with the relevant counter displays sited above.
‘Autolocator’ buttons can be used to locate and recall specific points on the tape, or check these locations and automatically return the tape to the main counter return point at 0000.
You can also repeat a specified section of tape by using the Loc 1 and Loc 2 buttons, also in the Autolocator section.
This facility is useful for rehearsing a piece of music, or for setting the EQ or effects on any of the tracks for mixdown without having to laboriously switch by hand.
There is also a RHSL (rehearsal) button for trying out drop-ins without committing anything to tape, while an Auto in/out switch allows the drop-in point to be selected automatically.
The Tascam's DBX noise reduction can be switched in and out, and status LEDs for channel groups 1–4 and 5–8 are provided.
The tape shuttle control and its associated LED are also sited on the front panel.
The shuttle can roll the tape forward or backward at continuously variable speed while monitoring the playback — useful for cueing out, or locating exact edit points.
Overall, the 238's layout is very easy to get on with, and it doesn't take long, even for a first-timer, to get the hang of operating the buttons.
IN USE
To try out the 238 Syncaset I recorded a track using a drum machine on tracks 1–2, rhythm guitar doubled onto tracks 3 and 4 (then mixed and bounced onto track 8, then bounced again through a compressor/noise gate back onto track 3), bass guitar onto track 4, harmony lead guitars onto tracks 5 and 6 (again bounced onto track 8 and mixed back to track five with delay), lead vocal on track 6, first vocal harmony detuned using the pitch control on track 7 and second harmony in normal pitch on track 8.
Operating the 238S requires a separate mixer, which I actually find easier than using an all-in-one machine because working alone and trying to remember complicated bounces and mixes and all the things which have to go on tape is hard enough, so routing signals through the desk seems to make more sense to an already cluttered mind.
Quality-wise the drum tracks came out very well indeed and any degradation in signal and tone was not noticeable to my ears.
Bouncing the rhythm and lead guitars and reprocessing them was, I admit, a bit over the top but, even so(apart from a slight dulling of the sound, easily compensated for in the final mix), I thought the results were very good.
The bass guitar was DI'd and compressed but I wasn't very happy with the final sound; I actually got a much better result by miking an old HH bass combo.
Achieving a good sound this way determined that it wasn't the recorder at fault but the desk.
My guitar sounds were generated by a DI'd Marshall JMP-1 preamp for the rhythm tracks and a miked-up Ampeg AX-44C valve/solid-state combo for lead.
I thought the 238S could have handled the top end slightly better; the lead guitar suffered from lack of cut because of the DBX noise reduction, but without it there was too much tape hiss to produce any acceptable recording.
Obviously the tones are sharper without DBX but the 238S does seem to generate quite a lot of noise on its own.
Vocals went straight down with only the minimum of top end EQ to keep them sharp, and when I went for the final mixdown I have to say I was amazed at how big a sound was coming back from the monitors.
There was slight muddying of some tones, and the bass end could be made so heavy that it wiped out the rest of the mix, but with some careful EQ'ing during mixdown I ended up with a result which would be more than acceptable as a demo tape.
Had I spent a little more time with it I could have justified asking money for my very first attempt at using the Tascam 228!
CONCLUSION
It's difficult to fault Tascam's 238 Syncaset.
It's a well set out machine and using it became second nature after just a couple of hours.
I also like it because it doesn't offer any false promises of amazing results; instead, what it has to offer is a reasonably priced, workable upgrade from four tracks to eight with a more than creditable end result (as long as the guidelines in the manual and certain obvious rules are observed).
For the home studio or the small commercial demo setup a multitrack like this is going to be a real benefit.
Even the amount of time saved by not having to fiddle with reel-to-reel tapes is noticeable, and in a home environment where space is at a premium it helps with the problem of tape storage.
Considering the overall sound quality and taking into account how much is in such a compact package the retail price of a touch under £1500 might seem a tad high, but it compares more than favourably with reel-to-reel machines aimed at the same market.
In fact, from the simplicity aspect alone it could well mark the beginning of the end for reel-to-reels around the small studio, but of course only time will tell…
RRP: £1499.00 inc VAT
For further information please contact 
DOLLARS AND CENTS Peterson R450 Strobe Tuner
If you've ever looked up at a stage and seen a strange device with an illuminated spinning dial and wondered what it was, chances are it was a strobe tuner.
Peterson Strobe Tuners in particular have been used for years by professional musicians because of their superior accuracy.
The company has been making tuning devices for over thirty years and the R450 is the latest in their product line.
Based on the portable 450 unit the R450 is basically the same tuner, only this time rack-mountable.
While it might look a bit strange, even antiquated, to anyone who has only ever thought of guitar tuners as pocket sized oblong boxes with LEDs or a needle and a retail price of around forty quid, the Peterson's ability to accurately tune any musical instrument is known throughout the music industry.
The 3U high layout of the R450 makes it as easy to understand and use as any pocket tuner.
On the left hand side of the front panel is the on/off switch with the strobe display alongside.
Behind this fan-shaped window is the strobe disc.
Put simply, the pattern on the disc stands still when the selected note is in tune.
If the pattern moves clockwise the string is sharp, anticlockwise it's flat.
Along the sides of the window are numbers 1 to 7, indicating the octave bands; for guitarists, A-440Hz is highlighted.
The strobe disc itself has a red transparent filter to reduce glare from ambient light and for enhancing the clarity of the strobe.
The note to be tuned is selected by using the rotary pot to the right of the strobe display, labelled ‘Note’.
The second rotary pot marked ‘Vernier’ allows the frequency of the note to be raised or lowered from A-440 concert pitch.
Again, anticlockwise movement on the control flattens the pitch while clockwise raises it.
The dial is marked for A-440, A-442 and A-435 standard pitches, as well as by degrees of 100th of a semitone, or ‘cents’.
So, for example, when the Note selector is set to E and the Vernier knob is set to 25 cents sharp, the pitch of the tuning will be raised by one quarter of the frequency difference between E and F.
Below the vernier is an illuminated mute button which shuts down the output socket sited on the far right, so when the tuner is put in line between the guitar and amp it mutes the signal after the tuner, for silent tuning on stage.
The input socket is to the left of the output and both are repeated on the back panel.
Sited between the input socket and the mute switch is the onboard mic for acoustic instruments.
This is so sensitive that in a noisy office it can pick up an unamplified solid electric guitar from about 12 inches and show the exact pitch on the strobe.
CONCLUSION
While it may look slightly imposing, in reality the R450 is as easy to use as any tuner you've ever tried.
However, in the professional world, little plastic boxes are not the order of the day, even though for everyday tuning needs they are more than adequate.
The R450 handles special tunings equally well and it's also spot on when it comes to setting up guitars; if this tuner shows your intonation to be out then it's out.
After all, a guitar tech's job has to depend on such accuracy, and if it were my job then I'd rather put my faith in the R450 than a box-load of pocket tuners.
In fact, while the R450 is here I'm using it to set up my own guitars, all of which I tuned first with a normal tuner.
And while they're close, the R450 is allowing me to get them absolutely spot on.
Of course there are other rack-mounting tuners on the market which are probably just as accurate and reliable, but when it comes to professional credibility Peterson Strobe Tuners are still the thing to go for; even voltage surges and variations in temperature won't upset them.
Peterson have no pretensions about selling these racks to the masses, because of course they're really for well-heeled professionals, and a pocket tuner (which costs about a tenth of the price of the R450) really is adequate for most things.
However, in order to sway you over to their way of thinking, Peterson might paraphrase the old adage and say, ‘Look after the cents and the dollars will take care of themselves…’
RRP: £449.00
For further information please contact .
TOOLED UP PS Systems Power Tool
More and more modern amplifiers feature a direct recording facility.
But who's taking care of those guitarists who want to use their 100 watt stack in the bedroom?
Well, we recently reviewed a couple of power attenuators by Palmer, and now the American company PS Systems have launched a product to help you run an amp flat out, but at a volume that won't offend even the most sensitive ears.
The Power Tool is a type of power soak, but according to the user's guide it has a reactive load identical to that of a speaker cabinet.
This supplies varying impedances, in the same way that working speakers do — unlike ordinary power soaks which supply a fixed impedance.
And that's not all.
Housed in its 2U 19″ rack format is a four-band EQ section, variable level line-out with three voicing options, a variable amplifier output controlling the Power Tool's internal 50 watt solid state amp, also with voicing options, and a headphone socket with adjustable level.
The front panel starts with three ‘traffic light’ LEDs; the green shows a signal is present, the amber shows it's running at its nominal level while the red warns of clipping distortion.
Alongside these are a pair of input control pots for ‘amp in’ level and ‘line in’level.
Amp In controls the level going into the Power Tool from the amp's speaker output, while Line Level is used when connecting outboard preamps or effect devices to the Power Tool.
It's possible to use a normal setup, with amplifier, Power Tool and speaker cabinet, introduce an external preamp into the sound at the same time and DI the sound from the Power Tool direct into a mixer (that's possibly a bit over the top, but it can be done).
Where the Power Tool is really impressive is in its active EQ section.
This consists of four rotary pots for Bass, Mid, Treble and Presence, each one offering cut or boost of 18dB across its given frequency.
Because the Power Tool's EQ is added to the sound after your amplifier it can drastically change the tone produced at the end of the chain, especially in the lower frequencies.
The Line Out and Amplifier Out controls each have a second pot for selecting the Power Tool's exclusive ‘Instigator’ circuit.
The Instigator provides frequency response to allow an open backed cab to sound like a sealed cab.
The control has three settings: Dry, for a straight signal; Open, simulating an open-backed cabinet; and ‘4x12’, simulating a 4x12 cab.
The Amp Out section has just two settings: Off, for a straight amp signal and ‘4x12’ which really does transform the sound into that of a full-sized cab.
Finally, there's a headphone socket which takes its signal from the Power Tool's own amplifier and so has to be controlled by a level pot which sits alongside.
The rear panel houses a balanced line out XLR, an unbalanced jack (See Doctor Robert for an explanation of ‘balanced’ and ‘unbalanced’) and an earth lift.
There are two speaker outputs, plus an effects loop and ‘line in’ and ‘amp in’sockets.
But be warned, the Power Tool can only cope with the output from a 100 watt amp; anything bigger will prove a useful test for your smoke detectors!
IN USE
I decided to try the Power Tool in two ways: the first using a stack, with the amp set to full shred; the second with a Vox AC30 on full tilt, but with the Power Tool bringing down the volume to bedroom level.
In both cases I recorded the results through a Fostex desk to find out how the Power Tool translates these sounds to tape.
I set the stack's volume so high that it was painful, but with a sound fat and ballsy enough for any rocker.
Using the Power Tool as instructed I was able to reduce the volume without losing the dirt.
Some tone did go, but this was more than compensated for by the Power Tool's onboard EQ.
At a very tolerable volume level I managed to produce the sound of a heavily overdriven amp at full tilt, but at a volume where Granny could still hear The Archers.
Switching to the 4x12 setting the Instigator actually improved on the sound of the 4x12, which was no longer overdriving its speakers.
Recorded, the sound was really tight and rich, and matching the Power Tool to the mixer was easy.
The EQ had to be re-tweaked and so did the mixer's, but the end result was a very powerful rock guitar sound indeed.
The cab simulator I think sounded best on Open, and I would have settled on the ‘4x12’ setting as my next choice.
However, Dry was really fizzy and horrible, and the least said about it the better.
The AC30 test was disappointing by comparison, and I'll own up and say that whatever I did, I couldn't get the Power Tool to accurately attenuate the sound of the amp driven flat out.
I could get all sorts of reasonable tones, but live or recorded I wasn't hearing the sound of an AC30; all I could hear was the Power Tool's solid state amp and the massive amount of EQ I was adding and taking away.
CONCLUSION
As a means of attenuating a stack or combo the Power Tool is certainly a versatile proposition.
It also offers a very impressive solution to one of guitar recording's biggest problems: getting heavy distortion onto tape.
I wouldn't say it's the answer in every case, especially when a ‘classic’ sound source is required to sound classic at a low level.
That said, versatility could be the Power Tool's middle name, and in a serious rock player's rack or studio I could see it being permanently in use.
RRP: £449.00 inc VAT
For further information please contact 
London Vintage Show
If the news of the London Guitarist Show's demise has left you shaky, sleepless and generally off your feed, then relax.
This year's London Music Show at Wembley will have just as many guitars, just as many basses, just as many amps, the same mind-boggling array of talent on stage.
In fact it's the same show, still sponsored by us, but this time there's also percussion, synthesisers, PA and recording equipment to try and buy.
In other words, fire up the Transit, shove every member of the band inside, come down and make thorough, absolute pigs of yourselves.
And if you need more encouragement, remember that your fiver will also get you into our very first ‘Vintage And Collectable’ show, unearthing a plethora of oldies including Gibsons, Fenders, Martins, Gretsches and more — some expensive, some cheap, and some just plain weird.
Come down to haggle or just to window shop, and bring your own mystery guitars for identification or valuation.
It'll be a great weekend — don't miss it!
Wembley Exhibition Centre
Saturday 28th November (10am–6pm)
Sunday 29th November (10am–5pm)
‘57 Gretsch 6120 courtesy of Guitar Workshop, Newcastle
STRANGE BREW Chandler 555 Where will it all end, this retro-frenzy currently consuming the guitar world?
Rick Bateysifts through the veritable medley of classic influences that make up the latest sepia-tinted offering from Chandler in San Francisco…
As designers dig ever deeper for traditional guitar designs ripe for modernisation, we're getting some interesting-looking instruments.
Where have you seen this body shape before?
Probably in an old photo of Lennon banging out barre-chords in some dive off the Reeperbahn.
It's basically the body that Rickenbacker introduced first on the Combo 650 and Combo 850 guitars back in 1957, the same shape they later carried over to Lennon's favourite, the model 325.
Where have you seen this blonde, almost greyish colour before?
On a '50s Fender Telecaster.
And the bridge, with the strings going through to the back of the body?
It's like a non-trem Strat.
How about the pickups?
Elementary, my dear Watson; they're from the Gibson Firebird.
And so the list goes on…
Until recently Chandler have busied themselves producing guitar parts and accessories — everything from high-quality necks and exotic wood bodies to various pickups and just about every guitar-orientated nut and bolt you can think of.
But now they've come up with two original-design guitars.
The first is the ‘Austin Special’, drawn up by Ted Newman-Jones in Texas and sporting a six-in-line headstock, three of those shimmery-sounding lipstick-tube pickups and a body that looks like someone left a black Les Paul out to melt in the sun, and the second is our review guitar, the Chandler ‘555’.
We rang Paul Chandler in San Fransisco for the full story.
‘The 555 is designed entirely by Fred Sampson, a professional musician and designer who's done a lot of work with Tom Scholtz,’ explained Paul.
‘We've been doing replacement parts for many years and although that's still a big part of our business, I wanted to sell complete, good-quality guitars and the Austin Special and the 555 are just perfect for us.
‘People seem to like the vintage vibe the 555 has.
When I was a kid it was great because you could go to the music store, put down your money and get something like an SG Junior — not an expensive guitar but a really good guitar all the same, a guitar you could keep for life.
That's what we're aiming for here — trying to make individually-designed guitars with real integrity that you can take right down off the shelf and use at a gig.’
You wouldn't call the 555 exactly normal-looking.
To be fair, the combination of the butterscotch finish and the black scratchplate is perhaps the livery that suits the 555 least; the other options are black and transparent red, both with white scratchplates, which sounds more promising.
But we all like the way they've borrowed the Rickenbacker body — it's a very cute design.
Alder is the wood, and although it could be a touch thinner — at 44mm thick, it looks rather blocky — Chandler have thoughtfully given the back edges a big, soft radius and it's a very comfortable little guitar to hold, sitting or standing.
It's also a very spooky guitar to hold, because the headstock is completely straight, in line with the neck, which almost makes it look like it's pointing forwards .
The reason Chandler can get away with this is because they've chosen to use a slotted headstock with side-mounted Kluson machines, and that's what gives the strings the necessary angle to stop them jumping out of the nut slots.
Mind you, both the bottom E and the top E strings rub against the woodwork between machines and nut, which is careless.
Slotted heads are rare on electric guitars, and remember that string-changing tends to be slower.
The 555's neck is maple with a rosewood fingerboard, glued in to the body in a Les Paul Junior kind of style, giving a clear run right to the top 22nd fret.
Although it has a 25½″ scale this is much more a Gibson player's neck than a Fender player's, since it's thin and very wide — 44mm at the nut.
The width, the flat 16″ fingerboard radius and the massive jumbo frets are the factors that really decide whether you like this guitar or not.
Apparently the profile was taken straight from an old late-'50s Gold Top belonging to Paul Chandler, while the Austin Special's neck was lifted from a pre-CBS Strat.
So if you like your fingerboards more cambered, either buy an Austin Special or badger Chandler and suggest what I did — that they offer a choice…
Our review guitar's setup left a fair bit to be desired.
The bridge saddles were too high and the truss rod needed a full half-turn to make the neck straight and playable.
That was all easily fixed in five minutes, but the nut slots were still far too high.
I don't know why makers leave nuts high in this way; if they have real confidence in their necks, they should set nuts up perfectly before the guitars leave the workshop.
For pickups, the 555 is armed with three of Chandler's own Firebird-style humbuckers with plain chrome covers, all scratchplate-mounted like Fender pickups.
Some original Firebirds had three pickups, but only a three-way switch; as well as master volume and tone controls, the 555 links its pickups to a five-way slider switch for extra variation.
‘I've been working personally with these pickups for some time, putting them on Teles and Strats and all kinds of things,’ says Paul.
‘They have the same basic EQ as a humbucker, so you can get that really crunchy sort of distortion, but we also found that when you linked them up to a Fender-style five-way switch they had this amazing ability to clean up, like a Strat, in the in-between positions.
‘Each pickup is based around two Alnico V bar magnets, and there's a mild steel plate on the underside of each pickup.
Basically you've got two miniature coils mounted side-by-side, with the bar magnets running right through the middle of the coils, the same way as the original Firebird pickup.
People often confuse Firebird pickups with the pickups on Les Paul Deluxes or the small Epiphone humbuckers, but these ones sound a lot more focused since the Les Paul Deluxe pickups had a single Alnico magnet underneath both coils.’
These pickups are seriously great.
There's always been a ‘missing link’ in pickup sound, the gap between the traditional Gibson-style humbucker — loads of power and warmth, but often too thick and blurry for rhythm work — and the classic Fender single coil, which has all the bite and clarity you could want but needs the hands of Hendrix to make it sing.
Stacked humbuckers are one solution but Chandler's Firebird pickups cover all the bases equally well, while sounding refreshingly individual.
They've got the power and depth of a PAF but the wiry, almost shrill treble of a Telecaster on top of it all.
We're talking major league crunch here, aided and abetted by the sustain of the glued-neck construction and the vibrancy of alder and maple.
The bridge pickup is positively vicious, but if it all gets a bit too much then switch positions 2 and 4 transform the sound into something sweet enough to rot your teeth.
Lots of character, lots of variation, and lots of fun.
CONCLUSION
This is a weird but fascinating guitar.
There are some production hiccups that still need sorting and the setup should be better, but it's generally well-built, highly individual to look at and I'd recommend it to anybody just for the wonderful mixture of filth, jangle and clang that the pickups provide.
It's not cheap, especially considering the straightforwardness of the design, and there's some strong and equally nostalgic competition about.
You'd have to compare it to the Rickenbacker 650 reviewed last month — roughly the same price, but a much slicker guitar — or maybe a Hamer Special, if your tendencies are more Gibson-orientated.
Then there's the New York guitar from Patrick Eggle, several hundred pounds cheaper but with the same ugly-is-beautiful appeal, or if you're strapped for cash then the new Starfields look hard to beat.
But I've got a feeling that there's a small group of players out there who will probably play a Chandler 555 for the rest of their lives, and you'll have to play one yourself to find out why.
RRP: £799
No left-handers available.
For further information please contact 
FeedBack Letters To The Editor All of a flutter?
Something to crow about?
Aim your carrier pigeon toward ‘Feedback’ Guitarist, Alexander House, Forehill, Ely, Cambs CB7 4AF.
THE NAKED TRUTH
Dear Guitarist
Please can you or your readers help me?
It seems that I am too much of an ‘air head’ to understand the Washburn advertisement on pages 152 and 153 of the October edition of your magazine.
I have four questions…
1) Does the purchaser get a free naked woman with the MG104 guitar, or a free MG104 guitar when buying the naked woman?
2) When did Mercury — son of Jupiter — have that stunning sex change?
3) If Washburn has discovered the centre of the universe within our own solar system, how come it has taken them so long to tell anybody about it?
Professor Stephen Hawking must be making a beeline to Washburn HQ even as I write!
4) Is the Mercury poster, for which the small print invites one to send away a fiver, washable?
Yours anytime,
→ The perfect letter — brief, vicious, and elegant.
If you could send us your real address, Anne, along with your ‘distinctive’ signature so we can be sure it's you, a year's subscription will be yours…
SIX SHOT
Dear Guitarist
It was great to see the Oldies review of the 1969 Fender Bass VI in the September issue; this is a much neglected instrument, the worst neglect emanating from Fender themselves, who don't seem to realise what they've got.
There's been the reasonably-priced reissues of the Tele, Strat, Precision, Jazz Bass, Jag and Jazzmaster, but fans of the Bass VI (of whom there are plenty) have to search out old examples and pay the earth for them: witness an asking price of £1295 for a post-CBS ‘blockmarker’ model.
It would be nice to see Fender do a £400 Japanese reissue of the 1962 ‘dot-fret’ model; with demand like that, it would sell.
I have to say, though, that my pleasure in reading the article was modified a little by other aspects of it.
Gibson Keddie might argue that Jack Bruce is the most famous exponent of the Bass VI, but the argument isn't convincing.
I'm sure that Jack himself (who didn't really exploit its potential) would defer to the earlier use of the model by Jet Harris, who recorded with it as early as April 1962, a few weeks after he had left The Shadows.
His Main Title Theme showcased the capabilities of the 6-string bass as a lead voice — surely you've heard of him?
True, Jack is more famous, but it is Jet who is indelibly linked with the instrument.
And other players were using the model at the same time or earlier, some as a bass (eg. Bob Bogle of The Ventures) and some as a lead instrument, such as Hank Marvin, Jet's old colleague in The Shadows.
Hank still has one and there's an ad in your classifieds for a new CD featuring Jet playing the Bass VI…
Something else I am puzzled by is Gibson's reference to the 6-string bass's ‘customary’ BEADGC tuning.
Customary in what sense?
The instrument was produced by several manufacturers 30 years ago, Gibson, Burns and Hagstrom as well as Fender, and all were tuned one octave lower than a guitar (EADGBE), with the major third interval between the second and third strings to maintain guitar fingering.
All the above (the Gibson EB6 excepted) had vibrato units too, a heavy clue as to their intended purpose.
I am aware that several newer basses feature non-standard low tuning, but it is the Fender, the Gibson, the Burns and the Hagstrom which are ‘customary’.
Come now Gibson, a little more of your usual well-balanced perspective please!
Yours historically,
PS.
Did you know that the Bass VI had a bridge-mounted mike (missing from your sample)?
→ When you think of Fender's seeming unwillingness to bring the reissues of the Indie-cred Jaguar into this country, Jim, I think we'll probably wait a very long time before a Bass VI emanates from anywhere other than the Fender Custom Shop — a facility available to the wad-carrying fanatic.
As far as exactly who was the most famous exponent of the six-string bass, I think Gibson was spot on, but I do acknowledge that Jet Harris played a considerable role in the history of the instrument.
As far as the reference to the ‘customary’ tuning of the 6-string bass, Gibson was referring to what has become the modern standard amongst contemporary players: that is, opting for the low B while keeping the fourths tuning intact across the other five strings.
PITCH SHIFTER
Dear Guitarist
Do I get a prize for being the 1000th person to point out that guitar music is written up an octave, not down, to keep it on the treble clef?
(Sept issue p.49)
→ No: but I'll agree that portion of the Metheny interview was ambiguous!
Where the confusion seems to stem from is the fact that guitar music sounds an octave lower than concert pitch.
That is to say that Middle C, at 256Hz, has its true pitch represented on the guitar at the first fret, second string.
But when it is written on the stave, middle C is played an octave lower — on the third fret, fifth string.
Hence it's dropped an octave.
I think this was the point Pat was trying to get across.
VIVA EGGLE!
Dear Guitarist
Following your enthusiastic review of the Patrick Eggle Berlin Pro in March, I was motivated to try one and subsequently purchased a deluxe model with non standard options at very reasonable cost.
I travelled to the plant to collect the guitar and was treated to a comprehensive tour of what I can confirm as an impressive facility of skilled and committed people in every department.
Tim Pollard, the Marketing Director, even extended the courtesy of collecting me from and returning me to Birmingham Airport.
A few weeks later, unbidden, a very good quality leather strap fell through my letter box — with compliments.
The instrument more than justifies your lavish praise and I am delighted with it in every respect.
Recently, I had cause to telephone the factory in pursuit of another non-standard modification — the sort of thing which can be a real pain when you have two new model lines to get into production.
However, I was immediately transferred to Glynn, a technical guy who took my fax number with the promise that he would send me a drawing that morning of the necessary mods.
as if that wasn't enough, Patrick Eggle himself telephoned within a few minutes to confer on the requested changes.
Glynn's fax duly arrived and when it became apparent that the wiring was beyond the skills of a cack-handed caveman they promptly offered to collect the guitar (I only live in Aberdeen!), modify it and return it within a few working days.
All for the sum of £50 including a setup and ‘we're building a couple of guitars for Gary Moore with a push/pull volume pot to provide the Peter Green out of phase sound.
We could do that if you like’.
If I like?!
I thought I'd died and gone to heaven!
It's little wonder that this month Patrick Eggle guitars occupy two of the top ten slots in the British guitar sales league.
In contrast, it took me months and umpteen phone calls to obtain even a brochure from a well-known American vintage manufacturer.
It's great to see this British company competing on quality and service with the established giants and winning hands down!
Yours faithfully,
→ We so often receive letters from people slamming companies for poor service, that it's nice to receive a letter from someone heaping praise upon a manufacturer for a job well done.
COMPOUND INTEREST
Dear Guitarist
I read, with interest, Rick Batey's review of the Manson Classic S series guitars in your September ‘92 issue.
Rick points out that the Manson features a compound radius fingerboard, and goes on to say what an excellent idea this is and that it is a pity that only custom builders are able to implement this feature properly.
What Rick has failed to realise is that the Yamaha Pacifica (7,9 & 12 series) also features a compound radius fingerboard, and has done since the range was introduced in 1990.
Due to Yamaha's sophisticated production facilities, the US designed Pacificas have many features which are often exclusive to custom instruments.
The Pacifica series retail between £329 and £935.
Best regards,
→ Sorry to have forgotten about the Pacifica, Graham — although, come to think of it, Charvel/Jackson might also have been in on the act back in the mid-eighties.
It's also possible to customise your own guitar to compound-radius status.
For instance, Chandler's in Kew import some extremely high-quality necks by Warmoth in the USA in just about every conceivable combination of woods, scale lengths, neck profiles and so on .
DESIGN…
Dear Guitarist
With regard to your August and September editorials on guitar design, the majority of your comments were perfectly fair but you can hardly blame guitar manufacturers for turning out what the public seems to want (currently, vintage lookalikes and the so-called superStrat).
The generic Oriental ‘identikit’ guitar which you outlined is a practical compromise package which crams the majority of popular features into a single product at a price which the average semi-pro or amateur guitarist might be prepared to pay.
Commercially speaking, building superStrats had to be a safer bet for the manufacturers than attempting to break new ground.
The insurmountable problem for contemporary designers (including the staff of Guitarist !) is that the definitive electric guitars already exist.
The Stratocaster, Telecaster, Les Paul and ES335 have certain things in common.
They all look right, are comfortable to wear, feel good to play and sound musical through virtually any sort of amplification.
These four designs — together with the Steinberger and Gibson Chet Atkins solid classical — have all the essential features which a guitarist might need but no gimmicks.
The only improvements which could be made to them are minor ones.
Repositioning the volume knob on a Strat further away from the strings, for instance.
I would argue that virtually every successful electric guitar since 1958 has owed something to one or more of the above-mentioned instruments.
The further any given design deviates from these styling norms, the smaller the quantities in which it sells (the Ultimate Guitar Book is full of such turkeys).
The better ones have been amalgamations of Gibson and Fender features with the Paul Reed Smith topping the heap.
The PRS traditional, yet improved philosophy is the very attribute which most of its buyers are looking for.
The same is true for the current crop of Fender Custom Shop guitars.
The only significant advance in guitar design, per se, in the last thirty years has come from Ned Steinberger.
Ned's headless guitar and bass are eminently correct in design terms but do not sell in large numbers because plastic guitars are not sexy.
Every other improvement for the guitar has occurred in the realms of hardware and pickups.
These items usually become immediately available to all manufacturers so that they are unlikely to give any single guitar an edge over its rivals.
Rickenbacker deserves an honourable mention for the most significant non-advance in design.
They seem to be locked in a time warp but this has become their biggest selling point because, by remaining stubbornly unlike every other manufacturer, their instruments cannot fail to be distinctive.
I am not sure what benefit Signature model guitars are supposed to impart.
I see no need for a Fender SRV Stratocaster, for example, because the most important ingredient in that particular recipe was the man himself.
Heavy gauge strings and high action apart, the Stratocaster in question was a fairly ordinary one.
It was what he did with it which was important.
No Stevie Ray, no point.
(Lee Jackson's anecdotes in the September issue concerning would-be George Lynch soundalikes bear my point out perfectly.)
I own a Fender JB Telecaster.
Forget the obvious Country music associations, I bought it because it is a bloody good straightforward electric guitar.
It combines my favourite neck profile with my favourite pickup configuration and has all its controls in the proper places.
(There was also the trifling matter of it being discounted to £650!)
The JB Tele is a simple merger of Tele and Strat features and the only obvious elements of James Burton-ness about it are the Paisley finish and its eminent suitability for recording studio work.
I would agree with all your assertions that quoting millimetre-perfect guitar dimensions is irrelevant.
Generally, guitars are (and should be) judged by touch and by listening.
The manufacturers are having to rely on hyping specification minutiae because, as you say, they have nothing truly original to offer.
Even the much-lauded Ibanez RG series is little more than a go-faster Strat in the final analysis.
The only way to build truly distinctive guitars today is to make them as ugly as possible.
Pointy-shaped guitars spell attitude and, presumably, the pointier the guitar, the more of this attribute it bestows upon its wearer.
These shapes might look cool on stage and in promotional videos but tend to be uncomfortable to wear.
Maybe this explains why the pointiness is usually confined to the headstock?
Perhaps manufacturers ought to come clean and just build pink guitars with purple headstocks?
If nothing else, such instruments would assured of a place as a prop in the next round of Trantec Systems adverts!
Yours sincerely,
…
OF THE TIMES
Dear Sirs
I think the reason a lot of guitarists go out and buy traditional Fender or Gibson-like designs has nothing to do with single coil versus humbuckers, vintage trem systems or control layout; they simply hope that some of their guitar hero's ‘mojo magic’ will rub off on them!
Yours musically,
→ I would add to N B Cherry's letter by saying that of course modern guitar design owes an awful lot to the pioneer designs of the ‘40s and '50s in very much the same sort of way that the modern motor car owes a great deal to its predecessors — that is to say, four wheels, petrol driven internal combustion engine etc., etc., you get my drift.
But I would hesitate before I based my critisicms on, say, a new Vauxhall on the premise that it was slavishly derivative of a Henry Ford original with a slightly different body shape and the knobs in different places!
DATA-BASS
Dear Guitarist
I would very much appreciate it if you could let me know the meaning of bass terminology ‘bi-amping’ and ‘preamp’.
I presently use a Peavey TNT 130 but I fail to understand the concept and use of this facility in bass amplification.
A second question which I am struggling with is whether or not there is a great deal of difference between bass flangers and guitar flangers.
I own a Yamaha FL10 MII, but I find that much of the drive and body of my bass sound is lost when I operate the flanger.
Could you advise me as to how I could solve this problem?
Would a particular setting help to maintain a punchy sound?
Cheers,
→ Bi-amping is the use of two amplifiers to work upon the different frequency bands of a single signal.
Very simply put, you'd have one amp to deal with the low end and one to deal with the upper mid of your bass signal.
You would need to ensure that each amp dealt only with its allotted frequency range and so the signal would be split using a crossover, or filter.
A preamp is the tone circuitry of your amp, before the power stage.
Its job is to condition the tonal content of your bass's signal prior to its final amplification…hence ‘pre’ amp.
As to the flanging question, in general the only difference between guitar and bass flangers is the frequency range that they are designed to work on.
Flanging, by nature, has the effect of thinning down a signal, especially if used on an extreme setting.
Try using much less effect and matters may improve.
THE WORD
Dear Guitarist
Having just shelled out for yet another year's subscription to fabbo Guitarist magazine, I was raisy-eyebrowed to see under ‘Postscript’ in September's issue: ‘…will not only win that automatic free year's Letter of the Month subscription…blah, blah, blah, blah…’
Er, excuse me, but is this a new and wondrous use of the word automatic?
My dictionary cites automatic as ‘self acting’ or more appropriately ‘carried on unconsciously’.
I can't find ‘except that twit in Barwell’ anywhere.
Yours faithfully,
→ Nice try, Warwick .
POSTSCRIPT 2
We are still eager to bestow riches beyond belief, each month, upon the author of a letter which we deem either brimming with astute observations or glowing with sharp wit.
The riches of which we speak?
A year's free subscription plus some other guitar-related goodies.
We're not going to award these prizes arbitrarily each month, either — only the very best will be good enough!
techniques
PHIL HILBORNE Solo Analysis AFTER THE WAR — GARY MOORE
Scales
This solo uses one scale type throughout: the D Aeolian mode/Natural minor scale.
There are also a number of passing notes used:
1)
A♭ — ♭5 of D in bar 5
2)
E♭ — ♭3 of C in bars 6 and 7
3)
C♯ — major 3rd of A in bar 15
Performance Notes
1)
This solo is taken from the title track of Gary Moore's ‘After The War’ album (Virgin Records Ltd. no. 409 543–630).
To my ears it sounds like a composed solo as opposed to an improvisation, and as such is very typical of his rock/metal soloing approach at that time.
2)
The trills found in bars 1–4 and bars 9–11 should be performed by picking the principal (un-bracketed) note and then by pulling-off and hammering-on in quick succession and in the appropriate rhythm to the bracketed note.
3)
In bars 5–7 there a lot of left-hand-only hammer-ons and tremolo arm slides.
As you play through this section, take care to avoid any undue handling noise.
4)
The final phrase found in bars 15–18 consists of two bars of tremolo-picked notes followed by a sustained bend.
To perform the tremolo picking part correctly you should use alternate picking, and aim to keep you right-hand wrist as relaxed as possible.
5)
This solo was played on a Hamer guitar, through Marshall amps and cabs.
My thanks for suggesting this month's solo go to Mr. F. Donavan from Milton Keynes; a couple of sets of Scalar strings, courtesy of Clive Norris at Selectron, will be sent on their way to you soon.
In the meantime, have fun!
techniques
HILBORNE'S Rock Guitar DOUBLE STOPS PART III — DEVELOPING THIRDS AND SIXTHS
In the past two articles we've seen how double stops can be derived from chords, and also some different approaches for incorporating double stops into your playing.
If you have played through all the examples, you'll have noticed how often 3rd and 6th intervals have come up; this is because the intervallic structure of most chord types rely heavily upon these two intervals.
This month, we'll be looking at some examples that should help you to develop your fluency in playing these two interval types from a scalic standpoint.
Beginning with scale-derived thirds and sixths, the first nine examples show some fingerings extracted from the scale of A major and played on all string-sets.
As you go through these, try to aim for clarity and smoothness, not just speed (and if you have a 21-fret guitar, obviously only play up as far as you can go!).
Also, make sure that you play each of these in a descending direction as well.
Another important point is that these examples can be used modally: ie. A major, B dorian, C♯ phrygian, D lydian, E mixolydian, F♯ aeolian and G♯ locrian.
Try practising them against any of the following chords: A maj, B min, C♯min, D(#4), E7, F♯m and G♯m7♭5.
Technically, examples 1–5 should be played with a pick, but muting the unrequired string as you play the sixths.
Examples 6–9 should be played using a pick/finger combination; pick the lower notes, and finger-pick the upper ones.
The next five examples contain further ideas for developing your interval-playing facility.
Due to limitations of space I've only shown these using thirds, but don't forget to apply the same ideas to sixths as well, and in in both ascending and descending directions.
Ex. 10 is a short study in ‘broken thirds’.
Play this using both alternate picking and sweep picking.
Ex. 11 and Ex. 13 are again broken third ideas, but this time connected with left-hand slides and position shifts.
Ex. 12 and Ex. 14 feature ‘resolving thirds’— two simultaneous lines, one phrased in eighth notes, and the other in quarter notes.
Make sure that you allow the notes to ‘ring into’ each other as much as possible to get the full effect of the resolving suspensions.
Finally, don't just copy these ideas.
Experiment with other ideas of your own invention, and play them using various different scale types in as many keys and in as many different musical situations as possible.
Good luck!
GERRY HOGAN Rockabilly'n'Country Licks LINDA'S DAY
In 1976, Linda Ronstadt released an album called ‘Hasten Down The Wind’(Asylum Records No. 7E-1072) which featured not only the guitars of Andrew Gold and Waddy Watchel (anyone remember seeing him with the Everlys way back on their 1973 UK tour?) but also a fine, guitar-playing steel guitarist named Dan Dugmore.
Late ‘76 saw Linda in this country with an excellent show and playing with the same guitarists that had appeared on the album.
Come to think of it, that one-year period — from late-'75 to late-'76 — was pretty good for UK music-lovers, since aside from Linda, Emmylou came over twice with James Burton in her ‘Hot Band’.
I've been asked to tab out the solo and the ending from a song from ‘Hasten Down The Wind’, Linda's version of That'll Be The Day .
In this song Andrew and Waddy play individual solos before harmonising together for the end of the solo section and for the ending lick of the song.
This month I'm only going to tab the two-bar ending, leaving the 16-bar solo for the next two issues.
Unlike Buddy Holly's version, Linda's is not in A but in E, a key which still gives some nice open-string options.
Andrew and Waddy grasp on to some of these in the ending lick, which is actually a standard blues ending which can be adapted to many tunes, particularly those of the 12-bar variety.
(Interestingly, in the December ‘89 issue of Guitarist we examined a very similar lick used by Franny Beecher of The Comets that ended Blue Comet Blues .)
Anyway, I've tabbed the two harmonised parts out separately for your ease of reading.
The main (upper) harmony is as follows:
The lower harmony goes like this:
I've tabbed the pull-offs symmetrically between the two parts, so that they should blend evenly when played together.
For harmony licks like these you'll find that where you pick and where you pull off or hammer-on really makes a difference to how the harmony sounds.
It's not just making sure that the notes harmonise, it's making sure that they're attacked in a similar manner.
The second lick this month is one of Albert Lee's, taken from the Emmylou Harris song Two More Bottles of Wine (from the 1978 album ‘To Daddy’— Warner Bros.
Records no.
BSK 3141).
This is Albert's entry to the solo; I seem to recall Emmy playing this in E♭, but I've written it in the key of D so that you won't have to ‘capo-up’ at the first fret.
You'll need to tune string 6 down to D and then pick, pull-off and hammer-on with as much percussiveness as you can muster.
I think this is one of the finest solo entries EVER!
See what you think…
I'll be back next month with the two solos from Andrew Gold and Waddy Watchel.
See you then.
JOHN CURRIE Bass Analysis MILLER KILLER
Driving around the North Circular in Walthamstow on a weekday morning is not usually an activity likely to bring a smile to one's face.
However, while North Circular-bound a few months back I was flipping through the channels on the radio trying find something decent when I came across what I later learned to be Hey from the recent ‘Upfront’ album by David Sanborn.
Initially it was the drumming that got me bouncing in my seat, but when the bass came in I just couldn't help grinning insanely at all the other drivers, wishing they could hear it too (mind you, I had it up so loud that they probably could).
I couldn't wait to finish at the studio that day so I could slip down the record shop to pick up a copy, and several months later I still haven't stopped playing it.
So I needed no more prompting than a letter from Sean Constable of Runcorn for me to choose Marcus Miller on Sanborn's Hey for this month's analysis (enjoy your Elites, Sean).
Marcus is undoubtedly one of the world's top funk bass groovers; his feel and timing are just superb.
As well as David Sanborn he has worked with Aretha Franklin, Miles Davis and Dave Grusin, not only as bass player, but as a producer too.
He is renowned for both his fingerstyle and slap playing, and both of these techniques are displayed on this instrumental track, with Marcus using his Sadowsky bass to slot in seamlessly with the irresistible drumming of Steve Jordan.
This bass part contains some relatively complex syncopated sixteenth note patterns, and you may find it takes quite some time to get these parts to settle.
So take your time to learn the phrasing, start off slowly and then build gradually to the written tempo in each case.
Above all, the notes need to be spot on while allowing the overall rhythm to flow smoothly.
So you must be relaxed to enable you to groove, but not so relaxed as to be too loose.
Notes
1)
The opening section of the tune is basically a repeating four-bar pattern with slight variations based on the E mixolydian mode (E, F♯, G♯, A, B, C♯, D) with passing notes A♯ and G*natural" pos="UNC">natural*.
2)
There's a fabulous swooping line in the C7 section which uses the C mixolydian mode (C, D, E, F, G, A, B♭) plus the flattened 3rd E♭ which adds a bluesy touch to the phrase.
Check the tab for the correct positioning here, including the slide and the hammer-on.
3)
Very James Brown, this — simple, but it still cooks!
After a bar of eighth notes comes a pair of sixteenths followed by a quarter's rest, then a long, low root — just right!
4)
The trademark Miller slap section appears on the ‘outro’ as a two-bar phrase with variations built on the E dorian mode (E, F♯, G, A, B, C♯, D) with a passing note of D♯, with a blinding eighth bar fill of sixteenth triplet mutes followed by an E blues scale type of phrase (E, G, A, B♭, B, D), also using the flattened fifth (B♭) to good effect.
CORRECTION
In last month's analysis of She's Got It Bad by Shaun Ward of Simply Red, the second half of bars 12 and 16 should read Gn, G♯, A, not G♯, A, A♯.
Sorry guys and gals!
Have a funking good time — catch you next month!
Published by Hiatus Music/Music Corp of America, a division of MCA Inc/Crazed Weasel Music/Risque Situe Music/Warner Chappell Music, Inc/BIPA Music Co, BMI/Thriller Miller Music/MCA Music Publishing, a division of MCA Inc.
ASCAP
ALAN LIMBRICK Pentatonics GO FOURTH AND MULTIPLY
This month's is going to be a very practical lesson featuring a number of phrases and riffs from various musical situations that use 4th intervals.
All the examples are made of notes from a pentatonic scale, but harmonised using 4ths to fatten them up and make them sound a bit more ‘chunky’.
4ths are of particular value to guitarists as they are one of the few intervals that consistently sound good with a distorted sound (try playing thirds with distortion, and you'll see exactly what I mean).
However, try these five examples using both clean and distorted sounds, and then make your own mind up as to which works best.
Example 1 is the hook riff from a well known Huey Lewis tune from a few years back.
Use pick and fingers for this one, and set your amp not to full distortion but to a slight overdrive.
Example 2 is a typical Hendrix-style fill which sets up either a G major chord (as in the example) or an E minor chord.
Check out the intro to Little Wing for more of this kind of 4th type fill — very useful indeed for ballads or minor blues.
Example 3 is another well-known riff in the style of Ritchie Blackmore.
Use a lot of distortion on this one and practise it with a drum machine or a metronome.
Example 4 gives a comparison between a single-note melody in bars 1 and 2 and the melody harmonised in 4ths in bars 3 and 4.
Try it over a Dm7 chord.
Example 5 is the classic Smoke On The Water , a riff which epitomizes the use of 4ths in rock.
Hint: go to your local music shop, plug into the biggest, loudest amp, play the intro to Stairway To Heaven and then follow it immediately with this one.
You'll be surprised at the effect it has!
MICHAEL FATH Technique As A Result Of Harmony THE DORIAN MODE
Modes still remain something of a mystery to many guitarists, and I've found that one of the most reliable methods of teaching modes is simply that of practical usage.
The dorian scale is the second mode.
For example, D dorian would be a C major (Ionian) scale starting on D, because is the second degree of C major.
However, a more practical way of looking at D dorian would be to compare it to D major.
If you flatten the 3rd and the 7th degrees of D major, you have D dorian.
See Example 1.
But the really important thing is to learn the sounds of these modes.
No matter how much you learn in theory, you should always rely on what your ear is telling you.
If it sounds right, it is right!
Example 2 is another position of D dorian, with the D minor arpeggio notes outlined (D, F, A).
Practise these modes by starting and finishing on the lowest D note in the position.
Also, if you emphasise the arpeggio tones it will sound more like a D minor scale rather than a C major — or any other mode, for that matter.
Examples 3 and 4 should be practised the same way.
Interaction between arpeggios and scales makes up a big part of my personal style, and I've included examples #5 and #6 to show a favourite approach of mine.
In fact, many blues-rockers favour this mode for their melodies.
Beck, Clapton, Page, Moore and Hendrix all used a simple pentatonic minor and, by adding certain notes to colour the scale, created the dorian.
We'll look further into this concept in the future, but in the meantime, thanks for reading.
ESMOND SELWYN Techniques HAND TRAINING
This month we'll be doing some technical exercises which will train the hands to cope with diverse situations with ease and without straining.
Exercise 1 is a major to minor 7th arpeggio played as a continuous loop, which represents the relatively wide intervals of the thirds.
By contrast, Exercise 2 is a chromatic scale, similar in concept to Exercise 1 in that it's also a continuous loop, but in reality quite different in terms of feel and effect.
This represents the very tight, close intervals of the minor chords.
After you've tried all of these, you should have found that while the chromatic scale meanders slowly up and down, taking its time to reach its goal, the arpeggio crosses the strings at a dramatic rate of knots!
Technical mastery means feeling at ease in both types of situation.
Finally, as some homework, can you think of a way of adapting these two exercises so that they can be linked together in an ongoing continuum?
Look for the answer in the next issue.
ADRIAN INGRAM From Rock To Jazz IMPROVISING THROUGH THE CHANGES: TENSION AND RELEASE
In the last ‘From Rock To Jazz’ column I introduced the concept of chromatic approach notes and applying them in order to improvise through chord changes.
Generally speaking, notes which move from chromatic to diatonic, or from non-chordal to chordal, provide the strongest vehicle for creating the tension and release upon which effective jazz improvisation depends.
This month I have written out several ‘popular’ jazz phrases, all of which use chromatic approach notes and semitone resolution and release which, in turn, add interest to the melodic contour of the phrases.
Use the examples as a model by learning them in every key.
Then introduce similar chromatic movement into your own jazz improvisation.