

Editorial
There's been a show running in London for a while called ‘Good Rockin' Tonight’ which is the story — probably a touch glamorised, since he wrote it himself — of Jack Good, the ‘discoverer’of many of the British rock'n'roll legends, including Cliff Richard, Billy Fury and Marty Wilde.
All of the above feature in the show which, incidentally, I've seen and which, coincidentally, features the talents of Guitarist interviewee Ron Caryl (October 1990 ) and his Les Paul Standard.
I was talking to Marty W. recently about ‘Good Rockin', and while he agreed it was both enjoyable and extremely well done, he confided that something which didn't come over was the almost unbelievable youth of everyone involved back then.
Now, the talent of musicians like Extreme's Nuno Bettencourt goes without saying.
And look at the twenty year-old Blues Saraceno featured in this very issue; I've seen him play and he's tremendous.
But it seems we're constantly being informed of the amazing abilities of this remarkable 22 year-old or that incredible kid just turned 21.
And I for one would not want to question the validity of people like these — and the many others I haven't mentioned — who have the guts and determination to become young masters of their instruments.
But did you realise Marty Wilde was 17 when he hit stardom; that Cliff Richard and Billy Fury were the same age if not younger; that some of the singers and dancers on Jack Good's ground-breaking ‘Boy Meets Girl’ and ‘Oh Boy’shows were only 15 and 16?
These kids really were kids !
And how many people can comprehend a George Harrison not even out of his teens when The Beatles had their first Number One?
McCartney was less than a year older and even Ringo, the ‘old man’ of '60s pop was just 23.
Free's All Right Now anthem was performed by 17 year old Andy Frazer on bass, and a 19 year old Paul Kossoff, resulting in one of the most memorable British rock solos ever.
Stevie Wonder wrote, sang and played arguably his finest albums, ‘Talking Book’ and ‘Innervisions’, having only just broken the twenty threshold.
And when Elvis sang That's All Right Mama he was 20, as was Eric Clapton when he left The Yardbirds to join an aged John Mayall (reputed to be in his…gasp…thirties even then) to make that seminal Bluesbreakers LP.
Then of course there were Jimi Hendrix and Charlie Christian, both sadly dead some years before their thirtieth birthdays.
You're probably wondering where the point lies in all this.
Well, it's just an observation I've made lately that precocious talent is nothing new — although some PR companies, record labels and press would love us to believe otherwise.
What's more, with so much emphasis placed upon cultivating a creative youth — schools and parents actively promoting music, local radio and TV picking up regional talent, the reasonable cost of good equipment and the ease with which quality demos and records can be made, plus the all-round encouragement young people receive in all recreational pursuits these days — means it was almost certainly harder to break out in those starchy, stifling times than it is now.
The main sway against my argument would be the vastly increased competition in the '90s, with every other kid wanting to be a soap star or a pop idol.
I suppose what I'm really saying is that we should stop for a second each time we leap to elevate some young lad or lass to godlike status for a fifteen second guitar solo, and think about Paul McCartney penning Yesterday at age 23.
Or Stevie Wonder writing Visions at 21.
Or Charlie Christian turning jazz on its head at 24.
See you next month…
N.M.
WHAT'S NEW News & New Products As Christmas stalks menacingly nearer, the prezzie problem looms correspondingly larger.
But you might find some helpful hints in here…
SMALL IS BEAUTIFUL
We've seen loads of model guitars of late, but these are definitely some of the nicest.
Others think so, too; Gary Moore has just bought a mini ‘58 Flying V as a gift for Albert King.
The craftsman is Trevor Usher, a guitar maker and former model boat builder.
The models shown here — a Tele, a Gretsch, a Flying V, an Explorer and a PRS — are just the tip of the iceberg, since Trevor offers a whole range of handmade miniature guitars either off-the-shelf or custom built to your exact specification.
Trevor uses all the appropriately authentic woods for his models — maple, mahogany, koa and alder — and the hardware and detailing is made from materials including solid silver and mother of pearl.
The guitars come complete with hardwood and glass presentation cases, and prices start at £99.
Contact .
AND THERE'S MORE!
London based model maker Dave Doré is also beavering away producing some excellent miniatures of Flying Vs Explorers, Les Pauls, 335s Strats and Teles, in fact anything you care to ask him to make.
Prices start at around £45 so why not give Dave a ring and get your favourite guitar made in miniature.
You can contact Dave Doré on 071 272 5348 or write to him at .
RETURN OF ROCKMAN
Scholtz Research And Development, the people behind Rockman amplifiers and effects, have appointed P&R Global Services as their sole distributors for the UK.
P&R are planning a big push on Rockman gear together with a series of demonstrations and workshops featuring guitarist Jim Barrow.
For more details on products, dealers and workshops, contact .
CASE IN POINT
Two new solutions to the guitar's transportation dilemma this month: one lightweight hard case, and one, erm, heavyweight soft case.
The former comes from those well-known case people Hiscox , and it's a super-lightweight, fully-shaped hard case in the Liteflite range but specially designed for Strats, Teles and the like.
Although this is the lightest hard case on the market, at 3.3kg, it will still withstand a 12-stone adult standing on the lid and comes complete with a comfy, flightcase quality leather handle.
Peace of mind starts at around £72, or for your custom requirements call .
New to the gigbag game are Tee Pee .
Their guitar and bass bags feature 10mm thick high-density foam with black nylon covering, soft pile interiors, heavyweight non-scratch zippers, zip-up pockets on the outside for odds and ends and a two-position shoulder strap.
Tee Pee gigbags cost £34.95 from good guitar shops, or call the manufacturer on .
OVATION CLINIC
Look sharpish, and there'll still be time to whip down to Rose Morris in London's Denmark Street on Wednesday Nov 18th to catch an Ovation clinic featuring one of the UK's best-known sessioneers Ian Aitken.
The action starts at 6.30pm and free tickets can be collected from .
MANSON CORRECTION
Misinformation from respected sources led us to state in the Feedback section of our November issue that the neck on the recently reviewed Manson ‘Classic S’ guitar was Japanese in origin.
Hugh Manson informs us that the necks on his guitars are ‘ninety per cent made in our own workshop, and ten per cent imported from (USA manufacturer)Warmoth.’
We'd like to apologise to Hugh Manson for any inconvenience this may have caused.
BASIC INSTINCT
‘The Urge’ is an unusual new bass designed by the Fender Custom Shop in cahoots with Satriani's old buddy Stu Hamm .
It boasts a well-rounded alder body, a two-octave maple neck with a Pau Ferro fingerboard, and no less than three pickups: a custom vintage J-bass by the neck, a custom ‘62 vintage P-bass in the middle and an extra-hot J-bass unit by the bridge.
These are linked up to some rather clever controls: two concentric pots (one for master volume and pan pickup selector, the other for active treble boost/cut and active bass boost/cut), one four-position rotary switch offering ‘off’, active with mid-boost, active, and passive with the bass boost/cut becoming a master tone control, and a mini-switch that allows you to add the P-bass pickup to any switching combination.
‘The Urge’ is available in Lake Placid Blue, Burgundy Mist, Emerald Green Metallic and Montego Black, and you can find out more through your local Fender dealer.
STOLEN
Two very distinctive vintage guitars were stolen in Long Eaton, Nottinghamshire on the 3rd of November.
The first, a ‘67 or ‘68 double-cutaway Gretsch Chet Atkins Nashville in orange sunburst, bears the serial number 494407 stamped in gold on the rear of the headstock.
The second, a sunburst-finished 1961 Gibson ES-350 with a very rare sharp-pointed ‘Florentine’ cutaway, has the serial number 19240 on the label and at the rear of the headstock.
Down by the tailpiece there are some screw-holes left over from fitting a Bigsby vibrato.
If spotted please call the Long Eaton Police, or Phil Boot on .
The Klondyke Trading Company lost a considerable amount of gear from a break-in during October.
Keep 'em peeled for a gold-coloured Heritage H150 Les Paul-style guitar, serial 115403 , a black Fenix Telecaster copy with a Granite gigbag, a Rat distortion pedal serial 164076 , two Sansamp units serial numbers 70332 and 70333 , two ADA Micro Tube guitar power amps serial numbers VT10428 and VT10431 , and two ADA MB-1 bass effects units numbers 900853 and 900871 .
Please ring 0202 552099 , quoting crime no. 92C 15388.
JANGLE BELLS
John Hornby Skewes are doing some rather wicked guitar-orientated Christmas stockings this year.
We've been sent a sample, and inside there's a very posh-looking Seiko quartz guitar tuner, a nice blue T-shirt, a set of Picato ‘All Steel’ electric guitar strings, a good quality lead in a violent shade of green, a set of pitchpipes, a miniature enamel guitar badge, a pegwinder, a classic ‘Cadillac bumper’capo, a red nylon-weave strap and a can of that excessively useful Fastfret stuff.
Unfortunately, we're not allowed to keep it…
No, it's got to go to a reader instead.
So, to win your (sniff) wonderful stocking, send us a postcard telling us which '50s rock'n'roll star had a song called I Want Elvis For Christmas .
Too hard?
Well, here's a clue: he played a Gretsch 6120 with a Gibson P-90 pickup in the rhythm position.
Send your answer to JHS Xmas Stocking Comp, Guitarist, Alexander House, Forehill, Ely, Cambs CB7 4AF .
COMPETITION WINNERS
Sorry for the delay, but here's the results of our 1992 Readership Survey competition.
R. Bennett in North Yorkshire has won a Washburn XS8 bass and an Ampeg SVT15EV combo, and Campbell Tidey of Hertfordshire has got himself an Epiphone EM-2MR guitar and the Crate G160XL guitar combo.
In addition, free subscriptions to Guitarist go to D. Douglas in Gateshead,Andrew Trowers in Farnham,Tim Humberstone of Harrow,Alan Sandiford in Bolton,George Custnie of Inverness,M. Naughton of North Shields,Graham Platt of Hightown in Clwyd,Dom Heriz of Exeter,Rene Da Costa in Leicester,L. Hazeldine of Plymouth,Paul Raindle of Upminster and David Hunt from Biggleswade.
Again, our thanks to all our readers for being so helpful and to Bluebridge Music, Rosetti and Washburn for their generosity in donating these prizes.
Finally, the Trantec S1000 guitar radio system in our September edition giveaway has been won by Dave Penn of Sheldon in Birmingham.
The answers, incidentally, were (1) Very High Frequency,(2) Pilot Of The Airwaves,(3) Buggles and (4) Morse.
Many thanks to Trantec, and well done to Dave.
DOWN TO THE DOCTOR'S
In these days of digital technology and modular electronics, it's hard to know where to turn when your blue-speaker AC30 begins to issue smoke, your Copicat starts munching recording tape or your beloved Marshall JTM45 just sits and coughs in the corner.
But one solution is The Amp Clinic , the brainchild of electrical whizz Ken Vickers.
The Amp Clinic can cope with everything from routine servicing, valve replacement, troubleshooting, tweaking and hot-rodding through to general refurbishing and even rebuilding an amplifier from a cardboard box of bits.
What's more, modern transistor-powered amps and PA systems are just as welcome as valve-driven vintage stuff.
There's also a vintage amp hire service for video shoots and recording.
There are various pick-up points around the Amp Clinic's home area where you can leave your equipment for collection, including The Drum And Guitar Centre in Cambridge, Machinehead Music in Harlow and Drum And Sound in Royston, or else gear can be sent direct to The Amp Clinic.
Give Ken a call on .
SOUTHERN RAG
A new guitar centre has just opened in the South West — not just a shop, but a guitar school too.
Manson's Guitar Shop combines the talents of guitar builder Hugh Manson along with bass specialist Adrian Ashton, a graduate of the Los Angeles Bass Institute Of Technology, and Jay Henson, an Honours music graduate.
The instruments available in the shop will range from budget beginners' guitars right up to custom-made guitars and basses, all set up and adjusted by Hugh Manson to give the same service previously offered to Jeff Beck, Andy Summers, John Giblin (Simple Minds, Kate Bush), The Sisters Of Mercy and Led Zeppelin's John Paul Jones, to name a few.
There's also a full repair service for guitars and amps, with valve amps a speciality.
The Guitar School's evening classes will offer first-class tuition in a variety of styles for both guitar and bass.
It's also a perfect place for students to prepare themselves for the new grade-level Trinity College Of Music Pop Exams, since the Guitar School is the new local exam centre!
In addition there'll be visiting guest artists, technical clinics, ‘open hour’ counselling and a special discount scheme for purchases at the Guitar Shop.
Contact Manson's Guitar Shop and The Guitar School at .
GREEN MACHINE
Crikey, it's back!
The Orange/Matamp GT120, the beefy 1960s British amp that helped define the sound of bands like Free, Wishbone Ash and the original Fleetwood Mac, is available again as part of the Matamp ‘Roots’ range, with only one big difference — it's green.
‘This is not just another retro classic to be purchased as decorative furniture by nostalgia buffs,’ say Matamp.
‘The circuitry is faithful to the original GT120, and while it's rudimentary by today's standards, that doesn't detract from the virtually limitless range of good valve sounds it places at your fingertips.’
The amp head pushes out an extremely loud 100 watts, and you can complete your stack by adding a separate valve-driven spring reverb unit and two cabinets — one 2x12″, one 4x12″ — both loaded with Celestion G12 speakers.
For more information, contact Matamp on .
HARMONY IN MY HEAD Brian May I spoke to Brian May on the day the news broke that his guitar had been mistakenly despatched to France by a roadie, to await an uncertain fate at the hands of ‘lost and found’…
Interview by David Mead.
Happily, Brian was able to dismiss the story as complete fiction.
‘It certainly didn't come from me,’ he shrugged.
‘I haven't even seen it yet, I just heard about it.’
But it would be difficult to imagine May separated from his lifelong playing companion.
‘I'd certainly find life very difficult without it,’ nods Brian.
So how's the guitar actually wearing?
It must be going on twenty-three years old.
‘It's amazing how it's holding up.
The only thing we've ever replaced are the machineheads.
Everything else is original; the frets are very worn down, but they still work and I wouldn't like to touch them until I have to.
It does have a good feel.
‘The frets were one of the few things I actually bought for the guitar.
Everything else was junk.
I bought the fretwire from Clifford Essex in Cambridge Circus.
They used to publish a magazine called BMG — banjo, mandolin and guitar — which was rooted in old, acoustic instruments and older players, bluegrass players, really fascinating stuff.
You could get anything in that shop, though.
It was one of the only places that you could get banjo strings to put on the top, because in the old days you couldn't get thin guitar strings.
So we used to go up there and get our .008″ banjo strings and put them on the top and it really transformed what you could do.’
You've always used a combination of very light gauge strings with a very heavy pick — the notorious sixpence.
‘It is heavy, but I hold it lightly, to compensate.
What I like is that I can feel the movement and it all gets transmitted to the fingers.
To me, it's a very sensitive way of playing.’
What with the AC30s and the guitar and so on, you must have got your gear sorted out pretty early on…
‘I was lucky.
I knew the sound that I wanted, in my head, and I just happened to find this old AC30 which belonged to a friend of mine.
I played through it and thought, ‘That's it, that's what I want,’ because of the warmth.
And with the treble boost you can push it hard, smoothly into distortion.
And it has this lovely articulation on the top…’
On the album sleeve of ‘Back To The Light’ you say that you use both old and new AC30s.
Are these the vintage re-issues?
‘Yeah, that's right.
There was a period in the middle which wasn't too good.
I don't like any of the transistor stuff and some of the modifications didn't work, but nowadays they're making them just like the old ones and they're brilliant.’
Your live setup was twelve AC30s, split into four banks of three, each group with a different effect.
Were they all on at once?
‘Really, I played off the monitors.
The bigger the venue, the less you can hear your own amps anyway.
So I just played off the monitors.
I'd have them all on if I needed a confidence boost, or just for the sheer enjoyment of the sound, but it was fundamentally one AC30 that made that noise.
And then I used a delay, which in the beginning was an old, modified Echoplex, to produce a single repeat.
That came back through a separate AC30 so they could both distort to their hearts’ content and not interfere with each other.
You wouldn't get this intermodulation distortion; they would both have this full-blown, distorted sound, which blended together really nicely.
Eventually I had the other repeat to make the three parts, so then I could make harmonies by playing along with the tape.’
Have you ever been tempted away from your tried and tested gear by anything that you've seen?
‘I've tried out a lot of things on the way.
I've tried most of the guitar synths and stuff, but I just prefer my instrument: it's very human and it makes the right noise.
I do play through Zoom boxes these days, which I enjoy; I think they're a good little piece of apparatus.
They're great for each end of the spectrum; for the full-blown solo or for clean rhythm.
The only thing that perhaps they don't handle is that intermediate area, which the AC30 is very good at — where you can strike a chord and it's distorted, but you can still hear what the chord is.’
I hear you've been looking at Eggle guitars…
‘Yes, I've been playing around with one for quite a while; it's a very nice piece of work.
We've actually talked about doing a deal together.
I don't know whether that will actually happen, because Guild really have the first option, but I was hoping there'd be a way that we could cooperate and perhaps Eggle could do the British end of it.
But they're beautifully made, really beautiful.
‘I've also used an Ibanez Satriani guitar, which is really inspiring and so speedy up the top end of the neck.’
You established some elements of your sound very early on: the stacked harmonies and so on.
Was that a fixed idea from the word go?
‘It was a dream to do that from way, way back.
I was always fascinated with harmony, anyway, from the '60s records that I grew up with — the Everly Brothers, Buddy Holly and the Crickets.
But I also felt that the guitar became a different instrument when it was turned up to maximum and fully distorted — it was no longer a polyphonic instrument, really.
So it seemed to be crying out to be orchestrated, and I could hear just what it would be like in my head.
This is long before Queen and even before Smile, which was the group before that.
‘Then there were a few things that reinforced that feeling.
For instance, Jeff Beck's hit Hi Ho Silver Lining had a bit in the middle where he double-tracked the guitar and, just for a moment, it breaks into harmony.
I don't know if it was by accident — I should ask him one day — but I used to play that over and over again and just revel in that sound, and I thought if you could get hold of that sound and make a feature of it, and if it were not just two guitars but as many as you needed to make a proper arrangement, the possibilities would be endless.
So, as soon as we got in the studio, I was on the trail.’
You must have an established formula for achieving your harmony sound.
So where do you start?
‘It starts in the head.
I find the best ideas come from when you're not actually touching the guitar, otherwise your fingers fall into the same positions and you get stuck in ruts.
Also, the best solos often come from the best songs, because there's something in the song to feed off — a chord structure, a feeling or an atmosphere.
That's why it was so great working with Freddie and the band; there was always something unusual to work guitar into, and usually it was in some weird key as well.
And that helped, because then you have no preconceived ideas, so if you do come up with something, it's going to be something unusual.’
Do you think of it in terms of a melody and then harmonise it, or does the whole thing come as a block concept?
‘I've always thought of the guitar as another voice, so I start with a voice, singing along with the vocal, and from time to time you can hear a place where other voices would come in, like backing harmonies, which then become part of it.
It's just a question of realising what is in your head, because I find I can usually hear roughly what I'm trying to get to.
Occasionally, there's a happy accident that leads me in a nice direction.’
How many tracks do you use for one of your multi-track guitar lines?
‘It varies.
On this album I think the maximum was about thirty.
On The Dark , I wanted this real frightening wall of sound coming out to contrast this very small voice — the kid in the cot.
You can get a long way with three parts and with four you can conquer the world!
‘In the case of Killer Queen , which I still like, it was just three separate voices and they go in and out of harmony, but they play their own tune; I enjoy things like that, where they have a life of their own.’
The Queen harmony vocal idea was pretty much fully developed even on your first album, and it seems like the most significant developments since have been on the part of technology catching up.
But it must have been very difficult to start with…
‘True, you had to bounce things as you went along.
It's a bit of a shame, really, because when we go back to those old multi-tracks, there's nothing you can do in some cases.
Somebody re-mixed You're My Best Friend the other day and I always thought it would be nice to re-balance that stuff, but when we got the tape out, it was all on one track, so that's it.’
I was thinking recently that if anything was a prime candidate for digital remastering, it would be the early Queen albums…
‘Well, we've been working on digitally remastering them all.
There is a lot you can do when you get back to the original mix tape, but for us the mix was all part of the creative process and I don't really want to remix stuff.
We have let a few people remix a few things, just for fun, but normally I wouldn't want to change it; it had a certain magic at the time.
‘I like most of those original mixes, but they were incredibly complex to do, and without any automation.
We all used to be at the desk — four of us, plus Roy Thomas-Baker and Mike Stone — all six of us with fingers on the faders and sometimes we'd work thirty-hour mixes!
At the end, you were totally blind and deaf to it, you'd go to sleep and wake up the next morning and the mix was still going on!
Weird…very intense.
But they definitely have a special quality, those early mixes.’
The pioneer spirit!
But that's what I meant about technology having caught you up.
For instance, have you seen the Digitech Vocalist?
Instant Queen vocals!
‘Oh yeah, I've used one.
The beginning of Driven By You is just one voice, put through the Vocalist.
I did it live, but it's only one take — great machines!’
Going into the studio now, you must know exactly what you want.
‘Well, I try not to stay with the same methods.
Certainly when I was setting up my studio in the country, the nice thing was that we didn't do anything standard; we didn't take anything for granted, whether it was mics, positions of drums or anything.
We started everything from scratch, which is nice, because people get so stuck in their ways: you walk into a professional studio and things are always done in a certain way.
The guy says, ‘The drums go over there…’ and it's nice to get out of that and just find your own sounds with no preconceived ideas.
‘For instance, there was one little overdubbing room in Air studios which was tiny — it was about as big as an armchair — but we used to put the AC30 in there and put the mic facing the window and get this amazing sound.
There was a very nice room in Wessex, I don't know whether it's still there, but it was the main room, where we recorded We Will Rock You and that was all acoustic stuff — it's just us stamping on boards and clapping over and over again.’
There wasn't a bass drum on that?
‘No, no drums whatsoever — just feet on the boards and handclaps.’
The new album starts with an entirely different version of We Will Rock You , that is to say, the traditional carol.
Was that kind of polarisation with the Queen song intentional?
‘Er, yes.
I'm a bit wary of explaining things, but throughout the whole album you can hear this person who is very small and very confused, confronted by different situations as they roll past him.
So I started off with the idea that there's this little baby in the cradle, he's completely in the dark and the dark is something really frightening.
It was convenient that it was We Will Rock You , because here was this nursery rhyme and the version Queen did was very big and macho.
Total opposites.’
It must have been very strange making an album containing many familiar Queen attributes, but without Freddie.
‘Very strange.
It was always a project which was in parallel with Queen, because we always had a positive attitude to people doing stuff outside the band, getting new experiences and bringing them back into the band.
But it did become something very different at the end, when Freddie went.
I started to realise that this was a kind of bridge toward the next part of life, whatever that may be.
‘I always felt close to Freddie in the studio, whether he was there or not, because we worked together so intensively over the years.
So I can still hear him talking to me when I'm doing some of this stuff, especially when I'm trying to sing — which has not been easy.
But I wanted to do it, because I didn't want anyone else to be speaking my ideas when it was such a personal statement.
So it was good for me to imagine Freddie sitting there.
‘In the beginning, Freddie didn't have all the powers that he wanted to have as a vocalist; he worked to achieve those and improved as he worked over the years.
So I just took that as a good example.
I thought, ‘If I'm going to sing this album, I'm going to have to work at it,’ and I treated it rather like a weight-training program — I went in there, sung my guts out and tried to reach further every day.
It's amazing what you can do if you really try.
I was quite stunned, because in the beginning I was struggling with it — all those regions around top A — and in the end, in Resurrection , I got up to a D above that, without going into falsetto, which was quite a little crusade for me.
I was amazed that I could actually do that.
It's another question as to whether I can do it on stage, but at least it happened, at least I know I can get there if I really try hard enough.’
When you first performed Too Much Love Will Kill You at Freddie's tribute concert at Wembley, you played it solo and there was a point where you paused and the audience went a little wild.
You seemed to register surprise…
‘Relief, more than anything else!
It was a big step to do it and I wanted to do it for Freddie.
It wasn't that the song had a particular relevance — it wasn't about AIDS — but it was a song that I felt was the best way of expressing myself and also the best thing I had to offer at the time.
‘It was terrifying!
It was in front of 72,000 people in the Stadium, half a billion people around the world and so it took an incredible amount of getting hold of myself to do it.
As I was walking over to the piano I was thinking, ‘Should I really be doing this?’
So it was difficult, it really was.
It's so easy to do in rehearsal and yet, when that moment comes, something happens to your throat.
Plus it really brought me back into touch with what was going on; suddenly there wasn't a big show happening, there was only me doing my personal little bit.’
At the Tribute and subsequently in Seville, it must have been great to be surrounded by so many people who openly acknowledge Queen as a huge influence.
I'm thinking of Extreme in particular.
‘It's fantastic, a great compliment and I think Extreme are great.
If they're going to carry the banner, they're very worthy.
They're incredible musicians and they have this feeling that they can cross all the boundaries, which we had, too.
The new album is unbelievable; they're so adventurous and they have a habit of pulling it all off, whichever area they go into.’
I remember the medley of Queen songs they did at Wembley…
‘That took a lot of courage, more than people realise.
In front of our audience, to do our songs, it could have gone awfully wrong.
And they must have known that.’
What was the Guitar Legends concert in Seville like for you?
‘Fun.
Really great fun.
I had the opportunity to get all my favourite people together.
What made it fun on the night was the fact that we knew what we were doing.
We put enough rehearsal in to know we were going to be okay; it wasn't people just going up there and jamming.’
‘I was particularly keen on the idea that Joe Satriani should play with Steve Vai.
This was a one-off and a chance to do something special.
They both played on my stuff and we all played with Joe Walsh, which was really a great buzz, pounding out Rocky Mountain Way …’
Although the riff went wrong…
‘Ahhh…
You noticed that!’
Only because it's one of my all time favourite riffs…
‘It was very funny.
I guess Joe Walsh started it, but the two drummers heard it in opposite senses — you can see we're all laughing.
‘But I've got this attitude that if you're going to show guitarists off in their best light, you don't just put them on stage and let them weedle around all night.
Some of the greatest guitar songs have been the riff songs, so I immediately thought of Paul Rogers.
Sadly, Kossof isn't there but I knew every guitarist in the world would enjoy playing All Right Now .’
It must have been some challenge to oversee that.
You had to learn some of Steve Vai's stuff too.
‘Yeah!
My God!
What a fool to even try!’
But you played Liberty from Steve's album and that brings it right back to your influence — the tightly arranged, harmony guitar thing…
‘He said that God Save The Queen was an inspiration for that.’
How did the Ford advert come about?
‘I had some time off while I was working in Los Angeles and I was down by the hotel pool.
There were these two outrageous guys, splashing about, and they just came up and asked if I'd ever considered doing anything in the advertising world and I said, ‘No.’
They said, ‘Do you want to?’ and I said, ‘Not particularly,’but they suggested running a few things by me to see if I was interested.
‘Anyway, they came up with this slogan, which originally was ‘Everything We Do, We Do For You’ which was uncannily similar to the Bryan Adams song, which came out a little while afterwards.
I thought it sounded a bit slushy and didn't really relate to it.
But then they came back and said it was changed to ‘Everything We Do Is Driven By You’ and my initial thought was ‘Yuk, I don't think I can do anything with that either,’because it just sounded like motor cars and I'm not interested in singing songs about motor cars.
But then I thought ‘Driven By You…’ and ping!the lights went on; I thought of it as the power struggle that goes on in relationships.
So this song sort of sprang to mind and I could hear it as I wanted it to be and I could also hear a few little modifications that would suit their purposes, too.
‘It's funny, I've spent most of my life thinking of advertising as a sort of dirty business, but in fact the same mechanisms work: you get input from someone, you get inspired and you give back.
So I enjoyed it and they were great to work with.
Very quick, very efficient.
I produced a first version of that track in a week and they had it on the TV the next night!
They really don't mess about.
I was impressed and it also gave me a lot of momentum for the album.
And it also gave me a hit, which I never expected.’
Presumably, the next step is to tour with the new material…
‘Yes, well luckily for me, Cozy Powell and Neil Murray are into it and we will go out in November and do some gigs.
I'd like to start somewhere not too much in the public eye, because it takes the pressure off, so I'll probably go to Argentina or somewhere like that, do some rehearsals and some gigs and see what transpires.’
But you're used to doing challenging material on stage.
I mean,Bohemian Rhapsody can't have been a picnic…
‘I think we copped out with Bohemian Rhapsody .
We never really played it all the way through.
But we never played to a tape, either.
I mean, with the middle bit, we'd put the record on and get off stage so there was never any doubt that we were playing live when we were on stage.
‘But you're right, we did bluff our way through almost everything.
It's a nice way to be; I don't think you need all these backing tapes and samples.
A live show is something separate and you do different things in a live show to what you do on a record.
I personally don't get any joy from seeing people reproduce their records exactly on stage; I want to see something which is special for the night.’
Queen certainly had a reputation as one of rock's most impressive live acts…
‘But I'm not going to try and be Queen.
Stage shows have become a little formularised, and lot of the things we brought in are now commonplace.
But I don't really want to compete in that world; I want to do it a bit differently, something a bit more personal.
I say this now, but we'll see how it goes.’
I suppose the $64,000 question must be, ‘Is Queen actually over now?’
‘It's a difficult question which we're still tossing around.
We had a meeting today and there's a lot to talk about.
But there's no reason, in principle, why we couldn't work again together; but in my mind it would be wrong, certainly this soon, to go out and try and be Queen without Freddie.
This is my personal feeling, but I really don't want to be out on tour with another singer trying to be Queen.
It would feel dreadfully wrong.
So then you think ‘Well, can we do anything together?’ and the answer is that we can probably do something .
There are some projects that have been offered to us and there are a couple of tracks just sitting there which have Freddie's vocal on — not much, but maybe two or three songs.’
Brian sits reflectively for a few moments…
‘On the whole, Queen was a good old band, really…’
The best solos often come from the best songs, because there's something in the song to feed off — a chord structure, a feeling or an atmosphere
I always felt close to Freddie in the studio, whether he was there or not, because we worked together so intensively over the years
I really don't want to be out on tour with another singer trying to be Queen.
It would feel dreadfully wrong
BIG APPLE Patrick Eggle New York Imagine Time Square, Broadway, The Bronx, Fifth Avenue, all embodied in a guitar…
Review by David Mead.
Opening the case containing a new guitar from Patrick Eggle is, for me, a trying experience.
I know my objectivity as a reviewer is going to be put sorely to the test, because so far I've loved every one that I've laid my hands on.
The New York is a design which owes very little to established precedents and yet still looks familiar and comfortable.
The same could be said of the recent Starfield and Chandler ranges, both of which we have looked at lately, and if this steering away from routine duplication is indeed a new trend, then it's one which I applaud wholeheartedly.
Can the day of the Stratocaster clone be gone?
I somehow doubt it…
CONSTRUCTION
The New York has a very ‘short-scale’ appearance.
This takes some getting used to, but claustrophobic fingertips need not concern themselves unduly, as the feeling is dispelled immediately upon picking up the guitar.
It's compact and well-proportioned, surprisingly light and very well-balanced.
The body is made from mahogany and this has been contoured at the upper edge, for all the usual reasons.
The review copy is a solid black, but the basic model comes oil-finished.
Shape-wise the New York is hard to pin down, not having an obvious parentage.
It has leanings toward Gibson's Melody Maker/Les Paul Special range, but so slight that you would be hard pushed to detect it without laser-optic assistance.
The neck is a single piece of rock maple, which joins the body by means of a very understated four bolt affair.
The line of the body is not impinged upon at all at this point and everything is very neat and tidy.
The neck features a volute behind the nut in order to maximise strength at this infamous weak spot, although I suspect that this is done more in the service of art than anything else, maintaining as it does a classic line.
Maple has a much tighter grain than mahogany and breakages are consequently far less common, so whether a neck like this needs further strengthening is debatable.
Tuning heads are by Sperzel, the keys being finished in an attractive, satin-finished steel.
This is a headstock shape that works, I think; it's functional and not overly indebted to its forbears — modern, without being moderne , if you see what I mean.
The New York has a rosewood fingerboard which is well up to usual Eggle standards; they really do seem to be consistently good across the entire range.
It has twenty-two quite chunky and well-seated frets, and a low, buzz-free action testifies to quality of workmanship in this area, too.
Position markers of mother-of-pearl are inlaid offset in the rosewood, and their diminutive size once again departs from the traditional and scurries off in the direction of the new, though there's garish or clumsy about them.
The nut is made from Mycarta, a synthetic bone-like material.
Pearloid sheet has been used for the scratchplate, again reminiscent of bygone days.
This bears one humbucker and a single coil pickup, both designed for Eggle by Kent Armstrong.
The two rotary controls are the expected volume and tone, the latter pulling out to double as a coil tap for the humbucker.
The expected toggle switch controls the pickup selections, but in a rather cunning fashion.
With the coil tap not selected, the toggle switches from the front (single) to the back (humbucker) pickups.
However, once the coil tap has been activated, the switch moves you between tapped bridge and both bridge and neck together.
It's clever, efficient and, more importantly different .
I suppose the feature on this guitar that would be most difficult to miss is the distinctive string anchorage.
After the tun-o-matic bridge, the strings follow a gentle break angle down towards six staggered ferrules, the strings being loaded from the back.
It can't be a coincidence that the strings' pitches, when plucked behind the bridge, are exactly three octaves higher than their respective open pitches.
I assumed that open string resonance must be enhanced by this.
However, Patrick Eggle assured me that this was just a spooky coincidence, and even that some players had remarked upon a tendency for the bottom string to slip off the bridge, so he was going to move it anyway.
I must say this wasn't a problem for anyone here and I would hope that moving the string ferrule doesn't affect the brightness or jangle factor overmuch.
IN USE
The New York is a very playable guitar.
Even those of us in the office who had their doubts at first were soon won over by the instrument's simplicity and friendliness.
Its unamplified tone is very bright and zingy and, to the casual strummer's point of view, brings Music Man, Rickenbacker and just a hint of Danelectro to mind.
The neck feels solid and moderately chubby, although not immediately reminiscent of anything I've played before.
However, as a rough guide, it feels slightly more Gibson-like than it does Fenderish, if that helps.
Through an amplifier, the New York maintains its acoustic brightness and bluntly refuses to be anything other than a blank canvas.
Though you might expect some echoes of a Telecaster or a Les Paul Junior, it actually sounds like neither.
So, having been robbed of all convenient benchmarks, I'm somewhat at sea.
It's a little like describing the taste of wine; I could blather my way, of course, using adjectives like piquant, saucy or even rakish, but I shall deny myself any such tomfoolery and try another course.
Played clean, the humbucker sounds sweet and transparent.
When coil-tapped, it suggests country bends aplenty.
The neck pickup is sharp and punchy, but knock the tone back a little and it becomes sweet and bluesy: Mississippi without the mud, if you like.
When overdriven, the New York screeches, bellows, rasps and rants on all combinations, but again with a voice of its own.
CONCLUSION
Once again, Patrick Eggle has provided me with an excuse to get a paper round, take in laundry and even think about selling my body.
I think the introduction of this guitar is quite significant; it's fresh, different and just plain exciting, and those are three words you won't often see in the review of a new guitar.
Neither can I impose a specific style on it, try as I might.
I can see Lou Reed and Keith Richards playing one, and I suspect that some of the current Indie bands, champions of retro-style, could easily find themselves bewitched by the New York.
It's a great guitar that deserves to scale considerable heights.
For further information please contact 
RESURRECTION SHUFFLE…
Basses by Bernie Goodfellow Proving that it's extremely difficult to keep a good bassmaker down, here are the latest offerings from the hands of Bernie Goodfellow…
Review by Gibson Keddie.
One of the disadvantages of monthly reviewing schedules is that most instruments arriving at the Guitarist office are brand spanking new.
Guitars rarely give of their best when new — acoustic ones especially so — and the reviewer is constantly faced with the slightly off-putting scenario of having to assess potential, while simultaneously breaking instruments in.
When Bernie Goodfellow arrived with two basses for us to look over, it was pleasing to hear him qualify them with, ‘They've already done some serious gigging — I hope you don't mind too much.’
Not at all…
Funnily enough, Mr Goodfellow now finds himself in a similar situation to the late Leo Fender, having left his original company bearing his name (now owned as a registered trademark by Lowden).
So while these are the latest basses from Goodfellow, they're not actually Goodfellow basses, if you see what I mean.
A name for this new range has yet to be confirmed.
Ideas, please…
In the meantime, even a brief look confirms a familiar profile: the large ellipse of the rear bout pulling into the elongated narrow waist, the exaggerated offset of the upper and lower horns, the elegant necks topped off with a neat and compact headstock.
What, I wondered, had inspired Bernie to return to the fray with these instruments?
‘I wanted to be able to produce instruments which would look attractive, and could be tailored to any individual requirements, and still be available at reasonable cost.
One of the main reasons for this range lies in the electronics; these have been developed in collaboration with a whizz-kid colleague, Dick Straker, who has an electronics company called Tamtec.
He has developed circuit boards specifically for the basses, and we can tailor the components to incorporate almost any type of sound the user might want.’
Although the woods look impressively exotic and expensive, it has not been necessary to pilfer the last few acres of an equatorial hardwood rainforest in order to achieve the attractive grain patterns on these basses, hence the (ultimately) rather reasonable prices.
4-STRING
This bass has actually been built for a customer, and serves as an example of what can be done to satisfy specific requirements.
Maple is the main wood used in the construction of both of these instruments.
In the case of the 4, a lightly flame-patterned section makes up the main body, with a strip of darker walnut separating this from the attractively-grained birdseye on the front.
The neck/body join is a half-through bolt-on, representing one departure from Goodfellow's traditional through-neck construction, and is effected by four individual countersunk Allen-headed bolts, secured via brass collars into threaded inserts in the body.
The neck itself is a sturdy five-piece laminate, three pieces of maple sandwiching two of walnut, finished off with a plain ebony fretboard containing wide oval nickel-silver frets.
It's a two-octave neck, marked by neck-top mini-dots, and possesses a distinctive ‘stepping’ at the 24th half-fret.
This ‘step’ is mirrored at the tip of the asymmetric headstock, and at the recess in the base of the body, with two straplock buttons either side of the base allowing for good free-standing stability.
The headstock is scarfed on behind the first fret (as, in fact, were those on original Goodfellow basses).
This type of jointing is not only economical in terms of wood use, but provides additional strength at the vulnerable neck-to-headstock transition.
However, these will be one-piece in future, if the actual billets of maple are deep enough to allow it.
Finally, a pleasantly-grained veneer of dark ash has been used as a finish on the front and back of the headstock.
Truss-rod adjustment lives under the traditionally-situated cover above the nut, and offers full dual-action flexibility.
On this bass the two single-coil J-type pickups are Bartolinis, which are often thought of as almost over-efficient, with a too-bright sound, but this characteristic (shared by the Pedullas reviewed recently) can be modified by the onboard circuitry.
The controls are unusual.
Two independent volumes, and independent bass/mid/treble rotaries offer a massive ±21dB of boost or cut, thanks to the onboard Tamtec circuitry.
The toggle switch is two-position, and flicking it on takes the sound straight to a pre-determined setting.
As I mentioned earlier, this rather unusual configuration was as a result of customer specification.
In the control cavity, which, like that of the two-PP9 battery compartment, is covered by a smoked perspex plate, we find the wonderfully neat Tamtec double-sided, plated circuit board, neatly cut to fit the cavity perimeter.
According to Dick Straker, the exceptional amount of gain on offer won't adversely affect battery life, as a suitable compromise between noise and gain has been developed, thereby allowing battery life of some 300 hours.
Why had he given the EQ such power?
The answer is succinct: ‘That's what Bernie wanted.’
Another neat touch: the output jack on the rim of the lower bout is of the latest Swiss-made ‘Neutrik’ type, with a small safety clip to make sure the jackplug is secure, looking (and feeling) like a superior 3-pin Cannon connector.
Other than that, the specified light gauge (40–105) strings are kept taut at either end of the bass by Schaller's finest.
The result is a very bright piano-like acoustic ‘twang’, which bodes well…
One ever-welcome characteristic of Goodfellow basses is the way they balance; they're so obviously players' instruments, equally comfortable to play whether sitting or standing.
Sitting, the bass sits comfortably on your leg, the top contour resting exactly round your lower ribcage.
The neck feels like a cross between a Jazz and Precision.
It's quite wide (42mm across the nut) with good string spacing (approximately 19mm at the bridge) allowing an easy, open style of playing.
This is further abetted by the gentle metamorphosis of the neck profile: from shallow oval close to the heel, to a more pronounced ‘D’ section near the extra thickness of the behind-nut volute.
The headstock is gently raked back, and the strings pass directly over the nut to the Schaller machines.
With the EQ set flat on the centre detents, the resulting tone is bright, but laced with a subtle hint of power.
I found the individual (notched) volume controls straightforward enough, although the more customary volume and pickup pan system would blend the sound just as well.
As mentioned, the strings are light gauge, further emphasising the trebliness of the instrument.
However, the versatile EQ and the additional power of the bass boost make it easy to fill out the sound, and a smooth, mellow tone is little more than a brief twiddle away.
One of the satisfying aspects of a high quality bass sound is that the listener can hear and separate the constituents of the overall tone (a characteristic of top-drawer active EQ systems, which when boosting/cutting your required frequency band manage not to compromise the sound's other components).
The flick switch here is a practical touch, working in a similar fashion to, say, Trace Elliot's ‘pre-shape’ facility on their amps in providing instant access to a specified sound, in this case a cut-mid sort of slappy sound.
The inherent tone of the Bartolinis gives the bass plenty of sustain and treble overtones and works well in conjunction with the tone-modifying electronics.
Ideally, I'd have my preferred gauge of 45–105s fitted, which would further attenuate this brightness.
This bass is finished in polyester which, though undoubtedly resilient, is a tad too modern and shiny for my taste, and detracts from the more tactile effect of the woods used.
Again, though, this was customer specification.
5-STRING
Is the 5-string more of the same?
Well, not really.
The most obvious difference, apart from the extra string, is the use of through-neck construction.
Maple is again the main wood used, the five-piece neck laminate utilising figured rock maple to sandwich two sections of Goncalo Alvez.
The wings are of flamed maple with two layers of walnut, separated from the central body section by ebony, itself edged by fine multi-coloured veneering, which can also be found under the fretboard and headstock facing.
The distinctively figured wood facing the wings on both back and front is an unusual choice of yew.
And it works well, the fine cracks in its surface merely adding to the character of the bass.
The 5- and 6-string models in the range have a slightly extended scale length of 35″ to help the response of the low ‘B’ by increasing string tension.
This bass, too, is a double-octave machine with an ebony fingerboard.
Kent Armstrong humbuckers are fitted here.
These are switchable between series and parallel modes, and a master volume/pickup pan system is used this time, again with ±21dB of boost or cut.
Incidentally, wooden pegheads on the Schaller machines add to the decorative aspect, and Bernie has said that the rotary knobs will also be wooden in future, built to simulate the body laminates.
In use, the tonal abilities of this bass are ridiculously wide: series/parallel switching, with huge reserves of boost and cut available, in conjunction with the low ‘B’ string.
The impact of all this will test any speaker to the limit, so handle with care.
In normal use, however, it's best to back off a little and enjoy a more even and consistent sound across the five strings.
The bass has settled in well, with a good compromise having been achieved between a low action and — the enemy of 5-stringers everywhere — fretbuzz on the lower frets, which is barely noticeable here.
I prefer the satin-type finish on this bass, too.
It's much more ‘natural’, allowing the owner to appreciate the feel of the wood used.
Furthermore, although it's much more time consuming to properly achieve this type of finish, there is no extra cost incurred by the prospective owner.
CONCLUSION
The custom aspect of this new range of basses is important, and emphasised by the maker.
For example, a choice of timbers is available, through-neck or bolt-on types of construction, even individual neck radius preferences can be taken into account, and the ability to incorporate any electronic requirements has already been mentioned.
Perhaps this should be typed in bold capitals: orders for left-handers are particularly welcome, with no extra charge incurred for these either.
A lifetime guarantee is offered, along with general assistance in fettling any new bass as it settles down.
Lastly, the really good news: a concerted effort has been made to keep prices competitive, and the 5-string range starts at £850 for a bolt-on.
It's good to know that we have such capable luthiers in the country, bearing in mind the present overall despondency caused by the recession, and especially when the price of such individuality is so reasonable…
For more information please contact 
CUT AND THRUST Hughes & Kettner Attax/CF-200 Rack Adding to the mind-boggling maze of equipment available in the never-ending search for the best compact rack setup, Hughes & Kettner add in their few pfennigs worth…
Review by Eddie Allen.
The Attax and the CF-200 power amp fit together into a 2U rack case, constituting a small, very portable setup.
Of course the addition of a stereo processor would require a slightly bigger case but would still make for a manageable little rig.
ATTAX PREAMP
The Attax features three separate channels, one solid-state (clean) and two powered by a tube (crunch and lead).
There are two effects loops, an additional MIDI capability (via an add-on module) and a couple of three-band EQ sections, one passive (clean channel), the other a passive/active combination.
There's effects level mixing and the Attax comes complete with footswitch.
The control layout is virtually idiot-proof.
Above the obvious guitar input sits a MIDI Learn switch; this only functions with the MIDI option fitted and allows effect and sound parameter settings to be saved.
The clean channel's volume control comes next, and when cranked to 7 reaches the clip threshold; anything above that adds a soft distortion to the sound.
A green status LED shows the channel is on and Bass, Mid and Treble pots take care of the clean channel's passive EQ.
Marking where the clean channel ends and the tube (a single 12AX7) crunch channel begins is a push-button selector switch.
The controls for both the crunch and the lead channels come after it, the first control being Crunch gain and the second Lead gain, each with a coloured LED showing which channel is active.
Common to both channels, the EQ is a combination of active and passive circuits.
Again it's Bass, Mid and Treble and each pot has a recommended start setting of 12 o'clock to allow for cut or boost, which makes me wonder why these controls are labelled 0 to 10 — wouldn't -5 to +5 have been more sensible?
The Crunch and Lead channel masters have the manual Crunch/Lead push switch sited between them.
The next pot, FX-Mix is interesting.
It fulfils its more conventional role as a control for the mix of wet (effected) signal to dry signal, balancing the level coming through the loop with that going directly through the preamp.
However, if no effects processor is being used it doubles as a second master volume pot, offering yet another sound level for all three channels.
The amp's master volume pot, headphone socket and mains switch make up the remainder of front panel controls.
In fact, the input and headphone sockets are neatly recessed so they're almost flush with the front panel, which is a neat way of finishing them off and I wish more companies would look at ideas like this.
Rear panel connections are as you'd expect: a pair of stereo line outputs, recording outputs, parallel effects loop with mono send/stereo returns, and a series loop with single send and return sockets.
The footswitch socket is a DIN type, hence the plug is somewhat flimsy — stand on it and you could spend the rest of the gig trying to get it back into shape.
That said, the footswitch on the other end of the long cable is a very sturdy metal-cased affar with three switches, each one with its own status LED.
CF-200 POWER AMP
Although the CF-200 power amp might seem less glamorous, it's equally essential to the overall sound and, what's more, it leads an intriguing double life.
On the one hand, it's a guitar power amp, using its ‘current feedback’ circuitry to provide (claim H&K) the same warmth and punch as a tube power amp.
On the other, it can act as a straightforward PA power amp.
Either way it has an output of 100 watts per side into 4 ohms, or 70 watts into 8 ohms.
Changing to bridged mono operation, which is as simple as flicking a switch, allows the CF-200 to kick out something in the region of 200 watts into 8 ohms — and all this from a 1U rack space.
Two level controls live on the front panel, each with a red and green triangular LED; the green illuminates when the signal is -20dB below clipping while the red shows that clipping is actually taking place.
The rear panel houses the selector switch for the PA/guitar option, the aforementioned lockable ‘bridge mode’ switch, an earth lift and a pair of speaker protection fuses.
All in all this is a very neat, compact power amp.
IN USE
The Attax preamp is as easy to use as any combo.
Setting the master volume to around half as a starting point, the channels can be quickly matched for clean, crunch and lead levels.
Balancing the master volume against the power amp's levels will have some effect on the sound so, again, I settled for about half-way, with the CF-200 feeding a pair of Celestion-loaded Proamplifier 2x12 cabinets.
At low output all three channels put out some very convincing sounds.
The clean channel ranges from a sparkle to a dark, deep and warm tone — exactly what I'd expect from a solid state clean channel.
The mid seems a little biased towards the upper part of the frequency band and at low level that also adds bite to the top end, creating a good, solid midrange tone.
Crunch exhibits exactly that, although a certain amount of brittleness does get in the way of the smooth, valve-based sound I tend to prefer.
EQ'ing helps, but I found that over-correction would affect the lead channel, which shares the same tone circuitry, so I had to accept a compromise for my crunch sound.
One thing the Attax has in abundance is overdrive, with all the harmonic overtones you could want.
Initially, this looked promising, but on turning the system up to normal stage volume I'm afraid I was somewhat disappointed.
The only channel I could really work with was the Clean; Crunch and Lead developed a very hard, transistorised quality which, had I not already known differently, would have convinced me that this was a totally solid state preamp.
Loud, the Crunch channel reminded me of a tranny amp struggling to produce a good lead sound, while the lead channel lost its lush sustain and clear harmonics.
I tried lots of EQ and various level changes, but when pushed hard the combination of the pre and power amp made for a hard, aggressive sound which, okay, some players might really go for.
Unfortunately, no-one here was too keen.
Recording with the Attax produced mixed emotions too.
Clean, it was an absolute dream; the EQ offered more than enough scope to produce anything from a cutting Telecaster to a rich acoustic tone, and with the help of a short delay and pitchshift I put a sound onto tape which I'd defy anyone not to recognise as an acoustic guitar — and I'd actually used the Patrick Eggle New York model reviewed elsewhere in this issue.
I continued using this guitar for the distortion sounds and, as with the power amp and cabs, the Attax sounded too processed and clinical for my liking.
But that's not to say it was a bad sound.
Again, using a processor to fatten and delay the sound I could add in enough mid and bass to produce a real American sound with great harmonics.
CONCLUSION
With a great clean sound, reasonable amounts of crunch and buckets-full of sustain, The Attax preamp should've had me jumping about in praise.
Unfortunately, for me it lacked the warmth and character of something like a Marshall JMP-1, a hybrid Crate or the American Carvin Quad-X, all available for around the same money.
To its credit, however, it's initially simpler to use than both the Carvin and the Marshall.
I was disappointed that the valve didn't seem to play as big a part in the sound as I was hoping, so maybe Hughes & Kettner should look at giving this part of the Attax a tweak or two.
Another valve might help; after all, the Marshall has a couple and the Carvin is mob-handed with a total of nine — and I'll say it again, we're talking about the same price range here.
In the end, I was much more impressed by the performance of the CF-200.
Set to guitar mode it gave the sound bags of depth while remaining well up front.
Check one of these out for your rack at the first opportunity.
If a tight, hard-edged sound is your thing then this Hughes & Kettner rig will do the job.
If, however, you're into a more traditional sound — smooth and warm with natural depth — you might well be disappointed when the rig is pushed.
Even so, the use of the effects mix control as a second master volume doubles the Attax' versatility and that could suit the Top 40 player who needs to switch quickly between two levels.
Neither should one underrate the rig's ability to work well with a processor in order to create the kind of modern guitar sounds which, in a mix, are voiced at exactly the right point to cut through…
For further information please contact 
SOUTHERN COMFORT The Black Crowes' Rich Robinson With a stated mission to put the Soul back into rock'n'roll, the Black Crowes visit the UK this month.
Eddie Allen finds Zemaitis-toting guitarist Rich Robinson harbouring some strong feelings about the music establishment…
To date, the Black Crowes' track record includes album sales of over five million for their ‘Shake Your Money Maker’ debut, a Grammy nomination and two MTV Awards, while their first tour saw them performing 350 dates to a total audience of over five million people.
Mixing elements of new and old, ‘Shake…''s organic, loose-limbed rock'n'roll made for a bracing antidote to the prevailing pomp and precision of The Crowes’ hard rock rivals.
And if anything, this year's follow-up LP ‘The Southern Harmony & Musical Companion’(the title comes from a Hymn book) has proven even more popular, and arguably more aggressive than ‘Shake Your Money Maker’.
Recorded in Atlanta, the LP took a mere eight days to record.
The band performed the tracks live, using analogue recording equipment with no regard for the modern, multi-layered, digital way of doing things.
This no-nonsense attitude isn't confined to recording, either.
For the Black Crowes it spans the whole music business, including those who try to label the band the ‘new Rolling Stones’ or ‘The Faces reincarnated’.
‘I'm baffled by the Stones and Faces thing,’ says Rich.
‘I mean, on our first record, the press didn't hit on what we were trying to do, and then on this record they're miles away again.
For them to say either of these records sounds like The Stones or The Faces is insane.
There might be bits of those bands in there, as far as influences go — music I've heard — because all music I've ever heard is obviously an influence.
‘You can't be influenced from the future because you don't know what's going to happen, so you can only be influenced from the past.
But this whole retro-Rolling Stones bullshit, I think it's just the journalists’ way to get uptight and be lazy, picking up on what other people are saying rather than actually thinking for themselves.
I don't think they really want to listen.
‘But there's so much music that we've heard throughout our lifetimes that it all shows up as an influence.
So why don't these guys forget about the influences and worry about what we're doing and what we actually sound like.
‘It's like saying Bob Marley was just a reggae guy.
No, he was Bob Marley, a great musician.
And Bob Dylan wasn't just a folk singer.
He rose above that — he's Bob Dylan.
And the same thing with Zeppelin — no-one ever called them a heavy metal band.
No-one ever called the Clash a punk rock band.
No-one ever called The Stones a rock band; they were just The Stones.
And even Prince, today — no-one ever really tries to pigeonhole him, because he's a truly talented person.
‘The trouble is, the music industry today is so sad and pathetic that if Bob Dylan started a career today, he'd be deemed a Woodie Guthrie wannabe, instead of them saying what amazing songs he's written.
And without some of Bob Dylan's songs we'd be at a huge loss.
Many bands wouldn't even have a career because their careers were based on Bob Dylan's songs.’
Rich might not like the labelling, but some things about The Black Crowes seem to beg the comparisons.
For instance, he's just bought a new Zemaitis guitar, which both Ron Wood and Keith Richards are known to use.
So why did he want one?
‘I think they're great!
I'm kind of partial to Teles, so I talked to him about making a Tele version.
It took three and a half months and I was just wondering about it the whole time and I thought, ‘Man, it's either going to be so good that I'm never going to want to play another guitar, or it's going to suck.
But it'll still be cool just to have it in my house.’
It's like owning a saddle or a gun — it's a personal thing.
But you'd be hard pressed to find someone who takes as much time and care with a musical instrument as Tony Zemaitis.
Even if I never played it again I would put the guitar on display in my house, because it's like a work of art.’
So Rich wouldn't say he was following Wood And Richards?
‘Not really.
Of course I'd seen pictures and I've always wanted a guitar like that.
My Dad used to have custom-made guitars from some people in Tennessee, called the Gower brothers.
They hand-made him this acoustic guitar and I thought it was really beautiful, so I thought I'd like something like that.
Then I saw some pictures of these Zamaitis guitars and thought they were such beautiful instruments that I'd want to try to get one.
And he's made a beautiful one for me, so I'm happy about it.’
And pickups?
‘Well, you can't really define good humbuckers any more, so I just sent the Seymour Duncans which are based on the originals, made the exact same way that the original humbuckers were.’
So, is the Zemaitis destined for a working, or a purely ornamental life?
‘I use it for a couple of songs every night, but because I don't use effects — I just plug into an amp — I always use different guitars to get different tones.
So it plays a part in that sense.’
Do you vary what you use live and in the studio?
‘Yes.
To me the studio is a totally separate entity; you can't go out on stage and try to re-create your record, because it's boring.
I mean, your record is for sitting at home and listening to and live is for taking it somewhere different.’
What do you expect from a guitar amp?
‘Just to sound good.’
What kind are you using?
‘Well, in the studio I used a bunch of Fenders and a couple of Marshalls and I would just switch them around.
Live I use both — like, one Marshall head and one Fender Showman — and I mix the two together.
‘I have four or five cabinets going.
Two are run by one amp and the others are run by another, and then out front our sound guy mixes them.
Actually, on stage it's also mixed because I put one Fender cab on top and a Marshall cab on the bottom and then a Marshall cab on top and a Fender cab on the bottom.
So it mixes it and you can hear the difference.
‘But equipment is not really important to me.
I like guitars, I think they're beautiful things, and that's what I do — I play guitar and therefore I like them as objects.
But as far as being anal about my equipment, as some guys are, I don't really give a shit as long as it sounds good and works.
‘I think it's funny.
You look at some of these effects racks and they have these little buttons you can push and it says ‘Bad Ass’, ‘Heavy Metal’ and ‘Old Fender Tweed’.
Well, why don't you plug into an old Fender Tweed, you f***ing idiot?!
You sit there and spend a million dollars on effects to try to make it sound like something you can already go out and buy.
It's like we're all idiots.’
Do you think of yourself as more of a rhythm guitarist than a lead player?
‘Some people ask me about solos: ‘How come you don't play solos?’ or whatever.
Well, I do play some, but I'm not like ‘the solo guy’ because I think a good song is much harder to come by than a good solo.
It's also a lot harder to be a rhythm player than it is a solo player, because anyone can make their fingers move really fast and play shitty solos.
‘You know, a great solo could be in a shitty song and who would give a shit?
But a hack solo in a great song — it's still a great song.
It's also much harder to know when to back off; it's much harder to know when not to play than when to play.
It's so easy to overplay.
And so many people still don't understand that.’
What's involved in putting a Crowes' song together?
‘Well, we don't really jam in the studio — we just go and record the songs.
And that's how I write songs.
I like flowing things, things that flow together and make sense, so that's how I write.
I mean, I'm not into things that happen for effect or for taste; I like doing things that mean something.
Different people write songs differently, and that's my way of writing.’
But your writing does seem to be carrying a torch for the songs of the mid-'70s.
‘Well, see, in the mid and late '70s I think the music industry dropped the ball, and I think that's why there was rarely a good band in the '80s.
I'm speaking only of the United States, here, where there was a huge low in music.
It was just a sack of shit.
‘I think money became too important.
Disposable bands came in and out and now people are TV stars instead of rock stars.
And there's no mystery to bands any more.
I think people give it away too much; I don't think they take the time to sit down and think about all aspects of being a creative person.
If you're creative in a songwriting sense, then you are a creative person, period.
And that includes thinking about videos.
‘Videos are here to stay, whether that's sad or not, whether it's ruining the industry or not.
And I think that instead of sitting round and bitching about them, which you can do, it's better to try to take more of an interest and make interesting videos, because if you're a creative person I think you can make creative videos.’
What inspires Rich to write?
Is it everyday things, or does he have to wait until he feel really strongly about something?
‘No, I don't get pissed off and run to my guitar and write a song.
They come whenever they come for whatever reason, and I never ask myself what it was about — I just wrote it.
And I think if you start analysing it and trying to think back to how or why, or questioning why it happened, you start worrying about whether it's going to happen again, and then it won't happen.
So don't ask questions.
Also, greed and money and success start becoming involved in the music then, and I think that's when it sucks.
‘I mean, what do you do if you're in a band?
Well, you play.
But then you have these bands, like Def Leppard…
I'm sure they're the nicest guys in the world, but I was at the MTV awards in America when they were trying to do a soundcheck, and they couldn't do a song because their tapes weren't working.
And then they couldn't sing a ballad in the key that they recorded it because of some studio trick!
What is that?
That's not a band!
I mean, what do you say to someone like that?
‘And what do you say to a rap band?
‘Hey, that's a really good sample!
That's a really good choice of sax solo of someone who was actually playing, that you just stole’?
The same thing goes for Def Leppard, or any band like that.
I don't mean to take the piss out of them, but I feel passionately about playing your instrument.
If you're in a band, you play — you don't rely on back-up tapes.
‘I liken being a creative music person to going to see a football game or rugby game.
How disappointed would you be if you went to a game and they made you watch a video instead of the real thing?
The human aspect is the whole point.
‘We recorded this record in eight days, because we can.
Why would you need three years to make a record?
If that's the case, then you're not a band.
People might call me an asshole for saying that, but I think it's cheating the kids and the fans who go out and spend money on a record, who spend their time following a band and respecting and loving that band.
For the longest time everyone thought that people in bands were puppets and idiots.
But then again there haven't really been any bands that have said what they felt in a long time.’
Why is that?
Is it due to intimidation by the record companies?
‘Well, what does the president of Sony records know about music?
Could you sit down and talk to him about your favourite band?
Could you sit down and say, ‘Hey, wasn't it cool what Sly Stone was wearing?’ or ‘What about Jimmy Page's Les Paul?’
It's just business now.
You can work for a record company now because of your college degree, instead of what you know about music.
And a lot of people out there who work for these record companies are idiots who know nothing about music.
Again, I'm speaking on America's behalf here because I don't live in Europe.
But the whole music business has turned into a service industry, and it's ‘give the people what they want’.
Well, how do these people know what they f***ing want?
‘The way I see it, if everyone knew what they wanted, the TV would never have been invented, the car would never have been invented, the plane would never have been invented or ‘Led Zeppelin II’ would never have come out because no one liked ‘Led Zeppelin I’.
That's what it comes down to.’
But can you change anything?
‘If I didn't think I could, then I wouldn't be doing what I'm doing.
If enough bands got together and maybe took a stand, for once, on certain things — like corporate sponsorship, which is a big sack of shit.
‘As far as the position of Top 40 radio in America and radio in Europe, I don't think they give a lot of bands a fair shake.
AOR radio in America, which is album-oriented rock, they take chances on people, they play the whole song and they don't edit.
Top 40 stations in America edit the songs down to three minutes.
But then what happens when three minutes is too long?
Is it going to be two minutes?
And what happens when that's too long?
What happens when it's thirty seconds?
How can you justify taking a whole verse out of a song?
It's like taking a chapter out of a book; it just doesn't work.
And those people say, ‘Well, it doesn't catch our audience's attention.’
Well, who gives a shit?
Those guys have been spoon-feeding this pure shit to their audience for so long, that that's why they don't have an attention span!
Maybe if they took a chance and played a song that was over three minutes long, the audience's attention span would grow.’
How aware are you that the powers that be could be steering you down a particular course?
‘What are they going to do?
I mean, we'll go wherever we want.
We have control of where we're going.
The only thing that could warp the way that the band goes is the media, because they lie for the most part; they come up with their own reasons and their own interpretations and people just believe what they read.’
Before we provoke any lawsuits, let's go back to what turned Rich on to playing guitar in the first place.
What was he listening to when he was growing up?
‘When we were real little, my Dad was into anything from The Chieftains to Sly & The Family Stone, to Joe Cocker, to Buffalo Springfield; there were so many different things that he loved.
Hank Williams…
I mean, anything.
When we were growing up we listened to so much different music and that sat in our heads, I guess.
And I just wanted to play guitar for whatever reason.
‘It wasn't because I saw some guy and said, ‘Hey, he gets a lot of girls,’ or I saw some guy and said, ‘Man, I want to be that guy,’because there's no-one on earth I want to be.
I respect people's music, but I don't give a shit for the people behind it.
If they're nice people then that's good, I'd like to meet them, on the merit of them being good people, honest people.
But other than that I don't really give a shit.’
Did you get your first riffs from your father?
‘No, I taught myself.
Dad never took an interest in Chris and myself being musicians.
He never tried to force the issue.
It was, ‘If you guys want to do it, you can do it; whatever you decide to do I'll be behind you, but I don't want to push you either way because you're individuals.’
Even young people have ideas and can make up their own minds, and he didn't want to tell us what he thought we should do because it was our lives and he realised that.’
Is your family background musical?
‘Well, no — my Dad was an actor.
He acted and danced off Broadway as a young person.
He played semi-pro football and he founded a rugby club.
He's done a lot of things.
There are a lot of different aspects to our family.’
Do you see yourself branching out in any different directions?
‘No, I love music and that's my way to express myself right now.
You've got to do it somehow.
Whatever creative facet or business you're in, you have to express yourself.
Everyone's got to do that, otherwise they're miserable.
All I know how to do is write songs, and that's what I want to do because I would like people to feel as good as I did when I heard a song for the first time.’
How do you personally deal with all the problems you've pointed out?
‘I just don't give a shit.
You can sit down and fume about it, or you can try to change things.
I mean, the whole point of the matter, the whole thing it comes down to, is that you don't have to settle for what is now.
Anything can change; nothing is written in stone.
As far as the music industry, as far as any industry, you don't have to settle for any of it.
And maybe in a few years people will look back and see the things that we tried to do, and hopefully respect them.’
The Black Crowes are successful.
How do you feel about those bands who are trying to follow your example and cash in?
‘A lot of people will be jumping on the bandwagon with anything that's successful.
Like every other Seattle-type band who rips off Guns N’ Roses (er, Rich, are you sure about this?— Grunge Ed ), like any band who rips off REM.
But if you truly believe, and if you're inspired by a band — and you have to be inspired by something — then I think you should just do your homework, and just realise that life existed before Van Halen…’
You look at some of these effects racks and it says ‘Bad Ass’, ‘Heavy Metal’ and ‘Old Fender Tweed’.
Well, why don't you plug into an old Fender Tweed, you  f***ing idiot?!
There's no mystery to bands any more.
I think people give it away too much; I don't think they take the time to sit down and think about all aspects of being a creative person
I liken being a creative music person to going to see a football game or rugby game.
How disappointed would you be if you went to a game and they made you watch a video instead of the real thing?
The whole thing comes it down to, is that you don't have to settle for what is now.
Anything can change; nothing is written in stone
SOLO FLIGHT Manson Bluebird Things are cooking in the fertile minds of Britain's guitar builders.
Rick Bateytwiddles the tuners on a particularly elegant combination of ancient and modern…
Before we get down to examining this unusual and highly specialised guitar, it's worth mentioning once again that there are two Manson brothers, behind two quite separate operations: Hugh is in the solid electric guitar business, while Andy makes acoustics, electro-acoustics and carved arch-top jazz guitars.
The arrival of the Bluebird acoustic now brings the number of different Manson flat-top guitars up to six.
There's the Kingfisher (a small, 12-fret, 00-sized guitar with a slotted headstock), the Raven (another small guitar, designed in collaboration with Ian Anderson of Jethro Tull and featuring a cutaway and a soundhole pickup), the Magpie (a medium-sized guitar, with roughly the same dimensions as a Martin M-series), the Dove (a square-shouldered dreadnought), and finally the Heron (a jumbo-shaped guitar reminiscent of a Guild or a Taylor, also available as a 12-string).
Andy Manson's acoustics come in two styles.
Style I incorporates back and sides of Indian rosewood or similar, an ebony fingerboard, ivoroid binding, dot markers and chrome Schallers, while Style II gives you the all-out luxury treatment, including back and sides of Brazilian rosewood, flamed maple or koa, herringbone binding, a bound fingerboard, diamond position markers, gold Schallers with ebony, gold or pearloid buttons, and so on.
To give a rough idea of the price, a Style I dreadnought retails at £1,150, and a Style II dreadnought at £1,695.
Okay, A.B.
Manson & Co. guitars aren't as cheap as Japanese imports but what you're getting is one of the classiest handmade acoustics in Britain, fully customised to your requirements with extra inlays or even a pickup, and left-handers don't cost a bean extra.
And so to the Bluebird, a small-sized guitar with one obviously unique feature: its shape.
What the maker has done has been to start with a 12-fret guitar design (not a guitar with only twelve frets, but a guitar with a neck that joins at the 12th as opposed to the 14th fret) and then he's combined this with a deep cutaway on the treble side to open up the whole fingerboard for exploration.
But instead of a square heel, or even a radically smoothed-off heel similar to the Revell acoustic we recently reviewed, Andy Manson has gone back to first principles and has ended up virtually doing away with the heel altogether.
In fact, one piece of wood makes up the side of the guitar, all the way from the endpin, round the left-hand side, behind the neck and ending at the point of the cutaway.
Check out the photograph of the heel area, and ask yourself, is that neat, or what?
‘The design of this guitar comes from a number of things,’ Andy explains.
‘First, I've found that people are getting interested again in very lightly-strung guitars, so the Bluebird is built with that in mind.
This one has a .010-.047 set fitted as standard.
‘Secondly, a number of acoustic players are coming round to the belief that the 12-fret configuration is the best for tone, which it is.
But players are also getting used to cutaway acoustics with the whole fingerboard available to play around with, so the Bluebird is really a way of bringing all these factors together in one instrument.’
Koa is the choice for back and sides.
It's an expensive wood and not that easy to work, but the beautiful flaming and the rich pale brown colour makes it worth the trouble.
The top is German spruce, very even-grained and sprayed a delicate ‘aged’ colour.
The neck is Brazilian mahogany, 44mm wide at the nut, finished in thin, gloss water-based lacquer like the rest of the guitar and shaped to a well-rounded V. The headstock, which is bound and has a koa wood facing to match the back and sides, carries a set of gold Schallers with ebony buttons.
Confident that his style is identification enough, the maker has also left his name off the headstock — a cool move.
The fingerboard is plain, dot-free Indian rosewood, with a two-fret extension over the soundhole to bring the number of frets up to twenty-two; The frets themselves are hard nickel silver, made in Holland — not the kind that will need replacing after a year or so.
The bridge is Brazilian rosewood, and comes with six pearl-inlaid bridgepins and a straight saddle, made of Corian and shaped for compensation.
Some guitars hang together design-wise, and some don't.
To my mind, the Bluebird emphatically does; the line of the cutaway is echoed by the curvy, koa-faced headstock, and on the headstock lies a very elaborate inlaid ebony truss rod cover that matches the equally elaborate ebony scratchplate.
The scratchplate draws your eyes to the body outline, the outline leads into the cutaway and…well, you get the idea.
And the body and headstock binding is simple white plastic, to avoid detracting from the overall look.
Some will like the blue-stained purfling line just inside the front binding, and some won't; still, it's a custom guitar.
The most striking thing about this instrument is its weight: it's unbelievably light.
If you've ever picked up a real handmade lute, you'll know the feeling.
Andy has made the top, back and sides thinner than he usually does, with lighter X-bracing to match, and the end-blocks are as small as possible.
He's even lightened the kerfing (the strips running around the internal edges of the body) by steam-bending thin pieces of solid maple to fit the exact curve, and then carving the wood away to the absolute minimum.
Why all the trouble?
‘This is intended to be a very personal, intimate guitar,’ explains Andy.
‘It makes no compromises towards projected volume.
Of course, if you want to perform with it then you can mike it up just as easily as any other guitar, but it's really a player's instrument — a guitar for the kitchen, if you like.
I always like to build guitars with specific people in mind…
With this one, I suppose I was thinking of Dave Gilmour sitting on his veranda!
‘You see, the trouble with guitars that are designed to project is that they just don't sound good to the player.
But if you're playing guitar for your own personal pleasure, which many of us do, then you want the guitar to talk to you — not to some non-existent person sitting fifteen feet away.
With a lightly-built guitar, the sound ‘surrounds’ the instrument, and it's the player who gets the full enjoyment.’
Sure enough, Andy's new baby is a delicious-sounding thing — crisp, subtle and very, very sensitive, perfect for anything from complex traditional-style tunes through to New Age doodlings, thumb-picked ragtime or simply strumming with a light pick.
It's surprisingly loud and sounds just superb with dropped tunings; dedicated fingerpickers of the Martin Simpson or Martin Carthy schools should investigate this guitar with all speed.
I did find that the sensitivity and thin construction has two side-effects.
The first is a faintly dead, thuddy response on certain notes, like the open G. It's by no means disastrous, but it's there.
However, quieter deadspots and louder ‘wolfnotes’ are inherent to all wooden instruments, and it's usually not a problem to adapt to them.
The second side-effect — and this isn't necessarily a criticism — was that I found this guitar absolutely unbearable to play unless it was as near perfectly in tune as possible.
In desperation I sometimes reverted to tuning step-by-step by harmonics, something I haven't done for yonks.
But while this is a perfectionist's instrument, it's not intimidating.
In fact, the light weight, the attractive looks, the easy-feeling neck and the light, low action make it one of the most pick-up-able guitars we've had for some time.
CONCLUSION
Oh dear, it's unequivocal approval time again.
It's very, very hard to fault this guitar; it looks superb, it's made to the highest possible standards and it also works a treat, combining near-total fingerboard access with a bright, responsive, almost classical sound.
Andy Manson has a reputation as one of the most stylish guitar-makers around, and the new Bluebird is arguably the most stylish guitar he makes.
Who's going to buy one?
I don't know, although if I were a rich rock star I'd probably be on the phone to Mr. Manson before you could say ‘creative accounting’.
Price from £1,200
Left-handers at no extra charge.
For further information contact 
TICKET TO RIDE Encore RK-33R & RK-32ZB Some guitars are easier to copy than others.
Rick Batey examines some potentially cut-price fares to the world of jangle…
The recent appearance of low-price Rickenbacker copies from Encore and Tanglewood calls for a bit of discussion on the replica guitar business in general.
Now, some people take the view that replica guitars are always completely justified; USA-made instruments are over-priced, they argue, and if a Far Eastern company can make the same product for half the money, then what's the problem?
It's only free enterprise, after all.
For example, take Tokai's notorious early '80s Fender copies: at long last , affordable, pro-quality guitars with classic looks for the impoverished working musician.
And aren't these Encore guitars exactly the same thing?
Well, not quite.
For one thing, Fender seemed to deserve Tokai's kick up the backside, since apparent mismanagement and increasingly poor quality control meant that from the early '70s through to about ‘82, Fender simply weren't offering the musician a consistent, value-for-money product.
You just can't level the same accusation at Rickenbacker, since they've always made good stuff.
Secondly, Fender were prepared to compromise themselves to try to clobber Tokai by setting up Fender Japan; Rickenbacker's whole philosophy, on the other hand, is based upon never making guitars anywhere other than under their own roof.
And lastly, Tokais were good.
Really good.
As good as Fenders of the '70s, and often considerably better.
And these Encores?
They look like Rickenbackers, especially from fifteen feet away, and they're perhaps fairly acceptable for the price, but they're not comparable to Tokais.
But that's jumping the gun…
CONSTRUCTION
What we have here is one jet-black copy of a Lennon-style Rickenbacker 325 (dubbed the RK-32B, ho ho) and one red sunburst-finished copy of Townshend's fave battleaxe the 330, the Encore RK-33R (I think we'll call them the red one and the black one).
Visually, the black one is by far the more convincing of the two, even though close inspection reveals a badly rippled finish.
Wisely, Encore have opted to copy Rickenbacker's famous body cut-outs to accommodate the tailpieces, but the 330 copy suffers from a cheap-looking sunburst, and the roughly sawn-out triangular soundhole displays the body construction all too clearly.
It's been routed from a solid block of not very posh plywood.
Neck-through-body construction?
Not a chance.
Plateless bolt-on necks are the order of the day, and the Koreans have had to work out a strange method of extending the neck an extra step past the end of the fingerboard to try to keep the Rickenbacker look (you might be able to spot this feature on the black one, between the neck and middle pickups).
Incidentally, both necks can be shifted around in their sockets by applying pressure from the side.
Built to a 24½″ scale, the necks are maple and appear to have genuine rosewood fingerboards.
But they're not like real Rickenbacker necks, since they have kicked-back headstocks and no walnut stripes, and in fact they look and feel like the standard Korean-issue necks you'd find on a hundred other guitars.
The hardware is…interesting.
The tailpieces look like they came off an Eko electric from the '60s, and they've added squiggly wire designs that echo the famous ‘R’ tailpiece — from fifty feet, anyway.
The bridges are lightweight affairs, complete with handrests; the six saddles are adjustable for intonation, but for height adjustment you've got to play with the four screw-legs that hold the whole bridge up.
The pickups — three on the black one, two on the red one — are single-coils, and completely non-adjustable.
The double-layer white scratchplates sport two volume knobs and two tone knobs apiece, together with Gibson-style three-way switches.
And, finally, the machineheads are not Kluson copies, as you might expect, but tubby-buttoned Schaller copies.
IN USE
And so — cue dramatic drumroll — how do they play?
Not very well, I'm afraid, especially the black one.
The nut is the main offender; it's so ludicrously high that you can easily slide a matchstick between the top string and the first fret.
Apart from that, the neck is almost acceptably straight and the frets aren't too bad, but with a nut like that, it barely seems to matter.
The 330 copy is a bit better.
The neck is a wee bit too wide for the strings, or the bridge is too narrow for the neck — whichever way you want to look at it.
The nut is still miles too high, and the strings choke off badly, despite the way the frets have been heavily filed in an attempt to cure a slightly wavy neck, but it's within the realms of playability…just.
It sounds quite jangly acoustically, and I suppose it's quite amusing in a cheesy kind of way.
As for the amplified sound, it all depends on where your tastes lie.
If you like Danelectros and Silvertones, for instance, then you'll probably love these Encores.
The bridge pickups are the best ones on both guitars, producing quite an effective gnarly jangle.
The 330 copy comes off best again but, just like the black one, its middle and rhythm positions are disproportionately loud and bass-heavy.
CONCLUSION
Well, they're cheap, and that's something.
An hour on the workbench could make them play quite reasonably, but don't imagine you're getting anything like a real Rickenbacker for a bargain price; they've got the looks, but that's about all.
Both guitars are too inexpensive to have received much setting up, and both suffer from poor finishes, bad chrome plating, uneven frets, indifferent machineheads and ill-balanced pickups.
The importer's answer would undoubtedly be ‘what do you expect for this kind of money?’
That's a tricky one, but one thing's for sure: it's much, much harder to make a worthwhile Rickenbacker copy than a worthwhile Fender copy, and I should imagine that Rickenbacker themselves view these particular replicas as a bit of an insult.
I'm sure these guitars are actually selling rather well, although all you starry-eyed 14-year olds out there with Ride or R.E.M.
fixations might do better in the long run by holding out until you've got enough cash to buy the real thing.
For further information please contact .
BLUES' SCALES Blues Saraceno Blues Saraceno's metabolic rate must be seven times faster than the rest of mankind's.
He talks fast, plays fast and at only 20 has crammed in the kind of experience which guitarists twice his age would envy…
Interview by David Mead.
Talking to Saraceno is a runaway train ride, a ‘stream of consciousness’ affair prone to sudden changes of track, with alternate persona interrupting at random.
Blues (yes, it's his real name!) started playing when he was nine.
His father played guitar and the young Saraceno picked things up from watching him.
‘Originally I was going to race bikes,’ confides Blues.
‘That's much more cool than playing guitar when you're nine.
I was going to be a pro racer and was doing real good until, at thirteen, I was goofing around and broke my arm.’
The accident put paid to Blues' thoughts of racing, but also rekindled his interest in the guitar.
‘I had to spend a month in a cast,’ he recalls, ‘so when they set the cast, I had them set it so I could move my arm just enough to play.’
Kind of like Les Paul?
‘Kinda, but it wasn't that drastic.
It was in a sling and I figured that if I could move it, I could play.’
What was your first guitar?
‘It was a really cool guitar.
It was a Wish.
It was made by this guy who built guitars, some hippy dude, and it was the oddest-shaped guitar.
It was really bizarre.
It had the exact headstock that's on the Washburn guitars, only years and years ago.
I really hated it!
It looked like an elf shoe, it looked like Santa's helper's elf shoe!
But it had 22 frets, big frets, and really loud humbuckers and that was why I liked it.
It was cool and so I played it…
Remember, I was only nine!
‘Then I sold it for a Telecaster, which I hated, because the Tele didn't have any knobs; it was a real simple guitar and I didn't like it, so I bought a Les Paul and I loved it.
I liked the Les Paul because it had a lot of knobs!
And then I sold that and ended up getting a Strat.
I've had tons of guitars, but never at the same time — I never had enough money to have them all at once.’
What was your first musical influence?
‘My father, just because he played.
My Dad was a kinda bluesy player and so I liked that.
Then, when I was eleven, he had a friend who owned a music store and he talked him into letting me work Saturdays.
So I would go down there and that's where I got hip to Van Halen, because all the kids were playing the stupid Eruption solo every day.
So it's like, ‘Who is this guy?’ and that's how I got into Van Halen.
Once I got into him, then I started listening to Johnny Winter, Brian May, Ritchie Blackmore…
‘There were always people around the house, like my Dad's band, and so that's how I learned to play bass and drums as well, 'cos it was just there.
I didn't think about it.
Everybody makes a big deal out of it now, because I've done a couple of albums and you do all these guest sessions and stuff and it's like ‘Wow, he plays bass.
Wow, he plays drums —multi-talented!’ and you've just grown up with it and it's no big deal.
Everybody I know plays a couple of instruments.’
You've developed a style which is immune from the dash, flash, thrash and crash of the modern, do-or-die fraternity…
‘Well, when you first hear that, it's real impressive, all these guys chasing round the fretboard.
It's the typically cool thing, but it just seemed like a road to nowhere.
It's good, but I look at it like…did you see the movie ‘Road Warrior’?'
Er, I don't believe so…
‘Well, it's Mel Gibson and he hits this turbo drive and this car just takes off.
Now that's cool!
So, to play fast, you're cruising along, you hit the turbo drive and then it's cool, but if you start out of the gate going 1000 miles an hour, it's not impressive any more.
It was the same when The Who smashed their gear at the end: everyone would turn up just to see them smash their gear and it wasn't cool, because everybody knew they were going to do it.
The only reason why I go to see a Nirvana show is just to see them wreck the gear!
‘So the deal is, with all the fast playing, I thought it was very good and I'm very much for it, but it should be the icing on the cake.
Trouble is, if someone gave you icing all the time and no cake, that just sucks.
Anything's only as good as the foundation it's built on.
That's my whole approach.
There's a cut on the album called Friday's Walk which has got some of the fastest playing on the album, and yet it's the slowest track on the album.
And the tune two cuts later is the fastest one and yet that's the one where I probably play slowest.
A lot of players go straight for it, and they don't set it up.
It's like just telling the punchline: if you don't know the joke, it's not that funny.’
So how did you develop your style?
I've a feeling you're going to say ‘practice’.
‘You kinda just do it.
It's natural.
There is definitely discipline at the beginning, to get your chops to par.’
You didn't do the GIT thing?
‘Naaah, too lazy!
I think my style basically came from copying other people's stuff, but it was never that important to me to get it perfect.
So it would be, ‘Hey, this is close enough.
This looks like a Van Halen thing.
Cool!’
So it was basically my completely wrecked versions of someone else's things.
But I think it's starting to turn now.
I can remember when Malmsteen hit, everybody was getting very technically geared up and that was the thing.
Now that has come to pass, I think everyone is gearing back down and it will be down for a couple of years before it goes back up; it just seems to go back and forth.
What really impresses me about players is having a unique sound, whether it's fast or slow.
A lot of people say that if you play fast you have no feeling, which is completely wrong.
If you have feeling, then you can have fast feeling.
That's the way I look at it.
‘When I play, some days it's off, some days it's on, and I take it for what it is.
If it's off then I just walk off stage and go ‘Eeyaahh!’ and that's it.
If it's on, then I go ‘Cool.
Too bad every other day can't be like this.’
I've gone to see my favourite players play — I'd see them one night and they'd be phenomenal and I'd like the show so much that I would go the next night, drive two hours to see it and it would suuuuck!and that's just the way it is.’
What was the first big break for you?
‘I was working at the store and I was pretty much going nowhere, from eleven to fifteen.
It was a great learning experience and I needed that time, but I wasn't moving in leaps and bounds.
So I wanted to progress and I just couldn't do it.
Now, Michael Bolton was from my town, Newhaven, and this guy I knew just knew him, and he says, ‘Michael, I got this kid I'm thinking of managing; tell me what you think of him.’
So Michael says, ‘Bring him down to the studio.
I'll have him play on my album.’
So I played on this really, really heavy cut by Michael Bolton — it was really rockin' and it was really cool.
I walked out of there thinking ‘Damn, that's a cool cut!’
We had Desmond Child producing at the time when Bon Jovi were at the top of the ladder.
‘So we did that and I went and told everybody , because I was like sixteen at the time I did it.
I'd just got my licence and I drove into Manhattan, because I got my licence the day I turned sixteen.
I told everyone!
My teachers were goin' ‘Hey, why weren't you in school?’ and I was goin' ‘Oh, I was doing a record with Michael Bolton!’
Cool, y'know?
Then the album came out about six months later and there was no track — the track never made it to the album!
So I was completely depressed for a week and then Cher's album came out and I'm on that !
‘What happened was, the track was very heavy and I guess Michael wanted to go more toward a ballad direction, so what they did was sell the song to Cher and she sang on it.
So that's how I ended up on Cher's album.
It just started from there and Michael said he liked the way I played and that he would help me along in the industry, and this was just before his career hit.
‘So I had two choices.
I could have done that or I could have done the instrumental album.
But I chose to do the instrumental album, even though it was a lot smaller scale, because I had more control.
‘Michael was getting busier and our appointments were getting further apart.
He'd say, ‘Well, I'm in a meeting on Tuesday and I'm on MTV on Thursday.’
So it just got to the point when he was getting real busy and I didn't want to put my fate in someone else's hands — even though my way it was a much slower progression.
I realised Michael could save me maybe five years of work, but I figured I'd rather go slow and steady than to go fast and have it all fall apart.
‘So I did the first album, ‘Never Look Back’, and it did really well.
I only intended to do that first album, because it was a new label and I didn't want to sign to a label that had no track record.
So the whole approach to the album was to make this cool CD sampler.
I thought I'd play for thirty minutes, 'cos any more than that is kinda boring — thirty minutes of anything is enough.
I figured that rather than have a tape and a black and white photo, I would have a CD that would be in colour .
So I did the CD, put it out and thought, ‘Hey, if it sells a couple of thousand, I'll be smiling all the way,’ because I just did it so I could have something to hand people.
‘And it did really, really well.
It went out, the press got behind it and it began turning into something.
We were getting letters, saying ‘Do another album’ and the buzz was getting really big.
But I never took it that seriously; I just did it to do it.
Then they came and said, ‘We want to do a second album’, and I really didn't want to do it, because I don't want to be the next, let's say, Joe Satriani or Eric Johnson, even though those guys are really successful in their field.
It's just not what I want to do; I don't want to be The Guitarist's Guitarist .
‘The album is just like one leaf on the tree, and that's why I waited two years to do the next one, because I wanted to be sure that my playing had something new to offer.
There's nothing worse than people just spitting out albums; you get all these mediocre albums that do nothing but take up shelf space.
‘I did this one at my house.
I engineered it and produced it, I did all the bass and everything else on it except the drums.
On the first one, I didn't have as much control: I had no track record, I was sixteen and they said, ‘Just play and SHUT UP!’
On the second one it was more like, ‘Okay, this is what we want to do, but if you don't like it then we won't do it.’
I did the album at my house because, that way, they would come in and say, ‘Oh, I think we should do this, this, this and this,’ and I would say, ‘Hey, great idea!’
And then they'd leave and I would do exactly what I wanted.
It was good experience.
I don't think I would actually want to be a producer, but I know I'm capable of doing it if I chose to.’
You toured with Jack Bruce and Ginger Baker.
I would imagine that nobody can do that gig without the inevitable EC comparison…
‘I think I got off really lightly.
What I figured was that EC ain't playing like EC used to play any more, so I played exactly as if it was a garage band from Seattle!
I just approached it in the way I would were it my album and my band.
‘A lot of people liked it and some didn't, though the press was real kind about it.
We played in Los Angeles and New York and it was real good, because they all picked up on the fact that it was different.
So I think the tour did a lot for me.’
Jack and Ginger are renowned for their differences of opinion.
Were there any upsets?
‘It varied from perfectly cool to completely outrageous!
To the point where the tour had been cancelled about four times.
Cops were showing up…
I mean, it was great!
I've got stories: equipment getting trashed, feet through speakers, Ginger would throw lighted cigarettes in my hair!
But you expect it, y'know?
One thing I learned there was how to deal with people and basically just how to get through it all.’
On stage, Blues uses a Marshall JCM900 100 watt half-stack, a wah-wah pedal and a custom designed Yamaha guitar in a delicate shade of plaid, or green tartan, if you prefer…
‘I built this guitar for myself and what I wanted was something very simple.
The pickups look like Seymour Duncan Trembuckers, but they're not — they're Blues Trembuckers.
It's a completely different pickup, it's wound completely different, it sounds completely different.
I said what I wanted was a pickup to make my guitar sound more like a Les Paul — really fat and not this thin, screechy shit that everyone's got.
‘So we made the pickup and it did really well.
At first I said, ‘Don't put this pickup out; I don't want anyone to have it.’
But sure enough, they got all these calls, people wanted them and so they put it out.
The only thing I'm bent out of shape about is that nobody knows it's a different pickup; everyone thinks it's a regular Trembucker!
‘I had the guitar built pretty much like a Strat body.
I mean, why reinvent the wheel if it rolls?
The wood is alder and the deal is that I scaled down the body a little bit.
Everybody is making the bodies real small, but I scaled down a teeny bit and what I took off that way, I added in thickness, so it's fat, like a Les Paul, so you can get that big, beefy sound.
It's got a big neck and twenty-two big frets, Jim Dunlop 6100s.
A lot of people make guitars that look great, but they're designers, not players.
I mean, three little toggle switches look great but you just can't get to them in time — they suck!
So I put the knob where you can reach it, but it's not in the way.
You can see how much I move the switch — I wear the paint off the thing — but I put it where you can always get at it.
I also designed the neck joint.
The two usual options are either a big block, like on the back of a Strat, which is really hard to deal with, or there's nothing, because they've sanded it all away.
So I split the difference.
I used clay — I put my palm in clay to get the natural contours of my hand.
Although my hand may be bigger than a lot of people's, it's still a hand — it's not a block of wood.
So this is a player's instrument.
A lot of people scarf the neck to keep costs down, but I wanted the quality.
I didn't tilt the headstock and we countersunk the Floyd.
Everything about it is a player's guitar.
Anyone who picks it up will notice that it feels real comfortable.’
A guitarist your age should be looking to the future.
What do you see in it for you?
‘The future for me is going to be a vocal project.
We did the second album, and even though it is hard to find, which is depressing as hell, it sells.
And that's real good.
‘I'm really into the guitar playing, because that's what I'm about, but there are so many other things that I'm capable of and so I want to get some of that out there, too.
So there will be a third album, because there's a real big demand for it, plus, I've got so much material that I want to get out.
‘But I really want to get out of this Guitarist's Guitarist scene.
I want to be in a band, because that's what I'm strongest at.
These albums are me doing everything, but can you imagine if I had three other players who were pulling an equal share?
You'd have one hell of a project!
Three people are always stronger than one…’
A lot of people say that if you play fast you have no feeling, which is completely wrong.
If you have feeling, then you can have fast feeling
My teachers were goin' ‘Hey, why weren't you in school?’ and I was goin' ‘Oh, I was doing a record with Michael Bolton!'
The tour had been cancelled about four times.
Cops were showing up…
I mean, it was great
PRIME EXAMPLES PRS EG-1 & EG-2 As everybody knows, you have to pay for quality but, as Eddie Allendiscovers, the price isn't always as high as you might think…
Mention the name Paul Reed Smith and most people's wallets head for the hills.
Okay, PRSes are expensive, and that prevents a lot of players even considering one.
What's more, the early EG models, which sold for just under £600, didn't seem to have the feel or charisma of the Customs and Classics.
But all that could change with the latest EG models.
Most guitarists would expect to pay anything between £500 and £1000 for an all-American, quality-built, pro-standard instrument, and as the EGs here fit that bill, their asking price of around £800 would seem reasonable.
Of course, saying that, I am assuming these instruments are up to the company's usual standard and not just the poor man's alternative.
CONSTRUCTION
The EG is available in three models: EG-1, EG-2 and EG-3, the difference being in each guitar's pickup configuration.
The EG-1 features a bridge humbucker and two single coils, the EG-2 is humbucker/single-coil/humbucker, while the EG-3 has three single coils.
While the middle single coil on the EG-2 is of regular design, the single coils on the EG-1 are designed especially to keep the noise down, and presumably also to emulate Gibson's P-90 in picking up more of the vibrating string, thanks to some added width.
Imagine a normal single coil split in the middle, with one side then reversed; the result is still a single coil pickup but one which isn't susceptible to noise.
Actually, it's not unlike an Precision bass pickup, only encapsulated as one unit.
There are two body options in the EG range.
Solid alder, the cheaper of the two and the one we have here, or maple topped, which naturally pushes the price up towards that magic £1000.
The new EGs have been rethought and in part redesigned with a less obvious PRS body style.
There are also improvements in the routing department: the early EGs had large pickup cavities under the scratchplates, but on the new versions the cavities have been kept as small as possible to retain wood, with the aim of improving tone and sustain.
Another major deviation from the old EG range involves the machineheads.
Here, they're real PRS locking machines as used on all the top-notch PRS guitars — not the non-locking Schallers used previously.
Black or white tri-laminate scratchplates come as standard, but these can be changed for a much more interesting and fashionable pearloid affair which, for some strange reason, costs a touch more.
The tremolo is the tried and tested PRS type which I rate as probably the best all-round compromise for elegance, usability and tuning stability.
Thanks to the locking tuners, the EG's trem performs just as well as that on the top-of-the-range Artist costing around £2,000 more!
A single volume, tone and five-way selector operate all the usual switching and adjusting functions, but the EGs have an additional control in the tone pot; pulling it out acts as a coil tap for the humbuckers.
The neck joins the body around the 21st fret and has the same fixing as the old EG. It's a mortice and tenon joint with the hidden part running under the scratchplate.
All EGs have one-piece maple necks with rosewood fingerboards, 22 superbly finished frets and the feel of a real PRS, even though the neck is finished with a matt lacquer.
This is already starting to ‘gloss up’ with use, giving both these guitars a friendly, used feel after only a couple of days' playing.
From the nut up is unmistakably PRS, and while one or two people around the office weren't sure if they liked the standard PRS headstock shape on this design I think it looks fine, instantly identifying the instrument.
IN USE
The consistency in the build quality and feel of these two instruments is such that the only real difference lies in their pickup configurations; swap one to the other and the EG-1 would become the EG-2 and vice-versa.
When I took these two guitars into the studio to try them out, over the course of the first hour everyone and their cat called in and couldn't resist having a go.
Interestingly, these instruments complement each other very well tonally, and as we muddled through everything from new age to rock to the Isley Brothers greatest hits, the EGs seemed the ideal instruments for every job.
Taking the EG-1 first, the HFS bridge humbucker delivers a warm, fat sound reminiscent of a vintage PAF, and while the guitar doesn't have the image of a rocker the bridge pickup is almost arrogant in the way it handles an amp at full tilt.
With the same amp settings the low hum single coils sing with almost the character of a Gibson P90.
With a clean tone they're warm and solid-sounding, offering just the right amount of signal to cause the amp to get gritty when the guitar's volume pot is whacked full up.
Back off the volume and the sound cleans up really well and shows hardly any sign of thinning out.
The same is true for the humbucker, which has all the power and big sound you'd expect, with none of that excessive mid-range honk.
Pulling the tone pot taps the humbucker, and compared with the middle single coil it seems a little tame.
I'd tend to use the middle pickup for solos requiring a full ‘Strat-type’ sound.
Using the pickup selector set between middle and bridge the two pickups blend very well, and although the sound in this position is usually the weakest, on the EG-1 it's stronger than you'd expect and balances favourably with the other positions.
The EG-2 sports two identical HFS humbuckers, so when these are coil-tapped the EG-2 has the configuration of a standard Stratocaster.
This gives it the versatility of a Strat or Les Paul and with the power of the untapped HFS pickups it really is the best of both worlds.
Here I feel the middle single coil is a little on the thin side against the tapped humbuckers, but when the five-way is in positions two or four it makes for some interesting and very usable tonal combinations.
Both guitars have a real PRS feel and the wide, thin necks are comfortable for any style.
Top fret access is adequate, although I think a touch more contouring on the rear of the lower cutaway would make it even better.
CONCLUSION
Years ago I owned a Mercedes Benz estate car.
More recently I've driven other Mercs, a 190E and also our Chairman's 500SEL.
Surprisingly, although they were all different models from different eras, they had the same familiar feel about them.
The same is true of these PRS EGs; both the EG-1 and EG-2 feel like my own PRS, which I suppose is what I'm really trying to say here.
Build quality and sound are as good as I expected, so these guitars are definitely not poor relations.
They are the real thing and have all the hallmarks that have made PRS one of the world's top-rated manufacturers.
Different colours are available, as well as custom finishes, but I hope PRS don't start offering options that push the price over £1000, because with their current retail price these guitars offer not a cheap, but at least a reasonably affordable chance to own a real quality instrument.
And what's more, someone who already owns a PRS and needs a comparable spare guitar can now have one.
So, just when you thought you couldn't afford a real Paul Reed Smith and were going to spend what money you had managed to save on something else, along comes the new EG range.
Ain't life a bitch?
RRP: EG-1, EG-2 £799.00 inc case
Left-handed models should be available in the new year.
For further information please contact 
CURIOUSER AND CURIOUSER Alvarez Offset & Villain Basses Alvarez seem determined to occupy that contentious area between patentable innovation and marketable gimmick…
Review by Gibson Keddie.
In Rick Batey's review of the Alvarez Scoop guitar, he found a good basic instrument whose success in the UK may be impeded rather than enhanced by its outlandish appearance.
Still, the Alvarez range is by no means confined to the self-consciously exotic: guitar-wise, there's the non-scoop AED200, a more conventional style of guitar which counterbalances the company's more elaborate ambitions.
As we can see, Alvarez' balanced strategy also holds sway in the bass arena.
The Offset represents the weird and wonderful, and at first glance has the same unsettling effect as an optical illusion.
Something here is not quite as it should be, and it takes a while to work out exactly what it is…
Firstly, though, the Villain bass, which serves to illustrate Alvarez' more conventional side.
This one is the AE900 5-string version, although an AE800 4-stringer is also available.
First impressions are of a bass which looks very long, with a full-size body, 24-fret neck, 34″ scale length helping to keep the low B-string commendably taut, and an elegantly-shaped five-peg headstock.
It may be a lengthy beast, but the body is positively anorexic, at least helping to keep the instrument's weight within reasonable limits.
The body is solid alder, arched gently at the front and back and tapering to a width which is just wide enough to accommodate the Switchcraft-type output jack socket on the lower rim.
The ever-familiar profile seems to derive more than a smidgeon of alternative inspiration from Aria's Magna-series, as in fact does the whole bass.
The cutaways are quite pronounced below the horns, turning into the fretboard fairly high up (the 20th fret for the top, the 22nd for the lower) and giving the bass a very contemporary and streamlined look.
Although the reach of the top horn only extends as far as the 14th fret (which could spell balance problems given such a long neck) the body does have a pronounced lower bout, with the face-mounted bridge situated quite well back; this relocated mass helps to preclude potential neck-heaviness.
Alvarez-designed EMG pickups are used in traditional ‘P’ and ‘J’fashion, and are controlled by three rotaries offering individual pickup volume, plus pickup pan.
The rotaries possess a nicely damped action, and the mini-toggle (with LED indicator) operates ‘active’ selection.
On the back of the Villain bass there is a usefully large access plate for the control cavity, with a separate, centrally-located flip-top battery cover hiding a single PP-9.
The neckplate sits on the instrument's chamfered heel, the chamfering helping the player to access upper-register notes.
The neck itself is made from Canadian maple and feels fairly slim for a five — 45mm across the nut, with a depth of just 23mm and a width of 60mm at the twelfth fret.
The shallow oval profile is flattened and squared at the heel to match its recessed location in the body.
The raked-back headstock has been scarfed-on between the nut and the machines, indicating measures of economy in manufacture (it's supposedly stronger, too, but with maple there's not normally a strength problem).
The top end finishes up with the three-over-two layout of Gotoh black chrome machines.
IN USE
So, Villain by name, villain by nature?
Not really, but I must confess to experiencing some trouble locating my favourite sounds.
In ‘passive’ mode the bass felt slightly lacking in ooomph, and also somewhat susceptible to unwanted noise.
This was rectified to an extent by switching in the active circuitry, which gave the signal a kick in the pants, but care had to be exercised to avoid muddying-up the lower-mid frequencies and making the treble over-twangy.
The Villain is a bit buzzy, too, often a problem with 24-fret 5-stringers due to the difficulty of getting three and a half octaves worth of notes to perform equally.
Which brings me to another point; looking at the frets after only minimal use there's already evidence of some scoring and scratching, so their life expectancy seems rather suspect.
Which is unfortunate, for with some extra attention paid to these details this could have been a worthy instrument rather than just a competent one.
DANA SIGNATURE ‘OFFSET’ AE700
Okay, so you've looked at it again and worked out that the strings appear as though they've somehow slipped across the body.
Time for the brochure to explain why…
‘The Dana 700 has an offset neck, because when you play a bass, the neck normally angles away from your playing hand; with the Dana, the neck is offset on the guitar body and angles straight at your playing hand, making this the most logical, easy to play bass ever…’
The Offset again makes use of a slimmed-down, solid alder body, with some fairly pronounced ribcage contouring.
A very basic but functional bridge is secured to the body by four rather insubstantial-looking screws.
J and P pickups again, this time ‘Dana’ models, three rotaries and a three-way toggle switch to control the on-board DSR6 Bass Harmonic Enhancer.
The 24-fret neck, this time bolted on by four individually countersunk screws and collars, also uses Canadian maple for construction, topped off with a rosewood fingerboard and those unusual ‘white-line’ block markers.
The gently raked-back pointy-esque headstock is again scarfed on between the nut and the first machine.
IN USE
Acoustically, the Dana Offset does have a distinctive feel.
Plugged in, you get the benefit of the Harmonic Enhancer, which offers controllable amounts of additional harmonics to brighten and colour the sound.
The niggles are still there, though.
I can't find anyone who actually likes this offset idea, and you really don't want to spend your playing career justifying why your instrument looks so wacky; left to hang around the user's neck, it does actually rest neck-up, as promised, although I would think that this has a fair bit to do with the strap button being under the top horn and slightly back towards the body.
The frets here seem as soft as those on the Villain, and this would appear to be an area which the company will have to address, as it does them a disservice; do they know how long poor quality bass frets last?
The oblong block markers aren't centrally positioned either; perhaps they're meant to be offset as well…
The neck is bowed out of shape already, which, in truth, could happen to any bass, but it's not to be expected from an instrument with virtually zero miles on the clock, and these initial impressions are important to anyone considering an investment.
CONCLUSION
If an instrument is to be marketed as different, radical even, it's important to have successfully addressed the basics.
Alvarez' oversights are unfortunate because it's genuinely heartening to see a company actively promoting a bass range.
Although they are offering something different in the instrument arena, they could have scored higher by paying more attention to the basic build quality of these instruments.
For further information please contact any branch of 
ARTISTIC LICENCE ART Multiverb Alpha 2.0 Applied Research & Technology have long since established themselves as makers of quality rack equipment.
The Alpha 2.0 processor is one of the newest generation of all-singing, all-dancing sound tools which look set to keep the guitarist's interest in digital effects very much alive…
Review by Eddie Allen.
What should have been a simple review looked like it was about to turn into techno-confusion when the owner's manual stated I could find a hook-up diagram on page 42, and it wasn't there.
Apparently, the blank white space on that page matched the expression on my face as I envisaged programming the Alpha 2.0 unaided.
To be fair, the diagram turned up on page 45 and, anyway, the Alpha 2.0 proves straightforward enough when it comes to hooking up to a power amp, combo or mixer.
What's not so easy is working out which button does what, and why.
The layout of the Alpha 2.0 isn't the simplest to get to grips with without some help — especially if you're used to such simple machines as the Alesis Quadraverb — and the fact that the manual seems to require a PhD in logistics to understand just makes it all the more frustrating.
Please, ART, write your manuals for musos, not for engineers!
Part of the problem is that the Alpha 2.0 has so many features.
The 20 KHz bandwidth, 24 bit digital integrated effects system offers a total of 50 effects, a built-in bass and guitar tuner, two octaves of pitch transposing plus multi-interval pitch shifting, 200 memory locations, sampling, full programming of all parameters, programmable 7 band graphic, random access keypad, stereo/mono operation, 9-volt DC output socket for powering MIDI pedals, two assignable remote jacks, cuddly toy, microwave…
Okay, so I lied about the cuddly toy and the microwave, but I bet if ART could have got them into the Multiverb's 1U, 19″ rack format they would have.
The control layout is on a par with ART's tried and tested formula, and on the face of it should be fairly simple to understand.
However, as a lot of the controls serve two functions, some initial confusion can arise.
LEDs alongside certain buttons indicate which mode of operation has been selected and these do help in keeping tabs on what's happening during programming.
The LCD display window to the left of the front panel and the LED readout in the centre are clear enough: the LCD shows patch name, effects in use and other essential programming information; the LED tells the patch number and also becomes the tuning meter when the Alpha's internal bass/guitar tuner patch is selected.
Between these two displays are the rotary encoder control and four push buttons.
The encoder is used to make changes to presets, parameters and values and it ‘clicks’ through 360 degrees, with each click changing the selected parameter by one step.
The four push buttons select either Preset mode, which can be adjusted by either the encoder or the front panel keypad, Mix (for balancing the effects against the dry signal, or against the effected or dry EQ signal), Parameter (for accessing the effects in a patch) and Value (which allows all the parameter values displayed to be adjusted).
Pressing the Parameter or Value button automatically puts the Alpha 2.0 into edit mode, illuminating the Edit Mode LED alongside its designated push button.
Selecting edit mode enables full programming and creation of presets and parameters, plus the editing of titles, MIDI parameters and utility functions.
The front panel's 10 keypad buttons are also used in edit mode to recall, add, delete, store and enter parameters and effects.
The remaining buttons access the MIDI side of the Alpha, along with the sampler, utility and recall functions.
To the right of the keypad is the signal level indicator, comprising three coloured LEDs as well as input and output sliders; each patch also has its own programmable output levels for dry, effected and EQ levels.
So avoiding level changes when you change patches is easy.
One point here, the Alpha 2.0 seems very tolerant of slightly inconsistent input levels.
Even when set up correctly some units have their clip lights coming on at the slightest provocation, while the Alpha seems to have more headroom before it clips, which should therefore mean less chance of unwanted distortion.
As I seem to be getting a real thing about digital clip distortion lately, this elevates the Alpha 2.0 on my list of processors to be seen with.
On the rear panel the connections are as you'd expect, with stereo in and stereo out sockets, two remote footswitch sockets, MIDI in, out and thru, and (something I wasn't expecting) a 9-volt DC output socket to power primarily ART's X15 foot controller but actually any MIDI controller which runs on a 9-volt supply.
IN USE
I'll reiterate here that the complexity — or at least the perceived complexity — of the Alpha's operation could limit its market as far as first time buyers go.
A well set out manual with step-by-step diagrams, even cartoon pictures, would make all the difference, because the Multiverb has so much to offer the guitarist in terms of both quantity and quality.
The depth and richness of the reverbs, for example, are amazing.
The Alpha's ability to delete a whole effect from a patch (or add another) is a godsend, and I found it useful to dispense with the equaliser, which worked for some sounds but definitely not for others.
I'm really not keen on having the processor affecting my amp's EQ, although some guitarists like to shape the sound this way.
So whatever your preference the Alpha 2.0 seems to be able to handle it.
The delays are very varied and multiple repeats stay true to the original tone, as do the chorus and pitch-shifted sounds.
Subtle use of the EQ here can help add sparkle, or crispen a flat-sounding amp; conversely it can dull a digital sound to create an analogue type effect.
The rotary encoder makes light work of selecting the various effects and parameters and the keypad's addition of ‘Patch Recall’ is useful in the studio (you can dial a patch number on the keypad, thus saving time running through the encoder).
Also useful in the studio should be the onboard sampler, but with only 1.30 seconds of sampling time available it's obviously limited in what it can do.
Drum samples should be alright, though, and the sample patch I tried had its own reverb, which could be very useful for snares and toms.
CONCLUSION
Once the programming side is mastered, the versatility of the ART Alpha 2.0 becomes ever more impressive.
Something which appeals to me a lot is its ability to sound either blatantly digital (with a sharp, bright quality to the effects), or (if you dispense with the EQ or treat it with care) to simulate analogue effects.
Of course you can do this with other digital processors, but to remove the EQ from the system completely, at the touch of a button, is a real advantage, especially as the latest trend seems to be away from overprocessing and back to more natural, warmer tones.
The Alpha 2.0 is also fully compatible with ART's X15 foot controller, which offers even more sound options.
With the power for this or any other 9-volt pedal coming from the separate rear panel socket, battery changes and adaptor hassles are completely eliminated.
The Alpha 2.0 is possibly the most versatile digital processor in its price range, with sound quality and stage or studio flexibility that belies the unit's modest price tag.
I've used this one in the studio and I've heard it used live, and in both instances it made a positive contribution to the sound.
And that, after all, is what using a processor should all be about…
RRP: £399.00
For further information please contact 
Odies ACTIVE DINOSAURS Gibson RD Artist Bass
The ‘famous user’ list for the Gibson RD Series could very easily fit onto the back of your average stamp, with room left for a week's shopping list…!
By Jon Shrimpton .
RD users include Chris Novoselic of Nirvana and the Mission's Craig Adams, to whom this particular specimen belongs, and on whose early tours and recordings it was used to great effect, before it was trashed at a gig in 1987.
The RD series itself appeared in 1977, and with unconventional looks and active electronics designed in conjunction with Moog Synthesisers, fell into the same bottomless pit that welcomed the company's Corvus, Marauder and Victory.
All of these were fine guitars, but each was met with a disappointing thumbs-down from the Les Paul-totin' guitar heroes of the day.
The body is made entirely from maple and features some token contouring for the right arm, and a bit more round the back for the ribcage.
The glued-on neck is made from three pieces of maple and capped with a fingerboard of tight-grained ebony.
Above this is a bone nut and the customary bell-shaped truss rod cover, bearing the legend ‘RD Artist Bass’.
The ‘Artist’ denomination of the guitar model meant gold-plated hardware, block position markers and a bound fingerboard.
Not so for the bass, however.
Inlaid into the front of the black-faced headstock is the familiar Gibson logo, and what looks like a stylised seahorse.
Keeping the strings up to tension are four Gibson-engraved Kluson-style machineheads which work in standard ‘loosen towards the player’ style.
Some of Gibson's basses of this period come with ‘tighten towards the player’ heads, as on early Fender Precisions, and could cause a certain amount of confusion.
The other end of the strings are secured through the body and over Gibson's three-point tune-o-matic bridge, a standard feature for their solid basses of this time, such as the Triumph, Ripper and the re-issued Thunderbird bass.
The RD series was offered in three colours: Black, Sunburst and Blonde, with the option of a maple fingerboard.
This meant that on the blonde version the entire bass — body, neck and fingerboard — was light-coloured wood, except for the scratchplate and the front of the headstock.
Very un-Gibson!
Now, the RD's electronics is where things get a bit tricky, and probably where Gibson were ahead of the average bassist of the time.
The pickups are two of Gibson's Series V Humbuckers: ‘Specially designed for the active RD77 models, perfectly matched to the active circuit to provide maximum efficiency in level and frequency response,’ as the Gibson handbook put it.
Each had a volume control, a three position selector switch (nearest the knobs), and that's it as far as any familiarity to your average Gibson-user goes.
The Moog circuit board in the back is just massive.
About half the rear of the guitar is covered by shielded black plastic; this includes the battery compartment which houses a single PP3 battery, wrapped in foam to stop it rattling around.
This circuit provides compression for the neck pickup and expansion for the bridge pickup, ‘offers a very fast, explosive response with rapid decay,’ and can be adjusted by a trim pot in the back.
The circuitry is controlled by the other three-way switch, and this is where things start to happen.
With the switch facing away from the strings, the bass is in passive mode, where volume and treble response can be adjusted as usual.
Mid position is Active (normal) mode, where treble and bass can actually be added to the sound (the circuit powers up with a large leap in volume).
Flicking the switch toward the strings introduces the compression/expansion system.
With the body and neck made of maple, a wide strap is almost essential, as the Artist weighs a ton, and lasting out a long gig without collapsing or gaining some kind of spinal disorder is something of an achievement.
As for the sounds that this beast will make: well, it's not unlike a normal Gibson bass in that it's raunchy and powerful.
In active mode the range of sounds is first class, with the maple and ebony construction adding a good rock edge to the sound.
In Compressor/Expander mode, compression on the neck pickup swells out the tone to a given ceiling and sustains it, making it good for McCartney-esque melodic lines, but also for slapping, as the limiter-like properties of the compressor prevent massive explosions of sound.
With the bridge pickup in expander mode the RD is more than capable of producing some very aurally uncomfortable noises.
With the two pickups combined, it really sounds great: a full-bodied tone with the expander giving a touch of edge — almost the perfect hard rock sound.
The fact that each pickup has its own volume control is in itself a bonus, and means that you could play most of the song on the bridge pickup, then flick the switch to a different volume preset on the neck pickup for your solo.
Alternatively, stay with the bridge pickup, flick on the expander circuit and — voila!— instant Jean-Jacques Burnel.
This bass is as versatile as a…well, a particularly versatile thing.
The only thing they've left off is a ‘subtle button’; try to play anything subtle on this bass and it just won't let you!
Alas, it seems that its versatility was probably the RD's downfall.
The most your average muso was comfortable with in the clomping '70s was a pickup, a volume and a tone.
Another contributor to the RD's demise could well have been its unconventional appearance; that space-aged body, looking like a rounded-off, stretched-out Thunderbird or a squashed Explorer, allied to Gibson's time-honoured headstock, does look a little uncomfortable.
Perhaps the Thunderbird's one-sided peghead might have been more in keeping with Gibson's bold step into the next century.
The serial number of this bass, 72997058, tells us that it was made in Kalamazoo (that's the 0; guitars made in Nashville at this time carried a 5) and that it was the 58th made in the batch that was stamped the 299th day of the year.
So Craig's was made around October 17th 1977, shortly after the range was launched.
Back in the late '70s an RD Artist bass would have set you back around £800 (Gibson UK carried an ad that read, ‘The guitar you probably couldn't play, even if you could afford one,’ which probably didn't help its sales!— Ed).
These days, though, you could pick one up, if you could find one at all, for around £380, showing just how unfashionable the poor old RD has become.
And that's a shame, really, as it's a cracking bass that offers some truly wonderful noises.
But as with Gibson's non-reverse Thunderbirds — and remember, until a few years ago the same could be said for Fender Jaguars and Jazzmasters — they are just not currently de rigueur.
So my advice is, go out there and buy one before the collectors realise the RD's worth and start pushing prices way beyond the means of we average musos.
Guitarist would like to say thanks to Craig Adams for the loan of his fascinating bass.
Ry Cooder Much more than just a wizard on slide guitar, Ry Cooder is a composer, a multi-instrumentalist, a lifelong student of ethnic music and a thoroughly nice bloke.
His latest project takes him back to Hawaii, and Rick Batey finds out why…
Mention Hawaiian music, and you automatically think of lap-steel guitar.
But lap-steel is a relative newcomer to the island's culture when compared with the tradition of slack key guitar, a beautiful acoustic fingerpicking style based around dropped, or ‘slack’ open tunings which have been handed down through the generations.
One of the foremost exponents of Hawaiian slack key guitar was the superb musician and singer Gabby Pahinui, and Gabby is the reason we've been given this rare and welcome opportunity to speak to Ry Cooder.
Back in 1977, Cooder guested on one of Gabby's best albums, ‘The Gabby Pahinui Hawaiian Band’, and Gabby returned the compliment by playing on Cooder's ‘Chicken Skin Music’.
Gabby died in 1980, but the spirit of his music lives on through three of his sons, Cyril, Bla and Martin.
Their seductive latest release ‘The Pahinui Brothers’ features contributions from Ry Cooder, David Lindley, Van Dyke Parks and Dwight Yoakam, and ranges a number of modern covers alongside the staple, traditional melodies played by their father.
These days, the influence of early Hawaiian lap steel and slack key guitar styles on blues, country music and more is all too often overlooked.
In fact, almost a hundred years ago, Hawaiian music's infectious melodies were starting to seep into much of the American continent, to be heard by white audiences in the northern states, the blacks in the South and even Latin Americans.
But in the days before television and radio, almost before phonograph records, how did the music spread so far and so wide?
‘They had travelling vaudeville acts, and medicine shows,’ Ry Cooder explains.
‘They were about the only way people could see and hear and know about things outside the scope of their own town.
And for some unknown reason a lot of Hawaiian musicians played in these travelling shows, and also at the World Fairs around the turn of the century — a lot of people must have seen them there.
‘The speed at which Hawaiian music spread was really something.
Some musicians stayed over in the States and opened Hawaiian music schools, plus there were dozens of mail-order courses — it just dispersed like magic.
It was quite amazing, really.
And the effects have rippled down through the years into just about every local music scene in America, from the blues players to the hillbillies up in the mountains.’
The extent of the Hawaiian music craze is illustrated by the response of America's guitar makers.
National, Rickenbacker, Gibson and a hundred other manufacturers all went for lap-steel production in a big way.
For many years lap-steels far outsold Spanish-style guitars; in fact, the first electric guitars of the late '20s and early '30s were nearly all Hawaiian-style instruments.
But where did the original instruments, the Hawaiian players' own guitars, come from?
‘Well, it's a very arcane area of instrument history,’ says Ry, beginning to get enthusiastic.
‘My own guess is that they were mostly using guitars made over in Hawaii.
In those days — we're talking 1890 to about 1915 — there were hundreds of different brands and varieties of guitars being made in the United States, but it's hard to say for sure that any of them were actually distributed in Hawaii — it was kind of off the beaten track.
‘But there were a couple of makers who settled in Hawaii, and one of them was a Portuguese called Nuniads.
He came in on a boat, I suppose, and he plopped himself down and began making ukuleles, very good ones, and some fabulous guitars which are quite rare nowadays.
Beyond that, we've got to assume that the main source for instruments was the same as for everybody else who lived out of the range of urban merchandising, and that's catalogues: Montgomery Ward, Sears & Roebuck and places like that.
Mail-order guitars in those days were actually pretty good.
Come to think of it, everything was better made back then!
And later on, in the '30s, the Hawaiians managed to get hold of the early electrified lap-steels, like the Rickenbackers and the Gibsons — Gibsons were just everywhere in those days.’
But going back to the influence of Hawaiian music — would the bottleneck blues style ever have happened without it?
‘No, I don't believe it would.
It's such a bizarre thing, sliding an object over guitar strings — I mean, who would have figured it out without some kind of influence?
I think that everywhere this stuff was heard, it was replicated.
For instance, take Blind Willie Johnson (one of Cooder's big early blues influences); he was from Texas and lived near Dallas, so there's a good chance the Hawaiians would have visited the area.
And he probably heard Hawaiian recordings, because we're talking about the 1920s now, when phonograph records were getting to be a pretty widespread thing — the first real window on the rest of the musical world.
They say that Blind Willie Johnson also learned slide from somebody else, someone who was too early on the scene to be recorded, and God knows who he learned it from, because nobody back then thought to ask those kind of questions.
‘So we've got this whole elusive area concerning the connection between Hawaiian music and the blues.
On top of that, there's the mystery surrounding the fact that the black folks mostly turned their guitars upright and played slide in the Spanish position rather than in a lap style — typically inventive, of course, but quite a departure all the same .
Somebody ought to do a research project into it; the answers are all there to be unearthed, if you've got the time and the energy.’
Today we all too often judge Hawaiian music by its most commercial format, the saccharine-sweet elevator fodder we all love to hate.
It's an easy mistake to make, and one that Cooder himself has fallen prey to…
‘I remember thinking Hawaiian music was so bad, the corniest shit in the world.
Of course, the actual truth is that there's different levels in everything, and while some of the worst Hawaiian records were released in the '40s and '50s, some of the greatest Hawaiian records were made at exactly the same time.
It was really getting there, like blues, like Tex-Mex music, and really well-recorded too.
‘But the '50s and the '60s was a bad time for a lot of indigenous music.
A lot of times it's economics that determines what people do in all their endeavours, and in the case of Hawaii tourism was the thing and so of course they had to play music for tourists.
And tourists don't always want to hear the authentic thing, so the local musicians end up having to reflect their audience.
And so, like a lot of American music, Hawaiian music ended up being tainted by the Las Vegas thing.
‘I mean, it's ridiculous; Elvis Presley's trying to sound like Dean Martin, and so is some poor guy in Waikiki.
He can't resist it, it's just such an all-permeating style.
So he's got the white shoes, the white pants, he sounds just like Dean Martin and Bing Crosby and he's schmaltzing all the old tunes to death.
He's doing it well, mind you, because whatever style the Hawaiians play, they always do it well.
And he's making good money doing it, of course.
Unfortunately, the end result of it all was that by the '60s Hawaiian music was regarded with pretty much universal contempt.
‘But Hawaiian music has always been the most hybridised music in the whole Pacific, because the island was the most impacted by other people.
Originally, a long, long time ago, they used a completely different melodic scale to ours.
It was based on vocal chanting and the scales were very micro-tonal, with no octave thing, let alone anything like our own twelve-note scale.
‘But then two things happened.
The first was the arrival of the Portuguese sailors, who brought in a whole load of European and even North African musical influences, as well as early forms of the ukulele and the guitar.
The Portuguese melodies were pretty Moorish and strange, but they introduced the Hawaiians to ideas like fixed melodies, and keys and so forth.
‘And the second thing was the arrival of the missionaries.
Their actual effect was pretty disastrous; they screwed up the whole culture, and they opened up the island to being overrun by pineapple and sugar plantations.
But they brought the hymn book with them, the same Baptist hymn book that spread throughout the Caribbean and the Pacific, and they deposited their hymnal, tune-structured music on top of these people.
‘Those damned missionaries just about ruined everything, but they did a good job with the music.
So right away you had Hawaiian choirs singing church music, but they tinged it with this Hawaiian melodic sense, which is like a different way of resolving a melody.
And then there was this tremendous musical development in a very short period of time — one or two generations — and by the twenties they're playing jazz-swing, very well.’
And where does Gabby Pahinui come in?
‘Well, Gabby came in riding the second wave.
He was young and recording in ‘49, and doing the best work possible — the best guitar, the best singing.
I don't think anybody's ever been better, except for Sol Hoopi, the steel guitar man, who was never really recorded properly.
But Gabby was influenced by the people he was growing up with, the old-timers.
Everything was family-centred, see, so you were living in little towns, little plantation villages, just like the black folks in the South.
‘And Gabby turned out to be particularly good, which saved him from having to do the usual terrible, crap jobs that the Hawaiians had to do, and he ended up playing for a living in just about every joint in Hawaii — and there were lots of them in those days, because live music was a big thing.
And also, like all the Hawaiian musicians, Gabby was heavily influenced by jazz; they had this kind of natural rhythmic sense, so it was very easy to go right off into it.
There was one guy, way back in the '20s, who used to play mandolin just like a clarinet — incredible.
Gabi told me he used to play along to Django Reinhardt and Count Basie records — if you wanted to hear Gabby play One O'Clock Jump then you had it, he could play all that shit.
All the guys were into it.
Hawaiian they did for a living, jazz they played for themselves.
‘Gabby's famous for his slack-key guitar work because he was so good at it, but his steel playing was just as good.
He was a fabulous steel guitar player, just fabulous, as good as anybody can be.
He was just a great, great musician.
Quite transcendent, quite beyond the abilities of most people, and it really takes somebody like that to pull the genre up, to be singled out and to be remembered that way.
A kind of interplanetary world musician — there's only a few, in any form or at any time, and he's one of these guys.
‘And it's a lucky thing that he was recorded as much as he was.
You can still go into a music store in Honolulu and buy his first records.
‘They're all on these little labels that were primarily there for the tourists, like Waikiki and Hula records.
You can buy slack-key that he did in the '40s and the '50s and the '60s, it's all there.
And it's awesome music.
I mean, he was great when he was old, but when he was young he was just something else.
You hear this rich voice and this guitar, and it's just unbelievable.’
Slack key tunings are the direct forerunners of virtually all of today's alternative acoustic tunings.
Here are some you might like to try, all written from low to high: CGEGCE, CGDGBD, CGDGBE (called ‘C wahine’), DGDF&sharp; BD (‘G wahine’) and DADF&sharp; AC&sharp;(‘D wahine’).
Some of Gabby's own tunings were CGEGBE, CGEGAE (‘mauna loa’), DGDGBD (‘taro patch’), and FCEGCE.
Prodded for details of his own guitar tunings, Cooder reveals that he mostly sticks to DGDGBD, a plain open G, or DADF&sharp; AD, an open D, although he sometimes changes the open G to an open C, or tunes the second string up to make open D into a D6 tuning.
‘Gabby's F-on-the-bottom tuning is a beautiful thing, but kind of hard to get around on,’ Ry adds.
‘Cyril Pahinui is a real virtuoso with open tunings — he can play modern jazz chords and everything.
I can't see how he does it.
I've watched him play, and it just goes by too fast.
I've never sat down and tried to figure all that shit out — it gets very subtle and very complicated.
But I personally think it's more universal to tune guitars to chords than it is to anything else.’
Whoo, hang on a minute.
More universal than Spanish tuning?
‘No, flamenco tuning — that's what ‘normal’ guitar tuning is.
It's a minor, chromatic thing; it enables you to play in a minor key, which most open tunings don't.
But what the guitar likes to hear, to my mind, the real harmonic nature of the guitar, is major intervals, triads and things.
‘That's where the Hawaiians and the Africans get this sense of a wide open sound: low strings to play the roots, then you play the melody on the top.
It's very easy.
Of course, then these guys took it into ninth tunings and strange sixth configurations, and everybody's got their own bag of tunings.
But most people say ‘Oh, I can't play in an open tuning.’
In fact, it's a lot easier; all you have to do is just do it.
Find some notes, and start right in.’
On the Pahinui Brothers' album Cooder is listed as playing mandolin, an eight-string ukulele, an ‘electric tenor guitar’ and a mysterious thing called the Kona lap steel…
‘That's an instrument made by a guy called Weisenborn in Los Angeles in the '20s and '30s,’ Ry explains.
‘David Lindley plays them all the time, and they're special because not only is the body hollow, but the neck is hollow too.
So it shoots the notes down into the body better, and the whole instrument resonates.
It sounds a lot louder and a lot prettier.
They were made out of koa wood and they were very beautiful, up-market instruments.
He made some of them with solid necks for playing slack-key instead of slide — there were a number of different models.
I've got a couple of them.
They're just sort of relics of a time when people experimented with shapes and tried all kinds of different things; these days instrument makers seem to have settled on making everything the same.
‘I've completely forgotten what the ‘electric tenor guitar’ was…
It must have been one of those little short-necked electric guitars that Lindley had.
God, I have to think of what to call these things.
Half the time they're just crazy instruments that don't have a name.
You know, you're sitting there with these guys, you're looking for something to do, there's a pile of instruments and you grab something that seems to fit.
That's what making this kind of record is all about, really.
You're trying for something that's funky, something that sounds good, and you just grab whatever comes to hand.
Then when you've all found a good combination, you do it for a while, then you turn on the tape machine…
‘As for the mandolin, it's natural for Hawaiian music.
They always used mandolins, and ukuleles too, and the ukuleles went from little ones through to eight-string ones and baritone ukuleles like big mandocellos, all related.
And since the mandolin has a different tuning to the guitar, it gives you a different chord voicing to everybody else.
See, the whole trick with Hawaiian music is the mixing of the chords: everybody might be in C, but everybody is tuned differently, so instead of always playing the same damn intervals at the same point on the instrument, you have this wonderful overlap that spreads the feeling of the key out into kind of a pre-'60s sort of an effect.
So adding mandolin is like the old string band concept — it's just another bunch of intervals.
‘I played some electric guitar as well, because I'd never pass up the chance to play electric — I really like it better.
I'm not saying I don't like playing acoustic, mind, but it's tough sometimes.
This was a digitally-recorded album, so you're just playing into a microphone and what you're getting back through the headphones tends to be a little dry and sad.
It sounds good later, of course, but I find the process a little uninspiring.
Playing electric just generates so much more sound.’
Questioned more closely on how he gets his sound — for instance, the mind-boggling tone for the slide solo on the Pahinuis' versh of Steve Earle's My Old Friend The Blues — it becomes more and more apparent that the unassuming, virtually ego-free Mr. Cooder is far happier discussing musicians other than himself…
‘Well, look, I mean, I just play.
That I can't say.
It's the instrument, it's the day, the moment, you know.
Tone is everything, it's all there is, it's all you have, it's an expression of how you are with your instrument.
Actually, on the song you're talking about, I didn't like my amp that day, I was mad about it, but I guess it sounded good.
‘You're trying to play into the music, you see.
You have to.
If you do a good job, it sounds good; if you don't do a good job, it sounds terrible.
It's just as simple as that.
‘And also that's a very good take of that song, one hell of a rendition, so it would be almost impossible to sound bad.
There's no way you're going to miss!
The song's tailor-made for those guys, it's perfect, and Bla Pahinui loved it because he thought ‘Hey, this is me, it's got my name on it,’ in a very true, deep way.
So then it's just a matter of waiting to get a good take, and if you don't do it by take three, you don't have any business doing it.
So you say ‘Well, we guessed wrong,’ or decide to try again tomorrow.
These guys don't like to mess around; they get in there and record the goddamned thing, because they don't know anything about how to not do it good.
‘They don't think about it, see, and that's what they're good at.
Hawaiians are all feel-oriented people, they feel big, they've got a big heart, they've got a big soul.
There's nothing linear about it at all; it's just about the vibe of the place, the people, the way they live, the way they feel.
And when a tune like that comes along, it's as if they've always known that song, and so then you tap in the song and that's why you're doing the record.
If you're not doing that you're not doing your job, you know.
That's what you're there for; that's what the experience is all about.’
RY COODER
Born on March 15th 1947 in Los Angeles, Ryland Peter Cooder was encouraged to begin playing guitar by his father, a keen amateur guitarist with a varied record collection that included albums by Josh White, Pete Seeger, Leadbelly and Woody Guthrie.
Acquiring his first proper guitar at the age of ten, Ry first discovered bluegrass and then the country blues players: the Rev. Gary Davis (who gave Ry lessons), Lightnin' Hopkins, Sonny Terry, Brownie McGhee and Son House, plus Howlin' Wolf, Muddy Waters and Sleepy John Estes.
He learned to play bottleneck from John Fahey.
In 1965 the young Cooder teamed up with the equally young Taj Mahal in a band called The Rising Sons.
They recorded one album, and bootlegs reveal it to be a rough but fascinating affair, veering wildly between respectful renditions of traditional classics and slightly embarrassing Beatles pastiches.
1966 found him guesting with the amazing Captain Beefheart on The Magic Band's first album of psychotic psychedelic blues, ‘Safe As Milk’.
But relations between the quiet, let's-get-on-with-it Cooder and the not entirely sane Captain proved too much of a strain, and after this brief walk on the wild side Ry immersed himself in session work — much of it bread-and-butter stuff, although he did play for Randy Newman and Phil Ochs, began to learn about music for films, and became a friend of The Stones, a period he does not generally discuss.
You can hear Ry's mandolin on Love In Vain (‘Let It Bleed’) and slide guitar on Sister Morphine (‘Sticky Fingers’).
In 1970 he scored a solo deal with the Reprise label, and by the end of ‘72 had released ‘Into The Purple Valley’ and ‘Boomer's Story’.
These albums reflect Cooder's earliest folk influences, and his fascination with the downtrodden dustbowl America of the '30s.
1974's ‘Paradise And Lunch’ was more upbeat and polished, a mixture of R&B, gospel, blues, folk and reggae that formed a blueprint for his later successes.
He broadened his horizons even further in 1976 with his superb Mexican and Hawaiian-tinged ‘Chicken Skin Music’ album, with contributions from Gabby Pahinui and accordion player Flaco Jiminez.
‘Showtime’ is a live album from the same period.
1977, however, brought a big failure with ‘Jazz’, an attempt to give a contemporary slant to old jazz tunes.
Next came Cooder's first real involvement with film-work; over the next two or three years he produced soundtracks for The Long Riders, Southern Comfort and The Border .
Well-deserved mainstream success came in 1979 with the soulful, bluesy ‘Bop Till You Drop’, closely followed by ‘Borderline’(this last one featured John Hiatt, a favour returned by Ry's appearance on Hiatt's ‘Bring The Family’ LP).
1982's release ‘The Slide Area’ found Cooder writing more of his own material, and covering much the same territory.
More soundtracks followed: first Alamo Bay and Blue City , then the Robert Johnson fantasy Crossroads and, best known of all,Paris, Texas .
Since then Ry has released another album, ‘Get Rhythm’, plus a compilation or two.
His last live performances in this country were with Little Village, a happy collaboration between Cooder, John Hiatt, Nick Lowe and Jim Keltner.
And now, after the Pahinui Brothers project, what's next?
‘I have absolutely no idea,’ he admits.
‘I've just finished a movie score, so I'm kinda waiting to see.
Something great may just be waiting around the next corner, you know?
At least, it had better be!’
‘It's such a bizarre thing, sliding an object over guitar stings.
Who would have figured it out without some kind of influence?’
‘Open tunings are a lot easier.
All you have to do is do it; find some notes, and start right in.
MADE IN TAIWAN Behind The Scenes At The Yamaha Guitar Factory, Kaohsiun Misconception number one: Taiwanese guitar production is something relatively new.
Yamaha's factory in Kaohsiung has been building guitars now for over twenty years…
Neville Martenflies East.
The Island of Taiwan is situated several hundred miles off the Chinese mainland, west of Hong Kong; Japan lies a few hours’ plane ride north-west while the Philippines rest a similar distance southwards.
The city of Kaohsiung, the third largest container port in the world after Rotterdam and Hong Kong, is an important production base not only for Yamaha, but for a number of other multinational corporations, including Philips, Brother and Panasonic.
Yamaha's three-floor complex was opened in 1971.
Originally making only acoustic guitars, the facility's scope was broadened in 1983 to take in electrics, and today it produces most of Yamaha's guitar range.
A few exceptions are the SGs and Weddingtons (which we don't actually see in the UK); these are built in Yamaha's factory at Kasuga in Japan, while the semi-acoustics (including the AE, SA and AES ranges) hail from the Iida facility, also in Japan.
Yamaha also operate an R&D Studio in Tokyo, which up to 1000 artists pass through each year, and the Yamaha Guitar Design facility in North Hollywood, USA, where developments such as the Pacifica, Attitude basses and Weddington models originated.
Kaohsiung Yamaha covers over 235,000 sq ft of space and houses 800 staff; electric guitar production takes up the ground floor while acoustics are built upstairs.
The factory's output capacity is 200,000 acoustics and 100,000 electrics per annum, although electric production is running a little below maximum, due to a general and, Yamaha insist, temporary downturn in demand worldwide.
These figures make Kaohsiung probably the third largest guitar factory in the world, after Sammick in Korea and Fuji-Gen Gakki in Japan.
Misconception number two is that a Taiwanese factory represents some kind of ecologically disastrous sweatshop, with underpaid conscripts breathing dust and fumes and churning out rubbish guitars for eighteen hours at a stretch.
First of all, there's virtually no dust at Kaohsiung Yamaha; massive ducts extract almost every speck from the air-conditioned atmosphere.
Paint spray booths remove overspray by a waterfall system; the water is then cleaned in the factory's own special ‘pond’ and recycled.
Even the timber offcuts go back to run the factory's boiler system, making Kaohsiung both self-sufficient and environmentally pretty sound.
Working hours are similar to our own and the factory workers enjoy a high standard of living.
Remember, competition for labour in Taiwan is now great, and so good conditions are essential if staff are to stay and quality of output is to remain consistently high.
The constant pall of smog over the city would suggest, however, that not all of Kaohsiung's industries share Yamaha's ecological concerns.
Outside the building the tonewood is stacked and stored.
It arrives precut, primarily in boards of maple and alder from North America, nato from the Orient (the mahogany-like material from which many Eastern guitars are built) and rosewood from India.
The wood is naturally seasoned outside before being kiln dried, the total process taking around six months.
Furthermore, during production the guitars are left to acclimatise at various stages, so the wood settles down even further as it metamorphoses into musical instruments.
In the acoustic shop, a surprising amount of work is carried out by hand.
For instance, it's still better to fit body linings (kerfing), struts and soundhole rosettes in the old-fashioned way, and Yamaha aren't about to argue with such traditions.
Quality inspections are made by hand at every stage, and rejects returned to the previous process for repair.
This kind of control ensures consistency, and expensive rejects of completed instruments are kept to a minimum.
For this reason, acoustic tops and backs are undercoated before production, to prevent denting or marking of the wood during subsequent processes.
Acoustics' fingerboards are glued on relatively late in production, in fact after the necks have been fitted to the bodies.
All fretting is done by a specially designed machine.
One robot ‘hand’ locates the fret in its slot, while another presses it home.
Guitars from the more expensive ranges, such as the APX electro-acoustics (not the 1200 — that's built in Japan) receive fret finishing by hand.
Fingerboards and necks are heated to aid drying before the assembled instrument receives its lacquer coatings.
Yamaha use various combinations of polyester and polyurethane on their guitars.
The grain is sealed before a basecoat is applied; solid colours or tints are put on next, then the guitar receives its top coats of clear polyurethane.
The next stage is buffing to a gloss finish.
Some of this work can be achieved by machine and at Kaohsiung computerised buffers take care of the large, flat areas (you can often spot the computer's work on the backs of guitars, by the buffing lines which run across the body at 90 degrees to the grain).
Of course, intricate burnishing must be done manually, since only the human hand and eye can correctly judge the perfect level of finish.
It's in this department that the upper and lower ranges are separated, with the more expensive models receiving the star treatment.
The assemblers actually wear white cotton gloves to protect the guitars before they are sealed in airtight bags, packed and shipped.
The business park on which the Kaohsiung Yamaha factory is sited (alongside 100 other businesses) boasts its own Customs complex, so the guitars are palleted and sent straight there.
Here the usual export formalities occur before the guitars are shipped all over the world.
Down on the bottom floor the timber for Yamaha's ever-increasing range of electric guitars is rough cut and then smooth finished.
RGXes, RBXes, Pacificas and MSGs start to take shape here, necks are scarf-jointed where necessary and bodies laminated together.
Necks and bodies are paired up very early on and remain paired throughout the whole of the production process, ensuring compatibility, good fit and finish.
Solid bodies, generally American alder, are routed on numerically controlled machinery, much of which has been designed or customised by Yamaha staff.
Bodies are shaped several at a time and come off the machine almost ready to finish.
Kaohsiung operates a system whereby employees can offer operational advice regarding improvements to production methods.
When these ideas are taken up the employees receive bonuses of one kind or another.
One very simple improvement I saw concerned the pouring of lacquer into containers before spraying.
Previously, large drums would have to be lifted and paint poured into the much smaller spray jug — rather cumbersome.
An ingenious Yamaha employee suggested a hoist for the drum, so that the jug could simply be held under it by the sprayman, or woman (women undertake almost any job in the factory), making life easier, ensuring less waste and almost certainly fewer days off work due to back injuries!
Although electric guitar necks are also shaped on NC machinery, the final playing profile is put on by hand.
Tiny, almost primitive spokeshaves are used to shape the heel, the area behind the nut and the curvature of the back of the neck.
Metal gauges then show the woodworkers the exact profile of the neck at the first and twelfth frets.
Electric guitar spraying is carried out using robot spraying equipment; this is the most accurate and paint-conserving method of finishing, and one which is prominent in the motor industry.
The robots were programmed to simulate the hand movements of Yamaha's most experienced sprayer, so the guitars receive no more and no less paint than they require.
Special finishes are of course completed in the time-honoured fashion; sunbursts and other fancy finishes are carried out by hand.
Each of the three stages of painting involves several coatings and several sandings, and the thickness of the bodies is checked periodically for too much or too little finish.
Polyester and polyurethane are quick-drying paints and it's surprising to learn that bodies can be buffed only hours after their final coating.
After assembly — electronics wired up, scratchplates mounted, machineheads screwed to necks, necks screwed to bodies, guitars strung and tuned to pitch, etc. — each guitar is stood in a climate-controlled room for three days before final setup and adjustment.
This settling period ensures that the necks get used to the tension of strings before their final truss rod adjustment.
All guitars, from the cheapest acoustics to the top-of-the-range electrics are buzz-checked in soundproofed rooms; their playing actions are measured and if any guitar falls below the proscribed tolerences it is sent off to be readjusted, perhaps even fret-dressed, before rechecking, packing and shipping.
The factory workers tend to stick to one task — neck shaping, spraying, buffing, kerfing etc. — and, with the exception of ‘star pupils’ who are groomed for higher things (and therefore shown most processes), it stays that way.
This means that each job is learned completely and thoroughly, but I couldn't help thinking that a few musicians and/or luthiers at strategic points around the factory wouldn't go amiss — groundworkers who actually understand how a guitar works and who could spot problems from the playing perspective, rather than just the engineering view.
For instance, in American factories (I visited Peavey a couple of years ago and many, if not most of Yamaha's processes apply there, too) there's a far higher proportion of musicians involved — people who know why guitars work and who are actively interested in the fact that they're producing musical instruments and not simply ‘product’.
But while Kaohsiung's attention to quality is not unique to Yamaha (and we shouldn't forget that lower rejection rates also benefit the manufacturer, translating into lower cost per unit), their pioneering attitude, honouring quality above all else, has helped raise the standard of Far Eastern guitars to levels which would have been unthinkable only a few years ago.
BIG BRAAANG THEORY Jackson Infinity XL Pointiness is lent a friendlier aspect by this new Japanese Jackson, but don't be fooled by appearances: herein lies some classic rock nastiness.
David Meadapproaches warp speed and gets the (final) frontier spirit…
Jackson have long stood for high quality American instruments, with their Japanese- and Korean-made Charvel counterparts sitting at the other end of the corporate see-saw.
Recently, part of the Jackson operation was transferred to Japan, and the first fruits of this rearrangement include this, the model JIX4MR, known to its friends as the Infinity XL…
CONSTRUCTION
Jackson are at last joining the select list of manufacturers who are seeking to provide the guitar community with non-Strat-shaped alternatives.
The Infinity's shape seems to be a sort of half-Les Paul, half-Stratocaster hybrid: the offset horns of the one against the rounded lower half of the other.
It works, too.
Jackson have chosen basswood for the Infinity's body.
It's a fairly thick 1″, but the beauty of basswood is that you can be quite generous and yet still keep the overall weight down.
The usual area of wood has been dressed away on the upper edge of the body, in the name of player comfort.
Also, the area surrounding the neck joint has been contoured in a rough crescent moon shape, presumably to aid top-of-the-neck access.
Unfortunately, this admirable attempt to streamline this vital area has been all but defeated by the bafflingly thick four bolt neck plate.
I don't think it will be too long before such neckplates are abandoned in favour of the recessed bolt idea we've seen recently on Ibanez and Heartfield guitars among others.
The body has been quite attractively edge-bound, which sets the metallic red finish off rather nicely.
The Infinity's neck is made from oil-finished rock maple, with the trademarked pointy headstock grafted on via a scarf joint behind the first fret.
On this particular model, there is a hint of a birdseye pattern in the maple, which is quite exotic and renders the guitar individual and attractive.
Jackson have been very possessive of their peghead shape in the past and it could be argued that this guitar wouldn't be a Jackson without it.
However, I don't think it blends that well with the body shape: maybe a reverse idea would have suited better — or even, dare I say it, a rounded-off affair.
The tuners are Jackson-stamped Gotohs and have proved in the past to be man enough for the job, relegated as they are to being mere anchor points for the strings, taking into account the Floyd Rose licensed tremolo employed here.
The Infinity's scale is a Fenderish 25½″ with a rosewood fingerboard and 22 fattish frets.
The pickups are Jackson's own, with a J92-C in the bridge and a J50-M in the neck.
Both pickups have been screwed directly into the body of the guitar, a device being employed more and more by the rock fraternity, ever in search of yet more sustain.
It may work, or it might be just another item from the guitar voodoo handbook.
The rotary controls are the standard volume and tone and the toggle switch a simple three-way.
IN USE
The Infinity is a comfortable guitar to play.
I own a Charvel myself and so I'm at home almost immediately with the feel of this one.
There is something pleasantly chunky about a Jackson/Charvel neck; it's slim, without being anorexic.
We've spoken in the past about the importance of the acoustic tone of an instrument; the better the tone is at this point, the less work the pickups and amp have to do to produce that sound .
In the Jackson's case, all is well here so the signs are good for linking up with something good and loud.
Put to the test, the amplified tone of the Infinity fails to disappoint.
Both Jackson pickups seem well suited to the majority of modern rock sounds, with plenty of power, but more importantly, bags of tone .
Twin humbucker guitars are enjoying something of a rebirth at present, thanks mainly to the players who are treading that particular path (I'm thinking of Nuno, Satriani & co) and having played Strat derivatives for so long, it's easy to forget just how good a neck humbucker sounds at full throttle.
The bridge pickup is very fat and sweet — perfect for the new brand of melodic rock — and would probably suit many thrash fanatics, too.
The volume control tends to be a bit‘all or nothing’— not a smooth increase in power, but a sudden double helping of filth in the last quarter turn.
One thing that can be said for this type of control is that you only need a minimum of movement in the pot to switch between crunch and scream.
So if that's to your liking, then walk this way, but it does render the rest of the volume control virtually redundant.
The tremolo took all the abuse I could possibly muster against it and I can for once say that retuning the guitar was not necessary as a result — absolutely solid as a rock.
CONCLUSION
I like this guitar a lot.
I warmed to it first of all because, like the Eggle New York elsewhere in this issue, it obviously isn't trying to be anything else; it can stand on its own merits without any need for the usual identikit comparisons.
As far as the build quality is concerned, you'd expect it to be up there with the best of the Japanese instruments, and you'll be pleased to know that Jackson have not compromised their reputation here at all; there's nothing in the slightest ‘second rate’ about the Infinity.
On the contrary, armed with this guitar, the possibilities are, shall we say, endless…
RRP : Infinity J1X4MR £749.00
No left-handers available.
For further information please contact 
VOX CONTINENTAL Teardrop & Phantom 6 & 12 No.
These aren't the same Voxes that appeared last month.
They're Italian, they're 25 years old but at the same time brand new…
Review by Neville Marten .
The Phantom and Teardrop which Eddie Allen looked at last month were made by Paul Chandler in the USA.
They are to be marketed by Korg in this country and feature bodies and necks built to the original design, but allied to American pickups and hardware and retailing from between £750 and £1,000.
As Eddie detailed in his review, although the first Voxes were designed and made over here, production switched in the later '60s to Italy, where the guitars were built in the Eko factory.
And the story behind these instruments is that Roberto Brandoni, a London-based importer of Italian musical goods, stumbled upon a warehouse full of necks, bodies and parts, bought the lot and is currently assembling and selling them.
Rather successfully, too, having equipped bands such as The Cure and others with various weird and wonderful wares.
The guitars are being marketed as ‘Vox by Brandoni Custom’ which, although it's a bit of a mouthful, should avoid confusion with the Korg UK Voxes, which probably have a slightly different market anyway.
But it's not only components by Vox which feature in Roberto's cache; his Wembley warehouse is chock full of interesting bits and pieces.
There are Eko 12-string necks and bodies, curious banjo necks, oddball Eko violin bass parts and lots, lots more.
And visitors are welcome, with an appointment, to check out and discuss their requirements.
It truly is an Aladdin's cave of all that's quirky and unusual in Continental '60s guitar design.
Among Roberto's pile of parts were many items of original Vox hardware — tremolos, knobs, pots, bridge assemblies etc. — but, while Brandoni Custom will fit certain of these to order, they generally prefer to equip their Voxes with modern pickups and bridges, since these are by and large better.
Those fitted to the guitars you see here are Oriental pickups of the Strat-style variety, similarly sourced stop tailpieces and tune-o-matic bridges.
But as these guitars are to all intents and purposes custom made, the buyer can specify virtually anything.
Anachronisms such as Floyds and EMGs can even be catered for, so long as the purchaser is willing to foot the bill.
The ash bodies and maple necks are sprayed in Italy, and while most examples I've seen have been black or white, there's no telling what other colours might come forth at some point (Fender-type metallics would look awesome).
The necks are tinted to look aged, and with the pearloid and glitter scratchplates the impression is one of instant '60s kitch, which of course is very ‘now’.
What's quite remarkable about the necks of these guitars is that they're as straight as could be; one might have expected, after a quarter of a century festering away in an old warehouse, that the day-to-day fluctuations in temperature and moisture would have wreaked havoc.
But no, and I think one could assume, and indeed expect, that they'll now stay that way.
In true Eko fashion the guitars have bound fingerboards, zero frets and aluminium nuts/string-guides, and although it's difficult to be sure, the fingerboard material is so dense and dark — almost black — that it could well be that rare and prized commodity, Brazilian, or Rio, rosewood.
A neat touch is the central laminate of the maple necks.
It tapers from the heel, where it's about an inch across, down to about a quarter of that at the headstock's tip.
Because these are so individually made, they're rather like instruments which have been devised for a specific individual, and so to criticise them for details of design is hardly fair.
If I were to be critical it would be to say that the scratchplates could be finished off more tidily, and occasionally the necks and bodies don't look entirely new — although that's hardly surprising, really.
But a bit more attention to detail at the spraying or finishing stage would add a touch more panache.
The machineheads on these examples vary between open-backed Eko Ranger heads and Gotoh sealed units.
The tremolo on the black Teardrop is the old Bigsby-like unit, which does have a problem with its tuning.
But this, I'm assured by Brandoni Custom, is due to the inconsistency of the old springs, and they're currently researching an improved spring so that guitars can be equipped with original units when required.
So what do they sound like?
Again, what pickups do you want and therefore how would you want one to sound?
These are fairly standard issue Japanese replacement Strat pickups mated to a five-way switch and the usual controls, so you have a pretty good idea how they sound.
But the last thing a 12-string requires is a set of Velvet Brick humbuckers, and the kind of player who'd want a 6-string like the Teardrop will probably be looking for more twang than thrang, and so the same applies.
What I really love about these guitars — the 12-strings especially — is that they've been set up with the lowest, most buzz-free actions imaginable.
The twelves play like sixes and you could play an entire set on rhythm guitar with the white one here and hardly know you'd done it.
And because the necks are flat and wide — 42mm at the nut and 21mm behind the 12th fret — they're ideal for playing anything, including the usual Harrison, Hicks, McGuinn, Townshend, Buck styles, or whoever else you might want to conjour — possibly even yourself.
The '60s are here to stay, folks!
So get those hipster strides on, polish your Chelsea boots, dust off that old black polo-neck, comb the fringe and get down to Brandoni's place in Wembley (call them first, though, please).
These guitars aren't cheap, but they're not overly expensive either.
And they do represent a little slice of history…
Supplies are obviously limited and prices start from £550 including case
Left-handers are possible, at a small surcharge
For further information please contact 
MAKING TRACKS This month: a cheap but well usable drum machine from Yamaha; a set of recording teaching tapes from CVM; and a noise gate from the German manufacturer Behringer…
BASS IN POCKET Yamaha RY10 Rhythm Programmer
You know how it is, you're in the middle of nowhere when you suddenly think of a drum pattern and bass line for your latest track.
Well, Yamaha's battery or mains powered RY10 can use its own internal speaker, or headphone output, to enable programming just about anywhere but in the shower.
It can be used in either mono or stereo; a guitar can be plugged in to access the onboard tuner and allow you to play along with a drum pattern; it's MIDI compatible, and with a Yamaha FC4 or FC5 footswitch you can start and stop the machine, tell it to drop in a fill pattern, or tell it to advance to the next pattern or song.
IN USE
The RY10 is easy to use.
Inside lurk 211 wide-ranging drum and percussion sounds, 30 sound effects and nine bass sounds.
Extra effects provide various industrial and ambient noises, along with off-the-wall sounds which work well in contemporary rhythmic contexts.
The bass section of the RY10 provides slapped, fingered and various synth bass sounds which appear flexible and sound convincing.
The sounds are played via the 12 fingertip-sized pads spread across the bottom quarter of the front panel.
These pads have been laid out like a C to C octave on a keyboard, with the lower row of pads as the white notes and the upper row the black ones.
They're not velocity sensitive (ie. they won't respond to how hard you hit them with changes in signal), and although you can record rhythms and bass lines of varying dynamics into an RY10 pattern from a MIDI source, the incoming velocity values aren't recorded by the drum machine and so the sounds play back at a fixed level.
You can group sounds 12 at a time into banks, or ‘drumkits’ and the RY10 comes with 15 preset banks.
You can also create another 15 of your own, using any of the sounds.
For each bank you actually get three: Drum, Percussion and Bass.
That's 24 drum and percussion sounds and one bass sound per pattern.
The Bass bank spreads the selected bass sound across all 12 pads, in semitones, and you can also assign three different octaves to the pads for bass playing.
The RY10 comes with 50 preset patterns and 50 preset fills, and allows you to program a further 50 of each yourself.
A fill can be dropped in at any time while the pattern is playing.
Unfortunately, each pattern can't be more than 16 steps long, a fact which leads to some limitations on time signatures and record resolutions (for instance, you can't record triplet 16ths in a 4/4 bar), although there is a ‘swing’ function which allows you to program a rather rigid swing feel on 16ths.
CONCLUSION
Although step time and real time are both available here, the RY10 isn't the most versatile of machines in the programming department: there's that limit of 16 steps per pattern and due to the velocity limitations you can't record dynamic performances.
But these are restrictions you have to live with on a budget machine.
There are drum machines which allow more programming scope and greater flexibility — for instance Yamaha's own RY30 and Roland's R70 — but they're more expensive and don't have the RY10's ‘use anywhere’ portability, nor its basic simplicity.
Sonically, this little machine packs a real punch, has a very commendable number and variety of sounds, and is a very modern-sounding drum box.
Simon Trask & Eddie Allan 
RRP:
RY10 £249.00
YKBA2 carrying case £10.99
For further information contact Yamaha-Kemble Music (UK) Ltd, Sherbourne Drive, Tilbrook, Milton Keynes, MK7 8BL.
RECORDING TO VIDEO Getting The Most Out Of Home Recording
Armed only with a mug of tea and a packet of wholewheat biscuits, David Mead takes Julian Colbeck's video crash course in home recording…
Along with learning to scuba dive, swim with dolphins, become an astronaut or climb Everest, one of my ambitions has always been to take time out to become really familiar with the business end of a recording studio.
I've been on the other side of things often enough — guitar in hand, waiting for someone behind a mixing desk to give me the word to start playing — but they'd never actually let me touch anything!
I suppose on the studio engineer evolutionary scale I rate about as high as the average amoeba, which makes me the perfect test pilot for this series of videos.
If, at the end of several hours' watching, I can walk into the Guitarist studio and sit behind the desk with any confidence at all, then I shall declare the whole operation a complete success.
With home recording equipment so comparatively cheap these days (you can buy quite a workmanlike setup for the cost of a decent guitar) these video manuals could be just the answer to a layman's prayer.
They come in three volumes, each presented by Julian Colbeck, and volume one is clearly aimed at the complete novice.
On this first video, Mr Colbeck guides you gently through the workings of an array of popular home studio gear (including the Fostex X28 four-track cassette recorder and the Alesis Quadraverb) with the friendly manner of a family doctor you've known for years.
We are taken through all the various stages of recording a simple song on four-track and, along the way, it becomes apparent that recording at this level is nowt but common sense and a basic understanding of the gear you have in front of you.
At the very end of this volume, Julian offers a brief glimpse into the world of MIDI — often considered a dark and hostile place by guitar players, but the very life-blood of the modern, sequencer-based home studio.
By the time we get to volume two, Julian has not only nipped off and changed his shirt, but he has upgraded his gear somewhat, too.
Nothing drastic — it's just that his studio is taking on a more Tardis-like appearance than before.
This volume concerns itself mainly with effects.
Now, you may think that as far as chorus, delay, flanging etc. is concerned, guitarists could probably write the book, being arguably the most effects-hungry musos on the planet, but when it comes to a studio environment do you know how much delay to add to a vocal part to make it sound really brill?
Neither did I.
Drum machines, too, come under close scrutiny as far as their effects-worthiness is concerned, with sensible examples of different delay times, types of gated reverb etc.
Now I know the old adage that the best way to discover this kind of information is to experiment, but this video offers you a series of starting points that will definitely save you a good amount of time in the long run.
I suppose of most interest to guitarists will be Julian's insight into the tricks of the recording trade.
Both electric and acoustic guitars feature in his attempt to assemble a piece, with the multi-track guitar-playing chores in the more than capable hands of Milton McDonald.
Once again, at the very end of this, the longest video of the three, Julian sneaks in some additional MIDI-based information, leading you on to the rather more complex volume three.
So far, so good.
I think I've followed everything, mainly thanks to the way in which the often quite technical information is put across.
Running my eyes down the contents list of volume three, however, makes me think that I am about to encounter uncharted waters, featuring as it does sequencing, the MIDI studio and something called SMPTE…
Julian's changed his shirt again and we're off on the most challenging trip of this home recording trilogy.
Once again, the budget has been increased to include computer-based sequencing software and synchronising devices a-plenty.
Now, seeing as my own computer literacy extends only as far as Super Mario Bros, I'm left feeling a little bewildered by it all.
But it does figure that if you were to start out in the home recording business with the comparatively modest gear featured in volume one, then you would probably follow an upgrade path very similar to the one being demonstrated here, and so the whole thing retains a nice, logical pattern.
I'm left a little cold by sampling and sequencers in general— just as I wouldn't consider a romantic liaison with my fridge — but I did find myself interested by it all.
The temptation to switch off and bluff my way through the rest of this review never once raised its ugly head.
A little further down the line, we are introduced to hard disc recording, intent on replacing tape for good and just beginning to enter the field of the home user in terms of price.
This is a means whereby analogue signals like guitar, vocals etc. can be converted to digital and inputted to computer storage, to be sequenced and looped or whatever digital hocus pocus takes your fancy.
Of course, there are plenty of bands around who still shun the use of a digital recording system in favour of its analogue forbears, but fings ain't want they used to be and DAT's the truth.
The whole course is finished off with a word or two about the final stage of the recording process: the mix.
Then we are left to form our own conclusions.
One thing I should mention is that you'd be advised to try and view these videos on a stereo VCR, as many of the recorded examples — panning, for example— are pretty meaningless otherwise.
Overall, though, I was left with the desire to dip my toes in the shallow end of home recording; it looks fun as well as potentially rewarding.
I think I'd call it a day long before I found myself turning part of my humble dwelling into the bridge of the Starship Enterprise, but one thing is certain: I'd have Julian Colbeck's video series close at hand before boldly going forth!
DM 
Each video costs £24.95
For further information please contact 
GRAND SLAM Behringer Studio Noise Gate
The Behringer studio noise gate can be likened to a surgeon's scalpel; it's a shining, finely-honed blade of a rack unit, innocent enough in the hands of the unwary, but capable of being used to lethal effect.
Behringer have created a range of precision dedicated processors, of which this is the least expensive, designed to offer the quality associated with the German Behringer name at an affordable price.
And, as far as I'm concerned, the ploy works.
The Studio Gate takes the form of an innocuous-looking 19″ rack-mount affair, with a straightforward complement of rotary controls, LEDs and small switches.
It is two-channel in normal operation, with balanced quarter-inch jack inputs (the dearer Pro Gate has balanced XLRs, but is essentially the same machine), and each channel has a sidechain facility.
Should the need arise, the two channels can be slaved together, so that the signal passing through Channel 2 is actually controlled by the parameters you have set for Channel 1.
As with many such units, the controls are simply duplicated for each channel (five rotaries, one switch and four LEDs), so the front panel is almost symmetrical.
The In/Out switch does what it suggests, placing the gate circuitry in or out of the signal path; when this is selected to Out, the signal passes through unaffected.
This is accompanied by a status LED, to let you know at a glance what you've selected.
Three other LEDs are used to set up the operating status, arranged in a horizontal ‘traffic light’ formation: red indicates that the input signal is below the Threshold level, yellow that it has reached Threshold, and the green that it is above Threshold.
This thoroughly logical arrangement makes setting up levels a doddle.
The five rotaries cover Threshold, Attack, Hold, Release and Range.
Threshold is the most important, allowing you to set the signal level.
If a signal falls below this level, the gate shuts; if it exceeds it, the gate opens.
This is the simplest principle behind any noise gate, the easiest example being tape or equipment noise before the start of a recording.
The noise gate eliminates this unwanted hiss and buzz, by shutting off the signal through the unit below a certain threshold level.
Thus, if the start of your recording contains only hiss, the gate remains shut, but as soon as the wanted sound starts, the gate opens.
The Threshold level must be set carefully for the unit to be fully effective, and beware, because getting this absolutely right takes a little time.
Three further rotaries relate to the functioning of the gate after the Threshold level has been reached.
Attack adjusts the time the signal needs to achieve maximum level (unity gain) after it has crossed the Threshold.
Too slow an attack time would cut the sharp percussive effect of a snare drum sound, for example, but might suit softer, synth pad sounds.
The Hold control governs the length of delay time before the gate starts to release, as the pad crosses below the Threshold.
This is useful for, say, sustaining the effect of a quiet reverb which would otherwise be cut out if the gate started to release immediately.
At minimum level, the Hold period is 20ms; at maximum it is a whopping four seconds.
The Release control performs more or less the reverse of the Attack rotary, adjusting the time for the signal gain to fall back to the level set by the Range control.
A-ha!
The Range control.
This final rotary, simply put, is an attenuator for the signal, governing how much level passes through the unit when the gate is shut.
It ranges from 0dB (no attenuation) to 80dB (full attentuation).
All the rotaries, as with any noise gate, take a little time to get into using and effective gating comes about through practice, although it can at times appear something of a black art.
But the Behringer really scores in its hair-splitting precision — if one of those rotaries is even slightly nudged you become all too aware of it — so the unit's fussiness is as much a blessing as a burden.
Apart from the shining neon power switch and the Slave function already discussed, the Behringer will sit quietly in your rack, floating in a sea of general blackness, and probably won't be the first thing a visitor to your studio comments upon.
But when you use it, it's an entirely different matter!
I tried the unit out in a variety of everyday situations, the most notable of which was with a very distorted preamp passing through the gate and into the desk.
A personal hate of mine has always been the general level of noise which distortion sounds seem to produce, no matter what precautions you take.
Humming pickups, poorly grounded leads, or the waves of hiss emanating from your preamp and effects might well be part of your sound, but they create an editing nightmare.
The Behringer is the panacea for my guitar-induced headaches, and it's sensitive enough to take care of the variable pick velocities in the average full-tilt rock solo.
The Behringer Studio Gate cuts through curtains of noise with razor-like precision.
Not even a Wilkinson Sword comes this close.
Ian Masterson 
RRP: £196.00
For further information please contact  
THE DOG'S BLX?
Trace's new baby bass combo has been brought into the world to convince us that small can be beautiful…
Review by John Currie.
I must confess to falling for this combo the moment I saw its name; anyone with a sense of humour like that is okay in my book!
In common with many bass amplification manufacturers, Trace Elliot have been trying over the last few years to build powerful, yet compact bass gear to ease the strain on the poor bass player's back.
The BLX-80 is their latest: an ‘entry level’ 80 watt 1x10 combo aimed at the small pub or club gig and rehearsal situation.
I was (I think you will understand) initially dubious about a single 10″ driver in such a small box really delivering the goods (especially with the lower notes on my 5-string) but was certainly intrigued by the cabinet design, so I was looking forward to giving the little beast some stick on a couple of gigs…
WHAT YOU SEE
The cabinet is constructed of ¾″ (18mm) Medium Density Fibreboard, covered with what feels like a tough, lightly textured ‘Black Dice’ vinyl, with metal corner protectors, round plastic feet and a single, strong, leather, top-mounted carrying handle.
Its dimensions are 18½″ (47cm) wide x 19″ (48.3cm) high x 13″ (33cm) deep, and the weight of around 30kg feels reassuringly substantial, yet easily portable, especially if carried in the arms.
The familiar bright green printed front panel is sensibly recessed to avoid accidental damage to the controls, as are the rear panel and amp cooling fins.
The real surprise here, though, is the unusual speaker enclosure design — but more of that later.
WHAT YOU GET
Basically, the standard Trace Elliot GP7 preamp, running into a transistor power amp, feeds its 80 watt output into a single 10″ speaker.
Left to right on the front panel we see first the input section, with two sockets: one for passive and one for active basses.
These can be used simultaneously should you wish to play with another instrumentalist.
The rotary input gain control can be set to the optimum level so that the overload light flashes momentarily on for the loudest peaks of signal.
Here we also have the ‘mid pre-shape’ button which introduces a cut in the middle frequencies at about 400Hz, and a boost in the bass (50Hz) and treble (2kHz-5kHz).
Next is the graphic equaliser, also switchable in or out, with a powerful 15 dB of boost or cut at the 7 well-chosen frequency centres of 50Hz, 100Hz, 230Hz, 500Hz, 1kHz, 2kHz and 5kHz.
Following that is the effects send and return loop, the ‘line in’ socket (useful for plugging in a drum machine or tape recorder to play along with) and the ‘line out’(for connecting to external power amplifiers or a studio or PA mixing desk).
Finally comes the output level rotary for overall volume setting, and a headphone socket.
This does not automatically cut out the speaker when in use; that must be disconnected at the rear (but don't forget to plug the speaker jack back in as soon as you've finished with the cans!).
A couple of small gripes here…
Personally I prefer effects loops and line links to be situated at the back of an amp.
Nearly all rack effects have their connectors at the back and I find it looks very untidy having cables hanging all over the front of an amp.
Also, while I don't desperately miss most of the extra facilities found on the big brother GP12 preamp, I really feel a balanced DI output would be a great advantage here when feeding a desk and would obviate the need for a separate DI box, as I'm sure a large number of this combo's potential users will be hoping to use it either in the studio or to reinforce their sound through a PA.
Having said this, Martin Little at Trace Elliot was at pains to point out that their aim was to produce a high quality product using the best components available, but to keep the price down by supplying only the essential facilities in a standardised format.
Round the back we find the mains power socket, rocker on/off switch and fuse, plus a single speaker output socket and fuse.
You'll have to remove the internal speaker jack if an extension speaker cabinet is used — again saving costs on extra components.
Finally, a multi-finned heatsink keeps the amp cool when things get hot.
To obtain the best possible tone and depth from such a small driver and cab, Trace's engineers spent three months researching various designs of enclosure, eventually settling on a kind of reverse flare, with the inner front panel of the cabinet curving in on each side to channel the sound of the rear mounted speaker through a central, vertical slot, 11″ (28.5cm) high x 1″ (3.5cm) wide.
Then, to maximise response, the cab is also rear ported, the sound from the back of the driver fed down and out of the lower, separate front port at the bottom.
The loudspeaker itself is a Celestion, built to Trace's own specifications, using their latest Kevlar-impregnated cone.
Although there is no speaker grille or cloth for protection, the cone does sit some six inches back from the front of the cab, so you would have to be very unlucky for anything to poke that far in through the narrow slot to do any damage.
WHAT YOU HEAR
With a single 10″ driver in a small cabinet the flat sound is as you would expect: rather middle-biased and ‘boxy’.
However, punch in the mid pre-shape and things immediately become more natural, with a mid cut, and a bass and treble boost which complement this setup perfectly.
By judicious use of the more than adequate graphic, a wide variety of sounds can be accessed.
Using my Martin Petersen 5-string with Bartolini single coils, a 6dB cut at 500Hz and a 3dB boost at 50, 100, 2K and 5K produced a good all-round sound.
My ESP Jazz fretless with Seymour Duncans proved clear and full with the same EQ, but with the pre-shape out, giving added mid punch.
A twin-humbucker-equipped bass sounded rich and heavy with the pre-shape back in and about a 6dB boost at 50 and 100Hz.
In fact, this system should cater for whatever tone colouring you may desire, although background noise levels do rise significantly when the pre-shape is used while boosting the treble area on the graphic.
It must be remembered that this combo is designed for use in small pub and club gigs and rehearsal situations.
All settings up to about 8 (out of 10) on the master volume elicit a clear, punchy tone, right down to the lower notes on my 5-string, and live it proved well able to compete with two rawk'n'rawl guitar players and a loud drum kit on an R&B pub gig.
The previous evening I used the amp in a very large club as my own backline monitor, with a line out to the PA.
I was very impressed by the volume and depth of sound from such a small cab, and although there's not the power to cover a very large stage, I found there was no great loss in tone when standing to the side of the amp — a problem with some larger rigs.
WHAT WE THINK
Considering the diminutive size of this combo and the fact that it's only an 80 watt amp, I thought the tight, punchy tone and low frequency capabilities were quite remarkable.
If you're looking for portability rather than high output levels and do not need the extra facilities of the big brother amps, you might well find yourself tempted…
RRP: £385.00
For further information please contact 
Dr ROBERT Answers Your Queries Doctor, Doctor, gimme the news…
Send your sob stories to .
HIGH TENSION WIRES
Dear Doctor I have some questions regarding guitar strings :
1) Why do the different string manufacturers make slightly different gauges within gauged sets and what effect will changing to a brand which is differently matched have on a properly set up neck: eg. changing from 010 014 020 028 040 050 to 010 013 017 030 042 052?
2) What effect does using open tunings have on the guitar neck?
Surely, lowering and raising the pitch of certain strings alters their tension.
3) What was the lightest gauge available to the early rockers, such as Buddy Holly and Eddie Cochran?
→ String manufacturers are under no real pressure to provide standard gauges, Martin.
Indeed, musicians argue amongst themselves as to preferred gauges in any one set, so the blame does not lie entirely at the manufacturers' door.
Another problem is the terminology relating to gauged string sets; what may be an XL or ‘extra light’ gauge for one manufacturer is an XXL or (more confusingly) a UL ‘ultra light’set for another.
Because the subject of gauged sets is so confusing, most manufacturers offer a gauge kit, which is basically a box of strings covering all the popular gauges.
These boxed kits are supplied to the dealers who restock it as the individual strings are sold.
You may think that gauge kits solve the problem of different makes and gauges of string, but as with everything else, nothing is so simple.
The wound strings vary in tension from make to make, according to the diameter of the inner core used for a particular string gauge.
For example: two identical .042″ strings may have different inner core diameters, and that will result in different tensions.
The change in string tension when changing brands will probably be more noticeable if your guitar is fitted with a tremolo system, which may have to be readjusted slightly.
Otherwise, there should be no adverse effect on the guitar's action or playability, unless the truss rod is on an extreme setting (an overtightened rod, for example, would result in fretbuzz were you to change to a lighter gauge).
Changing between the 0.10 gauge sets that you refer to should not cause any problems; the first set has a heavy top and light bottom and vice versa for the other, and the difference in tension and playability would probably be too small to notice.
Regarding the use of different tunings, problems would only occur if the tunings are extreme in nature, which might require some sort of compromise truss rod setting to minimise fret buzz.
If you intend to change gauges and/or tunings regularly, try to avoid ridiculous extremes.
Changing from .009″s to .010″s is fine and may not require truss adjustment; using anything heavier would require the instrument to be set up and re-intonated, but no long-term damage should be sustained.
Obviously, extremes of heat and cold could have a detrimental effect in conjunction with heavy strings and overtightened truss rods, so be careful in this respect.
The strings available to Buddy Holly and Eddie Cochran in the mid-'50s would have ranged from medium (.011-.52 or more) to heavy (.013-.60) gauge and would have included a wound third.
Light gauge string sets which included a plain third did not appear on the market until the late '60s.
Eric Clapton used to buy medium gauge sets, discard the sixth string and move the other strings across so that the 5th became the 6th, and used a plain banjo G string for the top E.
TREM ARM TACTICS
Dear Doctor I recently purchased your ‘Guitar Physical’ video and it's brilliant.
When does the next one come out ?
I have a question for you regarding the setting up of my trem.
In the video you say that a gap of ″ should be the distance between the body of the guitar (Strat) and the underside of the bridge plate.
What's your recommended gap for the bridge on a PRS Custom, again from the body to the underside of the plate?
Could you also tell me the recommended height between the plate (front) to the underside of the six screws.
I also have a Washburn D70 Golden Harvest acoustic.
Which pickup is best suited to this guitar (one that fits under the bridge saddle) and what standard of sound can I expect?
→ There are a few things to consider when setting up a PRS guitar.
Firstly, because the PRS has a carved top, the gap from the underside of the bridgeplate to the table may need to be set a fraction more than ″, depending upon the amount of ‘pull up’ required on the tremolo.
I allow enough clearance so that the Top E string can be raised one semitone when fitted with .009″ — .042″ gauge strings.
The six screws at the front of the bridge plate are different to those of a Strat in that each one has a V-shaped groove which fits into a corresponding knife edge on the bridge plate.
This dictates that the clearance from the underside of the screw to the bridge plate should be the same for each screw.
These screws are for overall height adjustment purposes only and should only be touched if the desired action height is out of range for the individual saddle height screws.
If this is the case, the adjustment is best made with the strings slackened so as to reduce the possibility of damaging the knife edges on the bridgeplate.
Each screw should be adjusted a quarter of a turn at a time, to maintain the correct height relationship and prevent undue force on the V-slots and knife edges.
(Chandler guitars recommend holding the tremolo arm down to make adjustments; you can then prop up the rear of the bridge with a small block of wood or the like).
When the overall height is approximately right, retune the guitar and make any necessary fine adjustments for height and intonation with the saddle screws.
Regarding a transducer pickup for your acoustic guitar, Washburn will happily suggest the correct model to fit the D70.
They can be contacted on 0462 482466.
THE TONE ZONE
Dear Doctor I have recently bought a 1986 Fender Contemporary Tele, featuring two single coils (Strat-style) and a standard humbucker (with 6 non-adjustable pole pieces and 6 adjustables) plus individual pickup selection via three mini switches .
However, I'm not too impressed by the pickups and need some replacements to give it a bit more OOMPH.
I like to play various stuff from GN'R, Clapton, Bettencourt, Metallica (particularly James Hetfield) and mostly Rossi and Parfitt from Quo.
Do I need to replace the pickups at all?
I want the guitar to look cosmetically identical, if new pickups are to be fitted.
→ Several companies do replacement pickups that match the cosmetics of your Tele, Mark: Seymour Duncan, Kent Armstrong, DiMarzio and of course, Fender, among others!
But I'm not convinced the pickups are the cause of your dissatisfaction.
You mention that you need a bit more ‘oomph’ in your sound, but this won't necessarily be obtained by replacing the pickups.
And it might easily be at the expense of tone if it was.
If you actually like the tone of your existing pickups, but just require more of it, why not try an overdrive pedal to give your amp (you don't actually mention what it is) a bit of a boost?
If you take your guitar to your local music shop and try out their range of pedals, the chances are that you will find something to do the job and save yourself the substantial cost of a new set of pickups.
GETTING YOUR BACK-UP
Dear Doctor
Can you please help with the following:
1) Is there a quick way to clean a five-way pickup selector switch without taking the strings and scratchplate off?
2) Can I easily get a replacement cartridge/cassette for a tape echo machine?
All the writing on the cartridge appears to be in Taiwanese.
I've never heard of the make before (Melos), but it's a nice machine and I'll be sorry when the tape wears out.
3) In the instruction manual for the BOSS ME-5 it says to take it to a recognised dealer to get the back-up memory battery replaced.
I've written to the makers for info, but with no reply.
Can't I do this myself, or is damage inevitable?
4) I want to replace the old RCA valves in my Roland Bolt 30.
Will any equivalent make be alright?
→ The answer to your first question, Mel, is no.
In the time it took you to write this letter you could have stripped the guitar down, sprayed the switch with contact cleaner and fitted new strings — you do change your strings occasionally, I assume?
Seriously, though, shortcuts rarely work properly and it's only half an hour's work to get the job done.
With regard to the replacement tape cassettes for your echo machine, I haven't got a clue!
If any reader can help with this, please contact me and I shall pass the information on to Mel.
The back-up batteries in your ME-5 can be replaced by your local Roland dealer.
Phone them for information.
Roland do not necessarily have time to reply to letters where the course of action has already been explained in the handbook.
However, it's definitely not advisable to carry out this procedure yourself, as static electricity could damage some of the ICs.
The RCA valves in your Roland Bolt can be replaced with any good quality brand equivalent
STYLE FILE Hilborne on Malmsteen
If you read my brief interview with Yngwie, back in April, you will recall that he had just released his tenth album ‘Fire and Ice’ and was touring the world to promote it.
On his visit to London we were able to get together for a bit of a jam and a chat about some of the parts he played on the ‘new’ album…
The first part we looked at was the diminished arpeggio intro phrase and main riff from the album's opening track Perpetual (figs 1–2).
Notice how the chord at the end of the intro phrase is the 1st inversion C major: C/E, or C major with the third (E) in the bass.
The use of such inversions is a common approach of Yngwie's.
The riff in fig 2 is constructed using the F♯ Spanish phrygian scale: the 5th (mixolydian) mode of a B harmonic minor scale…
F♯ G A♯ B C♯ D E F♯
1 ♭2 3 4 5 ♭6 ♭7 1
As you play the riff, take care to apply the correct amount of right hand muting.
Ensure, too, that you accent the chords as indicated above the notation.
The Spanish phrygian is also used for the tune's main theme, as well as the solo section, which is played over the riff shown in fig 1.
Fig 3 illustrates a typical three octave fingering of this scale, which should be played using alternate picking throughout.
Care should also be taken to use the correct r/hand fingerings.
Figs 4 and 5 contain two fingerings often used by Yngwie for diminished arpeggios: Fig 4 ascends using sweep picked six-note groups while fig 5 descends using a sixteenth note sequence involving a good deal of left-hand position shifting.
Both these examples feature A♯ diminished arpeggios (G, E and C♯ diminished) and over the accompanying F♯ major chord they imply a F♯7♭9 sound.
After working through these ideas it's a good idea to record the riff shown in fig 2, or the F♯, G, E, G progression that's played behind the main theme.
You can then improvise some solos using ideas from the scales and arpeggios shown in figs 3–5.
The wah-wah riff to the next track we looked at,Dragonfly , is shown in fig 6.
Yngwie refers to this type of riff as a ‘groover’, and to sound effective it should be played with feel and dynamics.
During the F♯m-E part of the solo Yngwie uses both the F♯ minor pentatonic (F♯, A, B, C♯, E) and the F♯ aeolian mode.
The latter is derived from the 6th note of A major…
F♯ G♯ A B C♯ D E F
1 2 ♭3 4 5 ♭6 ♭7 1
Fig 7 shows a cascading sequence similar to a phrase played in the first part of the solo.
Notice that the distance between the first two notes of each four-note group is either a fifth or ♭5th.
Again, be sure to follow the fingering carefully.
Also bear in mind that the eventual target speed for this is around 160 bpm for each crotchet, which for most people will obviously take a lot of practice to achieve.
After looking at Dragonfly we briefly discussed which riffs by other players had the same sort of feel, and ended up jamming our way through Hendrix's Spanish Castle Magic, Manic Depression, Purple Haze and Voodoo Chile — also Clapton's Forever Man and White Room .
All of these riffs Yngwie cited as good ‘groove’ tunes.
The next example is the catchy syncopated intro riff taken from the single Teaser .
This is a very straightforward part and shouldn't present any problems.
If you listen to the riff on the record you will notice that every 4th bar Yngwie plays a one bar fill.
For these he used ‘mainly major pentatonics with a bit of chromatic stuff thrown in’.
As you play fig 8 try to improvise your own fills in a similar style.
During the solo on this track, Yngwie used F lydian for the F chord:
F G A B C D E F
1 2 3 ♯4 5 6 7 1
And G mixoldian for the G chord:
G A B C D E F G
1 2 3 4 5 6 ♭7 1
For the remainder of the solo he chose to play F♯ minor arpeggios (F♯, A, C♯) and F♯ aeolian mode (see note for fig 6).
He also plays a Django-type line, similar to the phrase shown in fig 9, in which we see a descending series of trills (fast hammer-on/pull offs).
These are essentially the notes of an F♯ minor arpeggio approached from a semi-tone below.
Yngwie then told me how he created the orchestra on ‘Fire And Ice’: ‘We had two violins, a viola, a cello and a contrabass and we overdubbed that quartet four times, so on record it sounds like a chamber orchestra rather than just a quartet.
Live, I have them sampled, though.’
Fig 10 is from the pre-solo section of the track Cry No More and is the melody which Yngwie played along with his ‘chamber orchestra’.
In terms of style it's like a short Bach piece containing lots of idiomatic motifs and pedal tone ideas.
Once again, to play this at the correct tempo you should play it metrically, with great care given to the evenness of each note and to the left-hand fingering.
YNG'S TOP TEN
TO ROUND OFF THIS PIECE, I asked Yngwie to list ten albums which he considers essential listening for all guitarists.
Never one for false modesty, you'll notice he's included two Malmsteen albums: ‘Rising Force’ and UFO's ‘Strangers In The Night’.
1)
‘Made In Japan’— Deep Purple
2)
‘Splendido Hotel’— Al Di Meola
3)
‘Metal Fatigue’— Allan Holdsworth
4)
‘Van Halen I’— Van Halen
5)
‘Band Of Gypsys’— Jimi Hendrix
6)
‘Paganinni 24 Caprices’— Itzhak Perlman
7)
‘Rising Force’— Yngwie Malmsteen
8)
‘Strangers In The Night’— UFO
9)
‘Elegant Gypsy’— Al Di Meola
10)
‘UK’— UK
MODERN LOVE Fender SRV Strat Fender's newest angle on the seemingly limitless Stratocaster theme is a glossy recreation of the late Texan blueser's tattered old workhorse.
Rick Batey probes beneath the polish…
‘It's a ‘59 Stratocaster, although I've got a different neck on it now, because I'd worn the original one to the point where every time I re-fretted it, I had to fill in the holes!
But it's the same size neck — a big, V-shaped one.
I use bass frets, jumbo bass frets, and that seems to cause more of a rattle.
Of course, some of that comes through tuning down to E flat, although my action is pretty high.
The pickups are stock, but I still seem to get pretty much any sound out of it…’
The words of Stevie Ray Vaughan, from his interview with Guitarist back in September 1988.
And what he's saying is that his ‘Number One’ guitar, the one this Fender reissue is modelled upon, was basically a cobbled-together rat guitar.
Not only did it have a mismatched neck and body, but the scratchplate was black, and therefore from the '70s.
It also had an assortment of different-coloured knobs, a mixture of old and new bridge saddles, a custom bone nut, a left-handed vibrato, burn marks on the headstock and stickers all over the place.
In other words, a bit of a mess, and rumour has it that the thing was virtually unplayable.
But it worked for him, and looked cool into the bargain, and that's Fender's problem, really.
You can recreate an electric guitar accurately enough, down to fractions of a millimetre if you want to, but can you recreate the thirty years of wear and tear that's the main attraction of a knackered old Strat?
Yes, just about— but not on a production line.
So, essentially, what we've got here is a ‘59-style rosewood-board Stratocaster — not a Custom Shop model, but from the same line as the Strat Plus and the Clapton Strat.
It's got a somewhat scrappily-engraved ‘SRV’ scratchplate, a ‘signed’headstock, a left-handed trem, Fender's own Texas Special pickups and, for some inexplicable reason, gold hardware throughout — not really to my taste, and Fender would never have put custom gold bits on a standard sunburst Strat in the old days.
However, it's still an impressive-looking guitar, and that's largely due to the stunning three-tone sunburst finish over the plain alder body.
There's sunbursts and there's sunbursts, and although this one is flawed by a couple of sanding marks around the back, the overall effect is more than a little tasty.
Pity it's not cellulose…
To my mind the SRV's overall appearance is let down by the fingerboard.
As it should be on a ‘59-style Strat it's a proper thick ‘slab’ board, not the curved veneer type, and it's got reasonably authentic-looking plastic clay-type markers.
But it's a weird colour for rosewood, a pale, stripy brown, like a halfway house between a Rickenbacker fingerboard and a cheap kitchen cabinet.
Some '70s Strats used this kind of rosewood, and however much you oiled them they still looked pretty bad.
Behind the fingerboard lies a thick, well-rounded, gloss-finished neck.
It's not as huge as a Jeff Beck model, being just under an inch deep at the 12th fret, nor is it anywhere near as vee-shaped as a Clapton Strat, but it's still a sizeable handful, except down by the first couple of frets where it's a fair bit shallower, in good ‘59 fashion.
Stevie Ray's own ‘Number One’ was refretted so many times that its fingerboard flattened out from about an 8″ radius at the first fret to nearly 10″ around and above the octave.
Rather than copy this ‘accidental’ compound radius, Fender have chosen to equip the reissue with a simple 12″ radius board and .098″ wide medium jumbo frets — big, but not as big as the .110″ wide ‘jumbo bass frets’referred to by the man himself.
However, this size of fretwire should please more of the people more of the time, and you can't deny that the fret job is superb; the ends are so well finished you can almost see your reflection in them.
Thankfully we've been spared the agony of SRV's favourite .013 to .058 strings; the reissue comes with a much more manageable .010 to .046 set, and it's been set up with an action considerably lower than the man's own and at the 12th fret.
The action is smooth and buzz-free all over the fingerboard, but even without the humungous strings and the heavy action this is still a pretty beefy-feeling beast — definitely not a Strat for the lily-fingered.
There's a fault with the nut on this guitar.
Strum an open G chord and you'll hear a strange ringing noise, which proves to be the G string vibrating in sympathy behind the nut.
The culprit is the G string slot, which has been cut away at too sharp an angle, leaving the string supported on a tiny knife-edge; this slot will wear much faster than the others, which will eventually call for a premature nut replacement, or at least some fancy manoeuvring with superglue and baking soda.
Stevie Ray obviously got his notion about the value of a vibrato with the arm protruding out from above the strings from watching Jimi Hendrix.
It does in fact work quite well, provided that you're actually using the thing, but when out of use the arm seriously impedes any muting of the strings at the bridge.
On our review model the tremolo has been set up with three springs instead of Stevie's five, and the baseplate is kicked up way too high from the face of the body.
More setting-up time wouldn't have gone amiss.
Also, the intonation screws are too long; on the bottom E, the screw is so long that it literally digs into the string.
You can usually tell a good Fender before you plug it in, and I've got to say that acoustically the SRV is one of the loudest and most solid-sounding Strats I've come across (and in that I include non-trem Strats, which usually sound better under these conditions).
As I've said, the pickups are Fender's Texas Special models, with staggered polepieces (and badly fitting covers).
You all know what Strats sound like and what 5-position selectors do, but to get an overall picture of this guitar I lined it up against a regular office hack (a Tokai hybrid with an old ‘58 Fender neck and Alnico Pro II's in the middle and bridge positions) and can report that the SRV came out well.
It doesn't have quite the presence or the lovely transparency of the Seymour-equipped hybrid, but the Texas Specials make it sound fractionally bigger, deeper and more authoritative.
It's still an essentially traditional Strat sound, but with just that extra bit of in-your-face mid-range bite to drive the amp harder.
I can't imagine any Strat-lover objecting to the sound of the SRV; it basically sounds very Hendrix indeed — and I couldn't imagine Stevie Ray making a fuss about that…
CONCLUSION
Fender's first-ever posthumous signature model raises some interesting questions.
If the man were still alive, would he have played one himself?
Well, he might have kept one as a spare, but I rather suspect he'd have handed it to a friend with strict instructions to thrash it to death and to return it in five years’ time…
Objectively speaking, the SRV's best points are the toothsome sunburst finish, the great fret job, the thick, grabbable neck and the Texas Special pickups.
Its worst points are the nasty scratchplate, the problems with the tremolo and nut and, slightly less objectively speaking, the inappropriate gold plating and the odd-looking fingerboard.
As for the left-handed tremolo, well, it's a matter of taste, although I've a feeling that this feature might prevent the SRV overcoming its strong artist connection and becoming a popular guitar in its own right, like the Clapton Strat has.
It's also a mite expensive, although you should bear in mind that retail prices are deceptive things; the chances are that after a period of high demand and correspondingly high prices, the cost of the SRV will settle down to around the same as the Clapton Strat.
To sum up?
There's a really good guitar buried in here, but considering (a) the high price and (b) the fact that you could easily retro-fit Texas Special pickups to your very own Strat, the SRV Strat is strictly for the fanatics.
RRP: £1,214
Tweed case included
No left-handed versions (except through Custom Shop for Custom Money)
For further information please contact 
Music for the Nation London Music Show
Cancel the wedding or the holiday, sell the theatre/football/movie tickets, put the dog in kennels and get down to the Wembley Exhibition Centre…sharpish!
Whatever you're doing over the weekend of 28th/29th November, forget it, your time could be better spent…
The London Music Show is the place to be.
And for a number of reasons…
First, there's the chance to try out new gear from a host of different exhibitors, and second, the opportunity to experience live, at no extra cost, some top players in the Capital Radio Live Music Hall.
On Sat 28th, for instance, you can witness the explosive talent of guitarist Jan Cyrka, who has teamed up with bass virtuoso Pascal Mulot to bring you the most lethal double-act since Smith met Wesson.
Guitarist columnist Michael Fath and his band will be performing, as will the stunning Jennifer Batten, still running hot from Michael Jackson's world tour and here to promote her amazing solo album ‘Above, Below and Beyond’.
On Sunday 29th, Francis Dunnery, ex-It Bites whizz and currently working with Robert Plant meets the Thunder From Down Under himself, Frank Gambale, who joins the ranks of live performers.
The afternoon will be finished off with Jennifer Batten giving her full GIT Rock Guitar Clinic — definitely not to be missed!
And don't forget that this year's show includes a Vintage & Collectable section, where you will be able to see some of the instruments that until now have featured only in your dreams!
So whether you come along to buy, try or just sigh, we can guarantee a day of thrills and trills.
See you there!
FRETBUZZ
STEVE LUKATHER The LA lead guitarist sings, swears and salutes the passing of Toto…
The tragic death of drummer Jeff Porcaro has heralded not just the end of an era but, according to Toto's guitarist and now frontman Steve Lukather, the end of the band's fourteen-year career…
‘Jeff was my best friend and my brother; he was my spiritual and musical mentor since 1972 and I never lost anybody this close to me before.
We finished the album and we were going in a new direction, one which we were all very pleased with.
‘After we lost Jeffrey, I didn't have any intention of continuing, nor did David or Mike, we were so stunned.
But Jeff's mother and father said, ‘Look, you guys have got to do this.’
So it's really about keeping his spirit alive and making sure people get a chance to hear this album and see it performed live.
At the end of this, as far as I'm concerned, it's over.’
Jeff's mysterious death visited an already troubled Toto camp, the band having become the victims of some typical record company insensitivity.
Steve's not in the mood to pull any punches…
‘The American record company sent us this singer, which was completely the wrong thing for me.
It was hard to get through every show.
Then they kept making us promises that they had no intention of keeping.
They're just scum bags; they really are just useless people and the reason why music is so mediocre at the moment.
‘The guys can't play, can't write, can't produce, can't do nothing, and they want to tell everybody who can what to do.
It's easy for them to say, ‘Okay, put this in the computer and we'll find someone to sing it.’
I got sick and tired of wet-nursing all these singers.
Not only me, but poor Dave (Paich ) too: we'd just sit there and look at each other and go, ‘This is wrong,’ trying to get somebody to interpret our music.
‘So I said, ‘Okay, if we're going to do this again, just drop everything down a f***ing third and let's get rocking again.
F*** this wanky shit we've been doing.'’
So Steve took on the singer's mantle, but how does he think he's shaping up as a guitarist/vocalist?
‘Well, I'll tell you what, the guitar's a little bit more shallow when you've got to sing and play some of this shit, and the new album's got a lot of riffs, but I'll rise to the occasion.
I like a new challenge, especially as I'm really focused, my mind's clear, my body's clear.
I really want to go out and kick some ass one last time for Jeffrey, for me, for us, and most importantly for the people who come to see us.’
The guitar work on the new album is unmistakably Lukather and, although his playing seems less restricted, Steve still heeds Jeff's guidance…
‘Jeffrey was always the one saying, ‘Hey, man, don't play so many notes; you know, not everybody out there's a guitar player.
I dig all that shit too, man, but just play something from your heart.’
So consequently a lot of stuff that ended up on record was the more soulful, slower stuff, but I have some places where I really get to stretch out on this record.
‘I get to play that stuff a lot more live.
On record you have to consider repeat listening, if you know what I mean.
A lot of the time the guys would prefer to have something they could sing along to, instead of three million notes for the sake of three million notes.
But I did get away with it a couple of times on this record.
I'd say there's something for everybody on the record, but the overview of it is much more hardish stuff.
But there's a few things that will please the older fans.
It's a long album, like seventy-three minutes, with a lot of jam stuff that happened by accident.
‘This tour is going to be very retrospective, though; we're going way back.
We're going to play stuff off ‘Hydro’; we're going to do stuff off albums, songs we've never played live.
We're going to play all the hits, too, for people that want to come and hear them.
It's going to be pretty much a retrospective of our whole career.
‘We have a real big production screen, and as Jeff was in on the design of the set, I still feel him with me.
I know that sounds kind of spiritual and weird, but I really do; I feel like this was important to him and so it's really important to me.
And that's why I've gotten my whole scene focused on what I need to do, what we all need to do.
We're all going to go out there and give it a billion per cent every night.
We're going to play every night like it's the last one.
Because, it really is the last one…’
EA 
OTIS GRAND A guitarist with a knack for recreating the excitement of vintage big band blues…
Otis Grand's first exposure to the blues was in Oakland, California, where the suburbs teemed with juke joints and the radio stations played nothing but blues.
Around 1965, Otis discovered BB King…
‘I had his album ‘Live At The Regal’ which completely turned my head.
I must have worn two or three copies out!’ he laughs.
After a time spent playing a sort of country blues acoustic guitar, Otis got a Sears Roebuck Silvertone, with one lipstick pickup — the one with the amp in the case.
‘I bought it second-hand and I was so thrilled to own an electric guitar; that guitar meant so much to me.
The thing was, there must have been some sort of short circuit in the amp, because every time I played the damn'd thing, I got a shock!
That didn't stop me, man — I was playing that thing for two years.’
You beat the aversion therapy, then?
‘I had that determination to do it.
Then I bought a Telecaster in 1967.
By that time, certain records had come out that would prove to be milestones in my life.
There was Albert King's ‘Blues Is King’.
I discovered Buddy Guy, who was playing in Muddy Waters' band and there was this album called ‘Folk Festival Of The Blues’, which was the first album that Buddy Guy had appeared on.
He was playing a Stratocaster and nobody else was, and he had that ‘in-between’ tone and everybody was trying to figure out how he got that sound.
Nobody could figure out that you could get the switch to stick in that position.’
You saw BB King live around that time?
‘I saw BB King when he played the Fillmore West that first time.
He was opening for a rock band and his playing at that time was the best, for me.
‘By that time, also, there were a lot of blues albums being reissued, like Otis Rush's ‘Groaning the Blues’ which he had recorded in the late '50s with Ike Turner producing, and it had some of the best blues tunes on it, and some of the best playing I have ever heard.
‘In the '70s, I moved to Paris, France.
I tried to start a blues band, but it just did not work.
My other music influence was Western Swing, which is really just white man's blues, so I decided that the only way to make a living in France was to play that kind of music.
The band was called Touching Home and we got a lot of church functions and ended up playing for the American community there.’
There's not a great Blues tradition in France…
‘No, and in ‘77 I went back to the States — to Austin, Texas.
I figured I must be the only fool who was trying to start something; I was trying to get that big BB King sound and then I saw The Fabulous Thunderbirds, with Jimmie Vaughan on guitar.
I walked into this little club on the highway and I'd never heard of them before, but there was this great, white blues band.
I'd never seen a white blues band playing so good and this kid, Jimmie Vaughan, was playing some of the most devastating guitar I've ever heard in my life.
I had a chance to talk to him and he said, ‘If you like what I'm doing, then go check out my little brother!’
So the next day, I went to see Stevie Ray, playing with his band.’
Stevie Ray must have been really young at the time…
‘He looked very young!
He must have been about nineteen and, let me tell you, that was the best I ever heard him play.
He was playing his ass off!
‘Around that time there were an awful lot of white guys who were deeply into the blues.
I mean, listening to Duke Robillard was kinda the kiss of approval to what I was trying to do.
So that accelerated my own ideas and I came over to England with that in mind.
That would be around 1983.
I realised straight away that there was not an awful lot happening over here; the country scene was far bigger than the blues at that time.
My natural instinct was to go into it; I went around and sat in with various bands, but they were all so loud!’
What sort of gear did you have then?
‘I only had my little Fender Super Reverb, which was basically only a 35 watt amp — undistorted it's about 25 watts — so I couldn't handle it.’
Around 1985, Otis put together a band called The Dance Kings, whose big break came in 1987, when they supported Gary Glitter at the Albert Hall.
‘I was just in the right place at the right time, I guess.
I met the promoter at a party and he was looking for an opening act and I said that I had this dance band which would be a perfect opener for Gary Glitter and he took us on.
It went down really well.
It was absolutely great and confirmed to everybody in the band that what I was doing was viable, and I got picked up by an agent right away — the same night, in fact.’
Otis was launched onto the college and club circuit, playing six nights a week.
‘We were doing horn-led, jump blues and after five years of doing that stuff, I got tired of it.
We always had busloads of Glen Miller fans turning up, because the name ‘The Dance Kings’ kinda denoted that we would be playing that kind of music.
And I got pretty pissed off with that stuff.
So I started using guitar as the main line instrument and changed the band name to The Otis Grand Big Blues Band and looking back, it's the best thing I've done.’
Grand's choice of guitars betrays not an ounce of the usual blues axe snobbery…
‘Right now, my all-time favourite guitars are a couple of Tokais.
I went into London and I picked up this Tokai and just fell in love with it — it just had the perfect neck.
I have big hands and I need to be able to grab onto something and bend the shit out of those strings.
I didn't like the colour on it, though, so I sprayed it gold with car spray.
I've also got an early '60s L-series Strat and I've never played a better Strat than that one, but I don't use it live in case I lose it.
All I do to the Tokais when I get them is put five springs in the back, take the tremolo arm out and tighten all the screws at the bridge and raise the action.
I use heavy gauge strings: 11, 13, 18, 28, 38, 48.
The only other major change is that I put Van Zandt pickups in them.
‘My other guitar is a custom DuPont.
We were playing in France, in a place called Cognac and this kid came up to me, gave me a guitar and said he would really like me to test it for him.
I liked it so much that I used it for the show and played the hell out of it, it sounded so good.
After the show, he said he would make me one and so I said that I would really like a sort of Gibson 355, like BB was using in the mid-'60s and I would like my name on it and all sort of things.
He said, ‘Don't worry…
See you next month.’
When we finished the tour, we ended up in the same place and he comes back to me with the most beautiful guitar I've ever seen — handcrafted in under a month!
‘I use a blackface Fender Super Reverb amp.
Without that amp, I can't survive.
I don't use any effects, no pedals, nothing; I just use a guitar straight into the amp and I let the wood and the fingers do the work…’
Selected Discography:
‘Big Blues From Texas’ JSP Records (with Phillip Walker) JSPCD 248
‘He Knows The Blues' Sequel NEXCD 219
MARTYN JOSEPH The Ian Woosnam of crafty acoustic pop talks of guitars, golf and Glen Campbell…
Looking at the present state of the Top 40 singles chart, the recent appearance of a song entitled Dolphins Make Me Cry by Welsh songwriter/guitarist Martyn Joseph was especially surprising.
But did it surprised its writer?
‘To an extent, but the song always aroused a lot of interest and it seemed to capture people's imaginations.
But it certainly isn't an obvious single, although Radio 1's Simon Mayo made it his ‘Record Of The Week’ which was a big help.
But then again I'm surprised that anyone ever listens…’
Before gaining the commercial weight of the mighty Epic Records, Martyn Joseph had already established a considerable market for his songs, having recorded on independent record labels over the last six years, including his own.
‘An Aching And A Longing’, Martyn's previous album on his own label, has to date sold over 30,000 copies in the UK, proving that it is still possible to achieve success via the traditional workaholic route.
But what had prompted Martyn to take the risk of recording and releasing his own material?
‘Rejection slips, mainly.
And, to be honest, the motivation was gained from the reaction of friends and people who came along to the gigs, because I don't always have a lot of confidence in what I do.
Then when I was doing a tour I recorded three of the nights and the results sounded good.
These recordings were put out speculatively and sold really well.
I do tend to react to what people say, which was fortunately always favourable, so that gave me something to aim at.
Two years ago it worked out for me whilst I was playing the Greenbelt festival; Gordon Charlton, CBS's A&R guy at the time, saw me play there and bought a copy of my album.
Afterwards he got in touch, not to sign me but to offer encouragement and say that he liked the album.
I kept in touch after that, obviously, and continued to badger him and send him new material until I was signed last August.
So it was a question of waiting till the right moment.
‘Even so, I've been trying to get to this level for seven or eight years, even though I knew that people liked what I did.
I already had a mailing list of over 7000 people, which is healthy for someone who isn't a household name, and is a good base for putting out a single, if those people then go and buy it.
As with the new ‘Being There’ album, it's quite daunting to think of the number of people who are listening and liking it.
Epic have been fabulous; they're much better known for the Michael Jacksons and George Michaels of this world, but they've been really helpful to me…’
As a youngster, Martyn possessed a variety of talents, and playing the guitar was not his primary obsession.
‘When I was ten, my Dad bought me a guitar for Christmas, which I'd asked for, but at the same time he enrolled me at the local golf club!
I really took to golf, too.
When I was 15, my handicap was 1, so in my teenage years sport was my main thing and the guitar was a hobby.
I fully intended to be a professional golfer.
‘I'd started classical guitar lessons, too, as that was the proviso for getting my original guitar.
Funnily enough, I was recently asked by Johnnie Walker on his Saturday Sequence show who had first inspired me to want to play the guitar.
I was almost embarrassed, though I don't know why because he's such a good guitarist and singer, to reply that it was Glen Campbell.
Honey Come Back was one of the first singles I ever bought, and I always loved the way he played.’
Glen Campbell is well-known for his association with Ovation guitars.
Did Martyn follow his hero?
‘No, my main guitar is a Takamine, but one which isn't available in Europe.
It's the same model that Bruce Springsteen uses, and I use the six and also the 12-string versions.
And it's not one of their more expensive ones, either.
I now play that through a Trace Elliot acoustic amp via a GP16 processor and that's about it.
It's a setup with a lot of punch, it's reliable and I feel confident with it — anything that I do on the album I can do live.
However, most of the guitar work on the album is done with a Lowden, a really sweet-sounding guitar.
For the venues that I do now, I prefer the ‘bigness’ of sound of the Takamine, though.
I'm doing Chris De Burgh's tour, and that will involve doing the Earls Courts and NECs, and, doing those solo, I need a big sound.
‘With Joan Armatrading, we did 2–3000 seaters, and that just worked fantastically, especially as I like to communicate with the audience, and people these days aren't used to that.
It's like ‘Wow, he did all that and he didn't even have a band!’
But I often find myself being far less nervous than the artists I'm supporting, because I'm so used to gigging; I've been doing a steady diet of around four gigs a week to support myself for many years, whereas they make an album then go out on tour every two years.’
The material on the album tackles some uncomfortable topics, including the recent decimation of the mining industry (Please Sir ), and the Gulf War (Swansea ).
Does Martyn draw much inspiration from the Welsh environment?
‘Well, Wales has its Max Boyces, Tom Jones, Shirley Basseys and Shakin' Stevens, but there aren't many singers who actually sing about the country, and the funny thing is that it's taken me about thirty years to start writing about where I was brought up.
Previously I've written songs about all these other subjects which personally affect me, but now I'm thirtysomething and it may be down to a need to find out about and rationalise my environment, but these songs about Wales seem to be appearing.’
‘Being There’ contains impressive performances from a variety of guest musicians, too…
‘Mark (Walking In Memphis ) Cohn was a great help and inspiration.
Charlie Morgan was on drums; he's on tour with Elton John at the moment.
Bass guitarists included Mo Foster, and Lee Sklar who played on a track for us, but we didn't use what he did, as we felt that what we already had was better.
‘On guitar there's John Levinsall who plays on Mark Cohn's records, and an amazing guy called Bill Dillon who does the majority of the guitar work on Robbie Robertson's albums.
He puts down something like eight guitar tracks using numerous WEM Copicats and what have you, and it's only when you hear them all together that you realise he's assembled this sound that he had in his head.
It's amazing to watch.’
GK 
INDIGO GIRLS Just when you thought it was safe to go back into the folk club…
‘I've just got a whole load of new guitar tunings from Mary Chapin Carpenter,’ enthuses Emily Saliers.
‘She said they'd been helping her to write songs, and sure enough I tried one of them — low string down to D, and top string right down to C — and I got three new songs straight away:Galileo, Virginia Woolf and a ballad that didn't make it onto the record.
It's so inspiring; you get those low bass notes and that drone thing going, and it always puts you in a certain mood.’
The Indigo Girls are Emily Saliers and Amy Ray, two songwriters from Georgia with great taste in pearl-inlaid Martins.
Although little known as yet over here, their unashamedly passionate lyrics and stunning vocal harmonies have earned them a big name in the States.
They began working together at high school, and moved on to ‘open-mike’ nights at folk clubs in Atlanta, covering songs by Jackson Browne, Carole King and James Taylor.
The often awkward transition from playing covers to playing original material went without a hitch, and before long REM were providing backing on their first album.
And they've carried their tradition of illustrious contributors over to their third and latest release, ‘Rites Of Passage’…
There's Budgie from Siouxie And The Banshees, This Mortal Coil's strings supremo Martin McCarrick, bassist Sarah Lee from the B-52s and the Gang Of Four, while vocal contributions come from David Crosby, Jackson Browne and famed New York sister trio The Roches.
The producer, bizarrely enough, is Peter Collins, ex-knob twiddler for such acts as Queensryche and Alice Cooper.
‘We had a kind of ‘wish-list’ of players we wanted to come in,’explains Emily.
‘It turned out to be pretty energy-sapping record to make, actually, but the last two albums have done pretty well so we had the luxury of doing some hit-or-miss experimentation in the studio.
We felt really honoured by the presence of the other players, and it was great to watch the record unfold.
‘Budgie is one of Amy's favourite drummers, and he brought in an African tribal kind of feel to the album.
Mind you, I think we've managed to avoid that self-conscious ‘world beat’ kind of feel, because we didn't do it on purpose — it was all an accident!
‘Sara Lee's been playing with us for a while; it was Scott Litt (REM producer)who recommended her, and I love the way she plays bass.
I used to take bass for granted, because I didn't really understand it, but having been around Sara I've got a much deeper appreciation for the way she fits into the rhythm section and comes up with lines that move around underneath the melody.
It's a kind of deceptive simplicity, I guess, and musically she's right up our alley.
‘One of the most beautiful things about being in this business is that you get to meet your musical heroes.
We ran across David Crosby when we were playing in LA, the same night we met Joan Baez and Jackson Browne.
I went up to him and gushed at him for about twenty minutes, told him we were making an album, asked him to sing on it and he said, ‘Sure.’
As for The Roches, we've been big, big fans of theirs since way back — I've been listening to them since I was about 13.
I love their harmonies and their acoustic sound and the wackiness and quirkiness of their songs.’
Like many songwriters, Emily has found that the prolific teenage years don't last.
‘I was writing a song a day at college,’ she laughs.
‘I was so depressed, but at the same time the world was my oyster.
At eighteen it's so easy to romanticise things and put them down in a song.
I cringe when I hear those songs these days; mind you, perhaps one day I'll be cringing about the songs I'm writing now…
‘They say that pain is good for writing and I'm not sure about that, but I guess my trouble is I don't know how to keep a distance.
Some lyricists manage to keep themselves apart from the song, suggesting things instead of making them obvious, and that approach is maybe better because the listeners have to use their imagination…
I've never figured out how to do that!
All I can do is feel what I'm feeling, and translate it in my own way.’
Comparisons between Emily's work and that of Joni Mitchell are definitely not taken as an insult.
‘She's by far the biggest influence on my writing,’ affirms Emily.
‘There's just no-one else to touch her, except maybe for Bob Dylan in a very different way.
I like all her records, especially the early stuff and things like ‘The Hissing Of Summer Lawns’ and ‘Don Juan's Reckless Daughter’— she's just a great musician and poet.
‘There are some really good women writers around at the moment; Shawn Colvin's excellent, and so's a woman called Ferron, although she got kind of pigeonholed into ‘women's music’, and I think that's limited her audience.
I must admit that we ourselves started out with a strong women's following, but I think that's because of society and the way men are brought up not to be so immediately emotional.
Our music is always emotional, and I think that's why people either like our stuff or absolutely hate it!’
Indigo Girls Amy Ray and Emily Saliers
THE FRANK & WALTERS The deep thoughts beneath the clownish guise of the best ever cabaret band to come out of Cork…
In the tolerant, big-hearted world of The Frank & Walters, there's still one special breed of human being guaranteed to get the bird, and Guitarist readers will recognise him straight away…
‘We walked into this shop in Denmark Street,’ relates Niall Linehan, ‘with the intention of buying a spare guitar, and I'd had my eye on this Gibson Les Paul hanging on the wall there.
There was this guy sitting behind the desk with a guitar, practising his flamenco scales.
Finally, we got his attention and we asked him if we could try it out.
He said, ‘Well, you know what it sounds like,’ and of course we said, ‘No, we don't.’
And he said, ‘Have you ever heard a Thin Lizzy record?’
‘Yeeeess…’
‘Well, that's what a Gibson Les Paul sounds like…’
We couldn't believe it!
Next time, we're going back with a record player and a Thin Lizzy record, we're going to plug it in and when he asks what the hell we're doing, we'll say, ‘Just listening to that Les Paul on the wall there!'’
With The Frank & Walters' debut LP (‘Trains, Boats And Planes’) already captivating the UK public, Mr Anonymous Music Shop Employee would do well to show them more respect.
Its blend of Niall's pure, insistent guitar and the clear-piped vocal melodies of his bassist brother Paul is uniquely uplifting, while its lyrics champion the cause of society's undersung and misunderstood.
Yet the Franks have received criticism for including a lot of songs dedicated fans will already own.
So, are they ripping off The Kids?
‘Well,’ argues Paul, ‘you have to remember that it's our first album and it's, like, our album for the world.
It's not just for England; it's for people in Norway who've never heard us before, so we've just put our eleven best songs on the album.
Our eleven most varied songs, too, with a different feel to each song.’
Typical.
Only The Frank & Walters would honestly care about Norway.
They also care about trainspotters and bus drivers.
Who else do they care about?
‘Midwives!’ exclaims Paul.
‘Lighthouse keepers!’
‘Fishermen!’ adds his brother.
‘And gardeners who work the allotments…’
‘People think that the trainspotter is a fool,’ Paul explains, ‘but he's not really, because he's got romance in his life.
The train is magic, and we're too educated and stupid to see it.
You're a fool in some ways when you're too smart for your own good.
The trainspotter is lucky, and I don't like it when people scorn him.
‘We want to help people.
If there's something in our music that someone can identify with in some way, something that makes their life easier…
Because in my lifetime bands like The Beatles have helped me, and even Bob Marley.
If we can comfort people in some way with our music then it'll have been worthwhile.’
Although he wouldn't wilfully bar anyone from the F&W love-in, Paul is as aware as any band member or gig-goer of the forces stacked against his musical vision…
‘I don't like violence, you know.
Last night at our gig in Cardiff there was a bouncer at the front and he caught a youngster and he hit him in the throat, and he could have killed him.
He started punching another young feller and we stopped the gig, and said if it continued we just weren't going to play.’
Niall shakes his head in disgust…
‘We've had this security feller tell us how he could disable a punter by cutting the tendons at the back of his leg with this fancy Stanley blade.
Imagine the mentality…
He thought he was in Vietnam!
And he was in charge of sixteen year-old kids on a night out.
And you can't do anything about it, because there are so few security firms; they have a monopoly and they don't give a shit.’
It's a terrible situation and one that has to change.
We agree that what's needed is a credible, punter-friendly security firm to establish themselves, offering bands and venues a less twisted and psychotic alternative…
But enough of such doom and gloom; what's it like working with Guitarist Number One Diamond Geezer, Edwyn Collins?
‘He's brilliant,’ Niall brightens, ‘in every way.
He makes the whole thing much easier.
He's got a brilliant sense of humour and he comes up with very good ideas and he keeps the energy there.
You get a lot of people who'll tell you how to sing and play, and stop you because it sounds a bit out of tune, but he'll say, ‘No, there's soul in there, even if it is slightly out of tune.
Leave that in.’
If we got a big name producer in, he could make a song bland or something, and that's what we're afraid of.
‘There were mistakes, and buzzes and stuff, and guitar noise that the other engineer — who's very particular — wanted to take out.
But Edwyn would say ‘No, no, no, no!
Leave it in!’
He'd say that it proved that, instead of a machine or a sampler, we really did play it!
It's that human feel…’
The Franks have chosen to play a version of The Monkees' I'm A Believer for the NME's charity covers album, ‘Ruby Trax’.
It seems to sum up their philosophy perfectly, but were there any other reasons for the choice?
‘It was the only cover we could play, to be honest,’ shrugs Paul, ‘and we had a tight deadline.
We used to play it when we were doing the cabaret circuit in southern Ireland.
‘You see, we couldn't get gigs in the city of Cork, so we used to play these places around the county.
And the pubs were only interested in cabaret bands, so we had to pretend we were a cabaret band and play as many covers as possible.
And we had to pretend our own songs were covers!’
Niall laughs: ‘Like,Walters Trip became ‘an obscure Bruce Springsteen number’!
And we'd say, ‘This is Neverending Staircase off an unreleased Rolling Stones album.’
And your man would come up to us afterwards and say, ‘Those were some very obscure cover versions you were playing tonight, but I liked a few of them…yeah, quite interesting.
Here's your money.’
‘Our plan is to make all our songs famous enough so that we can go back to Cork and do the circuit again, and they'll recognise Walters Trip as a song by The Frank & Walters!’
And I'll bet it won't be long before that happens.
FRANK'S PLANKS
Paul:I have two basses: a Fender Precision sunburst — 1978, I think — and a Fender Jazz — which I think is a 1974.
It's blond and it looks brilliant.
I love the colour of that and I love the sound off it.
The Precision in a way is too middly, but the thing about the Jazz is that you can get more top and bottom from it at the same time, and that's the sound I like.
It's the sound I always wanted.
It sounds great with new strings and it records brilliantly: I get the real bassy sound from the amp and use the treble from the desk.
My amp is a 1969 Marshall, and I think there's soul in those valves.
There's something in valve amps that's just brilliant.
Niall:My main guitar is a Gibson 330 semi.
The record company had been lending it to me for the last six months, but they gave it to me at the London gig as a present because Andy MacDonald — the feller who owns the company — was so into the gig!
It's an amazing guitar; I just love it.
It's perfect because it's very sweet when you play individual strings but the minute you strum it you get the noise, the power.
I have two Telecasters, a 1980s Rosewood Telecaster and there's a brand new American sunburst Telecaster that I bought last year as a spare.
The Rosewood's very close to a Jazzmaster sometimes, actually, because it's very sweet; when you put it on the front pickup it's very mellow.
But for recording the last four EPs and the album, most of the guitar actually is this hired-in Gibson Les Paul Junior.
It's a 1959.
It's a magic guitar, hired off this guy John Harris in London.
It's just got the one pickup, the P90, but it's beautiful.
And Edwyn's got a very old Jazzmaster which we used.
I used my Telecasters a bit and I used the 330 just for feedback, because the whammy bar is excellent for controlling that.
My amp's a Marshall JCM900 top and a 4x12, but we don't use artificial, like, electronic distortions.
I just have a small preamp pedal to balance the volumes when I'm changing from the Telecaster to the Gibson.
Then I have a tuning pedal and I have another pedal just for one song — a dynamic filter.
It's like a wah, but not a wah, if you see what I mean, and I just use that for Angela Cray .
But as I say, I hate pedals, because the sound of a guitar through an amp is just a beautiful sound, and if you put it through too many other things it just gets weakened and made mock.
Feedback Your Letters to the Editor More loony letters than usual this month, but never fear — we can take it.
Tell the warder to address your ramblings to ‘Feedback’,
LETTUCE OF THE MONTH
Dear Guitarist
I'm sick with all the arguing about magical matching valves and everything.
If you want my advice, use carrots.
I use nothing else, and I think they're fab.
→ It depends where the carrot comes from, I'm afraid, Hartley.
I've heard that Chinese carrots tend not to be as reliable as some Eastern European ones…
Have you ever considered seeking psychiatric help, incidentally?
AD NAUSEAM Dear Guitarist
Yes, I did get the name of the company and the guitar — Washburn Mercury — but once I'd dragged my eyes away from the damsel's cleavage, the questions started.
What is she doing with the guitar to produce that look of dreamy ecstasy?
Well, unlike the lady in the Patrick Eggle ad, she certainly isn't playing it.
Sophisticated photography or soft porn?
Eventually I checked out other guitar ads in the October issue.
The ad man's four main weapons are:
1.
Safe Sex : a picture of the guitar — a Les Paul will do it for me every time.
Potentially dull, but Yamaha's bass ad included a chess set (class, intelligence) and a harmonica (roots).
2.
Dreams Are Made of This : star-endorsed product.
Seal and Brian May united by an Ovation, etc.
3.
Rebel Yell : metal male in full rage.
Aria can help you do it.
4.
Dodge City : The Washburn kind, which make me feel uncomfortable, one way or another.
And the winner is: Hohner's ATN.
‘Beyond the shadow of doubt…the one that does it all.’
A Category 1 ad with a neat idea.
The ATN is illuminated at the pinnacle of a pyramid of silhouetted guitars.
A plank-spanker's ego-trip — ah yes, Ricky, Strat, Tele…
Clever, non-sexist, no nasty lingering odours.
Shows what can be done.
Ed Pritchard
Oxford
MR ANGRY
Dear Guitarist
The music industry is a rip-off and it's about time something is done about it!
Musical instruments and equipment are far too expensive.
£2,195 for a Soldano valve head and £2,700 for a PRS guitar is not just expensive, it is extortionate.
Guitar magazines devote much of their space to equipment reviews that are, nine times out of ten, merely a plug for the manufacturer, when the magazine could be putting subscribers' money to good use by running more informative and educational articles aimed at the musician eager for knowledge and not glossy adverts!
→ Do you realise, Steve, that a professional standard, concert classical guitar could set you back in the region of £7,000, and that orchestral instruments regularly change hands for much more?
Sure, these instruments would be bought only by committed musicians who would see the price as the cost of entry to the type of quality they need.
And yet, there are student and semi-professional models available at more modest prices and, most importantly, the classical instrument industry is unsupported by glamorous, glossy ads.
Transfer this back to good ol' rock'n'roll and you will find a vast amount of instruments (and amps) in a moderate price range.
However, top of range is top of range in both cases and professional instruments cost a fair bit.
It has never been the intention of Guitarist to augment dealer ads with sycophantic reviews, either.
See letter below…
DUTCH TREAT
Dear Guitarist
I am a gigging guitarist living in Holland, and I would like to reflect on some of your readers' comments.
First of all, concerning those people who write to say that you review mostly expensive, esoteric items like the PRS Artist, the Patrick Eggle Legend, Mesa Boogie Mark IV, etc.
Didn't they read the articles on the Washburn Mercury series, Epiphone's MIII, Crate Stealth combo, Fender Champ 25 and so forth?
Is it blindness or plain envy?
And apart from that, if you project the same issue onto cars, for instance, not many of us will ever own a Ferrari Testarossa or an Aston Martin, but aren't they wonderful!
Also, innovative ideas do tend to work their way down to the more affordable guitars and equipment, so it might not be for you now, but maybe in a year's time it will be.
See, for instance, how the expensive Floyd Rose tremolo systems have worked their way down to cheaper guitars.
And apart from all that, isn't it okay to dream a little every now and then?
Secondly, I've read complaints about your subjectivity when it comes down to reviewing equipment, but I feel that you can't really get away from your own preferences, and why should you?
So as much as the reviewers' preferences shine through, I still feel that they review without prejudice.
How can anyone not rave about a guitar as beautiful as the Patrick Eggle JS Legend, regardless of price?
Thirdly, I've read in another British guitar mag that they don't like your ‘chummy’ approach to your readers.
Anything wrong with that?
It seems to me that you're a bunch of people having fun doing what you do, and I think a lot of people would like to be able to say the same.
I'm not telling everyone to stop criticising your magazine, but please, make it constructive criticism, and stop whining!
As far as I can tell,Guitarist has always welcomed valid criticism and suggestions for changes or new ideas, but that doesn't mean that they have to follow all of it all of the time.
Ever since the Dutch version of Guitarist appeared on the shelves in Holland, the English version has been withdrawn.
We Dutch get a magazine approximately one quarter the size of the British Guitarist , with translations of the English reviews, but through the translation we lose the individuality and humour of the original article.
On top of all that, we pay the same amount for it as you do for your four times fatter version.
So consider yourselves lucky to have, in my opinion, the best guitar magazine available.
→ Thanks for being this month's voice of sanity, Dick, and for your comments regarding the magazine.
We think the Dutch version of Guitarist is a fine publication, but remember that the UK version is available abroad on a subscription basis.
MONEY FOR NOTHING
Dear Guitarist
I live overseas, in an area devoid of music shops stocking anything more advanced than a plectrum.
As a result, I sent letters to fourteen music retailers requesting quotes on about £2,000 worth of gear to be sent, tax free, to my overseas address.
That was about 2 months ago and I have received only one reply, to tell me that they couldn't help me.
Where are the rest?
Surely they didn't get lost in the post?
My only conclusion is: THERE IS NO RECESSION IN THE MUSIC RETAIL TRADE.
That is perhaps unfair but it is the way I feel at present.
The £2,000 is at present burning a hole in my bank account.
Doesn't anyone want my money?
→ I can't believe that you managed to wave two grand under the noses of retailers in this country without response, JR.
Maybe the situation referred to in the next letter is worse than we thought!
TIN PAN ALLY
Dear Guitarist
In response to George's complaints about indifference in Tin Pan Alley (October ‘92) you said, ‘It's difficult to know exactly where to lay the blame.’
Well one thing's for sure, it's not the music shops.
So who else could it be?
Well, maybe it's us guitarists!
Your mag, like similar productions, panders to guitarists' obsession with their playing ability and the equipment they use.
I've yet to meet one who isn't engrossed in comparing his talent with other guitarists or who isn't frustrated or embarrassed by the fiscal constraints on the equipment he uses.
Put any group of players together and watch the torture as they painfully suss out where they fit in the ability stakes, and watch the most inept contract into a meek and confused, self-effacing heap.
Most guitarists know people who can outplay them in some way and so most register somewhere on the meek and self-effacing scale.
Guitars themselves have become revered icons rather than something to play music with.
They are now items of fashion or something to collect.
Your mag promotes and encourages all this; reading an analysis of Joe Satriani's playing, for example, probably does little for the confidence of most readers (I myself found it quite stretching at first !).
Every month brings more expensive guitars and equipment that the already meek and inferior-feeling strummer can't afford.
I know you review stuff from the ‘economy’ end of the market but to the guitar player's complex psychology, anything they can afford can't be that good.
Little wonder, then, that guitar shops take the attitude so many complain about.
Most people they sell to probably can't play that well.
More importantly, they almost certainly think they don't.
They'll want to spend time looking at equipment they can't afford or can only just run to and will be at some stage of agonising over whether to buy or not.
Given the chance to try something, they'll be in such a state that their fingers turn into bananas and confirm to all those pretending to be interested that they are indeed crap!
I'm not criticising guitar players — after all, I'm one myself and not in a position to be judgmental.
Neither am I knocking Guitarist .
I'm simply saying that because of the nature of our interest in guitars and playing, that's the way it is.
We're to blame for the way we allow ourselves to be treated, but curiously the solution does not lie in our hands.
I don't think the problem is limited to Tin Pan Alley by any means, but since I went there recently let's examine my experience to see where the answer is to be found.
I went there with the intention and cash to buy a PRS/Eggle dream machine — surely a salesperson's dream!
But the people selling them put me off!
It's a yawn to go on about it, but their attitude was in every sense of the word incredible.
To rescue some purpose to my 6 hour round trip (that's how desperate I was to part with my money!)
I tried in one shop to buy some strings.
No one seemed to want to serve me so I walked out and went home without so much as a plectrum!
No, in reality the solution lies with the manufacturers.
Why aren't they up in arms?
These people must be losing them sales hands down all over the country!
Perhaps they're doing okay without having to try too hard.
Perhaps they know how a guitarist's mind works: the more daunting something is, the more they want it.
LETTER OF THE MONTH LEVIN UPDATE
Dear Guitarist
Having traded in a Levin Goliath for a Martin D35 in 1972, I can give Mick Silva, your ‘Levin Lover’ of October some further information.
Firstly, the forum for exchange of info on acoustics in the '60s and '70s was the folk clubs.
Usually, the pros used Martins or Gibsons.
American musicians who came over here, like Tom Paxton or Paul Simon, usually played Martin Dreadnoughts; we never saw the 00 or 000 sizes.
Strummers, and singers who played in duos or groups used Martins: The Spinners, Jimmy MacGregor of Robin Hall & Jimmy MacGregor etc.
Occasionally, flatpickers used the big Guilds.
Gibsons were usually played by fingerpickers using very light strings —á la Jansch and Renbourne — or ragtime pickers like Ralph McTell or by female artists like Sandy Denny.
Early Ralph McTell LPs will also show that Gibsons with light strings have a sweet clear sound, whereas a Martin or a Guild just won't move at all with anything that light.
The usual Gibson models were the J45s and 50s.
Epiphone flat-tops had a similar following and a similar sound.
They did acquit themselves well with heavier strings and a flat pick, but in the main they were seen as fingerpicking guitars.
The Levin was top of division two.
I trekked the length and breadth of Charing Cross Road and the surrounding area when I bought mine in ‘68, and I still remember it was in a different league to everything else, although it crept into the £50 plus bracket, rather than the £40 I had saved.
I was replacing a Framus flat-top, built like a brick privy.
There were such things as occasional Hagstroms, but the Levin had only one major competitor worth having and that was the old Harmony Sovereign.
Flat-top Ekos did abound at the bottom of the market, but they all ended up with a Dulux psychedelic front and a magnetic pickup across the soundhole.
The Levin came in two finishes: mine was a sort of toffee sunburst, and then there was a blonde one for about £10 more, presumably because the better grained wood went into blondes.
I actually bought the Levin because my first choice was unavailable.
Hands up who remembers John Pearse and ‘Hold Down a Chord’?
He endorsed the Aria John Pearse which was the first of the Japanese acoustics and was available in two sizes: Dreadnoughtish and 00'ish.
But no-one stocked the John Pearse and I ended up with the Levin.
A year or so later the guitars that really killed the Levin came in — the first flat-top Yamaha acoustics.
They retailed around £38-£45, depending on the model, and for sound kicked the shit out of my Levin.
Suddenly, everyone had one.
They were all blonde too, and although the pickguard was ugly and went all the way round and forward of the soundhole, looked more like Martins.
I don't remember the Levin as particularly special.
From day one my D35 blew it away, and I felt no pangs as it went, traded in against the Martin which cost me £225 in Top Gear in Denmark Street.
Funnily enough, I understand what Mick Silva means when he says Martins were ‘leaden and toneless’.
The early '70s (mine is a ‘71 — serial number 290586) wasn't a great time for American guitars of any ilk as far as I remember.
Martin introduced a lifetime warranty and apparently made their guitars a bit heavier because of that.
My D35 did sound less snappy than the 28s and 21s I'd heard and played, which were all early- and mid-'60s.
Mine suffered from a lack of treble, and while I wasn't disappointed overall, I did wonder a bit.
But now, 20 years on, it's aged into a real beauty.
Almost white when I bought it, it's a beautiful mellow light gold.
Whilst still not over-trebly, the sound is beautifully balanced.
It vibrates in sympathy with music played in the next room.
I can't imagine my Levin ever maturing like that.
Levins died because Europe couldn't compete with the Far East.
Levin the ‘equal of Martin's Dreadnought in sweetness, tonality, power and playability’?
I certainly don't agree.
→ Thanks to everyone who sent in information and recollections concerning Levin guitars — especially the short, concise ones (just kidding, Bob!).
STATING TERMS
Dear Guitarist
Is there any chance you could run a page or so every now and then to explain a few of the terms that crop up in the reviews?
For example, what is a scarf joint, or a volute?
What does it mean if the maple has been ‘bookmatched’?
There are a lot more questions I could think of, but could these be covered in your pages?
You see, I think a mag such as this which is dedicated to a particular subject should carry some article which would help readers learn more about the technical aspects of guitars as well.
I fully accept that if I want to know everything a top luthier knows then I should go away and make a serious study of the subject, but I would be quite happy to read a dedicated magazine each month from which I can learn about what's new, who's up to what, what new guitars are like to play etc. etc. and also the meaning of the industry's technical terminology.
I have been playing for about 13 years now, and doing so for pleasure.
I'm fairly happy with my playing now so I'd like to just learn a bit more about the construction of guitars.
Okay, maybe I should know all this by now, but I don't and I bet there are a lot of new readers who also read the mag and in many of the reviews there comes a point where they say to themselves, ‘what's one of them?’
→ A ‘scarf joint’ is a way of gluing headstocks on to necks.
Look at a cheap modern electric and you'll see a glue-line running diagonally through the neck somewhere behind the second and third frets — that's a scarf joint.
A ‘volute’ in guitar terms is a carved hump or peak of wood at the back of the neck, just where it joins the headstock.
It's supposed to act as a reinforcement.
As for‘bookmatched’, well…imagine you've just lifted a book from a library shelf.
That's how a wedge of flamed maple would be cut from a tree.
Now, hold the book with the spine upright and towards you, and open the book right down the middle so that the pages face away.
That's the way the maple is split down the middle and rejoined so the figuring matches up, just like on a Les Paul.
Hope that helps, and we'll try to explain things more in the future…
ADS ABOUT RIGHT
Dear Guitarist
I read with interest your September editorial on readers ads.
I have used this service for selling, although more so on the buying side, having been tempted on numerous occasions!
I believe the readers ads fulfil a necessary part of the market, but let us not forget our local and national dealers.
As I work in the Middle East, I usually only have a short space of time while I'm home to sort out my musical needs and Colin from my local store, Heads Hands and Feet, has helped me tremendously over the years.
Recently I required a Music Man Silhouette, and even though Derek from Glasgow's Guitar Store didn't have one in stock, he had one sent from the distributors based in Brighton and delivered to my door in less than 24 hours.
He also arranged to have a guitar I wished to sell collected on my behalf — all this and a wicked deal to boot!
Having perused the readers ads in the treasured final pages of Guitarist it would help if the advertiser indicated his area next to his area code, and that they did not ask overambitious prices.
They cannot compete with dealers who offer a warranty, cash discount, credit, part-ex and back-up etc.
Being an avid reader and buyer for years, I have come to recognise ‘shop numbers’ and the ‘mini dealers’, so I usually ignore these ads!
Thanks for a great mag, which is the first thing I grab on my trips home, being a subscriber!
RETURN TO BASS
Dear Guitarist
In answer to John Mowforth's justified moan about Warwick truss rods — I'm a guitar repairer and I was presented with the exact same problem by one of my clients a few months ago.
I won't bore you all with the technical details; suffice it to say that the alloy truss rod previously fitted to Warwick basses just isn't man enough for the job — a classic case of a nice design let down by choice of materials.
With all due respect, I don't think your advice of rotating the truss rod through 180 degrees would gain enough improvement, particularly with medium or heavy gauge strings.
I too pondered over making up a few of my own out of spring steel, but decided to try the cheaper option of a note to Warwick themselves before going down this route.
Less than a fortnight later, a steel truss rod arrived in the post, with compliments from those nice people at Eggolsheim.
This was duly fitted to said bass and instantly cured the problem.
I would echo your comments and ask Mr Mowforth not to slag off a company before you try them out.
Warwick are obviously a firm who stand by their products and the people who use them.
We can only hope that their soon to be announced UK distributor is as helpful in sorting out these little problems.
THE GAUNTLET
Dear Guitarist
In response to Mr Fothergill's letter concerning Carlton amps, we enjoy being in the music business, and to us that means listening to what guitarists want and doing something about it.
You want the sound of a valve amp but you don't want the hassle; Smooth Tubes are analogue preamp stages packaged in a valve-like format.
At the moment they come with our amps and we've used standard valve connectors to make the step towards our ultimate goal of fitting Smooth Tubes in traditional valve amps simpler.
The Guitarist staff are as cynical and critical as anyone else and a favourable review reflects how well an amplifier actually performs.
Our experience of the average guitarist is that they know what they want and they won't be fooled into buying fresh air simply on the strength of a good review!
Read the review, try the amp; judge the sound, not the LED.
We think Smooth Tubes look good when they glow but if that is a problem, Mr Fothergill, call us or your dealer and we'll make you a special without the LEDs .
Our company is based on sound and we stand or fall on it; since the introduction of Smooth Tubes we have never been busier and it is insulting and naive to suggest our success is based on a few LEDs.
→ A challenge, egad!
Over to you, Mr Fothergill.
SET AND MATCH
Dear Guitarist
I read with great interest, Rick Batey's article on the D'addario string factory in your November ‘92 issue.
Although I'm sure the article was of great interest to guitarists and bassists alike, I would like to set the record straight on a few points.
It was stated that D'addario invented the half round string in 1978 and the phosphor bronze string 1974.
This information is not quite correct as C.M.S.
Strings Ltd were manufacturing and selling half round and phosphor bronze strings in the '50s under such brand names as Picato and Monopole.
I guess Jim meant that they were the first American string company to invent these strings.
With regards to putting all six strings in one packet and the problem Jim has with how guitarists will know which gauge is which, why don't you colour code each string, Jim?
This proved very successful in the '60s when Picato used to put all six strings in one packet, namely the circular plastic box which those of us who were around then remember with affection.
Who knows, perhaps Jim is right, every string manufacturer might be packaging strings his/our way in five years time.
Controversy, intrigue, the literary spilling of blood is the very stuff of the Guitarist letters page.
Our offer of riches beyond dreams still stands for those deft with pen and sharp of wit.
PHIL HILBORNE Solo Analysis TOO MUCH LOVE WILL KILL YOU — BRIAN MAY
Scales
This solo uses one scale type throughout:
G Major scale:
G A B C D E F♯ G
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1
As well as the above scale type there are also a few arpeggio ideas employed.
These are found as follows:
1
G major — bars 4 and 6
2
E minor — bar 7
3
D major — bar 11
4
D9 — bar 11 (4th beat)
Performance Notes
1
This month's analysis is a very melodic and tasteful piece which owes much of its effectiveness to the use of chord tones and notes which act as extensions to the chords.
In terms of performance, the main facets to concentrate on are the feel and the overall sense of dynamics.
The phrasing of the notes should be treated quite freely throughout, hence the rhythmic notation should only be treated as a general guide.
2
Although on the record this solo was played on an acoustic guitar, it also works very well when performed on an electric instrument.
3
Technically this solo shouldn't present too many problems.
The only tricky section is the phrase found in bars 11–12.
Apart from the sweep-picked (with a down-stroke) D major arpeggio, the remainder of this section should be played using alternate picking.
As always, remember to practise sl-ow-ly at first and only build up the tempo as and when the part begins to feel comfortable.
4
This solo was played on an Ovation acoustic guitar which was most probably DI'ed straight into the mixing desk.
5
My thanks for suggesting this month's solo go to Mr J. Evans from Cardiff, Wales.
A couple of sets of Scalar strings courtesy of Clive Norris at Selectron are winging their way to him as we speak.
6
Taken from the Brian May album ‘Back To The Light’(Parlophone 0777 7 80400 2 6)
©1992 Duck Productions Ltd.
© 1990, EMI Blackwood Music Inc/Frank Musker Music/Queen Music Ltd, USA.
Reproduced by kind permission of Queen Music Ltd/EMI Music Publishing Ltd/EMI Songs Ltd, London WC2H 0EA.
techniques
HILBORNE'S Rock Guitar DOUBLE STOPS PART IV — THE BLUES
This month I would like to continue our study of double stops by taking a look at some examples of their usage in blues playing.
The first example shown in fig 1 is a fairly typical intro idea, taken from the intro of Jimi Hendrix's Red House .
Bars 1–2 of this part rely on the intervals of thirds, sixths and flat fifths — or in other words the interval structure of the B7 and Bb7 dominant chord structures that are used.
This is then followed by some b7-root bends and a descending blues scale phrase.
Notice in this how the major 7th (A♯) is used as a passing tone.
Double-stops abound in nearly all aspects of blues playing.
The next example (fig 2) shows a 12 bar ‘walking bass’ rhythm part idea in which each bass note is followed by an open string double-stop.
This obviously creates the overall impression of both a bass line and chords within a single part.
To perform this effectively you should hold down each full chord voicing wherever possible, so that if you pick any strings accidentally the notes that sound will still be okay!
After working through this example try to come up with some other bass line/double-stop ideas of your own.
Also, make sure that you improvise variations on the fill-ins at the end of each two bar phrase.
Blues solos often employ double-stops to thicken up the lines.
Figs 3 and 4 illustrate a couple of ideas.
In fig 3 the double-stop is the b7 and 4 with the 4 ascending to a b5 and back again.
This sort of idea is fairly typical of players such as Billy Gibbons and Robben Ford.
Fig 4 has an upper pedal tone of A which has lines based on the A blues scale (A C D Eb E G) played simultaneously underneath.
To play this correctly you should use either a fingerstyle or pick/fingers combination.
Gary Moore uses an idea similar to this at the end of the first verse of the track Story Of The Blues , from his ‘After Hours’ album.
The final two examples for this month (figs 5–6) are both very standard turnaround phrases that would usually be played through bars 11–12 of a 12 bar sequence.
To fully understand how these work it is vitally important that you take the time to compare the notes in the phrases to those in the accompanying chord progressions.
A proper understanding of this aspect will allow you to create your own ideas much more easily and effectively.
GERRY HOGAN Rockabilly'N'Country Licks THAT'LL BE THE DAY…
CONT'D
I'm continuing, this month and next, with the 16-bar guitar solo from Linda Ronstadt's That'll Be The Day .
As I stated last time, both Andrew Gold and Waddy Wachtel are credited with the lead work on this track — Andrew on the (stereo) left and Waddy on the right.
Both solos are played in a mild, ‘find yer head’ style and tone that owes a lot to '60s rhythm and blues.
Glen Campbell used a similar approach on a few tracks when he did the sessions for The Everlys' wonderful Great Country Hits album of 1963.
This month's eight bars are Waddy's and they're fairly straight-ahead.
They're over the verse section of the song and need to be played aggressively, especially the bend-up at the end of the second bar and the four picked triplets in the final bar.
Use lots of finger vibrato with the fretting hand each time you pick the notes in this bar.
(Even if you take the B note slightly sharp whilst you do it, no matter; that's what's needed.)
Thanks to Mr. P.A. Fletcher for the idea for this version of Buddy Holly's and J.I. Allison's well-known standard.
Next month it's the turn of Andrew Gold; his 8-bar solo includes a 2-bar riff which he harmonises with Waddy.
See you then.
MICHAEL FATH Technique As A Result Of Harmony THE PENTATONIC MAJOR SCALE
The pentatonic major scale is and has always been a pre-eminent part of the rock guitarist's vocabulary.
It is sometimes stereotyped as being ‘country’ or ‘southern' (USA) but in reality is a beautiful and very functional group of notes.
Listen to any Eric Johnson, Steve Morse, Gary Moore, Jeff Beck, Jimi Hendrix and on and on, and you'll hear what I'm talking about.
The pentatonic major has the following five elements: 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 5th, 6th of the major scale.
In the key of A there would be: A B C♯ E+ F♯.
Note that there are no half-steps within this set of scale degrees and this gives it a very rounded and open flavour.
Examples 1, 2 and 3 are my favourite arrangements of the A pentatonic major.
Practise each position using alternate picking (or slurring in the case of ex.2).
Example 4 is a combination arpeggio run with descending A pentatonic notes.
It is a very good idea to be familiar with the arpeggio notes in scale positions (more on this in the future).
Note that I added a minor 3rd (C) in this run to give it more of a country flavour!
Example 5 is a potentially very fast legato run in sextuplets (6 per beat).
The left-hand fingering in this position is very crucial (refer back to example 3 for the visual).
Example 6 is part of the chorus melody (see Example 2 for visual) of the tune Suspended Animation from my new record.
Example 7 is a pedal tone idea.
This is a great left-hand exercise because the 2nd finger will stay put while the others move.
Try hybrid picking this using PI (downstroke with pick = thumb plus first finger) and M (up stroke with second right-hand finger).
Example 8 should be a very familiar sounding double-stop melody.
Jimi Hendrix was very much into this technique and rhythm style.
Best of luck!
ADRIAN INGRAM From Rock to Jazz PRACTICE AND THE LEARNING PROCESS
Contrary to popular belief, long timespans given over to arduous, repetitive practice do not necessarily equate with improvement.
In fact they may even be counter-productive.
Perhaps you are developing the wrong muscles or refining movements which are opposed to the natural physiology of your hands.
If for example you practise chord changes, or scalic passages, with excessive finger movement, you will be en route to acquiring a technique based upon finely honed excess.
This is tantamount to becoming an expert at walking along the street lifting your knees as high as your chin — novel but, as we discover as an infant, tiring and unnecessary!
Practice, then, is not the mindless repetition of difficult movements, although repetition and the overcoming of adversity may be present in any well-planned practice schedule.
The pre-requisite for an effective practice routine is thought .
For without the actively-focused mind the learning process will be inhibited.
But if practice is more than repetition, what is it and where do we start?
In the first instance, the task must be isolated ; only then can meaningful practice begin in earnest.
CHORD PLAYING
Let us take a hypothetical case.
Assume that the player wishes to improve his chord playing.
First we must determine what is meant by chord playing.
It is far too broad an area from which to devise a practice schedule and once again it is necessary to isolate .
There are many techniques and concepts relating to chord playing; here are just a few:
1
Chord construction
2
Learning new shapes
3
Working out different inversions of known chords
4
Voice leading
5
Pluralities and synonyms
6
Extension
7
Alterations
8
Substitions
9
Ubiquitous movements (II-V, II-V-I etc.)
10
Symmetrical cycles
Let us assume the player is unsure where to begin; he knows only that his chord playing is below par and wishes to improve it.
He should begin by asking a series of questions to determine the areas of chord playing most in need of attention.
These might be along the lines of:
1
Do I know how to construct chords using extensions and alterations?
2
Do I know the interval functions and positions in the chords I already use?
3
Can I find the same chord in more than one place on the fingerboard?
4
Am I aware of the voice-leading possibilities for chords I regularly use?
Having isolated the most pressing area of weakness, the real work can begin.
If work is needed in all of these areas, careful planning will be as important as hard work.
The minor 7th, minor 6th voice-leading exercises below are a product of careful planning.
If you schedule your practice routine to include one exercise per session, in just one week you will:
1
Have a better knowledge of m7/m6 voice-leading.
2
Have a wider vocabulary of chord shapes.
3
Know some different ways to play familiar inversions.
4
Know some basic chord pluralities/synonyms: ie. visualising Cmaj7 as Ami9 etc.
JOHN CURRIE Bass Analysis LED ZEP I
In all the time I have been writing the bass analysis column, I cannot remember receiving any requests for the very influential playing of John Paul Jones of Led Zeppelin, and now I get two in the same month.
This will give me the pleasurable task of transcribing sections of two Zep tracks from the all-time classic album ‘Led Zeppelin II’.
This band had such an enormous impact on the rock world in the late '60s, and it was only some years later that I fully appreciated my own debt, realising that for a (heavy) rock band, Zep often had an underlying funkiness, due in large part to the style of J.P.J. which allowed for some very subtle and interesting grooves.
This month's choice is from Paul Savides of Stanwell, who asked for Ramble On,a song containing a very gentle verse pattern which contrasts greatly with the heavy, busy choruses.
John would have used his Jazz bass on this, playing fingerstyle on flatwound strings for that thick, warm sound.
Notes
1
A melodic four-bar line using notes from the E mixolydian mode (E, F♯, G♯, A, B, C♯, D).
The 7th (D) here, if played, would be natural and not a major 7th (D♯) as the guitar accompaniment makes frequent use of a sus 4 chord on the bars of A: that chord containing A, D natural and E. Check out both tab suggestions here to find your preferred position — they both work equally well.
Keep this section light and relaxed, and make it flow as smoothly as you can.
2
Four bars leading up to the chorus using the same notes as before, but a more basic pattern and an octave down, until the chorus comes in loud and heavy, a complete contrast with its barrages of driving sixteenth notes.
Make sure to articulate these clearly, alternating your plucking fingers except where raking from the 1st to 2nd strings (notes E to A and D to A).
Note the use of the open A string to facilitate position changes.
3
Four bars bridge around A, again using the root, perfect 4th and 5th intervals A, D and E, with a nicely varied rhythmic content.
4
The ninth to sixteenth bars of the final choruses; I couldn't resist including these as they really are the climax of this bass part.
There is no mistaking the James Jamerson influence in the syncopated sixteenth note phrasing here, with various chromatic ideas incorporated into the melodic element.
Wonderful stuff, and very innovative for its time.
Heavy rock with a tinge of funk that still sounds fresh and exciting today.
More J.P.J. next month (specially for blues freaks).
See you then!
Written by Jimmy Page/Robert Plant.
Reproduced by kind permission of Warner Chappell/IMP.
ALAN LIMBRICK Pentatonics ‘OUTSIDE’ PLAYING
Like all art forms, music evokes emotion in the listener and whether or not the particular piece of music is to the listener's liking is based on a number of factors.
Irrespective of the style of the piece, all music creates tension and release (dissonance and consonance) which brings on different emotions in its audience.
In most pop music for instance, the verse sections of a song often end with a Dominant chord (ex D7, D11 etc.) which creates tension.
This tension is then ‘satisfyingly’ released by the resolution from the Dominant chord to the tonic chord which usually starts off the chorus of the song.
Solos also create tension and release, depending on the soloist's ability to create motion over the chord changes via his/her improvising.
There are many different ways of doing this by reharmonisation, superimposing.
One simple way of creating tension in your soloing is by using Pentatonics ‘outside’ of the normal harmony suggested by the chord changes.
Here are two approaches for creating tension using Pentatonics:
1
Pentatonics a semitone above the root of the chord (ex. use a Bb Minor Pentatonic over an Am7 chord.
See eg. 1).
2
Pentatonic Chromaticism.
In ex. 2 we have a simple pentatonic idea repeated chromatically, ascending and descending up the fretboard.
The lick starts on A minor at the 5th position and then moves towards its ‘target’ final note (D) which resolves the tension and takes the phrase back to A minor at the 10th position.
Assignment
1
Record a 5-minute tape of an Am7 chord groove.
2
Practise the licks over the tape until your ear becomes familiar with the tension and release created by each lick moving in and outside of the harmony.
3
Make up your own outside licks, making sure you always resolve to the original harmony.
READERS' ADS
FOR SALE
ACOUSTIC guitar with built in pickup, good condition, £80 for quick sale.
ADA MP-1 preamp, 400 watt power amp, 2 x EV 1x12 speaker cabs, £850 the lot.
ADA MP1 programmable preamp, immaculate, never gigged, under guarantee, £420.
ADA preamp, £375, Gibson Les Paul Standard, £425.
AKAI XE8, Yamaha FB01, Korg SKD1, Roland PR100.
Would swap for MIDI guitar.
ALEMBIC series 2 with laser LEDs, cost £4,500, sell for £3,500 ono, as reviewed in Guitarist, only two in the world.
ALESIS Quadraverb GT, as new with flight case, £350 ono.
Art X15 ultrafoot, 3 months old, £150, both for £450.
AMP and speaker cab, 50 watt, £60, f-hole acoustic, £20, 4 basic mics, £5.
AMPLIFIER HH electronics, 150 watt, speakerless, 4 inputs, £100 ono.
Must go.
ARBITER Les Paul copy plus hard case, excellent condition, £155.
ARIA amplifier, model AG350, 20 watts, 3 months old, excellent condition, £110.
ARIA electro-acoustic, excellent condition, red sunburst, £200.
Marshall Bluesbreaker pedal, as new, £30.
ARIA SB1000 active bass, mint condition with case, cost over £600, sell for £300 or will part exchange for Rickenbacker bass.
ART Multiverb Alpha and X15 Ultrafoot, still boxed, £400 ono.
ART SG Mach 2, multi-effects rack unit, excellent condition, £250 ono.
ART SGX Mach 2, £250 ono.
AUCTION of Tom Anderson guitar parts.
AXIS SuperStrat, Floyd licensed trem, VGC plus Dean Markley practice amp, £110 ono.
BASS Collection SB401, sunburst, excellent condition, £275.
BASS guitar, Sunn Mustang Precision copy, red, £65 ono.
BC Rich Stealth, custom made, Kahler trem, ebony fingerboard, neck through body with case.
BC Rich USA ST-3 Strat, crackle, Floyd Rose, DiMarzio, case, excellent condition, £475 ono.
ADA MP1 preamp, £325 ono.
BC Rich USA ST-3 Strat, crackle, Floyd Rose, DiMarzios, case, excellent condition, £475 ono.
ADA MP1 preamp, £325 ono.
BEAUTIFUL Les Paul copy with case, amp, books, pedal, tuner, strings, strap, leads and picks.
New for over £400, bargain at £250.  30pm.
BIRD Golden Eagle combo, vintage rarity, 25 watts, 1x12 Jensen speaker, tremolo, spring reverb, £200 ono.
Or swap for old Squier Strat.
BLADE R4 SuperStrat, mint condition, £400, handbuilt custon Telecaster, Seymour Duncans, nicely figured neck and body, brown sunburst, beautiful but unused.
BOOGIE 295 power amp, perfect condition, £950.
ADA MP-1 preamp, perfect condition, £450.
BOSS CS-3 compression sustainer, excellent condition, boxed, £45.
BOSS DR-550 drum machine, £90.
Chandler lipstick pickups, 3 number, £15 each.
BOSS GE-10 graphic equaliser, £45, Boss FT-2 dynamic filter, £30.
BOSS GE7, EF2, CE2, HF2, DD3, PH2, in flight case with power, £300.
BOSS HM2, boxed, as new, £35, DiMarzio pickup, £30.
BOSS ME5 multi-effects processor, home use only, boxed, manuals, immaculate, only £180.
Can deliver most places.
BOSS MZ-2 digital metaliser foot pedal, boxed with instructions, hardly used, as new, £70.
BOSS MZ2 Metalizer, £40, DD3 delay, £50, DC2 Dimension, £40, CS3 compressor, £35.
BOSS pedals, compression sustainer, £45, octave, £60, also 2 12″ JBLs in cabinet, £150.
BOSS pedals, various, plus DCD-6 carry case, also Hughes & Kettner Cream Machine valve preamp, offers.
BOSS SE50 multi-FX processor, still boxed, never gigged, £265 ono.
BOSS pedals for sale, delay, chorus, distortion, tone booster and power supply, £100 the lot.
BURNS guitar, Nu Sonic, 1963, red and in good condition, £250.
BURNS Marvin, black and sunburst, ebony fingerboard, all original, tremolo, £1,200 ono.
CARVIN DC-200 custom thru-neck guitar, twin humbuckers, active electronics, gold hardware, fixed bridge, £725 ono.
CELESTION FR1 loudspeakers, 500 watt each, with lids and FRC1 Mk 2 controller, totally faultless, excellent condition, £795 firm.
CHARVEL 475 active, excellent condition, £295 ono.
CHARVEL 475 limited edition, black and platinum crackle finish, 10 months old, only 250 worldwide, quick sale, £425.
CHARVEL Avenger Randy Rhoads shape, Floyd Rose trem, as new condition, still boxed, £250 ono or swap for Fender Strat.
CHARVEL model 4 guitar, black, with all original parts including Kahler trem, immaculate condition, with case, £350, no offers.
CHARVEL model 5, neck thru-body with active circuitry plus case, £400 ono, or swap/px for Charvel 550XL.
CHARVEL ST custom, cherry sunburst, home use only, as brand new, box, tags etc, £295.
CHARVEL US import with Jackson pickups plus amplifier, Boss HM2 footpedal, guitar case and stand, £380.
CHARVEL USA Strat, early 80's, much sought after instrument, as played by Gary Moore, Steve Vai, £1,250, possible part exchange.
CHORUS pedal, £20, JHF headphone amp, £15.
COMPLETE collection of vintage guitars including 2 ‘58 flame top Gibson Les Paul Standards.
Custom-built case for acoustic guitar, modern style (rectangular), very robust, £60.
CUSTOMISED Yamaha RBX 5-string bass, EMG pickups with expander, immaculate condition, £500 ono.
DALLAS Arbiter sound city, one 20 watt valve amp, good condition, custom inputs for slave amp, £150.
DAN Armstrong guitar, mahogany, sliding pickup, number 18, Kent Armstrong rewind and rewire, good offers invited.
DANELECTRO Bellzouki 12-string, circa 1963, 2 lipstick pickups, see Tom Wheeler's ‘American Guitars’ page 20, mint condition, case, £550.
DICK Knight beautiful handmade acoustic guitar, in Calton, tailormade case, £450 ono.
DIGITECH DFP-128 plus multi-effects including MIDI, good condition.
DIGITECH DSP-128, digital multi-effects processor, hardly used, home use only, bargain at £195 
DIGITECH GRP-1 guitar effects processor, floor controller and preamp, 3 weeks old, boxed, immaculate, £270 ono.
DIGITECH GSP-21, Pro multi-effects processor with footswitch, home use only, 1 year old, £475.
DIGITECH RP-1 guitar effects processor and preamp, floor controlled, mint condition, 1 month old, £295.
DOBRO Model 36, superb guitar, with case, £800.
DUET split channel practice combo, absolutely immaculate, £45.
DUNLOP original Crybaby, £40, Ibanez FP-777, Stereo phase and pan, £45.
Eccleshall Melody Maker, sunburst, 2 humbuckers, rosewood fretboard, mahogany body and neck, £350.
EMG Telecaster pickups and controls, unused, boxed, cream colour, unwanted gift, cost £120, sell for £60 ono.
EPIPHONE by Gibson, 3 pickups, locking trem, ideal beginner/rock guitar, £150 ono.
EPIPHONE Casino, early 60's, £600.
EPIPHONE EA-250, red, 335 shape, tremolo, £160.
Fender classical acoustic, £80.
Kay 50 watt amp, £30.
EPIPHONE Les Paul Standard, excellent condition, 3 months old, never gigged, £225 ono.
EPIPHONE Rivera, £350 ono, plus Proamp Demon, £75 ono.
EPIPHONE Sheraton, blonde, beautiful, hard case, all original, £200.
EQUALIZER Boss GE7, boxed, unused, £45, Precision pickup, original ‘77, perfect, £30.
ERNIE Ball Edward Van Halen guitar, figured top, £850 ono.
ERNIE Ball Musicman Silhouette, red, with two EMG's and one Hot Rails pickup, £400.
EV-12L speaker, 1x12 cab, £115.
Session SG2100 stereo head plus footswitch, £125.
Roland SDE1000 delay, £145.
EXPLORER Epiphone Gibson model, black, hard case, reasonable condition, £155.
FASTFINGERS comprehensive lead guitar cassette course, new, duplicate gift, £25.
FENDER 75, 1x15″ combo, all valve, switchable, sounds like a Boogie, hardly used, amazing value, £325 ono.
FENDER Bassman 50 and 2x15″ cab, 1970's, good condition, great sound, £200.
FENDER Champ 12 valve amplifier, as new, £140.
FENDER Champ 12 valve amplifier, black, mint condition, virtually unused, £140.
Boss GE-7 equaliser, boxed, £40.
FENDER Champ 12, perfect condition, £130.
FENDER Coronado, Mk 1, 1966, blue, plus hard case, absolutely gorgeous, £700.
FENDER Deluxe 85, 65 watt combo, excellent condition, twin channel with footswitch, great sound, £210 ono.
FENDER Deluxe 85, never gigged, £225.
FENDER Jaguar, 1964, pre-CBS, professionally refinished, plus refret, cream coloured, plus new case, plays beautifully, £750.
FENDER Japanese 12-string Strat, mint, £330.
Giffin, weird six string pick up guitar, £250.
Bond Electraglide, £250.
Silvertone amp in case guitar, £250.
Gretsch Wilbury, £100.
Vox bass amp, 50 watts, new combo, £50.
FENDER Japanese Stratocaster, black, Kahler double locking trem, £450 ono, immaculate condition.
FENDER Japanese Stratocaster, Floyd type tremolo, locking nut, sunburst, £195, hard case extra, or swap for Telecaster.
FENDER Jazz Bass USA, 1973, maple neck and board, original custom colour, VGC plus case, £525 ono.
FENDER M-80 combo, 65 watts, fully switchable split channels and stereo chorus, 1 year old, £230.
FENDER Malibu, Korean sunburst steel-strung acoustic, hard case, shadow bridge pickup, £150.
FENDER Precision, 1963, salmon pink,(refin) tortoiseshell scratchplate, rosewood neck, well used and bursting with charater, £650.
FENDER Precision bass, 1973, black body, rosewood neck, excellent condition, £300 including case.
FENDER reissue Strat USA standard, hardware, locking machines, TBX, USA pickups, graphite nut, £250 ono.
FENDER Standard Strat with maple neck, USA, cream, Evans bridge and Lace Sensor middle pickup.
It screams!
Must sell, £260.  5724.
FENDER Strat Plus Deluxe, crimson burst, 2 months old, immaculate condition, £450.
FENDER Strat USA, pewter, lace sensors, rosewood neck with Fender hard case, absolutely mint, £395.
FENDER Strat, 1979, USA, excellent condition, plays beautifully, cream with maple neck, £450 ono.
FENDER Strat, 1980, Lake Placid blue with case, £450 ono.
FENDER Stratocaster Standard, gunmetal blue, excellent condition with hard case, £360.
Jen Crybaby, £25, compressor pedal, £10.
FENDER Stratocaster USA 70's, rare Antigua finish, maple neck, trem, excellent condition/player, £450 or swap older dodgier Strat/nice Gibson.
FENDER Stratocaster, ‘57 reissue, EMG pickups, Floyd Rose with locking nuts, beautiful mint guitar, £475.
FENDER Studio 85 combo, 65 watts with reverb, footswitch, 6 months old, mint, £200 ono.
FENDER Studio 85 combo, 65 watts, reverb, footswitch, 6 months old, mint, £200 ono.
FENDER Super 60 combo, 60 watt, 1x12 speaker, footswitch, new valves recently fitted, 2 years old, £320.
FENDER Super 60 combo, immaculate condition with Groove Tubes, £325 ono, or consider px for Fender Strat or Yamaha FX-500.
Lowden acoustic also for sale.
FENDER Superchamp, rare, immaculate condition with footswitch and cover, £350.
FENDER Telecaster, Japanese ‘62, edgebound reissue in candy apple red metallic, looks exactly like Konpfler's on Guitarist Sept cover, £250.
FENDER Telecaster ‘62 edgebound reissue, cherry red, excellent condition, £275.  30pm, Suffolk.
FENDER Telecaster 1969 with Fender Bigsby, £650 ono.
Fender Coronado 12-string, mint, £350 ono.
FENDER Telecaster Standard USA, rosewood neck, 1 year old, not gigged, original case etc, £350.
FENDER The Twin, excellent condition, groove tubes fitted, £500 ono.
FENDER Twin Reverb, 100 watt, as new, genuine reason for sale, £475.  216.
FENDER Twin Reverb, circa 1971, non-master volume model, all original, excellent condition with flight case, £350.
FENDER Twin Reverb, silverface, £275 or swap for Ovation Breadwinner.
FENDER twin reverb, silvercloth, vibrato and ‘sidelegs’ model, circa 1972, excellent condition, £375.  30pm, Suffolk area.
FENDER USA Standard Strat, Floyd, 1 HB, 2 SC, pearloid plate, case, tags, excellent, £400.
Swap for Baretta.
FENDER USA Standard Strat, red with maple neck, home use only, £325.
FENDER USA Standard Strat, sunburst, hard case with tags, brand new, £350.
FENDER Vibroverb, boxed, almost new, superb tone, £500.
FERNANDEZ Jackson, pearl white, locking trem, £275.
FLIGHT case, 5-star aluminium, fit Aria bass, very good condition, £60.
FRETLESS bass Fender style, natural, rosewood fingerboard, very good condition, £225 ono.
FRETLESS bass guitar, precision copy by Maya, maple neck, sunburst finish with tortoiseshell scratchplate, excellent condition, £110.
FYLDE Oberon acoustic, absolutely mint condition, superb fingerstyle guitar, with case, £550 ono.
G&L SB2 sunburst precision bass, humbucker pickups, includes hard case, £800 ono.
GALLIEN Kreuger 250 professional studio/stage amp, £400 ono.
GALLIEN Krueger SEL1000 stereo guitar head, 5 switch foot controller, new £1,100, sell £600.
GEORGE Benson Ibanez semi-acoustic jazz guitar, excellent condition, including hard case.
GIBSON 335, 1969/71, walnut, recently setup, superb action and sound, beautiful instrument, £695.
GIBSON 1959 ES 125T semi-acoustic, P90 pickup, sunburst, best example in UK, £650 ono.
GIBSON 1964 vintage bass guitar, very cheap, £250 including case.
GIBSON 1975 Marauder, Les Paul shaped body, flying V head and neck, beautiful guitar, £295 ono.
GIBSON 1980 limited edition V2, gold plated hardware, walnut finish, Kahler tremolo, inc case, excellent condition, £650 ono.
GIBSON black M-111, with case, good condition.
Fender Lace Sensor pickups.
GIBSON Epiphone, black with rosewood neck, Strat shape with tremolo, 2 years old, £100, very good condition.
GIBSON ES-335TD, 1965, sunburst, totally mint condition, all original, superb player, case, £750.
GIBSON ES-345, 1967, vintage instrument in superb condition, £1,200 or will swap for PRS Custom 10-top.
GIBSON ES335 dot neck reissue, tobacco sunburst with original case, excellent condition, £500.
GIBSON ES335, 1961, cherry red, dot neck, ex-name owner, £2,000 with case.
GIBSON Flying V, 1979, refinished in blue, very good condition, with dirty fingers pickups, £400 ono.
GIBSON Flying V, 1980, silverburst with tremolo, good condition, £495 with Gibson case.
GIBSON humbuckers, 2 at £25 each.
2 brand new Marshall EL34 valves, cost £27, accept £18.
GIBSON Hummingbird acoustic, 1969, cherry sunburst, very good condition, £599.
GIBSON Hummingbird custom, 1979, super condition, £650.
GIBSON J-200, 1976, sunburst, all original, excellent condition including original fitted case, tags etc, £1000.
GIBSON J45, round shouldered 1967 model, cherry sunburst, excellent, all original condition, £750.
GIBSON Johnny Smith single, superb instrument, £2,500 ono, might part exchange.
GIBSON L5 or L7 wanted, South East area.
GIBSON Les Paul 40th Anniversary limited edition, plus case, ebony, 2 months old, immaculate, £925.
GIBSON Les Paul custom, 1975, rare model, maple neck, gold hardware, £600 ono.
GIBSON Les Paul custom, 1980, tobacco sunburst, gold hardware, excellent condition, including case, £525 ono.
GIBSON Les Paul custom, black, mint condition, 12 months old, unused, Brown leather Gibson case, £750.
GIBSON Les Paul Special, P90 pickups, TV yellow, immaculate condition, must go, hence offers.
GIBSON Les Paul Standard 80 heritage elite, cherry sunburst with original case, £1,500.
GIBSON Les Paul standard 1989, cherry sunburst, immaculate condition, £550 ono.
GIBSON Les Paul Standard, black, excellent condition with case, £450 ono.
GIBSON Les Paul Standard, tobacco sunburst with brown vintage case, immaculate condition, £600.
GIBSON SG custom, white, three gold pickups, immaculate, £700.
GIBSON SG Melody Maker, 1962, blue, good working condition, 2 pickups, beautiful sound, £400 ono.
GIBSON SG Melody maker, 1962, blue, good working condition, 2 pickups, beautiful sound.
GIBSON SG Standard, 1974, walnut finish, humbuckers, ebony fingerboard, owned by me from new, plays beautifully, some marks, £350.
GIBSON SG Standard, 1990, cherry, absolutely mint, quality hard case, extras, £375.  249, daytime.
GIBSON Super 5, 1979, antique sunburst, superb condition, collectable, with case.
GORDON Smith GS2 with factory fitted Seymour Duncan P90's, mint condition with hard case, £400 ono.
GORDON Smith, new and unused, cost £360, will accept £200, or swap for Fender Superchamp.
GRETSCH New Yorker acoustic guitar, tobacco sunburst finish with flight case, good condition, £550.
GUITAR case, hard shell, alloy bindings, fits all solid electric guitars, £35.
GUITAR School and Guitar For The Practising Musician magazines, 1984–1992.
GUITAR tab books and magazines.
Phone for list.
GUITAR tab, mainly middle of the road, phone for list.
GUITAR tuition videos also guitar transcriptions.
Videos £8 each, transcriptions £2 each.
Clark, 071 387 4111, London area.
GUITARIST magazine, complete set, 1984–1992, offers.
HAMER Scarab bass, as used by Def Leppard, shocking pink, £350 ono.
HAMER Steve Stevens model 1, custom built, fuschia, £450.
Also Hamer Special cherry sunburst, £325.
HARD case for bass guitar, explorer etc, £25.
HARTKE 1x15 bass cab, cost new £600, still boxed, never used, accept £450.
HARTKE 3500 bass amp, as new, boxed, £425.
Trace Elliot 4x10 new type ported cab, £425.
HARTKE 3500 bass amp, as new, boxed, £425.
Trace Elliot 4x10 new type ported cab, £425.
HERITAGE 535 sunburst, beautiful condition, £650.
HH Bass Baby, 1x15″ 100 watt combo plus 1x15″ bottom cabinet, powerful and portable, £90.
HH bass amp top, £50.
HOFNER Senator guitar with case, early 1960's, sunburst red.
Unused so in mint condition, £195 ono.
HOFNER Violin bass, short scale, good working order, £150.
HOHNER acoustic guitar, steel strung, very good condition, £40.
HOHNER acoustic, late 50's, dark sunburst, round shoulder model, £150.
HOHNER GE3T black ‘Steinberger’ guitar plus gig bag and strap, present for Christmas, £150 ono.
HOHNER headless Jack with hard and soft case, £190.
HOHNER Jack bass guitar, black, very good condition, £135.
HOHNER Jack bass, natural wood, active, 4 sets of strings, new flight case, £225.
HOHNER new active 5-string bass, perfect, plays great, sounds better!
Gig bag etc, £270.
HOHNER The Jack bass, natural wood finish, EMG pickups, good condition, £200 ono.
HULLAH custom built headless bass, metallic blue, black hardware, hard case, mint condition, £220 ono.
IBANEZ 540 Saber guitar, black, as new, immaculate condition, with case, £600.
IBANEZ 540-R, white, rosewood fretboard, new Di-Marzios, Fast Track 2 at neck and Super Distortion at bridge, excellent sound and condition, £550 ono, Zoom 9000, still boxed with adaptor, £200 ono.
IBANEZ 540S Saber, lovely flame maple top, 4 months old, as new condition, £250 ono.
IBANEZ AE450 electro-classical guitar, immaculate condition, £300 including case.
IBANEZ Artist AM205, gold hardware, £400.
Ibanez roadstar 2 fretless bass, £175, both with case.
IBANEZ Artist EL100, sunburst, in good condition with case, £250.
JHS wah pedal, as new, £20, Electric Mistress flanger, £15.
IBANEZ Artist professional series, natural ash body, maple neck, ebony fingerboard, twin humbuckers, £180 ono.
IBANEZ Artist, twin humbuckers, thru-neck, block inlays, hard case, beautiful instrument, lovely sound, £300.
IBANEZ electro-acoustic AE4052V, slimline body, single cutaway, volume plus tone control, tobacco sunburst plus case, £175 ono.
IBANEZ fretless bass with case, £350 ono, Yamaha SPX90 sound processor, includes pedals and case, £200 ono, Fostex 260 4-track, £400 ono.
IBANEZ George Benson GB20, archtop jazz guitar, 1981, rare limited edition, excellent condition, £695.
IBANEZ Jem 77, vine inlaid neck, DiMarzio pickups, low pro trem, mint condition, £699.
IBANEZ Paul Gilbert neck, body and pickups, all new, needs trem and machine heads only to complete, £350.
IBANEZ pro 540 radius guitar, beautiful black cherry sunburst finish, £450 ono.
IBANEZ RG-750, nice guitar, dark metallic red, £475 ono.
IBANEZ RG540 radius custom guitar with Hiscox case, immaculate condition, £550 ono.
IBANEZ RG540, DiMarzio, basswood body, rosewood fingerboard, mint, including extras, £480.
IBANEZ RG550, black, Floyd Rose, excellent condition, hardly used with deluxe case, reluctant sale, £350 ono.
IBANEZ RG550, pink, £300.
Charvel 375 fusion, red, £200.
Crate G60 XL combo, £150.
IBANEZ SBGR 5-string bass, £350.
IBANEZ speaker cabinet, 2 2x12 Celestion sidewinder speakers, only used in recording studio, great condition, £150 each or £250 for the pair.
IBANEZ Starfield valve preamp, 4 overdrive settings, 23 gigs only and immaculate condition, £150.
IBANEZ Universe UV7, plays amazingly, amazing quality, with hard case, £675 ono, must sell.
IBANEZ UV7 Universe, white, immaculate, showroom condition, amazing playability, best offer secures, must sell.
JACKSON , 2 superb custom models for sale, £650 each ono.
JACKSON Pro, black, recent refret, £600.
KRAMER American sustainer, maple neck with rosewood fingerboard, Floyd Rose and schallers, infinite sustaining bridge pickup, excellent neck/action, plus case, bargain at £600 ono.
KRAMER Baretta, Seymour Duncans, Jeff Beck bridge, Hot Rails neck, original Floyd, nice guitar, £400 ono.
KRAMER Pacer Custom 2, fitted with original Trembucker, Schaller hardware, Floyd Rose, unused, £300.
KRAMER Pacer, metallic red, Floyd Rose, £255.
L'ARRIVEE RS-4 Canadian handbuilt Super Strat, ebony fingerboard, thru-neck, carved top, Floyd Rose with hard case and strap locks, £375 ono.
LANEY 100 watt amp and 2 100 watt bass bins, good condition, £150.
LANEY DP-210, dynamic power series, 8 ohm top cab, 2x10″ speakers, £100 ono.
LANEY Linebacker 100 watt bass amp, good condition, £165.
LANEY PL100 reverb head including footswitch and 4x12 Marshall cab with flight case thrown in, £260.
LANEY Pro Linebacker 100 watt bass amp, £180 ono.
LANEY Pro tube, top model, flight cased, 2 Laney 300 watt speakers, flight cased, excellent, £500, no split.
LEFT-HANDED Chapman Stick, including case lead and instruction book, £500.
LEFT-HANDED custom made doubleneck 12 and 6-string, £450 ono.
LEFT-HANDED Fender Strat USA, TBX tone, complete with case, mint condition, £450.
Peavey Renown 200 watt, 2x12 combo, £275.
LEFT-HANDED Fender Stratocaster, 1975, white, rosewood fretboard, shaved neck, tremolo, original pickups, good condition, no case, £375.
LEFT-HANDED Fender Telecaster, 1976, black, maple neck, mint condition, plays great including original Fender case, £395 ono.
LEFT-HANDED Fender Telecaster, wine red with maple neck, USA including case, £400.
LEFT-HANDED Ibanez bass, sound gear SR-800, active, all black, £400.
LEFT-HANDED Les Paul Standard, ‘59 reissue, flame top, cherry sunburst, unmarked, brown case, 1 of 30, USA list price $4,500, will accept £1,995.
LEFT-HANDED Ovation electro-acoustic guitars anniversary (similar/legend), rare, £500.
Country artist nylon strung, £300, both in good condition.
LEFT-HANDED Telecaster Custom, 1964 with B bender, sunburst, maple neck, extremely rare, sensible offers.
LEFT-HANDED Tokai Tele, black M/N, £125 or swap for left hand bass of similar make.
LES PAUL gold top copy CMI, £75, Mighty Mite super distortion humbucker, £15, Melos echo units, £45, Boss HM-2 distortion pedal, £30.
LEVINSON Blade R4, misty violet, gold hardware, immaculate condition with hard Fender case, £600 ono.
MAISON 5-string fretless bass, excellent condition with hard case, £130.
MARLIN Masterclass, excellent condition, with case, £125.
MARLIN Sidewinder guitar, red and white with soft case, plus Marlin 10 watt amp with leads, ideal beginner, will split, £160 ono.
MARSHALL 2x12 cabinets, 1936, ideal for stereo set up, very good condition, £130 each or £250 the pair.
MARSHALL 4x12 cab, 1983, used maximum 12 hours, £200.
MARSHALL 25/50 1x12 combo, very good condition, 3 channel switching modification by Marshall, £275.
MARSHALL 30th anniversary limited edition, 100 watt combo, mint condition, sensible offers.
MARSHALL 100 valve amp, £150, Angle 4x12, £100, Turbo Ratt £35, Nady 101, £100.
MARSHALL 200 watt integrated bass amp, unused, as new, £275 ono.
MARSHALL 5150 150 watt combo, good condition, £300 ono.
MARSHALL 8080 Valvestate amplifier, 7 months old, never gigged, immaculate, £225 ono.
MARSHALL 9001 valve preamp plus footswitch, good condition.
MARSHALL bass combo, 200 watt, 1x15, 5522 model, RRP £590, hardly used, still boxed, £350.
MARSHALL JCM 900 dual reverb combo, 50 watts, 1x12, plus cover, mint condition, £375.
MARSHALL JCM800, 100 watt lead head, excellent condition, £160. tel: Glen, 0787 77102, Suffolk.
MARSHALL JCM900, 50 watt hi-gain head, £250, sorry no offers.
MARSHALL JCM900, 100 watt, dual reverb, 2x12 combo plus footswitch, £350.
MARSHALL JCM900, hi-gain, 50 watt head, £250.
South East area.
MARSHALL JMP 50, in original rare red covering, £495, 1970's model, excellent original condition.
MARSHALL JMP-1 MIDI preamp, immaculate, £380.
Why pay £450 for a new one?
MARSHALL JTM 45 amp head, Mk II reissue, excellent condition, £245.
MARSHALL Lead 100 head, 1970's, 4x12 cab, £250 ono, also Fender Super 60 valve combo and 2x12 cab, £325 ono.
MARSHALL lead 12, mini-stack amp, great for bedroom or small gig, £100.
MARSHALL MOSFET 100 watt, lead head, split channel reverb, £160.
MARSHALL Super Lead 100 MK2, early 70's, as new, very pokey, ex-Fleetwood Mac, £275 ono or swap for nice guitar.
MARSHALL Valvestate 80 watts, 2 weeks old, never used, £280.
MARSHALL Valvestate 8080 amp, 6 months old, limited private use, £275 ono.
Sansamp, amp simulator, £130 ono.
Marshall JCM 800 100 watt lead series, head and cab, £400.
MARTIN D-35, excellent condition and tone, with Martin hard case, £800.
MARTIN D28 and OM28, £850 and £1,250.
MARTIN M-36, superb guitar with case, £800.
MARTIN M38 acoustic guitar, including case, mint condition, £1,100.
MARTIN second generation thinline 332 acoustic guitar pickup, cost £60, sell for £30.
MESA Boogie Studio 22 Plus combo, £450.
MESA Boogie 1x12″ EV Black Shadow speaker, wood and cane extension cabinet, immaculate condition, £350.
Rundall, 0223 240483, Cambridge.
MESA Boogie 295 power amp, loud, vgc, £750.
Crybaby, modified Roger Mayer, Hendrix's effects wizard.
2 wah sweeps, £85.
MESA Boogie caliber 50 combo, £700.
MESA Boogie Mk 2B, clean, full flight case, wheels, 60/100 reverb graphic EV fan, half new price, vgc, £625.
MESA Boogie Mk 3 simulclass, EV speaker, flight cased, immaculate, £975.
MESA Boogie Mk 4 combo, flight cased, as new, £1,350.
MESA Boogie Quad preamp plus footswitch, £650. 295 poweramp, £650, both mint and unused.
12 unit rack, £80.
MESA Boogie Quad preamp, 295 power amp, 2 1x12 EG speakers, Boogie flight case, £1,700 for quick sale.
MESA Boogie special studio 22, rack mounted, separate lead channel modification by factory in USA, a very unique amp, £395 ono.
MESA Boogie cabinet, 15″, 10″, 2x6 and horn, 3 months old, like new, £700.
MUSICMAN 2 matching 65 2x10 combos, tremolo, reverb, superb vintage stereo set up, £600 the pair.
MUSICMAN EV 2x12 reflex bass cab, with full flight case, very good condition, £250.
MUSICMAN RP-65 valve combo, good condition, £200.
MUSICMAN Silhouette, black, rosewood neck, humbucker and 2 single coils, fitted case, excellent condition, £495.
MUSICMAN Stingray bass, black, very good condition, case included, £550.
MUSICMAN Stingray bass, fretless, 8 months old with hard case, £550.
MUSICMAN Stingray bass, natural, pre-Ernie Ball, £525, or possible part-exchange Precision plus cash.
NADY 201 guitar wireless system, £140.
Leach 4x12 angled cab, £80.
NATIONAL steel guitar, previously owned by legendary Mississippi Delta Bluesman, serious offers.
OVATION Electro-classical guitar, model number 1613, excellent condition, price includes case, £475 ono.
OVATION Glen Campbell acoustic, gold plated hardware, bound ebony neck, Ovation hard case, beautiful guitar, £350.
OVATION Preacher Deluxe, solid bodied electric, active, coiled taps, mahogany with gold fittings, Ovation hard case, £450.
OVATION Preacher electric guitar with sculptured Ovation hardcase, mint condition, superb instrument, rare, £250 no offers.
OVATION USA custom balladeer, immaculate condition with hard case, £500.
OVERWATER progress 2 active bass with case, double octave neck, graduated fretting, as new, RRP £1,140 absolute bargain, £600.
PANGBOURN custom fretless bass, active electronics, Kent Armstrong pickups plus hard case, £550.
PARK 100 watt combo, vgc, £400, Orange 120 watt head plus cab, £350.
Echoplex, £200.
Vibrochamp, £130.
Vox Escort, £60.
PEAVEY 300 series monitor amp, still boxed, £220.
PEAVEY backstage, 65 watt guitar amp with reverb, very good condition, £150.
PEAVEY Bandit 112, 85 watt guitar combo, immaculate, never gigged, detachable mains lead, footswitch, £195.
PEAVEY Bandit amplifier, 65 watts, £160 ono.
PEAVEY Bandit, 3 months old, never gigged, £220, also Squier Telecaster plus case, £120.
PEAVEY Bravo USA valve guitar amp, virtually new with footswitch, £225, also Marshall 4040 power amp, £145, recession forces sale.
PEAVEY Deuce valve combo, 120 watts, 2 channel, reverb and phase with footswitch, 2x12 Black Widow speakers, totally immaculate, £260. tel: 0580 712406, Kent.
PEAVEY EVH5150 head and 4x12, the ultimate rock'n'roll monster, excellent condition, £950.
PEAVEY stereo chorus 70 combo, £120.
Fender 100 watt Twin Reverb combo, £120.
PEAVEY Studio Pro 40 amp, £100.
Early Squier ‘62 type Strat, £150.
PEAVEY Vandenburg, great rock guitar, 24 fret neck, Kahler etc with formed fit case, £300 ono.  314 (office).
PERFECT pitch course, mint condition, £35.
Fast lines advanced jazz and blues, £15.
PRO AMP VFQ65 valve 65 watt combo, as new, hardly used, very versatile, £650 ono.
PRS Artist, tobacco sunburst with case, totally exclusive, £1,995 ono.
PRS Classic maple-top, grey, quilted, June ‘92, immaculate, with case, £800.
PRS Custom, quilted top, vintage yellow, bird inlays by laser, brand new, never used.
PRS Custom, £960.
Gibson Les Paul, £480.
Musicman Silhouette, £490.
Marshall JTM45, plus cab, £485.
PRS Signature, vintage yellow, quilted top, superb guitar, £1,500.
QUADRAVERB GT plus Rolls MT80 MIDI pedal, free if you will give me just £330 for the patch lead.
RACK system, Hofner preamp, Art SGE, Crate 200 watt power amp, all flightcased.
Yamaha foot controller plus pair of 1x12 cabinets, £675.
RARE Gibson, approximately 1912, open to offers from serious collectors.
RICKENBACKER 360 12-string, fireglow, flight case, mint, £600.
Carlsbro Sherwood 90, acoustic combo, £150, Marshall practice amp, £45.
RICKENBACKER 370, 12-string, Roger McGuinn limited edition, maple glow, case etc, great sound, as new, only £899.
Rickenbacker 360, 6-string, jet glow, unused, still in box, only £550.
RICKENBACKER 650E, limited edition, 60th anniversary guitar, brand new, £700.
RICKENBACKER 4001 bass guitar, 1978, cream with original case, looks and plays great, £340 ono.
RICKENBACKER 4001 bass, 1979, natural wood, £450 ono.
RICKENBACKER 4001 stereo bass, 1974.
Maple with case and BOSS tuner, £350.
Peavey TKO bass amp and Hot Licks bass video, £150.
ROCKTRON Pro gap rack mount preamp, programmable, MIDI, hush noise reduction, £190.
ROLAND DEP5 multi-effects with MIDI, excellent condition plus manual, £200 ono.
ROLAND GR50 guitar synth, plus GK2 controller plus PG10 programmer plus manuals, bargain at £500.
ROLAND Jazz Chorus 120, excellent amp, twin channel, footswitch, very good condition, £325 ono.
ROLAND RE-201 bass echo, new tape fitted, excellent condition, £170 ono.
ROLAND RE301 tape echo, chorus/echo/reverb/sound on sound, immaculate condition, £300.
SCHECTER Telecaster, recent refinish, 2 single coil pickups, £375.
SESSION 30 watt, 2 channel amp, loud enough to gig, footswitch, cover, as new, £80.
SESSION 75 2x12 amp, cover, footswitch, 2x12 extension cab, £185 complete.
SESSION SG-75 Mk 1, 75 watt, 1x12 combo, complete with footswitch and slip cover, immaculate condition, £175 ono.
SEYMOUR Duncan 100 watt convertible amp, with modules, immaculate condi 