

MEET supermodel CLAUDIA SCHIFFER 200 SENSATIONAL STYLES PRACTICAL ADVICE Colour-treated hair Win!
A PROFESSIONAL HAIRDRYER MOST BEAUTIFUL HAIR COMPETITION PERMING SPECIAL Body, Volume & Curl HAIR BASICS YOUR PULL-OUT AND KEEP GUIDE
contents november 1992
‘Big hair achieved with Clairol's Curl Control Setters.
These wax-filled heated rollers have soft rubber surface which means they are gentle and kind to hair.
Turn to page 66 for more details.
Dear Reader,
This month we've gone absolutely perm crazy!
Turn to page 10 to find out all you need to know about perming and how to achieve the look you want this winter.
Whether it's profession or a D.I.Y.
job, you'll find something to suit you.
Caring for your curls is top priority — on Page 18 we put intensive conditioners to the test while on Page 43 you can win a brilliant Reverso Hairdryer from BaByliss to style your new look to perfection!
EDITOR   
what's new
Great ideas for hair and beauty
SMOOTH TALKING
Create beautiful barrel curls and perfect evening styles with a little help from Schwarzkopf.
Factor 12 Body & Shine is the latest finishing product in their professional Silhouette range.
The creme gel formulation is ideal for smoothing and protecting and costs £4.50 — call  for your nearest salon.
Hair by Ian Duncan at Partners for Schwarzkopf.
Achieve the ultimate sleek chic with the Clairol Super Shot.
No diffuser — just a nozzle attachment to direct the airflow where you want it.
Super Shot is compact and lightweight and available now at Boots and Argos priced at only £14.95.
Put an end to flyaway hair once and for all with the new Smoothing Complex from the Professional Hair Care System at Boots.
It's an easy-to-use liquid that's non-greasy, antistatic and enriched with conditioners.
Smooth it over dry or damp hair for controlled shine with no frizz — it costs £2.19/200ml.
If you like a perfume that's a little wild, a lot of fun and kind of unpredictable, Beverly Hills 90210 is for you!
Available from Boots, Superdrug and selected stockists, the Fragranced Body Mist costs £3.95/150ml and the Eau de Parfum Spray starts at £5.95/15ml. © 1991 Torand, a Spelling Entertainment Co.
All rights reserved.
Got a date?…
No time to wash your hair?…
Why not give it a boost with St. Ives ‘Swiss Formula’ Hair Repair Shine Boost Laminator.
Put three drops in your palms (more for long hair) and smooth through hair to restore tired locks.
Hair becomes instantly shiny and easier to style WITHOUT greasiness!
Use Shine Boost Laminator after a shampoo to seal and protect hair too.
It costs £3.65 from boots and good chemists.
Alternatively, if it's brilliant shine on a sleek wet look that you want then try new VO5 High Shine Styling Gel.
It gives great gloss to wild wet looks and is great value at only £1.09 for a 125ml tube.
Kill three birds with one stone — invest in a Clynol Styling Spray (£5.22/200ml).
Combining the body-building power of mousse, the sculpting ability of gel and the fixing strength of spray, it's all a girl needs for fabulous hair every time!
Call  now for your nearest Clynol stockist.
The benefits of diffuser drying are quite simple — soft, gentle drying power that's kind to hair.
New from BaByliss is the Professional Ultra II Dryer & Two-Way Diffuser.
Its unique diffuser attachment features a double-sided cup which simply flips over to smooth as well as curl!
With all the benefits of a real salon-style dryer, it's the perfect combination for fabulous hair.
The Professional Ultra II Dryer & Two-way Diffuser costs £34.95 and is available from Boots only.
Call BaByliss Customer Careline on  for information and advice on any BaByliss appliance.
Don't let the weather dampen your curls.
New Grafic Curl Spray from Laboratoires Garnier fixes curls with a lightweight spray and has a  targeted micro-diffuser spray applicator for total control.
Use it on permed or naturally curly hair — i costs £2.39/200ml.
Look for:Re-Nutriv All-Day Lipstick from Estée Lauder in Taffeta and Circus Pink at £9.50 each.
‘Lips must have more colour this autumn to balance the importance of eyes’, says Mrs Lauder.
Brillantissimo Lipstick from Bourjois in four new Cashmere shades at £3.99.
Available from October 21st.
Top tips for skin from E45
Always moisturise exposed skin with an effective emollient like E45
Exfoliate regularly with a loofah to break down dead skin cells and encourage blood flow and healthy skin renewal.
Combat low humidity with humidifiers or plants around the home.
Lowering the central heating or air conditioning will also help
Avoid washing with soap or cleansing bars and use a non-drying soap-free product, such as Wash E45.
Wear protective gloves for household chores.
Washing-up can lead to dry hands but cleansing fluids, sprays and polishes can also irritate dry, sensitive skin.
Don't turn your back on you most beautiful asset this winter.
If there's no-one on hand to wash your back for you, keep a loofah or gentle scrubbing brush by the bath.
Regular care will ensure a clean, spot-free back and shoulders — a drop of the new Badedas Moisturising Bath Gelee with extract of Orchid in the water will help keep skin soft and smooth too.
It costs £4.79 for 300ml.
Slack tummies beware — the new Elancyl Stomach-Firming Treatment is here!
As well as Silicon and Collagen, it contains a special patented ingredient to help promote the body's own cellular regenerating activity.
Team it with a careful diet and a sensible exercise routine and you'll tone up your tummy in no time at all.
Stomach-Firming Treatment will cost you £15.25/100ml.
For great skin at great value, Clinique has the answer.
Their 3 Step 3 Product System has been developed by dermatologists, takes only three minutes a day and costs just £32.50.
STEP 1.
Cleanse with one of Clinique's two soaps
STEP 2.
Exfoliate with the right strength Clarifying Lotion for your skin type
STEP 3.
Moisturise with Dramatically Different Moisturising Lotion.
Visit your nearest Clinique counter for a personal skin analysis on the famous Clinique Computer and find out which three products are right for your 3 Step skincare programme.
Check out the new-look Simple range which includes four new caring moisturising products as well as all the old favourites for skin and hair.
As ever, the range promises to be ‘not perfumed, not coloured, just kind’.
Prices of new products start at £4.29.
Moisturise and protect — that's the key to beautiful skin.
Visage UV Protection Beauty Fluid and Beauty Cream are two new moisturising products from Nivea which protect skin from the sun's rays all year round.
As an all-over moisturiser, choose a Nivea Lotion for your skin type and enjoy a silky smooth body.
THICK, SHINY CURLS CREATED BY ISHOKA
BY MARTIN GOLD FOR WELLA
COURTESY OF BAIN DE TERRE SPA THERAPY
LUXURIOUS, LONG HAIR BY SAKS
BEAUTIFULLY SET HAIR FROM HUDSON & KEMP
PIN-CURLED BY GARY HOOKER FOR SAKS
BLONDE CURLS FROM THE GIANNINI STUDIO
RINGLETS PILED HIGH BY M & M HAIR ACADEMY
SEXY STYLING BY THE FORRESTERS TEAM
DRAMATIC STYLING FROM MO AT M & M
HAIR STYLED BY CLIPSO FOR REDKEN
SOFT WAVES FROM W. M. MACKENZIE HAIR
GLOSSY SET BY TERENCE RENATI
SOFT, NATURAL WAVES FROM PAL REYNOLDS
ELEGANT LOOK BY PHILIPSHARON
Style file
Curls, curls, curls!
Whether your hair is naturally curly or permed it needs extra special care to keep it in tip-top condition.
We take a look at the latest perming techniques and show you how to care for your curls in our brilliant perm feature.
We've also chosen a great collection of great curly styles to help you find the look you want.
Body, Volume & Curl
PERM SPECIAL
Now there's a permanent solution for everyone!
There's not getting away from the fact that a perm is a chemical treatment that works by altering the structure of your hair.
The condition of your hair BEFORE you perm, the type of product you CHOOSE and how you treat your hair AFTER your perm will all determine the end result.
To make life easier, we've put together a basic guide to perfect perming.
BEFORE you start Take a good look at your hair and decide whether it's really in a fit state to tackle the onslaught of chemicals, however gentle.
It's amazing how many women perm hair that's already damaged and then wonder why the results are ghastly.
Concentrate on getting hair in peak condition with moisturising treatments and more importantly, regular trims to get rid of split ends.
If you're opting for a D.I.Y.
perm, choose a product that's formulated for your hair type (see On The Home Front).
If you're leaving it to the experts, tell your hairdresser EVERYTHING about your hair such as:
Which products you use on it
When you last had colour/perm/highlights
What you would like to achieve — curls/waves/body
How you style your hair and how often — tons/hairdryer/heated rollers
Once these factors have been determined, he/she can choose a perm solution for your hair type and the look you want to achieve.
How the hair is curled and the size of the curler is also vital to the finished look.
The bigger the curler, the bigger the curl.
Main Pic.
Which perm to CHOOSE?
The perming process is made up of three basic elements — the perm solution which breaks down the structure of the hair; the curler around which the hair is wound and the neutraliser which resets the hair into its new shape around the roller.
All of the major hair manufacturers produce excellent permanent waves, many of them with special formulations for specific hair types and results.
For instance;
L'ORÉAL'S new Tec Ni Wave Foundation Perm System is designed to add volume and curl without frizz.
The Tec Ni Wavers come in four sizes for a variety of finishes and the perm solution comes in two strengths — natural and coloured hair.
SCHWARZKOPF Natural Styling perming system includes a brand new product called Osmotical Equaliser.
It reduces the swelling of the hair cuticle t the crucial part of the process when hair is at its most vulnerable — between the perm solution and neutraliser stage.
ZOTOS System Dynamics, a complete perming system for all hair types.
Before perming, hair is prepared with a deep cleansing shampoo and curls are locked into place with a postperm treatment.
After-care products are also available.
WELLA'S Lockwell Acid perm takes the stress out of the whole process by minimising the swelling of the hair cuticle and gently forming hair into long-lasting curls.
It's available in five variants.
LAMAUR'S Naturally 10.
With a fast processing time of just 10 minutes and the added benefits of ingredients such as Primrose, Irish Moss and Comfrey, this perm will leave hair beautifully conditioned.
REDKEN'S Trust Permanent Body System includes a Perm Map Indicator Paper which reveals any waving lotion left on the hair after rinsing and a Perm Lock Perm Life Extender which prolongs the life of your curls.
CLYNOL'S Stylewave Body Perm.
The inclusion of Silk Protein helps maintain the natural water balance to protect, condition and restore the elasticity of hair.
TRESemmé's 4+4 Exothermic perm guarantees a strong wave formulation which means the curl structure lasts the full life of the perm.
Ask your salon for details.
ON THE HOME FRONT
Salon perms are expensive because you are paying for the expertise of the technician and their time — an average perm takes approx. two hours for short to mid-length hair, more if hair is longer.
According to Laboratoires Garnier who make Permifique, over 6 million women in the UK have permed hair, a third of whom choose a home per.
You too can save lots of money by perming your own hair and there are several good home perms available on the market.
Select by Alberto.
Includes a Selective pre-conditioner to help guarantee an even perm.
Two variants at £2.99.
Fashion Style Extra Care Perm.
The waving lotion has been formulated with an intensive conditioner based on the natural protein Keratin to help strengthen hair and improve texture.
These variants at £2.99.
Velvet Performance Perm by L'Oréal.
Includes an inbuilt conditioning formula to protect hair during perming.
Three variants at £4.75 each.
Permifique by Laboratoires Garnier.
Has a built-in self timing action to avoid over-processing plus a patented conditioning formula.
Three variants at £3.99.
Poly Style Deep Care Perm.
Includes a special Protein Intensive Treatment which is mixed with the waving lotion to protect and restore hair during perming.
Two variants at £3.79.
Poly Style Foam Perm.
Easy-to-apply formula with specially adapted nozzles for quick, accurate application.
Three variants at £4.38.
AFTER care
Gentle, caring perm formulations won't do your hair any good at all if you mistreat your new look.
Any chemical treatment will leave hair less resilient than before and it should be treated with care accordingly.
To help look after your new perm use shampoos, conditioners and styling products with special ‘permed hair or chemically treated formulations’.
If you stick to your usual haircare regime you may find your perm drops and the curls lose their shape or even worse, it may become frizzy and unmanageable.
DO'S & DON'T'S
Don't wash a new perm for at least 48 hours — give it time to settle.
Treat wet hair with care.
Don't towel-dry vigorously — gentle patting is best.
Don't over brush.
Use a special wide-toothed comb to tease curls into place.
Do cut down on the use of heated appliances if you can and always use a diffuser attachment on your hairdryer.
Don't over-process.
Speak to your hairdresser first before perming coloured or highlighted hair.
Do listen to the experts.
If your hairdresser decides a perm is not a good idea for your hair, don't do it!
ONLY NATURAL
If you're environmentally conscious, there are perms available that are gentle to your hair and the planet.
Basically they do the same job, that is they break down the structure of the hair and reset them with a neutraliser, but are made without animal testing, contain naturally derived ingredients and are biodegradable.
Ask your hairdresser about the Novena perm by Well and Schwarzkopf's System E. Alternatively, if you're within easy reach of London or Barnet, check out the famous Spring Water perm from the organic and mineral hairdresser himself, Daniel Field.
This perm only takes 23 minutes to process and the results actually last longer than conventional perms.
Daniel has pioneered a preperm treatment containing lemon juice, water and a specially derived avocado protein.
This is sprayed onto hair before perming and combed through to regulate hair's porosity and ensure an even finish.
STYLE AND HOLD
It's possible to give ‘tired’ curls lift and definition with the right styling products.
Look for:
Silvikrin Active Care Revitalising Mousse for Permed Hair (£1.99/150ml)
Alberto VO5 Curl Booster Hairspray (£1.09/200ml)
Grafic Curl Spray (£2.39/200ml)
Paul Mitchell Sculpting Foam with conditioners
System Dynamics Perm Revitalizer by Zotos
Wella ShockWaves Curl Control Mousse (£2.45/200ml)
Greenleaf curl Refresher by Goldwell
TiGi Perm Revitaliser
Available from salons only
INTENSIVE CARE
Chemically treated hair will always benefit from regular intensive treatments.
For an update on these special conditioners, turn to page 18 or try your luck with our two fabulous freebies!
Simply send your name and address to us at Hairflair Intensive Conditioner Offer, 178–182 Pentonville Road, London N1 9LB, stating which one you'd like to try.
TIP A good rolling technique is vital to ensure even results.
Ask a friend to help you with the difficult to reach areas.
TIP Make sure you choose a variant that's right for your hair type
Hair is diffuser dried with Carmen's Salon Professional dryer
Look for: Creme Silk for Permed and Coloured Hair; the new Helene Curtis Advanced Therapy Hair Cosmetics range; Neutrogena Shampoo & Conditioner for permed Hair; Alberto Balsam 2 in 1 Shampoo and Conditioner for Dry/Permed Hair.
Permed hair cared for with Goldwell Greenleaf products
FREE! 75 Clynol Intensive Conditioners, each worth £8.10/500ml.
A deep action treatment that's been specifically formulated ‘for sensitive hair that needs extra care and protection.
Its self-adjusting actions means that hair only absorbs as much lotion as it needs.
150 Wella Balsam Intensive Deep Action Hair Masques, each worth £2.25/150ml.
An enriched conditioning creme which restores softness, suppleness and shine to hair.
Its rich, moisturising formula penetrates deep into the hair shaft to smooth and detangle.
HAIRFLAIR PROMOTION
PERM PERFECT
Whether you want to achieve bouncy curls or a style that's full of body and volume, perming with Poly Hair Cosmetics is the answer for you.
The experts at Poly know that we want more from a perm than just curl so they have formulated a product that does much more.
Here's what Poly Style Deep Care Perm has to offer:
actually improves the condition of your hair
designed to suit all hair types
mild and gentle on the hair and scalp
two variants, each with long-lasting results
Each pack of Poly Style Deep Care Perm includes a special Protein Intensive Treatment.
Once mixed with the waving lotion and applied to hair, this milk protein restores the hair shaft, inside and out, during the perming process.
After perming, a neutraliser containing conditioning ingredients is applied to smooth the surface of the hair.
As a result, Poly Style Deep Care Perm leaves hair stronger and more resilient with a fabulous shine AND long-lasting body and curl!
Choose the Poly Style Deep Care Perm to suit your requirements — Long Lasting Bouncy Curls or Long Lasting Body and Wave.
Both are available from Boots, chemists and all good stockists and cost £3.79 each.
STEP-BY-STEP
Before: Rebecca's long, one-length hair is quite coarse and she feels it looks dull and boring.
To add life, Nick Arrojo chose Wella's Optaform perming lotion.
1.
Nick restyled Rebecca's hair, cutting it to hug the nape and leaving heavy layers on top.
2.
Hair was divided into two areas with a zig-zag parting to blend curve and movement.
Working on irregular square sections, hair was then lifted at an angle from the head for maximum lift.
3.
Rollers were wound at an angle, spiralling hair around the curlers to give a firm pincurled result.
Well a Optaform perm lotion was the applied.
4.
After rinsing, Optaform No-Wait Neutraliser was put on and rinsed off immediately.
Before styling, Ultracare Opta Finishing Rinse was applied to prolong the life and vitality of the perm.
The result, fabulous shapely curls.
ROLL UP For girls that want to achieve the brilliant set looks which have been inspiring us lately but don't want to roll their hair everyday, Zotos may have the answer.
Their new roll-A-Perm takes a little longer than a general set but the results last up to eight weeks.
Its special Ultra Bond ingredient leaves hair in superb condition with a soft ‘unpermed’ look, reflected in these three styles.
PERM DIRECTORY
HAIRFLAIR PROMOTION Q&A
Joan Newton, Redken's European Education Manager answers your perming problems
Q My hair is highlighted and I would like a perm.
Is this advisable and, if so, which perm would you suggest?
A If you would like a perm and your hair is highlighted, it is very important to first built-up hair strength and condition.
A Redken stylist can analyse your hair and assess its condition suing Redken's unique Trichoanalysis system, enabling her to prescribe an appropriate regimen of products to promote strength and condition.
Redken's CAT Protein Network system is a treatment which if applied repeatedly can increase hair strength by as much as 65%.
It should be applied prior to and after a perm, to maintain hair condition.
Q I'd really love some oomph in my hair and my hairdresser says I'll only get it with a perm.
I've had perms in the past but have never been happy with them — they are always too curly.
What is a ‘body perm’ and is it what I need?
A A body perm is one that creates volume and body rather than tight curls.
It is achieved using large perm rods rather than small ones.
Redken would recommend a new permanent wave called TRUST which combines both acid and alkaline ingredients to create anything from a soft body wave to springy, resilient curls.
It leaves hair in fabulous condition, with no perm odour and you can even wash your hair the same day, without affecting curl formation.
Q My hair is very fine and lank and I'm sure it would benefit from a perm but I'm worried that it will break.
Is there anything my hairdresser can use to avoid this?
A If you have any concerns about the condition of your hair before a perm or colour service, Redken's Trichoanalysis system will eliminate doubts and determine suitability.
The system enables the professional stylist to correctly prescribe either protein or moisturising products, or a combination of the two, depending on hair type and condition.
CAT Protein Network System should be applied prior to and immediately after a perm service to increase hair strength and maintain condition.
An acid wave is more gentle on the hair and we would recommend either Creative Curl for springy, healthy curls, Day Into Night for soft, natural looking curls, or inner secret.
Q I've been having my hair permed every four months for the past three years.
I want to give it a bit of a rest now and I'm trying to leave it as long as possible before I have it permed again.
Is there anything I can use on my hair to add a bit of life to my curls between perms?
A Yes, shampoo hair with Redken's Amino Pon Protein shampoo which gently cleanses and reinforces the structure of permed and colour-treated hair.
After each shampoo, apply Phinal Phase, a pH balancing rinse that restores hair to its natural acidity, detangles and adds shine.
Every 4th or 5th shampoo, apply a penetrating treatment to really give your hair a boosts.
Try either CAT Protein Network System or PPT ‘S77’.
For light style support, and to add body and volume to your hair, scrunch Redken's Touch Control Styling Whip into the hair.
Q I am getting married in the spring and am planning to have my hair permed nearer the time when it is longer.
I want to get it into brilliant condition first.
What products should I sue?
A If you want to get your hair in brilliant condition before your wedding, you must first establish what it lacks — either moisture, protein or a combination of the two!
Ask your Redken stylist to evaluate your hair using Trichoanalysis.
She will then prescribe the appropriate treatment for your hair to be used on a regular basis between salon visits.
This may include a moisturising treatment such as Redken's Climatress which you wold apply if your hair is dry, brittle or damaged from the sun or constant use of heat styling products.
If your hair is damaged from a chemical service (such as a tint or bleach), you would need a protein treatment such as Redken's PPT ‘S77’.
If your hair is both chemically and mechanically damaged then Redken's Extreme Protein Treatment strengthens and adds moisture and manageability.
Q I have very thick, coarse hair and I'm really fed up with it.
I'd like to try a perm to see if it makes my hair more manageable.
Is this a good idea and is there a specific perm for my hair type?
A Yes, a perm would give your hair more manageability.
Ask your Redken stylist about the possibility of using TRUST or Vector Plus on large perm rods to give volume and control rather than lots of curl.
Vector Plus combines low pH alkaline perming with an advanced protein treatment to create soft, shiny waves.
Q I've just had my first perm and I'm a bit disappointed that my hair has lost its shine.
What can I do to get it back?
A When a perm is first applied, if it is an alkaline perm hair does lose its shine because of surface damage.
Use the right treatment to impart proteins and moisture — PPT ‘S77’ mixed with Climatress, or Extreme.
Other Redken products than can be applied for shine include Phinal Phase, a pH balancing rinse, and styling products such as Touch Control, Suspend — a forming and mending spray gel and Shine Design a wonderful weightless finishing gel.
To maintain her in optimum condition either prior to or following a perm or colour, it is important to use the correctly prescribed products at home, between salon visits.
Redken products are scientifically formulated in their own research and development laboratories, and are not tested on animals.
Because Redken believes that the professional stylist is the best person to advise and prescribe for all your hair care needs.
Redken products are only available from appointed salons.
For details of your nearest Redken salon telephone Sheila Steele on 0908 672772.
Hair by Michael at Paul Nath for Redken
TIRED & TESTED
Do glossy locks come naturally or can conditioning treatments really make the difference?
We asked readers to put nine top intensive conditioners to the test.
There is something quite stunning about ahead of shiny, glossy hair but as we all know, keeping it that way can sometimes prove difficult.
As well as potential damage from chemical treatments, hair suffers daily from chemical treatments, hair suffers daily from outside elements, heated styling appliances and general wear and tear.
With current trends emphasising the need for healthy hair, more and more women are including intensive conditioners in their haircare routine.
We asked our readers to find out if regular use of a treatment really did help to repair and protect their hair.
Blot wet hair with a towel to remove excess water before applying an intensive conditioner.
Distribute conditioner evenly by combing it through gently with a wide-tooth comb.
For maximum effect, wrap your hair in a warm, damp towel or cover with a plastic cap and apply gentle heat.
This will enable the treatment to really penetrate the hair.
Conditioning treatments won't cure split ends — only a good haircut will do that.
Intensive conditioners are designed to coat and seal the hair shaft.
NAME: Alex
HAIR CONDITION: Dry at the ends
TESTED: John Frieda Concentrated Conditioner
PRICE: £2.95/125ml
‘I loved it!
After I had styled my hair it felt very soft and silky and it also seemed much thicker and more glossy.
This was a lovely treatment and it made my hair feel absolutely wonderful.
I am definitely going to use it again.’
NAME: Sally
HAIR CONDITION: Normal, slightly dry at the ends
TESTED: Finesse Intensive Conditioner
PRICE:
2.19/150ml
‘I did use a towel and left the conditioner on for about 6 minutes.
It had a nice smell and my hair felt very silky and manageable after I'd rinsed it.
My hair had more shine than before and I found it left a stronger smell than other conditioners which I really liked.
I would use it again, yes.’
NAME: Carol
HAIR CONDITION: Medium length, permed
TESTED: Silvikrin Intensive Conditioning Treatment
PRICE: £1.59/100ml
‘I have an 18 month old son so I could only leave the conditioner on for three minutes but I was still very impressed.
Conditioning I've just had a perm and I've been blow-drying my hair every day, I found that the conditioner gave my hair a lovely shine and added a bit of life to it as well.
I will certainly be buying this Silvikrin treatment again.’
NAME: Melanie
HAIR CONDITION: Thick and dry
TESTED: Paul Mitchell Super-Charged Conditioner
PRICE: £6.45/4oz — salons only
‘After eight minutes this one was easy to wash out and it left my hair feeling silky but not greasy.
It was definitely easier to style and I would use it again without a doubt.
Because my hair is dry I could really see and feel the difference and the fact that it didn't leave a coating or residue on my hair was great for me.’
NAME: Nina
HAIR CONDITION: Fine and highlighted
TESTED: Alberto VO5 Treatment Wax
PRICE: £2.39/250ml ‘I left the conditioner on for 15 minutes and wrapped my hair in a hot towel.
The smell was lovely and afterwards my hair felt soft and easy to brush.
My fried used it as well and we both really liked it.
I didn't make our hair feel at all greasy and we'd definitely recommend it and use it again.’
NAME: Jan
HAIR CONDITION: Fine and dry at the ends
TESTED: Salon Selectives Deep Moisturising Treatment
PRICE: £1.99/150ml ‘I loved the smell of this treatment and after just five minutes, my hair felt very soft and tangle-free.
It rinsed out easily and considering I only used a very small amount, my hair was much more manageable and shiny afterwards.’
NAME: Sonia
HAIR CONDITION: Sun-damaged with split ends
TESTED: Cosmetics To Go Strandlooper
PRICE: £4.00/200ml.
Call  for a free brochure ‘I have to say that I really didn't like the smell much, but it is a VERY natural product so I was happy with that.
It didn't make that much difference — but that may be because my hair is untreated.’
NAME: Debbie
HAIR CONDITION: Coarse and dry all over
TESTED: Bonacure Intensive Repair Complex
PRICE: £3.60/150ml — salons only
‘I used a hot towel and left the product on for ten minutes after which time my hair felt very soft.
My hair is really short so I don't actually have to style it but it did feel better and I would use this conditioner again.’
NAME: Barbara
HAIR CONDITION: Slightly dry all over
TESTED: Wella Intensive Deep Action Hair Masque
PRICE: £2.25/150ml
‘I left the treatment on for about 10 minutes but I didn't really have the time to use a plastic cap.
It conditioned my hair really well but I think I may have used it too often because my hair became a little TOO soft to style after a while!’
Top and right: Hair by Cream Silk
HAIRFLAIR COMPETITION
THE MOST BEAUTIFUL HAIR OF THE YEAR ‘92
Once more the search is on for the woman with the most beautiful hair — could it be you?
Enter our exciting competition and find out!
Yet again Hairflair magazine in association with the hair care experts at Supersoft bring you THE hair competition of the year.
We are looking for beautiful hair of any colour and style — it can be long, short, straight or curly .
So, if you are aged 18 and over and have healthy hair that's in fabulous condition, you could be the lucky winner of this year's title.
The preliminary judging will be made on the photographs that we receive so make sure you send us two good, clear shots of your lovely locks.
Six finalists will be chosen from the pictures by representatives from Hairflair and Supersoft and all six will be invited to London for the final judging.
After booking into a London hotel you will get the chance to relax and meet the other finalists over lunch.
The winner of The Most Beautiful Hair of the Year will be announced later that afternoon and our photographer will be there to record the event.
To end the day we will all have dinner before going to the theatre to see a top London show.
All of our finalists will also take home a goodie bag full of sensational Supersoft products.
THE WINNER
You will be whisked off to a photographer's studio for a photo session where a top hairdresser, make-up artist and fashion stylist will be waiting to give you a fabulous makeover.
The photographs of this year's winner will then appear in glorious colour in a future issue of Hairflair magazine.
HOW TO ENTER
All you have to do to enter this brilliant competition is to complete the entry form and send it together with your photographs to Hairflair/Supersoft Most Beautiful Hair Competition, 178/182 Pentonville Road, London, N1 9LB.
All entries should reach us by 16th November 1992.
PHOTO REQUIREMENTS
Please send two recent colour photographs that show your hair clearly — remember to write your name on the back of them.
Only pictures with a stamped addressed envelope will be returned.
Schwarzkopf Supersoft   
Hair by Supersoft
Last year's winner It's time for Louise Nicholson to hand over her title
The Supersoft new Three Weather haircare range includes: Fixing Spray, Hairsprays, Gel Sprays, Mousses, Shampoos and Conditioners
don't miss out PUT YOUR SALON ON THE MAP IN THE NEW salon directory
Include YOUR details in the most UP-TO-DATE salon guide, now appearing in Britain's ONLY monthly magazine for women who REALLY care about their hair.
Our NEW, regionalised guide to LEADING salons throughout Britain will be SEEN by over 400,000 hair conscious young people EVERY MONTH!
To advertise your salon for as little as £14 per month, call Svetlana Kirov on (note telephone number omitted)— NOW!
STYLE REVIEW
As winter approaches, we bring you a collection of crisp, cool cuts that incorporate classic shapes and new techniques.
Colour is strong; shapes are exciting and above all, the choice is yours!
Precision cutting by Mo Nabbach at M&M Hair Academy emphasises the beautiful condition of this bob
Hair has been set and gently combed through with fingers.
Styled by Geno Ventti
Charles Worthington of Worthingtons in London has created this beautiful soft set
Natural looking body and curls from Paul Houghton at the Level salon in  Bournemouth 
Add shine with a finishing product.
Terence Renati has used Schwarzkopf Final Touch
Hair by Suyo using Grenadine Red from Wella's red Sensation colour range
Hair has been vertically spiral wound on large rods by Beverly Kyprianou at Cobella
Soft waves add body and texture to this style from the artistic team at Cobella
Geno Ventti has created softness and volume by using warm colour tones
These gentle curls have been cut to frame the face by the Avant Garde salon
Eamon from Toni & Guy has used the TiGi Linea range of styling products to create this style
Beautiful hair styled by the Forresters creative team in Reading, Berkshire, using professional products by Schwarzkopf
Long hair, set on rollers and gently brushed onto the face.
By Georgia at Altered Image
Softly permed style by the Bain de Terre Spa Therapy artistic team using their own products
Sexy styling.
The neat centre parting contrasts with cascading curls.
By Nick Foster Brown
Warm tones and soft lines from the autumn collection at Geno Ventti Hair and Beauty, London
Thick corkscrew curls conditioned for maximum shine.
Hair, make-up and model from Intermodels
Soft styling by Altered Image.
Delicate waves and subtle highlights enhance gentle movement
Natural colourant adds richness to long, wavy hair.
This look was created by Cathy at Cat's Whiskers
Debbie Lawrence at Pal Reynolds Hairdressing used KMS sculpting lotion to create these curls
Use styling products to shape and define natural movement.
Model: Zoe Lee Brown at Intermodels
The team at Aveda have set hair onto barrel rollers for this glamorous style
The Jingles International salon have named this intriguing style The Peruke
Hair was permed and styled using Bain de Terre Spa Therapy products
Fabulous face-framing curls from the creative team at Denise McAdam in London
Hair was permed and scrunch dried before being pinned by the Ralph Kleeli salon
Bows, bands and clips can really give height to a style.
This cut by Sloanes for Hair
This elegant and sensual style was created by Paul Stafford for Zakks in Belfast
Use a leave-in conditioner to help keep ringlets in beautiful shape.
By Heinz Schumi
Hair has been tonged at the ends for this great look by Paul Houghton from the Level salon
Corkscrew curls look stunning on long thick hair.
Created by the innovative Model Hair Artistic Team in Switzerland
Bonfire and Roxy Red from Redken's Shades EQ gives fabulous colour and shine.
Hair by Michael at Paul Nath Hair for Redken
Dramatic styling with strong colour from Frankie Chan Hairdressing in London
A soft style can look so feminine.
Hair by the team at Sweaty Bettys
This layered cut with a high fringe was created by the Mahogany salon for Wella
A mass of corkscrew curls in great condition.
From Intermodels in Liverpool
Hair was cut short into the neck and layered to add texture to the crown by Umberto Giannini
The clever use of colours by the Ralph Kleeli salon gives this style depth and volume
Luxurious long hair with lots of shine created by the team at Ocean Boulevard
A superb asymmetric fringe by franco Alberico at the Alberico hair salon in Leicester
Vibrant colour and great cutting gives this style body and movement.
By Model Hair
Hair was coloured with L'Oréal's Majirouge and styled by Gerardo for Main Street Hair Design
Jon-Paul Holt form the Avant Garde artistic team used colouring techniques to emphasise shape
A perfect cut on beautifully conditioned hair.
By Angela Williams at the Stage Door salon
Vibrant yet natural-looking, this colour really suits the cut.
Created by Ralph Kleeli in Rochdale
Soft tousled perm on Elizabeth at Intermodels.
Soft finishing spray will keep curls in place
Elegant styling from Pierre Alexandre in Manchester, taking inspiration from 40's film stars
Smart, chic style, enhanced with a brilliant shade of red.
Cut, coloured and styled by Ishoka
Gregory Couzens used Irish Red from Wella's Koleston 2000 Red Sensation range on this bob
The ultimate shine achieved with a mixture of colour, condition and movement.
By Model Hair
HAIR BASICS
Pull Out and Keep!
Perfect hair — the professional way
The concept behind the enormously successful Toni & Guy artistic team is soft, wearable styles that will  suit everyone and are easily maintained.
On the previous page are five of their most popular shapes, all of which can be worked onto the face or brushed back as an alternative.
We asked the Tony & Guy team to share a few of their style secrets with us.
Softly layered, mid-length bob
1.
‘Rough-dry’ layered styles with a hairdryer.
This not only creates body but also takes a lot of the hard work out of blow-drying as styling very wet hair has little effect.
2.
Use a ‘Denman’ style brush, working in sections for a smooth finish.
3.
Then, to shape the ends and create an up-to-the-minute feeling, place the brush on top of the hair and flick out with your wrist at the ends.
4.
A light spray will hold a soft, pretty look in place.
The classic, one-length bob
1.
To enhance shine and eliminate static on a timeless, one-length bob, apply Protein Protective Spray to damp hair.
2.
For hold and body, run mousse evenly through the hair and comb well.
3.
A bob should look smooth and shiny.
To create this classic shape, always use a round brush, lifting the hair at the roots and keeping the tension of the brush even, turning the ends of the hair under.
For the perfect finish, use a couple of drops of Pure Gloss.
This should be rubbed between the hands and smoothed over your hair for great shine.
Short, structured style cut very short at the sides with longer top layers
1.
Before styling, apply Protein Protective Spray to the hair.
This leave-in conditioner will protect hair from the heat of the dryer and is recommended for all hair types.
2.
To create a textured separated look with movement, use about a rounded tablespoon of styling mousse, as shown.
3.
Make sure you apply the mousse evenly throughout the hair or you can end up with a stiff, sticky mess!
4.
Use a vent-type brush when blow-drying and lift the hair from the roots as you dry.
5.
To create more texture and keep the style in place, use Finishing Spray, a non-aerosol, medium-hold spray.
Short crop with choppy layers
1.
Short, cropped styles can go a bit flat so finger-dry the hair with a little styling mousse for added texture to avoid this.
2.
For an interesting finish, apply a little Glaze.
Rub it between your fingers (about the size of a 20p piece to start with, massaging it into your hands slightly) and work it through your hair until you find a shape that you like.
All products used by the Toni & Guy artistic team are from the TiGi styling range.
For more information call .
TIGILINEA haircare products the ultimate product range for the modern lifestyle
designed to create healthy hair
AVAILABLE FROM PROFESSIONAL SALONS ONLY FOR YOUR NEAREST STOCKIST PHONE:
HAIR BY TONY & GUY ART TEAM
This fabulous colour was created with Copper Red from the Wella Red Sensation range by Roberto Moura
Chic continental styling by Leilani Cortez at the Donn Matlack Design Team for Redken
Heinz Schumi's version of a bob emphasising the movement and freedom of curly hair
Smooth, 50's styling from Michael at Paul Nath using Redken styling and finishing products
Mid-length natural curls are given a wet-look effect with Redken products.
By Michael at Paul Nath
Sleek, high gloss finish achieved with maximum height.
Style created by Eggison Daniel
Lightly oiled curls for part of the collection from Academy Richard Koffijberg, L'Oréal
Two blunt, dramatic cuts styled to perfection by the Zotos creative team using their own product range
Short, sculptured waves enhanced with delicate colour.
Created by Norman Ellis at Options salon
Three fabulous styles created with the L'Anza range of products.
Call  for stockists
Smart styles with a casual feel for him and for her.
By the Eggison Daniel artistic team
Beautifully conditioned curls by Michael at Paul Nath.
He uses Redken products to add shine
Super slick grooming with a hint of colour from Partners Hair using the Schwarzkopf range
Leilani at the Donn Matlack Design Team used the Redken Trust Permanent Body System
Ultra short cut incorporating a bluntly cut fringe and precision shaping.
By the Ralph Kleeli team
Peter Mark in Dublin used the Bain de Terre styling range to create these superb styles
Another great look from Heinz Schumi, this time thick natural waves have been expertly styled
Glemby, who have salons in department stores around the country, created this short, smart look
Sexy, swept back curls contrast well with a short back and sides.
By Hair Salon FACE, Helsinki
This asymmetric style has been cut to different lengths y Paul Stafford of Zaks
Superb avant garde styling from Anthony Mascolo for Toni & Guy using TiGi Linea products
A variation on the pretty Bo-peep look from the artistic team at Andrew Jose
Short shiny bob with jagged fringe effect by Charlie Miller in Scotland
Sexy blonde curls have been pinned on to the crown for this look from John Peers
Hair was set to create these big glossy ringlets.
By the Andrew Jose Salon
A fabulous crop on naturally fine, straight hair by the Forresters salon in Reading
Sleek styling on long hair from the team at Salon Works International
This dramatic hair design was created by the Andrew Jose Salon in London
Salon Directory
YOUR REGIONAL GUIDE TO THE BEST SALONS IN TOWN
WIN A TRIP TO NEW YORK
If you missed the chance to win this fantastic three night stay in the Big Apple in our September issue, have a go NOW!
All you have to do is complete our survey to help us, Rombouts Coffee and the Hairdressing Training Board establish the standard of customer care in Britain's hairdressing salons.
We want to hear about the last visit you made to the hairdressers.
Send your completed questionnaire to Hairflair Customer Service Survey .
All entries will be treated with the strictest confidence and on November 30th, we will pick our winner from the bag of completed surveys.
One lucky reader and a friend will stay in a 3 star hotel in the heart of New York.
The trip must be taken between 1st January–30th June 1993, excluding 1st–8th April.
Dates are subject to availability at time of booking.
Travel will be on scheduled flights with a choice of departure from either Gatwick or Heathrow airports.
HAIRFLAIR SURVEY
SALON NAME
SALON ADDRESS 
1.
How would you describe the general atmosphere/decor of the salon?
2.
How would you describe the attitude of staff?
3.
Did you feel comfortable and relaxed in the salon?
4.
If not, why not?
5.
How satisfied were you with your hair?
6.
How satisfied were you with the refreshments?
7.
If refreshments were available, did you have to pay for them?
8.
Was there a good selection of up-to-date magazines for style inspiration?
9.
What was your overall opinion of your visit?
10.
Would you visit the salon again?
40 PRIZES TO BE WON!
HAIRFLAIR COMPETITION
AHEAD OF TIME!
Enter this month's fabulous competition and beautiful, achievable styles could soon be yours!
By introducing their Reverso hairdryer earlier this year, BaByliss have taken diffuser drying one step ahead.
Its unique lightweight design is incredibly simple — so simple that it makes you wonder why nobody thought of it before!
It's a ‘twoin-one’ dryer that power dries from the front and diffuser dries from the back.
In fact, it's the first hairdryer on the market to blow air from both ends.
Brightly designed in purple and white, the Reverso has 1300 watts of drying power, two heat/speed settings plus a diffuser setting and electronic display lights that let you know which end of the dryer is operational.
It comes with an extra long lead and a fitted plug and costs £29.95 from Boots, Argos, leading department stores and electrical retailers.
The BaByliss Reverso is definitely THE hairdryer of the future!
FIRST PRIZE
Ten lucky winners will each receive the exciting Reverso hairdryer from BaByliss PLUS a stylist watch, designed exclusively by BaByliss in striking purple and white.
Beautiful hair will be yours — in no time at all!
RUNNERS-UP
30 Runners-up will each receive a brilliant, exclusively designed BaByliss watch
HOW TO ENTER
For a chance to win the BaByliss Reverso all you have to do is find the six words in our Wordsearch that relate to this competition, ring them clearly, fill in your name and address and send your completed coupon to Hairflair/BaByliss Reverso Competition  by Friday 13th November.
RULES
1.
This competition is open to all readers in the UK only.
2.
No responsibility can be taken for entries lost, delayed or damaged in the post or otherwise.
3.
The employees of Hairflair are the companies sponsoring the competition are not eligible to enter.
4.
Winners will be the first correct entries drawn from the bag on Friday 13th November
BEAUTY SPECIAL
NAIL BITING STUFF!
10 Top Tips for Beautiful Hands and Nails
Filing your nails regularly doesn't mean you haven't got anything better to do.
In fact, a set of beautifully manicured nails is a sign of a woman who takes pride in her appearance.
Bosses may take a good look at your hands during an interview and it's quite common for men to put well-kept nails high on their list of priorities when it comes to women.
Having said all that, you should keep your hands and nails in good condition for yourself and be proud of them rather than try to hide them away from view.
1.
Good looking nails don't have to be long.
Even the shortest of nails will benefit from regular manicures.
Treat yourself this Christmas to the Complete Care for Hands & Nails kit from Cutex.
No less than six fabulous products in a pink quilted satin bag for just £9.99.
Available from November while stocks last.
2.
Nail nibblers should invest in a nasty tasting product such as Sally Hansen's Nail Biter.
Check-out that great range of nailcare products.
3.
Take advantage of bath-time when hands have been soaking in warm water to gently push back  cuticles with an orange stick.
Massage hands and nails afterwards with a cream such as Cutex Hand & Nail Treatment (£1.49) to help prevent excessive moisture loss.
4.
Give weak nails a boost with a specially formulated strengthener like Nail Magic.
Use it twice a week for 60 days then once a week to get nails into peak condition.
It costs £7.75 from large stores, good chemists and beauty salons around the country.
5.
Filing your nails the wrong way can cause the to split and break.
Never file nails from centre to sides — always file in one direction only, from side to centre.
Look for a new range of nail files called Lazers from Eylure.
Available in four fabulous colours, each with a different level of abrasion or ‘grit’.
They cost 99p each.
6.
Always use a base coat to even out the nail surface and to prevent dark polishes staining.
Try Silk Ridge Filler by Delore Nails.
It's been formulated without animal testing and is included in one of the Delore nail care gift sets.
Prices start at £1.99.
7.
Elongate broad, wide nails by leaving a fine, unpainted strip on either side.
8.
Keep brush strokes to a minimum.
Clean, even sweeps will ensure a smooth, perfect finish.
9.
Don't paint short nails with dark colours.
Stick to very pale or clear shades.
Look for the two Les Naturelles shades in the Lancôme Vernis Absolu range (£9) or apply a coat of Sally Hansen's Clear Supershine (£2.95).
10.
Finish off with a top coat to help prevent chipping and prolong the life of your coloured polish.
Try Elegant Touch Top Coat (£2.25)
HANDS UP
Regular use of a good cream helps keep hands soft and smooth and protects them from the onslaught of cold weather.
It will also help strengthen nails and moisturise  cuticles .
Apply it to clean, thoroughly dry hands in the morning and before you go to bed at night.
Try:
A CLEAN SWEEP
Old, chipped polish is bad news — it reflects a careless, slovenly attitude and a lazy disposition.
As well as keeping some nail polish remover at home, make sure you carry some handy remover  in case of emergencies.
Try Quickies Nail Polish Remover Pads (99p/15g) and Quick & Easy Remover from Elegant Touch (£1.49).
FRENCH MANICURE OFFER
For neat, natural-looking nails, try a French Manicure — a soft, pastel base colour with fresh, white nail tips.
As a special offer to Hairflair readers, Dream Nails have reduced the price of their French Manicure kit.
Usually priced at £4.95 for Barely Pink and Barely Beige base coats plus Polar White tip colour, it's yours for just £3.95 inc.
P&P.
Send your completed coupon to Hairflair Offer .
PRACTICAL ADVICE
The first step to beautiful hair is knowing how to care for it — we show you how.
Leave-in conditioners and protective styling sprays will help to maintain a healthy shine and longer-lasting colour results
colour treated HAIRCARE
French manicure by Dream nails
SHAMPOO
Some colours, particularly shades of red, are prone to fading so it is important to use the right products.
Avoid moisture based products which swell the hair and allow the pigment to escape.
Instead, look for a protein based product that is acid balanced to keep the cuticle tight and hold on to the colour.
CONDITION
Look for specific colour safe conditioners with a low pH.
During the day try to use a leave-in conditioner with built-in U.V. sunscreens — the sun's rays can cause rapid colour fade, even in the winter.
Hair that's been coloured with a permanent product will benefit from an intensive conditioner once a week.
Leave this on as long as possible for maximum results.
You will find that semi-permanent products improve the texture of your hair and you won't need to condition it quite so often.
STYLE
Chemically treated hair is always easier to style than natural hair and usually holds its style well.
Avoid using strong styling waxes as these are moisture based and can cause reds to fade.
Experiment with different styling products such as mousses and gels to achieve a variety of finished looks to complement your new colour.
MAINTENANCE
Cut down on the use of heated appliances such as dryers and tongs if possible and ALWAYS use a protective product beforehand.
As with any chemical treatment, colour can cause hair to become dry and prone to splitting, especially on the ends.
Have your hair trimmed every 5–6 weeks, even if it is long or you are trying to grow it.
In between cuts, look for finishing products designed to ‘mend’ split ends and smooth down flyaway hair.
If your hair has lost its natural gloss because of the chemicals in the colour, try a shine enhancing spray.
PRODUCTS
Daniel Galvin Pre-Shampoo Treatment Masque.
Designed to protect coloured hair BEFORE you wash it.
It costs £3.75/95g from Boots
Amino Pon Protein Shampoo and Phinal Phase low pH Conditioner, both from Redken.
From salons only — call  for your nearest stockist.
Cleane Shampoo for chemically treated hair from the Trevor Sorbie range at Boots.
£2.99/300ml
Nu-Pak Deep Penetrating Treatment from Lamaur.
Used weekly, Nu-Pak will prevent premature colour fade.
It costs £7.60/40oz — call  for your nearest Lamaur appointed salon
Gliss Corimist Shine Tonic.
Will add a healthy, gleaming sheen to dry, permed and coloured hair.
£1.65/100ml from all good chemists
Coloured hair is generally very versatile and easy to set.
Look for rollers that are kind to hair and use them with a gentle setting lotion
Instead of brushing your hair after setting which can cause splitting, gently run your fingers through it to create tousled waves.
Remember that chemically treated hair is delicate so treat it accordingly
With a little loving care and attention your hair will keep its beautiful colour and you'll be rewarded with a healthy, natural-looking shine
READER MAKE-OVER
SOPHISTICATED LADIES
During the summer we teamed up with top Hairdresser Christopher Dove for a  mega reader make-over.
Girls were chosen to go along to the Sophisticut salon in  Paignton , Devon where they spent the day being pampered and totally transformed by Christopher and his artistic team.
Name: Susan Hayward
Hair Type: Long and curly/frizzy.
No definite shape, rather dull colour.
Not a very flattering style.
What we did: Hair was razor cut to lighten the texture and add lift with a soft wispy effect around the face.
A rich copper red was applied tall over to warm and enrich Susan's hair, finished with a polishing product to add shine.
The result: Very feminine and much more flattering with beautiful colour and condition.
Name: Michelle Greer
Hair Type: Grown out tinted layers with lots of regrowth. naturally dark blonde straight hair, fine in texture.
What we did: Michelle's hair was bobbed to the length of her shortest layers, leaving some of the tint on the ends.
her roots were then highlighted.
The Result: This shorter, blunt cut gives the appearance of thick, healthy hair.
It's a lot stronger than before and has softer colour tone which complements Michelle's skin.
Name: Hayley Bowden
Hair Type: Long, lifeless, ‘just grown out’ look.
Not previously coloured.
What we did: Hayley wanted a complete change and advice on a new shape and colour.
We cut her hair into a jaw-length bob with heavy textured layers for body and fullness.
Hair was shaped softly to contour the face and coloured with Koleston 2000 to enhance the textured look even more.
We finished off with an application of Wella High Form & Finish Spray.
The Result: A softer, face-framing shape with more body volume and lift.
Name: Celia Price
Hair Type: Predominantly grey, short style.
What we did: Hair was cut to give more texture and shaped well around the neck and sides.
 Koleston 2000 Light Natural Ash Blonde was applied first to the mid-lengths and the ends for 20 minutes and on the roots for 40 minutes to change the tone and cover the grey.
A touch of Wella High Hair Soft Wax was rubbed through the hair to break up the texture and smooth down the coarseness of the hair.
The Result: A livelier colour tone which suits Celia's complexion beautifully and also makes her hair appear smoother.
Giving a far more youthful look altogether.
Name: Debbie Floyd
Hair Type: Grown out crop lacking in volume and texture.
What we did: Hair was cut quite a bit shorter using a razor and texturising shears for an asymmetric feel.
To add a burst of colour, a combination of Venetian Red and Alazarin from the Well a Colour Touch range was applied after woven lights of Blondor Special Bleach.
This gave the effect of gloss and texture.
The Result: A richer, more vibrant colour.
This eye-catching hairstyle really suits Debbie's personality far more than her original style which was quite flat and lacking body.
Name: Hannah Pearson
Hair Type: Long, slightly straggly.
Hannah was growing her hair but wanted some shape and softness around the face.
What we did: Fine highlights of Fiery Copper Gold, Cayenne Red and golden Blonde from Wella were woven through Hannah's hair, getting lighter towards the front hairline to add warmth, richness and shine.
Hair was then set on rollers and dressed to achieve height on the crown and pieces were brought down for added softness.
The Result: A full bodied style with lots of shine.
Name: Sarah Humphries
Hair Type: Short, grown out style which had been coloured at home.
What we did: A new shape was needed to achieve a softer effect.
Colour needed a complete revamp to quieten the tones and add warmth.
We applied shades from the Wella Koleston 2000 range to lighten the roots and warm the ends.
Hair was shaped into the neck with fullness through the top and it was then blast-dried onto the face into a face-framing style.
The Result: A warm, natural looking even colour and cut which rally suited Sarah's face shape and skin tones.
Name: Rachel Iles
Hair Type: Very full and permed
What we did: Rachel was tired of her style and wanted it cut short so we decided to make use of the remainder of the perm and create a look with lots of volume.
After cutting out other drier, sun-lightened ends, we painted on some strands of High Lift Blonde Tint.
We scrunch-dried Rachel's hair for a casual effect but it can be blow-dried for a completely different look.
The Result: Hair looks very natural and in good condition.
The shape suits Rachel's facial shape and style well.
HOT OFF THE PRESS
ON THE ROAD
Following their successful ‘National Scene Live’ tour for Goldwell Hair Cosmetics (GB), the New Dimensions Design Team have been asked to take the show to Holland.
The sixteen strong team will be presenting their show in Apeldoorn, home of Goldwell Netherlands — well done Carl and Tina Shaw!
COLOUR WISE
With the current demand for hair colour, L'Oréal Technique Professionnelle have created a package called ‘Reflections of Colour’ for their salons.
Featuring winning looks from the 1992 L'Oréal Colour Trophy Awards, commercial looks from leading hairdressers around the country plus technical advice on products used, this glossy book provides all the client needs to know about hair colour.
For details, contact your L'Oréal Technique Professionnelle representative.
OH SO SMOOTH
According to‘Looking Good’, the latest shaving report from Gillette, designer stubble is definitely old hat!
There are 21.7 million men in the UK over 15 years old and over two thirds of them wet shave.
Only a tiny 7% of the male population do not shave regularly which is great news for women who prefer their men to be clean shaven.
Paula Kent Meehan, Redken Founder Chairman, who has signed PETA (People for Ethical Treatment of Animals) Statement.
The statement pledges that her company (Redken) does not test on animals or contract with outside laboratories to do such tests and is also an active supporter of animal rights groups such as the Doris Day Animal League.
JUST JOINED
Martyn Maxey of Max & Co recently welcomed Mac as Technical Director of the salon.
Mac began his career with Vidal Sassoon in 1984 until he became Head of Technology and Cutting for the Ginger Group.
He joins Max & Co after two years as Technical Director for Trevor Sorbie.
For appointments call the salon on .
CROWNING GLORY
Use THE original all-in-one shampoo/conditioner to save time and leave your hair smelling fabulous — unlike women in the 18th century who used a paste made of hog's grease to keep their towering hairstyles in place!
Launched in the 50's, you'll be pleased to hear that Linco Beer is still going strong!
GREY MATTER
However distinguished grey hair makes a man look, most of them would rather not have it.
The problem is, they don't want to resort to hair that looks dyed.
Daniel Galvin in London has come up with a treatment that takes only thirty minutes and rather than causing a dramatic change, it softly camouflages grey hair with a subtle, natural-looking colour.
It costs £35 per session—for a free consultation, call .
Well done to…the Leeds branch of The Guild of Hairdressers who have been raising money over the last twelve months for the Children's ’Wing at the Seacroft Hospital.
Keeping up the good work, they are now holding meetings and demonstrations every six weeks to motivate young people coming into the industry.
Admission is just £1 and raffles will be held during the events.
As always, proceeds will be given to a local charity.
GIFTBOX
This month there's something for everyone in our great hair and beauty give-away!
Promising to be more exciting and more spectacular than ever before, the Clothes Show Live fashion and beauty extravaganza is back in London.
From December 10th–15th at Earls Court, top designer names and leading high street stores will present their dazzling displays of style before huge audiences and as always, there'll be the ever-popular make-over stands where visitors can treat themselves to a new look.
Ticket prices are £7.50 but we have 10 pairs valid for the first day of the show (Thursday 10 December) to give away.
Send your name and address to Hairflair/Clothes Show Live Ticket Offer .
For ticket enquiries, call .
10 FREE
Keep yourself neat and tidy and feeling fresh with Quickies.
These handy pads come in three variants for fast beauty fix ups — Nail Polish Remover pads to remove chipped polish; Eye Make-Up Remover pads which are tough enough even for waterproof mascara, and Face Cleansing & Refreshing pads which are lightly scented.
Ideal for popping in handbags and desk drawers and usually priced at 99p each, we have 100 sets of all three to give away.
Send your details on a postcard to Hairflair/quickies Offer .
100 FREE
‘Beauty does not come by chance but by choice and caring’.
Those are the words of Rose Laird, a pioneer in skincare who has become a legend in the beauty industry.
Her fabulous products for face and body contain a wealth of natural ingredients and have been formulated without animal testing.
Now available by mail order for the first time (call  for a brochure), we have 30 Make-Up Removers worth £7.25 each to give away.
Suitable for all skin types except very dry, it should be used morning and night to remove heavy make-up before cleansing.
Send your name and address to Hairflair/Rose Laird Offer  
30 FREE
Hot news from Clairol — the latest addition to their already extensive heated appliance range is now available in the shops and we've got 10 to give away!
The Clairol Hot Shot is a professional-style brush and tong in one with a unique automatic cut-off switch.
Now you don't have to worry if you go out and forget to turn your styler off — Hot Shot does it for you!
For a chance to own one put your name and address on a postcard today and send it to Hairflair/Hot Shot Offer  
10 FREE
Fresh breath is an indication of a healthy mouth, say the experts at Macleans.
Their Active Mouthguard is a refreshing mouthwash with a special anti-bacterial agent to fight plaque plus it contains fluoride to strengthen teeth.
Sloosh twice a day after brushing to get to all the areas your toothbrush can't reach and make your mouth a fresh, clean, plaque-free zone.
Usually priced at around £1.99/300ml, we have 250 75ml bottles in refreshing mint flavour — send your details on a postcard to Hairflair/Macleans Active Mouthguard Offer, PO Box 98, Carshalton, Surrey, SM5 2DB.
250 FREE
Did you know that the average woman will have around 500 periods in her life, adding up to a staggering six and a half menstruating years?
To make it as convenient for you as possible, Tampax go out of their way to produce comfortable, reliable sanitary protection that you'll feel confident with.
If you're not already familiar with Tampax tampons, we have a Tampax Fresh Start Kit for EVERY reader who writes in.
It comprises of a pack of Tampax mini tampons, an information booklet full of reassuring advice about using tampons plus a neat discreet tampon holder.
Send your name, address and date of birth to Hairflair/Fresh Start Kit offer .
Look out for a special Beverley Craven concert ticket promotion on packs now!
UNLIMITED
Two ‘knock 'em dead reds’ have been added to the exciting Poly Color Easy Color range.
At just ‘2.45 each, it's a great way to liven up your locks.
The new peppery ‘Cayenne’ is a fiery red for girls who want to be bold while ‘Tamarillo’is a rich, dusky alternative.
Both are suitable for dark blonde to dark brown hair and we have 25 of each of each to give away.
Write to Hairflair/Poly Color Easy Color Offer  stating your choice.
50 FREE
Make someone's birthday or Christmas realm memorable with ‘A Year to Remember’.
This collection of 40, hour-long videos covers every year from 1930 to 1969 — just choose a year that means something to your loved one and let them sit back and capture the atmosphere with news, special events and TV clips of the time.
Priced at £10.99, we have 20 videos to give away.
Send your details plus the year of your choice to Hairflair/A Year to Remember Offer .
20 FREE
CLOSING DATE FOR OFFERS IS FRIDAY 13TH NOVEMBER
Autumn Hair
Hair has been roller set to give lift to the roots and movement to the ends.
Clynol's Gel Forming Spray was used to give subtle hold to these sexy long tresses.
Hair by Sharon Cox.
Mousse was applied to the hair to give body and firmness.
Clynol's Sculpting Wax was used on the ends to help accentuate the loose tendrils.
The style was finished with Gel Forming Spray.
This look was created by Sharon Cox
Clynol's Styling Spray has been used to achieve a strong, even shape on this style.
To create smoothness, Salon Formula Sculpting Wax was used for a fabulous finishing screen, Hair Shine was applied.
Hair by Jackie Corbett
Hair has been roller set to give body and volume.
It was then styled with Salon Formula forming Mousse to create movement and finished with Clynol Sculpting Gel to define the shape of the waves.
This style was created by Jackie Corbett.
Hair was pinned back to give height and volume to the crown.
Salon Formula Forming Mousse from Clynol was used to add body and bounce to this feminine style and accentuate the natural curls.
Hair by Jackie Corbett.
This soft, carefree look was gently blow-dried using Clynol's Volume Builder from Salon Formula to give extra volume and body.
This natural style was finished with Clynol Fixing Spray.
Styled and finished by Jackie Corbett
Colourful and versatile — that's the key to the latest collection of styles from the Francesco Group.
HAIRFLAIR PROMOTION Q&A
This month we ask the creators of TiGi Linea — the complete product range for the promotion of healthy hair — to answer some of your hair care and styling problems
Q I have naturally curly hair which is inclined to become frizzy.
Is there anything I can do to soften it?
I'd like to have ringlet-type curls?
A One easy way to give naturally curly hair that perfect ringlet look just like you see in magazine pictures is simply to shampoo and rinse your hair and afterwards comb an even amount of conditioner through the hair.
Then either let your hair dry naturally or use a diffuser.
The weight of the conditioner pulls the curls down and as it dries it also helps the curls to separate.
You need a conditioner with a thickish consistency.
TiGi Linea Instant Conditioner is ideal and of course this process will help your hair become really healthy.
Q I find it very difficult to choose a shampoo.
I have tried many brands, but my hair often seems to look dull.
What is the answer?
A One of the reasons our products are only sold through selected salons is because we believe that haircare needs the advice of a professional.
All the staff in salons selling TiGi Linea have been trained so that they can recommend using two shampoos  alternately so that your hair does not develop a build-up to a particularly product, which so often results in dull, lifeless hair.
Our salon staff will always give a free consultation for both haircare and styling needs.
Q My hair is in terrible condition.
I spent the whole summer in the sun, often in the sea or swimming pools.
Can you suggest a really intensive conditioner?
A TiGi Linea's Conditioning Clay Pack with its organic silica base will certainly help to improve the condition.
A small amount of the Clay Pack is combined through the hair and it is then left to dry completely before rinsing.
You will see an instant improvement.
Continue using the treatment every two weeks until your hair is back to normal and then use it occasionally to pamper yourself and to maintain the condition.
Between treatments use Moisturizing Shampoo and Deep Reconstruct Conditioner and use Protein Protective Spray to protect your hair from the heat of dryers and other appliances.
Q My hair is nearly shoulder length.
I'd like to grow it a bit longer, but the ends are inclined to split and it looks dull.
What can you suggest?
A Get your hair trimmed regularly and make sure you always use a conditioner such as TiGi Linea's Instant Conditioner.
Also use Protein Protective Spray,(which is a spray-on conditioner) to protect and promote shine.
The very best product to smooth the cuticle and help mend the split ends is Pure Gloss.
Made from silk protein, it makes hair shine like glass.
Q My hair is layered and very fly-away.
I need hairspray, but I don't like hair that looks stiff and I don't like to use aerosols.
Is there a product to tame my hair?
A concern for the environment has resulted in harmful gases no longer being used as propellants in hairsprays, by recognizing that a non-aerosol spray is preferred by many, TiGi Linea have produced Finishing Spray which has a medium hold and is a fine spray which is invisible once it dries.
TIGI Linea haircare products are available from salons throughout the UK and all Toni & Guy salons nationwide.
To find your nearest stockist please call:
celebrity interview
This month we talk to supermodel Claudia Schiffer
Name:Claudia Schiffer
Age:21
Home:I live between New York, Paris and Germany so it's difficult to say which is home, but I always have things with me that make even a hotel room feel like home.
Who cuts your hair and how often do you have it cut?
Whenever I am working with someone I know and trust I ask them for a quick trim.
Would you have your hair cut?
No I don't think so, I started my career with long hair and I like it like this.
How do you feel about being named the most beautiful woman in the world and being called the new Brigitte Bardot?
It's very, very flattering.
I don't think of myself that way of course, but I enjoy all the attention.
As for the comparison to Brigitte Bardot, it's a great compliment, because she is very beautiful.
But Bardot is one of a kind, there is no such thing as the ‘new Bardot’ and I don't claim to be anyone other than who I am — Claudia Schiffer.
What is your facial beauty routine?
By necessity my beauty routine is pared down to the basics of cleansing, toning and moisturising.
If I've been working a lot I deep cleanse with a mask a few times a week.
Sleep is also very important for me, much more than going out to the newest disco or restaurant.
How do you care for your hair?
I always use Flex shampoo and conditioner for frequent use because when I'm working I may have to wash my hair more than once a day.
When I'm not working sometimes I just wash and condition my hair, let it dry overnight, comb it out in the morning and leave it alone.
What do you like to wear when you're relaxing?
When I'm a home I feel best in pullovers and sweatpants or jeans.
Do you follow a special diet?
I'm German, so I love to eat meat, but in moderate amounts.
I eat lots of vegetables and salads and nothing but fruit and juices in the morning.
I also love mussels.
What hair products do you use?
I love Flex and I do like the super lightweight hairspray like Flex for Extra Hold because of the built-in protein complex.
How long does it take you to apply your own make-up?
If I'm rushing out I can do it quickly — I know my face well.
I've learned the application techniques from the most talented people in the business and I know how to make the most of my make-up with the least effort and time.
Which make-up items would you be lost without?
I simply cannot live without mascara, loose powder and a natural coloured lipstick.
And of course, for the evening eyeliner is playful and sexy in the right situation and it certainly draws attention to a woman's eyes.
How do you cope with your high profile social life?
I'm very careful about what I eat, I don't drink, I don't like the taste and I don't smoke.
I have to get plenty of sleep to be fresh for work.
I don't accept dinner invitations and I have a small snack in my hotel room and go to bed immediately after a long flight.
It's the price I have to pay for my job, I'm very attentive towards my health because my income depends on it.
Tousled hair and upswept tendrils have become your trademark, do you like that?
I feel very feminine when my hair is done up that way.
That's also why I like having long hair, it's so versatile.
I can wear it up or down, teased and back-combed out or just brushed back with a headband.
You already have an incredibly successful modelling career and now with your Revlon contract you've reached the top.
What next?
I love what I'm doing for Revlon but there are two things that I do think about, one is becoming an actress and the other is going to university to study art history.
It's too early for me right now — besides I've got the best job in the world.
Do you have any beauty tips for our readers?
Remember that eyes are very important, they are the focal point of your face.
It's also important to take time to blend powders, eye pencils and eye-shadows — it really can make all the difference.
Look out for new products and colours, but remember to go with what you feel looks good and works best for you.
Make the most of your features, but do so naturally and with style.
You have to feel comfortable with your look.
NEXT MONTH: BANANARAMA
‘I prefer a natural look, but a polished one that makes the best of my features.’
READER MAKE-OVER
TAKE THREE GIRLS
We transform three readers — the Schwarzkopf way.
Schwarzkopf has recently developed a unique new perming method and an exciting range of natural hair colours.
We took three Hairflair readers along to the Schwarzkopf London Academy to try these new professional products — the results were stunning!
RACHEL
Rachel's hair is dry with a slight natural wave and very fine tinted highlights.
She wanted to give her hair more body so Robbie used Natural Styling number 2 lotion specifically for tinted, bleached and porous hair.
Rachel's hair is all one length and was wound to create a softer look with more definition to her natural waves.
When the perm was ready, Robbie used new Natural Styling Osmotical Equaliser to reduce hair swelling and thus limit potential damage to Rachel's hair.
To achieve these two great looks Forrester's Creative Director, Ian, used new Natural Styling Curl Revitaliser to energise her soft curls and new Natural Styling Shaping Hairspray.
SUE
Sue's hair is quite fine and in good condition but her eight month old perm was looking a bit tired.
Ian gave Sue's hair a good trim before shampooing with Natural Styling Perm Hair Bath.
New Natural Styling Pre-Styling Lotion was then applied to prepare and protect her hair prior to perming.
Technical Director, Robbie, chose Schwarzkopf's new Natural Styling Number 1 lotion, which is particularly good for normal and fine hair.
Sue's hair was wound onto rollers using the directional technique, following the contours of her head and giving a more natural result by allowing the hair to fall naturally into place.
The major cause of hair damage during a perm happens in the rinsing process.
A perm makes the hair more porous but it is the rinsing that causes the hair to swell, which is when the damage is likely to occur.
This is why Schwarzkopf have developed new Natural Styling Osmotical Equaliser.
This unique product is applied before the perm is rinsed off and looks set to change the face of perming.
It aims to reduce the swelling of the hair during the perming process, meaning the hair's structure is protected from any long term damage.
To finish, Ian styled Sue's hair using Natural Styling Shaping Mousse to create this soft natural look and New Style Shaping Hairspray for her glamorous upswept style.
After five years of intensive research, Schwarzkopf have developed Igora Botanic.
Designed as an alternative to traditional colouring products, this unique range of natural plant based hair colours is totally chemical free, biodegradable and is leading the way in professional, natural hair colourants.
JO
Jo's hair is naturally wavy and her true colour is dark blonde.
She wanted a vibrant, natural colour and Schwarzkopf's Igora Botanic Autumn Leaf shade was just the answer.
After Jo's hair had been shampooed with Igora Colour Care Mildly Moisturising hair bath, Ian mixed the Botanic colour with hot water.
Jo's hair was towel dried and put into sections, the mixture was then applied from roots to ends whilst it was still warm.
When all of the mixture had been applied, a cap was put on Jo's head — this helps to retain the heat and promote colour strength.
Ian left the colour to develop for the maximum time of forty minutes under a gentle heat.
Water was then added to loosen the mixture and rinsed away.
Ian then set Jo's hair using the Pin-curl technique and styled it using products from the Schwarzkopf Silhouette professional range.
DISCOUNT OFFER
These fabulous looks were created by the Artistic team at Forresters and they want to see more of our readers.
They are offering a brilliant 15% discount to everyone who takes this month's copy of Hairflair into their salons.
Where to find Forresters salons:
Because Igora Botanic colours are so natural it is possible to achieve different colour results.
This depends on the amount of development time chosen by your hairdresser.
HEAVEN SENT
tamed and restrained but never understated
We take a look at the latest collection of sensational styles from the Doyle Wilson salon in America
SPECIAL OFFER
BEAUTY BONUS
Tone up, slim down and save 25%
Not many women are totally happy with their body but luckily there are lots of ways it can be improved upon.
Of course, a sensible diet and exercise plan is very important but there are also specialist treatments which can speed up the slimming and rejuvenating programme.
One of them is Ionithermie, a salon beauty treatment, created in France to improve skin and muscle tone and help eliminate the fatty, dimply look often referred to as Cellulite.
Ionithermie works by a combination of thermal clay and two kinds of safe, therapeutic electric current and is only ever administered by fully trained beauty therapists.
It contains ingredients such as ivy, seaweed and amino acids and after a single one-hour session, skin feels smooth and fresh and noticeably improved.
A series of five Ionithermie treatments taken over two weeks gives optimum results — hips, thighs, tummy, waist and bottom are all trimmed and toned, often with visible body inch loss.
A course of five Ionithermie treatments usually costs between £180 and £220, depending on the beauty salon, but as a Hairflair reader, you are entitled to a 25% discount.
This price will include a set of four Ionithermie products.
Simply mention this offer when booking and take a copy of this magazine with you on your first visit.
For your nearest beauty salon offering the Ionithermie treatment, call .
urban gypsy
According to the experts at Clairol, 1993 is the year of the ‘Urban Gypsy’.
Soft, sensual styles are set to replace the uniformity of the barrel curls which dominated beauty pages earlier this year.
And the good news is that you can use your existing styling tools to create this new look.
think big
Forget curls for the moment and concentrate on body and movement — the key word for the sexy gypsy look is VOLUME.
To create our cover look we used a set of Clairol Curl Control Setters, wax-filled heated rollers with a soft rubber surface which is gentle on the hair.
We used large rollers on the top of the head and switched to the medium size at the back.
We wound the rollers down towards the root and secured them with the clips provided.
Once they had cooled completely we took them out carefully so we didn't disturb the curls too much.
We then brushed out the curls gently so that hair fell in soft, loose waves.
Clairol Curl Control Setters are available from Boots, Argos and leading electrical retailers priced at £29.95.
face facts
To set off your sensual new style you may have to re-think you make-up.
Eye colours should be rich and dark with lips outlined in soft brown and filled in with nearly nude shades of coffee and cream.
Look for Christian Dior Effets D'Ombre powder eyeshadow and eyeliner palette in Pinks and Brown (£25); Oyster Pink Lipstick (£2.60) and Iridescent Heather Liptint (£2.75) both from Colourings at The Body Shop.
Say goodbye to structured hair — movement and freedom of style are IN!
HAIR FLAIR SUBSCRIPTION OFFER
Don't miss out — subscribe to Hairflair today and we'll send you the magazine every month before it's in the shops!
For just £15, you'll receive 12 action-packed issues, crammed with up-to-the-minute hair advice, new style ideas and beauty tips PLUS exciting competitions, celebrity interviews, free gifts and lots, lots more!
SEND YOUR SUBSCRIPTION TO:.
This offer is open to residents of the U.K. only.
All subscription enquiries should be made to Beryl Revill on 