

INTRODUCTION
In just 28 days from now would you like to be the proud owner of a new body?
Would you also like to be in control of your emotions and on the path to a highly successful future?
In other words, become a new you.
If it sounds too good to be true I assure you it's not.
You really can change your shape, lose weight and improve your confidence.
How?
By simply following the day by day eating, exercise and positive thinking programme that is detailed in this book.
You will never again be labelled or label yourself ‘a failure’.
It's so much more fun being a ‘winner’ than a ‘loser’and if you think of yourself as a born loser, you're wrong!
In fact, the only things you are going to lose from now on are weight and inches!
Conquering your weight problem is probably the most important thing in your life right now.
No doubt you are among the many who have tried every diet around only to find that they just didn't work.
Actually, most diets do work, it's only our willpower that fails!
So how can we get more willpower?
Since we can't just purchase it from the chemist, we have to manufacture our own incentive.
Encouragement and real results are the essential ingredients required to nurture adequate supplies of willpower and to keep it growing.
If we have no reason to slim, if no one cares whether we slim or not, or if we feel we are trying hard on a diet but nothing seems to be happening, no wonder we get fed up.
All these negative influences convince us that we are diet failures .
Have you ever said, ‘I think I was meant to be big’ or ‘I only have to look at a cream cake and I gain 2 lbs (0.9kg)’or ‘I can't diet’?
These are all negative statements that you have imprinted onto your brain.
As long as you still think these thoughts you will continue to believe them and you won't succeed.
So how do we turn these ‘I can't’ messages around to positive ‘I can and I will’statements?
We need a time limit which is short enough to be attractive but long enough to effect a result.
Twenty-eight days is perfect.
If we are going to make this real effort for 28 days, not only do we want to quantify the difference on the bathroom scales, we also want to actually see the difference in the mirror and with the tape measure.
We want to reduce by at least one dress size if not two!
We want to wear some of those clothes in the wardrobe that we haven't been able to wear for ages.
We want to really look a lot slimmer.
And this will happen!
We definitely don't want to go hungry and eat rabbit food all the time and we don't want to mess about counting calories.
We'd like some freedom in what we eat and drink — yes, and we'd like an alcoholic drink too.
I know this sounds too good to be true but it can be done.
Now what about exercise?
Few people enjoy jogging or pumping iron in the local gym three evenings a week, so I've got over that problem too.
Just 15 minutes a day is all that is required initially.
And in the comfort and convenience of your own home.
These exercises are quite different from normal ones.
They combine exercises inspired by isometrics, aerobics, Callanetics and yoga — all wrapped into one fun routine which you can practise to music.
So how did I arrive at this mix?
Years ago I used to do isometric exercises because they didn't make me puff and they seemed easy.
(I didn't have as much energy 20 years ago.)
The only problem was that they were boring.
I then learnt yoga and trained as a teacher.
I loved it and I honestly feel it did me an enormous amount of good in calming my mind and making my body more supple (although as a Christian I don't practise meditative yoga).
However, I find yoga a bit slow and I like to exercise to music, so I moved on to popmobility-type aerobics which I named ‘slimobility’.
Aerobics (or exercises that make you puff) have the advantage of making your heart fitter, but sometimes the disadvantage of pushing the body too far and causing excess wear and tear on ligaments and joints.
For this reason, I limit the amount of aerobics I do so that they are within the capability of most people.
Then I introduced some modified Callanetic-type exercises into my programme.
Although I thought the Callanetics course was very good for small groups, it was unsuitable for my ladies as I have members of all shapes and sizes, whose ages range from 14–83.
So I included lots of my old yoga positions in the routine and combined them with the small isometric movements for maximum impact on the muscles.
I then added a few aerobics and, together with some great music, the new Intensive Stretching and Aerobic Programme was complete.
I introduced it to my classes in May last year and have developed and modified it as the weeks have passed.
By watching how much my members could do and seeing the different levels of suppleness, I could judge the various stages of their capability and progress.
I could also assess whether this new formula or exercise was really working for them.
They felt they were working hard enough to make their hearts stronger and at the same time they were stretching their bodies sufficiently to reach their deeper muscles.
They recognised that they were achieving the three ‘S’ factors — stamina, suppleness and strength.
In addition, the aerobic activity helped them to increase their metabolic rate which is, after all, what every slimmer needs.
There is no doubt that intensive stretching exercises can reshape your body.
And by combining them with aerobics, you can achieve even greater success — in fact, a fitness level and a beautiful body which you never previously dreamed of being able to attain.
What's more, it only takes a few weeks for the real rewards to start appearing.
Not only did my own shape improve dramatically but so did that of my ladies.
They were really seeing results.
Stephanie Stothard was a classic example.
Stephanie joined my class in November 1988 weighing 12st 8lbs (80kg).
The previous year she had produced a lovely baby boy called Tom and despite great efforts to reduce her weight, nothing seemed to work because all the diets left her feeling hungry.
Stephanie's sister-in-law, Kim Hames, had joined my class two months before, weighing in at 16st 7lbs (105kg).
She had shed 1½ st (9.1kg) in two months and consequently had inspired Stephanie to come along too.
Stephanie had always been on the heavy side for her 5 ft 4 ins (1.6m) frame.
She had slimmed down to 10st 7lbs (66.7kg) for her wedding eight years earlier and had gradually gained weight since.
Having Tom had added to the excess.
Stephanie followed the Hip and Thigh low fat diet and very soon the pounds began disappearing.
I asked her to take an intermediate photograph.
This served as a great incentive to spur her on.
By May she had reduced to 9st (57.1kg).
She was thrilled.
Another photograph was taken and the improvement was remarkable.
Stephanie has such a pretty face and I felt she could be stunning if she slimmed right down.
A new goal of 8 st 7lbs (54kg) was set.
It was also in May that I started my new programme of intensive stretching exercises and aerobics.
In the following three months of attending the class twice a week (30 minutes each session), Stephanie's body changed shape.
She lost 7lbs (3.2kg) more, and from being just ‘slimmer’, Stephanie's body became curvaceous and beautifully toned.
You can see opposite and on the previous page the photographs illustrating this transformation.
She looks and feels a million dollars now.
Stephanie is living, walking proof of this programme's effectiveness.
Stephanie's husband, Mike, is also thrilled with his ‘new’ wife.
He has never known her this slim and can't believe his luck.
He is really proud of her 34-26-34ins (86-66-86cm) figure — a bit different from the 40-38-44ins (102-96-112cm) she was before.
Stephanie has lost 6ins (15cm) from her bust, 12ins (30cm) from her waist, 10ins (25cm) from her hips and 6ins (15cm) from each thigh, having reduced each from 27ins (69cm) to 21ins (53cm).
She now wears size 10!
Meanwhile sister-in-law Kim had been working hard too and in 12 months she lost 5st (32kg), plus 12½ins (32cm) from her bust, 11 ins (28 cm) from her waist, 14ins (36cm) from her hips and 10½ins (26cm) from each thigh!
Kim, who is continuing on the diet as she wants to shed another couple of stone, has always had loads of personality but, as her weight has reduced, an even more bubbly girl has emerged.
It is so exciting to see a really quite overweight lady transform into a slimmer, more vivacious and prettier one.
I asked Kim to put  down on paper in a few sentences how she felt about her new shape.
This is what she wrote:
After a year of following the Hip and Thigh Diet combined with a sensible exercise programme, which I hasten to add has been great fun, I have managed to reduce my body weight by almost a third and in the process become fit and healthy.
It is great to be around friends who have never had a weight problem and find that I have a lot more energy than them and certainly a lot more breath!
My body is looking good and I feel great.
What an incentive to carry with my new body image.
I am becoming what I eat — fat free!
Perhaps you are thinking it is all very well for them, they are young.
The good news is that it works for all ages.
Doris King, a retired school teacher, is in her sixties and has lost almost 5 st (32kg) in 18 months since following the diet.
When Doris joined my classes, her figure resembled a barrel and, accordingly, she could only perform a few of the easier exercises.
She is now the proud owner of an enviable figure, comparable with someone half her age.
Her arthritic knees have improved dramatically and she is able to perform most of the exercises with ease.
In her leotard she looks wonderful as her new figure is in perfect proportion.
The best thing of all, however, is the inspiration these women have been to others.
I show their photographs to new members when they join and they gaze, open-mouthed, at the transformation.
There's always an immediate response: ‘Well, that's it then.
If it did it for them it can do it for me !’
And it is doing just that for the ladies in my classes.
Now it can work for you too.
So why?
How can all this suddenly seem so easy?
Let me explain.
In 1986 I discovered that low fat eating led to a leaner body.
It happened when I was forced on to a very low fat diet for health reasons (I had a gall bladder that grumbled very painfully when I ate fatty food).
As I didn't want to undergo the inconvenience of surgery to remove the offending gall bladder, I opted for virtually fat free eating, with the miraculous side effect of acquiring slim hips and thighs for the first time in my adult life (see photograph on next page).
Some years earlier, I  had lost almost 2st (12.7kg) from my heaviest weight of 10st 3lbs (65 kg), but I still had revolting hips and thighs as you will see from my ‘before’ photograph.
I weighed 8st 7lbs (54kg), when this picture was taken on holiday in 1985.
All other efforts to lose the fat from the offending areas proved a disaster because if I lost weight below 8 st 7 lbs (54 kg) my bust disappeared yet nothing went from my legs or posterior!
That was unshiftable, or so I thought!
My exercise class students witnessed the low fat diet's remarkable effect on my body (I had lost only 6lbs [2.7kg]but all from my problem areas) and then they tried the diet with similar benefits.
Further extensive trials were carried out before the first Hip and Thigh Diet was published in 1988.
Such was the response from readers who wrote to me with their amazing success stories, that it was decided I should write an extended version of the book and the Complete Hip and Thigh Diet was published last January.
Total sales to date are approaching one and a half million.
Why?— simply because it works!
Low fat eating leads to a leaner body and that's all we really ask of a diet, isn't it?
Years ago I used to get beside myself with worry about my weight problem.
I didn't know who to turn to and I felt really desperate.
I have struggled with my weight ever since because I adore food and have a large appetite.
But I am not a ‘diet prisoner’ any more.
Now I am free to eat lovely food —lots of lovely food!
I never feel hungry.
In fact at every mealtime I eat until I feel full.
I do not count calories any more and I eat three meals a day.
But I eat only foods low in fat, I don't eat between meals and I've stopped bingeing.
I don't need to binge any more — I can have plenty to eat at mealtimes.
Now this hasn't happened just to me.
My low fat eating programme, detailed in my Hip and Thigh Diet books, has helped hundreds of thousands of overweight men and women to lose weight and inches from their problem areas for the first time in their lives!
I have received literally thousands of letters from readers telling me of their successes.
It has been so rewarding for me to read about the happiness and freedom from the prison of obesity that is now enjoyed by so many.
This is a typical letter:
Dear Rosemary, I know you must receive hundreds of letters like mine but I have been meaning to write to you now for ages.
I am a trained nurse and I've always had a weight problem.
My hips and thighs have always been bulky, making me feel uncomfortable in trousers/tight jeans.
I am 23 and for the past three years I have been piling on the pounds without realising it until I finally took a good look at myself weighing in at 12st 3lbs (77.5kg) at 5ft 4ins (1.6m).
As a nurse I knew it was unhealthy to be so overweight and I felt extremely unhappy with what I had become.
I knew I had bad eating habits when I started secretly to buy sweets from several different shops and ensure the wrappers were well hidden from my boyfriend.
Then I started to make myself vomit and knew I had a problem.
I had always been an  erratic binge eater and was forever on a diet without losing weight due to bingeing/starving/vomiting.
I would always be ‘starting the diet tomorrow’ and if I ate one thing ‘out of order’, the diet would collapse and I would eat everything in sight until I could hardly move.
My boyfriend knew nothing of these habits and the first move was to tell him, which relieved me incredibly (actually to admit to someone how unhappy I was with these eating habits).
Just after Christmas we decided to get married, so I had until June to slim down.
I was already feeling depressed about having to diet and I hadn't heard of yours.
Firstly I tried the Cambridge Diet which just did not work for me.
I had tried it before and put on more weight due to not re-educating my eating habits, but I needed to see immediate results to get the enthusiasm to continue dieting.
Secondly, I tried the 3-day diet which was so depriving during the diet days (3 days on, 2 days off) that I still binged every week, felt terrible mentally and my weight fluctuated!
Then I bought your book.
I was most sceptical when reading all the letters, thinking it must be ‘fixed’.
My boyfriend commented that surely I couldn't lose weight eating so much food!
I started on April 16th and by June 30th (my wedding day) I had lost 21lbs (9.5kg)— all from areas previously unshiftable!
I couldn't believe how healthy I felt.
I no longer craved sweet things, no longer felt the need to binge and have only cheated twice (and I mean one chocolate — not the whole box as before).
As a nurse I cannot think of a healthier diet to follow and can see no disadvantages in it.
I feel fully satisfied appetite-wise and have lost weight easily despite having the bread or rice every day.
I looked my slimmest ever on my wedding day and thoroughly enjoyed my holiday.
I have never in my life looked forward to starting a diet, but by the end of my holiday I couldn't wait to get back on it to maintain my slimmer figure (with every other diet I have put weight back on and more!).
I have a new wardrobe full of clothes I couldn't wear before and fit comfortably into a size 10/12 instead of struggling into a size 14.
I've lost 4ins (10cm) all over and my friends cannot believe it — they have all been buying your book!
I feel so glad that I've finally found something that works and am not confined to a life of bingeing/vomiting, etc.
I can go out for the odd meal without suffering from the binge factor because we had a dessert.
I've recommended your diet to various patients as I don't see how anyone can fail to benefit from a diet low in fat.
I feel I owe you so much because this diet has changed my life.
Yours sincerely, Belinda Robinson
Almost a thousand readers have completed a questionnaire after following my Hip and Thigh Diet.
This has given me a vast amount of information about their needs and desires.
Their comments have been so interesting and helpful in enabling me to arrive at a diet plan perfected for absolute maximum effect .
Men have trimmed their tums without losing their physiques.
Women have whittled away their waistlines, flattened their tummies and shed their child-bearing hips and jodhpur thighs, but have held onto their bustlines.
So what's different about the Inch Loss Plan?
The diet is, of course, low fat but I have introduced some foods previously forbidden, such as the occasional egg, a little salmon, mackerel or tuna (in brine) and occasionally even a little ice cream.
To counteract this, I've sometimes specified quantities of potatoes, rice and pasta in the menus,just for the 28-day period , but given two courses at every meal so you shouldn't need to eat in between.
I've tried to learn from readers' comments and, hopefully, have now arrived at the ideal blend of appetite satisfaction combined with gastronomic appeal.
In other words, if you look forward to your next meal and feel happy and full after the last one, you're unlikely to cheat and have a binge.
Furthermore, if you can become satisfied with your regular daily bread you will get into a new routine which will take you on a continuing journey of successful weight maintenance.
After appearing on a television programme in Scotland, I was asked by an eminent Professor of Physiology to try to establish the long-term success of my Hip and Thigh Diet slimmers.
As I was sending a copy of the new book to all those slimmers who were mentioned in the Complete Hip and Thigh Diet , I decided to include with it a second questionnaire.
I asked for details of how well they had maintained their new figures or if, in fact, they hadn't.
I issued 83 Maintenance Questionnaires and 59 were returned.
Of these only 2 had regained a significant amount of their lost weight.
If we look on the black side and assume that the remaining 24 readers who did not reply had regained their weight, it still left over two-thirds who had maintained their lost weight.
This meant that almost 70  per cent had actually maintained their new figures.
This was an incredible result bearing in mind the general statistics of 98 per cent failure rates reported for most dieting attempts.
The Professor was impressed.
Just as I was writing this book I received a beautiful card from Sue Fuller whom I had met at the Town and Country Festival last year.
I was there to give some talks on motivation and slimming and had a stand displaying my books.
Sue and I got chatting and she bought a copy.
‘I'm determined to have a go,’ she said as she left.
So I was very pleased to read the message contained in the card:
To prove wrong those who say that any dieter will have put back the weight (and more) 12 months after losing it — 12 months on and 18 lbs (8.2 kg) down, I'm still a ‘Hip and Thigh’ fan.
Thanks so much, Sue.
Sue now weighs 8st 3lbs (52 kg) and tells me in an accompanying letter that her weight loss and subsequent new figure has completely changed her life in every respect.
So why did the Hip and Thigh Diet work when other diets didn't?
Why did it sell so many copies by word of mouth?
Why.did followers of the diet maintain their new figures instead of regaining their old ones?
The answer is simply that they enjoyed it.
It didn't seem like a diet — in fact, if there was one sentence that kept reappearing in most of the letters I received, it was: ‘You can't call this a diet, it's more a way of eating’.
And if we can enjoy a reducing diet, it follows that we won't mind following the basic principles in the long term.
But in reality, it is even easier than that because we do actually, amazingly, lose the taste for very fatty foods.
Bread tastes wonderful without butter, potatoes are delicious without fat, we can eat spaghetti, rice and porridge — all with a clear conscience.
That's the secret —freedom .
Now this freedom in our eating habits has been complemented with a programme of exercises that actually does something beneficial for both your health and your figure.
Additionally, there are a few lessons in positive thinking that will effectively change the way you look at yourself, as well as those around you.
In fact, your whole life is going to change so much for the better you will be amazed!
From now on, if you follow this 28-day Inch Loss Plan, you should achieve heights you didn't even know existed for you.
I promise you've got absolutely nothing to lose but your inches.
Have fun and enjoy the results!
DIET AND EXERCISE INSTRUCTIONS
DIET
1
It is very important that you weigh and measure yourself at the beginning of the day on which you commence the Inch Loss Plan.
Enter the details on the Weight and Inch Loss Record Chart at the back of the book.
2
Select one breakfast, lunch and dinner menu each day, except on the 7th, 14th, 21st and 28th day when you should choose a breakfast, lunch and supper menu.
3
It is important for you to enjoy your menus and feel satisfied.
If you find a favourite menu one day, select it again if you wish.
Menus may be interchanged to suit your individual taste.
4
Each day offers two choices at each mealtime, including a vegetarian option.
Because there is usually less protein in vegetarian dishes, more yogurt has been included in these menus to compensate for this.
If for any reason you are unable to eat milk, yogurt or cottage cheese, it is advisable to take a calcium supplement.
5
The menus listed should satisfy your appetite.
Ideally, you should eat all that has been suggested at each mealtime.
But don't force the food down if you are adequately satisfied with less.
However, if you still feel you need to eat more, fill up with extra vegetables to satisfy your natural appetite.
It is important to eat enough to prevent you from feeling hungry between meals.
If you do feel hunger pangs, nibble on carrot, celery or cucumber sticks or sliced green peppers.
Do not eat anything else between meals.
6
There is no restriction on the amount of non-alcoholic drinks you consume, but all cold drinks should be low calorie brands, and tea and coffee should be drunk only with milk from your allowance.
Use an artificial sweetener whenever possible.
Alcoholic drinks should be restricted to 2 per day (see Daily Allowance) unless otherwise stated.
7
Observe and learn the list of forbidden foods listed on page 153.
These are high in fat content and should be eliminated during the course of the Inch Loss Plan.
During the 28-Day Programme try to stick strictly to the menus listed within the diet.
8
All diet yogurts should be low fat, low calorie varieties.
All fromage frais and cottage cheese should also be low fat brands.
9
You are welcome to change the timing of the menus, e.g. you could have your main meal at lunchtime and your snack meal in the evening.
10
Do not save part of your meal for later.
It is important to re-educate your eating pattern, and your appetite, towards three meals a day.
If you eat sufficient at each mealtime you shouldn't need anything for later on!
DAILY ALLOWANCE
In addition to the menus listed you may consume each day:
4 fl oz (100ml) unsweetened fruit juice, any flavour
10 fl oz (250ml) skimmed or semi-skimmed milk
2 measures of alcoholic drinks (1 measure = 1 single gin or 1/2 pint [250ml]beer or lager, or 1 glass wine, or 1 glass sherry)
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
The following conversion rates have been used throughout this book: 1oz = 25g 1 fl oz = 25ml 1/2pt = 250ml 
EXERCISE
1
Always do the warm-up sequence before attempting any of the stretches.
2
Try to allocate yourself a set time each day when you will practise your exercises.
3
Only do what you feel you can.
Everyone's body is different so just do what you feel you are able to do, without ever straining.
4
If for some reason you have to miss a day's exercises, be sure to return to the missed day before continuing with the programme.
This is most important.
The exercises have been designed and arranged progressively, and for greatest benefit the days must be done in proper sequence.
Similarly, if you find some of the newer exercises get too hard for you, remain on the previous day's exercises until you become.more supple and strong.
However, do read each day's ‘Introduction’ and ‘Positive thought for the day’as you go through the programme as these will encourage you to persevere.
5
The exercises should, ideally, be practised on well-cushioned carpet.
Alternatively, use a rug or foam mat to protect you from a hard floor.
If this is not possible it is advisable to use cushioned footwear for the aerobic warm-up.
6
These exercises should not harm anyone, but if any discomfort is experienced (other than the ache of rediscovered muscles) stop exercising immediately and if necessary consult a doctor.
7
Do not rush your exercise practice but find approximately 15 minutes each day when you can seriously concentrate on the postures and enjoy the benefits they will give to your body.
8
If possible exercise to your favourite music.
This aids relaxation and adds greatly to the enjoyment.
9
Do take the time to monitor your progress with the aerobic exercises and enter the details each day.
10
Take three photographs of yourself at the beginning of this programme — a straight front view, a side view and a back view.
Then take them again after 28 days — and see the difference!
HEALTH WARNING IN THE INTEREST OF GOOD HEALTH IT IS ALWAYS IMPORTANT TO CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR BEFORE COMMENCING ANY DIET OR EXERCISE PROGRAMME.
DAY 1
Today is going to have a greater significance on your life than you could ever imagine.
You are about to begin an eating plan that will both satisfy your appetite and reduce the amount of fat on your body.
You are also about to embark on a series of exercises that will start you on the road to a more beautiful body — a body of which you will be proud.
Your body may have become out of shape through general neglect over a period of years, yet you can transform it incredibly in a matter of days with my unique dieting methods and special exercises.
You don't have to starve or wear yourself out jogging for miles.
You'll achieve much more by using this effective eating plan and intensive stretching and aerobics programme that will soon become a way of life.
These warm-up exercises wake up your body and bring your muscles into action.
They encourage better posture and promote a sense of well-being.
If you tilt your pelvis upwards, your abdomen automatically pulls in and your buttocks tighten, helping to straighten the ‘S’ shape that may have been allowed to develop over the years.
Try to adopt this new posture whenever possible throughout the day .
It will have an amazing effect on your figure.
MENU
BREAKFAST
1 oz (25g) Branflakes plus a medium-sized banana, sliced, served with milk from allowance and 1 teaspoon brown sugar OR 1 slice of wholemeal toast, spread with 2 teaspoons marmalade, plus 5oz (125g) diet yogurt — any flavour
LUNCH
2 slices of wholemeal bread, spread with mustard, pickle or reduced-oil salad dressing, and filled with 2 oz (50g) chicken breast and unlimited lettuce, tomatoes and cucumber OR Jacket potato (any size) topped with 4 oz (100g) baked beans, plus 5oz (125g) diet yogurt — any flavour
DINNER
6oz (150g) chicken joint (weighed with bone) with all skin removed or 3 oz (75g) red meat (no fat) served with unlimited vegetables including potatoes PLUS MELON SURPRISE (see recipe, page 158) OR VEGETABLE KEBABS (see recipe, page 162) PLUS CHEESE PEARS (see recipe, page 155)
WARM-UP STRETCH
1–2.
Stand tall with feet comfortably apart, arms raised above the head.
Pull your tummy in and tuck your bottom under.
Stretch up with alternate hands as though you are pulling a rope.
Repeat 10 times, 5 times with each hand.
WARM-UP WAIST STRETCH 3.
Interlink hands and stretch up.
Tilt the pelvis upwards — hold for 5 counts.
4.
Stretch over to the left — hold for 5 counts.
5.
Stretch over to the right — hold for 5 counts.
Relax.
SKI STRETCH 6.
Stand with feet slightly apart, arms raised above the head and stretch up as high as possible.
7–10.
Swing downwards in a ‘skiing’ motion, tucking your bottom under and pulling your tummy in throughout.
Return to the starting position and repeat 10 times.
AEROBICS: WALKING JOG/JOG 11–12.
Do 20 walking jogs on the spot, raising your arms up and down at the sides.
13–14.
Put a spring into your step and jog properly, still raising your arms as you jog on the spot.
This increases your heart rate and encourages more oxygen into the body as you breathe more quickly.
Continue for as long as you can without getting uncomfortably out of breath.
Count the number of steps you take and record them here so that you can measure your increased fitness as the days go by.
TODAY I JOGGED......
TIMES
AEROBICS: SIDEWAYS JOG 15–16.
Now jog with the legs swinging from side to side.
Let your arms swing with you and feel the energy coming from the extra oxygen you are breathing.
Again, count your steps and record them here.
TODAY I JOGGED SIDEWAYS......
TIMES
This type of aerobic exercise is much more enjoyable if practised to pop music.
It helps to relax you and provides a beat to keep the momentum going.
WAIST WHITTLER 17.
Stand with feet comfortably apart, arms stretched out to the sides.
18.
Curve the body to one side and hold on to a part of your leg that you can reach easily, stretching the other arm straight up.
Stretch up, in a tiny movement, 20 times.
The lower arm may bend if you wish.
Repeat to the other side.
This is the best exercise I know for eliminating inches from the waistline.
Be careful not to twist at all just curve.
Don't lock you knees; keep them relaxed.
Relax your head and neck throughout.
ARM AND BUST UPLIFT 19.
Stand with feet comfortably apart.
Interlink hands behind your back, palms facing inwards.
Keeping your arms straight, raise them as high as possible without slumping forwards.
Tilt the pelvis to keep your tummy and bottom tucked in.
From here, raise the arms slightly higher and hold for 1 second.
Feel the shoulders and arms working.
Repeat this tiny movement 25 times, raising the arms slightly higher with each count.
BACK LEG STRETCH 20.
Sit on the floor with legs outstretched and together.
Hold on to some part of your legs which you can reach without straining.
Keeping your knees flat on the floor, bring your head and shoulders forward and down as far as possible with elbows pointing outwards.
Feel the stretch between the shoulders, in the neck, and behind the legs.
Hold this position for 25 counts — just stretching forwards gently with each count without straining.
Raise your head slowly and relax.
This exercise encourages suppleness in the spine without undue strain on the body.
It also tones the back of the legs, which should always be flat on the floor.
TUMMY FLATTENER 21.
Lie on the floor with knees bent, feet hip-width apart.
Place your hands to either side of your head with elbows pointing forwards.
22.
With tummy pulled in, raise your head and shoulders, bringing your chin towards your chest.
Hold up for a count of 10.
Relax and repeat.
TUMMY RELAX 23.
Relax your tummy muscles by holding your knees close to your chest and rock from side to side.
TUMMY TONING TWIST 24.
Lie down with hands at either side of your head, knees bent and raised and ankles crossed.
Pull the tummy in and lift one elbow to touch the opposite knee twice.
Return to the lying position and repeat with the other elbow.
Repeat 5 times to each side, returning to the lying position between sides.
OUTER THIGH STREAMLINER 25.
Lie on your side and bend the lower leg, resting your head on your hand and using the upper arm to support you in front.
Keeping the top leg straight in a sideways position, with the knee facing forwards, point the foot.
Raise the leg approximately 18–24ins(46–61 cm).
From here, move it up and down very slightly — no more than 6ins (15cm)— and repeat 20 times.
Repeat on the other side 20 times, then repeat again on both sides, with 20 mini raises on each side.
This exercise tones the outer thighs as well as the lower abdominal muscles.
Ensure that your body is in a definite straight line.
To check this, when you are in position on the floor, look over your shoulder and you should be able to see the heel of your straight upper leg.
INNER THIGH TONE-UP 26.
Sit on the floor, bend your knees and place the soles of your feet together.
Clasp your toes and pull your feet in as close to you as possible.
Don't worry if your knees are way up in the air.
You'll be surprised how quickly they lower over the next few days.
As you clasp the feet together, try to pull in your feet and push down with your knees.
Repeat 10 times.
Do not strain.
THE COOL DOWN Repeat every exercise you have practised today, excluding the aerobics, holding each position for just 2 counts.
Do the postures continuously, in graceful slow motion with each exercise leading into the next.
Do not rush, but feel a sense of poise, elegance and beauty flow over you as you perform them.
Positive thought for the day
This diet will work if you follow it.
These exercises will reshape your body if you do them.
The proportion of fat deposited on your body will reduce in a most dramatic way , much more so than with almost any other diet and exercise programme.
This is because there is so little fat included in the diet and the exercises reach deep into the body, toning your muscles and improving your shape.
You may be wondering if you will have enough willpower to see this through for the whole 28 days.
It is quite a commitment and I can understand anyone having misgivings.
There is absolutely no doubt that you can do it if you want to badly enough.
This also applies to everything else in your life.
Perhaps now would be a good time to recognise other ambitions you may have.
Why not start thinking of all the things you would like to accomplish after you have achieved your new figure.
DAY 2
You know that you can succeed on this diet and exercise programme.
As you approach Day 2, I hope you will be feeling very positive about your chances of success.
You should be feeling slimmer this morning, and it should encourage you to carry on for another day.
Did you remember to pull your tummy in and tuck your bottom under at all times yesterday?
Look in the mirror at every opportunity to see the difference.
It is worth persevering with this very good posture habit.
MENU
BREAKFAST
1 oz (25g) PORRIDGE (see recipe) page 160) OR 4 pieces of any fresh fruit (e.g. 1 apple, 2 pears and a banana)
LUNCH
4 slices of light bread (e.g. Nimble or Slimcea) spread with reduced-oil salad dressing, and made into sandwiches with lots of lettuce, tomatoes and cucumber, plus 5oz (125g) diet yogurt — any flavour 1 cup of slimmers' cup-a-soup, plus 2 oz (50g) chicken (with skin removed) or lean ham, served with large salad and 4oz (100g) potatoes and a little reduced-oil salad dressing
DINNER
6oz (150g) white fish (cooked without fat) and unlimited vegetables (serve with tomato sauce if desired), plus 1 oz (25g) ice cream OR BLACKEYE BEAN CASSEROLE (see recipe, page 155) served with unlimited vegetables, plus 3 oz (75g) low fat fromage frais or 5 oz (125g) yogurt      
WARM-UP STRETCH 1.
Standing tall, stretch up with alternate hands as high as you can without straining.
Repeat 14 times, 7 times with each hand.
WARM-UP WAIST STRETCH 2.
Interlink hands and stretch up, tilting the pelvis upwards.
Hold for 10 counts.
3.
Stretch over to the left — hold for 5 counts.
4.
Stretch over to the right — hold for 5 counts.
Relax.
SKI STRETCH 5.
Stretch up as high as possible.
6.
Ski down, tucking your bottom under and pulling your tummy in.
Return to the starting position and repeat 10 times.
AEROBICS: WALKING JOG/JOG 7.
Do 20 walking jogs on the spot, raising your arms up and down.
Then jog properly for as long as you can without getting uncomfortably out of breath.
Record the number of steps you take.
TODAY I JOGGED.....
TIMES
AEROBICS: SIDEWAYS JOG 8.
Now jog with the legs swinging from side to side.
Let your arms swing with you and feel the energy coming from the extra oxygen you are breathing.
Again, count your steps and record the number here.
TODAY I JOGGED SIDEWAYS.....
TIMES
WAIST WHITTLER 9.
Start with arms outstretched and gently curve the body sideways.
Let your upper arm stretch up and over about 12ins (30cm) further than yesterday, resting the other arm on your leg.
(Don't go any further today, even if you feel you can.
I want you to exercise your muscles in every position, not just the extreme ones.)
Push and stretch that upper arm just a little further and hold for 1 second.
Repeat this tiny movement 20 times.
You may bend the lower arm a little if you wish.
Repeat to the other side.
BUST THRUST 10.
Stand with legs comfortably apart and arms bent at shoulder level.
11.
Thrust your elbows back 15 times, holding in the extreme thrust position for 1 second between each repetition.
INNER THIGH AND KNEE TIGHTENER 12.
Sit on the floor with legs stretched out in front of you.
Keep the legs straight and squeeze them together.
Place your hands on the lower part of your outer thighs so you can feel and see the muscle contractions as you squeeze.
Hold each squeeze for 1 second and repeat 20 times.
OUTER THIGH TIGHTENER 13.
Remaining in the same position, cross your ankles and, using the strength from the legs to work against themselves, attempt to pull the legs apart.
Place your hands above your knees so you can feel and see the muscle contractions.
Hold each contraction for 1 second and repeat 20 times.
TUMMY FLATTENER 14.
Lie on the floor with knees bent and hands placed at either side of your head.
With tummy pulled in, raise your head and shoulders, bringing your chin towards your chest.
Hold up for a count of 10.
Relax and repeat.
TUMMY RELAX 15.
Relax your tummy muscles by holding your knees close to your chest and rock from side to side.
TUMMY TONING TWIST 16.
Raise your legs with knees bent and cross the ankles.
Lift one elbow to touch the opposite knee once, return to the lying position and repeat with the same elbow.
Repeat with the other elbow to the opposite knee.
Then repeat ‘double lifts’ 3 more times to each side.
OUTER THIGH STREAMLINER 17.
Lie on your side with lower leg bent.
Lean on your elbow and use the upper arm to support you in front.
Keep the top leg straight and point the foot.
Keeping the leg in a sideways position with the knee facing forwards, raise it approximately 24 ins (61 cm).
From here, move it up and down very slightly — no more than 6ins (15cm)— and repeat 25 times.
Repeat on the other side.
LEG AND HIP STRETCH 18–19.
Still lying on your side with lower leg bent, gently swing the top leg forwards and backwards 10 times each way, without straining.
Change sides and repeat 10 times with the other leg.
THE COOL DOWN Repeat every exercise you have practised today (except the aerobics) just once.
Hold each position for 2 counts.
Do the postures continuously, in graceful slow motion with each exercise leading into the next.
Remember to try and feel a sense of beauty and slimness flow over you as you perform them.
Positive thought for the day
Your body is beginning to become familiar with the various movements you are undertaking and is becoming more supple each day.
You can expect a few aches tomorrow, as new exercises usually cause our muscles to respond 48 hours after we do them.
Don't be discouraged by this, as it is a good sign that you have stretched muscles that have not been used for some time.
You will be pleased to know that the discomfort is only short term and should not occur in the future.
Soon you will look both slimmer and younger, and will walk with more confidence because the exercises will improve your posture.
You should also be feeling more positive about yourself and your chances of success.
I am sure you are going to receive many compliments because your appearance will improve tremendously.
It isn't always easy to receive compliments, especially if you're not used to them.
Don't shrug them off and be embarrassed, but accept them in the way they are intended — with grace and gratitude.
DAY 3
Two days of dieting completed and you've found muscles in your body you didn't know were there.
Things are happening — the fat stores are depleting, the body is looking better already and you should be feeling more energetic.
Now it's Day 3 and you can have a treat.
It can be an extra glass of wine, an ice lolly, an extra yogurt or couple of pieces of fresh fruit — even a few sweets.
However, if you don't want to eat or drink it today, save it up for another occasion.
MENU
BREAKFAST
2 Weetabix (or 1 Weetabix plus a sliced banana) served with milk from allowance and 2 teaspoons sugar OR 6 prunes (soaked overnight in hot tea — ordinary or herbal tea is suitable) served with 5oz (125g) natural yogurt
LUNCH
RICE SALAD (see recipe, page 161), plus 1 diet yogurt 5 Ryvitas spread with 4oz (100g) tuna (in brine) topped with tomatoes, plus 4oz (100g) or 1 piece of fresh fruit
DINNER
4oz (100g) steak or 6 oz (150g) chicken (no skin), dry-fried or grilled, served with unlimited vegetables, plus a meringue basket filled with 2 oz (50g) fresh fruit and topped with 2oz (50g) diet yogurt OR VEGETABLE BAKE (see recipe, page 162), plus stuffed apple (cored and filled with 1 oz [25g]sultanas, plus artificial sweetener if desired) topped with a diet yogurt    
WARM-UP STRETCH 1.
Stretch up with alternate hands, really reaching for the sky.
Repeat 20 times, 10 times with each hand.
WARM-UP WAIST STRETCH 2.
Stretching up with hands interlinked, tilt the pelvis and hold for 5 counts.
3.
Stretch over to the left — hold for 5 counts.
4.
Stretch over to the right — hold for 5 counts.
Repeat the whole sequence once more, then relax.
AEROBICS: SIDEWAYS JOG 5.
Jog with legs swinging from side to side.
Let your arms swing with you.
Continue for as long as you comfortably can and record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED SIDEWAYS.....
TIMES
AEROBICS: WALKING JOG/JOG 6.
Do 20 walking jogs, raising the arms up and down.
Then jog properly for as long as you can without getting uncomfortably out of breath.
Record the number of steps you take.
TODAY I JOGGED.....
TIMES
WAIST WHITTLER 7.
Start as before with arms outstretched, then gently curve the body sideways.
Stretch the upper arm up and over a little further than yesterday — approximately 24 ins (61 cm).
Now push and stretch that arm just a little further and hold for 1 second.
Repeat this tiny movement 20 times.
Repeat to the other side.
ARM AND BUST UPLIFT 8.
With hands interlinked behind, raise the arms 30 times.
Keep the arms straight and try to raise them a little higher with each count.
BACK LEG STRETCH 9.
Sitting with legs outstretched, bring the head and shoulders forward and down as far as possible.
Hold for 20 counts, stretching forwards gently with each count.
Don't strain; try to keep the head and shoulders relaxed.
TUMMY CYCLE 10.
Lie flat on your back and cycle backwards with the legs 30 times.
This may seem awkward at first, but it becomes easier with practice.
TUMMY MINIMISER 11.
Lie flat on your back and bend the knees.
12.
Raise the feet off the floor.
13.
Curl your toes back and with tummy pulled in, raise both arms towards your toes, lifting your head and shoulders only a few inches off the floor.
Hold this position for 5 counts.
Relax your tummy muscles by cuddling the knees and repeat the exercise.
OUTER THIGH STREAMLINER 14.
Lie on your side with lower leg bent.
Lean on your elbow and use the upper arm to support you in front.
Pointing the foot of the other leg, raise it approximately 24ins (61 cm).
From here, move the leg up and down, no more than 6ins (15cm) and repeat 25 times.
Repeat on the other side, then repeat again on both sides, this time with just 20 mini raises on each side.
HIP AND THIGH EXTENDER 15–16.
Remain in the same position and, keeping the top leg straight, flex the foot.
Swing the leg forwards and backwards 10 times.
Then swing the leg forwards and hold in this position, with foot still flexed.
From here, lift the leg up and down 10 times, each time raising it no further than 3ins (7.6cm).
Relax the leg by bringing the knee in towards the chest, then roll over and repeat the whole exercise with the other leg.
INNER THIGH TONE-UP 17.
Sitting with soles of the feet together, pull your feet in as close to you as possible.
As you pull the feet in, push down with your knees.
Repeat 20 times, holding each repetition for 1 second.
THE COOL DOWN Repeat every exercise you have practised today (except for the aerobics), holding each position for just 2 counts.
Do the postures continuously, in graceful slow motion, with each exercise leading into the next.
Do not rush, but feel a sense of grace, elegance and well-being flow over you as you perform them.
Positive thought for the day
It is a known fact that most people who attempt a new diet or exercise regime fail on Day 3.
The very fact that you have reached this point means that you have crossed that most difficult threshold.
Congratulations!
I would like you to become more aware of your own achievements and attributes from now on.
Don't be self-critical.
You have already proved to yourself that you can find enough willpower to stick to this programme for three days.
I would like you to get to know your body better by looking in the mirror and seeing the improvements in your shape as each day goes by.
Learn to recognise which areas are toning up and reducing.
As you do each of the exercises, place a hand on the part of the body that is being stretched or toned so that you can feel the benefit as you go along.
If you are dieting and exercising with a friend, make a point of noticing their progress too.
From now on it should get easier and the results should be even more rewarding.
DAY 4
You are now at the halfway mark of the first week of this programme.
Your body will be showing a significant improvement in posture and you should be feeling healthier.
Soon you will be able to see your skin texture improving, and your new positive attitude towards yourself will give you a more sunny view on life in general.
Select from today's menu and enjoy the exercises which are specially designed to stretch your body a little further each day, giving it increased suppleness and strength.
Do only what you can and if the repetitions seem too difficult, then just do as many as are within your capability.
MENU
BREAKFAST
4 oz (100g) fresh fruit salad topped with 5oz (125g) diet yogurt OR 2 slices (2 oz)[50g]toast spread with Marmite
LUNCH
2 oz (50g) wholemeal bread, spread with mustard and/or Branston pickle and made into open sandwiches with 2 oz (50g) ham, chicken or turkey, and topped with sliced tomatoes OR Jacket potato (approx. 6oz [150g]) topped with 1oz (25g) sweetcorn and 3oz (75g) cottage cheese
DINNER
CHICKEN OR PRAWN CHOP SUEY(see recipe, page 155) served with 1 oz (25g)[dry weight]boiled brown rice and soy sauce) plus 1 diet yogurt OR VEGETARIAN CHOP SUEY (Cook as above recipe, see page 155) excluding prawns or chicken and serve with unlimited boiled brown rice and soy sauce, plus a low fat fromage frais or diet yogurt    
WARM-UP STRETCH 1.
Stretch up alternate hands — even higher than yesterday!
Repeat 30 times, 15 times with each hand.
WARM-UP WAIST STRETCH 2.
Stretching up with hands interlinked, tilt the pelvis and hold for 5 counts.
3.
Stretch over to the left — hold for 5 counts.
4.
Stretch over to the right — hold for 5 counts.
Repeat the whole sequence twice, then relax.
AEROBICS: WALKING JOG/JOG 5.
Do 20 walking jogs on the spot, raising your arms up and down.
Then jog properly for as long as you can, still moving your arms.
Don't get uncomfortably out of breath.
Record the number of steps you take.
TODAY I JOGGED..
TIMES
AEROBICS: SIDEWAYS JOG 6.
Jog with legs swinging from side to side.
Let you r arms swing with you.
Continue for as long as you comfortably can and record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED SIDEWAYS.....
TIMES
WAIST WHITTLER 7.
Start with arms outstretched, and curve the body sideways.
Stretch the upper arm up and over even further than yesterday.
Push and stretch that arm just a little further and hold for 1 second.
Repeat this tiny movement 20 times.
Relax and repeat to the other side.
Remember not to lean forwards as you do the exercise.
BUST AND ARM LIFTER 8.
Stand with feet comfortably apart and take your arms out to the sides.
Twisting your wrists forwards, turn your hands upside down so that your palms face upwards and your thumbs point away from you.
9.
Without slumping forwards, take your arms behind you, holding them up as high and as close together as possible.
Move the thumbs towards each other 30 times, remembering to tuck your bottom under and pull your tummy in as you do so.
SPINE AND LEG STRETCHER 10.
Sit on the floor with legs outstretched and apart.
Stretch your hands up above your head and as you stretch up, turn to face one leg.
11.
Slowly lower your hands and body towards that leg.
Hold on to the furthest part of the leg that you can reach without straining, lowering the body as close to the leg as possible.
Hold still in this position for 20 counts and feel the stretch in your spine and legs.
Relax for a few moments, then return to the starting position and repeat to the other side.
TUMMY PULL 12.
Lie on your back, bend your knees and raise them towards your chest.
Place your hands at either side of your head, with elbows pointing forwards.
Pull the tummy in and raise the elbows, head and shoulders towards your knees.
Hold up for 5 counts.
Repeat 4 times, holding up for 5 counts each time.
TUMMY TONING TWIST 13.
Raise your knees and cross the ankles.
Lift one elbow to touch the opposite knee.
Return to the lying position and repeat twice more to the same side.
Relax and repeat the whole exercise to the other side.
TUMMY MINIMISER 14.
Lie flat, bend the knees and lift the legs.
15.
Curl the toes back and raise both arms towards the toes, lifting the head and shoulders just a few inches off the floor.
Hold up for 10 counts.
Relax the tummy muscles by cuddling the knees and repeat the exercise once more.
OUTER THIGH STREAMLINER 16.
Lying as shown, raise the top leg approximately 24ins (61 cm).
Make sure the foot is pointed and the knee is facing forwards.
From here, move the leg up and down very slightly 25 times.
Repeat on the other side, then repeat again on both sides, this time with just 20 mini raises on each side.
HIP AND THIGH EXTENDER 17–18.
With foot flexed, swing the top leg forwards and backwards 5 times.
Swing the leg forwards and lift it up and down very slightly, 15 times.
Relax the leg by bringing the knee towards the chest, then repeat on the other side.
THE COOL DOWN To cool down, repeat all today's exercises (excluding the aerobics), in continuous slow motion, holding each extreme position for just 2 counts.
Feel the new strength in your muscles.
Exercise with grace and poise and always remember to pull your tummy in and tuck your bottom under.
Now have a really good stretch, then relax and pause for a moment as you realise how good you feel.
Positive thought for the day
You must be delighted with your progress, and I hope this feeling of wellbeing will encourage you to continue with the programme.
I am sure that you will be feeling more confident not only about your appearance, but also about your ability to persevere.
Often in life we are prevented from realising our true potential because we feel restricted, or are harbouring some feelings that we would love to share.
It may be that we have upset someone and a rift exists.
We dread facing them because we are frightened of what the other person might say.
Often such matters are trivial, yet they can have an immeasurably detrimental effect on our lives.
If you have anything that is troubling you today, I strongly recommend that you face it head-on.
Pick up the phone and speak to the person concerned.
If they have upset you , perhaps they are hoping you will make the first move.
If you can clear up this problem, you can look forward to a happier future.
DAY 5
Did you look slimmer this morning when you looked at yourself sideways in the mirror?
Try to assess your progress daily in this way.
Weighing scales are fine as a guide once a week.
but because our fluid levels change from day to day according to what we eat or drink, they sometimes give a misleading reading.
Also, the menstrual cycle of women can seriously disrupt fluid levels, causing in some cases increases of several pounds.
I invariably gain weight if I've eaten rice the evening before because it retains water and is often served with spicy food which is dehydrating.
So if you have a special occasion for which you want to feel particularly slim, don't eat rice the day before!
Today you are allowed to eat an egg for breakfast if you wish.
In my Hip and Thigh Diet eggs are not allowed because they contain fat in the yolk, whilst one occasionally is allowed in this programme.
MENU
BREAKFAST
1/2 fresh grapefruit, plus 1 small egg poached or boiled and served with 1 oz (25g) wholemeal toast OR 1 oz (25g) All-Bran served with milk from allowance and 1 teaspoon sugar
LUNCH
8oz (200g) tin of baked beans, eaten cold, plus 2 pieces of fresh fruit and a diet yogurt OR 2 oz (50g) bread roll spread with reduced-oil salad dressing and filled with salad, 1 oz (25g) ham or chicken, plus a banana
DINNER
SHEPHERDS' PIE (see recipe, page 161) served with unlimited carrots and/or green vegetables PLUS PEARS IN MERINGUE (see recipe, page 159) OR VEGETARIAN SHEPHERDS' PIE (see recipe, page 163) served with unlimited vegetables, plus a diet yogurt    
WARM-UP STRETCH 1.
Stretch up 30 times with alternate hands.
SKI STRETCH 2.
Stretch up as high as you can.
3.
Ski down, pulling your tummy in and tucking your bottom under.
Return to the starting position and repeat 10 times.
WAIST WHITTLER 4.
Starting with arms outstretched curve the body sideways, bringing the upper arm up and over.
Hold for 1 second in this extreme position.Push and stretch the arm a little further for 25 counts.Relax the body forwards, return to the starting position and repeat to the other side.
AEROBICS: WALKING JOG/JOG 5.
Do 20 walking jogs on the spot, raising the arms up and down.
Then jog properly for as long as you can without getting uncomfortably out of breath.
Record the number of steps you take.
TODAY I JOGGED.....
TIMES
AEROBICS: SIDEWAYS JOG 6.
Jog with legs swinging from side to side.
Let your arms swing with you.
Again, count your steps and record the number here.
TODAY I JOGGED SIDEWAYS.....
TIMES
BUST AND ARM LIFTER 7.
With palms facing upwards, take your arms behind you.
Hold them as high as possible and pull them towards each other 30 times.
SPINE AND LEG STRETCHER 8.
Sitting as shown, stretch up and turn to face one leg.
9.
Lower your hands and body as close to the leg as possible.
Stretch forwards gently for 20 counts, moving the body just a fraction with each count.
Relax for a few seconds, return to the starting position and repeat to the other side.
You'll be surprised how soon you loosen up.
BACK LEG STRETCH 10.
With legs together and knees flat on the floor, bring the head and shoulders  forward and down as far as possible.
Hold for 30 counts, stretching forwards gently with each count.
Raise your head slowly and relax.
TUMMY CYCLE 11.
Propping yourself up on your elbows, cycle backwards 30 times.
TUMMY MINIMISER 12.
Start as before, by first bending the knees and then raising the legs.
13.
Curl your toes back and raise both arms towards the toes, lifting your head and shoulders off the floor.
This time, gently stretch upwards for 10 counts, trying to pull up a bit further with each count.
Don't worry if you can't do 10 — just do as many as you can.
Relax the tummy muscles, then repeat the exercise.
HIP AND THIGH EXTENDER 14.
Lying as shown, flex the foot and swing the top leg forwards and backwards 5 times to loosen the hip.
Swing the leg forwards and lift it up and down slightly, 15 times.Relax the leg, then roll over and repeat on the other side.
BOTTOM AND THIGH STREAMLINER 15.
Roll over again, keeping the lower leg bent.
Extend the top leg forwards as far as is comfortable and hold in this position.
From here, keep the leg straight and stretch it forwards about 3ins (7.6cm) further — and then back to the holding position.
Move the leg forwards and back 10 times.
Roll over and repeat on the other side.
Feel the beautiful stretch in the thighs, hips and buttocks now that your muscles are able to cope with these more difficult stretches.
INNER THIGH TONE-UP 16.
Sitting with soles of the feet together, pull you r feet in and at the same time push down with your knees.
Repeat 25 times, holding each repetition for 1 second.
Do not strain.
THE COOL DOWN Repeat every exercise you have practised today (except for the aerobics), holding each position for just 2 counts.
Do the postures continuously, in graceful slow motion with each exercise leading into the next.
Positive thought for the day
If you prefer one day's menu to another, make a note of this and return to it in place of one that doesn't take your fancy.
After all, the most successful diet will be the one that you enjoy .
The important thing is that you don't feel hungry.
Today I would like you to think about taking up a new interest or hobby.
Ideally, it should enable you to burn up a little more energy and help you to become fitter.
The fitter we become and the more energy we expend on a regular basis, the easier it is for us to maintain our new figure.
In making your selection, please eliminate from your vocabulary the words ‘I can't’.
How do we know we can't do something unless we try?
I always suggest that people keep a note-book to list the long-term and short-term aims that they would like to achieve.
So today please consider what you would like to achieve most.
I have found that if you become happy with your body, you can actually accomplish a lot more in other ways.
Now that you have made a very real commitment towards achieving your new shape, you will automatically gain self-esteem and extra energy.
DAY 6
Yesterday I talked about having a more positive attitude towards ourselves.
As we near the end of this first week of body reshaping, I sincerely hope you are feeling better about yourself and more optimistic about the future.
The exercises are becoming a little more difficult but they are having an even greater benefit on your body.
Be sure never to rush them, but feel how they are toning and stretching your muscles as never before.
It won't be many days now before you see a real improvement in your basic shape.
MENU
BREAKFAST
1/2 melon, plus a diet yogurt OR 1oz (25g) lean bacon, well grilled, served with 8oz (200g) tinned tomatoes and 1/2 oz (12.5g) toast
LUNCH
8oz (200g) tin of spaghetti in tomato sauce served on 1oz (25g) toast, plus a piece of fresh fruit OR 1 slimmers' cup-a-soup, 2 pieces of fresh fruit and 2 diet yogurts
DINNER
PRAWN CURRY (see recipe, page 160) served with 1oz (25g)[uncooked weight]boiled brown rice PLUS PEARS IN RED WINE (see recipe, page 159) OR VEGETABLE CURRY (see recipe, page 162) served with 1½oz (37.5g)[uncooked weight]boiled brown rice, plus 4oz (100g) fresh fruit salad and diet yogurt   
WARM-UP STRETCH 1.
Stretch up 30 times with alternate hands.
WARM-UP WAIST STRETCH 2.
Stretching up with hands interlinked, tilt the pelvis and hold for 5 counts.
3.
Stretch over to the left — hold for 10 counts.
4.
Stretch over to the right — hold for 10 counts.
Repeat the whole sequence once more, then relax.
AEROBICS: WALKING JOG/JOG 5.
Do 20 walking jogs on the spot, raising the arms up and down.
Then jog properly for as long as you comfortably can.
Record the number of steps you take.
TODAY I JOGGED....
TIMES
AEROBICS: SIDEWAYS JOG 6.
Now jog with the legs swinging from side to side.
Let your arms swing with you.
Count your steps and record the number here.
TODAY I JOGGED SIDEWAYS....
TIMES
WAIST WHITTLER 7.
Starting with arms outstretched curve the body sideways, bringing the upper arm up and over.
Hold for 1 second, then push and stretch the arm a little further for 30 counts.
Relax the body forwards, return to the starting position and repeat to the other side.
SPINE AND LEG STRETCHER 8.
Sitting with legs apart, stretch your arms up high and twist at the waist.
Lower the hands and body towards one leg.
Gently stretch forwards for 15 counts, holding each stretch for 1 second.
Relax, return to the starting position and repeat to the other side.
This exercise encourages the muscles at the back of the leg to work deeply and strongly.
TUMMY FLATTENER 9.
Lying down with knees bent, raise your head and shoulders, bringing your chin towards your chest.
Hold for a count of 15, relax and repeat.
TUMMY TONING TWIST 10.
Still lying on the floor, raise your knees and cross the ankles.
Lift one elbow to touch the opposite knee.
Return to the lying position, then repeat twice more to the same side.
Repeat to the other side, then repeat ‘treble lifts’ 4 more times to each side.
Make sure you return to the lying position each time after touching the knee.
OUTER THIGH STREAMLINER 11.
Lying as shown, raise the top leg approximately 24ins (61 cm).
Make sure the foot is pointed and the knee is facing forwards.
Do 30 mini raises.
Feel it toning the outer thighs as well as the lower abdominal muscles.
Repeat on the other side, then repeat again on both sides.
HIP AND THIGH EXTENDER 12.
Flex the foot and swing the leg forwards and backwards 5 times.
Swing the leg forwards and lift it up and down slightly, 15 times, holding each raise for 1 second.
Relax the leg and repeat on the other side.
Relax.
INNER THIGH AND KNEE TIGHTENER 13.
Sit up with legs extended forwards.
Keeping the legs straight, squeeze them together 25 times, holding each squeeze for 1 second.
OUTER THIGH TIGHTENER 14.
Cross the ankles, then try to pull the legs apart, using the strength from the legs to work against themselves.
Repeat 30 times, holding each contraction for 1 second.
Repeat 30 times with the other foot on top.
THE COOL DOWN Repeat all today's exercises (except the aerobics) just once, holding each position for 2 counts.
Feel lithe and graceful as you do them.
Afterwards lie down and relax for a few moments.
Positive thought for the day
We are now really moving our body in these exercises and are finding muscles we didn't know existed!
Please continue to view your progress in the mirror and realise that it is only one more day before you measure and weigh yourself to enter your reduced (I hope!) statistics on the Weight and Inch Loss Record Chart.
Today try to be as energetic as possible in all that you do, putting a little extra effort into everything.
Tomorrow is Day 7, and you need to make a concerted effort to ensure that the results at the beginning of Day 8 really demonstrate your progress through the week.
Plan to do something that will take you out of the house and, perhaps, go for a long walk.
At least be more energetic than usual.
Please try and be really strong tonight and don't cheat at all.
You have done so well to get to this point, it is vital that you stay on the rails until the first weighing and measuring day.
And remember that if you do cheat, the only person you are letting down is yourself.
It just isn't worth it.
DAY 7
This is the last day of Week 1.
If you've come this far you can be confident of reaching Day 28.
The more you manage to re-educate your eating habits, stretch and tone your body, the more likely you are to continue in the long term.
Keep as busy as possible today and remember to hold yourself up, tucking your bottom under and pulling your tummy in.
You will not only look much slimmer but you will feel it too.
Think positively and try to make the most of your appearance so that you feel your absolute best all day.
Enjoy your day and smile at the world.
MENU
BREAKFAST
5oz (125g) plain yogurt mixed with 1/2oz (12.5g) oats, 1/2oz (12.5g) sultanas and 3oz (75g) sliced banana OR 6oz (150g) tinned grapefruit in natural juice topped with grapefruit yogurt
LUNCH
4oz (100g) roast lean meat or 6 oz (150g) chicken (no skin) served with DRY-ROAST POTATOES (see recipe, page 156) and unlimited vegetables and gravy made with powder not granules or meat juices PLUS ORANGES IN COINTREAU (see recipe, page 158) OR VEGETARIAN GOULASH (see recipe, page 163) plus 4oz (100g) fresh fruit salad, topped with a diet yogurt SUPPER 2oz (50g) wholemeal toast, topped with 8oz (200g) tin of baked beans, plus a piece of fruit OR 2oz (50g) wholemeal bread spread with a mixture 1 part tomato ketchup and 1 part reduced-oil salad dressing and made into sandwiches with lettuce and 4oz (100g) prawns, plus a diet yogurt    
WARM-UP STRETCH 1.
Stretch up 30 times with alternate hands.
SKI STRETCH 2.
Stretch up high.
3.
Ski down.
Return to the starting position and repeat 10 times.
WARM-UP WAIST STRETCH 4.
Stretching up with hands interlinked, tilt the pelvis and hold for 5 counts.
5.
Stretch over to the left — hold for 10 counts.
6.
Stretch over to the right — hold for 10 counts.
Repeat the whole sequence once more, then relax.
AEROBICS: WALKING JOG/JOG 7.
Do 20 walking jogs on the spot, raising your arms up and down.
Then jog properly for as long as you comfortably can.
Record the number of steps you take.
TODAY I JOGGED....
TIMES
AEROBICS: SIDEWAYS JOG 8.
Jog with legs swinging from side to side.
Let your arms swing with you.
Continue for as long as you can and record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED SIDEWAYS....
TIMES
ARM AND BUST UPLIFT 9.
Raise your arms behind you 30 times, with hands interlocking.
Try to lift them a little higher with each count.
BACK LEG STRETCH 10.
Sitting as shown, bring the head and shoulders forwards and down as far as possible.
Aim to get your head towards your knees.
Hold for 30 counts, stretching forwards gently with each count.
TUMMY PULL 11.
Lying down, raise the knees towards the chest.
Raise the elbows, head and shoulders towards the knees and hold up for 3 counts.
Relax and repeat 4 times.
TUMMY CYCLE 12.
Cycle backwards 30 times, then relax by cuddling your knees.
TUMMY MINIMISER 13.
Lie flat on your back, bend the knees, then raise the legs.
Try to straighten them a little more today.
14.
Curl your toes back.
Raise the arms towards the toes, lifting the head and shoulders off the floor as far as possible without straining.
Stretch up gently for 10 counts.
Relax by cuddling your knees, then repeat the exercise.
HIP AND THIGH EXTENDER 15.
Lying as shown, flex the foot and swing the leg forwards and backwards 5 times.
Swing the leg forwards and lift it up and down slightly, 20 times, holding each raise for 1 second.
Relax the leg by bringing the knee close to the chest, then roll over and repeat on the other side.
BOTTOM AND THIGH STREAMLINER 16.
Roll over again and swing the top leg forwards with foot flexed.
Move the leg forwards and back approximately 3ins (7.6cm).
Repeat 15 times, then roll over and repeat on the other side.
To feel the stretch in the thighs, hips and buttocks, place your hand on the back of your thigh as you move the leg.
THE COOL DOWN Repeat every exercise you have practised today (excluding the aerobics) just once.
Hold each position for 2 counts.
Do the postures continuously, in graceful slow motion with each exercise leading in to the next.
Remember to try and feel a sense of grace and well being flow over you as you perform them.
Positive thought for the day
Congratulations!
This is almost the end of Week 1 and you have nearly done it.
You are virtually 25 per cent of the way to your new shape and tomorrow morning you will be measuring and weighing yourself.
This is a very critical day as you may be feeling a sense of relaxation because you have got this far.
It is particularly important that you don't go out and celebrate yet!
For some inexplicable reason there seems to be a connection between weighing-in time and bingeing.
Ladies often come to my classes and explain that they have been very good all week and yet had a binge just prior to the class!
It is a psychological battle that we sometimes have to wage.
So please stick at the programme until tomorrow morning.
Don't eat rice or pasta today.
Try to stick to the suggested menu and have your main meal at lunchtime.
This gives your body more time to burn up the calories.
Be as active as possible.
I promise you'll be glad tomorrow.
Best of luck!
DAY 8
This really is an important day.
Before you step on the scales, find your tape measure and record your measurements on the Weight and Inch Loss Record Chart at the back of this book.
Measure yourself before you eat or drink anything to get your most accurate reading.
As mentioned earlier, scales can sometimes show disappointing results because of fluid fluctuations within the body.
The tape measure is a much more accurate way of assessing your progress.
If you have lost pounds too, all the better.
Today treat yourself to your favourite menus of the last week — any breakfast, lunch or dinner — or try my special menu designed to mark your achievement so far.
MENU
BREAKFAST
1oz (25g) of any cereal of your choice with 1 small banana, served with milk from allowance and 1 teaspoon sugar OR 1lb (400g) fresh fruit salad (orange, apple, pear, banana, etc.), plus 5oz (125g) diet yogurt
LUNCH
4 slices of light bread (e.g. Nimble or Slimcea) spread with reduced-oil salad dressing and made into sandwiches with tuna (canned in brine) or salmon, cucumber and tomato, plus 1/2 a fresh grapefruit OR 5 Ryvitas spread with low calorie coleslaw and topped with tomatoes, lettuce and cucumber, plus a diet yogurt
DINNER
CHICKEN CHINESE-STYLE (see recipe, page 155) served with boiled brown rice mixed with canned beansprouts and soy sauce plus meringue basket filled with fresh or frozen raspberries, topped with diet fromage frais of similar flavour (e.g. Shape) OR SWEETCORN AND POTATO FRITTERS (see recipe, page 162) served with RATATOUILLE (see recipe, page 160) and frozen peas PLUS HOT CHERRIES (see recipe, page 157) with 1oz (25g) ice cream
Today you are allowed an extra glass of wine or champagne to celebrate the achievement of completing your first week.
WARM-UP STRETCH 1.
Stretch up 30 times, 15 times with each hand.
AEROBICS: WALKING JOG/JOG 2.
Do 20 walking jogs on the spot.
Then j–g properly for as long as you can.
Don't get uncomfortably out of breath.
Try increase your stamina gradually.
Record the number of steps you take.
TODAY I JOGGED....
TIMES
AEROBICS: SIDEWAYS JOG 3.
Jog with legs swinging from side to side.
Let your arms swing with you.
Continue for as long as you can and record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED SIDEWAYS....
TIMES
WAIST WHITTLER 4.
Start with arms outstretched then curve sideways, bringing the arm up and over as far as possible.
Hold for 1 second.
Push and stretch a little further for a count of 25.
Relax forwards, then straighten up and repeat to the other side.
Do not strain.
BUST TONER 5.
Sit with legs outstretched and together.
6.
Take hold of your calves with both hands and squeeze them together quite hard, using the muscles in your arms.
Repeat 20 times, holding each contraction for 1 second.
If you perform this exercise in front of a mirror you will see all the muscles around your bust working really hard.
Toning these muscles encourages our ‘natural bra’ to develop and do a better job.
TUMMY FLATTENER 7.
Lying down with knees bent, raise the elbows, head and shoulders, bringing your chin close to your chest.
Hold up for a count of 10.
Slowly relax down to the floor.
Repeat the exercise but this time raise your body a fraction further with each count for even greater toning.
Hold each count for 1 second.
Relax by cuddling your knees.
TUMMY MINIMISER 8.
Still lying down, bend the knees and raise the legs.
9.
Curl your toes back.
Raise the arms towards the toes, lifting the head and shoulders off the floor as far as possible without straining.
Try to touch your toes!
Stretch up gently for 10 counts holding each count for 1 second.
Relax by cuddling your knees, then repeat the  exercise .
BOTTOM TONER 10.
Sit with one leg bent inwards, placing the foot in line with the centre of your body.
Bend the other leg backwards, away from the body.
Lean over sideways towards your front leg and take hold of the ankle.
Keeping your weight over to that side, raise your back leg 2 ins (5cm) off the floor and move it forwards and back just an inch or two.
Repeat the small forwards/back movement 15 times.
If you place your other hand on your hip as you practise this exercise you'll actually feel the muscles in your bottom working.
Relax, then repeat on the other side.
Relax.
HIP AND THIGH EXTENDER 11.
Lying as shown, flex the foot and swing the top leg forwards and backwards 5 times.
Then swing the leg forwards and lift it up and down slightly, 15 times.
FRONT THIGH STRETCH 12.
Now take hold of your top leg by the ankle and pull back the leg as far as possible without straining.
Repeat 5 times, holding each pull for 1 second.
This stretches and tones the front thigh muscle without adding bulk, and relaxes the muscles after the previous exercise.
Roll over and repeat both exercises on the other side: Hip and Thigh Extender x 15; Front Thigh Stretch x 5
BOTTOM AND THIGH STREAMLINER 13.
Roll over again, keeping the lower leg bent.
Extend the top leg forwards at right angles to the body.
Move the leg forwards and back slightly, 20 times, moving it only 3 ins (7.6cm) each time.
Relax the leg by holding on to your ankle and pulling the leg  behind  you for 5 counts (see previous exercise).
Roll over and repeat on the other side.
INNER THIGH TONE-UP 14.
Sitting with soles of the feet together, pull your feet in as close to you as possible.
As you pull the feet in remember to push down with your knees.
Repeat 30 times, holding each repetition for 1 second.
THE COOL DOWN Repeat all today's exercises (except the aerobics) just once, holding each position for 2 counts.
Feel elegant and poised as you do them.
Afterwards lie down and relax for a few moments.
Positive thought for the day
I hope you feel that you are really making progress.
The exercises are becoming increasingly effective as your body becomes more acclimatised to the postures.
Your muscles are now being used properly to create a much more beautiful contour of the body.
Take the time to look at yourself in the mirror and recognise the improvements.
Today I would like you to take a small piece of card which you will keep for your eyes only.
On it I would like you to write:
I am much slimmer and a better shape than I have been for some time (or for months, years, etc.) and I am going to get even slimmer and achieve an even better figure — a figure I never thought I could have.
This time I know I can do it!
Please take the trouble to write this or a similar message and look at it often.
Picture yourself succeeding.
If you can honestly visualise yourself as you want to be, you cannot fail to achieve it!
DAY 9
Did you enjoy yesterday?
Despite the odd ache in a previously dormant muscle, I hope you are feeling more energetic as you become fitter and slimmer each day.
There is a new aerobic exercise included in today's programme.
Only do what you can — please don't over-exert yourself.
You are not training for the next Olympics, just getting a little fitter and making your heart work more efficiently and become stronger.
Also in today's programme I have reintroduced the TUMMY TONING TWIST.
This exercises and tones up the muscles to the side of your tummy, helping not only to improve your waistline but also to flatten your tummy.
As you perform each twist it is important to concentrate on the movement of the muscles.
As the muscles get stronger you will be able to feel them working more and more.
MENU
BREAKFAST
1 oz (25g) PORRIDGE (see recipe, page 160) OR 1 slice of wholemeal toast 2 teaspoons marmalade or honey, plus a diet yogurt
LUNCH
5 brown Ryvitas topped with SALAD SURPRISE (see recipe page 161), plus 1 piece of fruit or a diet yogurt OR Jacket potato (any size) topped with 4oz (100g) baked beans and 2oz (50g) sweetcorn, plus 1 diet yogurt
DINNER
4oz (100g) chicken (no skin) served with unlimited vegetables, and a little gravy PLUS MELON SURPRISE (see recipe, page 158) OR VEGETARIAN CHILLI CON CARNE(see recipe, page 163) served with 1oz (25g)[uncooked weight]rice PLUS CHEESE PEARS (see recipe, page 155)
WARM-UP STRETCH 1.
Stretch up 30 times, 15 times with each hand.
SKI STRETCH 2.
Stretch up high.
3.
Ski down.
Return to the starting position and repeat 10 times.
AEROBICS: WALKING JOG/JOG 4.
Do 20 walking jogs on the spot, raising your arms up and down.
Then jog properly and record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED....
TIMES
AEROBICS: SKIPPING A STEP 5–6.
With a skipping step, cross one leg in front and kick the other leg out to the side.
Alternate legs, kicking them as high as possible.
Let your arms swing in the opposite direction to your legs.
Repeat 20 times, with 10 kicks to each side.
AEROBICS: FORWARD AND BACKWARD JOGGING 7.
Place your hands on your hips and with one leg in front jog forwards and backwards, transferring the weight from one leg to the other.
Continue for as long as is comfortable.
8.
Change legs so that the other one swings forward.
Continue for as long as possible.
Count the number of steps and record them here.
TODAY I JOGGED....
STEPS EACH WAY
WAIST WHITTLER 9.
Start as before and curve sideways, stretching u p and over as far as possible.
Hold in this extreme position for 25 counts, stretching a little further with each count.
Relax forwards, then straighten up and repeat to the other side.
BUST AND ARM LIFTER 10.
With palms facing upwards, take your arms behind you and hold them as high as possible.
Keeping the arms straight, pull them towards each other 35 times.
TUMMY FLATTENER 11.
Lying down with knees bent, raise the elbows, head and shoulders, bringing your chin towards your chest.
Hold up for a count of 10, relax and repeat.
TUMMY TONING TWIST 12.
Still lying on the floor, raise your knees and cross the ankles.
Lift one elbow to touch the opposite knee.
Return to the lying position and repeat with the same elbow.
Repeat to the other side, then repeat ‘double lifts’ 3 more times to each side.
Remember to return to the lying position each time after touching the knee.
TUMMY MINIMISER 13.
Lying flat on your back, bend the knees, then raise the legs.
14.
Curl your toes back.
Raise your head and shoulders off the floor as you stretch up towards your toes 10 times, each time, lifting the head and shoulders slightly.
Relax, then repeat the exercise.
LEG AND THIGH STRETCH 15.
Sit up, extending one leg forward.
Bend the other leg, placing the foot as close as possible to the inner thigh of the other leg.
Raise the arms and stretch up high.
16.
Slowly lean forwards as far as you can without straining.
From this position gently stretch forwards for 25 counts.
Straighten up slowly, then repeat with the other leg in front.
INNER THIGH AND KNEE TIGHTENER 17.
Sit as shown, and place your hands on the lower thighs so you can feel the leg muscle contractions.
Keeping the legs straight, squeeze them together as tightly as possible.
Repeat 20 times, holding each squeeze for 1 second.
Relax and repeat 20 more times.
OUTER THIGH TIGHTENER 18.
Cross the ankles, then try to pull the legs apart, using the strength from the legs to work against themselves.
Repeat 25 times, holding each contraction for 1 second.
Repeat with the other foot on top.
OUTER THIGH STREAMLINER 19.
Lie on your side with lower leg bent.
Point the foot of the other leg and raise the leg approximately 24ins (61 cm).
Do 30 mini raises.
Repeat on the other side, then repeat again on both sides.
HIP AND THIGH EXTENDER 20.
Keeping the top leg straight, flex the foot and swing the leg forwards and backwards 5 times.
Swing the leg forwards and lift it up and down slightly, 20 times.
Relax the leg and repeat on the other side.
TUMMY CYCLE 21.
Propping yourself up on your elbows, cycle backwards 30 times.
BOTTOM TONER 22.
Sit with one leg bent inwards and the other bent backwards.
Lean towards your front leg and take hold of the ankle.
Keeping your weight over to that side, raise the back leg 2ins (5cm) and move it forwards and back just an inch or two.
Repeat this small movement 25 times.
Relax and repeat on the other side.
Relax.
INNER THIGH TONER 23.
Sitting with soles of the feet together, pull your feet in and at the same time push down with your knees.
Repeat 25 times.
Do not strain.
THE COOL DOWN Repeat all today's exercises (excluding the aerobics), holding each position for just 2 counts.
Do the postures in graceful slow motion, with each exercise leading into the next.
Feel a sense of harmony and elegance flow over you as you perform them.
Afterwards lie down and relax for a few moments.
Positive thought for the day
How are you coping with the BOTTOM TONER exercise?
It is one of the most effective ways of toning and reshaping this difficult-to-exercise area.
You should now be looking significantly slimmer and will no doubt be attracting some comments — hopefully, complimentary ones.
There will, however, always be those who tend to see the negative side and may well suggest you ‘don't lose weight too quickly or you'll look old’ or ‘you'll only put it back on twice as fast if you lose it quickly’.
These so-called friends are usually overweight, failed-dieters who can't bear to see you succeeding.
What she (or he) doesn't realise is that you won't have actually lost very much weight (perhaps two or three pounds), but you will look much slimmer because you are holding yourself so much better and have lost inches.
Always try to respond positively to negative comments, perhaps by saying, ‘I've never felt so good for years’(only if it's true, of course).
DAY 10
Today a new exercise enters the programme.
The MIDRIFF STRETCH is especially good for eliminating a spare tyre around the middle and also helps to straighten out a double chin!
Practise it slowly for maximum benefit and to safeguard your back.
Always listen to your body and its built-in warning system — pain!
If an exercise ever causes you any pain you must stop immediately.
If the pain continues consult your doctor.
Don't be tempted to practise specific exercises in between doing other jobs or to demonstrate a particularly good exercise to a friend.
An impromptu performance might just leave you in a heap!
Intensive stretching exercises such as those in this book are exactly what they say they are —intensive stretching exercises .
A good warm-up is essential every time to prevent injury and to achieve the most effective results.
MENU
BREAKFAST
Mix 1 tablespoon of jam or honey into 4oz (100g) low fat cottage cheese OR 1 slice of wholemeal toast topped with 16oz (400g) tinned tomatoes, boiled well and reduced to a creamy consistency to prevent the toast becoming soggy
LUNCH
INCH LOSS SALAD (see recipe, page 158) with chicken or prawns OR 4 pieces of any fruit, plus a diet yogurt
DINNER
FISH CAKES (see recipe, page 156) served with broccoli, carrots and peas.
Add tomato sauce if desired, or a low fat PARSLEY SAUCE (see recipe, page 159) PLUS 1 slice of KIM'S CAKE (see recipe, page 158) and a diet yogurt OR Marks and Spencers Vegetable Chilli served with brown rice plus an M&S Mandarin Fruit jelly     
WARM-UP STRETCH 1.
Stretch up 30 times, 15 times with each hand.
WARM-UP WAIST STRETCH 2.
Stretching up with hands interlinked, tilt the pelvis and hold for 5 counts.
3.
Stretch over to the left — hold for 10 counts.
4.
Stretch over to the right — hold for 10 counts.
Relax.
AEROBICS: WALKING JOG/JOG 5.
Do 20 walking jogs on the spot, raising the arms up and down.
Then jog properly for as long as possible and record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED....
TIMES
FORWARDS AND BACKWARDS JOGGING 6.
With your hands on your hips, swing your legs forwards and backwards in a gentle jogging motion, transferring the weight from one leg to the other.
Change by swinging the other leg forward.
Do an equal number of steps with each leg in front and record them here.
TODAY I JOGGED....
STEPS EACH WAY
AEROBICS: SKIPPING A STEP 7.
Skip, crossing one leg in front and kicking your other leg out to the side.
Alternate legs and let your arms swing in the opposite direction.
Repeat 20 times, 10 times to each side.
BUST THRUST 8.
Thrust your elbows back at shoulder level 15 times, holding in the extreme thrust position for 1 second between each repetition.
TUMMY PULL 9.
Lying down, with knees bent towards the chest, raise the elbows, head and shoulders towards the knees and hold up for 5 counts.
Relax and repeat 6 times.
holding for 5 counts each time.
TUMMY RELAX 10.
Relax your tummy muscles by holding your knees close to your chest and rock from side to side.
TUMMY CYCLE 11.
Cycle backwards 30 times, then relax by cuddling your knees.
TUMMY MINIMISER 12.
Lying flat, bend the knees then raise the legs.
13.
Curl your toes back.
Stretch up towards your toes.
Hold, then stretch up for 10 counts, pulling up a little further with each count.
Relax by cuddling your knees, then repeat the exercise.
MIDRIFF STRETCH 14.
Lie face downwards with your hands beneath your shoulders elbows pointing outwards.
Slowly raise your head and shoulders, curving your spine, inch by inch, without straining.
Feel the stretch in your midriff.
Hold still in this position for 5 counts.
For added benefit stretch your chin up as you do the exercise.
This tones the chin and neck area.
INNER THIGH AND KNEE TIGHTENER 15.
Sit up with legs outstretched.
Squeeze the legs tightly together 20 times, holding each squeeze for 1 second.
OUTER THIGH TIGHTENER 16.
Cross the ankles, then try to pull the legs apart.
Repeat 25 times, holding each contraction for 1 second.
Repeat 25 times with the other foot on top.
HIP AND EXTENDER 17.
Lying as shown, flex the foot and swing the top leg forwards and backwards 5 times.
Swing the leg forwards and lift it up and down 20 times.
Relax the leg, then roll over and repeat on the other side.
BOTTOM AND THIGH STREAMLINER 18.
Roll over again, keeping the lower leg bent.
Extend the top leg forwards and stretch it forwards and back 20 times, moving it 3ins (7.6cm) each time.
Relax the leg, roll over and repeat on the other side.
BOTTOM TONER 19.
Sit as shown.
Leaning over for balance, take hold of your front ankle and raise the back leg.
Move this leg forwards and back 25 times.
Relax and repeat to the other side.
THE COOL DOWN Repeat every exercise you have practised today (except the aerobics) just once.
Hold each position for 2 counts.
Do the postures continuously, in graceful slow motion, with each exercise leading into the next.
Remember to try to feel a sense of grace, beauty and slimness flow over you as you perform them.
Positive thought for the day
Now that you are well into your second week, progress should be even faster.
Not only are you more familiar with the exercises, but your body is able to achieve the postures in a more relaxed manner, thereby increasing their effectiveness.
Confidence is a wonderful thing — it creates the courage we need to open up all kinds of doors.
Would you like to feel totally happy with yourself and able to cope with any situation without feeling inadequate?
Would you like to feel every bit as good as the next person?
Think of someone whom you admire at the moment.
What is it about them that makes them stand out from the rest?
At some stage in their lives they decided they were going to be a winner not a loser.
Instead of saying, ‘I can't do that’, or ‘I'm no good at that’, they switched to ‘I could have a go at that’, and then, ‘well they did it, why shouldn't I?’
Today I want you to turn that corner and change from a feeling of ‘I'm never going to do it’ to ‘I will do it’.
DAY 11
Did you feel more positive about your future when you woke up this morning?
Do you feel totally confident about achieving the figure you want?
Do you remember making all the usual excuses about being overweight?
‘I was a big baby — I'm obviously meant to be this size’, ‘all my family are big’, ‘I've tried every diet, they just don't seem to work for me’, ‘I only have to look at a cream cake and I gain 2lbs (0.9kg)!’
These are all negative personal conditioning statements.
If we say them often enough we will actually believe them and make them happen.
No wonder we've failed previously!
Instead we are now saying, ‘I know this diet and exercise plan is working for me’, ‘this time I am going to reach my weight and inch goal’, ‘because I never feel hungry and I am eating the foods I enjoy, I don't even feel as though I'm dieting’.
‘This will be the last time I have to diet because I have a completely different attitude towards my body and the food that I eat.’
MENU
BREAKFAST
3/4oz (18g) Branflakes and 1oz (25g) sultanas, served with milk from allowance, no sugar OR 4 oz (100g) tinned peaches (in natural juice) and a diet yogurt
LUNCH
3 brown Ryvitas spread with 3 oz (75g) pilchards in tomato sauce, topped with sliced tomato, plus a banana OR 8oz (200g) cottage cheese with a chopped pear, apple and 2 sticks celery, served on a bed of lettuce, plus tomatoes and cucumber
DINNER
3 oz (75g) roast leg of pork with all fat removed, served with apple sauce, 4 oz (100g) potatoes and unlimited vegetables, plus 4 oz (100g) fresh fruit salad topped with a diet yogurt OR Quarterpounder Dietburger (from health stores) served with braised onions, 4oz (100g) potatoes and unlimited vegetables, plus 4 oz (100g) stewed fruit topped with appropriate flavoured diet yogurt    
WARM-UP STRETCH 1.
Stretch up 30 times with alternate hands.
SKI STRETCH 2.
Stretch up high.
3.
Ski down.
Return to the starting position and repeat 15 times.
AEROBICS: WALKING JOG/JOG 4.
Do 20 walking jogs, raising the arms up and down.
Then jog properly for as long as you can and record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED....
TIMES
AEROBICS: FORWARD AND BACKWARD JOGGING 5.
Gently jog forwards and backwards, transferring the weight from one leg to the other.
Do as many as you can first with one leg in front, then repeat with the other leg in front.
Record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED....
STEPS EACH WAY
ARM AND BUST UPLIFT 6.
With hands clasped behind, and palms facing inwards, raise the arms 30 times, lifting them a little higher with each count.
Keep the arms straight throughout.
BUST TONER 7.
Sitting with legs outstretched, take hold of your calves with both hands and squeeze them together quite hard, using the muscles in your arms.
Repeat 20 times, holding each contraction for 1 second.
TUMMY FLATTENER 8.
Lying down with knees bent, raise your elbows, head and shoulders, bringing your chin towards your chest.
Hold for a count of 10, pulling up a little higher with each count.
Relax and repeat.
TUMMY RELAX 9.
Relax your tummy muscles by holding your knees close to your chest and rock from side to side.
TUMMY TONING TWIST 10.
Raise your knees and cross the ankles.
Lift one elbow to touch the opposite knee.
Return to the lying position and repeat with the same elbow.
Repeat to the other side, then repeat ‘double lifts’ 4 more times to each side.
MIDRIFF STRETCH 11.
Lying on your tummy, raise your head and shoulders, curving the spine, inch by inch.
Hold still for 10 counts.
To tone the chin and neck area, stretch your chin up as you do the exercise.
BACK LEG STRETCH 12.
Sitting with legs together and knees flat on the floor, bring the head and shoulders  forward and down as far as possible.
Hold for 30 counts, stretching forwards gently with each count.
Raise your head slowly and relax.
SPINE AND LEG STRETCHER 13.
Move your legs apart and stretch your hands above your head.
As you stretch up, turn to face one leg and lower your hands and body as close to the leg as possible.
Stretch forwards gently for 15 counts, moving the body just a fraction with each count.
Relax for a few seconds.
Return to the starting position and repeat to the other side.
OUTER THIGH STREAMLINER 14.
Lying as shown, raise the top leg approximately 24ins (61 cm) and do 30 mini raises.
Remember to keep the foot pointed and the knee facing forwards.
Repeat on the other side, then repeat again on both sides.
HIP AND THIGH EXTENDER 15.
With foot flexed, swing the top leg forwards and backwards 5 times.
Swing the leg forwards and lift it up and down an inch or two, 25 times.
FRONT THIGH STRETCH 16.
Now take hold of your top leg by the ankle and pull back the leg as far as possible without straining.
Repeat 5 times, holding each pull for 1 second.
Roll over and repeat the last 2 exercises on the other side: Hip and Thigh Extender x 25; Front Thigh Stretch x 5
BOTTOM AND THIGH STREAMLINER 17.
Roll over again, keeping the lower leg bent.
Extend the top leg forwards and stretch it forwards and back 25 times, each time moving it 3ins (7.6cm).
Repeat on the other side.
INNER THIGH TONE-UP 18.
Sitting with soles of the feet together, pull your feet in and push down with your knees.
Repeat 25 times, holding each repetition for 1 second.
THE COOL DOWN Repeat every exercise you have practised today (except the aerobics) just once.
Hold each position for 2 counts.
Do the postures continuously, in graceful slow motion, with each exercise leading into the next.
Remember to try to feel a sense of beauty and wellbeing flow over you as you perform them.
Positive thought for the day
I am often asked if exercise is essential to weight loss .
Amazingly the answer is no.
Without doubt it is what we eat that determines our weight, and calories do count.
I never detail calorie content in my diets because it isn't necessary.
I've done all that for you and if you follow any of my menus you should lose weight.
The reduction of fat in the diet helps to eliminate the fat on the body.
The result is weight and inch loss from just the areas we want to slim down.
So what about exercise?
Exercise is good for us and gives us a much better shape .
A beautifully toned body can be achieved at any age, even in later life.
The heart is also a muscle and it responds wonderfully to energetic exercise.
That is why we do a little aerobic exercise every day — just enough to make us puff and exercise our heart without over-doing it.
If our heart is stronger and working efficiently, oxygen will circulate all round the body helping to feed and renew our body tissues.
Our skin texture will also show a dramatic improvement.
DAY 12
One of my slimmers wrote: ‘My husband says I now have the figure I had when he married me 30 years ago’.
Another lady wrote and said how her husband ‘has regained his boyish figure again'.
This diet will work for men and women just as effectively, no matter what age.
Success in dieting is all about knowing that you will win.
Most diets actually work, but few give such immediate results in real terms.
I'm not interested in diets that say ‘lose 10 lbs (4.5 kg) in 10 days’.
If you did, most of what you lost would be water and some would be muscle tissue.
Only a little fat would burn away.
As soon as the slimmer returned to normal eating all the lost weight would return, plus more because the metabolic rate is reduced when subjected to a starvation diet.
MENU
BREAKFAST
1 egg poached and served on 1 slice of wholemeal toast OR 2 bananas sliced and topped with raspberry flavoured yogurt
LUNCH
8oz (200g) cold baked beans served with a large salad of mixed vegetables, including 2 teaspoons reduced-oil salad dressing, plus a diet yogurt OR 1 jacket potato (approx. 8oz [200g]) topped with 2 oz (50g) chopped chicken, 1 oz (25g) peas and 1 oz (25g) sweetcorn, mixed with 3 oz (75g) plain yogurt flavoured with 1/2 teaspoon curry powder, plus a wedge of melon
DINNER
4 oz (100g) steak, grilled and served with jacket potato (approx. 5oz [25g]) and unlimited vegetables PLUS FRUITY APPLE TERRINE (see recipe, page 157) OR LENTIL ROAST (see recipe, page 158) served with unlimited vegetables PLUS COEURS A LA CREME (see recipe, page 156)
WARM-UP STRETCH 1.
Stretch up 30 times with alternate hands.
WAIST WHITTLER 2.
Start with arms outstretched and curve sideways, bringing the arm up and over as far as possible.
Hold for 1 second.
Push and stretch further for a count of 25.
Relax forwards, then straighten up and repeat to the other side.
AEROBICS: WALKING JOG/JOG 3.
Do 20 walking jogs, raising the arms up and down.
Then jog properly for as long as possible.
Record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED....
TIMES
AEROBICS: JOGGING ARMS IN AND OUT 4.
Jogging on the spot, bring your arms in and out with each step.
Keep the arms as straight as possible throughout.
Record your steps here.
TODAY I DID....
STEPS
SIDEWAYS JOG 5.
Jog with legs swinging from side to side.
Let your arms swing with you.
Continue for as long as you can and record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED SIDEWAYS....
TIMES
BUST AND ARM LIFTER 6.
With palms facing upwards, take your arms behind you and pull them towards each other 35 times.
Remember to hold the arms as high as possible.
Do not slump forwards.
TUMMY PULL 7.
Lying on your back, raise the knees towards the chest.
Raise the elbows head and shoulders towards the knees and hold up for 5 counts.
Repeat 3 more times and hold up for 10 counts each time.
TUMMY MINIMISER 8.
Lie flat, bend the knees, then straighten the legs upwards.
Hopefully by now you should be able to get your legs almost at right angles to your body.
9.
Curl your toes back.
Raise the arms towards the toes, lifting the head and shoulders off the floor as far as possible.
Stretch up gently for 10 counts.
Relax by cuddling your knees, then repeat.
Try to stretch up for 15 counts this time.
TUMMY CYCLE 10.
Cycle backwards 30 times, then relax by cuddling your knees.
LEG AND THIGH STRETCH 11.
Sit up with one leg extended forwards and the other leg bent.
Stretch arms up high.
12.
Slowly lean forwards as far as possible without straining.
From this position gently stretch forwards for 25 counts.
Straighten up slowly, then repeat with the other leg in front.
INNER THIGH AND KNEE TIGHTENER 13.
Extend both legs forwards and squeeze them together 25 times, holding each squeeze for 1 second.
OUTER THIGH TIGHTENER 14.
Cross the ankles, then try to pull the legs apart.
Repeat 30 times, holding each contraction for 1 second.
Repeat with the other foot on top.
OUTER THIGH STREAMLINER 15.
Lying as shown, raise the top leg 24ins (61 cm).
With foot pointed, do 30 mini raises.
Repeat on the other side, then repeat again on both sides.
BOTTOM TONER 16.
Sit as shown.
Leaning over for balance, take hold of your front ankle and raise the back leg.
Move it forwards and back an inch or two, 25 times.
Relax and repeat to the other side.
THIGH STREAMLINER 17.
Sit with one leg bent in front of you and the other leg extended to the side.
With toes pointed downwards, raise the extended leg 6ins (15cm) off the floor, leaning right over to the opposite side for balance and holding on to the ankle in front of you.
Do 10 mini raises, holding each for 1 second.
Feel your muscles working by placing your other hand on your hip or bottom.
Repeat to the other side.
INNER THIGH TONE-UP 18.
With soles of the feet together, pull your feet in and push down with your knees.
Repeat 25 times.
Do not strain.
THE COOL DOWN Repeat all today's exercises (excluding the aerobics), holding each position for just 2 counts.
Do the postures in graceful slow motion, with each exercise leading into the next.
Feel a sense of grace, elegance and beauty flow over you as you perform them.
Afterwards lie down and relax for a few moments.
Positive thought for the day
In today's introduction I referred to the importance of maintaining our metabolic rate.
This is vital if we are to continue to lose weight and inches at a satisfactory rate, and essential if we are not to return to our previous shape.
Our metabolic rate is the rate at which we burn up energy.
We should always consume sufficient calories to keep the metabolism buoyant.
There is no danger of it slowing down if we eat around 1500 calories a day.
Added to this is the recent discovery of the effect on the body of fat calories compared with carbohydrate calories.
Research has proved that we can eat more carbohydrate calories than fat calories and still lose weight!
This is why low fat diets work so efficiently and why so many followers of my diet said that the most important contributory factor to their success was the large amount of food they were allowed to eat.
How can anyone seriously stick to a diet if they are hungry?
The freedom to eat as many vegetables as you want at mealtimes resolves this problem.
DAY 13
As you approach the end of your second week don't even think about cheating!
Just having a little treat here or there can add up to enough to stop the diet from working.
More importantly, once we start nibbling naughty things our willpower slides down a very slippery slope.
One biscuit becomes a whole packet, one chocolate bar turns into three and before you know where you are you've trapped yourself into a wholesale binge.
I'm not saying you'll never binge again but please don't do it today.
I want you to reach the beginning of Day 15 and the next weighing and measuring session without having faltered seriously.
MENU
BREAKFAST
1 fresh crusty bread roll (approx. 2 oz [50g]) spread with 2 teaspoons marmalade OR 1 oz (25g) very lean bacon (all fat removed) served with 4oz (100g) mushrooms cooked in vegetable stock, 3 oz (75g) baked beans and 8oz (200g) tinned tomatoes
LUNCH
4oz (100g) boiled brown rice mixed with 1oz (25g) each of peas, sweetcorn, red and green peppers, cucumber, a few spring onions and 1 chopped tomato, plus a diet fromage frais or yogurt OR 4 Ryvitas spread with reduced-oil salad dressing or a little horseradish sauce, and 3 oz (75g) salmon, tuna or mackerel, topped with sliced cucumber, plus 1 piece of any fresh fruit
DINNER
8oz (200g) white fish, steamed, microwaved or grilled, served with steamed sliced mushrooms, 5 oz (125g) mashed potatoes, unlimited vegetables, and tomato sauce if desired PLUS STRAWBERRY WINE JELLY (see recipe, page 161) OR RATATOUILLE (see recipe, page 160) served with 5oz (125g) potatoes and unlimited vegetables PLUS RASPBERRY AND STRAWBERRY BAVAROIS (see recipe, page 160)
WARM-UP STRETCH 1.
Stretch up 30 times with alternate hands.
WARM-UP WAIST STRETCH 2.
Interlink hands and stretch up, tilting the pelvis.
Hold for 5 counts.
3.
Stretch over to the left — hold for 10 counts.
4.
Stretch over to the right — hold for 10 counts.
Relax.
AEROBICS: WALKING JOG/JOG 5.
Do 20 walking jogs, raising the arms up and down.
Then jog properly for as long as possible.
Record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED....
TIMES
AEROBICS: FORWARD AND BACKWARD JOGGING 6.
Gently jog forwards and backwards, transferring your weight from one leg to the other.
Do as many as you can with one leg in front.
Change and repeat with the other leg in front.
Record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED....
STEPS EACH WAY
AEROBICS: SKIPPING A STEP 7.
Skip crossing one leg in front and kicking the other leg out to the side.
Let your arms swing in the opposite direction to your legs.
Repeat 20 times.
BUST THRUST 8.
Thrust your elbows back at shoulder level 15 times, holding in the extreme thrust position for 1 second between each repetition.
ARM AND BUST UPLIFT 9.
With hands clasped behind and palms facing inwards, raise the arms 30 times, aiming them slightly higher with each count.
TUMMY FLATTENER 10.
Lying down with knees bent, raise the elbows, head and shoulders, bringing your chin as close to your chest as possible.
Gently pull the body forwards for 10 counts.
Relax and repeat.
TUMMY PULL 11.
Lift the knees towards the chest.
Raise the elbows, head and shoulders towards the knees and hold up for 5 counts.
Repeat 3 more times, and hold up for 10 counts each time.
TUMMY TONING TWIST 12.
Lift your knees and cross the ankles.
Raise one elbow to touch the opposite knee.
Return to the lying position and repeat with the same elbow.
Repeat to the other side, then repeat ‘double lifts’ 3 more times to each side.
MIDRIFF STRETCH 13.
Lying on your tummy, raise your head and shoulders, curving the spine, inch by inch.
Hold still for 15 counts.
To tone the chin and neck area, stretch your chin up as you do the exercise.
BACK LEG STRETCH 14.
Sitting with legs outstretched, bring the head and shoulders forward and down as far as possible.
Stretch forwards gently for 30 counts.
SPINE AND LEG STRETCHER 15.
Move your legs apart and raise the arms.
Stretch up high and twist at the waist.
Lower the hands and body towards one leg.
Gently stretch forwards for 20 counts, holding each stretch for 1 second.
Relax, return to the starting position and repeat to the other side.
LEG AND HIP STRETCH 16–17.
Lying as shown, swing the top leg forwards and backwards 10 times each way without straining.
Roll over and repeat with the other leg.
BOTTOM AND THIGH STREAMLINER 18.
Roll over again and extend the top leg forwards.
Stretch the leg forwards and back 30 times, each time moving it 3 ins (7.6cm).
FRONT THIGH STRETCH 19.
Take hold of your top leg by the ankle and pull back the leg as far as possible without straining.
Repeat 5 times, holding each pull for 1 second.
Roll over and repeat the last 2 exercises on the other side: Bottom and Thigh Streamliner x 30; Front Thigh Stretch x 5
BOTTOM TONER 20.
Sit as shown.
Leaning over for balance, take hold of your front ankle and raise the back leg.
Move it forwards and back a few inches, 30 times.
Relax and repeat to the other side.
THE COOL DOWN Repeat all today's exercises (except the aerobics), holding each position for just 2 counts.
Do the postures in graceful slow motion with each exercise leading into the next.
Feel a sense of harmony, poise and slimness as you perform them.
Afterwards lie down and relax for a few moments.
Positive thought for the day
The exercises have been very comprehensive today — all part of the campaign to achieve maximum results at the end of this second week.
Again, as last week, try to be as physically active as possible during the next 24 hours, avoiding temptation by doing something outside the kitchen.
Now is not the time to start baking cakes for your freezer!
When I am trying to be stricter than usual with myself, I plan a really busy week so that I am out more than is customary.
Many slimmers make this an excuse for not sticking to the diet, but I find it much easier being away from the kitchen and the kettle!
All those cups of tea do add up and the fridge is always there ready to beckon when a hunger pang lingers.
If we keep our minds busy we can consciously ignore our tummy, which often only tells us it's hungry because we're bored.
We then end up eating for entertainment, rather than nourishment.
It is a habit we should try to curb.
DAY 14
It's the last day of Week 2 and I suggest that you have your main meal at lunchtime again, so allowing more time to work it off before tomorrow's assessment.
You will notice that I never include rice and pasta in the menus on the last day of the week to avoid causing an artificial weight gain — the last thing we want for tomorrow morning.
Alcohol also has a dehydrating effect and results in excessive thirst, so don't have more than your usual two drinks tonight.
If on any occasion you wake up in the night gasping for water, think back to the meal you had and recognise which recipes make you thirsty.
Avoid these in future, or, cut down on the seasoning.
Although excess fluid will not harm you, it will make you feel bigger than you really are.
Be as active as possible and have a good day!
MENU
BREAKFAST
1 banana sliced on to 1/2 deseeded honeydew melon, plus a diet yogurt OR 1 slice of wholemeal toast with 2 teaspoons marmalade or honey and a small banana
LUNCH
4 oz (100g) chicken served with unlimited vegetables, including 4 oz (100g) potatoes, plus 2 pieces of any fresh fruit OR 1 egg omelette cooked in a non-stick pan, and stuffed with 2 oz (50g) low fat fromage frais mixed with sliced boiled mushrooms and chopped green peppers, and served with a large salad PLUS PINEAPPLE AND ORANGE SORBET (see recipe, page 159) SUPPER Seafood salad (using seafood sticks, prawns, etc. 5 oz [125g]total) served on a mixed green salad, topped with SEAFOOD DRESSING (see recipe, page 161), plus 1/2 deseeded honeydew melon topped with melon flavoured diet yogurt OR Vegetarian Dietburger (available from health food shops) served with unlimited vegetables excluding potatoes, plus a diet yogurt mixed with 4 oz (100g) fresh fruit (any kind)
WARM-UP STRETCH 1.
Stretch up 30 times, 15 times with each hand.
SKI STRETCH 2.
Stretch up high.
3.
Ski down.
Return to the starting position and repeat 10 times.
WAIST WHITTLER 4.
Start in the outstretched position and curve sideways, bringing the arm up and over as far as possible.
Hold for 1 second.
Push and stretch a little further for a count of 25.
Relax forwards, then straighten up and repeat to the other side.
AEROBICS: WALKING JOG/JOG 5.
Do 20 walking jogs, raising the arms up and down.
Then jog properly for as long as possible.
Record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED....
TIMES
AEROBICS: SIDEWAYS JOG 6.
Jog with legs swinging from side to side.
Let your arms swing with you.
Continue for as long as possible and record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED SIDEWAYS....
TIMES
AEROBICS: JOGGING ARMS IN AND OUT 7.
Jogging on the spot, bring your arms in and out with each step.
Record the number of steps.
TODAY I DID....
STEPS
BUST AND ARM LIFTER 8.
With palms facing upwards, take your arms behind you and pull them towards each other 35 times.
BUST TONER 9.
Sitting with legs outstretched, take hold of your calves with both hands and squeeze them together quite hard, using the muscles in your arms.
Repeat 25 times, holding each contraction for 1 second.
TUMMY PULL 10.
Lying down, lift the knees towards the chest.
Raise the elbows, head and shoulders towards the knees and hold up for 5 counts.
Repeat 3 more times, and hold up for 10 counts each time.
TUMMY RELAX 11.
Relax your tummy muscles by holding your knees close to your chest and rock from side to side.
TUMMY CYCLE 12.
Cycle backwards 30 times.
TUMMY MINIMISER 13.
Lie flat, bend the knees then straighten the legs upwards so that they are at right angles to your body.
14.
Curl your toes back.
Raise the arms towards the toes, lifting the head and shoulders off the floor as far as possible without straining.Continue stretching up gently for 10 counts.
Relax by cuddling your knees, then repeat, stretching up for 15 counts.
LEG AND THIGH STRETCH 15.
Sit up, with one leg extended forwards and the other leg bent.
Stretch arms up high, then slowly lean forwards as far as you can without straining.
Stretch forwards for 25 counts.
Straighten up slowly, then repeat with the other leg in front.
INNER THIGH AND KNEE TIGHTENER 16.
Extend both legs forwards and squeeze them together 30 times holding each squeeze for 1 second.
OUTER THIGH TIGHTENER 17.
Cross the ankles, then try to pull the legs apart.
Repeat 30 times, holding each contraction for 1 second.
Repeat with the other foot on top.
OUTER THIGH STREAMLINER 18.
Lying as shown, raise the top leg, and with foot pointed do 30 mini raises.
Roll over and repeat on the other side, then repeat again on both sides.
HIP AND THIGH EXTENDER 19.
Flex the foot and swing the leg forwards and backwards 5 times.
Swing the leg forwards and lift it up and down 25 times.
Relax the leg and repeat on the other side.
THIGH STREAMLINER 20.
Sit with one leg bent in front and the other extended to the side.
With toes pointed, raise the extended leg 6ins (1 5cm), leaning over to the opposite side for balance and holding on to the ankle in front.
Raise the leg a fraction higher and repeat this tiny movement 15 times, holding each raise for 1 second.
Repeat to the other side.
THE COOL DOWN Repeat every exercise you have practised today (excluding the aerobics), holding each position for just 2 counts.
Do the postures continuously, in graceful slow motion, with each exercise leading into the next.
Then relax and pause for a moment as you realise how good you feel.
Positive thought for the day
Today's exercises will have really extended your fitness, suppleness and strength.
At the end of the whole routine you should feel as though you have achieved a great deal.
Cast your mind back to Day 1 and your first attempt at the elementary exercises I asked you to perform.
Do you remember how awkward it felt, how stiff you were, how you ached the next day?
Not any more: your body is stretching magnificently and your muscles are getting into better shape every day!
Fill yourself with low calorie drinks such as Diet Coke or slimlines and enjoy your evening snack.
Treat yourself to a special evening of entertainment — whether it be hiring a video you've been meaning to watch, going to the cinema or theatre, or just visiting a friend.
Do occupy yourself so that you don't over-indulge or leave yourself open to temptation.
Attack temptation with activity and look forward to your second weigh-in and measuring day.
Best of luck!
DAY 15
After visiting the bathroom first thing this morning, find your tape measure and make a note of your latest inch loss progress.
Now weigh yourself.
Always use the same set of scales and ideally place them on a piece of wood or chipboard for a more accurate reading.
I have no doubt that you will have lost both inches and weight.
However as your muscle tone increases and your level of fat decreases, sometimes little registers on the scales.
But the most important factor is that you like what you now see in the mirror better than two weeks ago.
So onward to Week 3.
You are now half way towards real success.
MENU
BREAKFAST
1 oz (25g) PORRIDGE (see recipe, page 160) OR 2 oz (50g) bread roll with your favourite preserve or marmalade
LUNCH
TRIPLE DECKER SANDWICH (see recipe, page 162), plus 2 x 5 oz (125g) diet yogurts OR Jacket potato (approx. 8oz [200g]) topped with 8oz (200g) baked beans, plus 8oz (200g) plums or similar fruit
DINNER
Barbecued pork kebabs (see recipe, page 154 for BARBECUED CHICKEN KEBABS and substitute pork steak for chicken) served with boiled brown rice mixed with beansprouts and soy sauce PLUS APRICOT PLUM SOFTIE (see recipe, page 154) OR VEGETARIAN SPAGHETTI BOLOGNESE(see recipe, page 163) PLUS STRAWBERRY WINE JELLY (see recipe, page 161)
Plus an extra glass of wine to celebrate the successful completion of your second week.
WARM-UP STRETCH 1.
Stretch up 30 times, 15 times with each hand.
WARM-UP WAIST STRETCH 2.
Interlink hands and stretch up, tilting the pelvis.
Hold for 5 counts.
3.
Stretch over to the left — hold for 10 counts.
4.
Stretch over to the right — hold for 10 counts.
Relax.
AEROBICS: WALKING JOG/JOG 5.
Do 20 walking jogs, raising the arms up and down.Then jog properly for as long as possible.
Record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED....
TIMES
AEROBICS: FORWARD AND BACKWARD JOGGING 6.
Gently jog forwards and backwards, transferring your weight from one leg to the other.
Do as many as you can with one leg in front.
Change and repeat with the other leg in front.
Record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED....
STEPS EACH WAY
AEROBICS: SKIPPING A STEP 7.
Skip, crossing one leg in front and kicking the other leg out to the side.
Let your arms swing the opposite way to your legs.
Continue for as long as possible and record your steps here.
TOTAL STEPS TODAY....
BUST THRUST 8.
Thrust your elbows back at shoulder level 15 times, holding in the extreme thrust position for 1 second between each repetition.
ARM AND BUST UPLIFT 9.
With hands clasped behind and palms facing inwards, raise the arms 30 times, lifting them a little higher with each count.
TUMMY FLATTENER 10.
Lying down with knees bent, raise the elbows, head and shoulders bringing your chin as close to your chest as possible.
Gently pull the body forwards 10 times.
Relax and repeat.
TUMMY RELAX 11.
Relax your tummy muscles by holding your knees close to your chest and rock from side to side.
TUMMY TONING TWIST 12.
With knees raised and ankles crossed, lift one elbow to touch the opposite knee.
Return to the lying position and repeat with the same elbow.
Repeat to the other side, then repeat ‘double lifts’ 4 more times to each side.
TUMMY AND DOUBLE CHIN ELIMINATOR 13.
Lying on your tummy with elbows pointing outwards, slowly raise the head and shoulders off the floor without straining.
Point the chin upwards and feel the wonderful stretch from your midriff up to your chin.
Hold this position for a count of 5.
Relax, then repeat 3 times, holding up for 5 counts each time.
To tone the face and chin even further, extend the lower teeth outside the upper set and hold.
It looks ridiculous but is exceptionally effective!
SPINE AND LEG STRETCHER 14.
Sitting with legs apart, stretch up high, then twist at the waist and lower the hands and body towards one leg.
Gently stretch forwards for 25 counts, holding each stretch for 1 second.
Relax, return to the starting position and repeat to the other side.
HIP AND THIGH EXTENDER 15.
Lying as shown, flex the foot and swing the top leg forwards and backwards 5 times.
Swing the leg forwards and lift it up and down a few inches, 25 times.
FRONT THIGH STRETCH 16.
Take hold of your top leg by the ankle and pull back the leg as far as possible without straining.
Repeat 5 times, holding each pull for 1 second.
Roll over and repeat the last 2 exercises on the other side: Hip and Thigh Extender x 25; Front Thigh Stretch x 5
BOTTOM TONER 17.
Sit as shown.
Leaning over for balance, take hold of your front ankle and raise the back leg.
Move it forwards and back 30 times.
Relax and repeat to the other side.
INNER THIGH TONE-UP 18.
With soles of the feet together, pull your feet in and at the same time push down with your knees.
Repeat 25 times, holding each repetition for 1 second.
Do not strain.
THE COOL DOWN Repeat all today's exercises (except the aerobics) just once, holding each position for 2 counts.
Feel slim, elegant and graceful as you do them.
Afterwards lie down and relax for a few moments.
Positive thought for the day
How did you get on with the DOUBLE CHIN ELIMINATOR?
This exercise is brilliant for toning up the loose skin under the chin.
I remember a lovely lady who attended my slimming club years ago.
Evelyn was in her sixties and lost 6st (38kg), reducing from 15 to 9 st (95 to 57kg).
The flesh under her chin sagged as the fat disappeared but after just 5 months of stretching her lower jaw over her front teeth 5 times a day, her neck toned up magnificently and she looked 10 years younger!
Reaching this third week is a very important and significant achievement.
It is at this time that some do-gooders may make all kinds of suggestions.
‘I heard you could eat any amount of steak and you'd lose loads of weight’, or ‘didn't I read somewhere that you aren't supposed to eat carbohydrate and protein at the same meal?’
These views do not feature in my own dieting philosophy.
What is absolutely vital is that while you are on one particular diet, you follow the rules that apply to that diet, and those rules only.
The next time someone offers you advice on slimming — did they try it?
Did it work for them?
Are they slim now ?
DAY 16
On previous days we have talked about setting goals.
I believe very firmly that we can accomplish so much more in our lives if we just pause occasionally to take stock of our plans and our aims.
We all need a goal and once we are well on the way to achieving it, then it is essential that we start thinking about another one.
The greater the goal the better.
It can be really ambitious but it must be realistic.
Some goals will be short term (like your weight and inch loss campaign) and others will be longer term, such as changing your job or starting your own business.
Start thinking today what you would really like to work towards over the next few months and even years.
If you want to achieve it badly enough you can't fail to succeed!
MENU
BREAKFAST
1 oz (25g) Branflakes mixed with a diet yogurt and a chopped fresh pear (including the skin) OR 2 bananas sliced and topped with a little milk from allowance and 1 teaspoon strawberry preserve
LUNCH
4 slices of light bread (e.g. Nimble or Slimcea) spread with reduced-oil salad dressing, and made into sandwiches with 3 oz (75g) tinned salmon and sliced cucumber, plus a diet fromage frais OR 8oz (200g) cold baked beans on 2 slices of wholemeal bread, plus a diet yogurt
DINNER
CHICKEN OR PRAWN CHOP SUEY(see recipe, page 155) served with rice PLUS RASPBERRY AND STRAWBERRY BAVAROIS (see recipe, page 160) OR SPICED BEAN CASSEROLE (see recipe, page 161) served with brown rice PLUS CHOCOLATE AND COFFEE ROULADE (see recipe, page 156)
WARM-UP STRETCH 1.
Stretch up 30 times, 15 times with each hand.
SKI STRETCH 2.
Stretch up high.
3.
Ski down.
Return to the starting position and repeat 15 times.
AEROBICS: WALKING JOG/JOG 4.
Do 20 walking jogs, raising the arms up and down.
Then jog properly for as long as possible.
Record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED....
TIMES
AEROBICS: SIDEWAYS JOG 5.
Jog with legs swinging from side to side.
Let your arms swing with you.
Continue for as long as possible and record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED SIDEWAYS....
TIMES
AEROBICS JOGGING ARMS IN AND OUT 6.
Jogging on the spot, bring your arms in and out with each step.
Record your total steps.
TODAY I DID....
STEPS
WAIST WHITTLER 7.
Starting with arms outstretched curve sideways bringing the arm up and over as far as possible.
Hold for 1 second.
Push and stretch a little further for a count of 25.
Relax forwards, then straighten up and repeat to the other side.
BUST TONER 8.
Sitting with legs outstretched and together, take hold of your calves with both hands and squeeze them together quite hard.
Repeat 20 times, holding each contraction for 1 second.
BUST AND ARM LIFTER 9.
With palms facing upwards, take your arms behind you and pull them towards each other 30 times.
Remember to hold the arms as high as possible.
TUMMY PULL 10.
Lying down, lift the knees towards the chest.
Raise the elbows, head and shoulders towards the knees and hold up for 5 counts.
Repeat 3 more times, holding up for 10 counts each time.
TUMMY CYCLE 11.
Cycle backwards 30 times, then relax by cuddling your knees.
MIDRIFF STRETCH 12.
Lying on your tummy, raise your head and shoulders, curving your spine, inch by inch.
Hold still for 10 counts.
To tone the chin and neck area, stretch your chin up as you do the exercise.
BACK LEG STRETCH 13.
Sitting as shown, pull the head and shoulders down towards the knees.
Gently stretch forwards for 30 counts, holding each stretch for 1 second.
INNER THIGH AND KNEE TIGHTENER 14.
Keeping the legs straight, squeeze them together 25 times, holding each squeeze for 1 second.
OUTER THIGH TIGHTENER 15.
Cross the ankles, then try to pull the legs apart.
Repeat 30 times, holding each contraction for 1 second.
Repeat 30 times with the other foot on top.
OUTER THIGH STREAMLINER 16.
Lying on your side with lower leg bent, raise the top leg.
With foot pointed do 30 mini raises.
Repeat twice on each side.
LEG AND HIP STRETCH 17.
Swing the top leg forwards and backwards 10 times each way.
Proceed to exercise 18 and 19.
BOTTOM AND THIGH STREAMLINER 18.
Extend the top leg forwards as far as possible and then stretch it forwards and back 30 times, moving it about 3ins (7.6cm) each time.
FRONT THIGH STRETCH 19.
Take hold of your top leg by the ankle and pull back the leg as far as possible without straining.
Repeat 5 times, holding each pull for 1 second.
Relax.
Roll over and repeat the last 3 exercises on the other side: Leg and Hip Stretch x 10 each way; Bottom and Thigh Streamliner x 30; Front Thigh Stretch x 5
THIGH STREAMLINER 20.
Sitting as shown, raise the extended leg 6ins (15cm).
Point the toes and raise the leg a fraction higher 15 times, holding each raise for 1 second.
Repeat to the other side.
THE COOL DOWN Repeat all today's exercises (except the aerobics), holding each position for just 2 counts.
Do the postures in graceful slow motion, with each exercise leading into the next.
Feel a sense of grace, elegance and beauty flow over you as you perform them.
Positive thought for the day
This morning we talked about setting goals.
I would like to suggest that you take a piece of paper and rule it as follows (see table on page 184), including the headings Short Term, Long Term and Ultimate Goals, and separating them into two sections — Tangible and Intangible.
Within each section add a couple of columns, heading the first one Target Date and the second, Date Achieved.
Target Date can be a specific date or as general as just the month or year in which you hope that goal will be achieved.
The Date Achieved is filled in only after you have reached your goal.
It doesn't matter if it is after the Target Date.
The important factor is you did it.
You don't have to show your master plan to anyone, but if you complete and update it periodically you will achieve so much more.
If we want to do something badly enough and set about it seriously it is staggering how much help just seems to fall our way.
So be bold in your plans and even if you don't accomplish them all, those you do achieve are probably far more than you ever dreamed possible anyway!
DAY 17
Did you give some serious thought to your goals?
Don't worry if you couldn't think of many.
It is fine to start off with just one or two very straightforward ones such as‘have my hair restyled’ or ‘buy a new dress’and perhaps ‘take a holiday abroad next year’.
As the days go by open your mind to what is going on around you — what are other people's goals?
It is always wise to look towards those who inspire and impress you.
Are you happy in your job?
Could it be better?
How can you improve the way things are?
Approach it one step at a time — just as you are reducing your weight and inches.
You are going to reach your weight and inch target, and when you do, unless you have another goal to aim for, you may well let your fitness campaign relax and fall back into old habits.
Start thinking about new physical activities you could try.
MENU
BREAKFAST
HOME-MADE MUESLI (see recipe, page 157) OR PINEAPPLE BOAT (see recipe, page 159)
LUNCH
4oz (100g) chopped chicken or turkey breast, mixed with plain yogurt into which 1 teaspoon curry powder has been stirred.
Serve with 3 oz (75g)[cooked weight]cold boiled brown rice, plus an orange OR 6oz (150g) jacket potato topped with chopped peppers and onion, mixed with 2 oz (50g) cottage cheese, plus a diet yogurt
DINNER
Steamed, microwaved or grilled trout, stuffed with prawns and served with unlimited potatoes and other vegetables, plus 2 oz (50g) iced yogurt (e.g. Weight Watchers) OR STUFFED PEPPERS (see recipe, page 162) served with unlimited potatoes and other vegetables PLUS RASPBERRY MOUSSE (see recipe, page 160)
WARM-UP WAIST STRETCH 1.
Interlink hands and stretch up, tilting the pelvis.
Hold for 5 counts.
2.
Stretch over to the left — hold for 10 counts.
3.
Stretch over to the right —hold for 10 counts.
Relax.
SKI STRETCH 4.
Stretch up high.
5.
Ski down.
Return to the starting position and repeat 10 times.
AEROBICS: WALKING JOG/JOG 6.
Do 20 walking jogs, raising the arms up and down.
Then jog properly for as long as possible.
Record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED....
TIMES
AEROBICS: SKIPPING A STEP 7.
Skip with your legs crossing over, and kick them as high as possible to each side.
Swing your arms the opposite way to your legs.
Repeat as many times as you can and record the number of steps.
TOTAL STEPS TODAY....
BUST THRUST 8.
Thrust your elbows back at shoulder level 20 times, holding in the extreme thrust position for 1 second between each repetition.
BUST AND ARM LIFTER 9.
Pull your arms back towards each other 35 times, with palms facing upwards.
BUST TONER 10.
Sitting with legs outstretched, take hold of your calves with both hands and squeeze them together.
Repeat 25 times, holding each contraction for 1 second.
TUMMY TONING TWIST 11.
Lie down with hands at either side of your head, knees bent and raised and ankles crossed.
Lift one elbow to touch the opposite knee.
Return to the lying position and repeat with the same elbow.
Repeat to the other side, then repeat ‘double lifts’ 4 more times to each side.
TUMMY RELAX 12.
Relax your tummy muscles by holding your knees close to your chest and rock from side to side.
TUMMY PULL 13.
Lift the knees towards the chest.
Raise the elbows, head and shoulders towards the knees and hold up for 5 counts.
Repeat 3 more times and hold up for 10 counts each time.
TUMMY AND DOUBLE CHIN ELIMINATOR 14.
Lying on your tummy with elbows pointing outwards, raise your head and shoulders.
Point the chin upwards and hold for 5 counts.
Then extend the lower teeth outside the upper set and hold.
Relax and repeat 4 times, holding up for 5 counts each time.
SPINE AND LEG STRETCHER 15.
Sitting with legs apart, stretch up, then twist at the waist and lower the hands and body towards one leg.
Gently stretch forwards for 25 counts, holding each stretch for 1 second.
Relax, return to the starting position and repeat to the other side.
HIP AND THIGH EXTENDER 16.
Lying as shown, flex the foot and swing the top leg forwards and backwards 5 times.
Swing the leg forwards and lift it up and down 30 times.
FRONT THIGH STRETCH 17.
Take hold of your top leg by the ankle and pull back the leg as far as possible without straining.
Repeat 5 times, holding each pull for 1 second.
Roll over and repeat the last 2 exercises on the other side: Hip and Thigh Extender x 30; Front Thigh Stretch x 5
BOTTOM TONER 18.
Sit as shown.
Leaning over for balance, take hold of your front ankle and raise the back leg.
Move it forwards and back a few inches, 35 times.
Relax and repeat to the other side.
INNER THIGH TONE-UP 19.
With soles of the feet together, pull your feet in and at the same time push down with your knees.
Repeat 30 times, holding each repetition for 1 second.
Do not strain.
THE COOL DOWN Repeat all today's exercises (excluding the aerobics) just once, holding each position for 2 counts.
Feel slim and graceful as you do them.
Afterwards lie down and relax for a few moments.
Positive thought for the day
I hope your mind has been working in an expansive way and that you have thought more about your future.
Before I became involved in business, I really had very few goals — with the result that I didn't get very far.
Then suddenly I got a bit more confidence, I felt better about my weight, my husband encouraged me as I started out in various career directions, and goals actually began to emerge.
It is quite incredible what has happened in my life — the help that has just seemed to come, the opportunities that have arisen, doors that have opened in all directions and, if occasionally one closed, it didn't matter because it always meant a better one would open later.
So don't ever dismiss anything as impossible.
Even if you try at something and fail the first time, have another go.
You have a much better chance of success next time because you will have learnt from your previous experience.
If you have a positive attitude to life you will get there in the end.
DAY 18
Are you feeling slimmer each day or do you feel things have slowed up?
Inevitably, once we have established ourselves into a new way of eating, progress does seem a little slower.
I do hope you took a photograph of yourself before you started.
If you look back at it you will see what a transformation has already taken place.
And whenever you wonder whether this regime is still working, just consult your Weight and Inch Loss Record Chart.
It is very strange that the slimmer we get the more critical we become of our body, often exclaiming, ‘but I've still got a big waist/tummy/hips/bottom!’
Even those who slim right down to their goal weight will always find parts they wish were even slimmer!
MENU
BREAKFAST
3 slices of light bread (Nimble or Slimcea) spread with 4 teaspoons jam or marmalade OR 8oz (200g) grapes, washed and pipped, served on 1/2 honeydew melon
LUNCH
1lb (400g) any fresh fruit of your choice, plus a diet yogurt OR 4oz (100g) red kidney beans, 4oz (100g) sweetcorn, chopped cucumber, tomatoes and spring onions tossed in mint sauce, mixed with natural yogurt and served on a bed of lettuce, plus 1/2 fresh grapefruit
DINNER
4 oz (100g) gammon steak (all fat removed) with a slice of pineapple, and 4oz (100g) potatoes and unlimited other vegetables PLUS AUTUMN PUDDING (see recipe, page 154) OR CHICKPEA AND FENNEL CASSEROLE (see recipe, page 156), plus 1 banana sliced lengthways, filled with 4oz (100g) frozen raspberries or blackcurrants and topped with diet yogurt     
WARM-UP STRETCH 1.
Stretch up 30 times, 15 times with each hand.
SKI STRETCH 2.
Stretch up high.
3.
Ski down.
Return to the starting position and repeat 15 times.
AEROBICS: WALKING JOG/JOG 4.
Do 20 walking jogs, raising the arms up and down.
Then jog properly for as long as possible.
Record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED....
TIMES
AEROBICS: FORWARD AND BACKWARD JOGGING 5.
Gently jog forwards and backwards, transferring your weight from one leg to the other.
Do an equal number of steps with each leg in front and record them here.
TODAY I JOGGED....
TIMES
AEROBICS: JOGGING ARMS IN AND OUT 6.
Jogging on the spot, bring your arms in and out with each step.
Record the number of steps.
TODAY I DID....
STEPS
WAIST WHITTLER 7.
Starting with arms outstretched, curve the body sideways, bringing the upper arm up and over as far as possible.
Hold for 1 second in this extreme position.
Push and stretch the arm a little further for 25 counts.
Relax forwards, return to the starting position and repeat to the other side.
ARM AND BUST UPLIFT 8.
With hands clasped behind and palms facing inwards, raise the arms 35 times, aiming slightly higher with each count.
BUST TONER 9.
Sitting with legs outstretched, take hold of your calves with both hands and squeeze them together.
Repeat 30 times, holding each contraction for 1 second.
TUMMY FLATTENER 10.
Lying down with knees bent, raise the elbows, head and shoulders, bringing your chin as close to your chest as possible.
Gently pull the body forwards 15 times.
Relax and repeat.
TUMMY CYCLE 11.
Cycle backwards 30 times, then relax by cuddling your knees.
TUMMY MINIMISER 12.
Lying on your back, first bend the knees then straighten the legs.
13.
Curl your toes back, then raise the arms towards the toes, lifting the head and shoulders off the floor as far as possible.
Stretch up gently for 15 counts, pulling up a little further with each count.
Relax by cuddling your knees, then repeat.
MIDRIFF STRETCH 14.
Lying on your tummy, raise your head and shoulders, curving your spine, inch by inch.
Hold still for 20 counts.
To tone the chin and neck area, stretch your chin up as you do the exercise.
LEG AND THIGH STRETCH 15.
Sit up with one leg extended forwards and the other leg bent.
Stretch arms up high, then slowly lean forwards as far as you can without straining.
Gently stretch forwards for 25 counts.
Straighten up slowly, then repeat with the other leg in front.
INNER THIGH AND KNEE TIGHTENER 16.
Extend both legs forwards and squeeze them together 30 times, holding each squeeze for 1 second.
OUTER THIGH TIGHTENER 17.
Cross the ankles, then try to pull the legs apart.
Repeat 30 times, holding each contraction for 1 second.
Repeat 30 times with the other foot on top.
LEG AND HIP STRETCH 18.
Lie on your side with lower leg bent.
Swing top leg forwards and backwards 10 times each way.
BOTTOM AND THIGH STREAMLINER 19.
Extend the top leg forwards as far as possible and then stretch it forwards and back 30 times, moving it about 3 ins (7.6cm) each time.
FRONT THIGH STRETCH 20.
Take hold of your top leg by the ankle and pull back the leg as far as possible without straining.
Repeat 5 times, holding each pull for 1 second.
Roll over and repeat the last 3 exercises on the other side: Leg and Hip Stretch x 10 each way; Bottom and Thigh Streamliner x 30; Front Thigh Stretch x 5
THIGH STREAMLINER 21.
Sitting as shown, raise the extended leg 6ins (15cm).
With toes pointed, raise the leg a fraction higher 20 times, holding each raise for 1 second.
Repeat to the other side.
THE COOL DOWN Repeat all today's exercises (excluding the aerobics) just once, holding each position for 2 counts.
Feel elegant and poised as you do them.
Afterwards lie down and relax for a short while.
Positive thought for the day
If you are invited out to dinner and feel reluctant to accept because of your diet, don't even hesitate.
Just select carefully from the menu.
Try to avoid the high fat Indian-type meal and also Italian food, which tends to have a very high calorie and fat content.
I adore eating out and always choose something different from my normal home-made menus.
I often order fish and ask for it to be cooked without fat and for any rice or potatoes to be fat-free too.
I choose a light starter such as melon cocktail or consommé and for dessert, select something fruity but special, such as oranges in Cointreau, but avoiding the cream!
I might eat a bread roll without the butter while I wait for the meal to arrive, and slimline or diet drinks act as a wonderful filler.
I don't start drinking wine until after I have had something to eat in case the alcohol affects my willpower!
Also, I make my two glasses of wine go further by adding sparkling mineral water.
Lifting a glass during a meal is important psychologically but too much wine would be a disaster.
So turn an invitation into a wonderful treat and enjoy it!
DAY 19
Only two days to go before you complete your third week of this Inch Loss Plan.
Do you feel really determined to reach the end of this programme?
If you do it will be the first fulfilment of a real goal — the first one of many!
Not only will you feel a sense of achievement but you will have re-educated your way of eating and the way you think about yourself.
And you will look so much better — slimmer, fitter, healthier, with more confidence and vitality — all wonderful improvements in your life.
But life (and particularly slimming) is never plain sailing.
There will be times when our good intentions fail miserably and we feel very disillusioned.
This is normal !
If everything we attempted succeeded first time, what challenges would be left?
Even if you do cheat and eat something you shouldn't, it doesn't mean that you have failed on the Inch Loss Plan.
Far from it.
All it means is that you will take slightly longer to achieve your goal — that's all!
MENU
BREAKFAST
1/2 fresh grapefruit and 2 oz (50g) lean ham (all fat removed) served with a little mustard, 2 fresh tomatoes and 1 oz (25g) fresh bread OR 5 prunes in natural juice served with 1/2oz (12.5g) Branflakes
LUNCH
4 brown Ryvitas spread with Branston pickle, topped with 2 oz (50g) chicken or turkey and served with salad, plus 4 oz (100g) any fruit OR 4 x 5 oz (125g) diet yogurts, plus a piece of any fresh fruit
DINNER
FISH PIE (see recipe, page 157) served with unlimited vegetables, plus 4oz (100g) peaches or any canned fruit (tinned in natural juice), and a diet yogurt OR STUFFED MARROW (see recipe, page 162) served with unlimited vegetables, plus 8oz (200g) stewed fruit (no sugar) topped with a low fat fromage frais 
WARM-UP STRETCH 1.
Stretch up 30 times, 15 times with each hand.
WARM-UP WAIST STRETCH 2.
Interlink hands and stretch up, tilting the pelvis.
Hold for 5 counts.
3.
Stretch over to the left-hold for 10 counts.
4.
Stretch over to the right — hold for 10 counts.
Relax.
AEROBICS: JOGGING ARMS IN AND OUT 5.
Jogging on the  spot, bring your arms in and out with each step.
Record the number of steps.
TODAY I DID....
STEPS
AEROBICS: SIDEWAYS JOG 6.
Jog with legs swinging from side to side.
Let your arms swing with you.
Continue for as long as possible and record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED SIDEWAYS....
TIMES
AEROBICS: SKIPPING A STEP 7.
Skip, crossing over legs in front and kicking them as high as possible to either side.
Let your arms swing the opposite way to your legs.
Do as many as you can and record your steps.
TOTAL STEPS TODAY....
ARM AND BUST UPLIFT 8.
With hands clasped behind and palms facing inwards, raise the arms 35 times, lifting them slightly higher with each count.
BUST AND ARM LIFTER 9.
Pull your arms back towards each other 35 times, with palms facing upwards.
TUMMY TONING TWIST 10.
Lying down with hands at either side of your head, raise your knees and cross the ankles.
Lift one elbow to touch the opposite knee.
Return to the lying position and repeat with the same elbow.
Repeat to the other side then repeat ‘double lifts’ 4 more times to each side.
TUMMY AND DOUBLE CHIN ELIMINATOR 11.
Lying on your tummy, raise your head and shoulders.
Point the chin upwards and hold for 5 counts.
Extend the lower teeth outside the upper set and hold.
Relax and repeat 4 times, holding up for 5 counts each time.
TUMMY PULL 12.
Lying on your back, lift the knees towards the chest.
Raise the elbows, head and shoulders towards the knees and hold for 5 counts.
Relax and repeat 4 more times, holding for 5 counts each time.
BACK LEG STRETCH 13.
Sitting as shown, pull the head and shoulders down towards the knees.
Gently stretch forwards for 35 counts, holding each stretch for 1 second.
INNER THIGH AND KNEE TIGHTENER 14.
Place your hands on your lower thighs and squeeze the legs together 30 times, holding each squeeze for 1 second.
OUTER THIGH TIGHTENER 15.
Cross the ankles, then try to pull the legs apart.
Repeat 30 times, holding each contraction for 1 second.
Repeat with the other foot on top.
INNER THIGH TONE-UP 16.
With soles of the feet together, pull your feet in and at the same time push down with your knees.
Repeat 30 times, holding each repetition for 1 second.
Do not strain.
OUTER THIGH STREAMLINER 17.
Lie on your side and bend the lower leg.
With foot pointed, raise the top leg and do 30 mini raises.
Repeat on the other side, then repeat again on both sides.
BOTTOM AND THIGH STREAMLINER 18.
Extend the top leg forwards as far as possible and then stretch it forwards and back 35 times, moving it about 3ins (7.6cm) each time.
FRONT THIGH STRETCH 19.
Take hold of your top leg by the ankle and pull back the leg as far as possible without straining.
Repeat 5 times, holding each pull for 1 second.
Roll over and repeat the last 2 exercises on the other side: Bottom and Thigh Streamliner x 35; Front Thigh Stretch x 5
BOTTOM TONER 20.
Sit as shown.
Leaning over for balance, take hold of your front ankle and raise the back leg.
Move it forwards and back 35 times.
Relax and repeat to the other side.
THE COOL DOWN Repeat all today's exercises (excluding the aerobics) just once, holding each position for 2 counts.
As you do them, realise how good you feel.
Afterwards lie down and relax for a few moments.
Positive thought for the day
I hope you are pleasantly surprised at how much further you are now able to stretch compared with the early days of the programme.
The body is very cooperative in becoming more supple quite quickly if we practise stretching postures regularly.
I am certain that by now you will be able to see a significant improvement to your body.
Look for the muscle tone,feel the muscles as you perform the exercises.
On the first day I doubt whether you could feel them at all!
Carrying on from this morning's thoughts about the occasional slip whilst following the programme, we should also realise that this will happen as we attempt to achieve our other goals in life.
We will find ourselves missing golden opportunities, getting ourselves involved in time-consuming, time-wasting activities which distract us from our main goals.
Don't worry about this but learn from it.
So long as we learn something from every mistake we make, time hasn't been wasted.
DAY 20
Yesterday we talked about the odd lapse in our good intentions to be a saintly slimmer, and also that occasionally our best intentions to achieve a goal are stifled — sometimes through our own wrong judgement but more often by getting involved in time-wasting, non-productive activities.
Beware of finding yourself volunteering for all kinds of jobs that you don't want to do.
I am not suggesting that you should be totally selfish, but people will put on those who can't say ‘no’ when they need a helping hand.
I am not suggesting that on occasions it is not totally appropriate to go and help someone — children particularly appreciate a parent's involvement in a variety of projects.
Husbands and wives also appreciate their partner's assistance when it's appropriate.
Hopefully, those closest to us have goals as well and I am sure we are all anxious to help them achieve them.
Remember that it's weighing and measuring day the day after tomorrow, so please be super-good today!
MENU
BREAKFAST
1 whole  grapefruit with 5oz (125g) diet yogurt and a banana OR 4 oz (100g) baked beans and 4 oz (100g) tinned tomatoes on 1 slice of wholemeal toast
LUNCH
1 slimmers' cup-a-soup with a bread roll and a diet yogurt OR 4 brown Ryvitas thinly spread with low fat soft cheese and topped with sliced tomatoes, cucumber and finely chopped lettuce
DINNER
STIR-FRIED CHICKEN AND VEGETABLES (see recipe, page 161) but serve without rice PLUS PEARS IN RED WINE (see recipe, page 159) OR OVEN CHIPS (see recipe, page 159) served with dry-fried egg; broccoli and carrots plus 6oz (150g) fresh fruit salad    
WARM-UP STRETCH 1.
Stretch up 30 times with alternate hands.
AEROBICS: WALKING JOG/JOG 2.
Do 20 walking jogs, raising the arms up and down.
Then jog properly for as long as possible.
Record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED....
TIMES
AEROBICS: FORWARD AND BACKWARD JOGGING 3.
Gently jog forwards and backwards as before.
Do as many as you can with one leg in front.
Change and repeat with the other leg in front.
Record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED....
STEPS EACH WAY
AEROBICS: SKIPPING A STEP 4.
Skip with legs crossing over In front and arms swinging in opposite direction.
Do as many as you can and record the number of steps.
TOTAL STEPS TODAY....
BUST THRUST 5.
Thrust your elbows back at shoulder level 20 times, holding in the extreme thrust position for 1 second between each repetition.
BUST TONER 6.
Sitting with legs outstretched, take hold of your calves with both hands and squeeze them together.
Repeat 30 times, holding each contraction for 1 second.
BUST AND ARM LIFTER 7.
Pull your arms back towards each other 35 times, with palms facing upwards.
WAIST WHITTLER 8.
Start with arms outstretched and curve sideways, bringing the arm up and over as far as possible.
Hold for 1 second in that extreme position, then push and stretch a little further for a count of 25.
Relax forwards, then straighten up and repeat to the other side.
TUMMY FLATTENER 9.
Lying as shown raise the elbows head and shoulders, bringing your chin towards your chest.
Gently pull the body forwards 20 times.
Relax and repeat.
TUMMY RELAX 10.
Relax your tummy muscles by holding your knees close to your chest and rock from side to side.
TUMMY TONING TWIST 11.
Still lying on the floor, raise your knees and cross the ankles.
Lift one elbow to touch the opposite knee.
Return to the lying position and repeat with the same elbow.
Repeat to the other side, then repeat ‘double lifts’ 4 more times to each side.
TUMMY MINIMISER 12.
Start as before, bending the knees then straightening the legs.
13.
Curl your toes back.
Raise the arms towards the toes, lifting the head and shoulders off the floor.
Gently stretch upwards for 10 counts.
Relax the tummy muscles, then repeat, this time stretching up for 15 counts.
MIDRIFF STRETCH 14.
Lying on your tummy, raise your head and shoulders, curving your spine, inch by inch.
Hold still for 20 counts.
To tone the chin and neck area, stretch you chin up as you do the exercise.
SPINE AND LEG STRETCHER 15.
Sitting with legs apart, stretch up, then twist at the waist and lower the hands and body towards one leg.
Gently stretch forwards for 30 counts, holding each stretch for 1 second.
Relax, return to the starting position and repeat to the other side.
OUTER THIGH STREAMLINER 16.
Lie on your side and bend the lower leg.
With foot pointed, raise the top leg and do 30 mini raises.
Repeat on the other side, then repeat again on both sides.
HIP AND THIGH EXTENDER 17.
Flex the foot and swing the leg forwards and backwards 5 times.
Swing the leg forwards and lift it up and down a few inches, 25 times, holding each raise for 1 second.
FRONT THIGH STRETCH 18.
Take hold of your top leg by the ankle and pull back the leg as far as possible without straining.
Repeat 5 times, holding each pull for 1 second.
Roll over and repeat the last 2 exercises on the other side: Hip and Thigh Extender x 35; Front Thigh Stretch x 5
BOTTOM TONER 19.
Sit as shown.
Leaning over for balance, take hold of your front ankle and raise the back leg.
Move it forwards and back a few inches, 35 times.
Relax and repeat to the other side.
INNER THIGH TONER 20.
With soles of the feet together, pull your feet in and at the same time push down with your knees.
Repeat 30 times, holding each repetition for 1 second.
Do not strain.
THE COOL DOWN Repeat all today's exercises (except the aerobics) just once, holding each position for 2 counts.
Feel a sense of harmony and beauty as you do them.
Then relax for a few moments.
Positive thought for the day
Earlier today we touched on the fact that other members of your family may also have goals.
If you and they are to succeed, these goals must not be conflicting.
There is little point in you setting your heart on sailing single-handed round the world if your other half is totally opposed to the idea!
But seriously, you do need the cooperation of your family if you are aiming for something very ambitious because we all need support and encouragement when things get tough.
Equally, the joy that can be experienced together in achieving our goals Is Immeasurable.
You will find qualities in each other you didn't know existed.
One more day to go before the end of Week 3.
The exercises are getting tougher and the additional repetitions are enabling your body to become more and more attractive.
By now I hope that you are accustomed to the pattern of eating, and are finding the variety and quantities adequate to satisfy your taste buds and appetite.
Remember to be as active as possible tomorrow.
Tomorrow's main meal will be at lunchtime again so please try to prepare for it today.
DAY 21
The last day of Week 3 — did you wonder whether you would ever get this far?
Today is particularly important because it marks the three-quarter stage of a very significant goal achievement.
Have you decided what your next main goal will be?
Start thinking about it seriously because in just 7 days you will be free to concentrate fully on it.
You may still want to lose more weight and inches, and your top priority may be to achieve a much slimmer body than you have so far.
That's fine, but you now know this will happen, and you know how to do it — just by carrying on with this Inch Loss Plan diet and the Maintenance Exercise Programme which will have the effect of continually improving your shape.
So busy yourself today and remember, making a really special effort today could mean even more success with the tape measure and the scales tomorrow morning.
So stick with it and please don't cheat once today!
MENU
BREAKFAST
8oz (200g) tinned tomatoes and 4 oz (100g) baked beans on 1 oz (25g) wholemeal toast OR 2 bananas mashed with a 5 oz (125g) raspberry diet yogurt
LUNCH
6oz (150g) lamb's liver braised in onions, 2 oz (50g) potatoes and unlimited vegetables, plus 8 oz (200g) fresh fruit OR SPICED BEAN CASSEROLE (see recipe, page 161), plus 4oz (100g) fresh fruit and a 5 oz (125g) diet yogurt SUPPER 4oz (100g) chicken served with a large salad and dressed with soy sauce, plus a pear and a banana OR 6oz (150g) jacket potato topped with 3 oz (75g) cottage cheese mixed with herbs and 2 oz (50g) sweetcorn PLUS BAKED STUFFED APPLE (see recipe, page 154)
SKI STRETCH 1.
Stretch up high.
2.
Ski down.
Return to the starting position and repeat 15 times.
WAIST WHITTLER 3.
Start with arms outstretched and curve sideways, bringing the arm up and over as far as possible.
Hold for 1 second.
Push and stretch a little further for a count of 25.
Relax forwards, then straighten up and repeat to the other side.
AEROBICS: JOGGING ARMS IN AND OUT 4.
Jog on the spot, bringing your arms in and out with each step.
Record the number of steps.
TOTAL STEPS TODAY....
AEROBICS: SIDEWAYS JOG 5.
Jog with legs swinging from side to side.
Let your arms swing with you.
Continue for as long as possible and record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED SIDEWAYS....
TIMES
ARM AND BUST UPLIFT 6.
With hands clasped behind and palms facing inwards, raise the arms 35 times, lifting them slightly higher with each count.
BUST TONER 7.
Sitting with legs outstretched, take hold of your calves with both hands and squeeze them together.
Repeat 30 times, holding each contraction for 1 second.
TUMMY PULL 8.
Lying as shown, raise the elbows head and shoulders towards the knees and hold up for 5 counts.
Repeat 3 more times and hold up for 10 counts each time.
TUMMY CYCLE 9.
Cycle backwards 30 times, then relax by cuddling your knees.
TUMMY AND DOUBLE CHIN ELIMINATOR 10.
Lying on your tummy, raise your head and shoulders.
Point the chin upwards and hold for 5 counts.
Extend the lower teeth outside the upper set and hold.
Relax and repeat 4 times, holding up for 5 counts each time.
INNER THIGH AND KNEE TIGHTENER 11.
Sit up with legs outstretched.
Squeeze the legs together 30 times, holding each squeeze for 1 second.
OUTER THIGH TIGHTENER 12.
Cross the ankles, then try to pull the legs apart.
Repeat 30 times, holding each contraction for 1 second.
Repeat 30 times with the other foot on top.
SPINE AND LEG STRETCHER 13.
Sitting with legs apart, stretch up, then twist at the waist and lower the hands and body towards one leg.
Gently stretch forwards for 30 counts, holding each stretch for 1 second.
Relax, return to the starting position and repeat to the other side.
LEG AND THIGH STRETCH 14.
Sit with one leg extended forwards and the other leg bent.
Stretch arms up high, then slowly lean forwards as far as you can without straining.
From here gently stretch forwards for 25 counts.
Straighten up slowly, then repeat with the other leg in front.
OUTER THIGH STREAMLINER 15.
Lie on your side and bend the lower leg.
With foot pointed, raise the top leg and do 30 mini raises.
Repeat on the other side, then repeat again on both sides.
LEG AND HIP STRETCH 16.
Swing the top leg forwards and backwards 10 times each way.
BOTTOM AND THIGH STREAMLINER 17.
Extend the top leg forwards as far as possible and then stretch it forwards and back 35 times, moving it 3ins (7.6cm) each time.
FRONT THIGH STRETCH 18.
Take hold of your top leg by the ankle and pull back the leg as far as possible without straining.
Repeat 5 times, holding each pull for 1 second.
Roll over and repeat the last 3 exercises on the other side: Leg and Hip Stretch x 10 each way; Bottom and Thigh Streamliner x 35; Front Thigh Stretch x 5
THIGH STREAMLINER 19.
Sitting as shown, raise the extended leg 6ins (15cm) and point the toes.
From here raise the leg up and down slightly 15 times, holding each raise for 1 second.
Repeat to the other side.
THE COOL DOWN Repeat all today's exercises (excluding the aerobics) just once, holding each position for 2 counts.
Feel slim, graceful and elegant as you do them.
Afterwards lie down and rest for a few moments.
Positive thought for the day
Previously we talked about the need to want your goal — whatever that goal might be — badly enough.
In other words are you prepared to be totally persistent?
Persistence is a wonderful thing.
Mike and I have three cats, a mother cat and her two sons — Oscar and Harry.
Oscar is quite slim and small, but is very streetwise.
Nothing frightens him.
He will even attempt to take bones out of the mouths of our two German Shepherd dogs, Nikki and Sheba.
He never takes ‘no’ for an answer.
He knows exactly what he wants and goes for it — no matter what!
When a neighbour's dog visited us one day, the other two cats ran away immediately.
But Oscar just stood there!
The visiting dog was so amazed, he walked off and left Oscar alone.
If you have persistence and courage, you can't fail to win and Oscar is one of the most convincing winners I have ever met.
Please be strong tonight — don't give in to temptation.
It is measuring day tomorrow.
Best of luck!
DAY 22
Did you look good when you looked in the mirror this morning?
After visiting the bathroom, please measure yourself before eating or drinking anything.
Then weigh yourself and record your progress.
I have designed a special celebration menu for you today.
Spoil yourself with an extra drink if you wish.
At each mealtime eat enough to satisfy your appetite, even if it means having second helpings of vegetables.
Better to do that, than being tempted by biscuits or sweets later.
Make a special effort with your appearance today and consider discarding any clothing that is unflattering to your shape because from now on you are going to be slim .
MENU
BREAKFAST
1 oz (25g) lean ham (all fat removed) served with 2 tomatoes and 1 wholemeal roll OR 1 oz (25g) any cereal and 4 oz (100g) sliced fruit of your choice, served with milk from allowance
LUNCH
4 slices of light bread (e.g. Nimble or Slimcea) spread with SEAFOOD DRESSING (see recipe, page 161) salad and 4oz (100g) prawns, plus 3 oz (75g) diet fromage frais OR Large bowl (10 fl oz)[250ml]vegetable soup and a wholemeal bap, plus a 5 oz (125g) diet yogurt
DINNER
SPAGHETTI BOLOGNESE(see recipe, page 161) PLUS PINEAPPLE BOAT (see recipe, page 159) OR VEGETARIAN SPAGHETTI BOLOGNESE (see recipe, page 163) PLUS OATY YOGURT DESSERT (see recipe, page 158)
Plus an extra glass of wine to celebrate completion of your third week! 13.
Curl your toes back.
Raise your arms towards the toes, lifting the head and shoulders off the floor.
Gently stretch upwards for 15 counts.
Relax the tummy muscles, then repeat.
WARM-UP STRETCH 1.
Stretch up 30 times with alternate hands.
WARM-UP WAIST STRETCH 2.
Interlink hands and stretch up, tilting the pelvis.
Hold for 5 counts.
3.
Stretch over to the left — hold for 10 counts 4.
Stretch over to the right — hold for 10 counts.
Relax.
AEROBICS: WALKING JOG/JOG 5.
Do 20 walking jogs, raising the arms up and down.
Then jog properly for as long as possible.
Record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED....
TIMES
AEROBICS: FORWARD AND BACKWARD JOGGING 6.
Gently jog forwards and backwards as before.
Do as many as you can with one leg in front.
Change and repeat with the other leg in front.
Record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED....
STEPS EACH WAY
AEROBICS: JOGGING ARMS IN AND OUT 7.
Jog on the spot, bringing your arms in and out with each step.
Record the number of steps.
TOTAL STEPS TODAY....
ARM AND BUST UPLIFT 8.
With hands clasped behind and palms facing inwards, raise the arms 35 times, aiming them slightly higher with each count.
BUST TONER 9.
Sitting with legs outstretched, take hold of your calves with both hands and squeeze them together.
Repeat 20 times, holding each contraction for 1 second.
TUMMY FLATTENER 10.
Lying as shown, raise the elbows, head and shoulders, bringing your chin as close to your chest as possible.
Gently pull the body forwards 20 times.
Relax and repeat.
TUMMY RELAX 11.
Relax your tummy muscles by holding your knees close to your chest and rock from side to side.
TUMMY MINIMISER 12.
Start as before, first bending the knees, then straightening the legs.
MIDRIFF STRETCH 14.
Lying on your tummy, raise your head and shoulders, curving your spine, inch by inch.
Hold still for 20 counts.
To tone the chin and neck area, stretch your chin up as you do the exercise.
BACK LEG STRETCH 15.
Sitting as shown, pull the head and shoulders down towards the knees.
Stretch forwards for 35 counts, holding each stretch for 1 second.
OUTER THIGH STREAMLINER 16.
Lie on your side and bend the lower leg.
With foot pointed, raise the top leg and do 30 mini raises.
Repeat on the other side, then repeat again on both sides.
HIP AND THIGH EXTENDER 17.
Flex the foot and swing the leg forwards and backwards 5 times.
Swing the leg forwards and lift it up and down a few inches, 30 times, holding each raise for 1 second.
FRONT THIGH STRETCH 18.
Take hold of your top leg by the ankle and pull back the leg as far as possible without straining.
Repeat 5 times, holding each pull for 1 second.
Roll over and repeat the last 2 exercises on the other side: Hip and Thigh Extender x 30; Front Thigh Stretch x 5
BOTTOM TONER 19.
Sit as shown.
Leaning over for balance, take hold of your front ankle and raise the back leg.
Move it forwards and back a few inches, 35 times.
Relax and repeat to the other side.
INNER THIGH TONE-UP 20.
Sitting with soles of the feet together, pull your feet in and at the same time push down with your knees.
Repeat 30 times, holding each repetition for 1 second.
Do not strain.
THE COOL DOWN Repeat all today's exercises (excluding the aerobics) just once, holding each position for 2 counts.
Feel a sense of wellbeing and control as you do them.
Then lie down and relax.
Positive thought for the day
Have you enjoyed your special day or didn't anyone notice your terrific new image?
Just because no one said anything doesn't mean that you went unnoticed.
People can be very shy about giving compliments.
While it is true that we shouldn't ‘show off’ our new slim figure, there's nothing wrong in making the most of it.
Complimenting people is a real pleasure — as much for the recipient as for the person giving it.
When did you last tell your partner that you find him or her very attractive?
That you still fancy him or her.
That you really love them.
That you appreciate all that they do for you, their consideration, their thoughtfulness, etc.
I have no doubt there are many things you wish they didn't do, or were not, but there must be some good points!
If there are, say which they are instead of pointing out only the faults.
This also applies to children, employees and even employers.
No one is above a compliment.
Try it and see what happens.
I promise it will make for a more positive atmosphere around you.
DAY 23
I would like you to consciously attempt to reduce the negative elements in your life.
I have often described this philosophy as preparing a garden full of flowers by removing all the weeds .
This has the effect of eliminating from our daily lives all those negative influences, problems and restrictions and replacing them with the seeds of positive plans, happiness and an expansive and creative mind.
There is no doubt that we are influenced by those around us and by our parents throughout our childhood.
Many an adult struggles with their weight because of being persuaded to ‘eat up’ as a child.
In our minds ‘eating everything that is placed in front of us’ is associated with ‘well done, that's a nice clean plate’.
All kinds of conditioning causes us to act in a way that we know is contrary to what we really want.
So try and be strong in your decisions and don't accept past conditioning as being the law'.
MENU
BREAKFAST
3 figs and 5oz (125g) diet yogurt, any flavour OR 1 scrambled egg on 1 oz (25g) toast with 2 grilled tomatoes
LUNCH
4oz (100g) mackerel or tuna (in brine) with a large chopped salad and 2 tablespoons reduced-oil salad dressing, plus a diet yogurt OR 4 Ryvitas spread with low fat soft cheese and topped with low calorie coleslaw and sliced tomatoes, plus a 3 oz (75g) low fat fromage frais 
DINNER
FISH CURRY (see recipe.page 156) served with rice PLUS PEARS IN MERINGUE (see recipe, page 159) OR VEGETABLE CURRY (see recipe, page 162) served with rice PLUS PINEAPPLE IN KIRSCH (see recipe, page 159)
WARM-UP STRETCH 1.
Stretch up 30 times with alternate hands.
AEROBICS: WALKING JOG/JOG 2.
Do 20 walking jogs, raising your arms up and down.
Then jog properly for as long as possible.
Record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED....
TIMES
AEROBICS: SIDEWAYS JOG 3.
Jog with legs swinging from side to side.
Let your arms swing with you.
Continue for as long as possible and record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED SIDEWAYS....
TIMES
AEROBICS: FORWARD AND BACKWARD JOGGING 4.
Gently jog forwards and backwards as before.
Do as many as you can with one leg in front.
Change and repeat with the other leg in front.
Record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED....
STEPS EACH WAY
AEROBICS: SKIPPING A STEP 5.
Skip with legs crossing over as before.
Let your arms swing in the opposite direction.
Repeat as many times as you can and record your steps.
TOTAL STEPS TODAY....
BUST THRUST 6.
With arms bent at shoulder level, thrust your elbows back 20 times holding in the extreme thrust position for 1 second between each repetition.
BUST AND ARM LIFTER 7.
Pull your arms back towards each other 35 times, with palms facing upwards.
WAIST WHITTLER 8.
Starting with arms outstretched, curve the body sideways, bringing the upper arm up and over as far as possible.
Hold for 1 second in this extreme position.
Push and stretch the arms a little further for 25 counts.
Relax the body forwards, return to the starting position and repeat to the other side.
TUMMY PULL 9.
Lying as shown raise the elbows, head and shoulders towards the knees and hold up for 5 counts.
Repeat 4 more times and hold up for 10 counts each time.
TUMMY TONING TWIST 10.
Raise your knees and cross the ankles.
Lift one elbow to touch the opposite knee.
Return to the lying position and repeat with the same elbow.
Repeat to the other side, then repeat ‘double lifts’ 4 more times to each side.
TUMMY CYCLE 11.
Cycle backwards 30 times, then relax by cuddling your knees.
TUMMY AND DOUBLE CHIN ELIMINATOR 12.
Lying on your tummy, raise your head and shoulders.
Point the chin upwards and hold for 5 counts.
Extend the lower teeth outside the upper set and hold.
Relax and repeat 5 times, holding up for 5 counts each time.
INNER THIGH AND TIGHTENER 13.
Sitting up with legs outstretched, squeeze the legs together 30 times, holding each squeeze for 1 second.
OUTER THIGH TIGHTENER 14.
Cross the ankles, then try to pull the legs apart.
Repeat 30 times, holding each contraction for 1 second.
Repeat 30 times with the other foot on top.
LEG AND THIGH STRETCH 15.
With one leg extended forwards and the other leg bent, stretch arms up high, then slowly lean forwards as far as possible without straining.
From here, gently stretch forwards for 25 counts.
Straighten up slowly, then repeat with the other leg in front.
SPINE AND LEG STRETCHER 16.
Sitting with legs apart, stretch up, then twist at the waist and lower hands and body towards one leg.
Gently stretch forwards for 35 counts, holding each stretch for 1 second.
Relax, return to the starting position and repeat to the other side.
OUTER THIGH STREAMLINER 17.
Lie on your side and bend the lower leg.
With foot pointed, raise the top leg and do 30 mini raises.
Repeat on the other side, then repeat again on both sides.
LEG AND HIP STRETCH 18.
Still lying on your side, swing the top leg forwards and backwards 10 times each way.
BOTTOM AND THIGH STREAMLINER 19.
Extend the top leg forwards as far as possible and then stretch it forwards and back 35 times, each time moving it 3ins (7.6cm).
FRONT THIGH STRETCH 20.
Take hold of your top leg by the ankle and pull back the leg as far as possible without straining.
Repeat 5 times, holding each pull for 1 second.
Roll over and repeat the last 3 exercises on the other side: Leg and Hip Stretch x 10 each way; Bottom and Thigh Streamliner x 35; Front Thigh Stretch x 5
INNER THIGH TONE-UP 21.
With soles of the feet together, pull your feet in and at the same time push down with your knees.
Repeat 30 times, holding each repetition for 1 second.
Do not strain.
THE COOL DOWN Repeat all today's exercises (except the aerobics), holding each position for 2 counts.
Feel beautiful, lithe and positive as you do them.
Afterwards, relax for a few moments.
Positive thought for the day
I'd like you to consider removing from your life, one by one, all those things that annoy you, that get you down, that upset you.
If you like your job but can't get on with the people with whom you have to work, consider asking for a transfer to another department.
If your husband has a particular habit that annoys you, tell him about it.
I bet he doesn't even know he's doing it!
Another way to describe these problems is to call them ‘Chinese drip tortures’.
In other words, little things that drive us mad.
If we can remove these little stresses, or ‘weeds’, from our lives it makes such a difference.
But unless we communicate our desires and feelings to those who are involved, how on earth will they know?
What are the ‘weeds’ in your life?
Start making a list and begin eliminating them, one by one.
It's easier than you think.
DAY 24
Are you pleased with your progress so far?
Sometimes it can be slightly embarrassing to be successful at something, and if you are beginning to turn the occasional head now that you are slimmer you may come in for some negative comments from your rivals.
There will always be someone only too eager to criticise your progress.
It is important to protect yourself from such kill-joys.
What we can do is choose our friends and only listen to those whose opinion we totally respect.
There is nothing wrong with criticism when it is constructive.
And remind yourself that you have worked very hard indeed to achieve the success you are now enjoying and you jolly well deserve it.
Having a positive attitude about your progress will ensure you have continued success.
MENU
BREAKFAST
1/2 fresh pineapple, chopped and mixed with 5OZ (125g) pineapple yogurt OR 1 oz (25g) cereal mixed with 5oz (125g) diet yogurt
LUNCH
1 slimmers' cup-a-soup, plus 2 brown Ryvitas spread with 1 dessertspoon Branston pickle and topped with 2 oz (50g) chicken or turkey roll, plus 4oz (100g) fresh fruit OR 4 brown Ryvitas spread with 4oz (100g) low fat cottage cheese and topped with salad, plus a banana
DINNER
FISH KEBABS (see recipe, page 157) PLUS BAKED APPLES WITH APRICOTS (see recipe, page 154) OR GARLIC MUSHROOMS (see recipe, page 157), RATATOUILLE (see recipe, page 160 and 8oz (200g) jacket potato with unlimited other vegetables PLUS RASPBERRY FLUFF (see recipe, page 160)
WARM-UP WAIST STRETCH 1.
Stretching up with hands interlinked, tilt the pelvis and hold for 5 counts.
2.
Stretch over to the left — hold for 10 counts.
3.
Stretch over to the right — hold for 10 counts.
Relax.
SKI STRETCH 4.
Stretch up high.
5.
Ski down.
Return to the starting position and repeat 10 times.
AEROBICS: FORWARD AND BACKWARD JOGGING 6.
Gently jog forwards and backwards as before.
Do as many as you can with one leg in front.
Change and repeat with the other leg in front.
Record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED....
STEPS EACH WAY
AEROBICS: JOGGING ARMS IN AND OUT 7.
Jogging on the spot, bring your arms in and out with each step.
Record the number of steps.
TOTAL STEPS TODAY....
ARM AND BUST UPLIFT 8.
Interlocking hands behind you, raise the arms 35 times, aiming slightly higher with each count.
BUST TONER 9.
Sitting with legs outstretched, take hold of your calves with both hands and squeeze them together.
Repeat 30 times, holding each contraction for 1 second.
TUMMY FLATTENER 10.
Lying down with knees bent, raise the elbows, head and shoulders, bringing your chin as close to your chest as possible.
Gently pull the body forwards 20 times.
Relax and repeat.
TUMMY RELAX 11.
Relax your tummy muscles by holding your knees close to your chest and rock from side to side.
TUMMY TONING TWIST 12.
Raise your knees and cross the ankles.
Lift one elbow to touch the opposite knee.
Return to the lying position and repeat with the same el bow.
Repeat to the other side, then repeat ‘double lifts’ 5 more times to each side.
MIDRIFF STRETCH 13.
Lying on your tummy, raise your head and shoulders, curving your spine, inch by inch.
Hold still for 20 counts.
To tone the chin and neck area, stretch your chin up as you do the exercise.
OUTER THIGH STREAMLINER 14.
Lie on your side and bend the lower leg.
With foot pointed, raise the top leg and do 35 mini raises.
Roll over and repeat on the other side.
Repeat again on both sides, this time with just 30 mini raises on each side.
HIP AND THIGH EXTENDER 15.
Flex the foot and swing the leg forwards and backwards 5 times.
Swing the leg forwards and lift it up and down a few inches, 30 times, holding each raise for 1 second.
Relax the leg and repeat on the other side.
BOTTOM TONER 16.
Sit as shown.
Leaning over for balance, take hold of your front ankle and raise the back leg.
Move it forwards and back a few inches, 30 times.
Relax and repeat to the other side.
THIGH STREAMLINER 17.
Sitting as shown, raise the extended leg 6ins (15cm).
With foot pointed, raise it up and down slightly 30 times, holding each raise for 1 second.
Repeat to the other side.
INNER THIGH TONE-UP 18.
With soles of the feet together, pull your feet in and at the same time push down with your knees.
Repeat 30 times holding each repetition for 1 second.
Do not strain.
BACK LEG STRETCH 19.
Straighten the legs and pull the head and shoulders down towards the knees.
Stretch forwards for 35 counts, holding each stretch for 1 second.
Do not strain.
THE COOL DOWN Repeat all today's exercises (excluding the aerobics), holding each position for 2 counts.
Do the postures continuously, in graceful slow motion with each exercise leading into the next.
Remember to try and feel a sense of poise, elegance and harmony flow over you as you perform them.
Positive thought for the day
As I have said earlier, we all need encouragement and often remarks from the most unexpected quarters are the most gratifying.
Pauline Singleton wrote to me regarding her success on the Hip and Thigh Diet.
She managed to reduce her weight by 1 st 2 lbs (7.2 kg) in 9 weeks to a delightfully slim 8 st 5 lbs (53.2 kg) for her 5 ft 5 ins (1.65 m) height.
Pauline wrote ‘I was thrilled at how quickly and easily the inches melted away.
Other diets left me feeling tired and sickly but on this I feel great.
Neighbours and friends keep telling me I look slim….
I tried to get the book for my sister-in-law for her birthday but most places were sold out.
When I explained this to the assistant she said, ‘Oh, I didn't think the book could be for yourself — you're lovely and slim’.
‘I bet that comment made Pauline's day.
We all need to be told we look good, so try to educate your family to support you in this way.
DAY 25
As we approach the end of the diet and exercise programme, it is important to decide at this stage how you intend to proceed afterwards.If you have a significant amount of weight to lose you have the choice of continuing on the diet menus as included in the daily plans or you can follow the diet contained in my Complete Hip and Thigh Diet .
The diets are similar in so far as they both exclude a great deal of fat, thereby maximising the reduction of fat from our body.
The Inch Loss Plan Diet is slightly stricter than the Hip and Thigh Diet in order to get the greatest benefit in just one month.
If you are almost down to your goal weight and inches you should follow the instructions in the Maintenance Programme detailed on page 164.
In fact, I would recommend everyone follows the Maintenance Programme for the week following the end of the Inch Loss Plan.
It will give you a break from the restrictions that have been placed upon you and will enable you to see how you get on on your own!
Having a break for a week also has the benefit of jollying up our metabolism so that our metabolic rate increases a little.
Your weight and inches should remain constant during that week and then when you return to the diet you will probably find you lose more weight and inches quite easily.
Some slimmers feel they need actual supervision and there are lots of clubs throughout the country such as Slimming Magazine Clubs and Weight Watchers, which offer excellent support.
If going along to a group on a regular basis helps you to stick at it — do it.
I also offer the facility of a Postal Slimming Club (see the back of this book for details).
MENU
BREAKFAST
1 oz (25g) bran cereal with 1/2oz (12.5g) sultanas and milk from allowance OR 2 slices of toast spread with 3 teaspoons marmalade, preserve or honey
LUNCH
CURRIED CHICKEN AND YOGURT SALAD (see recipe, page 156), plus 3oz (75g) fromage frais OR ORANGE AND CARROT SALAD (see recipe, page 158), plus 2 x 5oz (125g) diet yogurts
DINNER
FISH RISOTTO (see recipe, page 157), plus fresh strawberries or raspberries served with 2 oz (50g) iced yogurt OR BARBECUED VEGETABLE KEBABS (see recipe, page 155) PLUS APPLE AND BLACKCURRANT WHIP (see recipe, page 154)
WARM-UP WAIST STRETCH 1.
Stretching up with hands interlinked, tilt the pelvis and hold for 5 counts.
2.
Stretch over to the left — hold for 10 counts.
3.
Stretch over to the right — hold for 10 counts.
Relax.
AEROBICS: SIDEWAYS JOG 4.
Jog with legs swinging from side to side.
Let your arms swing with you.
Continue for as long as possible and record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED SIDEWAYS....
TIMES
AEROBICS: JOGGING ARMS IN AND OUT 5.
Jog on the spot, bring your arms in and out with each step.
Record your steps.
TODAY I DID....
STEPS
AEROBICS: SKIPPING A STEP 6.
Skip with legs crossing over as before.
Let your arms swing in the opposite direction.
Repeat as many times as you can and record the number of steps.
TOTAL STEPS TODAY....
ARM AND BUST UPLIFT 7.
Interlocking hands behind you, raise the arms 40 times, moving slightly higher with each count.
BUST AND ARM LIFTER 8.
Pull the arms back towards each other 40 times, with palms facing upwards.
WAIST WHITTLER 9.
Start with arms outstretched and curve sideways, bringing the arm up and over as far as possible.
Hold for 1 second.
Push and stretch a little further for a count of 25.
Relax forwards, then straighten up and repeat to the other side.
TUMMY PULL 10.
Lying as shown, raise the elbows, head and shoulders towards the knees and hold up for 5 counts.
Repeat 5 more times, holding up for 10 counts each time.
TUMMY CYCLE 11.
Cycle backwards 30 times, then relax by cuddling your knees.
TUMMY MINIMISER 12.
Start as before, first bending the knees, then straightening the legs.
13.
Curl your toes back.
Raise your arms towards the toes, lifting the head and shoulders off the floor.
Gently stretch upwards for 20 counts.
Relax the tummy muscles, then repeat the exercise.
INNER THIGH AND KNEE TIGHTENER 14.
Sitting with legs outstretched, squeeze the legs together 30 times, holding each squeeze for 1 second.
OUTER THIGH TIGHTENER 15.
Cross the ankles, then try to pull the legs apart.
Repeat 30 times, holding each contraction for 1 second.
Repeat 30 times with the other foot on top.
OUTER THIGH STREAMLINER 16.
Lie on your side and bend the lower leg.
With foot pointed raise the top leg and do 35 mini raises.
Repeat on the other side then repeat again on both sides.
BOTTOM AND THIGH STREAMLINER 17.
Extend the top leg forwards as far as possible and then stretch it forwards and back 35 times, moving it 3 ins (7.6 cm) each time.
HIP AND THIGH EXTENDER 18.
Flex the foot and swing the leg forwards and backwards 5 times.
Swing the leg forwards and lift it up and down a few inches, 35 times, holding each raise for 1 second.
FRONT THIGH STRETCH 19.
Take hold of your top leg by the ankle and pull back the leg as far as possible without straining.
Repeat 5 times, holding each pull for 1 second.
Roll over and repeat the last 3 exercises on the other side: Bottom and Thigh Streamliner x 35; Hip and Thigh Extender x 35; Front Thigh Stretch x 5
THIGH STREAMLINER 20.
Sitting as shown, raise the extended leg and point the toes.
From here, raise the leg up and down slightly 40 times, holding each raise for 1 second.
Repeat to the other side.
THE COOL DOWN Repeat all today's exercises (excluding the aerobics), holding each position for 2 counts.
Feel slim and graceful as you do them.
Afterwards, lie down and relax for a few moments.
Positive thought for the day
On Day 16 we started making plans for our tangible and intangible goals.
I hope you wrote some of them down and have started thinking very creatively towards achieving some of the short-term ones and making long-term plans for the more ambitious ones.
It is important to write these plans down and to keep them under review.
If we go on holiday we are meticulous in our arrangements — checking our passport, planning our wardrobe, organising injections, travellers cheques and currency.
We often make a careful list which we check off as we do each job.
It is not only easier to remember everything this way but it can actually be more fun too.
There is a real sense of achievement when everything has been ticked off and we can rest easy knowing that everything is under control.
However, we didn't write that list at one go.
We would have started with the priorities and gradually added items as they occurred to us.
In other words, the subconscious was working in an expanding way, trying to think of anything that might have been overlooked.
Lying in bed at night is a perfect time for scanning our brain for those things we might have forgotten.
I keep a notepad by my bedside to record these thoughts and in this way I can be confident that I really have thought of everything.
We exercise such good sense and creative effort when, for instance, going on holiday.
We often make a careful list which we check off as we finish each item.
Yet we hardly plan our lives at all!
If we took half the amount of effort in planning our future we would be much more certain of making that a success too.
DAY 26
Today I would like you to consider your attitude towards work.
Wouldn't it be great if you didn't consider your job to be actual work because you really enjoyed it?
I can honestly say I hardly do any work, even though I am involved in various projects that occupy me most weekdays and some evenings.
But because I really enjoy it all how can I call it work?
Am I just lucky?
No, definitely not.
My life is organised in such a way that I have excluded the jobs I like least.
Removing the ‘job weeds’ from my life has made for a less stressful lifestyle and I actually look forward to every day.
We are in control of our future and our happiness.
It doesn't just happen.
Consider today whether you look upon your job as ‘work’ or as an enjoyable way to earn a living.
MENU
BREAKFAST
2 oz (50g) smoked turkey breast and a small bread roll (1oz [25g]) spread with a little mustard OR 8oz (200g) tinned grapefruit in natural juice topped with a 5oz (1 25g) diet grapefruit yogurt
LUNCH
3 oz (75g) smoked mackerel served with CARROT SALAD (see recipe, page 155) and COLESLAW (see recipe, page 156), lettuce, tomatoes and cucumber, plus 4oz (100g) grapes OR RICE SALAD (see recipe, page 161), plus 5oz (125g) diet yogurt
DINNER
4 oz (100g) gammon steak (all fat removed), 1 slice pineapple, 4oz (100g) potatoes, unlimited vegetables and PINEAPPLE SAUCE (see recipe, page 160) PLUS RASPBERRY FLUFF (see recipe, page 160) OR VEGETABLE RISOTTO (see recipe, page 162) PLUS RASPBERRY AND STRAWBERRY BAVAROIS (see recipe, page 160)
WARM-UP STRETCH 1.
Stretch up 30 times, 15 times with each hand.
AEROBICS: WALKING JOG/JOG 2.
Do 20 walking jogs, raising the arms up and down.
Then jog properly for as long as possible.
Record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED....
TIMES
AEROBICS: SIDEWAYS JOG 3.
Jog with legs swinging from side to side.
Let your arms swing with you.
Continue for as long as possible and record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED SIDEWAYS....
TIMES
AEROBICS: FORWARD AND BACKWARD JOGGING 4.
Gently jog forwards and backwards, as before.
Do as many as you can with one leg in front.
Change and repeat with the other leg in front.
Record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED....
TIMES
AEROBICS: JOGGING ARMS IN AND OUT 5.
Jogging on the spot, bring your arms in and out with each step.
Record your steps.
TODAY I DID.
.. STEPS
WAIST WHITTLER 6.
Start with arms outstretched and curve sideways, bringing the arm up and over as far as possible.
Hold for 1 second.
Push and stretch a little further for a count of 25.
Relax forwards, then straighten up and repeat to the other side.
BUST AND ARM LIFTER 7.
Pull the arms back towards each other 40 times, with palms facing upwards.
BUST TONER 8.
Sitting with legs outstretched, take hold of your calves and squeeze them together quite hard, using the muscles in your arms.
Repeat 35 times, holding each contraction for 1 second.
BACK LEG STRETCH 9.
Sitting as shown, pull the head and shoulders down towards the knees.
Stretch forwards for 35 counts, holding each stretch for 1 second.
SPINE AND LEG STRETCHER 10.
Sitting with legs apart, stretch up, then twist at the waist and lower the hands and body towards one leg.
Gently stretch forwards for 35 counts, holding each stretch for 1 second.
Relax, return to the starting position and repeat to the other side.
TUMMY FLATTENER 11.
Lying as shown, raise the elbows, head and shoulders, bringing your chin as close to your chest as possible.
Gently pull the body forwards 25 times.
Relax and repeat.
TUMMY TONING TWIST 12.
Raise your knees and cross the ankles.
Lift one elbow to touch the opposite knee.
Return to the lying position and repeat with the same elbow.
Repeat to the other side, then repeat ‘double lifts’ 5 times to each side.
TUMMY RELAX 13.
Relax your tummy muscles by holding your knees close to your chest and rock from side to side.
TUMMY AND DOUBLE CHIN ELIMINATOR 14.
Lying on your tummy, raise your head and shoulders.
Point the chin upwards and hold for 5 counts.
Extend the lower teeth outside your upper set and hold.
Relax and repeat 5 times, holding up for 5 counts each time.
OUTER THIGH STREAMLINER 15.
Lie on your side with lower leg bent.
With foot pointed, raise the top leg and do 40 mini raises.
Repeat twice on each side.
HIP AND THIGH EXTENDER 16.
Flex the foot and swing the leg forwards and backwards 5 times.
Swing the leg forwards and lift it up and down a few inches, 35 times.
FRONT THIGH STRETCH 17.
Take hold of your top leg by the ankle and pull back the leg as far as possible without straining.
Repeat 5 times, holding each pull for 1 second.
Roll over and repeat the last 2 exercises on the other side: Hip and Thigh Extender x 35; Front Thigh Stretch x 5
BOTTOM TONER 18.
Sit as shown.
Leaning over for balance, take hold of your front ankle and raise the back leg.
Move it forwards and back 40 times.
Relax and repeat to the other side.
INNER THIGH TONE-UP 19.
Bend your knees and place the soles of the feet together.
Pull your feet in and at the same time push down with your knees.
Repeat 35 times, holding each repetition for 1 second.
Do not strain.
THE COOL DOWN Repeat all today's exercises (excluding the aerobics), holding each position for 2 counts.
Realise how good you feel as you do them.
Afterwards, lie down and relax for a few moments.
Positive thought for the day
In these last days of the programme I am asking you to stretch your body even further than before.
It is a wonderful feeling to be able to experience the strength, suppleness and stamina that you have built up over the last three weeks.
I am sure you will be feeling that it has all been worthwhile.
Just as you have stretched your body beyond what you had previously thought possible, so you can stretch your mind.
The times we hear ourselves saying ‘I'd really love to have a go at…, but I know I couldn't do it’.
How do you know?
Even if you tried once and failed, what is to stop you having another go?
Often when ladies come along to join my class, they say, ‘I can't get below 10st (63.5 kg)’.
Why?
Because up to this point they haven't achieved a lighter weight and they have conditioned themselves to believing they can't.
While they believe that, they won't!
We must break down the barriers of conditioning and open our minds to far higher goals.
DAY 27
The last but one day of this programme and I hope you are feeling good.
Today's exercises are repeated to the maximum number of counts and lay the foundation for your Maintenance Programme.
When you feel you have achieved your weight and inch loss to an acceptable level, you can work out your own routine of exercises so that you specifically tone and improve your problem areas.
I have designed the Maintenance Programme in such a way that after your warm-up you can select just the movements and exercises you want.
Maintaining your new figure has never been simpler or more effective.
Start planning your celebration for the day of the last measuring session — the day after tomorrow.
MENU
BREAKFAST
1 oz (25g) very lean bacon grilled and served on 1 oz (25g) toast with 2 grilled tomatoes OR 8oz (200g) fruit compote (mixed canned fruit in natural juice) topped with 3 oz (75g) diet yogurt
LUNCH
6oz (150g) jacket potato with COLESLAW (see recipe, page 156), plus a 5oz (125g) diet yogurt OR 6oz (150g) cottage cheese with large mixed salad in OIL-FREE ORANGE AND LEMON VINAIGRETTE DRESSING (see recipe, page 158), plus 4 oz (100g) grapes
DINNER
Findus Lean Cuisine Beef Julienne served with unlimited vegetables PLUS STRAWBERRY WINE JELLY (see recipe, page 161) OR Boots Country Casserole ready meal, with 3 oz (75g) potatoes and unlimited vegetables PLUS COEURS A LA CREME (see recipe, page 156)
WARM-UP WAIST STRETCH 1.
Stretching up with hands interlinked, tilt the pelvis and hold for 5 counts.
2.
Stretch over to the left — hold for 10 counts 3.
Stretch over to the right — hold for 10 counts.
Relax.
SKI STRETCH 4.
Stretch up high.
5.
Ski down.
Return to the starting position and repeat 10 times.
AEROBICS: SIDEWAYS JOG 6.
Jog with legs swinging from side to side.
Let your arms swing with you.
Continue for as long as possible and record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED SIDEWAYS....
TIMES
AEROBICS: JOGGING ARMS IN AND OUT 7.
Jog on the spot, bringing your arms in and out with each step.
Record the number of steps.
TODAY I DID....
STEPS
ARM AND BUST UPLIFT 8.
Interlocking hands behind you, raise the arms 45 times, always aiming slightly higher with each count.
BUST THRUST 9.
Thrust your elbows back at shoulder level 25 times, holding in the extreme thrust position for 1 second between each repetition.
TUMMY PULL 10.
Lying as shown, raise the elbows, head and shoulders towards the knees and hold up for 5 counts.
Repeat 5 more times and hold up for 10 counts each time.
TUMMY MINIMISER 11.
Lying down flat, bend the knees, then straighten the legs.
12.
Curl your toes back.
Raise the arms towards the toes, lifting the head and shoulders off the floor as far as possible.
Stretch up gently for 20 counts, pulling up a little further with each count.
Relax by cuddling your knees, then repeat.
MIDRIFF STRETCH 13.
Lying on your tummy, raise your head and shoulders, curving your spine, inch by inch.
Hold still for 20 counts.
To tone the chin and neck area, stretch your chin up as you do the exercise.
INNER THIGH AND KNEE TIGHTENER 14.
Sit up with legs outstretched.
Squeeze the legs together 35 times, holding each squeeze for 1 second.
OUTER THIGH TIGHTENER 15.
Cross the ankles, then try to pull the legs apart.
Repeat 35 times, holding each contraction for 1 second.
Repeat 35 times with the other foot on top.
SPINE AND LEG STRETCHER 16.
Sitting as shown, stretch up high, then twist at the waist and lower the hands and body towards one leg.
Gently stretch forwards for 40 counts, holding each stretch for 1 second.
Relax, return to the starting position and repeat to the other side.
LEG AND THIGH STRETCH 17.
With one leg extended forward and the other leg bent, stretch arms up high, then slowly lean forwards as far as you can without straining.
From here, gently stretch forwards for 25 counts.
Straighten up slowly, then repeat with the other leg in front.
OUTER THIGH STREAMLINER 18.
Lying on your side with lower leg bent, raise the top leg.
Point the foot and do 40 mini raises.
Repeat twice on each side.
LEG AND HIP STRETCH 19.
On your side as before, swing the top leg forwards and backwards 10 times each way.
Do not strain.
BOTTOM AND THIGH STREAMLINER 20.
Extend the top leg forwards as far as possible and then stretch it forwards and back 35 times, each time moving it 3ins (7.6cm).
FRONT THIGH STRETCH 21.
Take hold of your top leg by the ankle and pull back the leg as far as possible without straining.
Repeat 5 times, holding each pull for 1 second.
Relax.
Roll over and repeat the last 3 exercises on the other side: Leg and Hip Stretch x 10 each way; Bottom and Thigh Streamliner x 35; Front Thigh Stretch x 5
BOTTOM TONER 22.
Sit as shown.
Leaning over for balance, take hold of your front ankle and raise the back leg.
Move it forwards and back slightly, 40 times.
Relax and repeat to the other side.
THIGH STREAMLINER 23.
Sit with one leg bent in front and the other extended to the side.
With toes pointed, raise the extended leg up and down slightly.
Repeat this tiny movement 40 times, holding each raise for 1 second.
Repeat to the other side.
THE COOL DOWN Repeat all today's exercises (except the aerobics), holding each position for 2 counts.
Feel elegant and poised as you do them.
Afterwards, lie down and relax.
Positive thought for the day
Smiling and laughing is a terrific tonic for everyone.
Having reached the end of Day 27, you have every reason to smile.
Not only have you achieved a real goal, well, almost, but from now on there will be no more excuses, no more ‘false ceilings’ for projects and ambitions — this is just the beginning of a very new and different life for you.
Do you feel ambitious enough to attain goals that previously you might have thought were out of your personal reach?
Success is not about money or position — it is about personal satisfaction and self-esteem.
We must have confidence in ourselves; if we don't, how can we expect someone else to?
The only way to build self-confidence is to keep on having a go at goal-scoring.
Everybody is inspired by a successful person.
They want to be part of the action too.
And amazing though it might seem, you will attract new friends who want to be like you.
So next time someone copies what you are wearing, or wants to know how you got into shape — take it as a real compliment.
DAY 28
Can you believe it — this is the last day of the Inch Loss Plan.
Tomorrow is the final weigh-in and measuring session for this 28-day period.
I hope you will be particularly strong today so that tomorrow you can achieve the best possible results.
Exercise with energy, diet with even greater dedication and look forward to the future with total determination.
I hope at this point your self-image has improved dramatically.
I am only too well aware that few are fortunate enough to have a perfect body — very few in fact.
That aside, we should try to be happy with the body we have.
This 28-day programme should have given you the opportunity to come to terms with your body.
I am still very critical of my own shape but I console myself with the fact that while it is far from perfect, it is better than it used to be.
If I stopped exercising and ate everything I wanted, I know it would be a very different shape.
It is worth the effort because I feel so much better about it now than I did before discovering the benefits of low fat eating and intensive stretching exercises.
I'm not ashamed of my body as I used to be.
That's the difference it has made to me.
I hope it will do the same for you too.
Enjoy this last day and get ready for that celebration tomorrow.
Make sure you have a film in your camera and be prepared to have your ‘after’ photograph taken in the morning.
MENU
BREAKFAST
2 bananas mashed with 1/2 oz (12.5g) chopped sultanas and topped with 3 oz (75g) diet yogurt OR 1 whole fresh grapefruit, 1 slice of meal toast and 2 marmalade
LUNCH
6oz (150g) fresh salmon steak served with 4 oz (100g) new potatoes, plus unlimited vegetables such as mange-tout, asparagus or broccoli and served with PARSLEY SAUCE (see recipe, page 159) PLUS CHOCOLATE AND COFFEE ROULADE (see recipe, page 156) OR LENTIL ROAST (see recipe, page 158) served with unlimited vegetables, excluding potatoes PLUS APRICOT PLUM SOFTIE (see recipe, page 154) SUPPER 2oz (50g) chicken with large salad including CARROT SALAD (see recipe, page 155) and served with OIL-FREE ORANGE AND LEMON VINAIGRETTE DRESSING (see recipe, page 158), plus 4oz (100g) fresh fruit salad served in a meringue basket OR 6oz (150g) jacket potato topped with 4oz (100g) low fat cottage cheese and served with large salad including beansprouts, grated carrots, grated raw beetroot, dressed in soy sauce, plus 3 oz (75g) low fat fromage frais 
WARM-UP WAIST STRETCH 1.
Interlink hands and stretch up, tilting the pelvis.
Hold for 5 counts.
2.
Stretch over to the left — hold for 10 counts 3.
Stretch over to the right — hold for 10 counts.
Relax.
AEROBICS: WALKING JOG/JOG 4.
Do 20 walking jogs, raising the arms up and down.
Then jog properly for as long as possible.
Record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED....
TIMES
AEROBICS: FORWARD AND BACKWARD JOGGING 5.
Gently jog forwards and backwards, as before.
Do as many as you can with one leg in front.
Change and repeat with the other leg in front.
Record the number of steps.
TODAY I JOGGED....
STEPS EACH WAY
AEROBICS: JOGGING ARMS IN AND OUT 6.
Jogging on the spot, bring your arms in and out with each step.
Record the number of steps.
TODAY I DID....
STEPS
AEROBICS: SKIPPING A STEP 7.
Skip with legs crossing over in front.
Let your arms swing in the opposite direction.
Do as many as you can and record the number.
TOTAL STEPS TODAY....
BUST AND ARM LIFTER 8.
Pull your arms back towards each other 50 times, with palms facing upwards.
ARM AND BUST UPLIFT 9.
Interlocking hands behind you, raise the arms 50 times, always moving slightly higher with each count.
WAIST WHITTLER 10.
Start as before and curve sideways, bringing the arm up and over.
Push and stretch a little further for a count of 30.
Relax forwards, then straighten up and repeat to the other side.
TUMMY FLATTENER 11.
Lying down with knees bent, raise the elbows, head and shoulders, bringing your chin as close to your chest as possible.
Gently pull the body forwards 25 times.
Relax and repeat.
TUMMY TONING TWIST 12.
With knees raised and ankles crossed, lift one elbow to touch the opposite knee.
Return to the lying position and repeat with the same elbow.
Repeat to the other side, then repeat ‘double lifts’ 5 more times to each side.
TUMMY RELAX 13.
Relax your tummy muscles by holding your knees close to your chest and rock from side to side.
TUMMY MINIMISER 14.
Lying flat, bend the knees, then straighten the legs.
15.
Curl your toes back.
Raise the arms towards the toes, lifting the head and shoulders off the floor.
Stretch up gently for 20 counts, pulling up a little further with each count.
Relax by cuddling your knees, then repeat.
TUMMY CYCLE 16.
Cycle backwards 30 times.
TUMMY AND DOUBLE CHIN ELIMINATOR 17.
Lying on your tummy, raise your head and shoulders.
Point the chin upwards and hold for 5 counts.
Extend the lower teeth outside the upper set and hold.
Relax and repeat 5 times, holding up for 5 counts each time.
SPINE AND LEG STRETCHER 18.
Sitting as shown, stretch up high, then twist at the waist and lower the hands and body towards one leg.
Gently stretch forwards for 40 counts.
Relax, return to the starting position and repeat to the other side.
OUTER THIGH STREAMLINER 19.
Lying on your side with lower leg bent, raise the top leg.
With foot pointed, do 40 mini raises.
Repeat twice on each side.
HIP AND THIGH EXTENDER 20.
Flex the foot and swing the leg forwards and backwards 5 times.
Swing the leg forwards and lift it up and down slightly, 40 times.
FRONT THIGH STRETCH 21.
Take hold of your top leg by the ankle and pull back the leg as far as possible without straining.
Repeat 5 times, holding each pull for 1 second.
Roll over and repeat the last 2 exercises on the other side: Hip and Thigh Extender x 40; Front Thigh Stretch x 5
BOTTOM AND THIGH STREAMLINER 22.
Extend the top leg forwards as far as possible and then stretch it forwards and back 40 times, each time moving it 3ins (7.6cm).
Repeat on the other side.
BOTTOM TONER 23.
Sit as shown.
Leaning over for balance, take hold of your front ankle and raise the back leg.
Move the leg forwards and back a few inches, 50 times.
Repeat to the other side.
THIGH STREAMLINER 24.
Extend one leg to the side and point the toes.
From here, raise the leg up and down slightly 50 times, holding each raise for 1 second.
Repeat on the other side.
INNER THIGH TONE-UP 25.
Sitting with soles of the feet together, pull the feet in and push down with your knees.
Repeat 35 times.
THE COOL DOWN Repeat all today's exercises (except for the aerobics), holding each position for 2 counts.
Feel graceful, elegant and composed as you do them.
Afterwards, lie down and relax for a few moments.
Positive thought for the day
On this last day I want to sum up the things we have discussed.
Please use it as a reminder to ensure that you keep up the good work and the resolutions you have started.
1
Our body is now so much improved that we actually feel happier with it.
2
If we are to build self-confidence we must score lots of goals, no matter how minor these might be.
3
We must review our goal plan regularly.
4
We must eliminate any previous conditioning that has prevented us from winning in the past.
5
We must remember that if we want something badly enough, persistence will win the day.
6
We must believe in ourselves and not be sensitive to remarks made by others who want to hurt us.
We must try to respond to a negative with a positive.
7
Having a positive attitude makes life so much better.
8
We should try to be happy in everything we do.
We must remove all the ‘weeds’ from our lives.
9
If we are to achieve major goals in our life, we must plan accordingly.
10
Just as we need encouragement from others so they need it from us.
We must try to acquire the habit of complimenting and encouraging others.
11
When something doesn't go as we had hoped we must try to see the good that comes out of it in the end.
12
We must programme our minds to be expansive and creative and eliminate the words ‘I can't’ from our vocabulary.
13
We must learn to listen to others who have the benefit of experience and knowledge, and allow them to help us broaden our horizons.
14
We must accept that if we overindulge our eating, in itself this is not a disaster.
It just slows down our progress.
By continuing on the diet plan the indiscretion will work its way out over the next day or two.
15
For the first time we actually feel in control of our eating and of our body.
It is a wonderful relief from previous feelings of guilt and restriction.
16
For the first time in our life we actually KNOW that we are a winner.
We are not going to be a loser ever again.