

Within a week Little Chef was running the yard, bringing in the ponies from the fields, doing tricks for pony nuts, retrieving lost balls from the undergrowth, then running on to the field and dropping them when there was a pause in play.
He also learnt not to scrabble Dancer's leather trousers and who was welcome in the yard, biting the ankles of visiting VAT men, growling at Philippa Mannering when, ever hopeful, she dropped in on Ricky, and lifting his leg on the probation officer's bicycle.
He adored Perdita, but Ricky was his great love, and gradually as the ugly little dog limped after him, barking encouragement during practice chukkas, and even hitching a lift on the back of a pony in order not to be separated, Ricky succumbed totally to his charms.
And when the vet came to take out Little Chef's stitches, it was Ricky who held the wildly trembling dog in his arms.
Any visiting player who was foolish enough to make eyes at Perdita, or disparaging cracks about Little Chef's appearance, got very short shrift.
By the beginning of August Ricky's arm was so much better that he was able gently to stick and ball.
By the end of August so excessive had been the overtime paid the builders and excavators that Dancer and his gaudy retinue were able to move into Eldercombe Manor.
Miss Lodsworth had a busy summer.
When she wasn't inveighing against cruelty to ponies and disgusting language at Rutshire Polo Club, and furiously ringing up Ricky to complain about Perdita thundering ponies five abreast down Eldercombe High Street, she was writing to Dancer, to grumble about cheeky  builders, truculent security guards, and Alsatians chasing her cat, Smudge.
Nor was she amused by helicopters with flashing lights landing like fireflies at all hours, nor the deafening boom of all-night recording sessions.
Worst of all, some sadist of a landscape designer had slapped down Dancer's stick-and-ball field right next to her house, so she not only had fairies at the bottom of her garden, but also a microcosm of Rutshire Polo Club.
As Commissioner for Rutshire, how could she hold dignified get-togethers with her guides when expletives and polo balls kept flying over her hawthorn hedge?
Nor did any of the rest of the Parish Council come to her aid.
The Vicar, who was a closet gay, and the local solicitor, who reckoned that such development would triple the price of his house, both thought Dancer was splendid.
Dancer, however, was warned well in advance that Miss Lodsworth would be holding an All-Rutshire Jamboree in her garden on the first Saturday in September and had promised there would be no stick and balling that afternoon.
A perfect day dawned.
Rising early, Miss Lodsworth prayed that it would continue fine and her guides would find enjoyment as well as fulfilment in their Jamboree.
Believing in economy, Miss Lodsworth had already baked rock and fairy cakes and spread hundreds of sandwiches with crusts still on with Marmite and plum jam which was cheaper than strawberry.
Nor was Coca Cola or Seven-Up allowed.
Her guides would have lemon squash because it was better for them and less expensive.
Creaking up from her knees, Miss Lodsworth snorted with indignation.
Even on a Saturday Dancer's bulldozers were still knocking down trees and flattening hillocks to extend one of the loveliest cricket grounds in England into a polo field.
Just after lunch, as she was wriggling into her guide uniform, which had grown somewhat tight, Miss Lodsworth looked out of the window and saw a girl not wearing a hard hat clattering five ponies down the High Street.
It was that fiendish Perdita Macleod.
Now she had pulled up outside the village shop and was yelling to them to bring her out an ice-cream.
The Vicar's wife, who had parked on a yellow line while her gay husband went into the shop to get a treacle tart, got such a shock when Wayne stuck his big, hairy white face in through the window that she jumped out and ran away.
A traffic warden, finding an empty car, gave the Vicar a parking ticket.
Clattering on, trying to hold five ponies and eat an ice-cream, Perdita was not amused to hear whoops and noisy hooting behind her.
It was Seb and Dommie Carlisle packed into their Lotus, with  two sumptuous brunettes, and a bull terrier spilling out of the luggage compartment.
Aware that she was hot and sweaty and her hair was escaping from its towelling band, Perdita greeted them sulkily.
‘We're going to see over Dancer's palazzo ,’ yelled Seb, ‘and swim in his pool, which is even bigger than Loch Lomond.
Why don't you come over?’
‘I haven't got a bikini.’
‘That's the last thing you'll need.
See you later.’
When she got back to the yard, however, Ricky had other ideas.
‘What the fuck were you doing taking out five ponies at once?
I've just had Miss Lodsworth and the Vicar's wife on the telephone.
If you step out of line once more you're fired.
And don't think you're going to turn them out and slope off.
I want each pony washed down and all the sweat scraped off.
I'm going out to look at a pony, and don't forget to double-lock Wayne's door.’
The Jamboree was in full swing.
Guides were marching, pow-wowing, flag-waving and singing stirring songs as Dancer showed the twins over a totally transformed Eldercombe Manor.
As they progressed through the great hall, which was now a recording studio, and practice rooms and six master bedrooms, with bathrooms and jacuzzis en suite , and an intercom service so Dancer's retinue could chatter to each other all night, the twins' whoops of laughter and excitement grew in volume.
I want a mistress bedroom,’ said Seb, bouncing on one of the huge double beds.
Outside they admired a pink brick yard for twenty ponies, which looked like three sides of a  Battenberg cake, and an indoor school, completely walled with bullet-proof mirrors.
‘Bas said it looked like a tart's bedroom,’ said Dancer cheerfully.
‘He's seen enough of them,’ said Dommie.
‘How the hell did you get planning permission?’
‘Bas and I gave a little drinks party for all the local planning committee.
An' greased their palms so liberally their glasses kept sliding out of their 'ands.’
‘And there were German Shepherds abiding in the fields,’ said Seb, keeping a close hold on Decorum, his bull terrier, as Twinkie the security guard prowled past with an Alsatian.
‘But this is designated an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty.’
‘It will be when my ponies arrive next week,’ said Dancer cosily.
Soon the twins and their brunettes and various glamorous hangers-on were all stripped off round the pool.
Miss Lodsworth, exhorting her guides to greater endeavour in this modern world, was having great difficulty making herself heard over the din of Dancer's group, who were warming up in the recording studio.
Seb, standing on the top board with binoculars, was peering into Miss Lodsworth's garden in excitement.
‘That blonde one looks very prepared to me.
Lend a hand, darling,’ he shouted.
‘Isn't that what girl guides are supposed to do?’
‘I wish someone would lend me a farm hand,’ said Dancer's Interior Designer sulkily.
‘Wilhelm won't speak to me since I chucked his Filofax in the jacuzzi.
He's nice,’ he added, as one of Dancer's workmen went past wielding his JCB like Ben Hur.
‘Now they re doing semaphore,’ said Seb.
‘Get me a goal flag, Dancer, then I can signal, ‘Do you Screw?’ to that blonde.’
‘She'll tie a clove hitch in your willy if you're not careful,’ said Dommie.
‘Then it'll be a guided missile!’
Collapsing off the diving board with laughter at his own joke, Seb just managed to keep the binoculars above the water level.
Meanwhile over in Snow Cottage, Daisy Macleod, trying to fill up her painting jar, found there was no water in the tap.
In the house above her, Philippa Mannering, who wanted to wash her hair before the dinner party to which Ricky had refused to come yet again, found not only no water in the tap but that the washing-up machine had stopped in mid-cycle.
Over at Robinsgrove, finding no water to hose down the ponies, Perdita put them in their boxes and, having given them their hay nets and filled up the water buckets from the water trough, raced off to Dancer's for a swim.
Wayne, Ricky's favourite pony, had such a low threshold of boredom that he had a special manger hooked over the half-door so he could eat and miss nothing in the yard at the same time.
The yard escapologist, he had been known to turn on taps and flood the yard and, even worse, let other ponies out of their boxes when he got bored.
At matches he had to be watched like a hawk in case he wriggled out of his headcollar, and set off for the tea tent, where his doleful yellow face and black-ringed eyes could coax sandwiches and cake out of the most stony-hearted waitress.
Left to his own vices, deserted even by his friend Little Chef, who'd gone with Ricky, Wayne started to fiddle with the bolt.
At the Jamboree it was time for tea.
The Marmite and plum jam sandwiches were already curling on the trestle table under the walnut tree.
The guides were hot and thirsty, but as Miss Lodsworth went to the kitchen tap for water to fill up the jugs of concentrated lemon squash, only a trickle came out of the tap.
‘Please, Miss Lodsworth,’ said a pink-faced Pack Leader, ‘the upstairs toilet isn't flushing.’
‘Nor's the downstairs,’ said her friend.
Looking out across Dancer's emerging polo fields, Miss Lodsworth first thought how beautiful as a huge fountain of water gushed a hundred feet into the air, throwing up rainbow lights in the sunshine against the yellowing trees.
Picking up the telephone, she was on to Dancer in a trice.
‘D'you realize,’ she spluttered, ‘that your bulldozers have gone slap through the chief water main?
The whole village will be cut off, and my guides have nothing to drink.’
She couldn't mention the question of lavatories to Dancer.
Round the pool they were all having hysterics as Dancer tried to calm her down.
‘I'll get on to the emergency services immediately.
Of course they work on a Saturday.
An' if it gets too bad, your little girls can come and drink out of the swimming-pool.
And we've got plenty of Bourbon if you're pushed.’
He had to hold the telephone away from his ear.
An hour later Perdita sidled into the yard with wet hair to be confronted by Frances quivering with ecstatic disapproval.
‘Why the hell didn't you bother to dry off the ponies?’
‘I just nipped over to Dancer's for a swim.’
‘Can't keep away from the boys, can you?
Did you turn Wayne out?’
‘No.
Yes, I must have done.’
Perdita always blinked when she was lying.
‘Oh Christ, he must be in one of the paddocks or the garden.’
‘He isn't, I've looked,’ sneered Frances.
‘Thank God Ricky'll come to his senses and sack you now.’
‘Oh, please don't tell him,’ pleaded Perdita.
She hadn't realized quite how much Frances detested her.
‘You stay here.’
Frances handed her Hermia's lead rope.
‘I'll take my car and go and look for him.’
‘I'll go,’ sobbed Perdita, and, leaping on to Hermia's back, she clattered off down the drive.
Perdita couldn't get any sense out of the gaudy retinue round Dancer's pool.
They were all drunk or stoned.
‘Wayne's gone missing,’ she screamed.
‘Please someone come and help me look for him.’
‘Probably gone to the Jamboree,’ said Dommie, looking up from his brunette.
‘Miss Lodsworth'll be teaching him how to untie clove hitches.’
‘Don't be so fucking flip.’
Pulling on a pair of Garfield boxer shorts, grumbling Dommie tiptoed barefoot across the gravel out to his Lotus.
‘You go west, I'll go north.’
‘Have you seen a yellow pony with a white face?
Have you seen a yellow pony with a white face?’
Getting more and more desperate, Perdita stopped at every house and scoured every field.
Ricky would go apeshit if anything happened to Wayne.
Then, as she entered Eldercombe Village, she saw a pile of droppings in the middle of the road.
‘Looking for a pony?’ said an old man.
‘He went into that garden.’
Perdita went as green as the guides' unconsumed lemon squash.
For there in the gateway, framed in an arch of clematis as purple as her face, stood Miss Lodsworth.
She'd had to buy all her guides Coca Cola from guiding funds, and send them home early in a hired bus in case they electrocuted themselves storming the gates of Eldercombe Manor in search of Dancer.
She would be eating Marmite sandwiches and rock buns for months.
‘Dancer Maitland has wrecked my Jamboree,’ roared Miss Lodsworth.
‘Your pony has wrecked my garden.
He's trampled on my alstroemerias and my dahlias, kicked out my cucumber frame and broken down the fence into the orchard.’
‘I'm terribly sorry.
I'll pay,’ begged Perdita.
‘Please don't ring Ricky.’
‘I'm going to ring my solicitor.’
Wayne was enchanted to see Hermia and Perdita, and gave the appearance of having been searching for them all day.
As she only had one lead rope, Perdita had to walk both ponies the mile and a half back to Robinsgrove.
At the bottom of the drive, Wayne started to totter, and his yellow belly gave such a thunderous rumble, he started looking round at it in surprise and reproach.
Oh God, colic, thought Perdita; perhaps he's eaten something he shouldn't, I must get him home.
Halfway up the drive, Wayne started pawing his belly and rolling the whites of his eyes.
Soon he was cannoning off lime trees and, as they passed the second gates, crashed into the left-hand gatepost.
By the time he had staggered into the yard he could hardly stand up, hitting the ancient, mossy mounting block and tripping over one of the green tubs filled with white geraniums, as Little Chef came bounding out to lick him on the nose.
Perdita had never known Ricky so angry.
Taking one look at the swaying Wayne, he yelled at Frances to ring Phil Bagley, the vet.
‘Tell him it may be a heart attack, or colic, or twisted gut.
He could even have been hit by a car.
Tell him to fucking hurry.’
Then, turning on Perdita: ‘You stupid b-b-bitch, I told you to double-bolt those doors.’
‘I know.
I forgot.’
‘Well, you've forgotten once too often.
Get out, you're fired.’
‘Please let me see what Phil says,’ whispered Perdita, whose face was now as white as Wayne's.
‘Get out,’ hissed Ricky, who needed all his strength to guide the staggering, crashing Wayne into his box.
‘Just fuck off.’
Phil Bagley arrived in a quarter of an hour.
‘I was delivering one of Mark Phillips' calves,’ he said indignantly.
‘The things I do for you, Ricky.
Now, where's this pony?’
As he went into his box Wayne was still pawing his belly.
Then, slumping against the wall, he crashed to the ground.
‘I'll give him a massive jab of vitamin B,’ said Phil when he'd examined him, ‘and some Buscopan.
It's obviously hurting him.
Then we'd better get some fluids inside him.
I guess it's twisted gut.
Where's he been?’
‘Escaped to Eldercombe, got into Miss L-L-Lodsworth's garden.’
‘Jesus, you'd think he'd been programmed.’
As Phil loaded his syringe and Ricky tried to calm the terrified pony, whose eyes were quite glazed now, they heard frantic barking outside.
Next minute Miss Lodsworth's head appeared over the half-door, looking even more like a horse than Wayne.
‘I've come to make a complaint.’
‘Not now,’ said Phil, who was holding the needle up to remove the air bubbles.
‘Piss off,’ muttered Ricky under his breath.
‘I must speak to someone.’
‘Can you wait somewhere else?’ snapped Phil.
‘I'm sorry, but we've got a critically sick horse here.’
‘Sick, my eye,’ thundered Miss Lodsworth, ‘That horse isn't sick, it's dead drunk.
It's just eaten all my cider apples.’
There was a long pause.
Crouching down, Phil sniffed Wayne's breath.
‘I do believe you're right.
How many apples d'you reckon he ate?’
‘Close on a hundred.’
Ricky never thought he'd want to hug Miss Lodsworth.
‘Are you sure?’ he said, getting to his feet.
As he plunged the needle into Wayne's shoulder, Phil started to laugh.
A second later, Dommie Carlisle, shivering slightly in just boxer shorts, appeared beside Miss Lodsworth.
‘You've found him.
Thank Christ.
I've been looking everywhere.
What's the matter with him?’
‘Pissed as a newt,’ said Ricky.
‘I'm surprised you treat the matter so lightly,’ bristled Miss Lodsworth.
‘What about my apples?’
‘He ought to have some painkillers,’ said Phil, ‘and we ought to get some fluids into him.
Don't want him to wreck his liver.’
But Wayne was sleeping peacefully.
‘Better lay on some Fernet Branca for the morning,’ said Dommie.
‘I think I deserve a drink, Ricky.’
‘You all deserve a drink,’ said Ricky turning to Miss Lodsworth.
‘I'm frightfully s-s-sorry.
I'll refund you for the apples, and any other damage.
I haven't got any cider, but I can offer you plenty of whisky.’
Miss Lodsworth had had a long day.
‘Oh all right, I haven't been inside this house since I used to come here to dances when your father was a boy.
Not that he ever danced with me.’
After Ricky'd settled them in the drawing room with drinks, he went in search of Perdita.
She wasn't on the wooden horse or in the yard or in the tack room.
Little Chef tracked her down in the pink dusk at the bottom of the garden, with her arms round an apple tree, sobbing her heart out.
‘Please God, make Wayne better,’ she was saying over and over again, then started as Little Chef stood up on his stumpy back legs to lick her hand.
‘I'm so sorry,’ she wailed.
‘Please give me another chance.
I love it here so much.
I promise not to cheek Frances and cut corners.
I just love the ponies and Cheffie — and you — so much,’ she couldn't stop herself adding.
In a year of working for him she had never cried or apologized.
She looked so forlorn, so utterly defeated, her head drooping like a snowdrop, her wonderfully lithe body clinging almost orgiastically to the tree trunk.
Ricky had to steel himself not to take her in his arms, but he would have been putting a match to a petrol-soaked bonfire, and he didn't want to hate himself any more than he did already.
‘It's OK,’ he said gently.
‘He's not ill, just drunk.
He'd helped himself to Miss Lodsworth's cider apples.’
‘Oh, my God!
Will he be OK?’
‘Fine, except for a thumping hangover.
But you can't afford to make mistakes like that.
He might have got on to the motorway.’
‘Like Little Chef,’ shuddered Perdita, starting to cry again.
‘That's what makes it so awful.’
‘I over reacted,’ said Ricky dropping a hand on her hair.
‘You can start full time next week if you like.’
‘Oh, you are lovely.’
Seizing his hand, Perdita covered it with kisses.
‘I could make you better.
I really do love you.’
Ricky felt dizzy.
It was so long since he'd wanted someone like this.
‘No, you don't,’ he said firmly.
‘You ought to be meeting more boys your own age, not letches like Bas and the twins.
If you're coming to work here full time, you're bloody well going to join the Pony Club.’
Polo is largely a matter of pony power.
Having left the Army, Drew Benedict had spent a great deal of Sukey's money buying really good ponies.
With these he turned his game around and was gratified when his handicap was raised to eight in the autumn listings a year later.
The following year, after an excellent May and June playing for David Waterlane, Drew felt he ought to put something back into the game.
He therefore agreed to coach the Rutshire Pony Club for the polo championships, the finals of which were held at Cowdray at the end of July.
Drew also quite liked an excuse to get away from Sukey on summer evenings.
Used to commanding platoons, he was determined to knock the Rutshire teams into shape.
One of his crosses was Perdita Macleod, who had now been working full time for Ricky for nine months and felt she knew everything.
Perdita, on the other hand, even though she was playing with seventeen to twenty-one year olds, regarded playing for the Pony Club as deeply infra dig .
She loathed being parted from Ricky for a second, and Felicia, the ponies Ricky and Drew had lent her were still very green
Consequently she never stopped bellyaching to Daisy about how all the other Pony Club members had at least three ponies, and how humiliating it was having to hack to meetings when everyone else rolled up either in the latest horse boxes with grooms, or driving Porsches with telephones.
Nor, she told Daisy, did that ‘bloody old geriatric’ Drew Benedict ever stop picking on her, and all the other boys in the team were such wimps.
‘One of them started crying yesterday, when I hit him with my stick.
It was only because he was using his elbows all the time.
I tried to explain to Drew, but he just sent me off.’
‘Aren't any of the boys attractive?’ enquired Daisy hopefully.
‘Not compared with Ricky,’ snapped Perdita, ‘and they all think Drew's absolutely marvellous, because he's an eight and a Falklands hero and all.
He's such a bastard.’
‘You're always saying that about Ricky,’ said Daisy reasonably.
‘But I'm madly in love with Ricky, so I put up with it.’
It was nearly two and a half years since Hamish had walked out on Daisy and she could no longer claim to be madly in love with him, but she missed the presence of a man in her life, and her self-confidence was in tatters.
By some miracle she had hung on to her job with the Caring Chauvinist, but she found it exhausting coping with that, and running the house, and looking after Perdita, and more and more after Violet and Eddie.
Now Wendy had a daughter, called Bridget, after Biddy Macleod, Hamish seemed less interested in his older children.
Snow Cottage simply wasn't big enough for all of them, particularly when Perdita, who still hadn't forgiven her mother, was always banging doors and making scenes.
Daisy, ever hopeful and optimistic, however, still made heroic efforts to win Perdita round.
She couldn't afford a car yet, but on the day of the final trials for the Pony Club Championships, which were held at Rutshire Polo Ground, she and Ethel took two buses and walked a mile in pouring rain to lend Perdita support.
Perdita, however, was deeply embarrassed to see her mother arriving in unsuitably colourful clothes and dripping wet hair, like a superannuated hippie.
Why the hell couldn't she turn up in a Barbour, a headscarf and a Volvo like everyone else's mother?
Nervous because she was due to play in two chukkas' time, Perdita refused even to acknowledge Daisy's presence.
Momentarily the rain had stopped.
It was a hot, very muggy evening.
The sun, making a guest appearance between frowning petrol-blue clouds, floodlit the dog daisies and hogweed in the long grass and turned the pitch a stinging viridian.
A sweet waft of lime blossom mingled with the rank, sexy smell of drying nettles and elder flowers.
Daisy had brought her sketch pad, but found it difficult to capture the action and hold on to a straining Ethel.
Perhaps she could let Ethel off.
There seemed to be an awful lot of dogs around for her to play with.
Liberated, Ethel frisked with a Jack Russell in a red, spotted scarf and wolfed up a half-eaten beefburger bun.
Then, as the players came thundering down the boards, she joined the stampede, trying to steal the ball and nearly bringing down the pony of a fat child with pigtails, whose mother promptly started yelling at Daisy.
Fortunately her torrent of abuse was diluted by a downpour of even more torrential rain.
All the mothers raced for their Volvos as the players struggled over to another part of the field.
Sheltering her sketch pad under her shirt, Daisy looked helplessly around.
She had no mackintosh.
She'd just managed to catch a joyously soaked Ethel when a blond man with a flat cap pulled over his straight nose asked her if she'd like to sit in his Land-Rover.
‘It's all right.
I don't mind the dog.’
Ethel clambered into the back and slobbered down his neck.
‘You are kind,’ said Daisy gratefully.
‘Being a Pisces, I normally love rain, but this shirt's a bit see-through when it's wet.’
She was wearing a fringed dark purple midi-skirt and a pink muslin shirt from the early seventies, which had tiny mirrors sewn into it, and which was clinging unashamedly to her breasts.
Her dark hair fell damp and straight, just grazing her nipples.
‘You look like Midi Ha Ha,’ said the blond man, smiling slightly, but when Daisy unearthed a bottle of made-up vodka and orange from the chaos of her bag he shook his head.
Helping herself, Daisy noticed he never took his eyes off the play and was now turning on the windscreen wipers to watch a dark-haired boy coax a fat roan pony down the field.
‘That child's definitely team potential, but the pony's an absolute bitch, I must have a word with his parents.
And Christ, that pony's improved since last year.’
Then, consulting a list on the dashboard, ‘No, it hasn't, it's another pony.
Do you want my coat?’
‘I'm fine.’
Daisy took another swig out of her bottle.
‘Midi Ha Ha.
Laughing Vodka.
At least I can't be done for being drunk in charge of a setter.’
‘Nice dog,’ said the blond man, putting back a hand and rubbing Ethel behind the ears.
‘Isn't she?’ agreed Daisy, who was beginning to perk up.
She noticed that the man was very handsome in a stolid, heavy-lidded, way.
She would have to mix Manganese blue with a little Payne's grey to get the colour of his eyes.
He had a lovely mouth and lovely muscular thighs.
Daisy suddenly wanted to check her face, and when he went off at the end of the chukka to talk to the next group playing, which included Perdita, she toned down her rosy cheeks and drenched her neck with Je Reviens, but failed to put the top back on properly, so it stank out the Land-Rover.
‘Je Reviens,’ said the blond man, sniffing as he got back inside.
‘And I did.’
‘You're too young to have a child playing?’ asked Daisy, fishing.
‘Yes.’
Checking the list of players again, he opened the car  door, yelling, ‘For Christ's sake, Mark, you're not on your man.’
‘Ought to be called Un-Mark,’ said Daisy, taking another swig.
‘I'm dying to find out which is Drew Benedict.’
‘Really?’
‘Ghastly old fossil,’ went on Daisy happily.
‘He's giving Perdita such a hard time.
I would have thought having worked for Ricky for nearly two years, she might be allowed to evolve her own style.’
She offered the diminishing bottle to him again.
Again he shook his head.
‘How'd you get on with Ricky?’ he asked.
‘Never see him.
I just pay his farm manager our rent.
He rides past occasionally.
He still looks pretty miserable, but Dancer seems to have cheered him up, and the specialist says he'll definitely be playing again next year.’
‘Then we'll all have to look to our laurels,’ said the blond man, ‘but he's not a good teacher.
Too impatient and introverted, too obsessed with his own game.’
He's got a sexy voice, thought Daisy, soft and very quiet.
She wished she knew if he were married.
‘There are lots of boys playing,’ she said in surprise.
‘Perdita seems to be the only girl.’
‘Boys tend to avoid the Pony Club, because they're always being told to keep their toes up and clean tack.
Give them a stick and ball and it's a different story.
Some of them are pretty bloody impossible when they arrive.
No idea how to play as a team or to think of other people.
Most of them get far too much pocket money.’
‘Not Perdita's problem,’ said Daisy.
‘Nor enough discipline.
Parents’ marriages are so often breaking up.’
‘Hum — Perdita's problem,’ sighed Daisy whose tongue had been totally loosened by drink on no lunch.
‘Everyone keeps telling me she needs a father.
But it's tricky if you're a single parent — isn't that a ghastly expression?
If you go out at night looking for a father for your children, everyone brands you a whore.
People like Philippa Mannering and Miss Lodsworth.
D'you know them?’
‘Only too well.’
‘And if you're too miserable because you've been deserted, people think you're a drag and don't ask you to parties.
And if you're too jolly, wives think you're after their husbands.
I feel like taking a pinger to parties to stop myself talking to anyone's husband longer than two minutes.
Even girlfriends I know really well get insanely jealous.
Mind you, the husbands think you're  after them as well.
If you don't have a man, even the plainest ones think you're dying for it.’
‘And are you?’ asked the blond man, who was watching Perdita jump the boards and execute a particularly dazzling back shot.
‘Good girl, she kept her head down.’
‘Not really, but on lovely days you're suddenly overwhelmed with longing to be in love again.’
He turned and looked at her.
Did she detect compassion or was it slight wistfulness in those incredibly direct blue eyes?
She was just thinking how easy he'd be to fall in love with, and that she really mustn't start cradle-snatching when he said, ‘Perdita's seriously good.
She's already been picked for the Jack Gannon, that's the eighteen to twenty-one group.
But she ought to apply for a Pony Club polo scholarship.’
‘What'd that entail?’
‘Six months in New Zealand or Australia.
The BPA pay for her ticket out there and put her in a yard.
She'd get pocket money.
In return she'd look after the ponies, school them and play polo.’
‘Oh, how wonderful,’ sighed Daisy, thinking longingly of the peace at home; then added hastily, ‘For Perdita, of course.’
‘They have to be heavily vetted beforehand, so they don't let the side down.
Some winners in the past have been temperamental and failed to get up in the morning, but on the whole they go out as boys and come back as men.’
‘I hope Perdita doesn't grow hairs on her chest,’ giggled Daisy.
‘Sorry, I'm being silly.
It's a wonderful idea, but I'm sure Drew Benedict won't allow it.’
‘Why not?’
‘He thinks she's useless.’
The blond man looked faintly amused.
‘There's the bell,’ then, as a woman strode past in plus fours with an Eton crop, added, ‘and there's the DC.
I'd better go and have a word with her.’
‘Looks more AC to me,’ said Daisy, draining the last of the vodka and orange.
The sinking sun had appeared again, gilding the wheat fields and splodging inky shadows in the rain-soaked trees.
Daisy got unsteadily out of the Land-Rover.
Next moment Ethel nearly pulled her over as Perdita galloped up.
‘Hello, Mum.
You've got tomato skin on your front tooth.
What on earth were you talking to Drew about for so long.’
‘Drew?’ said Daisy faintly.
‘But you said he was old.’
‘So he is, at least twenty-nine, but I really like him now.
He's picked me for the Jack Gannon, and I'm four months under age, and he says Hermia's really improved.’
Daisy was almost too embarrassed to accept a lift home from Drew.
‘I had no idea,’ she mumbled.
‘I'll have to be a bit nicer to Perdita in future,’ he said drily.
Perdita was in such a good mood that she and Daisy actually had supper together for the first time in months.
‘Er — is Drew Benedict married?’ asked Daisy as she mashed the potato.
‘To a terrific Sloane called Sukey,’ said Perdita, not looking up from Horse and Hound .
‘She's just had a baby — it popped out during the semi-finals of the Queen's Cup.
If it had been a girl, Drew wanted to call her Chukka.
Bas said it ought to be called Chuck-up because it's always being sick.’
Daisy added too much milk to the potatoes.
‘Is she pretty?’
‘Sukey?
No-oo,’ said Perdita scornfully.
‘Drew married her for her money.’
‘I thought he was gorg — I mean quite attractive,’ said Daisy.
‘Too straight for me,’ said Perdita.
‘I wonder if I ought to take up weight-lifting.’
Daisy nearly said Perdita could start off by weight lifting some of her belongings upstairs, but desisted because it was such heaven to be on speaking terms again.
Encouraged by Drew, Daisy applied for a Pony Club scholarship for Perdita, and they were duly summoned to Kirtlington to meet the Committee in early July.
As their appointment wasn't until the afternoon, Sukey Benedict asked them to lunch beforehand.
To the Caring Chauvinist's extreme irritation, Daisy took the day off and hired a car.
Very out of practice at driving, she had several near-misses on the motorway and her nerves weren't helped by Perdita spending most of the journey with her hands over her eyes, as Daisy ground recalcitrant gears and proceeded in a succession of jerks down the High Streets of Oxfordshire villages.
Having thought about Drew Benedict rather too much in the last fortnight, Daisy was fascinated to see what Sukey was like.
But, as she came down the steps of the beautiful russet Georgian house, first impressions were very depressing.
Only five weeks after having a baby, Sukey's figure was back to an enviable slimness.
The perfect pink-and-white skin had no need of make-up.
Her collar-length, mousey hair was drawn off her forehead.
She wore a blue denim skirt on the knee and a striped shirt with the collar turned up.
Noting the lack of creases, the air of calm efficiency, the brisk, high-pitched voice, Daisy thought gloomily that Sukey couldn't be more different from her.
If this  was Drew's type, she didn't stand a chance.
Then she felt desperately guilty.
Who was she, who'd been crucified by Hamish's departure, to hanker after someone else's husband?
Escaping into the downstairs loo, which had photographs of Drew in various polo teams all over the walls, Daisy repaired her pink, shiny face.
It was so hot outside that she had settled for an orange cheesecloth caftan, which she'd jacked in with a belt of linked gold hippos.
The gathers over the bosom made her look as though she was the one breast-feeding.
She wore brown sandals, and tried to arrange the cross-gartering over two scabs where she'd cut herself shaving.
The telephone had rung just as she'd finished washing her hair, so it had dried all wild and was now held back with an orange-and-shocking-pink striped scarf, off which Ethel had chewed one of the corners.
Gold-hooped earrings completed the picture.
I look awful, thought Daisy, particularly as Perdita, who'd be expected to ride, looked absolutely ravishing in a dark blue shirt and white breeches.
Coming out of the loo, she found Drew, looking equally ravishing in a blue striped shirt rolled up to show very brown arms.
He had that high-coloured English complexion, which looks so much better with a suntan.
He took her into the sitting room, which Daisy was comforted to see was absolute hell — far too much eau-de-Nil and yellow and ghastly paintings of polo matches interspersed with some excellent watercolours.
Over the fireplace was a very glamourized portrait of Sukey in a pale blue ball dress and some very good sapphires.
Over the desk was a portrait of Drew, probably painted in his late teens.
He was wearing an open-necked shirt, and his blond hair flopped over his eyes, which were smiling with a lazy insolence.
Johnny Macklow?’ said Daisy, impressed.
Drew nodded.
‘Good girl.
Only had one sitting, spent the whole time fending the old bugger off.
Refused to go back for any more.
My mother was furious.
Vodka and orange, wasn't it?’
‘Not too large,’ chided Sukey.
‘She's got to talk sense to the Committee later.’
‘Need a stiff one to cope with that lot,’ said Drew.
Having handed the glass to Daisy, he turned to Perdita: ‘Like to come and see the yard?’
‘Lunch at one fifteen on the dot.
Don't be too long,’ ordered Sukey.
After they'd gone Sukey paced up and down sipping Evian water.
Out of the window, Daisy admired the incredibly tidy garden.
Not a weed dared to show its face.
Beyond, a heat haze shimmered above the fields which sloped upwards to a  wood which seemed about to explode in midgy darkness.
On the piano was a picture of a baby in a silver frame.
‘He's sweet,’ said Daisy.
‘Just beginning to smile,’ said Sukey, her voice softening.
‘And you've got your figure back so amazingly.’
‘Exercise and not drinking helps.’
‘It must,’ said Daisy guiltily, taking a huge gulp of her vodka and orange.
Sukey had reached the window in her pacing and was about to start on the return journey.
‘Look, I hope you don't mind my saying so, but I know Drew's frite-fly keen for Perdita to get this scholarship.
‘He's been so kind,’ mumbled Daisy.
‘But the Committee are really rather stuffy.’
Sukey was like a comely steamroller.
‘I honestly think you ought to wear something more conventional.
That orange dress would be lovely at a party, but it makes you look a bit arty and hippy.
And you should wear tights.’
‘They all had holes,’ said Daisy, flushing.
‘Let's just pop upstairs and see if we can find something more suitable.’
‘But you're miles thinner than me.’
Before she knew it Daisy was upstairs in the tidiest bedroom she had ever seen.
Even the few pots of make-up on the blue-flowered dressing table seemed to be standing to attention.
The double bed was huge too.
Lucky thing to be made love to by Drew on it, Daisy was appalled to find herself thinking.
‘When I was having Jamie, I had this lovely dress, which I hardly got out of,’ said Sukey, raking coat hangers along a brass bar.
‘Ah, here it is.’
Triumphantly she extracted a navy-blue cotton dress with a big white sailor collar, presumably to distract from the bulge.
‘Oh, I couldn't,’ protested Daisy.
But, as if mesmerized, she found herself getting out of her orange caftan and darting almost minnow-like into the navy-blue dress, so ashamed was she of the greyness of her pants, which had practically detached themselves from the elastic.
‘It really isn't me,’ she protested.
‘It is.
You need the whole look,’ insisted Sukey bossily.
‘Here's a pair of tights.
They've even got a darn; the Committee'll like that and these shoes will be perfect.
I love flatties, don't you?
But a little heel's better for this dress.
They do fit well.
And the earrings don't really go, or the scarf.
Just let me brush your hair back and put on this Alice band.
There!
Don t you look charming?
Neat but not gaudy.’
Daisy gazed at herself in the mirror.
Her forehead was unnaturally white where her fringe had been drawn back.
She suppressed a terrible desire to fold her arms and break into a hornpipe.
‘It's truly not me.’
‘It'll certainly be the Committee,’ said Sukey firmly.
‘You want Perdita to get this scholarship, don't you?’
There was a knock and a Filipino maid put a shiny dark head round the door.
‘It's ready, is it Conchita?
We'll be down in a sec.
Can you tell Mr Benedict?’
Drew didn't recognize Daisy when she crept in.
‘Where's Daisy got to?’ he said, breaking off a grape.
‘Christ!’ said Perdita.
‘You've been Sloaned, Mum.’
Doesn't she look nice? said Sukey.
‘She looks gross.’
Sukey's lips tightened.
Drew looked at Daisy incredulously, torn between rage and a desire to laugh.
‘But that's your maternity dress,’ he added to Sukey.
‘And as my disgusting stepfather walked out two and a half years ago,’ pointed out Perdita, ‘the Committee are going to think it pretty odd that Mum's got a bun in the oven.’
‘She doesn't look at all pregnant,’ said Sukey.
‘She looks like Jolly Jack Tar,’ snapped Perdita.
‘Shiver your timbers, Mum.’
‘Shut up, Perdita.’
Fighting a fearful urge to burst into tears, Daisy giggled instead.
‘Daisy looked lovely before,’ said Sukey, plunging a knife into the yellow, red and green surface of the quiche, ‘but you know how stuffy Brigadier Canford and Major Ashton are.
‘Charlie Canford's such a DOM he'd have much preferred Daisy as she was,’ said Drew coldly.
No-one could have told from his face that he was absolutely livid with Sukey, but he didn't want a row, which would upset Daisy and gee Perdita up before the interview.
Patting the chair beside him, he told Daisy, ‘If Perdita gets the scholarship, Sukey and I may well be going out to New Zealand at the same time to buy some ponies, so we can keep an eye on her.’
‘Not if you're going to dress me in sailor suits,’ said Perdita, giving a bit of pastry to Drew's slavering yellow labrador.
‘I don't think Perdita ought to have wine if she's going to ride,’ said Sukey.
‘Would you like salad with or after, Daisy?’
Ignoring her, Drew filled up Perdita's glass, then, seeing Daisy's  eyes had suddenly filled with tears, asked her if she'd like another vodka and orange.
‘Another thing to remember at the interview,’ said Sukey pointedly, ‘is to let Perdita do the talking.
Some mothers answer all the time for the children, which makes the Committee think the child lacks initiative.’
‘What have you done to my Mum, Suke,’ sang Perdita.
Shut up, Perdita, said Drew and Daisy simultaneously.
‘And do try and appear really keen, Perdita,’ advised Sukey.
‘The Committee loves enthusiasm.’
The interview lasted half an hour.
Very kindly, they asked Daisy about her financial circumstances.
She stuck out her darned leg, hoping to give an impression of genteel poverty, smiled so much her face ached and, despite Sukey's warnings, found herself talking too much to compensate for Perdita's bored indifference.
Brigadier Canford, who was indeed a lover of pretty girls, looked at Perdita's impassive, dead-pan face, and had a strange feeling he'd seen her before somewhere.
‘And what d'you want to get out of polo?’
‘I want to go to ten.’
‘Bit ambitious.
Nearest a woman's ever got is five.’
Out of the window Perdita could see children riding in pairs and dribbling balls in and out of soap boxes.
‘I know, but there was a piece in a polo magazine the other day saying many women were ten in beauty, but never could be ten in polo.
Fucking patronizing.’
‘Perdita,’ murmured Daisy.
‘I hope you wouldn't use language like that in New Zealand, young lady,’ said the Brigadier.
‘You'd be representing your country, you know.’
‘Still patronizing.’
Later they watched her playing a chukka with seven other contenders for the scholarship.
Brigadier Canford admired the lightning reflexes, the way she adjusted to a not-very-easy pony in seconds and showed up the others as she ruthlessly shoved them out of the way and cat-and-mouse-whipped the ball away just as they were about to hit it.
‘Wow,’ he said, turning to Drew.
‘I'm not sure she couldn't go to ten, and she'd certainly be ten in looks if she smiled more often.’
Puzzled, he shook his pewter-grey head.
‘I can't think where I've seen her before.’
Apart from Perdita, the Rutshire team for the Jack Gannon Cup consisted of Justin and Patrick Lombard, farmer's sons who'd spent their lives in the saddle and who made up for lack of finesse with dogged determination, and David Waterlane's son, Mike, now nearly twenty-one, who played like an angel when his father wasn't on the sideline bellowing at him.
In an exhausting, exhilarating fortnight, they moved round the country triumphing gloriously at Cheshire, being demoralized at Cirencester, where they drew against a vastly inferior team, cockahoop at Kirtlington, and nearly coming unstuck at Windsor, where Perdita was sent off for swearing, so Rutshire had to play the last chukka with only three men, and only just won.
On the first Friday in August they finally reached Cowdray and won the semi-finals by the skins of their gumshields.
The Quorn, opposing them, had rumbled Drew's Exocet weapon, and spent the match giving Perdita so much hassle that she only hit the ball twice.
The Lombard brothers and Mike Waterlane, however, scored a goal apiece to put Rutshire into Sunday's final against the mighty South Sussex, who hadn't been beaten for three years.
The entire Championships were being sponsored by petfood billionaire and fitness freak, Kevin Coley, Chairman of Doggie Dins, Moggie Meal and the newly-launched Fido-Fibre.
Kevin had formerly sponsored show jumping, but five years ago had run off with Janey, the wife of Billy Lloyd-Foxe, one of his professionals and Rupert Campbell-Black's best friend.
After Janey went back to Billy, Kevin had patched up his differences with his wife, Enid, but one of the conditions had been that  Kevin would sponsor polo instead of show jumping to avoid bumping into Janey on the circuit, and because their daughter, Tracey, would meet a nicer class of young man in polo.
Trace — as she liked to be called — at eighteen was playing in the crack South Sussex team against Rutshire in the final.
If she wasn't quite up to her other team-mates, her presence there vastly increased her father's generosity.
The whole South Sussex team had been driving round the country in a vast aluminium horse box, evidently the latest thing in America, and Kevin had provided each player with four top-class ponies.
The South Sussex team was also more than compensated by the rock solidarity of a boy called Paul Hedley at back, and the dazzling Sherwood brothers, Randolph and Merlin, who'd pulled out of high goal polo for a fortnight to piss it up with the Pony Club.
Randy Sherwood, who was known as the Cock of the South, had a handicap of two and was so glamorous with his long, long legs and curly hair that fell perfectly into shape, that girls clamoured to groom for him for nothing.
Merlin, who was quieter, but just as lethal, had pulled a different groupie every night of the Championships.
Randy, going amazingly steady for him, had spent the fortnight screwing Trace Coley, who was as pretty as she was spoilt, because he'd heard rumours that Kevin was thinking of including him in his team next year.
Perdita and Trace had detested each other on sight and, together with Randy, Trace spent a lot of time when they weren't screwing, winding Perdita up.
Not only did they drench her in a water fight when she didn't have a change of clothes and throw her on the muck heap, but on Friday evening offered her a roll filled with Doggie Dins, so she spent the rest of the night throwing up.
Perdita reacted with screaming tantrums.
Trace, suspecting Randy's incessant baiting might have some basis in desire, stepped up the spite.
And now it was Finals' Day and the number two Ambersham ground at Cowdray was a seething mass of caravans, tents, trailers, canvas loose-boxes for 200 ponies and rows of cars belonging to team managers and exhausted parents.
Breakfast of sausage, egg and chips was sizzling over camp-fires.
The mobile loos had worked until the day before, but now each bowl was an Everest of Bronco and the stench was getting worse.
With fifty teams present, there had also been one hell of a party the night before.
Now, revellers nursed their hangovers.
All the Beaufort and the VWH had been penalized for skinny-dipping.
One of the Quorn had been discovered in a very loose-box with a girl from the Cotswold and dropped from his team.
Perdita, not in a party mood, had stayed in her tent reading The Maltese Cat .
Daisy, having taken a fortnight's holiday to drive Perdita around in yet another hired car, had never felt so shattered in her life.
She spent the morning scrubbing out the ponies' boxes because the Rutshire team manager, miffed that Drew seemed to have utterly taken over, threatened dire reprisals if a blade of straw was left on the floor.
In despair at the greasiness of her hair, Daisy had washed it in the river — how the hell had women coped in biblical times?— and it had dried all crinkly.
The cornflower-blue dress she had brought to wear at the finals had been slept on by Ethel and was impossibly creased, as was her face after two nights sleeping in the car.
Her legs, not brown enough, were becoming bristly.
She was miserably aware of getting on Perdita's nerves, and, as all the fathers had rolled up, of the loneliness of being a woman on one's own.
She was almost abject with gratitude to Drew who'd insisted she use his Land-Rover as her base, and who'd come up specially that morning to invite her to lunch and to watch the match with him and Sukey.
Among the Pony Club, Daisy noticed, Drew was a Superman.
A fortnight ago he had played for England against America in the annual International.
Only his two hard-fought goals and grimly consistent defence had prevented the game turning into a rout.
Now he couldn't move twenty yards without signing autographs.
In his cool way Drew found this gratifying.
Marrying Sukey had admittedly enabled him to buy a string of cracking ponies and build a much-envied yard, but he was increasingly irked by the curbs on his freedom.
Sukey raised eyebrows when he ordered rather too good a bottle of claret in restaurants.
She winced at the size of his tailor's bill and questioned him going to Harley Street to replace two teeth knocked out in the Gold Cup when there was a perfectly good National Health dentist down the road.
And just because Miguel O'Brien had switched to a new, ludicrously expensive, lightweight saddle, why did all Drew's ponies need one too?
Drew had never been extravagant, but he couldn't see the point of parsimony for parsimony's sake, so he had decided to look for a patron, some ignoramus who would pay him a long salary to coach him and look after his ponies.
Kevin Coley was rumoured to be fed up with the dreadful Napiers and looking for a new senior professional.
Trace Coley was impossibly spoilt, but Drew felt he could handle her.
It was therefore in his interest to be the coach responsible for toppling South Sussex this afternoon.
While the South Sussex team, by invitation of Kevin, were all lunching on lobster, gulls' eggs, out of season strawberries and champagne in the Doggie Dins' Tent, half a mile away in one of Lord Cowdray's cottages, the Rutshire were having a team meeting.
The curtains were drawn so they could see the video that Drew was playing of their semi-final against the Quorn.
Drew leant against the wall, his thumb on the control button.
‘Today we have one problem — you have to mark the other guys or we'll lose.
You should never be more than two horse-lengths away from your man at any time.
You must concentrate.
Justin.
You were loose in the first chukka, so were you, Patrick.’
Drew froze the picture for a second.
‘Their Number Three was all on his own.
If Randy Sherwood gets loose with the ball we're lost.
Trace Coley's their weak link.
You won't have any trouble with her, Mike, so give Patrick all the back-up he needs and both mark the hell out of Randy.’
‘I'll try,’ said Mike, who had a hoarse voice like a braying donkey, the gentle timidness of a Jersey cow, and blushed every time he was spoken to.
Drew turned to Perdita, who was deciding whether to race to the loo and be sick again.
‘Remember you're playing polo, not solo, Perdita.
Their back, Paul Hedley, is quite capable of storming through and scoring, so stay with him.
And, above all, no tantrums.
South Sussex may be ludicrously over-confident, but we can't beat them with three players.’
Then, to Perdita's squirming embarrassment, he replayed the clip of her rowing with the umpire three times, freezing the frame of her yelling with her mouth wide open, until her teammates were howling with laughter and rolling round on the floor.
A shaft of sunlight coming through the olive-green curtains wiped out the picture.
‘Let's go and have lunch,’ said Drew.
Daisy hung about until Drew and the team came back to the Land-Rover.
Sukey had done everyone proud, and the Lombard boys, who were labradors when it came to food, were soon wolfing smoked salmon quiche, marinated breast of chicken, mozzarella in brown rolls,ratatouille and potato salad made with real mayonnaise.
Mike, who'd gone greener than the minted melon balls provided for pudding, and Perdita, who was lighting one cigarette from another, couldn't eat a thing.
‘You must get something inside you,’ insisted Sukey bossily, ‘and you too, Daisy.’
I'd like your husband's cock inside me, Daisy was absolutely  horrified to find herself thinking.
It was only because Drew had remembered she liked vodka and orange and had poured her two really strong ones.
In her present vulnerable state she was hopelessly receptive to kindness.
‘Oh, where's Ricky?’ moaned Perdita for the millionth time.
‘Don't be too upset if he doesn't come,’ said Drew in an undertone.
‘I know he wants to, but all these children riding and such family solidarity may be too much for him.’
He's so sweet to her, thought Daisy gratefully, getting out her sketchbook as Drew took the team off to the pony lines to tack up.
Sukey firmly screwed the top on the vodka.
‘You're driving.
I expect you'd like coffee now instead of another drink.’
‘Aren't you nervous?’ said Trace Coley fondly, as Randy accepted a glass of brandy.
Don't be ridiculous.
Mike Waterlane's their only decent player, and he'll go to pieces as soon as his father turns up.’
David Waterlane drove his Rolls-Royce with the leaping silver polo pony on the front towards Cowdray.
He had made the mistake of going via Salisbury because his bride of six months, who was twenty years younger than him, wanted to look at the cathedral.
As they drove through rolling hills topped by Mohican clumps of trees and moved into the leafy green tunnels of Petersfield, his bride, who'd been primed by Drew, put her hand on her husband's cock and suggested that it would be more fun to stop and have their picnic in a field than join the crowds at Cowdray.
It was only two o'clock, they'd seen the parade many times before, and Mike's match wouldn't start before 4.15.
Ponies tacked up in the pony lines yawned with boredom as their owners gave them a last polish.
Mothers cleared up the remnants of picnics.
Fathers looked up at the uniform ceiling of grey cloud and decided to put on tweed caps instead of Panamas.
Mrs Sherwood, Randy's and Merlin's mother, divorced, with a Brazilian lover, and too glamorous for words in a peach suede suit, was talking to Kevin Coley, who looked like a pig with a thatched, blond tea cosy on its head.
Kevin, in turn, was being watched by his wife, Enid, who had gaoler's eyes, was more regal than the Queen, and in her spotted dress looked like a Sherman tank with measles.
Daisy marvelled that she and Kevin could produce a daughter as pretty as Trace.
Cavalcades were riding quietly down to the ground, past trees indigo with recent rain, and cows and horses grazing alongside the faded grey ruins of the castle with its crenellated battlements and gaping windows.
Of the fifty teams taking part in the parade, only eight were playing in the four finals, but there was still the prize for the best-turned-out team to be won.
The ground, a huge stretch of perfect emerald turf, was bordered to the north by fir trees and to the south by mothers having fearful squawking matches about the authenticity of various junior teams who weren't allowed to ride bona fide polo ponies.
‘Tabitha Campbell-Black's pony played high goal at Cirencester!’
‘No, it didn't!’
‘Yes, it did!’
Brigadier Canford, Chairman of the Pony Club, and lover of pretty girls, was less amused to be stampeded by Valkyries.
‘The Beaufort are cheating.
They've back-dated membership of their Number Four.
He's American and only been in the country two weeks.’
‘The Bicester are cheating too.
I've just caught them trying to ditch their weak link and import a brilliant boy from Rhinefield Lower who doesn't have a team.’
‘Ladies, ladies,’ said Enid Coley, joining the group of howling mothers.
‘Polo is only a game.’
‘And she'll have the South Sussex team manager stoned to death at dawn with vegetarian Scotch eggs if they don't win,’ murmured Bas Baddingham who'd just rolled up and was kissing Daisy.
At two forty-five the parade began.
On they came: chestnut, bay, dark brown, dappled grey, palomino , the occasional extravagantly spotted Appaloosa, ears pricked, tack gleaming, stirrups and bits glittering.
Daisy marvelled at the shifting kaleidoscope of coloured shirts, and the great, ever-moving millipede of ponies' legs in their coloured bandages.
Many of the riders wore face-guards like visors in some medieval contest.
Daisy wished she could paint it, but you'd need to be Lady Butler to capture that lot.
Fatty Harris, Rutshire's club secretary, seconded for the day to do the commentary, had had rather too good a lunch in the Doggie Dins' Tent and was waxing lyrical over the ancient names.
‘Here comes the Beaufort, the Bicester, the Cotswold, the Vale of the White Horse, the Craven, the Shouth Shushex Shecond Team.’
‘Thought he'd have trouble with that one,’ said Bas.
‘And a big cheer for the Rutshire,’ went on Fatty Harris, ‘today's finalists in the Jack Gannon.’
On came the Rutshire in their Prussian-blue shirts, Prussian-blue bandages on their ponies' gleaming legs.
Little Hermia, a changed pony after a fortnight's attention from Perdita, danced and snatched at her bit in excitement.
‘She should have ridden Felicia in the parade,’ said Sukey disapprovingly.
‘Hermia doesn't need hotting up.’
But Hermia's the nearest she can get to Ricky, thought Daisy and she's still hoping he'll turn up.
Next to Perdita rode Mike Waterlane on Dopey, a deceptively sleepy-looking pony, who was faster than a Ferrari and nipped all the opposition ponies in the line-out.
Beyond him rode the Lombard brothers grinning broadly and enjoying themselves.
‘Oh, don't they look lovely?’
Suddenly the tears spurted out of Daisy's eyes and she had to turn away and bury her face in Drew's Land-Rover.
Next moment a large piece of kitchen roll had been shoved into her hand.
A minute later, when she'd got control of herself, Drew was back with another glass of vodka and orange.
A great cheer rang out as Cowdray, the home team, came on in their orange shirts.
‘And here we have the other finalists in the jack Gannon, unbeaten for the last three years, the South Shushex,’ Fatty Harris got it half right this time.
Randy, Merlin, Paul and Trace rode with a swagger and there was no doubt their ponies were the sleekest, fittest and most expensive of all.
‘I'm sure you all know that Trace Coley, the daughter of Kevin Coley, Chairman of Doggie Dins and our sponsor, is South Sussex's Number One in the final today,’ announced Fatty Harris.
Kevin raised both clasped hands in a salute to acknowledge luke-warm cheers; Trace lifted her whip.
‘She's left her hair loose, the little tart,’ said Perdita contemptuously.
‘That'll cost them the turn-out prize even if they win everything else.
Oh, I wish Ricky was here.’
‘Ladies and gentlemen,’ said Fatty Harris, ‘I give you the Pony Club.’
At the sight of these serried, beautifully turned-out ranks, this huge army with their polo sticks on their collarbones like bayonets, a deafening cheer went up.
Fathers rushed about with video cameras, mothers wiped their eyes.
Randy and Merlin Sherwood's beautiful mother adjusted her mascara in the driving mirror and eyed Rupert Campbell-Black who'd just rolled up alone in a dark green Ferrari to watch his daughter, Tabitha, play in the first final for the under-fourteens.
Rupert, who'd just been appointed Tory Minister for Sport, eyed Mrs Sherwood back.
Then, suddenly, out of the sky like a vast whirring hornet came a black helicopter.
Perdita gave a gasp as it landed to the west of the pitch.
The door flew open and, like a page from Nigel Dempster, out jumped the Carlisle twins, Seb carrying  Decorum, their bull terrier, and Dommie helping out a redhead and a blonde whose skirts immediately blew above their heads to show off wonderful suntanned legs.
They were followed by Dancer in dark glasses and black leather, Twinkle and Paulie, each with an Alsatian, and finally — Perdita gave a scream of delight — by Ricky with Little Chef in his arms.
‘Now, members of the Pony Club, will you please walk off the pitch,’ exhorted Fatty Harris.
‘We owe it to the Cowdray ground and to Lord Cowdray to walk off.’
In the past the temptation to gallop across the hallowed Cowdray turf, which so many of them were not going to have the chance to play on, had been too much for the teams.
Dreadful stampedes had resulted, with the whole field being cut up before a ball had been hit, which had resulted in turn in threats of not being allowed back.
The sight of Ricky, however, was too much for Perdita.
‘I'm here,’ she screamed, and digging her heels into Hermia, went straight into a gallop towards the helicopter, followed by 199 yelling Pony Club members, who fortunately veered off to the left, and didn't trample the new arrivals to death.
‘Disgraceful,’ spluttered Sukey.
‘She should lose her scholarship for that.’
Drew shrugged.
‘The sooner she's packed off to New Zealand away from Ricky the better.’
Seeing her master, Hermia ground to a halt and whinnied with pleasure.
Little Chef leapt up and licked her nose.
Jumping off, Perdita threw herself into Dancer's arms, hugged the twins, and then turned more shyly to Ricky.
Her heart was crashing around like Big Ben about to strike.
‘Thank you so much.
I never thought it'd make so much difference,’ she gabbled.
Ricky put up a hand and touched her cheek.
‘Hermia looks well,’ he said, ‘and much h-h-happier.’
‘She shakes hands for a Polo now,’ said Perdita.
‘You'd better win.
We've all got money on it,’ said Dancer.
‘Can you get that crate of Moët out?’ he added to Twinkle.
The twins, who had only left the Pony Club two years ago, pushed off to see their old chums.
Everyone else landed up beside Drew's Land-Rover.
Soon the autograph hunters were swarming round Drew, Bas and Dancer.
It broke Perdita's heart that Ricky, who'd only been out of top-class polo for three years, was totally ignored.
‘What a lovely shirt,’ said Sukey to Bas.
‘Where did you get it?’
‘Marks and Spencer, I think,’ said Bas.
‘There, you see,’ Sukey chided Drew.
‘I'm always telling you there's no need to go to Harvie and Hudson.’
Seeing the flash of anger in Drew's eyes, Bas tactfully enquired after the baby.
He'd forgotten what sex it was.
‘Oh, Jamie's at home,’ said Sukey.
‘I'm amazed how Drew dotes on him.
Men love having a boy, don't they?’
She turned to Ricky, ‘It matters so much to a man having an heir.’
For a second, as Ricky's face went dead, Bas and Dancer exchanged horrified glances.
‘Isn't that Tabitha Campbell-Black playing for the East Cotchester?’ said Bas, as a tiny figure, jaw thrust out, white stick-like legs flailing, thundered down the boards.
Come on, Tabitha.
‘Man, man, man,’ screamed the tiny figure to the East Cotchester Number Three.
‘Take the fucking man, for Christ's sake.’
The umpire blew his whistle.
‘That'll be forty against you for swearing, young lady.
Consider yourself lucky you haven't been sent off.’
Bellowed on by her father, Tabitha scored three goals and East Cotchester won the Handley Cross.
Leaning against the Land-Rover, Daisy drew Rupert.
Goodness, he had a beautiful face.
Then she drew Ricky with his sombre, slanting dark eyes and then Drew twice, trying not to make him too handsome.
In pencil, she could never capture the blueness of his eyes.
Having sketched Bas as a merry Restoration rake, she had a crack at Sukey.
Not easy — Sukey's charm was all in her colouring.
She had a long face and such a naked forehead, Daisy found herself turning her into a polo pony.
‘I'd hide that if I were you.’
Looking up with a start, Daisy saw that Ricky was actually smiling.
‘Oh my God.’
Daisy ripped out the page.
Very appropriate, said Ricky, taking it from her.
I'm sure Sukey turns on sixpence.’
‘She has a turn if Drew spends sixpence,’ said Bas, peering over Ricky's shoulder.
‘Bloody good, that's brilliant of Rupert.
I'm much better looking than that.’
Giggling, Daisy stuffed the page into her pocket.
‘I've done a couple of Hermia, in fact several,’ she shoved the book at Ricky.
He really was the most shy-making man.
Ricky flicked through, really looking.
‘You've got her, even that little scar over her eye.
They're marvellous.’
‘Keep them,’ said Daisy, blushing.
‘I framed your cat.
You must come and see it.’
‘You must come and have supper sometime,’ Daisy was staggered to hear herself saying.
It must be the vodka.
‘I'd like that,’ said Ricky.
And he always says no to Philippa Mannering, thought Daisy.
Perhaps if he fancied Perdita he saw her as a potential mother-in-law.
‘Hello, Ricky,’ said a shrill voice.
Grinning up at him, her two front teeth missing, was Tabitha Campbell-Black.
‘Hello, Tab.
D'you know Mrs Macleod?’
‘You played very well,’ said Daisy.
‘I know.
None of the others did.’
Tabitha, who had all the beauty and arrogance of her father, was now gouging out the centre of Sukey's home-made fruitcake with both hands.
‘Have you had a good camp?’ asked Ricky.
‘Great.
I haven't cleaned my teeth for a week.’
‘They'll fall out.’
‘No, they're used to it.’
‘Where's your father?’
‘Chatting up Randy Sherwood's mother.
He's given Beattie Johnson the push, which is a shame.
She never minded me getting into bed with her and Daddy.’
‘Has he bought any new horses?’
‘Yes, a stallion called Lord Thomas.
He's so good, I hold the mares when he mates with them.
Lord Thomas is the perfect gentleman, he always licks the mares afterwards.’
‘Unlike his father,’ murmured Ricky to Daisy, as Tabitha scampered off.
The Rutshire and the South Sussex were warming up their ponies for the Jack Gannon.
The long wait had told on Perdita's nerves.
‘Think positive,’ she said through clattering teeth.
Mike Waterlane was grey.
‘I don't know what's happened to Daddy.’
‘Hopefully, he's had a shunt,’ said Patrick Lombard, tightening his girths.
The pale yellow flowers of the traveller's joy entwined in the hedgerows brought no happiness to David Waterlane stuck behind a convoy of cars on the Midhurst Road which was held up by a huge lorry with a sign saying ‘Horses’ on the back.
‘Bound to be show jumpers — bloody  yobbos ,’ said David Waterlane apoplectically.
There was no way he was going to reach Cowdray nor his son's match for the throw-in.
The new Lady Waterlane, having drunk three-quarters of a bottle of Bollinger and achieved two and a half orgasms, was well content.
‘Go for the girl,’ ordered Randy Sherwood, as South Sussex rode on to the field.
‘Mark her stupid, bash the hell out of her.
Once she loses her rag, they'll all go to pieces.’
‘I want 5–0 on the scoreboard by half-time,’ Drew told Rutshire, ‘and don't let Randy get loose.’
‘My son is one,’ announced a large mother, whose red veins matched her dress.
‘That's a lovely age.
Is he crawling?’ asked Seb Carlisle's girlfriend.
‘She's talking about his handicap,’ said Sukey in a low voice, and looked very disapproving when Daisy started to laugh.
To a whirring of cine-cameras and a gratifying clicking of Nikons, Enid Coley progressed graciously into the stands.
Noone could see a thing round her big spotted hat.
Kevin Coley was busy supervising four different video cameramen to capture Trace's every stroke of genius on the field.
Seeing Dancer and Drew talking to Mrs Sherwood and Rupert and, being a terrible star fucker, he barged into the group.
‘Let the best man win,’ he smirked at Drew.
‘Well, it certainly won't be you,’ drawled Rupert.
Mrs Sherwood turned and smiled at Kevin.
After all, he was picking up her sons' expenses.
‘Do you know Dancer Maitland and Rupert Campbell-Black, Kevin?’
‘Rather too well,’ said the new Minister for Sport, his eyes like chips of ice.
‘Shut up,’ said Drew out of the corner of his mouth.
‘I hope he's going to sponsor me.’
‘I wouldn't advise it,’ went on Rupert, not lowering his voice at all.
‘Kevin sponsored a friend of mine a few years ago and took over his wife.
If you're going into business with Kev, I'd slap Sukey into a chastity belt pronto.’
‘That is quite uncalled for,’ spluttered Kevin.
‘They're about to throw-in.
Come on Rutshire,’ shouted Bas, filling up everyone's glasses.
‘Why are you wearing that wrist brace?’
Merlin asked Randy as he lined up behind Justin Lombard.
‘Too much wanking,’ said Mike Waterlane, going bright pink at his own daring.
‘I don't need to wank, you little pipsqueak,’ snapped Randy, nodding and smirking in Trace's direction.
‘I've got the real thing.’
‘I hope she's better at screwing than polo,’ hissed Perdita, who, like a cat waiting to spring, was watching the umpire's hand.
‘You bitch,’ squealed Trace.
The umpire, who was having great difficulty controlling his dapple-grey pony, hurled the ball in.
Hermia hated throw-ins.
It took all the strength of Perdita's frantically squeezing legs to stop her ducking out.
Reaching over, however, she managed to hook Randy's stick, so Mike was able to tap the ball away.
Thundering towards the centre of the field, giving two South Sussex players the slip, Perdita picked up a beautiful pass from Mike, skedaddled easily round Paul Hedley, hit two glorious offside forehands towards goal, before cutting the ball  perfectly through the buttercup-yellow goal posts.
Up went the yellow flag.
‘That'll teach you to booze at lunchtime,’ she said sweetly to Randy as she cantered back.
After that Randy really had it in for her.
Taking a pass from Patrick during the next chukka, she set out once more for goal.
‘Leave,’ brayed a hoarse donkey voice behind her, ‘leave, you bloody idiot.’
For a fatal second Perdita paused, thinking it was Mike shouting.
Turning her head, she saw it was Randy Sherwood imitating Mike to muddle her, and that he was the only player in pursuit and had now gained valuable distance.
The ball was ahead on her left.
As she stood up in her stirrups, stretching over Hermia's nearside shoulder to hit the forehand, her right leg automatically swivelled up in the air.
Lined up along the south of the field, the crowd could only see her left side.
One umpire was up the other end, the other was too busy controlling his refractory pony to watch what Randy was up to.
A second later he had neatly kicked her right stirrup out.
Perdita mis-hit wildly, and only by some miracle stayed in the saddle, by which time Randy had backed the ball upfield to Merlin, who scored.
‘Bastard,’ screamed Perdita, racing down the field, twirling her stick in the air, which was against the rules.
She also knew that she should have reported the foul to Mike, who would then make an official complaint to the umpire, but she was too angry.
‘The fucking, cheating bastard,’ she screamed.
‘He kicked out my stirrup.
‘I what?’ asked Randy, the picture of innocence.
The umpires conferred, then, like Tweedledum and Tweedledee in their striped shirts, cantered over to the third man in the stands, who'd been gazing at Mrs Sherwood at the time and missed the incident altogether, and who now waved his down-turned palms back and forth to indicate no foul.
‘You've got to be joking,’ said Perdita hysterically.
‘Bloody, dirty cheat.
The umpires awarded a thirty-yard penalty to South Sussex.
At the slowest, most mocking hand-canter Randy Sherwood circled and stroked the ball between the posts.
‘You're making things seriously easy for us,’ he told a raging Perdita as he cantered back.
Despite dogged marking by Rutshire, the superior pony power of South Sussex was beginning to tell.
They were six-five ahead and Drew and Ricky had their heads together at half-time.
Then, as the Rutshire ponies' girths were loosened and they  were washed down, scraped and walked round by the grooms, Drew called a brief team meeting.
‘I'm going to swap you over,’ he said.
‘You're going to Number Four, Justin, and you're moving up to Number Two, Mike.
Mike lowered the can of Coke which he'd been emptying down his parched throat.
‘I couldn't.
I'll never hold Randy.’
‘Randy's got a slower pony in this chukka, who won't like Dopey taking a piece of him in the line-out one bit.’
It was a wise change.
Randy's late night and heavy lunch were telling on him.
He was not seeing the ball so well.
Like a fly on an open sore, Mike harassed him, the way Randy had harassed Perdita earlier, and was too busy to notice that his father had finally arrived.
Randy got so mad, he slashed Mike across the knuckles with his stick.
The umpire, who'd finally got control of his pony, gave Rutshire a penalty.
Taking it, Mike hit the post, but a hovering Patrick Lombard slammed it in.
Six all.
The cheering was now non-stop.
Perdita had the line and was cantering a wilting Hermia down the boards, her roan coat turned the colour of red cabbage with sweat, her breath coming in huge gasps.
Ahead, the ball was bumping and slowly losing momentum over the divots, and Paul Hedley, the South Sussex Number Four, was galloping over to ride her off and back the ball up the field.
What was that fake she'd practised with Ricky and Dancer last week?
She checked a grateful Hermia.
Paul checked his big, black thoroughbred.
Perdita checked Hermia even harder, Paul followed suit.
Filled with the devil, Perdita swung Hermia even closer to the boards, so the ponies' nearside hooves were scraping the paint off, and Paul, who'd been instructed to mark Perdita at all costs, stayed with her.
For a second his mind was off the ball, leaving it free for Patrick Lombard to belt in and whip it away, dribbling it for a few yards, then powering it to Mike, who, relishing his new freedom at Number Two, took it up field.
Merlin, who'd been covering for Paul and protecting the South Sussex's goal, cleared once again, but Perdita blocked his shot.
She could have tried for goal, but Mike had an easier shot so she gave him a lightning, nearside, under-the-neck pass.
The whole ground groaned as Mike hit the post.
Like Chrissie Evert executing an effortless backhand crosscourt volley at Wimbledon, Perdita shot forward and whacked the ball home.
Seven-six, Rutshire were in the lead — the ground erupted, flat caps were being hurled in the air.
Horns tooted.
There were fifteen seconds left of play.
‘We can't go to extra time,’ Drew muttered to Ricky.
‘Our ponies have had it.’
Realizing this, Randy shook off Mike at the throw-in and raced off to level the score.
‘Look at the ground opening up for Randy Sherwood,’ said Fatty Harris.
‘Watch him going into overdraught, whoops, I mean overdrive.
Can Randy make it seven all?’
Randy felt he could.
With Sherwood arrogance, he lifted his stick for the copybook cut shot.
Next moment Perdita, streaking down the field, had thrown herself out of the saddle and clinging with her left hand round Hermia's damp hot neck, hooked Randy as the final bell tolled for South Sussex.
The crowd went crazy.
‘Ouch,’ howled Ricky.
‘Oh my God,’ gasped Daisy, letting him go.
‘Was that your bad arm?’
‘Nothing's bad at this moment,’ said Ricky triumphantly.
‘Bloody marvellous,’ yelled Drew.
‘I knew they'd win easy,’ crowed Dancer.
‘Swap jerseys with me, I dare you,’ said Merlin Sherwood to Perdita.
Without missing a beat, she whipped off her Prussian-blue shirt to show a flash of white breast and browny-pink nipple before she dived into Merlin's olive-green jersey.
‘Did you see that?’ said Sukey in a shocked voice to Brigadier Canford.
‘Indeed I did,’ said the Brigadier.
‘Wish I'd brought binoculars.
Damn fine little player.’
Stripped to the waist, brown from the Zimbabwe sun, Randy rode up to Perdita to shake her hand.
Grabbing it, he pulled her towards him.
For a second she felt his hot, strong sweaty body against hers, then he kissed her.
‘Well played, you stuck-up little bitch,’ he whispered.
‘I'll get you in the end.’
Next minute Perdita had slapped him across the face.
Fuck off, you great oaf, she screamed.
Laughing, Randy cantered off.
Trace Coley, who'd lost a match and a lover in as many minutes, burst into tears.
Dismounting to rest Hermia, Perdita walked off the field straight up to Ricky.
‘Was it OK?’
It was the first time she'd seen him look really happy.
‘It was f-fucking wonderful.’
Oh God, thought Daisy, he mustn't smile at her like that, he's utterly irresistible.
Kevin and Enid Coley were slightly compensated by the  barrage of cameramen, particularly one from The Tatler , who photographed them talking to Lord Cowdray, and later handing out prizes and cups.
Tabitha Campbell-Black was livid because she won a bag of Bailey's Performance Mix horse feed rather than a T-shirt with a picture of a polo pony on the front.
‘I'm sure your performance isn't at all mixed,’ murmured Rupert to Mrs Sherwood who seemed to have accepted South Sussex's defeat with great equanimity.
The Brazilian lover was looking increasingly disconsolate.
The prize-giving was supposed to be compèred by Fatty Harris, but having taken so many nips while he was commentating, he had to pop into the Portaloo immediately after the match.
He then had the humiliation of being locked in and towed away, with all the Pony Club screaming with delight at the sight of his vast red-nosed, anguished face and hammering fists at the window.
Horse boxes and cars were already driving off as Trace Coley, looking sexy in her father's Panama, sauntered up to receive a body brush and a blue rosette as one of the runners-up in the Jack Gannon.
Hastily scribbling out his copy for The Times on the bonnet of his car, J.N.P. Watson wrote:
‘The star of the side, however, was seventeen-year-old Perdita Macleod, the Rutshire Number One, who scored three goals.
Working at Richard France-Lynch's yard for the past two years, she showed much of the old France-Lynch magic, and must be regarded as high goal potential.’
‘And finally,’ announced Brigadier Canford, ‘we come to the Mary Tyler Award for the most promising girl player.’
Daisy watched an expectant Trace Coley re-arranging her Panama in the driving mirror of her father's Rolls as Brigadier Canford put on his spectacles to have a better look.
Then he beamed with delight.
‘Which goes to Perdita Macleod.’
For a second Perdita froze as the reluctant cheers began to crescendo and stuffed her fists in her eyes, fighting back the tears.
Then, immediately pulling herself together, she strolled up and thanked Kevin and Brigadier Canford very sweetly for her polo stick, before flicking a very obvious V-sign at Trace on the way back.
Immediately Drew took her aside.
‘Will you bloody well pull yourself together.
Non-stop swearing, stripping off on the field, making V-signs at the sponsor's daughter.
I saw you.
Do you want that scholarship or not?
After all the trouble your mother's taken driving you round the country, why the hell are you deliberately trying to hurt her?’
‘So we'll no more go a-Land-Roving so late into the night,’ sang Daisy five minutes later, as, dizzy with pride and vodka, she weaved back to Drew's boot looking for her bag and went slap into Drew.
‘The Coleys have asked us back for drinks at Château Kitsch — that's worth seeing anyway,’ he said, ‘but lots of potential patrons will be there and the Pony Club Committee, so it could be useful to Perdita.
They've just confirmed her scholarship by the way, but don't tell her or she might blow it.
It's nothing to cry about.’
‘I don't know how to thank you, and I've got nothing to wear,’ mumbled Daisy.
‘You look fine.
No one 'll change.’
Daisy wished just for once that Drew could see her when she wasn't looking awful.
‘Are Ricky and Dancer going?’
‘They've gone home.
Ricky's just been even ruder to Kevin than Rupert was.
Told him he didn't want to accept hospitality from patrons who go round cuckolding their players.
It gave him a ghastly feeling of déjà vu .’
‘Does Kevin know what déjà vu means?’
‘He does now.
And Enid's hopping.’
Half an hour later Enid had calmed down, at least on the surface, and changed into her aquamarine lurex hostess gown.
As her hair had been squashed down by her David Shilling spotted hat, she put on her prettiest blond wig with the tendrils over the forehead.
Drenched in Shalimar, wearing her pearls, because her diamonds might make people who'd been unable to change feel under-dressed, Enid awaited her guests, radiating regality.
‘I didn't realize it was going to be a tented wank,’ said Drew, as Sukey applied a dash of pink lipstick.
It was not yet dusk, but the drive up to Kevin's mock Tudor house was lined with lit-up toadstools.
The front door was flanked with the famous Moggie Meal cat and the Doggie Dins terrier.
Six foot high and floodlit, they winked, mewed and yapped when the door bell was rung.
Inside, maids in black took coats for tickets, and told everyone to go through the lounge as Mrs Coley was receiving in the pool area.
Perdita listened to her mother grinding gears and going on and on and on about how marvellously Perdita had played and how it had been the proudest moment of her life, and how everyone from Rupert to Brigadier Canford said what a great future she had and Drew this and Drew that.
And of course, being Daisy, she was quite unable to resist telling Perdita the thrilling news which she mustn't tell anyone , that she'd got the scholarship.
‘Just think,’ she raved on, as they drove past honeysuckled hedges and trees covered with reddening apples, ‘six months in New Zealand.
Hot springs and Kiwis and,’ Daisy couldn't remember anything else about New Zealand, ‘oh yes, Maoris, of course.’
‘Maori, Maori quite contrary,’ said Perdita gloomily.
Why wasn't she flying back to Robinsgrove with Dancer and Ricky?
She didn't want to go to New Zealand.
She'd die if she was parted from Ricky for five minutes.
He'd been so lovely, and her shoulder still burned where he'd put a hand on it after the game.
If she stayed in England with him, she'd learn much faster than shovelling horse-shit in New Zealand and being made to get up early in the morning.
Getting up early was only worth it if she were going to see Ricky.
‘I wonder if you'll be in South Island or North Island,’ said Daisy, narrowly avoiding ramming the car in front which had braked suddenly.
‘Oh, shut up, Mum, I want to think.’
By the pool at Château Kitsch, which was as blue as Enid Coley's hostess gown, Trace, who'd changed into a slinky black dress, was having a row with Randy Sherwood.
‘How dare you kiss Perdita Macleod in front of everyone?’ she hissed.
‘Because I want to screw her,’ said Randy unrepentantly.
‘I bet she's a virgin, and she'd be volcanic in the sack.’
Perdita had just walked in.
She was still wearing muddy breeches, black socks and Merlin s polo shirt.
Her hair was scraped back in a pony tail, her face was smeared with mud.
What was the point of tarting up if Ricky wasn't there?
Ignoring Randy's imperious wave, she walked over to talk to Mike Waterlane.
On the edge of the pool, knowing there was a possibility of Kelvin sponsoring Drew, Sukey was chatting up Enid Coley.
Perdita remembered Sukey being just as deferential to Grace Alderton three years ago, the first time she'd seen Ricky in the flesh.
I can't go to New Zealand, she thought.
The food being handed round was quite awful — muesli sticks, unsalted nuts, prunes, figs, sliced bananas.
Huge jugs of fruit juice were being pressed on guests, rather than booze.
Randy Sherwood edged up to Perdita.
‘My mother's just gone off with Rupert Campbell-Black,’ he said.
‘I think he is the coolest guy in the world, and the richest.
I wouldn't mind him as a stepfather.’
Reaching out for a vegetarian Scotch egg, and hurling it at  his brother, Randy added casually, ‘Will you have dinner with me tonight?’
But Perdita wasn't listening; she was far too engrossed in Sukey's conversation with Enid Coley.
‘When one thinks of the number of miserably displaced children from broken homes who've been given a sense of purpose by the Pony Club’ Sukey was saying, then, lowering her voice, ‘take Perdita Macleod.
She was a little horror when Drew took her over — but look how she played today.’
‘Given one or two shocking lapses of behaviour,’ snorted Enid Coley.
‘Mind you, it can't have helped working all this time for Ricky France-Lynch.
He is the rudest, most arrogant man I've ever met.
I mean, who does he think he is?
I totally understand his little wife going off with Bart Alderton.
Kevin and Bart do a lot of business together.’
‘He did lose a child,’ said Sukey.
‘Because he was drunk.
From all Bart says, he was rude and arrogant before that.
That's what stopped him getting to the top.
‘What did you say?’ said an icy voice.
Beneath the mud smears, Perdita was as white as a new polo ball.
She was shaking with rage, there was fifth-degree murder in her eyes.
Sukey started.
‘Oh, Perdita, I'd no idea you were there.’
‘We were saying,’ said Enid, without looking over her hefty lurex shoulder, ‘that Ricky France-Lynch's personality stopped him getting to the top.’
‘Well, you're going to the bottom, you disgusting old bag,’ screamed Perdita, and the next moment she had butted Enid in the small of a very large back right into the swimming-pool.
Jumping in after her, Perdita pulled off Enid s wig to reveal scant grey wisps and pushed her under the water, where the aquamarine hostess gown billowed up to display fawn pop socks at the end of fat, purple legs.
‘How dare you slag off Ricky?’ screamed Perdita.
‘How dare you?
How dare you?’
Everyone was shouting.
There were even some cheers.
Next minute, Kevin, Drew and Randy Sherwood, who was laughing his handsome head off, had jumped into the pool and were trying to prise Perdita away.
‘Stop it,’ said Drew, pinning her arms behind her back and grimly increasing the pressure until she gasped with pain and let go.
‘Did you hear what she was saying about Ricky?’ she cried hysterically.
‘You're not helping him by behaviour like this,’ snapped Drew.
For a second Perdita struggled with him, then watched with mixed emotions by Sukey, Daisy and a drenched Randy Sherwood, she collapsed sobbing in his arms.
‘No one understands Ricky like I do.’
Ricky was so furious with Perdita for deliberately sabotaging her scholarship that he gave her the sack.
Even the sight of Little Chef and the ponies longingly looking out for her every morning didn't make him relent.
‘He's a hard man,’ said plump Louisa, who also missed Perdita dreadfully.
Only the sullen, scrawny Frances was delighted.
At home Perdita behaved more atrociously than ever before, storming round the house, refusing to get a job and screaming at Violet and Eddie when they returned bronzed from a month in LA with Hamish and Wendy.
Nor were matters helped by Violet gaining ten ‘A's in her O levels, losing a stone and getting her first boyfriend, who rang her constantly at all hours of the night from Beverly Hills.
Violet and Eddie then went back to their respective boarding schools, paid for by Granny Macleod, which only stepped up Perdita's paranoia and jealousy.
At the end of September Violet came home for a long weekend and Perdita was so bloody-minded that in despair Daisy escaped to Harvest Festival for an hour of peace.
Eldercombe Church was packed.
Miss Lodsworth, who organized the flower rota, had excelled herself.
Huge tawny chrysanthemums big as setting suns, gold dahlias like lions’ manes, yellow roses, sheaves of corn, briar and elder glowing with berries all brought a glow to the ancient yellow stone.
Every windowledge was crammed with apples gleaming like rubies, vast vegetable marrows and pumpkins and, more prosaically, tinned fruit, sardines and baked beans.
Some joker had even added a tin of Doggie Dins.
Daisy also noticed, as she slid into an empty pew at the back, that the church was unusually full of attractive women.
There was Philippa Mannering looking avid in a beautifully cut check  suit and a brown beret at a rakish angle.
There was the pretty girl from the village shop wearing an emerald-green dress more suited to a wedding.
Exotic scent mingled with the more religious smells of incense, furniture polish and veneration.
Putting paid to Daisy's hour of peace were also hoards of children clambering over pews, chasing each other down the aisles, punching their mothers, and having to be repeatedly hushed for talking.
Not children used to being brought to church, thought Daisy.
Then she realized she'd forgotten to kneel down when she came in, and blushing, sank to her knees.
Oh, please God, she prayed, shake Perdita out of this ghastly mood and make her happy again, and look after darling Violet and Eddie, and Gainsborough and Ethel, and please God, if you think it's right, let me fall in love with a man who isn't married, who falls in love with me and don't make it too long.
Hell, she'd picked a pew next to the radiator.
She'd be as red as those beetroots in the window in a minute.
Please God, don't make me so vain, she asked, scrambling to her feet with the rest of the congregation as the organ launched into ‘We plough the fields and scatter’.
Then Daisy twigged the reason for all those glammed-up women.
Far ahead, in the France-Lynch pew, poignant because he was the sole inhabitant, stood Ricky.
He was looking unusually smart in a pin-stripe suit and a black tie which was the only colour he'd worn since Will died.
With the pile of huge marrows, the whole service seemed like some ancient fertility rite, with Ricky the unattainable corn king whom everyone wanted.
‘He only is the maker of all things near and far ,’ bellowed Miss Lodsworth, totally out of tune.
‘He paints the wayside flower, He lights the evening star .’
Daisy's eyes filled with tears.
What beautiful words.
Would she ever find time to paint wayside flowers again?
Ricky certainly lit the Evening Star for Perdita.
She must ask him round for a drink.
The gay Vicar, who loved the sound of his own voice, took a long time over the service and Daisy's thoughts started to wander.
Tears filled her eyes again as she thought of the little gravestone in the churchyard: In loving memory of William Richard France-Lynch, 1978–81.
Oh, poor Ricky.
Daisy blew her nose on a piece of blue loo paper.
She felt even sorrier for him with that stammer when he went up to read the first lesson, and had to announce that it came from the eighth chapter of Deuteronomy, a word which took him four goes.
His face was impassive, his hands steady.
Only the long pin-striped right leg, shuddering uncontrollably, betrayed  his nerves.
Now he was wrestling with the bit about ‘God leading thee into the w-w-wilderness for forty years to humble thee and to p-p-prove thee .’
Comparing his grey frozen features with the carved stone angel beside the lectern, looking at the long lit-up scar, and the furrowed forehead as he wrestled with the difficult words, Daisy thought he didn't need to humble or prove himself any more.
She supposed because he was ostensibly Lord of the Manor, he felt he had to do it.
Dancer would have had much more fun.
Daisy was sweating for him, and as he stumbled over the word ‘pomegranates ’, she could feel the collective good will of the painted ladies in the congregation urging him home like the favourite in the Grand National.
The Vicar then took the text for his sermon from the second lesson, ‘God loveth a cheerful giver’, and was so carried away by his own rhetoric that he absent-mindedly helped himself to most of the grapes hanging down from the top of the pulpit.
Daisy was screwing up her courage to accost Ricky and ask him for a drink after church when the Vicar launched into the final prayer about being made flesh, and she suddenly remembered the vast ox heart cooking in the oven for Ethel, which would burn dry if it wasn't taken out, so she belted home.
Anyway Ricky had been buttonholed outside the church by the gay Vicar and scores of eager ladies.
‘Come to dinner this evening, just kitchen sups,’ Philippa was saying.
‘I'm afraid I've got to work,’ Ricky said brusquely.
‘I'd simply love to,’ said the Vicar.
Daisy was still giggling when she got home to Snow Cottage and made the mistake at lunch of telling Perdita that Ricky had read the lesson.
‘Did you speak to him?’ demanded Perdita, dropping her forkful of braised fennel with a clatter.
‘What did he say about me?
Did you ask him for a drink?’
‘I didn't get near him.
He was surrounded…’
Daisy was about to say ‘by women’, but hastily changed it to ‘by members of the congregation as I was leaving, and I had to get back for Ethel's heart.’
‘What about my fucking heart?’ screamed Perdita.
‘You don't give a shit that it's broken.
You're so bloody wet, one could grow waterlilies all over you,’ and, storming out of the kitchen, slammed the door behind her.
‘Why don't you stand up to her, Mum?’ asked Violet.
I must not cry, Daisy gritted her teeth.
After she'd cleared up lunch she hoisted Ethel's huge ox heart out of its water on to the chopping board.
Usually she got through cutting it up by fantasizing that she was Christian Barnard saving the life of Francis Bacon or Lucian Freud.
Today it didn't work, the tears started flowing again.
I mustn't go to pieces, she whispered, tomorrow I'll be brave, and ask Ricky round for a drink.
Fortunately the Caring Chauvinist was away the following day, but Ricky's number was always engaged.
Only when she checked with directory enquiries did she learn that the receiver was off the hook.
Getting home from the office, she found Violet and Perdita having another screaming match.
‘I'm not coming home at half-term if she's here, Mum,’ complained Violet.
‘She's destroying all of us.’
Having cleaned her teeth, washed, put on a bit of make-up and brushed her hair, Daisy set out up the ride to Robinsgrove.
The sun was sinking in a red glow, the lights were coming out in Eldercombe Village.
Once more Daisy was knocked out by the fecundity of everything, the blackthorn purple with sloes, plump hazel nuts already shredded by squirrels, elderberries shiny as caviar hanging like shower fittings from their crimson stems.
She ought to make elderberry wine, then she wouldn't spend so much on vodka.
Ethel bounced ahead, crashing joyfully through the russet bracken, then splashing and rolling in the stream, spooking as ponies loomed out of the dusk.
Ahead towered Robinsgrove — such a large house for one unhappy man.
I must be brave for Perdita's sake, said Daisy through chattering teeth as she pressed the door bell.
He can only tell me to eff off.
Inside she heard frantic barking.
The door opened an inch.
‘Yes,’ said an incredibly unfriendly voice.
Little Chef had other ideas.
Barging through the gap, he hurled himself on Ethel in a frenzy of tightly curled tail-wagging.
Then, on tiptoe with excitement, he danced round her licking her eyes and ears.
‘Oh, it's you,’ said Ricky.
‘C-come in.’
‘Ethel's soaking.’
‘She's OK.
Little Chef seems to like her.’
Following him through the dark, panelled and tapestried hall, Daisy noticed the telephone off the hook in the drawing room, then froze.
Ahead on the kitchen table lay a twelve bore.
Ricky must be about to commit suicide.
She must get him out of the house.
‘I came to ask you to supper,’ she babbled looking back into the drawing room.
‘You must come at once.
Autumn's awfully  depressing, it affects lots of people.
I'm sure things'll seem better tomorrow.’
Ricky followed her gaze.
‘Oh, that accounts for the peace today.
I must have left it off the hook this morning.
Rupert rang about a pony.
I went out to the yard to check some detail.’
He replaced the receiver.
Instantly it rang — Philippa trying to fix up a dinner date.
‘I'm working tonight,’ snapped Ricky, ‘and next week I'm going to Argentina.’
He slammed down the receiver.
‘Fucking woman.’
He was going to shoot himself and Little Chef, thought Daisy numbly.
‘I don't think you should be on your own,’ she said in what she hoped was a calming voice.
‘I know you'll never get over what's happened.
But nice things do happen.
They played ‘’ Invitation to the Waltz'’on Radio 3 this morning' — she was speaking faster and faster, edging towards the gun —‘such a heavenly tune, I played it at school, and suddenly found myself waltzing round the kitchen, then Ethel leapt up and waltzed with me, and I thought perhaps there is a life after Hamish.
If you came to supper now, you could watch television, and Violet learnt how to play poker in California, she's teaching me, we could have a game and Perdita would love to see you.’
Her voice trailed off when she saw Ricky looking at her in utter amazement.
‘What are you going on about?’
Daisy pointed nervously at the gun.
‘I think you should put that horrid thing away.’
Suddenly Ricky smiled with genuine amusement.
It was as though the carved angel by the lectern had suddenly come to life.
‘You thought I was going to top myself.
I've been shooting partridge with Rupert.
I was cleaning my gun.
Look.’
He held up his oily hands.
‘Oh, gosh,’ said Daisy appalled.
‘How stupid of me!’
‘Anyway, you can't commit suicide with a twelve bore, although they're always doing it in books.
Look.’
He picked up the gun, and held it to his temples, ‘One's arms simply aren't long enough to pull the trigger.’
Daisy had gone absolutely scarlet.
‘I was just worried, with the telephone off the hook and all.’
‘I'm quite OK,’ said Ricky, slotting the gun back in its case, ‘and I would like to come to supper.’
‘You would?’
Daisy's jaw dropped.
All they had in the house was six eggs for scrambling and the remains of Ethel's heart.
as if reading her thoughts, Ricky said, ‘Better still, we'll go out.’
‘Oh, no,’ said Daisy, appalled.
‘I didn't mean that.
I wouldn't dream of foisting myself on you.
And the children…’
‘Are quite capable of looking after themselves.
I got my licence back last week, so it's a treat to drive someone.’
‘I'm not dressed.’
‘Nor am I.’ He was wearing faded olive-green cords, a check shirt and a dark brown jersey.
Daisy would so like to have got tarted up, but at least her hair was newly washed that morning and her teeth were clean.
But Perdita would never forgive her for going out with Ricky.
‘I'll just wash,’ he said, ‘and you can ring home.’
Daisy was desperately relieved to get Violet, who was wildly encouraging, ‘Go for it, Mum, he's gorgeous.
Got yourself a decent date at last.’
Ricky took her to a French restaurant in Rutminster with low beams, scrubbed pine tables, sawdust on the floor, rooms leading one into another and mulberry red walls covered with hunting prints.
The head waiter, enchanted to see Ricky after three years' absence, kissed him on both cheeks, enquired after his elbow, and found him a quiet corner.
Daisy was mildly encouraged that Ricky deliberately sat on her right, on his non-scar side.
He ordered her a large vodka and orange and Perrier for himself.
At first the pauses were dreadfully long.
‘D'you miss not drinking very much?’
He nodded.
‘I'm lousy at small talk, and it helped.’
‘Couldn't you just drink occasionally when you need it — like at parties?’
‘Once I start I can't stop — like Kinta.’
He uncrossed a pair of knives.
‘I suppose you feel it's a way of making sure it never happens again.’
She flushed as red as the mulberry walls.
‘I'm sorry.
I shouldn't remind you.’
Ricky broke up a piece of brown bread, but didn't eat it.
‘Does it get better?’ asked Daisy.
‘Not much.’
The flame from a scarlet candle lit up the stubble darkening his chin and the even blacker rings under his eyes.
Oh, Christ, that's torn it, thought Daisy.
‘Are you ready to order, Meester France-Lynch?’ asked the head waiter.
‘The moules marinières are very very nice.’
‘I'll have that,’ said Ricky, then turned to Daisy.
Oh help, she thought.
One of the things that had driven Hamish crackers was her inability to make up her mind.
‘No hurry,’ said Ricky.
‘Give us a few more minutes.’
‘I'd like mushrooms à la grecque ,’ said Daisy quickly,
‘And to follow,les perdreaux sont superbes .
We serve them stuffed with foie gras and cooked in Madeira.’
‘Partridge,’ explained Ricky.
‘They do them very well here.’
Daisy nodded hastily.
‘I'd like that.’
Anything not to irritate.
‘And don't overcook them,’ said Ricky.
‘And we'll have a bottle of the Number Fourteen.’
‘I'll be plastered,’ said Daisy, aghast.
‘No-one could accuse me of being a half-b-b-bottle man,’ said Ricky.
‘What was your husband like?’
‘Very half-bottle, very noble-looking, very serious.
He thought I was too silly for words, but he made it possible for me to keep Perdita, so I'll always be grateful.’
‘You miss him?’
‘I miss all the things he did — like policies and banks and keeping the children in order.
And I miss having a pair of arms round me.
It's like being a house without a roof.’
She was boiling.
She'd have to take off her thick blue jersey soon, and she couldn't remember how many buttons had come off the shirt underneath, and it was sleeveless, and she hadn't shaved her armpits since Philippa asked her to supper last week.
‘It's such a pity,’ she gabbled on, ‘one can't go out and buy a new husband or wife the next day, like you do with puppies or kittens.
I'm sure it'd be much easier to help one get over things.’
I don't want a new wife,’ said Ricky flatly.
‘No,’ said Daisy humbly, thinking of poor Perdita.
‘I can see that.
Chessie was so beautiful.
I've seen pictures.’
‘Better in the flesh.
Her colouring was so p-p-perfect.
It was my fault I neglected her.
I was foul-tempered and arrogant and polo-mad.
I never had any money to buy her the things she wanted.’
She had you, Daisy wanted to say.
It was no good, she'd have to take her jersey off.
Horrors, two middle buttons were missing to show an ancient grey bra.
Hastily she breathed in and clamped her arms to her sides to hide the stubble.
Then, seeing Ricky looking at her in amazement, said quickly, ‘Bart Alderton sounds hell.’
‘He's a sadist,’ said Ricky as the waiter arrived with their first course.
‘That's why I must get her back.’
And while the black mussel shells rose in the spare plate, like cars on a scrap heap, he told Daisy about Chessie's last taunt.
‘But that's wonderful,’ said Daisy, ‘so romantic.
You can win the Gold Cup and the Westchester, and go to ten like the labours of  Hercules.
I'd rather do that than kill the Hydra.
You must do it.’
Ricky passed Daisy a mussel.
‘They're very good.
I will if Dancer has anything to do with it.
Now they've lifted the ban on my going abroad, I'm off to Argentina next month to squander his millions on some really good ponies.’
‘Perdita adored Dancer,’ said Daisy.
‘These mushrooms are bliss.
In fact, the whole thing is a real treat.’
She took a huge gulp of wine.
‘How is she?’ asked Ricky casually.
‘Suffering from massive withdrawal symptoms.
She misses you — all,’ she added hastily.
‘I miss her,’ said Ricky.
‘She's a menace, but she makes me laugh.’
‘I wish she occasionally made us laugh at home,’ sighed Daisy.
‘Giving you a hard time, is she?’
Ricky filled up Daisy's glass.
It was not in Daisy's nature to bitch, but faced with Ricky's almost clinical detachment, everything came pouring out — Perdita's endless tantrums, her impossible demands, her spite to the other children.
‘I haven't got many wits, but I'm at the end of them.
That was lovely.’
She handed her plate to the waiter.
‘Hamish going affected her dreadfully.
They fought the whole time, but underneath she was frantic for his love and approval.’
‘Who was her father?’
‘It's so shaming,’ whispered Daisy.
‘Can't be that bad.’
She was saved by the waiter shimmying up with the partridges, making a great show of how pink they were inside, pointing out the foie gras stuffing, the celeriac purée and the exquisitely dark and glistening Madeira sauce.
But the moment he left Ricky returned to the attack.
‘So, what happened?’
Being Daisy, she blurted it all out.
‘I should have told Perdita years ago, but I'm such a drip I funked it.’
Tears were flooding her face and she wiped them frantically away with the sleeve of her jersey.
Aware a drama was taking place and dying to know if this was Ricky's latest, the waiter sidled over.
‘Everything all right, Meester Franch-Lynch?’
‘Perfect, now push off.’
Ricky put a hand over Daisy's, a large rough hand with callouses beneath the base of each long finger from endlessly holding a polo stick.
‘You are a good mother,’ he said gently.
‘I can read between Perdita's lies.
I know what sacrifices you've made, working in that ghastly Christmas pudding factory, not buying any new  clothes for years.’
He picked up the frayed, very pointed collar of her shirt.
‘I didn't know I was going out to dinner,’ said Daisy defensively.
‘Course you didn't.’
‘I don't know what to do with her.’
Daisy blew her nose on her red-checked table napkin, then realized what she'd done.
‘Oh God, I'll wash it and send it back.’
‘She needs polo,’ said Ricky, ‘but serious polo.
She ought to be playing ten chukkas a day with really good players, and she ought to get miles away from you so she can't kick the shit out of you.’
As he filled her glass again he knocked over the salt cellar and quickly chucked the spilt salt over his left shoulder.
‘Are you painting?’
‘Not much.’
Daisy was pleating the edge of the tablecloth.
‘All my inspiration seems to have dried up since Hamish left and I seem to have lost all my confidence as a woman.
Not that I had much, anyway.’
‘In what way?’
Ricky was stripping the partridge leg with his teeth, very white and even except a front one chipped by a polo ball.
‘Come on, eat up.’
It is quite difficult cutting up a partridge when your elbows are glued to your ribs.
Daisy started forking up celeriac.
‘Last week I went to dinner at Philippa's.
She insisted she'd got a lovely man for me.
But it was just as an excuse to get her latest lover into the house.
He wasn't remotely interested in me and brought Philippa some goat's cheese that looked like Tutankhamun's brain.
They disappeared for hours to look at some rare book and Lionel insisted on seeing me home.’
Her lip trembled.
‘I'm sorry, this is awfully boring.’
‘Horror films aren't boring,’ said Ricky.
‘And suddenly he leapt on me.’
Disgusting old goat!
Ricky was comfortingly furious.
‘Appropriate, really!
He tasted of goat's cheese.
I've never been very good at rejecting people, so I told him I was frigid.
He just leered and said, ‘’ I'm a psychiatrist, little girl.
I can cure that.'’
' Daisy gave a shudder.
‘I'll chuck them out,’ said Ricky angrily.
‘Joel says they're model tenants,’ said Daisy.
‘They're always cutting their lawn.’
‘Can't imagine Lionel modelling anything.
You're not to have anything more to do with them.
Understand?’
Ricky put his knife and fork together.
‘Let's get back to Perdita.
I'll take her to Argentina with me next week.
No, it's a good idea.
You know Alejandro Mendoza?
Then, with incredulity, But he's the greatest back in the world.
The Mendozas are blood rivals  of the O'Brien brothers, Juan and Miguel, who used to play for David Waterlane before the Argies were banned.
They invariably end up on opposite sides in the Argentine Open.
I'm going out to buy ponies from Alejandro.
He takes a few players every year on his estancia .
They bring on the young ponies and in return he teaches them.
My handicap went up in twos the winters I spent with him.
There are always young boys hanging round the place.
Perdita needs a boyfriend.
I'll leave her with Alejandro till Christmas.’
‘We couldn't possibly afford the plane fare,’ mumbled Daisy.
‘Dancer'll pick that up,’ he said.
‘He wants Perdita to play for him next year.
She'll add some much-needed tone.
He's been nagging me to take her back for weeks.
He can just advance her some salary.
There's no need to cry.’
‘I'm sorry.’
Daisy wiped her eyes on her sleeve again.
‘I ought to get the Niagara Falls Award for bawling.
I'm just not used to lucky breaks.
Are you sure?’
‘Positive.
Now Rupert's Minister for Sport, he can fiddle her a visa.’
As he smoothed back his dark hair, his signet ring caught the light.
‘What's your motto?’ she asked.
‘Never surrender,’ said Ricky bleakly.
And he won't until he gets Chessie back, thought Daisy.
Three-quarters of a bottle of wine had loosened her tongue.
‘I've been moaning on about Perdita all evening, but at least she's alive, whereas Will…’
‘…
Isn't,’ said Ricky watching the bubbles rise in his glass of Perrier.
‘Suffering's supposed to make you nicer.
Didn't work for me.
That's probably why I've been so bloody to Perdita.
The guilt still knocks me sideways — just being alive.
Sometimes I panic because I can't remember what he looked like.
Chessie took all the photographs.
She needed them.
He'd be six now, old enough to start hitting a ball around.
It comes in waves, doesn't it?’
He glared at her.
‘Look, I really don't want to talk about it.’
‘I just think you ought to try and forgive yourself,’ mumbled Daisy.
We're like two chickens side by side trying to defrost, she thought.
‘When are you coming back to England?’
‘February or March.
I can't stand another English winter.
Dancer's fixed up for me to make a bomb coaching movie stars in Palm Springs.
My elbow still plays up when I play too long.’
After that they talked about Dancer and Ethel and Little Chef and Ricky's ponies, and drank so many cups of coffee and Daisy even had a crème de menthe frappé that it was long after midnight when they left.
‘The colandered Barbour,’ said Ricky, holding out her coat for her.
‘You've been crawling through my barbed wire!’
Outside, in the back of the BMW, Ethel's great spotted goofy face was grinning out.
Beside her, his front paws on her shoulder, tail wagging his small body into a frenzy, was Little Chef.
‘It's easy for dogs,’ said Daisy with a hiccup.
‘I've had such a lovely time,’ she said as Ethel fell on her in ecstasy, ‘and Ethel's lick is much more efficient than cleansing cream.’
‘This road is awful,’ said Ricky as they bounced down the rough track to Snow Cottage.
‘I must get it fixed before the winter.’
Seeing all the lights on, Daisy quailed.
Surely Perdita wouldn't kick up when she knew she was going to Argentina.
Desperate Ricky shouldn't think she was giving him the come-on, she had the door open before the car stopped.
‘Do come in and tell Perdita.
She'll be so excited,’ she called back as she scuttled up the path.
If Ricky was there Perdita might not make a scene, but he had paused to look at the front gate which needed mending.
Perdita sat on the kitchen table dressed all in black.
She looked like a hell cat, sloe eyes glittering, teeth bared in a terrifying rictus grin, body rigid with loathing.
‘Darling — the most heavenly news,’ said Daisy.
‘How dare you go out to dinner with Ricky?’ screamed Perdita.
‘I bet his telephone wasn't off the hook at all.
You just wanted an excuse to vamp him.
You can't do without it, you bloody old tart, can you?
I bet you asked him out.’
Next minute Ricky had walked into the room and slapped her across the face.
Don't you ever talk to your mother like that again, you revolting little bitch,’ he howled.
‘Now go to bed!’
Perdita gazed at him, her white left cheek slowly turning bright scarlet, her eyes widening in horror.
‘Nothing wrong with your elbow if you can hit like that,’ she spat.
‘She's poisoned you against me, I knew she would.’
‘I said go to bed,’ said Ricky harshly.
‘Go on, bugger off.’
With a stifled sob Perdita stumbled upstairs, slamming the door so hard that every ornament in the house shook.
There was a pause, then both Ricky and Daisy jumped at the sound of clapping.
Slowly Violet walked into the room.
‘I always heard how marvellous you were,’ she said to Ricky, ‘but I'd no idea how marvellous.
I've been waiting for years for someone to do that.’
‘Good,’ said Ricky, unmoved.
Then, slowly, he looked round the kitchen and the sitting room at the flowers painted all over the pale green walls, like a meadow in summer, at the dark green ivy crawling up the  stairs and the bears and tigers and dragons decorating every piece of furniture.
‘Christ,’ he said in amazement.
‘I can always paint over it,’ said Daisy hastily.
‘It's stunning.
You said you hadn't been painting.
Stop shaking.
It'll be all right.’
‘Should I go to her?’
‘Leave her to stew,’ said Violet and Ricky in unison.
‘Oh, and by the way, Mum,’ went on Violet, ‘Philippa rang and said could you man the Bric-à-Brac Stall on Saturday.’
‘No, she can't,’ snapped Ricky.
‘I said you couldn't,’ said Violet gleefully.
‘I told her you'd gone out to dinner with Ricky.
She sounded put out.’
‘Oh goodness,’ said Daisy.
‘I've been hearing how marvellous you are,’ said Ricky drily to Violet, ‘but I'd no idea how marvellous.
Might put the bloody nympho off.’
After he'd had another cup of coffee, he went up to see Perdita.
She was crying great wracking despairing sobs into her pillow.
Ricky sat down on her bed.
‘Fuck off.
‘It's me, Ricky.’
‘Fuck off even more.
I hate you.’
‘You better stop sulking and apologize to your mother or I won't take you to Argentina.’
‘I'll never apologize to her,’ said Perdita tonelessly.
‘What did you say?
How?
When?’
‘Week after next, to stay with Alejandro.
He'll teach you a few manners and how to play polo properly.’
‘Oh, thank you!’
Perdita flung her arms round his neck.
He could feel her hot soaked cheeks, her wet hair, her lips against his cheek, the bars of her ribs, the softness of her breasts, the contrasting bullet hardness of her nipples.
‘And then can I come back to Robinsgrove?’
‘If you behave yourself.’
Still she clung.
He could feel her heart pounding.
She was so like Chessie.
He'd never wanted to screw anyone more in his life, but gently he disengaged himself.
‘Go and apologize to your mother.’
Next day the weather turned cold, bitter winds systematically stripping the trees.
Walking through Ricky's woods, Daisy noticed ruby-red sticky buds thrusting out on the chestnuts, although many of the trees still clung on to their shrivelled brown leaves.
Like Ricky and me clinging on to the past, thought Daisy.
Ten days later Ricky and Perdita left for Argentina.
‘I want to ask two f-f-favours,’ said Ricky as he put Perdita's suitcases in a boot crammed with polo sticks.
‘Could you possibly put flowers on Will's grave sometimes for me?
And if Little Chef goes into a real decline will you promise to ring me?’
Perdita hardly bothered to kiss her mother goodbye.
She hadn't forgiven her her night out with Ricky.
The wireless blared ‘I just called to say I love you’ as Daisy went back into the house.
She couldn't help envying Perdita.
It was a terribly long journey, even though they broke it in Florida.
Ricky hardly took his nose out of a Frederick Forsyth novel.
Perdita, bra-less, in a T-shirt and a skirt that buttoned up the front for easy access, writhed and burned beside him.
She cleaned her teeth every three hours and had Juicy fruit continually at the ready in case he wanted to kiss her.
She deliberately got a bit drunk at dinner and when the lights were switched out let her head fall on to his shoulder.
‘I'm cold,’ she murmured.
‘I'll get you another blanket.’
As he would for any of his ponies, thought Perdita bitterly.
‘I'm still cold,’ she whispered half an hour later.
Ricky put an arm round her shoulders, but made no pass and eventually she fell asleep.
Ricky gazed out of the window at stars as sleepless as himself.
If he slept he might have nightmares about Will and Chessie.
He couldn't bear to wake up screaming on the plane as he so often did alone at night at Robinsgrove.
Ricky got very uptight at Miami Airport when his polo sticks were nearly put on a plane to Hawaii by mistake.
‘Expect the poor things needed a holiday.
You work them hard enough,’ said Perdita.
But even Ricky telling her not to be bloody silly couldn't douse her sudden euphoria at the sight of the BA stickers being stamped on their luggage.
She was going to Argentina, home of the greatest polo players and ponies in the world.
The Buenos Aires flight was delayed and the plane horribly hot, but this didn't upset the passengers who seemed delighted to be going home.
The men, very handsome and as many of them blond as dark, gathered at the back of the plane, embracing each other and eyeing Perdita with approval and chattering like a great drinks party.
After a shamingly large second supper of chicken, sweetcorn and cake, a vast vodka and tonic and half a bottle of red wine, at one o'clock in the morning the chatter suddenly turned into the Frogsmore Stream running under Snow Cottage and she fell asleep until six to find the chatter going on as loud as ever.
Women passengers who'd nodded off in full make-up emerged with faces crumpled and ankles swollen.
For breakfast they were offered cake again, this time with salt and pepper.
‘Bearing in mind the vast divide between rich and poor in Argentina, they presumably let them eat cake all the time,’ said Perdita.
Ricky didn't smile.
He'd had another sleepless night and ahead lay customs, who couldn't be expected to be exactly pro-British, and because of post and telephone strikes in Argentina, he hadn't been able to confirm the flight with Alejandro, so they'd have to  go through the hassle of hiring a car to drive the 330 kilometres out to his estancia .
Perdita, however, was excitedly looking down on vast faded pink rivers curling through spinach-green forest, and the blue shadow of their plane lying across Buenos Aires.
Now she could see red houses, swimming-pools, race tracks, skyscrapers sticking up like teeth, and roads and railways so uniformly crisscross they seemed like tiles on a vast kitchen floor.
Rupert had also pulled some powerful strings.
After a lightning whip through immigration, an official located all their luggage and polo sticks and whizzed them through customs.
As they came through the exit doors, Ricky looked wearily round for an Avis sign.
Perdita, in a faded purple T-shirt and sawn-off pale pink jeans, was pleasantly aware of all the men staring unashamedly at her.
Then a young man in a blue shirt rushed up to his arriving girlfriend with a huge bunch of hyacinths and daffodils.
Abandoning the English winter, Perdita realized she and Ricky had gone slap into the Argentine spring.
Next minute a tall, blond boy with a bull-dog jaw and massive shoulders walked up to them, looking slightly apprehensive.
‘Hi, Ricky,’ he said in a deep Florida drawl.
‘Don't know if you remember me, Luke Alderton.
If you want to hit me across the airport, I'll understand, OK, but I'm staying with Alejandro.
Thought you might like a ride out to the estancia .’
For a second, Ricky glared at him, then he smiled.
‘I never had any fight with you, Luke.
It's incredibly kind of you to meet us on the offchance.
This is Perdita.’
Perdita found her hand being engulfed in an incredibly strong grip, and Luke looked down at her, grinning lazily and appreciatively.
‘What are you doing here?’ asked Ricky.
‘Being used as cheap labour to break Alejandro's ponies,’ said Luke, taking Perdita's suitcases from her, ‘in return for picking up a few tips from the master.’
(He pronounced it masster.)
‘Thank Christ for that,’ said Ricky.
‘You can look after Perdita.’
‘Shouldn't be too much of a hardship,’ said Luke, then eyeing Perdita s slender arms, but she better start pumping iron if she s going to play high goal.’
As he sorted out the porter with amazingly fluent Spanish, Perdita noticed he was wearing a bomber jacket with US Open printed on the back.
‘Who's he?’ she whispered to Ricky.
‘Bart's son by a previous marriage,’ said Ricky.
‘Potentially the best back in the world.’
Within seconds they'd piled into a battered Mercedes and were fighting their way out on to the airport road.
Luke pointed to a red spotted scarf gathering dust up on the dashboard.
‘You may want to put that over your eyes, the driving's kinda crazy here,’ he said as ten cars hurtled forward with absolutely no lane discipline, and all went straight through a red light with furious honking.
Next moment a huge bus with Jumbo El Rapido on the side tore past overtaking and cutting in front.
‘Christ,’ muttered Perdita.
‘Good training for the polo here,’ said Luke.
‘The Carlisle twins and my brother Red were down here last week with Victor Kaputnik.
They came out of a restaurant and had a race with Juan O'Brien and two of his cousins.
Victor nearly had a triple by-pass.
He jumped out of Red's car yelling, ‘’ Taxi, taxi'’.
He was so frightened he wouldn't let the driver go across a green light in case he hit Red and the twins coming the other way.’
Luke shook with laughter.
‘Who's staying with Alejandro?’ asked Ricky.
‘Well, one guy couldn't stand the pace and Ray Walter broke his wrist and went home, and there's an Argie, Angel Solis de Gonzales, ex-Mirage pilot, trying to make it as a pro.
Not wildly pro-Brit understandably.’
‘Any good?’ asked Ricky.
‘Awesome.
He's only been playing seriously for a couple of years,’ said Luke, hardly flinching as a car cut right in front of him, missing them by millimetres.
Leaning out of the window, he let loose a stream of abuse.
‘How come you speak such good Spanish?’ asked Perdita.
‘Last time I was here it rained for forty days.
The only answer was to learn Spanish.
They say my accent is 'orrible, but at least I can understand what they're saying on the pitch and suss out their Machiavellian little games.’
They were into flat, open country now.
Perdita looked at the huge puddles reflecting a vast expanse of sky.
‘I'm really, really here.’
Luke smiled.
‘You will fall madly in love with Argentina,’ he said in his deep husky voice, which had a slight break in it, ‘with the wild life, the birds, the open spaces.
But you will find it unconquerable, the extremes, the ferocity, the apparent heartlessness, the hailstorms that can wipe out a crop in half an hour.
People own masses of land, not developing it or working it.
It's just there.’
‘How very un-American,’ said Perdita.
Looking sideways at Luke, she decided that he wasn't at all good-looking but definitely attractive.
A tawny giant with  shoulders and arms like a blacksmith's, he had lean hips, more freckles than a gull's egg, a snub nose, sleepy honey-coloured eyes, Bart's pugnacious jaw and red-gold hair sticking up like a Dandy brush.
He was also attractive because he was so reassuring.
On top of the dashboard was a poem called Martin Fierro and a Spanish dictionary lying with its spine up, to which he must have been referring as he waited.
‘It's the great Gaucho poem,’ he told her.
‘Martin Fierro's aim in life was to sleep on a bed of clover, look up at the stars, and live as free as a bird in the sky.
He put his horse and his dog a long way before his wife.’
‘You don't look as though you read poetry,’ said Perdita in amazement, ‘and Martin's a very naff name for a Gaucho.’
Ricky, sharing the back with two polo helmets, a new saddle and numerous carrier bags of shopping, was beginning to relax.
‘How's Alejandro?’
‘Probably had ten more kids since you were last here.
Argentines adore their kids,’ Luke told Perdita.
‘Their big interest is the family.
They won't pay taxes, and they never stop at red lights.’
He put out a huge hand to shield Perdita as a car shot out.
‘Who are you playing for next year?’ asked Ricky.
‘Hal Peters — the automobile king — nice guy,’ said Luke.
‘Thought about nothing but cars for the first twenty-five years of his life, now he thinks about nothing but polo.
He's given me a free hand to buy horses.
But every time I show any interest Alejandro quadruples the price.
I guess I'm lucky to be working.
Young American players are really feeling the cold at the moment.
They can't get sponsorship, because all the patrons think it's chic to have an Argie on their side.’
‘Your father has three,’ said Ricky bleakly.
‘What's Red's handicap now?’
‘Six, should be higher.
He hates to stick and ball.
His mother allowed him to sit out college for a year and he never went back.
He won MVP awards — Most Valuable Player,’ he explained to Perdita, ‘all summer, then blows it by testing positive for drugs the day before the US Open.
Gets suspended and fined $5,000.’
‘Is he coming down here?’
‘Well, he's always expected, like the Messiah,’ Luke grinned at Perdita.
‘My kid brother's kind of wild.
Like Richard Cory he glitters and flutters pulses as he walks.
Look, heron on the edge of that alfalfa field.’
With the amazing eyesight that had helped him become a great player, Luke pointed out egrets, storks and even a snake that whisked into its hole before Perdita could see it.
Passing through a town, Perdita noticed someone had painted a blue-and-white flag and a ‘Malvinas belong to Argentina’ slogan on the plinth of a statue of a general.
‘For Christ's sake, keep your trap shut about the Falklands when we get there,’ said Ricky.
‘Alejandro's not anti-Brit,’ said Luke.
‘He likes anyone he can sell horses to.
He still talks mistily about Cowdray, and Guards and the parties, and the hospitality, and the women you didn't have to date twenty-two times before laying them.’
They were deep in the country now, driving through absolutely flat land like a table top.
Slowly Perdita was trying to absorb the immensity of the pampas.
The vast unclouded duck-egg-blue semi-circle of sky, like a protractor on the horizon, was only broken by the occasional windmill or fringe of acid-yellow poplars or milk-green gum trees.
The grass seemed to flow on for ever like a millpond sea.
Occasionally, like a liner, they passed an estancia with stables and a drive flanked by poplars and sailed on.
At last Luke swung on to a dirt road potted with huge holes.
His left elbow, sticking out of the window, was soon spattered with mud as they shattered vast puddles reflecting the blue of the sky.
‘Sorry,’ he said as Perdita nearly hit the ceiling.
‘You should have taken a sleeping pill.’
On the right was a sunlit village with square white houses like a Western shanty town.
‘This place is called General Piran after some top brass who defended his country against the marauding British.
It's the nearest civilization to Alejandro's place,’ explained Luke.
‘That's the phone exchange which never works.
That's the fire station.
They've got two fire stations, but all the houses are so far away they never get there in time.
The teachers are all on strike, hardly surprising when they're only paid a hundred dollars a month, so all Alejandro's kids are at home getting under their mother's feet.’
He is nice, thought Perdita.
How did anyone as vile as Bart produce a son like that?
‘Alejandro's land begins here at the water.’
He pronounced it ‘wott-urr’.
‘He owns everything in front of us as far as the eye can see.’
They had swung into an avenue lined with gums, their stark, white trunks rising like pillars.
At the end on the left was a stick-and-ball field, a polo field covered with gulls, paddocks full of polished horses, then a group of red modern buildings.
‘Barns to the right, grooms’ quarters to the left, Alejandro's straight  ahead,’said Luke as he drove up to a large ugly mulberry-red house with flowerbeds full of clashing red tulips, primulas and wallflowers, and a water tower completely submerged in variegated ivy.
Instantly out of the front door charged a man a foot smaller than Luke, but with a barrel-chest as big.
He had a huge Beethoven head of black curls, a brown face scorched with wrinkles by an unrelenting sun, small dark eyes and a smile like a slice of water melon, which showed a lot of gold fillings.
He wore old jeans, espadrilles and a torn blue T-shirt through which spilled a lot of black chest-hair.
Throwing open his arms, he gave a great roar of laughter.
‘El Orgulloso ,’ he shouted, ‘El Orgulloso .
Mountain Everest, he come to Mahomet at last,’ and he folded Ricky in a vast hot embrace.
‘Welcome, we are so please to see you.’
Then, peering round the side of Ricky's arm, he caught sight of Perdita and his little black eyes brightened even more.
‘And this is Perdita.
She is certainly very OK.’
Seizing her hand, he looked her up and down.
‘Why you waste your life on polo?
Find a nice billionaire instead.’
‘I want both,’ said Perdita.
Alejandro gave another bellow of laughter.
‘Good girl, good girl.
I speak very well English, don't you theenk?
Come and see my ponies.’
About to lead them back towards the stables, he lowered his voice and said to Luke, ‘Did you get it?’
Luke nodded and, getting a red jewel box out of his jeans' pocket, handed it to Alejandro just before a beautiful woman came out of the house.
She had heavy lids above huge, dark, mournful eyes, a wonderful sculptured, aquiline nose, a big, sad, red mouth and long, shiny, blond hair with dark roots showing down the middle parting.
She also had a wonderful bosom, a thickening waist and very slim brown legs in leather sandals.
‘Reeky,’ she hugged him.
‘It has been so long, and this must be Perdita.’
A shadow of apprehension crossed her face, immediately replaced by a warm and welcoming smile.
‘What a beauty,’ she said, kissing Perdita on both cheeks.
‘I am Claudia, Alejandro's wife.
Let me show you your room.
You must be tired.’
‘Nonsense,’ said Alejandro.
‘She 'as come 'alfway across the world,’ protested Claudia.
‘To see my horses,’ said Alejandro.
They went across a lawn down an avenue of mulberry trees, past a thickly planted orange grove.
‘To 'ide the chickens,’ explained Alejandro.
To the right, a lot of youths building a swimming-pool eyed Perdita with interest.
Alejandro snapped at them to get on with their work.
The stables were far more primitive than Perdita expected.
A few words in Spanish had been painted on the tack-room roof.
‘It says, ‘’ Please don't tether any horses to this roof, or they'll pull it off'’, ' translated Luke.
Dancer's latest hit single, ‘Girl Guide’, was belting out of the tack room.
A pack of emaciated lurchers with burrs in their rough dusty coats charged forward, whimpering and weaving against Perdita's legs.
But as she bent to cuddle them a small boy, brushing down a pony, picked up a lump of mud and hurled it at the dogs to drive them off.
Perdita was about to yell at him when her attention was distracted by a man with a cruel leathery face wearing Gaucho pants and a white shirt who was galloping a pony very fast round a tiny corral.
The horse's nostrils were vastly inflated and it was panting rhythmically as its hooves struck the hard ground.
The man's control was undeniable.
She could hear the horse groan as he squeezed it with his calves.
‘That's Raimundo the peticero, master of the horse,’ said Luke, with a slight edge to his voice.
‘Looks a nasty piece of work.’
‘Work isn't the operative word.
He's acting busy because Alejandro's here.’
In the yard an old man in a beret was clipping a pony's mane.
The pony was rolling its eyes but stood motionless because a young boy relentlessly twisted its ear.
Other horses wandered loose among the gum trees, while still others were muzzled and tied up.
They looked very thin, but well-muscled.
‘They're playing this afternoon,’ explained Luke.
‘Argentines don't feed or water their horses eight hours before a match.
I guess they are thin, but again Argentines don't like their horses to carry a lot of weight.’
Perdita grew increasingly boot-faced when every pony she tried to cuddle cringed away with terror.
‘They're all headshy,’ she complained furiously.
‘Shut up,’ said Luke.
‘You're here to learn not beef.’
Fortunately Alejandro was concentrating on Ricky, boasting that every pony in the yard had been entirely responsible for clinching last year's Argentine Open.
They were distracted by a boy in his twenties cantering into the yard on a beautiful red chestnut.
He had a bony, tortured face, angry, slanting peacock-blue eyes, bronze curls and a sallow complexion.
Wow! thought Perdita.
‘Angel,’ yelled Alejandro, ‘breeng that mare 'ere.
I want Reeky to see 'er.’
Then with a touch of malice, ‘These are my friends, Reeky and Perdeeta.
Isn't she beautiful?
Won't she need the charity belt?’
Angel pulled up in horror and a cloud of dust, growled something incomprehensible, but undeniably insulting, threw down the reins, kicked his right foot out of the stirrup and, swinging it over the horse's withers, jumped to the ground and ran into the house.
‘Zat is Angel,’ said Alejandro with a shrug, ‘still fighting zee Falklands War.’
Amazing cooking smells were drifting from the kitchen.
Seeing Perdita beginning to wilt, Luke took her back to the house.
Ricky and Alejandro had to be dragged away from the horses to a lunch laid out on a blue-and-white checked tablecloth under the gum trees.
They needed two tables to accommodate the ten children.
Ranging from twenty-one downwards, there were three boys, Patricio Maria, Luis Maria and Lorenzo Maria, followed by three ravishing plump girls, followed by four more boys, the youngest being little Pablo, who was three.
All had the dark eyes and dark curls of their father.
Claudia exclaimed in delight over the presents Ricky had brought, which included a dark red cashmere jersey, a length of Harris Tweed, a striped silk Turnbull and Asser dressing gown and a Herbert Johnson tweed cap for Alejandro.
Then she introduced her children to Perdita.
‘Don't warry,’ said Alejandro with his great laugh.
‘I don't recognize them myself sometime.’
‘Only the ones that play polo,’ said Claudia without rancour.
‘Have a wheesky, Ricky,’ said Alejandro, brandishing Ricky's duty-free Bourbon.
Then, when Ricky shook his head, ‘But you used to dreenk half a bottle before chukkas.
It was your petrol.’
‘I've changed.’
‘Luke?’ asked Alejandro.
‘Not if I've gotta play this afternoon,’ said Luke, sitting down next to Perdita.
‘You are, because I'm not,’ said Alejandro, splashing whisky into his glass.
‘The opposition's very weak today,’ he explained to Ricky, ‘but Luke is a good back.
I must look after my laurel.’
Two silent maids served them.
Perdita felt too tired to eat, but when she tried her steak it was pure poetry, tender as velvet, juicy as an orange, and so exploding with flavour that she was soon piling her plate with potato purée, tomato salad and geranium-red barbecue sauce.
‘I can't believe this food,’ she said to Claudia five minutes later.
‘It's wonderful.’
‘We in Argentina are very like the Breetish except in their cooking, which is 'orrible,’ said Alejandro, who was now wearing both his new dressing gown and the tweed cap over his black  golliwog curls.
‘I like to dress like an Englishman.’
The talk was all of polo.
Claudia didn't contribute and concentrated on the younger children.
‘I love to play again in England,’ Alejandro said to Ricky.
‘When you theenk the ban will be lifted?’
‘I don't know,’ sighed Ricky, who was eating hardly anything.
Prince Charles is Colonel of the Welsh Guards, which makes it very difficult for him.
And there's the security problem.’
‘That is a point,’ said Alejandro, looking round.
‘Where's Angel?’
‘Not 'ungry,’ said Claudia, trying to force potato purée into little Paolo.
‘Not 'ungry, angry.
Angel,’ he explained to Ricky, ‘was an ex-Mirage pilot.
He 'ate the English, but when he gets to know Perdita,’ Alejandro smiled at her from under the peak of his cap, ‘he will forgeeve.’
Perdita, having taken far too much, was now feeding the rest of the steak to the shaggy lurchers who ringed the table, but kept their distance.
‘They're so thin,’ she protested to Alejandro.
‘Raimundo don't feed them.
They live on hares and badgers they catch out in the pampas.’
Perdita didn't think she could eat another thing, but the figs in syrup that followed were so delicious she was soon piling on great dollops of cream.
‘Angel is stupid,’ went on Alejandro.
‘The rest of us in Argentina 'ave forgiven you for the Falklands War.’
‘Oh good,’ said Perdita, brightening up.
‘Why is that?’
‘Because of Benny Hill,’ said Alejandro.
‘We love heem, and all those lovely girls with no clothes on.
I love Eenglish programmes,Upper Stairs, Down Stairs .
The only thing I watch else is polo on cable, and we've got a veedeo of last year's Open.
I'll show it to you, Reeky.’
‘And you can point out all the ponies you've just showed me who allegedly played in it,’ said Ricky drily.
Alejandro giggled.
‘Some was previous year.’
‘Our doctor has tiny plane that was conscripted during the Malvinas War,’ said Claudia.
‘The military say they want to fly rockets on it, but when they see 'ow small it was, it didn't get called up.’
‘All the food parcels people sent us from abroad was stolen by the post office,’ said Alejandro.
What heavenly people, thought Perdita.
They're so merry and funny.
The spear-shaped leaves of the gum tree were dappling their faces as the sun moved towards the Andes.
A dragonfly was bombing the table.
Luke pointed out a stork, black and white between the silver trunks.
Beyond, the pampas seemed to swim in the midday heat.
‘Ow long are you weeth us, Reeky?’ asked Claudia, who'd had a secret crush on him in the old days and was appalled to see how grey and tense he looked.
‘Probably the day after tomorrow.’
‘But you said you'd stay a week,’ said Perdita in horror.
‘Where are you going next?’ asked Luke.
‘Palm Springs.’
‘That's great,’ said Luke.
‘My half-sister Bibi's out there.
Working in LA.
You must call her.
She doesn't get out enough.
She's on a zero handicap, but she'd play super if she played more.’
‘Who's your patron now, Reeky?’ asked Alejandro.
‘Dancer Maitland,’ chipped in Perdita proudly.
Alejandro nearly fell off his seat.
All the Mendoza children were roused out of their pallid apathy.
‘You get his autograph?’
‘You send us records?’
‘He numero uno this week.’
‘Is he nice?
Please breeng 'im 'ere.’
He's a sweet man, admitted Ricky.
But he's very busy, and has difficulty even finding time to stick and ball.
You stupid bitch,’ he murmured furiously under his breath to Perdita, ‘now Alejandro'll quadruple his prices.’
‘Please stay, Reeky,’ pleaded Claudia.
‘You need a holiday.
Let us pamper you.’
‘Let them pampas you,’ said Perdita bitterly.
She loves him, thought Luke.
Perdita was very pale now, her skin the parchment colour of her white-blond mane.
She'll be like a little palomino when she turns brown, he thought.
‘Have a siesta,’ Claudia urged her as they'd finished coffee.
‘No, I want to look at the ponies with Ricky,’ said Perdita, frantic not to miss a minute.
‘Just for an hour.
We all do,’ said Claudia soothingly.
Upstairs, feeling utterly suicidal, Perdita looked round her tiny bare room.
The only furniture was a wardrobe, a chest of drawers with no lining paper, a straight-backed wooden chair and a narrow single bed with a carved headboard.
There was  an overhead light with no lampshade and a bedside lamp on the floor which didn't work.
The only colour came from a picture of a Gaucho cracking a whip, a tiny red mat and a shocking pink counterpane.
She ought to unpack, but she only got as far as getting out Ricky's photograph in its blue silk frame and putting it beside the bed.
The thought of all those blonde movie stars in Palm Springs pursuing him made her feel quite sick.
She'd gone off Luke since he suggested Ricky ring his sister.
She'd just lie on the bed for a minute.
Did she imagine it or did a head of bronze curls pop round the door, and were a pair of peacock-blue eyes gazing at her with implacable hatred?
Then the door slammed shut and next moment she was asleep.
Waking the next morning, she was outraged that they'd left her to sleep.
Luke and Alejandro's three eldest sons had won their match.
The teachers had suddenly ended their strike, and the four youngest children had gone back to school.
Ricky, exhausted but elated after haggling all night with Alejandro, had bought eight horses.
Perdita, not in the best mood after a cold shower, found him having breakfast.
‘You promised to wake me.’
‘You needed sleep.’
He poured her some black coffee.
Sulkily she added milk and buttered a croissant.
Nice family, said Ricky.
‘Very,’ said Perdita.
‘I'm not sure about that Angel.
He looks as though he wants to Exocet me.’
‘Luke'll look after you,’ said Ricky.
‘Look, I'm leaving at teatime — catching the eight o'clock flight.’
‘You can't,’ said Perdita hysterically.
‘I've got the horses I need.
Luke's going to get them into America.
From there we'll fly them to England.’
‘But why so early, for Christ's sake?’
‘Alejandro's got business in Buenos Aires.
He's giving me a lift to the airport.’
Whatever Alejandro's business was in BA, it necessitated a silk shirt, light grey trousers, a jacket hanging from a coathanger in the back of the car, his Herbert Johnson cap and about fifteen pints of Aramis.
Perdita cried unashamedly after they left, fleeing to her bare room and hurling herself down on the pink counterpane.
Half an hour later there was a knock on the door.
‘Bugger off,’ she howled.
It was Luke.
‘Poor baby.
Feeling homesick?’
‘No, Ricky sick,’ sobbed Perdita.
‘I can't live without him.’
Luke sat down on the bed and put a huge arm round her.
‘You'll see him in less than three months.’
‘That's a whole school term.
I don't want it,’ she snapped as he handed her a large vodka and tonic, then took such a huge gulp that she nearly choked.
‘Isn't Ricky kind of old to play Florizel?’ asked Luke.
‘Not having a father, I'm only attracted to older men,’ said Perdita.
‘I used to hero-worship the guy when he played for my father,’ said Luke.
‘He was awesome.
I watched him yesterday.
He'll be as good as ever when his elbow heals.
He must go to ten.’
‘All he's interested in is getting bloody Chessie back.’
‘She's not bloody.’
‘How's she getting on with your ghastly father?’
‘Pretty happy, I guess.
Doesn't appear to be in any hurry to quit.’
Perdita sat up, blew her nose and looked at him with red, swollen eyes.
‘Jolly odd having a stepmother the same age as you.
D'you fancy her?’
‘Couldn't help it at first, but we've become friends.
Her marrying Dad didn't screw me up like the other two.
Red and Bibi have given her hell.’
‘Serve her right.’
‘She lost a kid,’ said Luke reasonably.
‘Does she still miss Will?’
‘Yeah, but she won't show it.’
‘Like Ricky.
He's so good at bottling things up, he ought to work in a ketchup factory.’
Luke picked up Ricky's photograph.
‘You gotta treat being down here as a chance to learn polo.
Meet them halfway and you'll improve out of all recognition.
And you'll like it here;, it's kinda fun.’
‘How come you're so nice?’ asked Perdita.
Luke yawned.
‘My brother Red's better-looking than me.
He gets all the girls — very good for the character.
Dinner's about ten, I'll boil up some water so you can have a shower.’
‘What time do we get up here?’
‘Six o'clock.
And on the horses by seven.’
‘God!’ said Perdita, appalled.
‘What else do we have to do?’
‘Shift the cattle, work the horses, stick and ball, come back for lunch, an hour's siesta, and you go out like a light I can tell you, then we play chukkas in the afternoon.
At least you won't be roped in to build the swimming-pool.’
He left her not much happier.
She tried to sleep, but she was desperately nervous about tomorrow.
What if she made a complete fool of herself and let Ricky down?
At least he wouldn't be here to witness it.
She felt twitchy about that vile Angel who hovered shadowy in the background, waiting to perform some dreadful mischief.
She started violently at a knock on the door.
Frantically wiping her eyes, she went to answer it and found Luke with only a small towel round his waist.
For a terrifying moment Perdita thought he was going to pounce on her.
Instead the bull-dog face creased into a huge smile.
‘Honey, I am absolutely shit-scared of spiders, and there's the biggest son-of-a-bitch in the shower.
Could you possibly remove it for me?’
Giving a scream of laughter, Perdita felt better.
Luke Alderton had been only three years old when Bart dumped his mother for Grace and his first memories were of tears and endless shouting.
Grace had proceeded to have two children, Red and Bibi, whom she and Bart adored and spoilt impossibly.
Grace, however, tended to ignore Luke when he came to stay, doing her duty without love or warmth.
Then his mother had married again, to a PT Instructor who beat Luke up so badly that a court ruled he should go and live with Bart full time.
Here he had always felt an outsider.
At eighteen, because they wouldn't let him read Polo at Yale, he chucked up any thought of an academic career.
Determined to be utterly independent of Bart, he slowly worked his way up, starting as a groom and finally getting his own yard, buying ponies cheap off the race track, or from other players who couldn't get a tune out of them, making them, and selling them on, which he detested because he got so fond of them.
Invariably riding green ponies, his handicap at six was lower than it should have been.
He didn't have the natural ability of his brother, Red, but he was bigger and stronger.
You didn't want to be in the way when Luke hit the ball.
Because he'd missed out on higher education, and because he could seldom afford to go out on the town with the other players, he spent his evenings listening to music and devouring the classics.
On long journeys in the lorry he'd keep the rest of the team entertained reciting great screeds of poetry, Longfellow, Macaulay, whole scenes from Shakespeare, now even bits of Martin Fierro , in an 'orrible accent.
All the Argentines adored him and nicknamed him Señor Gracias because he was so grateful for the smallest favour.
It was the same in the States.
He was always in work because he was cheerful, absolutely straight and very good company.
But although he smiled in the face of the direst provocation, underneath he was as determined as Ricky to go to ten.
After such a lousy start in life, and not a penny of the Alderton millions, people often expressed amazement that he was so unchippy.
The answer was always the same.
‘There's nothing to be gained from blaming your background or other people.
You've got to get out and help yourself.’
A second after Perdita fell asleep, it seemed Luke was banging on the door telling her to get up and to wear a sweater as it was cold first thing.
Out in the yard, Alejandro had turned from the charming rogue of yesterday into a roaring tyrant, bellowing instructions to all the boys.
In the corral the ponies waited, mostly chestnut, all young and timid, ducking nervously behind each other to avoid being caught.
When Alejandro yelled at Perdita to tack up a little chestnut gelding, she was so nervous she could hardly do up the throat lash or adjust the stirrups.
Once up, she felt she was straddling an eel.
Every male from the neighbouring estancias , except Luke, who was off moving the cattle, seemed to be gathered round the paddock to watch her as she set off in the milky, misty morning light towards a row of poplar trees.
Alejandro shouted after her to do turns at the canter.
‘I'll show them,’ she thought, shoving her nose in the air.
‘Don't jibe at me, Argentina.’
Reaching the middle of the field, she laid the nearside rein on the chestnut's neck to tell him to go right.
Instantly he did a lightning U-turn and set out back to the stables, leaving Perdita swearing on the stone-hard ground while all the onlookers roared with laughter and Alejandro shouted in broken English at her.
She had three more falls before she and a handful of other players started stick and balling.
She was just getting used to the chestnut when Alejandro moved her on to a dark brown mare who, when it wasn't bucking, shied at the ball, and then on to another chestnut, whom she had great difficulty in holding.
She was also staggered by how energetically the Argentines played, hitting balls up in the air, juggling and tapping them, twisting, turning and stopping, followed by Ferrari bursts of acceleration before circling again.
Then they did the whole thing all over again without stirrups, and all the time talking and shouting  to one another.
She was also aware of Angel, the Brit-hater, who hadn't once eaten at the same table as her since she arrived, who was now riding harder and turning faster than any of the others, urging his pony on with great pelvic thrusts.
It seemed he was deliberately galloping very close past her to upset her chestnut mare, who kept taking off into the pampas.
he had fallen off twice more and ridden twelve different ponies by lunchtime and was so tired she could hardly eat.
Although Luke translated the whole time for her, she felt desperately isolated and sick with longing for Ricky.
He must have nearly reached Palm Springs by now.
Tugged out of her siesta like a back tooth, she staggered groggily out to the yard.
The sun was shining platinum rather than gold now, and beating down on her head.
To her intense humiliation, Luke, Angel, Alejandro, three of Alejandro's sons, and two of their friends who'd come to lunch were playing on one pitch while Perdita had been put on another with Alejandro's three younger sons and four of their cousins — none of them a day over twelve.
‘Talk about going back to playgroup,’ snarled Perdita.
The ponies were tied up in the shade to the branches of a row of gum trees which divided the two pitches.
Gulls flapped around uttering their strange cry of ‘Tero, Tero’, and swooping down to scavenge whenever play moved on.
A strong lemon smell, from a local herb known as black branch, hung on the hot steamy air.
The mosquitoes went to work on any available flesh.
After the throw-in the ball came out miraculously in Perdita's direction.
Now I'll show them, she thought, lifting her stick for a flawless offside drive.
Next second she gave a scream of rage as she was hooked by an eleven-year-old cousin, who then proceeded to whip the ball away down field.
One of Alejandro's sons playing back rode him off for the backhand and hit it up the field to his brother who dribbled it a few yards, then sliced it to Perdita.
Instantly an eleven-year-old cousin pounced on her, shielding her from the ball and riding her off.
All of them played with such ferocious energy and skill that, for the next nightmarish seven minutes, she didn't touch the ball.
‘Faulazo ,’ they yelled, as they teased her into crossing in front of them.
‘Dejala ,’ they yelled as she rode in for the big swipe and missed it.
‘Hombre, hombre, hombre ,’ they chorused, urging her to take her man, and ‘Que lenta ,’they screamed when she failed to catch up  with her number four, and he went up the field and scored to loud cheers.
A huge cow bell was rung at the end of the chukka, but the boys went on playing.
‘Perdita,’ yelled Alejandro, ‘change the horse.’
‘Better change the rider,’ said Perdita, fighting back the tears.
She was sore all over, out of breath, pouring with sweat, and there were three more chukkas to go.
‘I don't want to play with kids,’ she screamed at Luke.
‘They're all laughing at me.’
‘Not at you,’ said Luke soothingly, while saddling up a black mare with a white star for her.
‘They always talk and joke among themselves.
You're over-reacting.
This pony's much easier.
She follows the ball and positions herself for every shot.
Just leave it to her.’
Perdita was settling down and had even hit a respectable forehand which only just missed the goal when Alejandro, out of some devilry, swopped one of his sons and a cousin for Luke and Angel.
Angel proceeded to put on an incredible display of histrionics, peacock-blue eyes flashing, nostrils flaring above his furiously pouting mouth, as he shouted and swore at Alejandro.
‘What's he saying?’
Perdita asked Alejandro's twelve year old, who blushed.
‘He say he no want to play with Eeenglish — er — scum.’
‘Charming,’ snapped Perdita.
‘Choto ,’ Angel swore at her as he galloped past to defend his goal and, however much Luke set up shots for her, Angel rode her off.
Then, after a whispered word with one of the cousins, Angel and he galloped up on either side of her and neatly lifted her off the little black mare.
‘Bastards,’ howled Perdita, sitting on the painfully hard ground, and bashing it with her stick, ‘fucking bastards.’
‘No understand Eeenglish,’ mocked Angel.
‘Go back home,’ and launched into a stream of expletives in Spanish.
Perdita replied in equally basic English.
Next minute Luke had cantered up with Perdita's black pony.
‘I'm not going to translate for either of you,’ he said softly.
Then, turning furiously on Angel, ‘For Chrissake, pack it in.’
Five minutes later Luke blocked a brilliant goal from the youngest cousin and cleared.
Christ, he really can smite the ball almost the length of the pitch, marvelled Perdita.
Angel, racing towards the enemy goal, tried to intercept with an air shot.
Missing, he swung his pony round in pursuit, and when it didn't turn quickly enough, clouted it very hard round the head with his stick.
In a flash Perdita closed on him and bashed him across the knuckles with her stick.
‘You triple bastard!
I'll report you to the RSPCA.’
Turning, realizing it was Perdita, Angel gave a howl of rage and set off in pursuit.
So blackly  venomous was his expression that Perdita fled towards the next pitch, scattering the polo balls which lay like a hatch of goose eggs near the goal posts.
Angel, on a faster pony and using his whip, had nearly caught her up when Luke thundered up and rode him off.
Such was the force of the bump that Angel's horse crashed to the ground, temporarily winded.
Leaping to his feet, Angel charged Luke, about to drag him off his horse.
‘I wouldn't,’ said Luke raising his stick.
‘Stop behaving like a two year old.
She's a woman.’
‘She's a beetch, and English beetch, like Margaret Thatcher,’ growled Angel.
‘I keel her when I catch her.’
‘You've been winding her up all day,’ shouted Luke.
‘D'you want to put her off completely?’
‘Yes,’ hissed Angel, looking at his bleeding knuckles.
‘Then she'll go home for good.’
For a second they glared at each other.
Then Angel vaulted back on to his pony, which had just tottered groggily to its feet, and galloped back to the stables.
Back in her room, Perdita fell on her bed, too despairing and exhausted even to cry.
She'd been a disaster and let Ricky down.
They'd pack her back to England.
There was a knock on the door.
It was Luke again.
‘Baby, it's OK.’
He took her in his arms.
‘Ouch,’ grumbled Perdita.
‘You've got hands like sandpaper.’
‘To rub off all your rough edges,’ said Luke.
‘I made such an idiot of myself.
Those were children.
The standard is ludicrous.
I'll never cope.’
‘Hush, hush,’ said Luke.
‘Argentines learn polo like a language.
Those boys have been playing with a short mallet since they were two.
By the time they're ten or eleven they're on a six handicap.
Look, you're jet lagged.
You couldn't understand what they were saying.
There's hours till dinner.
Let's go into General Piran and I'll buy you a drink.’
It was so hot that Perdita would have liked to have worn shorts or a dress, but her mosquito bites had come up in huge red bumps and were oozing and itching like mad, so she settled for her pale pink jeans and a dark blue shirt.
A huge yellow sun was gilding the puddles and turning the poplars the colour of lemon sherbets.
A cloud like a fluffy white crocodile basked at the bottom of the vast open fan of fading turquoise sky.
Luke drove slowly to avoid the potholes, just two thumbs on the steering wheel.
‘I had one hell of a hassle when I first came out.
I was used to riding with my reins hanging in festoons.
Alejandro and his son all stop horses with five-inch curbs and send them on with spurs about the same length.
I kept being carted all the way to Buenos Aires.’
Perdita stared moodily at the horizon.
‘You'll be playing in matches soon.
You'll enjoy that.
You can't go back to England without taking some Argentine silver.’
‘Some hope!’
To distract Perdita's attention from a terrified stray dog that was cringing on the right of the road, Luke pointed out three tumbledown houses on the left.
‘Known as Death Row.
In that house lived a bricklayer who murdered the baker because he thought he'd stolen one of his pigs.
Then four brothers turned up in a bus and killed three brothers who lived in that house next door.
Then the grocer who lived in the third house shot himself.’
‘If you hadn't bumped that sodding Angel there'd have been another murder this afternoon,’ said Perdita sulkily.
‘What a dinky little country this is.
What a dump,’ she added as they entered the village.
Luke pointed out the little white church, with its red corrugated roof, that was always having its windows broken by the football pitch next door.
‘At least it provides air-conditioning in summer,’ he went on.
‘And that's the gas station.
The prettiest girl works there.
Angel's dating her and spends his time filling up Alejandro's truck.
The gasoline bill at the end of the month is going to be something else!’
He shook with laughter.
‘Does he put draw reins and a five-inch curb on her?’ spat Perdita.
‘I'm surprised he didn't break that pony's jaw this afternoon.’
Because of the mosquitoes they sat inside the bar.
‘Señor Gracias,Buenas noches ,’ said the owner as he took Luke's order for a vodka and tonic and a Bourbon.
‘I'll pay for it,’ said Perdita, defiantly brandishing a $100 bill.
She was in no mood to accept charity from anyone.
‘How much is this worth?’
‘About fifteen dollars.
Put it away.’
‘D'you want water?’ asked Perdita, reaching for the jug on the bar counter.
Luke grinned and shook his head.
‘I'm a tidy person, I like my whisky neat.’
On the wall was a gaudy oil painting of a bull pouring blood with pics sticking out of it like a pincushion.
A smirking matador, with a pink satin bottom even tighter and more uppity than Angel's, was lifting his jewelled sword for the kill.
‘God, they're cruel.
They never speak to their ponies except to curse them.’
‘They're different from us,’ said Luke.
‘If Americans — and particularly the Brits — have a horse or a dog that behaves badly — they admit the fact, and rather celebrate and make a joke of it, right?
Whereas to an Argentine, it's a matter of pride never to have a horse or dog that's anything less than perfect.
They can't understand anyone not minding losing and they want to shine individually.
My buzz is being on a team.
I don't give a shit about not scoring goals.
If I've set up the play that leads to goals, that's OK by me.’
‘You're too fucking Christ-like,’ snapped Perdita.
‘You get no prizes for coming second.’
Luke picked up his whisky, his freckled hand was so big you could hardly see the glass.
He didn't tell her it broke his heart every time the Argentines hurt a horse or he saw a terrified stray dog racing by the side of the road.
He knew the cruelty she was going to witness over the next three months would be agony for her because, for some reason, she trusted animals far more than humans, but, like a nurse looking after animals in a vivisection clinic, he couldn't prevent her pain, only alleviate it as much as possible.
‘There's certainly a degree of roughness with horses,’ he admitted.
‘The Argies have so many, they can afford to dispense with them.
When Red and I were kids we had races jumping on ponies in the fields and galloping them round a tree and back without a bridle.
We could never do that with Argentine ponies: they just bolted in terror.
The Argentines break them by fear and pain, but they get results.
Look at those kids today.’
‘Look at Angel clouting that sweet little mare with his stick — the fucker.’
She was paler than ever and, Luke noticed, that in that shirt, her eyes were more navy blue than black.
‘He's OK Angel,’ he said, ‘Argentine saying — never judge a man until you have walked two moons in his shoes.’
‘Well, he needn't take it out on me.
I wasn't part of the bloody task force.’
Back in his bare, little room, Angel lay on his bed smoking one cigarette from another.
He should have been with the girl from the petrol station half an hour ago, but he was too eaten up with  jealousy that his dear amigo , Luke, had taken that white-haired she-devil out for a drink.
On the wall was a painting of a Mirage wheeling away from a flaming British aircraft carrier, with the sea and sky incarnadined by the blaze.
On the chest of drawers was a photograph of his elder brother Pedro in uniform, his pale patrician face the image of Angel's, except for a black moustache.
There were also photographs of his weak and charming father, who had read Pravda and the Daily Telegraph every morning, and his beautiful feckless mother, who'd run off with an Italian and now lived in some palazzo in Rome, and of the huge house in which he'd been brought up.
Besides these photographs were Pedro's polo helmet, which now had a map of the Malvinas stamped on the front (which Angel always wore in matches), and a jar of earth he'd dug up from the Islands on the day he'd been sent home as a prisoner of war.
The Solis de Gonzales family, eight-generation Irish intermarried with Spanish, were immensely rich.
Angel had had a magical childhood, bucking the system at the smart Buenos Aires boys' school of Champagnat and living during the term time in a large house in the Avenidad del Libertador.
Let loose on the family estancia during the holidays, he and Pedro had played cops and robbers on horses, and later polo with his cousins, who all came from large houses nearby.
In their teens Angel and Pedro had hung around the polo grounds, waiting for players to fall off, so they could substitute for them.
Angel had never had a lesson; he played as naturally as he walked.
Angel's branch of the Solis de Gonzales, however, were no good at looking after their business affairs.
His father, separated from his mother, lived six months of the year in Paris.
Every so often the camp manager would telephone from the estancia : ‘We have no more money.’
‘Then sell some land,’ Angel's father would say, and go back to his latest mistress or the gambling tables or the racecourse at Longchamps.
He never took care of the land, nor did he put anything back.
Denied parents for so much of the year, Angel had idolized Pedro.
On the polo field they had been dynamite and almost  telepathetic in anticipating each other 's moves.
But there had been no question of them taking up polo professionally.
Polo was all right as a hobby, but for a living, as Angel's father, who prided himself on his English had pointed out, it was distinctly ‘Non-U’.
He disapproved almost as much when Pedro, who was mad about flying, but unable to afford a plane, had joined the airforce in the late seventies to be followed, two years later, by Angel.
Disapproval turned to horror when both boys set off in their Mirages for the Falklands.
Both were brilliant pilots, having the same reckless flamboyant courage and ability to get the last ounce out of their ancient machines in the air as their ponies on the field.
A fortnight after Pedro's plane plunged flaming into the sea, Angel was shot down behind British lines and escaped with a smashed kneecap and concussion.
When he came round, he was interrogated by one particularly phlegmatic, poker-faced Guards Officer, a polo player who spoke fluent Spanish.
To someone as proud as Angel, this, and the result of the war, had been the ultimate humiliation.
But, even knowing how strong the British now were, he would give up polo tomorrow and climb back into his cockpit and resume the attack on Port Stanley.
Returning home with the other prisoners of war, he found his father had died of a heart attack.
It is Argentine law that when a man dies his estate must be divided equally between his children.
Angel's father had inherited 4,000 acres, but had sold off so much that only 800 acres were left for Angel and his three sisters.
The sisters, who had all married well, were unconcerned that Angel, with only 200 acres of grazing land in the middle of his rich cousins' estates, had been left to pay his father's debts.
His mother, happy with her Italian, was not interested.
His grandmother, living in luxury in the Plaza Hotel in Buenos Aires and grumbling because she had to wash her own stockings, claimed she had no money even to pay her own bills.
In despair, Angel had gone to his rich cousins, pleading that unless they helped him out he would be forced to sell the land to an outsider, a property developer who wanted to build houses there.
The rich cousins, thinking he was bluffing, ignored him; then, when he sold the land, they were absolutely furious and banished him from their houses.
Angel was now desperately trying to make his way as a professional polo player.
His secret ambition was for the Argentine ban to be lifted so he could get to England and avenge Pedro's death by taking out the English and especially one poker-faced Guards Officer.
Alejandro wouldn't help him.
He was jealous of new blood, particularly when it was as blue as Angel's, but Luke, who knew how hard it was to get established, had recognized Angel's talent.
Before Perdita arrived he and Angel had spent hours talking in  the evenings trying to improve each other 's English and Spanish.
Luke realized that, beneath his corroding bitterness and pyrotechnic bursts of Latin temperament, Angel was by nature merry, with a kind heart and an even greater sense of the ridiculous.
The latter had for the moment deserted him.
The Brits had taken Pedro, now this blonde witch had stolen Luke.
Angel was biding his time.
Perdita refused to admit it, but she was terribly homesick.
There was no post nor telephone because of the strike, and she was tormented by fantasies of Ricky being ridden off by starlets in Palm Springs.
Used to smothering any animal she met with love, she felt dreadfully deprived when the Argentine ponies flinched away from her.
Only Raimundo's lurchers responded when she combed the burrs out of their coats and fed them bits of meat.
Visiting players, Raimundo, the grooms and Alejandro looked at her with ill-concealed lust, but her dead-pan hauteur and Señor Gracias' large, looming presence kept them at bay.
Angel smouldered at a distance, losing no chance to bitch her up.
She was aware that none of the men except Luke took her seriously as a player.
Claudia was enchanting, endlessly kind and sympathetic, but, beneath her pre-occupation with her children, Perdita sensed a deep sadness.
Her daughters were also charming with their big dark eyes and exuberantly glossy hair and breasts rising like pomegranates, and they giggled in amazed delight when Perdita swore and yelled at the grooms and even screamed at their father.
Heavy chaperonage, too, seemed to enhance their value, like jewellery locked in glass cases rather than scrambled in trays on the counter.
But to Perdita they appeared curiously passive, sitting and waiting for some man to make them unhappy.
Luke was her salvation.
The Argentine night came down like a blind, but, when it was too dark to ride, he seldom took a siesta, struggling instead through Martin Fierro, Don Quixote , or El Cid with the aid of a Spanish dictionary, or listening to music, mostly Mozart.
But he was always prepared to turn off the tape and listen to her ranting on about how she missed Ricky  and how bloody the Argentines were being to her and to their horses.
An inspired listener, he seldom volunteered information about himself.
‘Have you got a girlfriend?’ she asked him once.
‘Yeah.’
‘Are you going to marry her?’
‘Nope.’
‘Why not?’
‘Not in love with her, I guess.
There's only one reason to get married, because you can't not.
And I've seen too much unhappiness caused by broken marriages.
I want mine to stick.’
A few weeks later Perdita sat under a jacaranda tree which was scattering purply-blue petals all over the parched brown ground.
At least the drought had driven off the mosquitoes.
‘Darling Ricky ,’ she wrote, ‘David Waterlane's been here today.
He brought a letter from Mum.
He's going on to New York, and promises to post this for me.
He bought four ponies, all of which Alejandro swore played in the final of last year's Open.
That makes over fifty ponies he's sold this year that he claims took part.
He must have changed ponies an awful lot.
How are you getting on?
Have you been signed up to star on a film yet?
Has Luke's bloody sister been in touch with you?
Do you miss me a bit?
I think I'm getting a bit better at polo.
There is a beautiful little iron-grey mare here that Alejandro has frightened out of her wits and says is too wet for polo.
I wish you'd bought her, I think she's brilliant.
If you send me the money, I think we could get her for $1,000.
‘Christ, the Argentines are cruel.
Last week they started breaking the wild three year olds and goodness, Raimundo and the grooms adored it, treating it like some macho game.
Did you realize they drive the ponies into a corral, then tie them to a stake in the burning sun for five days with no food or water?
Alejandro caught me stealing out to water them the first night.
We had a frightful row.
He said the English were fine ones to bang on about cruelty when they sent little boys off to boarding school when they were eight.
I said it had done Eddie a power of good.
Anyway after that he put Raimundo on guard with a gun.
I wouldn't mind being shot, but I'm sure Raimundo would insist on raping me first.
He's such a letch.
‘Anyway on the sixth day, it's really horrific.
I came back from moving the cows, and found Raimundo and his merry men engaged in breaking proper.
Five of them to one desperately weakened pony with sunken eyes and ribs you could play tunes on — lassoing it with weighted thongs, and pulling it over and over on the desperately hard ground, until it was crapping everywhere in terror.
God, I loathe Alejandro for allowing it.
‘Finally on the seventh day, I thought that, being Catholic, they'd  rest, but still unfed and unwatered, each pony was blindfolded and tacked up, and Raimundo got on each one's back, and whipped it and whipped it out into the pampas, until the pony's spirit was completely broken, and it'll never argue with man again.
How can any horse fail to be screwed up, when its first contact with man is fifth degree burns, starvation, and flagellation?
No wonder they're terrified.
‘I kicked Raimundo in the shins — there was a bit of a row.
Alejandro wouldn't let me stick and ball for a week.
And it's not just the animals they're cruel to.
Claudia was crying the other morning and I caught Luke hugging her.
He said he was comforting her.
Utterly bloody Alejandro has a mistress in BA.
He went to see her that day he took you to the airport.
According to Luke, Argentine men feel they've failed to demonstrate their virility unless they have a mistress, and that only their wives get married, they remain single.
Christ, what an attitude, just like Rupert Campbell-Black's when he was married.
‘I hate Argentine men, particularly that Angel.
All they're interested in is screwing and thumb-screwing.
And as there isn't an Inquisition any more, they take it out on the horses.
If Luke wasn't here, I'd go crackers.
God, he's nice, and he really works at his polo, every evening, lining up ball after ball, and practising penalties.
‘He's a brilliant teacher too.
Alejandro gets pissed off and shouts if you don't do the right thing straight away.
Luke tells you what to do all the time, but quietly, and he never loses his temper, except if he thinks you're not toying.
‘Please, please write.
I hope your elbow's better now.
Think of me sometimes.
I must go, as David W is leaving in half an hour.
All my love, Perdita.’
Having handed over her letter and waved goodbye, Perdita wandered down to the stables.
The sun, which had burnt the stick-and-ball field and the pitches to a dusty liver chestnut, had now set, but it was still impossibly hot.
She could hear whoops of laughter.
What devilish torture had Raimundo dreamed up now?
Running through the orange grove, which already had little green oranges on, past the chickens, she froze with horror.
In the middle of the yard the little pony Alejandro regarded as useless stood quivering with terror.
Her iron-grey coat was black with sweat and dust, her thin sides heaving, her eyes rolling.
Umberto, Alejandro's laziest groom, was holding tightly on to her, while Raimundo, who was wearing a leather apron to protect his Gaucho pants, his little eyes glinting with pleasure and cruelty, was attaching a long lead rope to her headcollar.
He then took the rope through her front and back legs and tied it firmly to the back bumper of the Mercedes, which Angel had backed into the yard.
Angel was now sitting in the driving seat, a fag hanging out of his sulky mouth, revving up the engine.
‘What the hell's going on?’ exploded Perdita.
Angel looked round.
‘Your little darling won't back,’ he sneered.
‘This lesson should teach 'er,’ and he revved the engine even more loudly.
‘Right,’ yelled Raimundo.
Umberto leapt clear, the grey pony made a bolt for freedom.
‘Stop it,’ screamed Perdita, making a lunge at Angel.
But she was too late.
He had rammed his foot down on the accelerator, the Mercedes shot forward, the little grey's neck jerked frantically and she cartwheeled violently in the air crashing to the ground, to be dragged ten feet before Angel braked.
The surrounding grooms roared with laughter and cheered.
Picking his way over the diarrhoea, which had splattered all over the ground and avoiding the frantically flailing hooves of the shocked, utterly terrified, pony, Raimundo grasped her headcollar and, aided by Umberto and the other grooms, yanked her to her feet.
Four of them hung on to her.
She made a frantic leap to shake them off, as they lifted her back and front nearside feet over the rope and positioned her with her back to the revving Mercedes again.
‘Three or four goes should make up the mind for her,’ said Raimundo evilly, as Perdita picked herself up off the dusty ground.
Angel crouched over the wheel.
That should teach that stuck-up bitch to fall in love with ponies.
He wished it were Perdita at the end of the rope, he'd like to see her crashing to the ground over and over again.
But with her, he'd keep on driving.
Raimundo was taking his time.
Angel glanced round and gave a shout of warning.
Too late — Perdita, her face ashen, her black eyes blazing, had a pitchfork poised a foot from Raimundo's capacious buttocks.
Next second she had plunged it into them.
Giving a bellow of pain and rage, Raimundo jumped a foot in the air and let go of the pony, who took off, jerking to a halt as the slack of the rope ran out.
‘Leave her alone, you bastard, or I'll kebab you,’ screamed Perdita.
All the grooms doubled up with laughter.
Swinging round in a fury, Raimundo was about to leap on Perdita when she brandished the fork in his face.
‘D'you want your eyes gouged out, you fucking sadist?
Untie that pony.’
Raimundo's sallow face had turned a dark red.
‘La puta que te pario ,’ he spat at her, but backed away as the evil-looking prongs stroked his eyelashes.
‘Get her off me, he bellowed at the other grooms.
But, enjoying the sport too much, they continued to barrack and laugh.
‘Olé,’ shouted Umberto.
Then, out of the corner of her eye, Perdita saw Angel approaching.
There was murder in his eyes; the beautiful pouting mouth had disappeared completely.
‘Don't you come near me,’ hissed Perdita, rage driving out all fear, flickering the pitchfork like an adder's tongue between him and Raimundo.
‘No wonder you lost the Falklands War.
Bullies are always cowards.
You run away from real men, so you take it out on horses, you lousy Latin creeps.’
Clenching his fists, rigid with rage, Angel advanced on her, translating what she had said for the others.
Perhaps she had better make a bolt for it.
‘I keel you, English beetch.’
Angel's grey shirt was touching the pitchfork now.
Perdita had drawn it back to ram it into him when suddenly she found her arms gripped from behind.
‘Drop,’ thundered Luke.
‘Fuck off,’ screamed Perdita.
‘Don't bloody interfere.’
‘Drop!’
Luke tightened his grip on her and the pitchfork clattered to the ground.
‘That hurt,’ shouted Perdita.
‘Are you on those bastards’ side?’
Just as Angel was about to leap on her, Luke picked her up and carried her yelling into the house.
Desperately she kicked backwards like a buck rabbit, trying to get him in the groin.
‘Let me go, put me down,’ and when he wouldn't, she tried to plunge her teeth into his arms which were clamped round her like steel bands.
The next second he had put her under the shower and turned on the cold tap.
For once it decided not to have cystitis and gushed out like the Victoria Falls funnelled through a hose pipe.
‘Had enough?’ he said fifteen seconds later.
Gasping, choking, spluttering, she struggled to escape.
‘Are you going to behave yourself?’
He pulled her away from the driving jet of water.
‘No,’ screamed Perdita, aiming a kick at his shins.
‘Now I know how Enid Coley felt.’
‘Well, go back under again.’
Her drenched hair stranded her face, her pale lilac dress clung to her body, her eyelashes divided like a starfish as he pulled her out a second time.
As she opened her mouth to shriek, he grabbed a green towel hanging over the shower rail and slapped it over her mouth.
‘Pack it in,’ he said sharply.
‘D'you want to get sent home?’
‘I don't care,’ mumbled Perdita, trying to bite him through the towel.
‘Bastards, how can you stand there and not mind?’
‘Of course I mind, but we're here to learn, Miss McEnroe.’
‘Don't call me that, you great jerk,’ said Perdita, hammering her fists against his chest, which was as hard as the ground outside.
‘They're going to break that pony's leg.’
‘Or teach it to rein back,’ said Luke.
He drew back the dingy plastic curtains covering the small window overlooking the yard.
‘Angel's on her back now, and she's reining back pretty good.
Their methods are cruel, but they get results.’
‘I hate this bloody country,’ hissed Perdita.
Luke made an attempt at levity.
‘There are good things about it.
Polo boots are three times cheaper than they are in the UK.’
‘Oh, shut up.’
Out of the window, she could see a huge pink moon, like the inside of a guava, climbing out of the gum trees.
‘Even the moon's blushing at the horrible way they treat ponies,’ she snarled.
‘Why's it that stupid colour anyway?’
‘Catching the last of the sun's rays,’ said Luke.
‘Sun's rising in the East now; gone to shine on your Mom.’
Suddenly Perdita had a vision of Daisy, kind, scatty, busty, in her awful clothes, constantly making concessions, whom she hadn't written to since she'd arrived.
Glaring at Luke, she burst into tears.
‘Hush, honey, hush, I hate it too,’ he murmured, enfolding her in his arms and stroking her sopping hair.
‘I know it's awful.
I guess I wanta play polo better so I can beat the shit out of them on the field.’
One moment she was sobbing her heart out, then, lulled by the bearlike warmth of his chest and the comforting shelter of his great arms and shoulders, she had fallen asleep like a child.
Gazing down, Luke thought how beautiful she was despite the tear-stains and the swollen eyelids.
She hardly stirred as he pulled off her lilac dress and carried her in her bra and pants into her bedroom.
Laying her gently on the bed, he removed the dark red blanket from his bed and put it over her.
Perdita woke at two in the morning.
Slowly the events of the previous evening re-assembled themselves.
Had it been a nightmare?
No, her bra and pants were still wet.
Luke must have put her to bed.
Oblivious of any guards, she stole downstairs.
Outside, huge stars blazed like shaggy white chrysanthemums; the moon had stopped blushing and was now flooding the pampas with ghostly silver light.
A warm breeze ruffled the leaves of the gum trees, which cast a thousand ebony shadows on the burnt dusty yard, which was now palest grey instead of brown.
She could hear the occasional snort and stamp of a pony, then jumped out of her  skin, as something cold and snakelike was thrust into her hand.
It was the wet nose of one of Raimundo's shaggy lurchers, who was frantically waving her long crooked tail.
‘Sweet thing,’ Perdita crouched beside her, stroking her rough fur, as the bitch writhed against her in delight.
Both jumped as a great snore rent the air.
Umberto, tonight's guard, was slumped against the bottom of a tree, an empty bottle at his feet.
Now was her chance.
Out in the corral, tied so tight to the big stake in the centre that the Argentines call a palemque that she couldn't even move her head, was the little grey pony.
‘You poor little duck,’ said Perdita gently.
Nearly breaking her neck, the pony pulled away in panic, the whites of her eyes glinting in the moonlight, coat curled with dried sweat like an Irish Water Spaniel.
At first, when Perdita held out the bucket, she was too frozen with fear to drink.
But when her muzzle was dunked in the water almost over her nostrils, the temptation became too much.
Sucking in great drafts, she drained one bucket and then half another.
Watching her fondly, Perdita was reminded of Fresco.
If only she could jump on her back and not stop galloping until she got to Ricky and Palm Springs.
As she laid her hand on the little mare's neck, she quivered violently, but didn't move away.
‘I'm going to call you Tero,’ she whispered, ‘because you and I are going to fly away from this hellhole.’
Loosening the rope so the mare's nose could reach the ground, she left her with a pile of hay.
Next morning the post strike ended, bringing five letters from Daisy, none of which Perdita opened.
She was in a black gloom because not even a postcard had arrived from Ricky.
Alejandro, having been out on the bat the night before, returned at breakfast time with the pallor and red eyes of a white rat.
He was then thrown into a frenzy by a letter announcing the impending arrival of Lando Medici, the richest of American patrons who always paid for ponies in readies out of a Gladstone bag.
Soon Alejandro was venting his hangover on all the staff, yelling at them to tidy up the place and all the ponies.
‘Where's Raimundo?’ he shouted at a wincing Umberto.
‘He sick,’ said Umberto.
‘Well, get him up.’
‘What's the matter with him?’ demanded Perdita, who was busy trimming the hairy fetlocks of a gelding that resembled a Clydesdale more than a polo pony.
Just for a second Umberto forgot his own hangover.
‘Señor Gracias give heem the eye black.’
‘He what?’ gasped Perdita.
‘Raimundo was in the bar with his friends last night.
Señor Gracias come in and talk to eem very quietly, then he heet him across the room.
Everyone cheer.
They no like Raimundo — very hard man.’
‘What did Raimundo do?’ asked Perdita in awe.
‘He run away,’ said Umberto with a grin.
‘He leave very quick.
Señor Gracias — how you say?— too beeg to tango with.
Angel was in the bar too.
Upchatting girl from the gas station.
Señor Gracias turned towards him and Angel ran away too — all down the road like Carl Lewis.
He was very frightened.
He not drive car tied to pony again in an 'urry.’
Later Perdita cornered Luke.
He looked tired and his eyes were bloodshot from the dust.
‘I thought we were here to learn not to criticize,’ she said sternly.
Then that wonderful once-a-year smile split her face in two.
‘You have definitely won the Man of the Macho Award.’
Standing on tiptoe, she kissed him on the cheek.
Luke blushed beneath his freckles and his heart jumped several beats.
It's only because there's a dearth of available women out here, he told himself sternly.
Alejandro, fed up with Raimundo's laziness and his exorbitant whining demands, was put in such a good mood when he saw the black eye that he agreed that Perdita could take over the breaking of little Tero.
‘She no good for polo, too cheeken, but eef you want to waste your time.’
Luke had temporarily routed Raimundo and Angel, but their animosity towards Perdita, if less overt, was in no way abated.
To give Perdita a break, Luke took her away the following Saturday to see a high goal match at the famous Hurlingham Club which left her speechless with wonder, then on to Buenos Aires to an English production of The Merchant of Venice throughout most of which she slept.
Her only comments at dinner afterwards as she gorged herself on tournedos, raspberries and cream and St Emilion were that Shylock was almost as beady about money as Alejandro and that Bassanio was a wimp.
‘Portia'd have done much better with that suitor who talked about his horse all the time.
At least he'd have given her some decent ponies.’
Luke, who knew the play backwards, had been moved to tears by the moonlit love scene between Lorenzo and Jessica.
A lemon-yellow half-moon was hanging overhead as he and Perdita left the restaurant.
But any hope he might have had of sliding his arm round her and trying a tentative first kiss on the drive home was scotched when she fell asleep the moment she got into the car.
Her white dress had fallen off the shoulder nearest him, her skirt was rucked up to mid-thigh, her hair rippled silver.
With her scornful mouth softened by sleep and pale eyelids hiding her furious eyes, she looked as vulnerable as she did desirable.
Wracked with longing, Luke drove through the grey lunar landscape, only broken by occasional white towns or ebony clumps of trees.
Up at five and sleeping badly of late, Luke kept his mind off Perdita and himself awake on the long straight roads, as he had  done so often in the past, by concentrating on a particular horse.
This time it was Maldita, a grey mare who had slipped into the yard already broken as part of a job lot a few weeks ago.
Alejandro was allergic to greys, particularly the whiter ones.
His father had been paralysed by a fall from a white stallion.
On the one recent occasion when the Mendoza family had got near winning the Argentine Open, it had been on a grey mare that Alejandro had missed the clinching penalty.
His phobia had spread to his grooms when Raimundo's even crueller predecessor had broken the leg of a grey filly, hurling it to the ground for branding, and the following day he had died of snake bite.
Whenever they passed a grey on the road, the grooms crossed themselves.
The iron grey, Tero, got by because her coat was almost black, but Maldita was so dazzlingly white, except for a sprinkling of rust-brown freckles on her belly, that she looked as though she'd been through the car wash.
At fourteen hands she was on the small side for polo, with a lovely intelligent head, wide-apart dark eyes, clean legs and a smooth, effortless stride.
Unfortunately she was as bitchy as she was beautiful, lashing out with teeth and hooves at any human who came near her, and bucking them off if they tried to get on her back.
Even when Raimundo strapped one of her back legs to her belly to stop her kicking, she struck out with the other leg and, crashing to the ground, laid about her with her front legs and teeth.
Alejandro was all for putting a bullet through this she-devil's head and dispatching her to the nearest abattoir.
Luke, however, who was a genius with difficult horses, begged to be allowed to have a crack at her.
He had begun by putting Maldita in a stable with no straw and taking water and feed to her every eight hours, then, when she went for him, immediately removing them.
After twenty-four hours she was so hungry that she dived her pale pink nose into the bucket instead of at him.
Two days later she allowed him to stand in her stable while she ate.
Starving her until the next evening, he coaxed her with pony nuts into a stall which Raimundo used for branding and saddling bigger horses, which was so narrow she couldn't turn round.
Tying her lead rope so tightly she couldn't move her head, Luke had climbed up and approached her from above.
Talking softly the whole time, he slowly ran his hands over her, caressing, gentling and scratching up and down her mane where once her mother would have lovingly nibbled her, then progressing to her back and flanks.
After the first minutes of trembling outrage, Maldita had stopped behaving as though his fingers  were red-hot pokers and reacted almost voluptuously to his touch.
Luke wished Perdita were as responsive.
At the end of half an hour, back in her box, he rewarded her with hay and water.
After a week of such treatment, he mounted her, sending her into the same orgy of bucking that had dislodged the grooms and all the Mendoza boys.
Finding she couldn't unseat him, she paused for breath, anticipating her next devilry.
She was so small, and Luke so long in the leg, he looked like some father riding a seaside donkey to amuse his children.
‘You won't need a mallet on that one,’ shouted Alejandro.
‘You can kick the ball with your feet, or if you miss, that beetch will kick it for you.’
Unnerved by Alejandro's great roar of laughter, Maldita had taken off into the pampas, somehow miraculously missing rabbit holes and fallen logs as she hurtled along.
Luke sat still and gave her her head, amazed that the more she warmed up, the faster she went, staggered by the distance she could carry his 190-pound bulk in the burning sun.
After nearly four miles she ran into the river that bordered Alejandro's land, which was so deep she was forced to swim.
On the opposite bank, Luke rolled off her back and lay on the grass.
The heaving mare glared back at him, too exhausted to move.
Afterwards he hacked her quietly home and was further amazed that she responded to his legs and hands and had the perfect mouth and balance of a made polo pony.
It didn't stop her lashing out at him with her teeth and back legs as he unsaddled her, but he felt he was making progress and, the next day, stick and balling her he found she was a natural.
In her dark-eyed pallor and arrogant bloody-mindedness, she reminded him of Perdita.
If she could trust one human, he felt, she could achieve anything.
Driving home from the theatre he pondered his next move.
Seeing General Piran ahead, he decided to try her in practice chukkas tomorrow.
It was past three o'clock, but the tack room light, besieged with huge crashing moths, was still on.
Raimundo's shaggy lurchers swarmed round Perdita as she staggered groggily out of the car.
‘I've never been so exhausted in my life.
Christ, what's that?’ she shrieked, as fat Umberto, clearly drunk and absolutely terrified, lurched out of the shadows brandishing a gun.
‘What in hell's the matter?’ said Luke, taking the gun from him.
‘Maldita, she is dead,’ gabbled Umberto in Spanish.
‘What!’ howled Luke.
Raising his hands in panic, begging Señor Gracias not to shoot him, Umberto whimpered that Maldita had developed colic that morning.
‘We fight all day to save her.’
‘What did you try?’ demanded Luke furiously.
‘Everything, enemas, catheters, fluids to hydrate her.
All impossible, she more busy fight us than the colic.
She get up, she get down, she roll, she kick the stomach, like crazy woman.
We try real hard.’
Then, seeing the expression on Luke's face, Umberto indignantly lifted his loose trousers up above his boots to display two huge purple bruises: ‘What you think these are, love bites?’
‘What did the vet say?’
‘A lump of sand block her gut.’
‘When did he last come?’
‘This afternoon.
He no come back.
His daughter getting married this evening.’
‘Then where the fuck's Alejandro?
Humping in BA, I suppose.’
‘He didn't even went,’ explained Umberto, who couldn't ever have imagined Señor Gracias being so angry about anything.
‘He go to wedding of vet's daughter.’
‘Along with everyone else, I guess,’ said Luke.
‘Why didn't anyone take her to the veterinary hospital?
They could have operated.’
‘Alejandro say she too weak,’ said Umberto, leaving unspoken the truth that Alejandro would be too mean to fork out the equivalent of $5,000 for a green and vicious mare.
‘Where is she?’ asked Luke.
‘In the first paddock under the gum trees.
Alejandro tell me shoot her if pain get too bad.
He say best stable for that mare is a coffin.’
Umberto crossed himself.
‘But bad luck to kill white horse.
Anyway she already die, she not move for twenty minutes.’
Followed by Perdita, who only half understood what was going on, Luke sprinted out to the paddock.
Although the moon had set, they could see Maldita's ghostly white body slumped in the corner like a cast-off shroud.
‘Poor little bitch,’ Luke was shaking with rage.
But as he put his hand beneath her nearside elbow, he felt the faintest heartbeat and, to his joy, the mare struck feebly out at him with her off-fore and gave a half-whicker of recognition which turned into a groan.
Her white coat was drenched with sweat, her belly horribly distended.
‘Put some rugs on her,’ he ordered Perdita, as he raced back into the house.
Under his bed he had a complete medicine chest, full of stuff given him by a veterinary friend in Palm Beach.
There was one thing that might save the mare, and that was only a 10,000 to I chance.
Back in the paddock he was greeted by a stream of expletives.
Even in her hopelessly weakened condition, Maldita had lashed out when Perdita tried to put a rug on her.
‘What are you giving her?’ asked Perdita as Luke plunged the needle into the mare's neck.
‘Neostymine.
Push her into internal contractions.
It'll either kill her or make her pass the sand.’
The mare writhed and groaned as another spasm of pain shook her body.
‘She's in such agony,’ stormed Perdita, ‘why don't we just put her out of her misery?’
‘We're giving her a chance,’ said Luke curtly.
‘Now help me get her to her feet.’
They both jumped as a black shadow fell across the mare's contorted body.
It was little Tero, turned out in the same paddock, offering silent sympathy.
Round and round they staggered like the end of some ghastly marathon, Luke dragging Maldita upright and along by her headcollar, supporting her with his body, Perdita propping up her other side.
Tero followed them at a distance, watching her new friend with sorrowful anxious eyes.
Luke could have done with more help, but Umberto had barricaded himself into the tack room with another bottle.
After twenty minutes Luke felt his Titanic strength was supporting both Maldita and a buckling Perdita, and ordered the latter to bed.
When she refused, flopping with exhaustion by the gate, he threw a spare rug over her.
The huge expanse of sky was lightening now, the stars growing pale, a far cry from Lorenzo's ‘patines of bright gold’.
Occasionally a farm dog barked, a frog croaked by the water trough gleaming in the half-light, a rabbit caught by some predator shrieked in terror, a distant pounding of pop music indicated that the wedding of the vet's daughter was still being celebrated.
Twice Maldita collapsed.
It was hard to tell now if it was Luke's sweat or hers that drenched her rug.
Occasionally she groaned and made half-hearted kicks at her agonizingly swollen belly.
Walking her round, Luke was reminded of his schoolfriend Spike, who'd been caught in the locker room with another boy.
Terrified that the publicity could ruin his father, who was a senator running for president, Spike had OD'd on barbiturates.
By talking to him all night and keeping him on his feet, Luke  had saved Spike's life, only to have him try again successfully a week later when the story finally hit the press.
Somehow Luke felt he owed it to Spike's memory to save the mare.
‘Come on, baby,’ he urged her.
‘You gotta pull through.
Just try and crap, then you'll feel better.’
To keep them both awake, he reeled off endless poetry; Shakespeare, Hiawatha, then because Maldita might prefer her own language, he started on Martin Fierro .
Afterwards he couldn't tell if he had dreamed it, but he was sure little Tero drew close to Maldita several times, trying to prop her up, and twice he felt Tero's timid nudge of encouragement in his back when he was buckling with exhaustion.
By the time the stars had faded, Maldita's heart had rallied, beating almost as fast as her pounding little hooves had on the pampas.
Her belly gave a massive rumble.
‘Come on, honey,’ mumbled Luke.
‘If you pull through, I swear I'll take you to Palm Beach, Windsor, Cowdray and Deauville.
You'll have a life without winters, playing the best polo in the world.’
But the mare was arching her back and groaning in such agony now that Luke only just managed to keep her on her feet.
It was as though Vesuvius had erupted inside her.
He could see a faint pink glow in the East.
From the tack room Umberto's snores rent the air.
In a distant field a mare whinnied, and a stallion whinnied back.
Luke staggered.
His strength was giving out.
‘Come on, Spike baby,’ he muttered.
‘Don't die, you've gotta see another sunrise.’
Waking very cold and aching, Perdita saw little red flames flickering across the great blue arch of sky and thought for a terrified second that she was in the middle of a forest fire.
Then she became conscious of a vast blood-red sun warming the pampas.
The trunks of the gum trees soared bright pink, the tack room windows flared crimson and all the birds in the world seemed to be singing for joy.
Sitting up stiffly, Perdita gave a gasp, for in the corner beside Tero, a beautiful rose-red mare, her coat mackerelled with dried sweat, was quietly grazing.
Fast asleep against the fence slumped Luke, his face as rumpled as an unmade bed, his shirt, as Perdita shook it, drenched with dew.
‘Maldita,’ whispered Perdita incredulously, ‘she's OK?’
Luke opened a bloodshot eye and grinned triumphantly.
‘She passed the sand.
What a mare!
If she can fight off that medication, she'll take on the whole world.’
Hearing Luke's voice, Maldita glanced up, gave a whicker of joy and, a little unsteadily walked towards him, pressed her nose against his shoulder and breathed lovingly down his neck.
‘She knows you saved her life,’ said Perdita in awe.
But, as she stretched out a hand to stroke the mare, Maldita moved even closer to Luke, flattening her ears and lashing out at Perdita protectively with a hind leg.
Umberto, snoring in the tack room, barricaded against ghoul and hobgoblin by one of the feedbins, was woken to a punishing hangover by the increasingly irritated din of muzzled horses kicking their water buckets.
Peering through the cobwebs at the stable clock, Umberto realized he should have been up an hour ago.
Any minute Alejandro would be back from the wedding breathing fire and brandy fumes.
Alejandro didn't like dead mares around; it looked bad if potential buyers dropped in.
He'd better get that she-devil shifted.
Clutching his head, Umberto set out to rouse the other grooms.
The sun had now lost its rosy tinge and shone extremely painfully into his eyes.
Next moment, he nearly died of fright.
For, ghostly in the pale light, glaring through the fence at him, was a dazzling white Maldita.
‘Fantasma!
Aparecido !’ he shrieked.
Frantically crossing himself over and over again, he fled screaming towards the grooms' quarter as fast as his fat legs would carry him.
‘What's up with him?’ asked Perdita in amazement.
Luke shook with laughter.
‘He left her for dead.
He figures she's a ghost.’
‘Figured she didn't have a ghost of a chance,’ giggled Perdita.
‘Why don't you call her Fantasma?
It's a much prettier name than Maldita.’
And so Maldita the malevolent became Fantasma the fantastic.
Within a few days she had recovered enough to play practice chukkas, going straight into fast polo as though she'd played it all her life.
She adored the game so much, Luke only had to shift his weight or touch her mouth to get her to do what he wanted, and she was so competitive she would bump anyone, at first even riding off ponies on her own side.
She was still bitchy.
If Luke were grooming her, she lashed out if he brushed her belly or round her ears, and went for anyone else who came near her.
But she could sense when he was getting her ready for a match and stood like a statue, even dropping her head for him to clip her mane.
The only other being Fantasma adored was Tero.
The two mares had become inseparable and cried bitterly if they were parted, Fantasma even bashing down fences to get at her friend.
Alejandro was so staggered by Fantasma's progress that he decided to waive his prejudice against greys; not so much that he was prepared to get on her back, but he spent a considerable time wondering how he could flog Fantasma to a rich patron without them finding out how vicious and unmanageable the mare could be when she was away from Luke.
One of the great debates raging through the Argentine polo world was whether Alejandro Mendoza was a greater player than the mighty O'Brien brothers, Miguel and Juan.
Certainly the Mendoza family's ambition in life was to beat the O'Briens.
Over twenty years the two great polo dynasties had battled it out in the Argentine Open at Palermo.
In the eighties the O'Briens, with Juan and Miguel on ten and their two cousins on nine, had predominated.
The Mendozas, however, were biding their time.
Alejandro had married at twenty.
In two or three years Luis, Patricio and Lorenzo would be catching up with Miguel's cousins, and by this time Miguel, who drank and ate too much, might well be over the top.
And Juan — as Alejandro (who as one who lived in a glass house and was in no position to hurl polo balls) pointed out — might well have died of sexual excess.
Hardly an evening passed without one of the Mendozas gnashing their teeth over old videos of the Open and swearing: Death to the O'Briens.
Alejandro was also very jealous that Miguel and Juan, aided by Bart Alderton's fat salary, had started their own polo club, buying much of the adjoining land and selling plots to polo enthusiasts at vastly inflated prices.
Another hotly contested tournament was the Copa de Republic, a vast knock-out competition which went on all over the country from November to April.
Played entirely on handicap, it meant that a team like the O'Briens, the aggregate of whose handicaps added up to thirty-eight goals, could be pitted against a team whose goals only totalled eight.
This year, by some freak of fate, the Mendozas had drawn the O'Briens in the first round, and were due to play them at the latter's new  polo club forty miles away on the first Saturday in December.
On the Thursday Luis Mendoza pulled a groin muscle, so Luke had to take his place.
On the Friday Lorenzo Mendoza lost his temper with a pony that kept going up with him.
Pulling it over to frighten it, he failed to jump clear and the pony fell on him, smashing his thigh.
Sobbing with pain and rage, he was carted off to hospital by an ashen Claudia and the family doctor, who'd been presented with a horse every time he delivered a Mendoza baby.
Now Angel would have to substitute for Lorenzo.
As a result, Alejandro, reluctant to face a rout, ducked out on Saturday morning complaining of an ancient back injury.
Perdita, covering the bottom of the lorries with straw to protect the ponies' feet, suddenly heard Alejandro shouting that she better dig out a pair of clean breeches and polish her boots, as she'd be playing in the match that afternoon.
Perdita went into shock horror.
In five hours she'd be marking Miguel O'Brien — a gnat trying to curb an elephant.
Her confidence was further eroded by both Patricio and Angel launching into a Hurry of Latin hysterics that all the press would be there and why should the humiliation of a certain Mendoza defeat be quadrupled by having a stupid girl on the team.
Whereupon Luke lost his temper and told them not to be such fucking chauvinists.
As a final straw, on going to change Perdita discovered she'd got the curse, which was invariably as bloody as Culloden on the first day.
How ghastly if she bled through her breeches.
The O'Briens' club was far too new to have a Ladies' Loo, and she was nearly out of Tampax.
Storming out of her room, she went slap into Luke.
‘I'll polish your boots,’ he offered.
‘I can't play.’
‘Sure you can.
Unknowns are always discovered in the Copa de Republic.
It's your big break.’
‘How can I play against Angel and Patricio as well as the O'Briens?’
‘Hush, hush.’
Luke drew her to him.
As always his vast warmth steadied her.
‘Think how proud Ricky would be.’
Burying her face in Luke's chest to hide her blushes, Perdita asked him if he knew the Spanish for Super Tampax, and if they could stop for some on the way.
‘I guess so,’ said Luke, putting a hand down to stroke her aching, knotted belly, ‘and some Buscopan too if you need it.
Stop worrying — we're on twelve, they're on thirty-eight.
All we've gotta do is stop them scoring twenty-six goals.’
They took two lorry-loads of ponies including Fantasma.
Little Tero whinnied hysterically when she discovered she was being left behind.
Angel drove the first lorry.
Perdita sat between him and Luke, who was busy working out who should ride which pony in each chukka.
A compulsive polo watcher, he was familiar with many of the O'Briens' horses and would probably have to rearrange the list when he saw which ones they were playing.
‘You've gotta mark Juan,’ he told Angel.
‘He ought to be a twelve or a thirteen, he's so good.
He's on to the ball before anyone else, but he conserves the energy of his horses.’
‘Unlike Reeky,’ taunted Angel, ‘who do too much and exhaust his horses.’
‘Don't talk crap,’ said Perdita furiously.
‘Pack it in,’ snapped Luke, ‘and drive a bit slower.
We don't want to go up the ass of that flour lorry in front.’
Angel's fingers drummed angrily on the steering wheel as he gazed moodily at the long, straight road ahead of them.
Suntanned now, he no longer looked as though he was dying of jaundice.
Bronze tendrils stuck to his forehead.
Lean jaws, continually chewing gum, were covered in stubble.
He might have shaved for a match, thought Perdita; the girl in the petrol station must have a skin like garlic sausage.
‘Look at those sheep grazing under that pylon,’ said Luke quickly, trying, too late, to distract Perdita's attention from another dumped dog, cringing and terrified, at the side of the road.
‘Stop!’ she screamed in anguish.
‘We can't leave him.’
Hunched over the wheel, Angel accelerated.
‘Aren't there any Dogs’ Homes in this shitty country?’demanded Perdita.
‘We don't need them,’ snarled Angel.
‘As a nation, we drive very fast which solve the problem.
Perdida means stray in Spanish,’ he added contemptuously.
Rigid with hatred, they sat a foot apart, with Perdita rammed against Luke.
But, as her shirt grew soaked in sweat, she was obliged to edge nearer Angel, who looked at her as if she were a tarantula.
Realizing they were both going through the roof with nerves, Luke put down his notes and tipped his battered Panama over his snub nose.
‘Listen, my children, and you will hear ,’ he began in his deep husky drawl, ‘of the midnight ride of Paul Revere,
On the eighteenth of April in Seventy-five.
Hardly a man is now alive
Who remembers that day and that year.’
‘Put a sock in it,’ grumbled Perdita.
‘Spik Spanish,’ said Angel fretfully.
A grin spread across Luke's freckled face.
‘You'll love this poem, Angel.
It's all about a crushing Brit defeat.
‘A hurry of hooves on the village street ,’ he went on,
‘And beneath from the pebbles in passing a spark
Struck out by a steed flying fearless and fleet.
That was all! and yet through the gloom and the light
The fate of a nation was riding that night.’
As he related the heroic tale of Paul Revere's gallop through the night to alert the Americans to the arrival of the British Redcoats, the forty miles flew by and Perdita and Angel strained to catch every word.
‘That was great,’ said Perdita in amazement when he'd finished.
‘Where d'you learn that stuff?’
‘In school when I had time to kill.’
‘Give us something else.’
Luke laughed and put on an English accent:
‘We few, we happy few, we band of brothers;
For he today that sheds his blood with me
Shall be my brother, be he ne'er so vile
This day shall gentle his condition.’
‘Nice,’ said Perdita.
Then under her breath, ‘But nothing's going to gentle Angel!’
The ponies, who always had an uncanny knowledge that they'd reached their destination, were stamping and scraping the floor in the back.
‘And here's Le Cloob O'Brien,’ announced Angel.
They turned into a dirt track flanked by very young gum trees.
On either side in various stages of development were yellow houses with crinkly red roofs like Swiss chalets.
The club house, which looked like a turreted Ruritanian castle, had white walls, grey roofs, flawless pitches front and back, but as yet no windows, nor, as Perdita suspected, a Ladies' loo, or changing room.
She changed in the lorry with Martina, a sorrel mare with four white socks, who was never let out until the last moment, as she was driven so crazy by the flies.
Perdita was trembling so badly that she could hardly zip up her boots.
She felt a stone overweight with the Super Tampax and all the Kleenex stuffed inside herself.
The once-crocus-yellow polo shirt, now faded to primrose with a huge maroon satin Number One on the back, was almost falling to pieces.
It had been worn the last time the Mendozas beat the O'Briens in the Open and on every occasion they had met since.
Trying to put her head through a sleeve, Perdita nearly ripped it further.
Luke let her out.
The primrose yellow suited him, she thought.
It emphasized the sleepy honey-coloured eyes in his brown face and the yellow streaks in his reddy-gold hair.
He looked in terrific shape too.
The massive shoulders and chest tapered down to the lean cowboy hips and long legs.
The O'Briens looked in even greater shape.
Everywhere, Perdita seemed to see the emerald-green colours they had chosen to emphasize their Irish origins, which were worn by players, grooms and supporters alike.
Both their lorries were green, and so were their lead reins, anti-sweat sheets, buckets and bandages, and there were green braids on their splendid horses' tails, which were left down until the last moment to protect them from the flies.
Perdita felt her stomach disappear.
There was Miguel, huge and thick-set with a permanently-hard ugly smirk on his face, and lithe, handsome Juan, whom she'd last seen being forcibly ejected for bonking his host's wife at the Waterlane's party, both swinging their sticks round and round to loosen up their shoulders.
Then she noticed a vast woman with a swarthy dead-pan face and black hair drawn back into a bun, who was standing near the O'Briens with grimly folded arms.
‘Who's Sitting Bully?’ she asked Luke.
‘Juan's wife.’
Then, at Perdita's look of incredulity, ‘Known as the Policia.
When she accompanies him to Palm Beach, he drops all his girlfriends, goes to church and prays, and becomes the model husband.
The moment she leaves, he's back with a blonde on each arm.’
Perdita started to laugh.
‘The good news,’ went on Luke, ‘is that, because she's around, Juan hasn't been able to have his extra-marital pre-match hump, which miraculously lifts his game.
Instead he and Juan lunched with Victor and Sharon Kaputnik.
Victor's thinking of buying a dozen horses off them, unless he sees something he fancies better at Alejandro's tomorrow.
They're not playing their best horses today.
They're saving them for the Open.’
‘So they have no doubt about wiping the floor?’
‘None,’ said Luke.
‘Let's hope pride comes before several falls.’
‘Will you do up my kneepads?’ asked Perdita.
‘I don't want anyone, particularly Angel, to see how much I'm shaking.’
‘The bad news,’ went on Luke, tucking a strap into a buckle, ‘is that one of today's umpires, Jaime Calavessi, bumped one of the O'Brien boys wrong last week.
After the match, ‘’ Tiny'’, as Mrs Juan is euphemistically known, and her three sons chased Jaime round the field and nearly broke his jaw.
So any decisions  he makes today will be nervously pro-O'Brien; The other umpire is Juan's brother-in-law, so he won't be un-biased either.’
A large crowd had gathered, giving a great air of carnival.
Little boys raced about hitting balls with short mallets.
Young players sat inside the boards, anxious to get as near their Gods as possible.
Voluptuous girlfriends, sisters and mothers constantly turned against the hot dusty wind to secure their cascading glossy hair with plastic bull-dog clips.
Perched on bonnets of cars, smoking and chattering non-stop, they were getting high on tins of diet Coke.
Spectators, wandering along the pony lines, were amused to watch Fantasma, who'd been muzzled to stop her savaging anyone, standing on her two front legs and lashing out with both back ones.
A ripple of excitement went through the crowd as Miguel's wife, who was small, dark, and as pretty as Mrs Juan was ugly, rolled up with Victor and Sharon Kaputnik.
Victor, fatter and balder and more like a bilious little hippo than ever, was obviously enjoying playing the O'Briens off against the Mendozas.
‘In Chile they like you anyway,’ he was saying loudly.
‘In Argentina they cheat you and laugh all the way to the bank.
They only entertain you if they know you're going to buy their ponies.’
‘Bloody rude,’ said Perdita, furiously.
‘How dare he bitch about Argentina?
And, my God, Sharon's been gentrified!’
When Perdita last saw her as Victor's bimbo in 1981, Sharon's hair had been dyed the colour of strawberry jam, her splendid breasts had floated like beachballs out of her skin-tight polyester dress and her six-inch spike heels must have terrorized any lurking moles as she tripped on to the Rutshire pitch at treading-in time.
Today her hair, the discreetest palest auburn, curled softly on her collar and she was wearing a white muslin midi-dress, white stockings and flat white pumps.
Vast pearls, which some poor oyster must have needed an epidural to produce, circled her neck and wrists.
The bracelet had gone from her ankle, the heavy make-up from her eyes.
The graciousness of her entrance, however, was somewhat marred.
Clinging on to her big picture hat with one hand and holding up her white parasol with the other, there was nothing left to prevent the hot wind from the Andes blowing her dress over her head, to reveal a white suspender belt and French knickers.
‘My people used to have an estancia in Chorley Wood,’ she was telling an uncomprehending Mrs Miguel.
‘Oh, best of luck, Hoo-arn,’ she cried, priding herself on her pronunciation, as  Juan cantered on to the field, followed by a cloud of dust and the eyes of every woman round the pitch.
Impossibly arrogant and handsome, teeth flashing beneath his ebony moustache, so much copied by the young Argentine bloods, black curls flowing from under a very unIrish tartan hat, Juan's long thighs gripped a bay mare who was so glossy he could have checked his reflection in her quarters.
A great cheer went up as he started hitting the ball around, the merest tap sending it miles across a field as brown as Raimundo's goatskin apron.
‘Idolo , my hero, I am 'ere!’ yelled a busty blonde through cupped hands, earning herself a wave from Juan and dirty looks from both Sharon and Mrs Juan, who had stationed themselves grimly on the halfway line, surrounded by supporters.
‘That bay Juan's riding is very powerful,’ Luke told Angel.
‘Three days without oats and she can still play, but Juan has trouble stopping her, don't forget.
He'll also try and hit you too late.’
Knowing the others were depending on him, Luke kept his nerves to himself as he went round checking girths and bandages.
To give Perdita confidence in her first chukka, he'd put her on a dark brown pony called Chimango (which meant bird of prey), who was as steady as a rock, but who swept down on the ball like a hawk.
‘Luke,’ shouted Juan; Cantering up, he bent down and gave Luke a great hug; ‘My dear friend, 'ow are you?
How is Alejandro?
Still bent as a paper cleep?’
‘No more than you,’ said Luke.
‘We hear you've been selling Victor carthorses.
Did you wax their fetlocks beforehand?’
‘No, we use Ladies’ razor,’giggled Juan; ‘Your father is very well.
He ring me tomorrow wiz zee 'andicap listings.
If he go up, we 'ave to look for another ringer.’
Under Juan's pony's elegant hooves, the ground was cracking and blowing away in clouds of dust.
‘I 'ear you reduce to playing wiz girls.
Alejandro must be sleeping,’ he said.
‘He is not,’ said Perdita, outraged.
‘He means slipping,’ Luke reassured her.
‘That's even worse.’
‘This is Perdita,’ said Luke.
‘Ay, ay, ay,’ sighed Juan, peering under her hat.
‘You are twelve goal in looks,señorita ; what does it matter about zee polo?’
‘Bloody sexist,’ muttered Perdita, as Juan rode off.
‘He's pissed,’ said Luke.
‘We'll show him,’ said Perdita as she mounted Chimango.
Angel and Patricio were about to ride on to the field.
Wait!’
Perdita leant forward and removed a piece of straw from Angel's pony's eyelashes.
‘Put on the Rimmel mascara next,’ said Angel sarcastically.
‘Oh, fuck off.
‘Knock it off.’
said Luke, picking up his stick.
‘Now come on, you guys.
We may be the underdogs, but we're gonna fight like pit bulls.’