

Modern History
In 1662, when Catherine of Braganza was preparing to marry Charles II of England, there was a great danger of Madeira's being ceded to England as part of the dowry.
The Queen Regent Luiza of Portugal was so anxious for this alliance that a secret treaty was drawn up in case England's Parliament did not consider Tangier and Bombay sufficient as Catherine's dowry, in which Madeira too would have been ceded to England.
Exactly why it was not included in the treaty is unclear.
Some stories say the scribe who drew up the document for the Queen Regent was a Madeiran and that he deliberately forgot to include Madeira.
Other stories say that the Queen Regent became afraid of a public outcry should it be found out that she had even contemplated giving up such a prize.
Anyway she never needed to play her trump card, and Madeira remained Portuguese.
After the marriage, many British merchants began to settle in Madeira to take advantage of Charles II's protectionist policies which were embodied in an Act of 1665 banning the export of European goods to the English colonies.
This was designed to build up English exports, to encourage English shipping and increase England's share of the carrying trade, of which the Dutch had the lion's share at that time.
This ban did not include Madeira and so British merchants were able to ship wine from Madeira to the American colonies.
In the seventeenth century a new era commenced, with Madeira at the centre of the trade routes between Europe and Africa, the East and West Indies and North and South America.
It became the last stop for taking on provisions for the large convoys of merchant and naval ships crossing the Atlantic.
On Captain Cook's first voyage in the Endeavour , he anchored at Madeira between 14 and 19 September 1768, after seventeen days sail from England.
The ship was welcomed by the British Consul, Cheap.
Captain Cook was accompanied by a group of scientists including Joseph Banks (1743–1820), later Sir Joseph Banks.
He was one of the greatest benefactors of the British Museum and devoted much wealth and time to the pursuit of science.
On his visit to Madeira he and other scientists  collected plants and investigated the lifestyles of the inhabitants.
On this visit, Mr Weir, the mate, is said to have become entangled in the buoy rope when the anchor was being dropped and was dragged to the bottom and drowned.
On Commodore John Byron's voyage in search of new land in the southern Atlantic (1764–6), he called at Madeira between 13 and 19 July 1764 in command of two British naval ships, the Delfim and the Tamar .
The island was also of interest to geologists, botanists, zoologists and other scientists.
(See Appendix I.)
The three main rivers through Funchal were often the cause of serious flooding.
By 1803 the river beds, in some parts of the city, were two or three metres above the city.
In 1803, after there had been no rain for several months, it began to rain incessantly and at about 8 p.m. on 9 October the rivers burst their banks.
All the bridges were swept away, except the one on which the surveyor's house was built, and part of the defensive wall was destroyed.
Several houses were flooded and the doors could not be forced because there was so much water inside.
The inhabitants were on the upper floors calling for help but, before anything could be done for them, the houses disintegrated and the people were all lost in the flood.
One house, inhabited by a British family called Tatlock, was carried out to sea whole.
It remained floating for some minutes, with lights burning at the upper windows and people shouting for help, and then finally sank.
When the floods subsided, the streets were littered with bodies, choked with rubble from the ruins, and there were heaps of dead oxen, sheep and domestic animals.
The victims were laid out in the churches to be claimed by relatives, many, reportedly, still showing a spark of life which was ignored in the general rush to clear up.
Afterwards all the bodies were burned and all the pitch and tar in Funchal were requisitioned to fumigate the streets with bonfires.
In all, some 600 people were lost.
On 19 February 1804 Brigadier Engineer Reynaldo Oudinot, a Frenchman who had taken Portuguese nationality, arrived in Funchal to look into the problems of flooding in the city.
Although he died in 1807, he had by then planned the ‘canalization’ of the three rivers and the construction of the walls alongside them which can still be seen today.
Madeira did not escape the effects of the Napoleonic Wars.
In 1801 a British force occupied the island to safeguard the port as a vital revictualling point for the Navy.
Troops commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel Sir William Henry Clinton stayed for some months co-operating with the Portuguese garrison.
In 1807 the British again returned to Madeira under the command of  General Sir William Carr Beresford, who had already won a great reputation whilst still under forty years of age.
This occupation, which continued until peace was concluded with France in 1814, was friendly, as Britain had no territorial designs on the island.
The arrival of the British had been impressive: on 24 December 1807 a squadron had anchored in Funchal under the command of Admiral Samuel Hood and consisted of four ships of the line, four frigates and sixteen ships for transporting troops, carrying two regiments of infantry and two companies of artillery.
The British flag was raised on all fortifications in Funchal.
In 1808 Beresford and half the force returned to Lisbon.
The British troops were very friendly with the Madeirans and many courted the local girls, which is said to explain why so many fair-haired and blue-eyed men and women of obvious Anglo-Saxon ancestry are to be seen in Madeira.
A reaction against the occupation by the British began to develop after an incident in December 1813 when the then British commander, Major-General Gordon, condemned to death a British soldier for insubordination and the murder of a sergeant.
The Portuguese Governor intervened and said such an execution on Portuguese soil would be an insult to the Portuguese Crown.
When the execution was carried out in the Fort of Penha de França, the people of Madeira showed their disgust by turning their heads away from the fort whenever they passed it.
On 23 August 1815 HMS Northumberland , commanded by Admiral Cockburn, anchored in Funchal harbour, bound for the island of St Helena and taking Napoleon into exile.
Only the British Consul, Henry Veitch, was allowed on board while the ship was in Madeira.
A quantity of fruit, books and old madeira wine was taken on board.
It is not known which lodge supplied the wine nor whether it was Napoleon or one of his party who ordered it.
This, however, gives rise to two legends: firstly that it was paid for by Napoleon in gold louis to Mr Veitch, who later buried the coins under the foundation stone of the English church; and secondly that the wine was never drunk by Napoleon but returned to Madeira after his death to be bottled in 1840 by Blandy's.
A bottle of this wine was opened at Reid's Hotel in 1950 when the British community gave a dinner in honour of Sir Winston Churchill's visit.
Sir Winston, when told the story of the wine, insisted on serving each guest at the table himself.
‘Do you realize,’ he asked, ‘that when this wine was made, Marie Antoinette was alive?’
Consul Veitch was later removed from his post for addressing Napoleon as ‘Your Majesty’ instead of‘General’, as he had been instructed by London.
A typical road into Funchal
North side of the Island near Ponta de São Lourenço
A quiet road with viewpoint in the mountains
Cooking espetada , a popular local dish
The Câmara Municipal (Town Hall) of Funchal
The valley of Serra de Água
An overall view of Funchal and its harbour from the east
On 26 August 1823 a new Governor, accompanied by a regiment of the Seventh Infantry, was sent to Madeira by King João VI, who had recently  been proclaimed absolute monarch.
When in 1826, the Carta Constitucional (Constitutional Letter) was published, the Bishop of Funchal ignored the directives of the Ministry of Justice refusing to explain them to his flock.
This led to insubordination amongst the Seventh Infantry who attacked the Governor and wounded one of the officers who accompanied him.
On 27 April 1827 a new Governor, Captain-General José Lúcio Travassos Valdez, arrived to calm the situation.
In Portugal, in May 1828, a rival claimant to the throne, Dom Miguel, proclaimed himself absolute monarch, and the following month Portuguese ships appeared off Madeira, bringing the new Miguelist governor, José Maria Monteiro.
In August 1828, after a small exchange of fire, Monteiro landed with a thousand troops under Colonel José António de Azevedo Lemos.
Some British officers had been sent to help the Madeirans with their resistance, but they had arrived only a few days before the Portuguese troops landed and had not had time to organize.
The Governor, Valdez, and his family and many locally important people fled to Britain on board the frigate Alligator .
The Miguelist forces entered Funchal, and some 146 people and twenty-one clergy were arrested and imprisoned, sent to Lisbon and deported for life to the Portuguese colonies.
Over the years many sailing ships were wrecked on the rocky shores of Madeira, driven there by foul weather.
In 1842 six ships were at anchor in Funchal Bay when a hurricane blew them all onto the shore.
In 1863 the 200-ton brig Comet sank at her Funchal anchorage, and in 1877 the schooner Patagonia went ashore near Ponta São Lourenço.
Salvage from sailing ships was an important additional income for the local people, but ceased with the coming of the steamships as they could stand out to sea in a storm.
In the autumn of 1852, the first failure of the vines coincided with extensive disease in the potato crop, and the people faced famine.
A committee was appointed by the Portuguese Government to receive and distribute food to those in distress, but there were still many deaths.
In the summer of 1856, an epidemic of cholera broke out and over 7,000 people died in the course of a few weeks.
In many parts of the island there was total disorganization as a result, and the government had to install many new officials to replace those who had died or fled.
In 1916 Portugal seized some German ships in Lisbon harbour, at which Germany declared war on Portugal.
On Sunday 3 December 1916 a German U-boat sank the French warship La Surprise and two other ships anchored in Funchal Bay and then lightly shelled the town.
Some houses were damaged and a shell fell on the church of Santa Clara.
There were few casualties on shore but forty-five seamen lost their lives when  their ships sank.
In 1917 Funchal was again attacked by a German U-boat, but little damage was caused.
During the Second World War Portugal was neutral.
Most of the Madeirans were sympathetic to the Allies and those who were sympathetic to the Germans (Germanófilos as they were colloquially called) were unpopular.
There were hardships on the island due to supply problems from Lisbon of goods such as petroleum, car tyres and spare parts and other imported commodities.
But, as in most places, shortages were eased by ingenious home-made car parts and machinery, by pooling transport where possible and , for instance, easing the salt shortage by extracting it from the sea.
The tourist trade was practically non-existent and Reid's Hotel was closed during the War.
Madeira became, however, the temporary home for 2,000 Gibraltarians evacuated to Funchal and their arrival relieved what might have been a financially distressing situation resulting from the lack of tourists.
The evacuees filled most of the small hotels and the Savoy, many of them financially supported by the British Government.
Always referred to by the locals as ‘the Spanish’, they had their own school (where the Hotel Monte Carlo is now situated) and the New Year's Eve parties here were particularly popular.
The Gibraltarians liked to drink coffee in the open air cafés and the women loved to knit — occupations new to the Madeirans but which rapidly became and remain popular pastimes.
After the War a few who had married in the island remained, but the majority returned to Gibraltar.
With the overthrow of the Portuguese monarchy in 1910, Portugal became a republic.
Internal dissension continued until 1926, when a military dictatorship gained control.
Dr Antonio d'Oliveira Salazar, an economics professor from Coimbra, was appointed Finance Minister.
In 1932 he became Prime Minister and in 1933 Dictator, a situation which continued until his retirement due to a massive stroke in 1968.
He was followed by Dr Marcello Caetano, a law professor, who remained in power until the popular Revolution of 1974 when the army overthrew the dictatorship.
At this time the colonial wars in Africa, which were destroying Portugal's economy, were abandoned and free elections were introduced.
The deposed leaders, president Américo Tomás and Prime Minister Caetano, stopped at Madeira on their way to exile in Brazil.
They were allowed ashore but were kept in the sixteenth-century São Lourenço fortress during their stay.
During the Salazar dictatorship Madeira fared badly, particularly after the revolt in the island in 1931.
About 300 political prisoners had been deported from Lisbon to Madeira in the autumn and winter of 1930, and  they were to be important in the trouble which followed.
On 26 January 1931 the so-called ‘Hunger Law’ was published which gave the monopoly on imported flour to a small group of mill-owners.
This caused the bankruptcy of two of the most important local banks where the majority of Madeirans had their money deposited.
On 6 February there was a spontaneous strike by the stevedores, and this quickly became a general strike, with the mills being attacked.
The Lisbon government reacted unusually promptly, and on 9 February Colonel Silva Leal arrived with some 300 soldiers and six pieces of light artillery to put an end to the trouble.
He immediately began harsh repressive measures and many Madeirans were deported to the Azores and some to the Cape Verde.
On Saturday 4 April the 300 deportees, the island garrison and some of the troops from Lisbon staged a coup , and the following day declared a military dictatorship.
The Civil and Military Governors and many officers were imprisoned, and General Sousa Dias (one of the deportees) was proclaimed Dictator.
Commerce was paralysed, the telephones were cut, there was strict censorship of all correspondence and telegrams, and careful control of the port.
This revolt soon spread to the Azores and Cape Verde, where there were more deportees from Lisbon.
On 8 April the British cruiser London arrived, having come from Gibraltar in twenty-four hours.
The commander explained to the Dictator that the ship had come only to ensure the safety of British subjects and not to interfere in the situation in Madeira.
The British Consul, Brown, advised all British visitors to return home in case the island was blockaded, and a large group left the island on the Edinburgh Castle , including an important delegation from Britain's Grand Masonic Lodge which had been in the island to attend the inauguration of a new Masonic temple.
The situation was quiet, with just a few soldiers in the street, for the next few days.
The Lisbon Government tried to avoid bloodshed by starving out the rebels and blockading the island.
On 28 April the Lisbon forces disembarked at Ponta de São Laurenço under cover of firing from the ships.
The Madeirans replied and claimed to have forced the troops back on board ship.
Men from the British cruisers London and Curlew protected the foreigners who were concentrated in the neutral zone of the Hotels Reid's, Atlantic and Savoy.
British fusiliers and marines also protected the British Consulate and the homes and businesses of British residents.
On Thursday 31 April 700 Lisbon soldiers disembarked at Caniçal and, aided by fog, took the town of Machico and forced the rebels into the  hills to the west.
By 2–3 May, General Sousa Dias realized he and the rebels had lost the battle and surrendered.
All the officers, except Dias himself and two others, sought asylum either with the British Consul (and went on board the London ) or in the neutral zone in the hotels.
The toll on the Lisbon troops was one dead and seven wounded and for the rebels three dead and fifteen wounded, including one civilian.
The rebel soldiers were imprisoned and taken to Lisbon.
The Revolution of 25 April 1974 was greeted enthusiastically in Madeira.
There was a period of unrest and excessive zeal, of settling old scores and family feuds — all very mild, really.
Some people left the island quickly in chartered planes to Brazil.
Some have since returned and lead quiet lives.
Various regional movements emerged, some of which became political parties.
The Madeirans were worried, in particular, in case a post-revolutionary Communist dictatorship should install itself in Lisbon.
The revolution deterred visitors to Madeira and adversely affected the already fragile economy.
The Jornal da Madeira , owned by the Diocese and directed by Dr Alberto João Jardim, became the centre of Madeiran democratic resistance against Communism.
In 1976 a constitution was drawn up in Lisbon which designated Madeira an Autonomous Political Region.
Today, under the leadership of Dr Alberto João Jardim, President of the Autonomous Regional Government, Madeira is responsible for most of the administration of affairs that affect the Region and can initiate legislation in certain areas.
However, the island remains very much a part of Portugal and receives annual funds from the central government.
Since the first democratic regional elections took place in 1976, the Region has been governed by an overwhelming Popular Social Democratic majority.
The PSD party is a national, slightly right of centre, party which in July 1987 won an absolute majority in Portugal.
In Madeira the local branch of it is dominated by the charismatic figure of Dr Alberto João Jardim and at any election, national or local, the party can count on between sixty-five and seventy per cent of the votes cast in the island.
As well as an overwhelming majority in the Regional parliament it controls most of the municipal local authorities.
The opposition is led by PS, the Socialist party, which is strongest in the urban areas around Funchal.
The CDS, which is more right wing than the PSD, has two deputies in the Regional Parliament.
The Communists, PCP also have one member and their colleagues, UDD or United Democratic Party, have two members and draw most of their support from the Machico area.
Since the Revolution of 1974 and the opening of the Regional Government and  Parliament granted by the new constitution in 1976, vast improvements have been made to the infrastructure of the islands and to the living standards of the people.
Emigration
Emigration and tourism have long been the main contributors to the economy of Madeira, emigration being the older.
The emigration of Madeirans to far-flung places, where they worked hard and sent back funds to support their families in the island, is almost as old as the colonization of the island itself.
When the islands were first settled, the population began to increase rapidly and the number of inhabitants soon exceeded the resources, prompting emigration to other Portuguese lands.
Whenever the flow of emigrants slowed, the government in Lisbon encouraged it again.
In 1676 a royal decree ordered the transportation of between three and four thousand people from Madeira to Brazil.
The majority of the islanders lived at subsistence level.
Their main preoccupation was how to feed their families, as the availability and price of imported wheat, maize and dried fish varied greatly.
Emigration in search of better living conditions increased whenever there was a crisis in the production or exportation of wine, upon which the island's economy depended.
In 1836 the population of the archipelago was 115,446 (1,618 of these in Porto Santo).
The continued increase in Population accentuated the hardships for the Peasants: a great variety of taxes to pay; the price of imported wheat continually rising, when most peasants could manage to grow only enough food to last them three months; and the vines and potatoes suffered blight and disease.
Nineteenth-century Madeira had many problems similar to those of nineteenth-century Ireland, and many people emigrated in search of a better life.
No precise official figure on emigration exists before the end of the nineteenth century.
It is, however, estimated that between 1835 and 1855 about 40,000 people left Madeira, and between 1890 and 1910 about 38,500 — but the total population of the islands remained constant.
There was a decline in the island s population in the mid-1850s associated with many people emigrating at the time of the oidium disease of the vines.
In 1843 the total population was 117,372 but this had  declined to 107,088 by 1854 and to 98,620 in 1858.
By 1900 it was back up to 148,263 and rising again.
Although the Madeiran knew about the hardships of emigration, it remained an attractive proposition when he saw an emigrant return well dressed, with shoes on his feet, money in his pocket and stories of success.
The early emigrants went to Brazil and the Portuguese African colonies (popular because of the common language).
As time went on, they also went to British Guiana, the Hawaiian Islands, North America and Curação.
More recent destinations have been South Africa, Venezuela, Australia and Europe.
The abolition of the Slave Trade by Britain in 1807 created shortages of manual labourers in the plantations of colonies such as British Guiana.
In 1841 the Madeiran Press published an advertisement, by the Governor of British Guiana, Sir Henry George Macleod, for an agent in Madeira and offered rewards for settlers who went to British Guiana.
So many people wanted to emigrate in answer to this that the local authorities feared that the traditional system of agriculture in Madeira as well as the new industries, would be endangered by a shortage of artisans and workers.
They therefore published terrible stories about the hardships of emigration and the problems which had befallen many emigrants.
The authorities also tightened up on illegal emigration — the coastal areas were patrolled and hiding-places for illegal emigrants were found in central Funchal; those responsible were arrested, tried and sentenced.
The would-be emigrant faced many difficulties.
First of all there was the paperwork: it was necessary to obtain permission from the head of the family, to have a certificate of baptism for each emigrant, to obtain exemption from military service for males, to have no criminal record and to prove how the voyage would be paid for.
These were significant problems for the majority, who were both illiterate and poor.
Then there were the hardships of the voyage itself.
For example, the sailing ship Thomas Bell , which left Funchal on 8 November 1887 and arrived in Hawaii on 14 April 1888 (156 days via Cape Horn), had 400 emigrants on board and they suffered a great deal from sea-sickness and hunger.
During the voyage there were fights and illnesses, seven babies were born, eleven people died and there was one marriage and a miscarriage.
Emigration began to Curação in the Dutch West Indies in the 1930s, when the Madeirans went to work in the petroleum industry there.
In the 1940s there was an agent in Madeira for recruiting emigrants, and he gave would-be emigrants a medical examination and enquired into their marital status, number of children, qualifications and so on.
The ships were very full, with large numbers of emigrants and a doctor on board.
During the Second World War the Portuguese Government tried to insist that only neutral ships be used, but this was often ignored.
On the night of 16–17 March 1944, for example, a ship left Funchal with a doctor and 1,206 Madeirans, all bound for Curação, their passage having been paid by the petroleum company.
On arrival they were given simple accommodation in the company camp and received their meals from the centralized kitchen.
After four years of service they could return home for a holiday with the family or bring out their wives and children, providing they had found accommodation for them.
(Many emigrants chose to bring out their wives, and in 1948 and 1950, for example, ships arrived bringing women only from Madeira and the Azores.)
After ten years of service, providing there had been no problems, the emigrant could continue living in Curação without working for the petroleum company, providing he had a job.
The year of maximum emigration to Curação was 1945, when 2,769 emigrated, this being forty-six per cent of the total number of Madeiran emigrants in that year.
Between 1952 and 1970 the number of emigrants to Curação declined and then stopped, largely because other places increasingly appeared more attractive to the emigrant.
In the 1960s the oil boom made Venezuela the country to emigrate to, and it was a common occurrence for the emigrant who made good to hire a large American car (Cadillac or similar) and to return to Madeira by ship with the car.
He would drive round his home village for a couple of weeks, impress his family and friends with the car, cigars and drinks and pick his future wife.
He would then marry her and return with her to Venezuela, where he would return his hire car and take his new wife to his humble home.
Sometimes an emigrant would advertise in the newspaper in Madeira for a suitable wife, marry her by proxy and pay for her passage out to join him when he could afford it.
Even today the emigrant returning for a visit is expected to spend a fair amount of money entertaining family and friends.
Today many Madeirans live and work in Venezuela.
They started work in the restaurants, supermarkets and hotels, and many still work in such establishments.
Some have done well and now own the businesses in which they were once employed or have opened their own.
There are, at the present time, 190,000 Madeirans in Venezuela.
South Africa has also been very popular with Madeiran emigrants.
Today there are some 600,000 Portuguese there, half of them from this small island.
Many of the emigrants to South Africa were from middle-class families and are now in the professions there.
Some have done very well indeed — for example, Manuel Pestana who emigrated from  Ribeira Brava to South Africa in the 1940s.
He became the first Portuguese emigrant to be allowed a licence to open a liquor store there.
Over the years he invested in South Africa and Mozambique.
Eventually Manuel Pestana returned to Madeira and bought the old Atlantic Hotel where he built the Madeira Sheraton Hotel, the only privately owned Sheraton in the group.
His son, Dionísio Pestana now heads the family organization in Madeira.
This includes the Madeira Carlton Hotel (formerly the Sheraton and now the largest hotel in Portugal), the Casino Park Hotel, more hotels, offices and apartments under construction, as well as the Madeira Beach Club timeshare complex.
Another success story is that of José Manuel Berardo —‘Joe Gold’— who left Madeira over twenty years ago and started work in a greengrocer's shop in South Africa.
Eventually he owned a greengrocery business which he then mortgaged to buy spoil heaps across the road from the gold mines, which had been there since mining began.
On the assumption that the equipment a hundred years ago was not as efficient at finding gold as today's modern machinery, he hired some plant and employed a geologist and found a lot of gold in those old spoil heaps — just at the time gold rose in value on the world markets.
He is now a large shareholder in a bank and has companies in Australia and Canada, as well as investments in Madeira, including the Hotel Savoy, banking and the tobacco industry.
José Berardo has just finished restoring the almost derelict Monte Palace Hotel as a private home, together with the restoration of the lake, with its waterfalls, fountains and water cannons which were once a feature of this Victorian hotel.
In the beautiful gardens of this quinta he has had planted over six hundred cycads from South Africa.
These trees are native of South Africa and in danger of extinction and have remained unchanged since prehistoric times.
They seem to have adapted well to Madeira and are being cared for by a specialist.
Surprisingly enough, the small island of Jersey has been host to about 5,000 Madeirans, many of them contract workers in the hotels for the season.
However, many have settled and stayed in the island.
The professionalism of the Madeiran hotel and restaurant workers has certainly something to do with the high standard of hotels and restaurants to be found in Jersey.
In fact, there are few corners of the world where Madeirans are not to be found: from Alaska to Australia, from California to Macau.
In Madeira, to stand behind a little old peasant lady, dressed in black, in the bank cashing her cheques from family worldwide is quite an experience.
She is an expert in exchange rates, with her cheques in many different currency denominations.
She may not be able to read or write but she can convert dollars, francs, rand, etc into escudos!
Landscape and Climate
Climate
The island of Madeira enjoys one of the most equable climates in the world.
It is warm all year round, with warm summers, mild winters and moderate rainfall.
Summer temperatures rarely exceed 27°C (86°F) and winter temperatures never fall below 10°C (52°F).
Within this general analysis there is a considerable variety of micro-climates — as one might expect on a small island in the Atlantic with altitudes from sea-level to 1,800 metres.
Precipitation of about 550mm per annum(in Funchal) usually comes in short but very heavy showers.
March usually has the heaviest rainfall, just over 100mm on average.
From May to September, there is almost no rain; from October to February, rain falls on average on five to seven days per month.
In the winter, snow or, more usually, hail can fall on the tops of the highest mountains and yet one hour's drive down in Funchal people are swimming and sunbathing.
Between December and April, the temperature averages between 15°C and 21°C (59°F to 70°F); it then gradually increases to around 21°C to 24°C (70°F to 75°F) between July and September, and drops again to an average between October and December of 18°C to 21°C (64°F to 70°F).
This equable climate has long appealed to people from northern Europe (especially the United Kingdom) as a place to escape to from the rigours of a cold winter.
During June and July, heavy cloud may at times build up and the weather can become very humid.
Prevailing winds from the north-east (the Trade Winds) very occasionally bring a leste , a hot, dry wind which blows from the desert areas of North Africa.
This normally happens only in the summer and lasts for an average of one to five days.
The sky turns greyish-brown and (he air is filled with fine red-brown dust.
During these times the temperature may rise to as much as 40°C (104°F) and the humidity drop to below ten per cent.
The temperature of the sea water is at its highest in September (21°C, 70°F) and falls to 16°C (61°F) in March.
The weather in the mountains can change very rapidly, and mists can descend suddenly, particularly in the winter months.
Very often the day starts clear and bright in the mountains, and this continues until about 11 a.m., when misty cloud develops between altitudes of 500m and 1,200m.
This is caused by condensation in the air which moves upwards as the temperature at lower altitudes rises.
The reverse process often takes place in the evening, and the mountains become clear and sharp again.
Above 1,200m you can often enjoy beautiful weather and look down on a sea of white clouds, with the occasional peak protruding through.
The impression is one of being on the roof of the world.
Thomas Stanford, in his book Leaves from a Madeira Garden , states (with regard to the changing climate and scenery) that in Madeira one can travel in the space of an hour from a sub-tropical region to the Riviera, from the Riviera to Bournemouth, from Bournemouth to Caernarvonshire, and from Caernarvonshire to the Alps.
It truly is an island of contrasts.
Porto Santo, being smaller and lower than Madeira, has a different climate.
The wind sweeps unhindered across the plains, and there is very little precipitation.
It is dry and arid.
Between July and October it is usually very hot, with little rest from the blazing sun — an ideal holiday place for worshippers of sun, sand and sea.
Location
The archipelago of Madeira consists of the islands of Madeira, Porto Santo, the Desertas and the Selvagens.
Madeira is situated between latitudes 32°22'20''N and 33°6'50''N, and between longitudes 16°16'30''W and 17°16'38''W.
Its maximum east-west length is 57km, and the maximum north-south width 23km.
The population of the island of Madeira is 260,000, including 90,000 in the city of Funchal.
Of the total island population, eighty-six per cent live on the south side and only fourteen per cent on the north.
Porto Santo is the second largest island in the Madeira group, and the only other one which is populated.
It is 64km north-east of Funchal and 36km from the nearest point on Madeira.
It is 12km long and 7km wide and has a resident population of 2,700.
Looking east from Funchal, you can see three islands called the Desertas.
These islands are uninhabited, except for a few wild goats, rabbits and birds.
At the nearest point they are 30km away from the island of Madeira.
From left to right (when viewed from Madeira), we see Ilhéu Chão, Deserta Grande and Bugio.
Ilhéu Chão is about 100m  high, 1,500m long and flat-topped.
To the north of this island is a pinnacle-shaped stack known as Sail Rock because it looks somewhat like a ship under sail.
Legend has it that it was once fired on by a warship because it failed to reply to a signal!
Deserta Grande is 10km long and 1,500m wide, has only one practical landing place and used to be inhabited.
Today it is sometimes visited by sportsmen in search of wild goats.
Bugio is 7.2km long and 750m wide.
The Desertas are now a bird sanctuary.
The fourth part of the Madeiran archipelago is a group of three islands and reefs called the Selvagens.
They are 250km from Funchal and are, in fact, nearer to the Canaries than to Madeira.
They have the effect of increasing the territorial waters of Madeira (Portugal).
Great Selvagem is 2.5km long by 2.2km.
It is used by fishermen and is designated a bird sanctuary.
The other main islands are named Great and Little Piton.
Great Selvagem is where the pirate Captain Kidd (1645–1701) is said to have buried his treasure.
In 1830 a search was made by a British Government expedition, but nothing was found.
In 1890 a private expedition was also disappointed.
There is another slightly different version of the story of treasure in the Selvagens.
On his way to the South Pole, Shackleton called in at Madeira  between 16 and 19 October 1921.
He persuaded the then owner of the Selvagens to allow him, on his return journey, to search for the treasure, which would be split between them.
According to Shackleton, the treasure was from a French pirate ship which had been wrecked on the island, proof of which, found in the British Admiralty, was an account by one of the survivors of the wreck.
Unfortunately Shackleton died whilst still in the Antarctic on 5 January 1922, and so he never did search for the treasure.
Geomorphology
Geomorphologically speaking, the island of Madeira can be divided into three main areas: the central mass, the western part and the eastern area.
The central area is volcanic in origin.
Eruptions started under the sea, probably in the Miocene period some 20 million years ago.
These successive submarine eruptions built up layers of material which eventually emerged above the ocean's surface as a small island, and coral reefs formed around its edge.
The island was uplifted and igneous intrusions took place.
It then became elongated west-north-west/east-south-east by successive eruptions of lava and ash from volcanic cones along the top of the ridge.
The maximum height thought to have been reached during this period is 2,000m.
The island became covered with vegetation, fossils of which are sometimes found in the volcanic ashes.
The volcanic eruptions are thought to have finished some 1.7 million years ago, and the volcanoes are considered extinct.
The western part of the island is separated from the central mass by the deep ravines between Ribeira Brava and São Vicente.
It is made up of volcanic formations deposited in a north-west/south-east direction, the plateau of Paúl da Serra being the main core.
This plateau is about 17 km long, 6km wide and 1,200 to 1,500m high.
In the west it is heavily dissected by the Ribeira da Janela and the Ribeira do Seixal, both of which flow to the north coast.
The eastern part of the island, ending in the narrow, curving peninsula of Ponta de São Lourenço, consists of the small plateaux of Poiso, Chão das Feiteiras and Santo da Serra.
These small plateaux, covered in basaltic lavas, are similar in formation to that of Paúl da Serra to the west of the central mass.
Shell sand, blown into the area between Caniçal and the end of the island in recent geological times, contains fossil shells and root- and branch-shaped concretions of the vegetation which existed at that time.
The volcanic rocks of the island of Madeira (tufas and volcanic ashes interbedded with basaltic lavas) have long been subject to the effects of  rain and rivers.
Differential erosion of the rocks has resulted in the hard rocks being left as peaks separated by deeply eroded valleys and ravines.
Curral das Freiras may look like an old volcanic crater but it was, in fact, formed by the headwater erosion of the Ribeira dos Socorridos.
The shape and direction of the valleys have been influenced by the location of the more easily eroded volcanic material.
Today Madeira consists of a curving longitudinal ridge with numerous minor ridges running north and south from it.
All valleys are deep, with steep, often precipitous, sides.
Between the mouths of the rivers are high cliffs, some of the highest in the world, with vertical columns of basalt and layers of red and yellow tufa exposed in some places.
The central mountains of Madeira are about 1,860m above sea-level, the three highest peaks being Pico Ruivo (1,862m), Pico das Torrinhas or Torres (1,85 1 m) and Pico Arieiro (1,818m).
One of the best descriptions of the landscape of Madeira is that given by White and Johnson (Madeira.: Its Climate and Scenery , 1860): ‘When Columbus was asked by Queen Isabella to give her some notion of the configuration of Jamaica, it is said that he took up a sheet of paper, and after crushing it in his hand, partly opened it out; then placing it on the table, he told her Majesty that she would derive a better idea of the island  from the crumpled paper than from any description conveyed in words.
The same rough model would serve very well for Madeira, the physical geography of which is composed like Jamaica, of hill and hollow in endless iteration.’
Prainha, at the eastern end of the island, has the only natural sandy beach in Madeira, albeit black sand.
There are beaches of rounded grey basalt pebbles of varying sizes elsewhere around the island.
At the river mouths are stones and huge boulders brought down when the rivers are in flood, although most of the year there is so little water in the rivers that it is hard to imagine.
According to soundings made in the surrounding ocean, there are some very deep ocean trenches in the sea around the island.
The shore slopes steeply down into the sea and, if the ocean were to dry up, the island would emerge in a single block some 5,400m above the sea bed.
Porto Santo consists of volcanic rocks (basalt and trachyte) which are located mainly in the north-east of the island, where most of the peaks are.
The rest of the island is much lower and flatter and is covered with deposits of sand, calcareous sandstone and clays.
The local people call the clays salão , and it is traditionally used for covering walls and houses.
The island is aligned south-west/north-east, and the whole of the north coast  is of cliffs with an average height of 100m.
These reach a maximum height in the north-east, at the top of Pico Branco.
Porto Santo is not connected under the sea to Madeira but it is of a similar age — Miocene.
The island has an eight kilometre long white sandy beach which is one of the last unspoilt natural beaches in Europe.
Geologically the Desertas are similar in formation to the volcanic rocks of the Machico area (post-Pliocene) from which they are separated by a channel 50–100m deep.
They are really a southern prolongation of Ponta de São Lourenço.
The Selvagens are geologically similar to Porto Santo.
Selvagem Grande is a plateau from which 100m high cliffs plunge into the sea.
The Madeiran archipelago is situated on the African plate in an area tectonically much more stable than the Azores.
Occasional earth tremors felt in Madeira are almost certainly reflexes from shocks in the crust affecting the Azores and continental Portugal.
The epicentres of these shocks occur on an axis from the Azores to Gibraltar.
Soils
In parts of Madeira (above 800m) the heavy precipitation has made a profound alteration in the basalt to form clays that are reddish in colour.
This coloration shows the presence of iron oxides.
The forest areas have deeper soils with an organic layer.
At the highest level the soils are skeletal.
Below 700m many of the soils are man-made — the soils on the terraces having been brought up from the river mouths or down from the bases of the escarpments.
Madeira Wine
Most people have heard of madeira wine, but few know it.
It is a very much lesser-known relative of port and sherry.
Such sayings as, ‘If it's too late for sherry and too early for the port, ring for the madeira’ and ‘Have some madeira, m'dear’are well known.
However, few people know or appreciate the rich flavours of the four main varieties of madeira wine or are aware of its history.
Production of madeira is very small compared with that of sherry.
It is made only on the one small island of Madeira, and production costs are high.
There are four main varieties of madeira wine:
Sercial is pale in colour, light-bodied, dry or extra dry and should be served moderately chilled as an appetizer.
Verdelho is golden, medium-bodied, light and elegant.
It is a medium-dry aperitif which is ideal with soup, a piece of cake (although madeira cake is a British invention), cheese, fruit or nuts, or as a nightcap.
Bual is a medium to dark dessert wine which is full-bodied and very fragrant.
Malmsey is a medium-dark to dark full-bodied, very fruity, luscious and fragrant dessert wine.
Fine old Malmsey is ideal for after the desserts have been cleared away.
The early history of madeira wine is somewhat vague.
The early settlers brought vines to Madeira and, according to tradition, Prince Henry the Navigator introduced the superior vine,Malvasia candida , into the island from Crete in an attempt to capture the trade in sweet wines from the Genoese and Venetians.
In 1455 Luigi di Cadalmosto, an Italian traveller, visited Madeira and noted the excellent wines.
There are references to madeira wine at the Courts of sixteenth-century Europe and in the works of Shakespeare.
Almost certainly these were table wines for local use or intended as supplies for ships — not madeira wine as we know it today.
The marriage of Charles II and Catherine of Braganza was very important for madeira wine.
In 1665 Charles issued an ordinance banning the export of European goods to ‘English Plantations overseas’ in pursuit of protectionist policies.
The ban did not include Madeira, and an important trade opened up sending madeira wine to the Plantations (the West Indies and the American colonies such as Virginia, New England, New York and the Carolinas).
The drinking of madeira became very popular in the New World, and the export of wine increased.
By 1680 there were twenty-six firms in Funchal exporting wine, and ten of these were English.
By 1780 the number of British houses had increased to over seventy.
It was during the eighteenth century that madeira wine as it is known today came into being.
In the mid-eighteenth century fortification with brandy was begun.
Towards the end of the same century estufas (heated chambers) came into use to reproduce the improvements in the wine which had been noted when it crossed the equator in the holds of ships, the changes being caused by the heat and not by the motion of the ship.
As a result of these processes, madeira wine gained qualities which made it a rival of port and sherry.
In 1768 Captain Cook, in the Endeavour on his first voyage to the South Pacific, called at Madeira.
According to records, he took on board some 3,000 gallons of wine for his ninety-four-man crew for the 2½-year journey.
Cook again took on wine on his second voyage, in Resolution , in 1772.
In 1784 a Mr Higgins sold wine to a twenty-six-year-old Horatio Nelson, then captain of the frigate Boreas .
During the eighteenth century Madeira's importance grew as a port-of-call for ships en route for the Americas and the East, and the market for wine increased.
Officers and officials returning to Britain after the American War of Independence took home with them a taste for madeira wine.
From Britain the taste spread rapidly to the rest of Europe and to India, where it was very popular in clubs and officers' messes.
In 1900 Cossart Gordon & Co issued a list of some 200 messes and clubs in India which they supplied with madeira wine.
In America Thomas Jefferson, George Washington and Benjamin Franklin were all connoisseurs of madeira wine, and the Declaration of Independence was toasted in it.
To this day there are many collectors of old madeiras in the United States.
The individual members of the Madeira Club of Savannah, Georgia (founded in 1776), own between them probably the finest collection of madeira wines in the world.
During the mid-nineteenth century, the wine trade was hit by a crisis of disease and lack of care and planning.
The vines were attacked in 1852 by mildew (Oidium tuckeri ) and again in 1872 by pest (Phylloxera vastatrix ), both with very serious consequences.
Production declined and  exports were made at the expense of reserves accumulated in the warehouses.
Many people considered planting coffee, tobacco, sugarcane and sugarbeet instead of vines.
Many British and foreign merchants left the island as the wine trade declined.
Other events which contributed to the decline of the madeira wine industry were the American Civil War (which meant a temporary loss of the American market) and the opening of the Suez Canal (which meant a reduction in the number of ships calling at Madeira).
With the onslaught of the Phylloxera crisis, peaking in the 1880s, American resistant hybrid vines were imported, the first in 1873 by Thomas Slapp Leacock.
Not only were the American vines disease resistant: they were also more prolific.
In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the Krohn brothers (Danish in origin) had a very important market in Russia.
Madeira wine was for many years the favourite wine of the Russian Court, and one of the Krohn family had been food-taster to the Tsar.
Heather Krohn, widow of Raleigh Krohn, now lives in a converted windmill on the island of Porto Santo.
By the 1880s the chief importers of madeira wine were Russia, Germany, Great Britain, France and Brazil.
In 1919, with ‘prohibition, in the United States of America, a valuable market was lost.
However, Scandinavia rapidly grew up as an important new market.
By 1913 companies began to amalgamate.
First Welsh & Cunha joined forces with Henriques & Câmara to form the Madeira Wine Association Lda.
In the years that followed they were joined by Donaldson's and Krohn Brothers.
In 1925 Blandy & Leacock and other firms joined the Madeira Wine Association within which individual firms retained their separate identities and their own agents.
Today the Madeira Wine Co Lda represents many famous names and brands, including all the British names.
It has a permanent stock of about 10,000 pipes of wines and ships about fifty per cent of the island's wine exports.
In addition the company owns many brand names from companies no longer in the madeira wine business, and these include Rutherford & Miles, Leacock, Bianchi, Ferraz and Welsh Brothers.
Many well-known firms remain independent of the Madeira Wine Co Lda, amongst them Henriques & Henriques, A.E.
Henriques Lda, Justinho Henriques Filhos Lda, Veiga França (vinhos) Lda, Vinhos Barbeito (Madeira) Lda, H.M.
Borges Sucrs Lda and Companhia Vinicola da Madeira Lda.
At the vineyard of Veiga França (vinhos) Lda in Estreito da Cãmara de  Lobos there is an interesting museum of agriculture, and each September here, and in the Madeira Wine Company's lodge in Avenida Arriaga in Funchal, is celebrated the Wine Festival, a very colourful and enjoyable occasion.
You can even join in the treading of the grapes — but remember to take off your shoes and socks first.
The celebrations are accompanied by song and dance and local food, and the new wine is drunk.
Just along from Reid's Hotel on Estrada Monumental is the most recent firm to be established in madeira wine — Vinhos Barbeito (Madeira) Lda.
They have one of the most modern lodges in Funchal, with much of their production going to Japan.
The northern slopes of the island produce over half the grapes, but they are not of such fine quality as those of the south side.
The best area for vines is around Estreito da Cãmara de Lobos.
The land is prepared in spring and early summer, and vines are planted in October so that they benefit from the winter rainfall and are well established by the spring.
The vines are propagated by cuttings.
A trench one to 1½m in depth is dug, and the base is lined with loose stones to prevent the roots going through to the hard soil beneath.
The cuttings are then placed wide apart, to allow room for growth.
The vines bear grapes in the third year after planting.
They are trained in a corridor fashion over latadas , a sun-bleached framework of chestnut wood posts with a lattice of canes on top.
Pruning starts in January and is a skilled art.
All non-productive wood must be cut out, and the skill lies in deciding which of the many buds are wood buds and which are fruit buds, and then in deciding which of the wood buds are likely to produce the most fruit buds.
This work is often done by an old man of many years experience.
In June similar skill is needed to strip some of the leaves from the vine to allow the sun to penetrate to the fruit to improve its richness.
Only some of the leaves are stripped, however, as it is through the foliage that the vine breathes, and the cultivator must use his skill to decide which leaves to strip.
The first grapes are harvested from Porto Santo in mid-August, then (on Madeira) Malvasia, Tinta and Verdelho at altitudes up to 200m, then Boal and Tinta at high level, and finally Sercial at around 700m and Muscatel at sea-level in October and early November.
The harvest, or vintage, is a family festive occasion.
Women, children and old people fill 50kg baskets (increasingly being replaced today by plastic containers) for the men to carry to the lorries which transport the grapes to the wine lodges in Funchal.
Only where the grapes are for local wine are they still trodden and pressed where picked.
At the wine lodges the grapes are weighed and graded before pressing.
They are destalked and pulped with a light press which produces ninety per cent of the must (juice).
Finally a heavy press crushes out the remainder of the must, but this is of an inferior quality.
For Sercial and Verdelho, the skins are separated from the juice before fermentation.
In the case of all the other varieties, the must and skins go into the fermentation tanks together.
Wine destined as a reserve is fortified before going into the estufa .
Ordinary madeiras are fortified afterwards.
Fine grape alcohol from Portugal, France and some Eastern Block countries is used for the fortification.
In the estufas the wine is heated for a minimum of three months, but most shippers prefer up to six months at slightly lower temperatures, After the estufagem , the wine is cooled carefully.
The wine is filtered or fined with bentonite or gelatine and is then put into oak scantling pipes for a period of twelve to eighteen months to rest (estagio ).
It is then racked (passagem ), when it is pumped up so it can fall into a trough and air can pass through it.
Finally it is stored in oak casks, from where it is drawn off for blending.
Soleras are wines which carry the date of the vintage wine with which the solera was begun.
No more than ten per cent can be drawn off per year, and this amount must be replaced by old wine of quality.
This process is continued until such time as the original solera would no longer exist, i.e. ten years.
A solera is a blended wine made through a topping-up process and bridges the gap between a vintage and a blended madeira.
All madeiras are blended and the blender is an artist, giving the blend its distinctive characteristics.
He is the most important man in the wine lodge and can smoke or drink spirits only in moderation so as not to spoil his palate.
Usually he can spend only a limited time at one session in the tasting room as his work involves so much keen concentration.
The tasting room needs an even temperature and good natural lighting, with silence and no distractions or interruptions.
Smell and sight tell the taster everything, and taste confirms his ideas.
Most tasters of Madeira rely almost entirely on their sense of smell.
Once the taster has made his decisions, the lodge workmen carry out the blending process.
This may take several weeks, depending on the volume of wine to be blended.
A number of wines are retained for blending only.
Among these are Canteiro, Tinta and Arrobo.
Canteiro is a wine which has been matured over many years without going into an estufa , and it is of a good age.
Tinta is made from the negra mole grape and is used for colouring and for sweetening.
Arrobo is used for sweetening as well as for giving body.
The  must is heated in a cauldron and boiled until it is reduced to one third of its volume to make the Arrobo.
Whether or not the wine has been blended by the solera method or by actual blending, it is made up in lotes and left to rest until the parts have ‘married’.
The whole production process is under the careful control of the inspectors of the Madeira Wine Institute, the official regulating body for all matters concerning madeira wine.
The Institute also has a small museum, with many interesting photographs and equipment concerned with the production of madeira.
Madeira wine is relatively expensive and should not be used in basic cooking to give richness or tenderness where a cheaper red or white wine would suffice.
However, it is well worth using in dishes which require the wine to be added at a later stage to give flavouring.
It is a very durable wine.
Only a small minority of the wines are kept for a long time as vintage wines.
Madeira wine need not be kept in a cellar but should be kept away from bright light and hot water pipes.
Ordinary madeira has no sediment and does not need to be decanted.
The wine needs re-corking every twenty years.
A thin, plain, uncoloured glass best shows off the colour and richness of the wine.
Most of the wine lodges in Funchal welcome visitors and are willing to offer samples of the various blends.
A very pleasant morning or afternoon excursion, whilst on holiday, is a visit to the Madeira wine lodges.
Agriculture Island Industries
Levadas
This lush green mountainous island, with one of the best all-year-round climates in the world, is also a huge self-regulating reservoir which holds up to 200 million cubic metres of water.
The rain seeps into and is held in volcanic ash above an impervious layer of basaltic clay and laterite.
At the junction of these rock types, springs form and the water runs down ravines to the sea unless diverted into levadas (drainage channels).
There are some 2,150km of levada channels, with 40km of tunnels.
They were started as early as 1461, and the system is still being extended and improved today.
The construction of levadas to carry irrigation and drinking-water has always been a difficult feat of engineering, and many men have been killed over the years in their construction.
(Errors in calculation have been made at times, but discovered only when the water began to flow and it was found that the levada went uphill.)
The majority of old levadas were built around 1580 and were of short length, bringing water from springs to agricultural land.
By the beginning of the twentieth century there were some 200 levadas with a total length of 1,000km.
Many of these were privately owned and water was unfairly distributed.
By the 1930s only two thirds of the island's arable land were under cultivation and only half of that was irrigated.
In 1939 the government began to study and develop new levadas .
Many of these are 1,000m above sea-level, where rainfall is plentiful.
This water goes first to generate hydro-electric power and then to irrigate the land.
Each smallholder has the right to receive water regularly for a certain length of time, and the levadeiro is the man responsible for ensuring this is done correctly.
The water is diverted by ingenious and simple means, with large stones, sods of grass, old woollens and nylon stockings being used to block a channel and divert the water to another one to irrigate the land and fill the storage tanks.
The levadas have all been built by hand, in areas where access is impossible men and their picks being suspended by ropes from above.
Many of the levadas have become tourist attractions.
Their paths afford  spectacular views, and new vistas open up around every corner.
The paths are bordered with many trees and shrubs as well as hydrangeas, agapanthus and belladonna lilies.
Many of the walks are suitable for everyone, but others can be risky and suitable only for people who are unaffected by vertigo.
(There is a good booklet of walks describing over twenty-five of these, written by John and Pat Underwood:Landscapes of Madeira .)
Some hotels and tour companies arrange escorted walks along the levadas .
It is also possible to arrange with taxi-drivers to drop you at one point and collect you some hours later from another.
Agriculture
Cultivation extends to about 600m, ending at a lower level on the colder north side of the island.
Forest extends up to 1,200m and covers an area of over 19,500 hectares.
The main varieties of trees to be found are pine (Pinus pinaster ) and eucalyptus.
There are £so significant numbers of acacia and chestnut trees, along with many other varieties.
Over the years the weather and man have been responsible for destroying parts of the forested areas and, although some re-afforestation has taken place, large areas have remained depleted for many years.
Above the forest the land is rocky and exposed and is left to sheep and goats.
There is also cattle pasture on the plateau area of Paúl da Serra.
In the Poiso area are to be found wild ponies and, more rarely, small wild pigs.
Almost every slope in Madeira is terraced from sea-level to far up the mountain side.
The normal method of construction has always been to build retaining walls between six and ten metres high out of huge basaltic rocks.
A dry-stone wall method is used to ensure free drainage.
The soil in the terraces is the result of sheer hard work.
It either comes from the river beds or is scraped from rock (tufa ) higher up the mountain — either way it has to be carried a long way over steep slopes.
There is little mechanical cultivation of terraces as they are small and access to them is difficult for machinery.
Among the traditional agricultural tools and implements which remain today, you can see in common use the enchada , a cross between a pick and a hoe which first came to Madeira in 1440 from the Algarve, and also a serrated sickle (fouce ) for grass-cutting and a kind of pruning hook (podão ).
Traditionally everything is carried in baskets on the head or shoulders, and you can often see these large wicker baskets full of cabbage, potatoes, oranges, apples or whatever is in season waiting at the side of the road for transport to the market in Funchal.
To a large extent the crops grown vary with altitude — they can be  grown to a higher altitude on the warmer, less exposed south side.
From sea-level to 300m sugarcane, bananas, mango, papaia, vine, custard Apple (anona ), fig, loquat and avocado pear are common.
Above 300m maize, wheat and other cereals are grown, as well as cabbage, runner beans, broad beans, potatoes, apples, pears, cherries, Peaches, sweet chestnuts, walnuts and sweet potatoes.
In the eastern part of the island grow large crops of onions which are much milder than the British ones and more palatable.
Also widely grown are tomatoes and strawberries, nowadays mainly under plastic sheeting.
Bananas are a popular crop.
In Madeira the plantain (Musa paradisiaca ) which is very good in cooking has been grown since the island was first settled.
In 1842–3 the ‘Cavendish’ banana was brought from Demerara (it originated in China).
In 191 1, in order to secure return freight to Lisbon, ship owners began to export bananas.
Today all the bananas exported go to mainland Portugal.
Strawberries have been grown in the island since 1860, but raspberries, gooseberries and currants, tried many times, have never met with success.
Coffee was grown successfully in Madeira until 1882 when there were problems of root disease.
Today experiments in growing coffee are being made.
Two unusual fruits very much prized in Madeira are the pittanga (Eugenia braziliensis ) and the tree tomato (Cyphomandra betacea ).
The small ribbed orangy-red fruit of the pittanga has a very distinctive, slightly bitter taste.
The fruit of the tree tomato looks like a cross between a red pepper and an elongated tomato.
Only the inside, which is full of seeds, is eaten, as the outer skin is very bitter.
The taste is somewhere between a guava and a grape.
The island of Porto Santo grows cereals, vines, figs, market garden produce, melons and pumpkins.
The vineyards produce table grapes and some very good wine.
Over 200m above sea-level barley is grown and there is pastureland for sheep and cattle, with a small amount of woodland.
Most of the island is cattle pasture, in great contrast to Madeira.
The donkey is the beast of burden, and windmills, originally used for grinding maize, abound.
In Madeira it is a rare sight to see a cow.
Most cows are kept in small sheds on terraced land and are taken out for weekly walks on the end of a rope.
They need to be manicured regularly because of the lack of exercise.
The cowshed has a bed of straw or bracken (or even camellias).
When driving in the countryside you often see walking human haystacks — people, who have been out cutting grass for their cows, returning home  and walking down the road often with only their legs showing beneath their enormous bundles.
The last decade has seen the growth of orchids and other sub-tropical flowers for export.
The government is trying to improve fruit and vegetable production, and recently the kiwi fruit, which is known for its prolific yield and good export price, has been introduced.
There is a constant flow of people leaving the land and going into service and hotel jobs, particularly in Funchal.
The young people, in particular, as they become better educated are reluctant to work the land — which is very hard work for a low income.In addition much land is being left to go to ruin, especially around Funchal, where it may be sold for building speculation.
On the other hand there are beginning to be larger, more profitable units specializing in market gardening, floriculture or cattle or pig production.
Sugar
Sugar was historically a very important crop in Madeira, and many economic and political battles have been fought over its production and monopoly of manufacture.
From the earliest times it was said that sugar was brought to Madeira by Prince Henry the Navigator to capture the trade from the Genoese and Venetians.
In 1452 the first sugarmill (water-powered) was constructed.
By the end of the fifteenth century, sugar was a large export, Flanders being the biggest market.
The importance of sugar production can be judged from a story dating from 1516 when Simon Gonçalves de Câmara, the Governor of the island, whose son had been made a bishop, sent a present to the Pope of a model of the papal palace with figures representing the whole Court and the Cardinals — all made in sugar.
Indeed, the Arms of Funchal bear five sugar loaves.
Throughout the history of Madeira, sugarcane and vines have rivalled each other.
After the failure of the vines in 1852, the area of sugarcane increased.
In 1856 Severiano Alberto de Freitas Ferraz opened a new steam-driven sugarmill in Funchal.
Further up a Mr Hinton opened a steam-driven mill at Torreão.
In 1873 the Sao João sugar factory opened with the most modern machinery, but it had been driven into bankruptcy by the 1880s.
The sugarmill at Torreão outdistanced all its rivals through improved machinery and good management by its owner.
In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the high import duties on sugar (as much as 300 per cent at times) prevented the import of cheaper foreign sugars.
By this time the Hintons more or less had a  monopoly on sugar processing, and more and more land was being turned over to sugarcane production.
Too much sugar was being produced, so the excess was made into aguardente (sugarcane rum) but this was said to be causing alcoholism as the unemployed took to drinking cheap aguardente .
Today sugar is no longer processed on the island.
The production of sugarcane steadily declined until in 1985 the refinery closed.
The sugar consumed in the island is now imported in bulk from mainland Portugal and bagged here.
Wicker
Willows are grown in the damp valleys of the island.
Madeiran willow, with its fine supple shoots, is never allowed to grow tall.
The shoots are always cut off near the ground.
The willow is cut between January and March, left in water until it starts to sprout and then peeled and dried.
The wicker industry began in Camacha, where it is still concentrated today.
It was here that the Hintons and other British families had their summer houses.
The wicker industry began with the manufacture of copies of cane furniture — popular at that time in Germany and Britain — for the British families, and then for the hotels in Funchal.
It proved very popular and from this start began the exportation of wicker furniture.
James Taylor and William Hinton brought baskets from Italy to be used as models.
Today whole family groups Produce basketwork at home in what is very much a cottage industry.
There are now over 1,200 different models made and some 2,500 people are employed.
As well as being sold in Camacha and in the Funchal craftwork shops, much production is now exported, especially to the USA and Europe.
Over 900 tonnes of wicker are produced annually and exported as bottle-covers, baskets or furniture.
A visit to Camacha to see the enormous variety of products and the families skilfully weaving the willow is an interesting half-day excursion by bus or taxi.
Embroidery
Embroidery was introduced to the island by Miss Elizabeth (Bella) Phelps, a British resident, during the period when the oidium disease struck the vines between 1852 and I 862.
At first the embroidery was sold Privately, but then Miss Phelps found agents in London, Robert and Frank Wilkinson, who established themselves in Madeira in 1862, by which time over 1,000 women were employed in the industry.
The work became known as ‘Madeira fine art embroidery’.
Embroidery remains  largely a cottage industry with thousands of girls and women employed as outworkers.
All the processes other than the actual embroidery are carried out in the numerous ‘embroidery factories’, most of which are located in Funchal.
The materials (thread and Irish and Swiss linen) are imported.
Some of the designs are imported, others are composed in the factories by stylists — either an original design or one based on a specific order or according to the article's intended market.
The finished design is then transferred onto heavy-duty tracing paper and pierced by a picador , a machine which makes tiny holes along the traced lines.
The tracing paper is then put on top of the cloth to be embroidered and a stamper wipes the surface of the paper with a cloth soaked in blue dye.
The design is in this way transferred onto the material (linen, cotton, silk, organdie, etc).
The cloth and thread to be used are then sent to the outworkers who very often work in the open air with their friends, talking, watching the world go by or listening to the radio.
The work takes many hours and is done with the type and number of stitches appropriate to the fabric and in the way demanded by the factory.
The embroidery is returned to the factory where the open work flowers and patterns are skilfully cut out.
It is then carefully washed and ironed.
A great deal of embroidery is exported to the USA and Europe, with Italy now the biggest market.
All Madeiran embroidery is hand-made and its production, quality and exportation is carefully controlled by the Instituto de Bordados, Tapeçaria e Artesanato da Madeira (Madeiran Institute of Embroidery, Tapestry and Handcrafts).
It is all good quality and every piece carries a special seal to prove it is genuine Madeiran embroidery.
However, for a very fine table set, be prepared for a price shock.
Tapestry
Tapestry is a traditional craft but its commercialization in Madeira is fairly recent.
It was introduced by Herbert Kiekeben, who arrived in Madeira to live in 1938.
An artist in his own right, he painted pictures onto canvas, and these were then sewn.
These pictures were original designs, landscapes, old master copies and floral pieces.
Within sixteen years tapestry-making had become an important and interesting local craft industry.
Other manufacturing industry in the island is concerned mostly with the tourist and craft industries and includes the making of straw hats, pottery, ceramics, inlaid wooden items, the traditional Madeiran half-length boots, costumes and hats in the traditional style, plus the manufacturing  of food products, such as biscuits, for the local market.
One of the few exceptions is a small factory, mainly employing women, which produces electronic components.
Service industries predominate for employment in the island offices, shops, banks, garages etc, as well as the whole infrastructure which is associated with tourism.
Fishing
A romantic vista on a moonlit holiday night is across the Bay of Funchal, and most nights it is made more so by the hundreds of flickering lights on the small fishing boats.
The boats, the same shape at the bow and the stern and often painted in very bright colours, can stand up to very high seas.
They are fishing mainly for espada (scabbard fish) which is caught four to five kilometres off shore in depths of over 800m, using lines with about 150 hooks.
This very ugly fish, rather like an eel but with large head and many teeth, is versatile and tasty and can be cooked in many different ways.
Tunny fishing is also very important, and many are caught in the waters around Madeira.
It is a popular dish, and tunny steak (bifes de atum ) is tasty served with local onions.
In recent years tunny fishing has become a popular sport around Madeira, and there are now many sport fishing boats available for hire.
There are also trawlers for net fishing which, as well as fishing around Madeira, work off the Africa coast.
Other fish commonly caught include cherne , grey mullet, mackerel and chicharro .
The Regional Government has recently opened a new fish-freezer cold store and has replaced the fish landing dock with a new one near the freezer plant and the road entrance to the harbour.
The Government of Madeira is also in co-operation with the Norwegian Government undertaking scientific studies of fishing grounds and methods of fishing.
Island Transport
At one time the best way of travelling between the different parts of the island was by boat.
Nowadays there are still tourist boats taking visitors to see Cabo Girâo or Machico or to swim in the sheltered coves, but Madeira now has a fine road network stretching to every small hamlet, whether it be on the top of a mountain or in the bottom of a valley.
Most of the main roads are in good condition, but driving can be very tiring as there are many bends, and most of the roads are built onto the mountainside with deep ravines dropping away below, and you never quite know what's around the corner — be it a bus straddling the centre of the road to take a corner or a group of children playing football in the road.
It would be difficult to average more than 30 km/hr driving round Madeira.
It needs a full day to explore just one of the island circuits thoroughly.
Many of the roads have  lay-bys with picnic tables and bench-seats, and many places are supplied with wood and simple cooking stoves for  barbecuing sardines and espetada (chunks of meat on a skewer cooked over an open fire of laurel twigs).
Car hire is expensive in Madeira considering that one cannot travel many miles in a day, but it is not excessive if the car is shared between four people.
Taxis are available for hire for full- or half-day excursions, and the cost for four compares very well with hiring a car for a day — without the trouble of driving yourself.
Most taxi-drivers also know good simple restaurants in the country for lunch.
There are many buses in Madeira, and all routes start and finish in Funchal, where most buses can be found arriving, departing or just dumped on Avenida das Comunidades Madeirenses (the main road along the sea front).
Timetables are sometimes available from the Tourist Office, although the times are not always reliable and many buses and routes are not shown in the timetable.
Tell your hotel porter where you wish to go and he will usually know the correct bus.
Seeing the island by service bus is the cheapest way and can be the most interesting.
Many years ago we went to Boaventura and back by bus.
We caught the bus outside the Savoy in Avenida Infante at six o'clock one winter's  morning.
The bus was almost full and we had to sit separately, and it was obvious that, as foreigners, we were the object of intense interest.
Once we had passed Câmara de Lobos, all the roads were cobbled.
When the bus stopped at Ribeira Brava for ten minutes, all the Madeirans got out and many, including the bus driver, crossed the road to the bar for a drink.
When it was time to set off again, there was a lot of noisy discussion, live chickens in baskets were moved and we were ushered into the front window seat across from the driver so we could see the view together.
This proved a privilege we did not altogether enjoy as, at that time, the road over Encumeada pass was only a very narrow shelf which fell away on our side of the road!
We had decided to return by service bus in the other direction so as to complete a round trip.
This meant a four-hour wait in Boaventura where we were observed by amused barefooted children, obviously unused to foreigners.
For want of a better location, we ate our picnic lunch in the cemetery with superb views of the north coast.
The return journey was on a very old bus which picked up people, with baskets of vegetables ready for Funchal market, all along its route.
Snow was falling as we drove from Ribeiro Frio to Poiso.
We arrived back in Funchal some twelve hours after we had first caught the bus.
We should add that animals and farm produce are no longer allowed on public transport.
For those who do not wish to explore the island by bus, hire car or taxi, there are organized coach excursions arranged by both tour companies and hotels, and these visit every part of the island.
Walking is very popular nowadays in Madeira, especially along the levadas and mountain paths.
(t is, however, essential to wear sensible clothes.
Just because it is 21°C (70°F) beside the hotel swimming pool does not mean that the weather is the same in the hills — it may well be raining there or the mist may be descending.
It is essential to wear good walking shoes and take waterproofs, some food/chocolate and a good map or guide-book.
The Tourist Office or your hotel porter can advise you.
Care needs to be taken not to start fires in the forests, especially in summer and autumn before the rains begin, when the foliage is tinder dry, and there are many forest fires every year.
Madeira once had its own peculiar forms of transport, but most of these are now seen only on display and not in use.
The bullock sledge (carro de bois ) was a canopied carriage without wheels which slid along the cobbled streets on wooden runners and was hauled by two bullocks harnessed beside each other.
This contraption was invented by an  Englishman, Captain Bulkeley of the Second Life Guards, in 1848 for his wife who had difficulty in walking and who felt sick when using the other forms of transport then available.
It was really an adaptation for people of the much earlier sledge used for transporting wine casks.
This form of transport was available in Funchal until the early 1980s for tourist excursions in the centre of Funchal and near the Savoy and Sheraton Hotels.
Sadly these have now disappeared, pushed aside by the needs of the motor car.
The hammock, which was slung from a long pole carried on the shoulders of two men, was used for transporting the sick and infirm across rough country terrain and, in and around Funchal, for the rich and for the tourists who were carried through the dirty, and sometimes muddy, streets.
These hammocks were used until the 1920s to carry tourists to Monte and the surrounding countryside, the pole-bearers being human taxis.
The Monte toboggan (carro de cesto or carro do Monte ), unlike the bullock sledge and the hammock which now remain as exhibition pieces, is still in daily use, albeit as a tourist attraction.
It was invented by Mr Gordon as a rapid means of transport between his house at Monte and his office in Funchal.
The toboggan consists of a wide wicker basket with a cushioned seat, set on wooden runners.
Powered by gravity, it transports tourists down the slippery cobblestones from Monte to Funchal.
White-suited drivers, wearing straw hats and Madeiran boots, run alongside, pushing the toboggan to gain momentum.
They then jump onto the runners behind the toboggan, steering and restraining it with ropes.
The descent, like a big dipper, is exhilarating but perfectly safe.
Ernest Hemingway is reputed to have considered the descent from Monte in a toboggan one of the strongest emotions of his life.
From the bottom, the drivers return to Monte by taxi, and the toboggans by truck, ready for the next ride.
There used to be a rack-and-pinion railway between Funchal, Monte and Terreiro da Luta.
Sadly, it was closed in 1939.
What an attraction it would have been today.
Construction of this short-lived railway was commenced in 1891 and two years later, on 13 April 1893, the Danish boat Concordia arrived from Antwerp with the rollingstock.
In 1894 the German steamship Zeus left Antwerp with another carriage and locomotive.
In 1919 one of the locomotives suffered a boiler explosion, resulting in four dead and many injured.
The Company struggled on until it finally closed in 1939.
The equipment was sold for scrap, and the line was dismantled in 1942.
Today you can still see the bridge which carried the railway at Monte, as well as the railway station.
The island of Porto Santo has a regular air link with Madeira by a small Air Portugal plane which only takes a few minutes.
Until recently, the sea crossing — in a flat-bottomed former Rhine riverboat, called the Pirata Azul — could cause concern to those who were not good sailors as the channel could be very rough indeed.
It took between three and four hours, depending on the weather.
All passengers were issued with black plastic bags as a matter of course and were sheeted in when the going was really rough.
The Madeirans describe the voyage as uphill to Porto Santo and downhill on the return journey, as the outward journey from Madeira is always rougher.
In 1983 a new boat,Independencia , came into service.
This is a modern catamaran with capacity for 244 passengers and makes the journey in about 11 hours.
In winter it makes an early morning crossing, returning in the late afternoon and allowing some six hours 2. shore in Porto Santo.
In summer it makes two complete round trips.
During 1990 a new larger catamaran, capable of carrying 400 passengers and built in the Isle of Wight, is due to come into service.
The island of Porto Santo has one of the last unspoilt beaches in Europe where, for eight kilometres, you can walk along a white sandy beach washed by the Atlantic Ocean and bordered by sand dunes.
The island is beginning to see an increase in foreign visitors, but as yet very little development has taken place.
The British Madeira
Wine Merchants
Apart from explorers and travellers, one of the first Englishmen to settle in Madeira was William Bolton, in 1695, when he took advantage of the Act of Charles 11 which prohibited the export of goods grown or manufactured in Europe to the West Indies and American Colonies, unless shipped from British ports in British ships, with Madeira specifically excluded from its terms.
The way was thereby opened for English merchants to establish themselves in the island, and William Bolton came to Madeira as an agent for Robert Heysham of London, who had a brother in Barbados to whom Bolton shipped a large quantity of wine.
Bolton's letters (The Letters of an English Merchant in Madeira, 1695–1714 ) are preserved and have been published part in book form and part in duplicated form.
There had been an English career Consul in Madeira since 1658 (although this was not the first foreign consulate), and by 1680 there were ten English wine-shippers in the island.
Although, sadly, the archives of the British Consulate in Funchal were lost in a flood in 1803, a few documents were saved, including a notice of the Annual General Meeting of the British Factory on 26 October 1722.
There is, therefore, something of a gap in the information available until 1741, when a young man of fifteen years named John Leacock arrived from London where his father, who was a weaver, had died.
John Leacock had been educated at Christ's Hospital in London and been apprenticed to a firm of British merchants in the island, Catanach & Murdoch.
When this apprenticeship ended, on 11 March 1749, he remained with the same firm as a clerk.
In 1748 a young Scot, Francis Newton, sailed for Madeira from Gravesend.
He became a book-keeper to Dom Joâo José da Câmara, one of the largest landowners at that time.
During this period both John Leacock and Francis Newton were learning about the wine trade and exploring the possibilities of setting up their own businesses.
Francis Newton was to found the firm Cossart Gordon & Co, which is one of the  oldest and most respected madeira wine merchants and is today incorporated in the Madeira Wine Company Lda.
In 1757 Mr Murdoch died, John Leacock married his widowed daughter, Mrs Durban, and founded what is now Leacock & Company Lda.
It no longer has interests in madeira wine, but the name Leacock continues as one of the most distinguished brand names within the Madeira Wine Company Lda.
The Leacocks have preserved many letters and documents over the years, including the original indenture of apprenticeship of John Leacock to Catanach & Murdoch in 1741.
The current head of this family is William Leacock.
Thomas Slapp Leacock, a grandson of John Leacock, was head of the firm during the years the phylloxera was attacking the vines.
He was one of the leading entomologists of his day and began experimenting with ways of overcoming the disease when it first appeared in Madeira, in 1873, until he finally succeeded (in 1883) in controlling it in his vineyards.
He subsequently bequeathed the results of his research to Cambridge University.
John Milburn Leacock, the first resident of Madeira to own a motor car and son of Thomas Slapp Leacock, continued to export fine madeiras and win gold medals.
He also built up the island's banana trade.
In the early years of the nineteenth century more British name began to appear, all connected with the madeira wine trade.
These names are still to be found on prestigious labels on madeira wine bottles.
John Blandy was a quartermaster with General Beresford's force when it occupied the island.
He returned to Britain to marry and came back to Madeira in 1811, having opened his commercial house in 1808 and begun to deal in wine.
In 1850, at his quinta (mansion) in Sto da Serra, John Blandy made the first butter to be sold commercially in Madeira.
His grandson, John Burden Blandy, was a great public benefactor and gave land for building the sea wall.
In 1882, when the Bourbon sugarcane crop began to fail, he imported other types from Mauritius.
The company expanded into coaling, shipping and banking.
In the disastrous oidium plague of 1852, the company had the good sense to buy up a great proportion of the old wine on the island, thus acquiring excellent stocks.
Today Blandy Brothers is a very large and important company on the island with such very diverse interests as madeira wine, Reid's Hotel, engineering, electronics, shipping and insurance agencies, newspaper publishing and tourism.
With branches in Lisbon and the Canaries, it is still administered by members of the Blandy family.
The present administrator, Richard Blandy, is the Honorary British Consul.
Thomas Gordon of Balmaghie joined Francis Newton's firm in 1758, and the company became Newton & Gordon.
His grandson, Russell Manners Gordon, became a partner in the firm in 1850, and in 1857 he married Dona Filomena Gabriela Correia Brandão Henriques of Noronha, Viscountess Torre Bella.
The King of Portugal offered to raise him to the title of Count Torre Bella on condition he took Portuguese nationality.
Gordon accepted the title and became the largest land- and vineyard-owner on the island.
He did, however, have to retire from the firm as he was no longer a British national.
William Cossart arrived in Madeira in 1808 from Ireland, where he had been the agent for Newton, Gordon, Murdoch & Co.
The Cossarts were Huguenots but had been living in Ireland for many years.
In 1831 the company became Newton Gordon Cossart & Co, and then in 1861 Cossart Gordon & Co.
It is still in the madeira trade, and Noël Cossart was one of the foremost experts on madeira wine.
He wrote an excellent book entitled Madeira — the Island Vineyard .
In 1803 William Grant arrived from Nairn in Scotland and in 1814 helped to found Rutherford & Grant, wine merchants.
After a series of partnerships and re-groupings, the company became Rutherford & Miles.
H.P. Miles had started the brewery in Madeira in 1872.
The labels of the wine company are still to be seen today, and their wine is shipped by the Madeira Wine Company Lda.
The brewery which H.P. Miles started is still in existence and is run by Anthony Cossart-Miles, his great-grandson who, from a very modern brewery, produces excellent local beers under the ‘Coral’ label.
The brewery also produces a number of soft drinks, and bottles others under licence, as well as being involved in the importation of other drinks.
Other British names which have been associated with the madeira wine trade over the past 200 years include Charles O.L. Power, who came to Madeira in 1878 and lived in Quinta Deão.
He was a great horticulturist and introduced many species of rare flowering trees to the island.
His son, Charles Power, wrote a famous guide-book to Madeira which was regularly up-dated during the first half of this century.
Other names include John Shorbridge, Henry Drury, Robert Donaldson and Welsh Brothers, who were one of the early firms involved in the formation of the Madeira Wine Association.
George Day Welsh came to Madeira at the end of the eighteenth century and married the important and rich Vicência Ludovina de Freitas, whose family were large landowners in the Madalena do Mar area.
Traders, Clergy and Characters
One of the most successful families in Madeira at the end of the last century was the Hintons.
William Hinton was born in Naples in 1817, the son of a Wiltshire landowner.
He came to Madeira in 1838 for health reasons and in 1841 married the daughter of Robert Wallas, a wine-shipper and steam-driven flourmill owner.
Some years later William Hinton started a steam-driven sugarmill which his son Harry expanded into a vast sugar empire, with a factory at the Torreão.
Today this company is administered by Jimmy Welsh and is a large commercial company with interests in vehicles, fuel oils, electronics and shipping.
Harry Hinton was a well-known character of his day.
He had been educated in Britain and in 1875, as an eighteen-year-old student, had brought the first football to Madeira — some thirteen years before it was ever played on the Portuguese mainland.
The first game played in Madeira was at William Hinton's quinta in Camacha.
The Zino family, originally of Italian (Genoese) origin arrived in Madeira from Gibraltar and Morocco in the mid-nineteenth century.
They had already become British subjects and had been trading in corn from the United States of America and morocco to Madeira.
After settling in Madeira they began trading in flour, sugar and leather.
The Cecilia Zino Foundation was created after the death of Cecilia Rose Zino in 1953 by her immediate family as her wish was that her estate be used entirely for the creation and maintenance of a hospital for poor children, Today the Foundation is administered by the Zino family with the strong support of the Dominican Nuns from the Order of Santa Catarina de Sena.
The Foundation is now dedicated to sheltering young girls from broken homes.
Elizabeth Phelps, daughter of the scholar and wine-shipper Joseph Phelps, was responsible for the introduction of the embroidery trade in the island (see page 54).
She taught women to embroider designs she herself had made as an addition to the income of families hit by the destruction of the vines by the oidium disease in the 1850s.
Her mother, Elizabeth Phelps, was a driving force behind the re-afforestation of large parts of the island.
Boys diving for coins thrown by passengers into Funchal Harbour in the late nineteenth century
A busy scene in Funchal Roads in the mid-nineteenth century
Mid-nineteenth century engraving showing traditional Madeiran costume
Loo Rock or the island of Nossa Senhora da Conceição in the mid-nineteenth century — now part of the mole of Funchal Harbour
Zeppelin over the Bay of Funchal in 1932.
The Graf Zeppelin made 148 crossings of the Atlantic
Krohn Brothers Wine Shippers in 1900 showing the wine press (lagar )
A windmill in Porto Santo around 1900
Wicker workers in Camacha.
The craft was introduced to the island by British residents in the last half of the nineteenth century
Embroidery and woollens for sale at the viewpoint, Cabo Girão
A picturesque levada path near Serra d'Água
Constructing a levada in 1949
Robert Page, who came to the island at the beginning of the nineteenth century in 1804 joined the firm of Joseph Phelps, which later became Phelps & Page.
During his short stay in Madeira, he was a great benefactor of the island.
Among his public works (mentioned in Elucidario Madeirense by Silva and Meneses), he was responsible for building houses of refuge near the exposed mountain passes, and public fountains for thirsty travellers all over Funchal, at his own expense.
He also had repaired many  of the roads and bridges that were damaged in the great flood of I 803 and built a bridge at Câmara de Lobos, improved the municipal theatre and presented six beds and a hundred blankets to the hospital.
He was best known for rebuilding the Milagres Chapel in Machico.
Henry Veitch, from Selkirk in Scotland, was very colourful and a well-liked figure in Madeira.
He was appointed British Consul by George III in 1809.
A wealthy and handsome ‘man of many parts’, he owned considerable property in Funchal and designed his own town house (the large house, with a tower, which the Madeira Wine Institute now occupies) and his favourite country residence, Quinta do Jardim da Serra, where he built his own mausoleum and was buried.
He also designed the English Church.
Although, as we have seen, in 1828 Veitch was dismissed from his consulship for having addressed Napoleon as ‘Your Majesty’ instead of plain ‘General’when he met the vanquished Emperor en route for St Helena, he had become such a popular figure in Madeira that, after representations from the island, he was reinstated by Lord Palmerston in 1831.
He continued as Consul until 1836.
The famous nineteenth-century scientist William Thomson (who later became Lord Kelvin) was another visitor to Madeira.
He came during the laying of the trans-Atlantic cable during 1865–6.
He met Fanny Blandy, who is said to have been the only person to understand what he was talking about, and she used flags to signal to him in the harbour from the family Quinta da Santa Luzia.
He returned to Madeira to marry her in the English Church in 1874.
After this he spent long periods in Madeira until his death in 1907.
Some of his inventions in the field of navigational instruments can still be found in the island.
A few can be seen in the travel agency of João Silveiro Pires in Avenida Zarco.
Dr Michael Grabham (1840- 1938), son-in-law of Charles Ridpath Blandy and brother-in-law of Lord Kelvin was still a practising physician when he died aged ninety-eight.
He was a prolific writer on biology and botany and carried out much research in Madeira, including scientific studies into the island's climate, plants and fish.
Although he married into one of the long-established British families and lived on the island for so long, Dr Grabham still bemoaned the exclusiveness of the British in Madeira and said he always felt like an outsider.
Mary Jane Wilson was born in Madras, India, on 3 October 1840.
She came to live in Madeira in 1880 and two years later opened St George's High School in the Palace of São Pedro (where the Municipal Museum is now housed).
This was attended by the daughters of the best society in  Funchal until she closed it in 1892.
She then rebuilt the old hospital in Santa Cruz and opened a pharmacy there, where she looked after the sick of that area.
Mary Jane Wilson founded a religious order in the island, whose members worked in the hospitals and taught in the many parish schools.
During the winter of 1907–8, sick seamen landed from a steamship were found to be suffering from smallpox.
Within a few weeks the disease had spread rapidly amongst the poorer people of Funchal, especially among the families of the boatmen.
There had been no serious outbreak in the island for over twenty years, so the majority were neither immune nor vaccinated (there was great reluctance to be vaccinated).
When things were at their worst and it appeared the disease would spread over the whole island, Sister Mary Jane Wilson offered, if the government would put into good order the hospital at Lazareto (which had been damaged and looted during riots), to take the group of sisters of whom she was in charge to nurse the sick there.
Within two weeks the hospital was ready.
The sisters had no money for food and medicines, but they received a continuous stream of charitable donations.
Because Sister Wilson had spent much of her life nursing the sick and the poor, she had their confidence and they flocked to the hospital.
From this date the disease was halted and its final disappearance coincided with a strong leste .
In recent years a road in Funchal has been named after Sister Mary Jane Wilson.
Dr Robert R. Kalley was born in Mount Florida, Glasgow, in 1809.
He became a medical missionary and came to Madeira in 1838, arriving in the island at a time of great social and economic crisis, to which he reacted by opening schools and a hospital where he dispensed free treatment.
Having visited Britain in 1845, where he had meetings with various Protestant groups, on his return Dr Kalley began to use his talents, as a gifted doctor and an eloquent and persuasive orator, to convert the people of Madeira.
He began to distribute literature, including readings from the New Testament, to the school pupils and the patients of his hospital.
Reaction against him, in the predominantly Roman Catholic island, grew until, on 9 August 1846, the quinta where he lived was surrounded and attacked by a large crowd of people.
Dr Kalley was forced to flee the island and was smuggled, via the British Consulate, to a British ship in the harbour.
He went to Illinois in the United States of America, from where he summoned his closest followers (from Santa Cruz, Santo da Serra and Machico), whose descendants still live in that state, especially in Springfield and Jacksonville.
Those remaining in Madeira were subjected to persecution and many emigrated to the West Indies.
A short while after his  flight, Dr Kalley put in a claim for compensation for £1,574, through the British Government, for the damage the crowd had caused to his house.
This claim gave rise to much discussion in the local and national Press, and the Portuguese Government did eventually settle the claim in full in 1853.
The Reverend Richard Thomas Lowe was a Cambridge graduate and eminent naturalist chosen by the members of the English Church to be their minister in 1833.
However, matters between him and his congregation gradually deteriorated as he was thought to be very ‘High Church’, and a bitter dispute broke out between 1845 and 1848 between ‘High’ and ‘Low’Church supporters.
Much to the disapproval of the majority of the congregation at this time, a petition was sent to Queen Victoria, and eventually Lowe was dismissed by Lord Palmerston, but he was still supported by the Bishop of London who had issued his licence.
In 1848, when the new chaplain for the English Church arrived, Lowe set up a rival church (the Beco Chapel) with his own supporters, who numbered about one third of the English Church members, and took with him communion plate and silver from the English Church.
He held rival services until his return to Britain in 1852 to take up a stipend at Lee in Lincoln, when he was succeeded at the Beco Chapel by a Mr Hossmer.
However, the Bishop of London refused Hossmer a licence and the following November issued one for the  incumbent of the English Church.
Thereafter the Beco Chapel closed and was used only occasionally by an unlicensed chaplain until its final closure in 1893 — when six pieces of gilded silver plate were returned to the English Church.
During the winter of 1847–8 Britain's Dowager Queen Adelaide stayed in the island.
She attended the English Church until Lowe was dismissed and then tactfully discovered she had her own chaplain and therefore did not need to attend either of the rival churches.
Lowe visited the island several times after his return to Britain, and in 1874 he and his wife were lost at sea when the SS Liberia sank en route for Madeira.
In 1875 a memorial was erected to him in the British Cemetery.
British Influence in Madeira
There was a British Factory in Madeira, but unlike Lisbon and Oporto the island had no British Factory House.
It was usual for the British trading community in Portugal to establish a chamber of commerce known as a ‘Factory’.
The Consul's house was where the meetings were usually held.
It is certain that there was a meeting in 1722 but, as almost all the records of the British Consul were lost in the flood of 1803, it is not known exactly when the British Factory began.
In the nineteenth  century, the British Factory Committee was of vital importance.
This Committee met on a regular basis, made rules and regulations administered charitable funds financed by a tax levied on imports, paid the expenses and salary of a chaplain, physician and surgeon, awarded pensions, buried paupers, assisted shipwrecked mariners and paid the passages of destitute persons stranded in Madeira.
It also regulated, amongst the British wine-shippers, the price of wines for export.
In 1826, when the members of the British Factory were worried by reports that a daily newspaper was about to be published in Funchal, they decided to set up a find for the protection of any British subject attacked by the newspaper.
The British Factory as such had virtually been dissolved by 1812, although a few ‘Select Merchants’ continued to hold meetings under the title of ‘The Factory’until 1848.
One of the privileges which British residents did enjoy, under the provisions of an old treaty, was the right to choose their own judge, the Conservador dos Ingleses , who was, in fact, usually the Corregedor (Chief Judge) of the island.
He was paid an annual sum by the British and tried any cases where there was a problem between them and the Portuguese.
This right disappeared in 1842, and thereafter they had to be tried in a normal Portuguese court, but the jury had to be half British and half Portuguese — this right has also, of course, long since disappeared.
There is still a lot of British furniture, silver and paintings in the island, especially seventeenth- and eighteenth-century works, When Britons came to Madeira, they built themselves houses and then sent home for their furniture and china.
There have always been rumours that Thomas Chippendale and George Hepplewhite once resided and worked here, but no proof of this can be found.
A surprising amount of work to be found in the island does, however, show their influence.
Many of the old families and old quintas still have good collections of antiques, augmented over the years by visitors who used to sell china, silver and furniture to pay their bills before leaving the island.
For example, the china which Queen Adelaide brought with her from Britain still exists more or less in its entirety in one Portuguese household in Funchal.
In the early years of this century, many a collector found Madeira a happy hunting ground.
Prices of antiques at auction now, however, are very high.
There has long been a tradition of skilled furniture-making in the island, making copies of British and French pieces.
Today this craft industry continues — on an individual basis as well as in a factory which produces copies of British furniture for export.
It may seem from this book that the British have always been in  Madeira in large numbers.
This is not so, but they have, over many centuries, contributed a great deal in the formation of the Madeira we know today — particularly in the areas of trade, industry and tourism.
Although Madeira has always been Portuguese, the British have influenced its thinking and development, but less so in recent years, particularly since the 1974 Revolution and the coming of the island s own political autonomy.
Madeira has its own very strong regional identity.
Also, as the world has changed and other pressures and influences have appeared, the British influence has lessened.
Today Madeira is European, part of Portugal and the European Economic Community, but its geographical position is off the African coast.
It has strong emigrant communities in South Africa and Venezuela, and it has its own regional autonomy to balance against the influences of central government in Lisbon.
Tourism
The history
Madeira can claim to have been in at the birth of modern tourism, along with such famous nineteenth-century resorts as Baden-Baden, the Italian Lakes and the French Riviera.
It was both a health resort and a winter retreat for the rich and influential of the day.
Tourism, in fact, really began somewhat earlier, with the island's reputation for having a healthy climate.
For example, between 1747 and 1751 the British physician Dr Thomas Heberden kept weather records which showed the excellence of the winter climate — pleasant between October and May, being not too humid and not too dry, with clean, dust-free air.
Other members of the medical profession became interested in the winter climate, and the island began to be recommended for the treatment of and convalescence from a whole range of ailments from anaemia to gout.
During the nineteenth century it became more specifically recommended for consumptive patients — initially in Funchal itself and later, at the beginning of the twentieth century, at Monte, when the Monte Palace Hotel opened in a magnificent park.
The companions of invalids explored the island on foot, on horseback and in hammocks and palanquins.
They took with them their sketchpads, diaries, palettes and easels (later their cameras).
Gradually the island became more widely known through picture albums, engravings and travel books.
During the mid-nineteenth century the Illustrated London News often carried reports about and illustrations of Madeira.
Many people stayed in the island with residence permits for from three to six months on their way to or from South Africa, South America or the Far East.
Visitors on their own rented a room with meals and amenities.
When the whole family came, with staff (servants, governess and even the private doctor), it was necessary to rent a house.
In the early days of tourism many people spent the winter months in Madeira in private quintas (large houses set in their own grounds).
These houses were owned by the rich — members of the Portuguese aristocracy or foreigners, mostly merchants.
The quintas were let for the season, either furnished or unfurnished.
This was a good source of income and employment for the island, in providing goods, food and services.
By 1887 over 300 people from Britain alone were wintering in the island.
The visitors amused themselves with writing, painting, riding, picnics, at social soirées and visiting the various social clubs, such as the English Club which in 1850 had over 2,000 books as well as the daily and weekly British newspapers.
Today, though many of these quintas have disappeared, most of those in existence are still in use as family homes, some have been restored by the Regional Government and others are awaiting the fate of time.
If you explore Funchal, you should be able to see many of these eighteenth- and nineteenth-century quintas .
A ‘ticket of residence’ had to be obtained by people staying in Madeira from the Police Authorities within forty-eight hours of their arrival in the island.
The Customs Authorities allowed furniture and household goods in tax-free for the visitors' stay, but they had to pay tax on all goods which they did not take with them when they left.
However, many people sold their things when leaving in order to pay their house rent as well as their baker's, butcher's and grocer's bills.
In 1836 William Reid, the founder of the world-famous Reid's Hotel, arrived in Madeira from Scotland, aged fourteen, with £5 in his pocket and a determination to succeed.
His father, who had a small farm in Scotland and twelve children to support, had sent him off to seek his fortune.
He worked his passage to Lisbon and then to Funchal.
In Madeira he first worked in a bakery and then developed a business with William Wilkinson in which they undertook the letting and management of quintas (complete with china, linen and furniture) on behalf of their Madeiran and foreign owners.
Later Reid turned the Quinta das Fontes into the Royal Edinburgh Hotel and then added the Hotels do Carmo and Santa Clara, as well as some pensions .
Dreaming of a luxury hotel and the famous people it might entertain, he bought a piece of land across the Ribeiro Seco (a deep ravine to the west of Funchal) and started to build the hotel where today stands Reid's Palace Hotel.
William Reid died in 1888, aged sixty-six, before the hotel was finished.
The first phase opened in 1891 and was completed in 1900–1901.
The hotel opened for the winter and closed for the summer.
In 1925 the Reid brothers, William's sons, sold the hotel to a British company, and in 1937 it was sold to the Blandy family who closed it during the Second World War and then modernized it before it re-Opened.
The hotel business was a virtual monopoly for the Reid family in Funchal at the end of the nineteenth and the beginning of the twentieth  century, the only real rival being Jones' Private Family Hotel (Jones' Bella Vista Hotel) which had been opened in 1880 and had a large garden; it is now the Seminary which overlooks the new Post Office.
Before disembarkation in Madeira, Health Officials would board the ships anchored in the Bay of Funchal.
If there were any problems, a yellow flag was hoisted and the ship was put in quarantine off Lazareto.
If the ship was given a clean bill of health, Customs Officials went on board.
On arrival in Funchal, ships were surrounded by a flotilla of rowing boats with local people selling embroidery and wicker, and youths diving for coins in the harbour.
People still exhibit articles for sale on the quayside for visiting cruise ships, but boys no longer dive into the murky waters.
In the nineteenth century, sailing ships or steamships direct from the United Kingdom took between eight and twelve days on the voyage from Southampton to Madeira.
Royal Mail Steam Packets spent twelve hours in Madeira on their way to Brazil.
The Union Company and Donald Currie Mailboats stopped in Madeira on their way to and from South Africa.
They later became Castle Line Royal Mailboats with a fleet of eighteen ‘castles’ which became very familiar and popular in Funchal.
Royalty arrived by private yacht or steamer.
In 1847–8 Queen Adelaide, widow of William IV, visited Madeira on her doctor's advice.
In 1849 Prince Maximilian, Duke of Leuchtenberg, arrived in the Russian naval steam frigate Kamchatka .
In 1852 Empress Amélia, widow of King Pedro IV of Brazil, and her daughter arrived on a Portuguese navy boat, and in 1860 Elizabeth, Empress of Austria, wife of Franz Josef, arrived on the British royal yacht Victoria and Albert .
The rich also visited Madeira in their private yachts as part of a grand tour.
The British yacht Sunbeam arrived in 1876 on a round-the-world voyage with its owner Thomas Brassey MP, his wife, children, guests and thirty-two crew members.
In 1930 the Prince of Wales, later King Edward VIII and then Duke of Windsor, visited the island.
Also in the 1930s came Prince Henry, Duke of Gloucester, and Prince George, Duke of Kent.
More recent royal visitors have included Saudi princes.
In 1985 the royal yacht Britannia spent two days in Madeira and Porto Santo with HRH Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, HRH Princess Alexandra and Mr Angus Ogilvy on board.
1986 saw visits from the King and Queen of Sweden and President P.W.
Botha of South Africa.
Early visitors to Madeira and Porto Santo were rowed to the beach when the sea was calm and were then carried on the backs of boatmen who rolled up their trousers and waded ashore.
All passengers were  carried in this way, whether royalty or ordinary mortals.
In 1757 the first stage of the harbour was built.
It was extended in 1885–9 to the island of Nossa Senhora da Conceição (also known as the Loo Rock) which has the fort on top.
The quay was again extended when a tunnel was made through the island in 1934–9, further extended in 1957–62 and achieved its present length in the 1970s, when a storage area for containers was made at the end.
The jetty in the centre of Funchal (long described as part of the ‘Entrance to the City’) was begun in 1843, but then neglected so that it was almost destroyed by the waves.
The reconstruction was completed in 1892.
In 1932–3 it was extended by a further 80m and has been a popular promenade for tourists and Madeirans ever since, as well as a good place from which to observe the activity in the harbour and marina.
By the 1890s, Madeira was very popular with the British, French and German upper classes and a few very adventurous Americans.
Many Europeans came, to avoid the more northerly winters, on board liners bound for South Africa or South America.
They stayed in the luxurious hotels or rented or bought quintas , attracted by the low cost of living, low taxation, the hospitality of the people and the beauty of the island — although many people (and this is often still true today) never or rarely left their hotel.
This type of person continued to visit the island until the 1960s and the advent of air travel for all.
Many of the famous liners of this century have visited Madeira at some time during their voyages.
The number of passengers arriving by ship reached a peak in 1969.
Since that time, with the decline in cruising and the opening of the airport in Madeira, the number of ship's passengers has fallen constantly.
1986 saw the sad end of the regular Fred Olsen Line cruises to Madeira and the Canary Islands.
In the 1989–90 winter season Fred Olsen Lines have introduced a popular weekly cruise between the Canaries, North Africa and Madeira.
These ships were regular visitors for over twenty years.
There are, however, still many opportunities to see ocean liners arriving at and departing from the island.
Most weeks, in the winter months, you can observe one of the numerous Russian cruise liners entering or leaving port, with occasional visits by the Canberra, Queen Elizabeth II or Europa , or one of the Italian or Norwegian cruise liners.
On 22 March 1921 the first sea-plane landed in Funchal after completing a flight from Lisbon; in the 1930s a Zeppelin passed over Funchal, and in 1949 Aquila Airways began a regular flying-boat service to the island.
These luxuriously equipped flying-boats took only nine hours to fly between Southampton and Funchal, but the service was not  entirely dependable as flights had to be cancelled whenever the sea was too rough to land.
The service ended in 1958 when a sea plane crashed into the sea between Lisbon and Madeira.
From the start of this service in 1949, when 1,591 people were transported by sea plane, the numbers had risen by 1958 to 8,713 passengers.
In 1960 the airport in Porto Santo opened.
This covers a large portion of flat land and could take the largest planes available, even by today's standards.
It was used for a few emergency landings by Royal Air Force planes during the recent Falklands War.
At the present time the runway and airport buildings are being improved.
During 1957 the first (very small) plane landed on an experimental runway at Santa Catarina Airport, Madeira.
On 8 July 1964 this airport was officially opened and the first commercial flight arrived in Madeira, bringing eighty passengers and taking away sixty-six.
The opening of the airport has affected tourism in Madeira more than any other single factor and has transported an isolated island directly into the latter half of the twentieth century.
In 1964 11,204 passengers disembarked by aeroplane.
By 1980 this had risen to 330,453 passengers.
In the 1960s the opening of the airport opened Madeira to a wider foreign market and to the Portuguese middle class.
By the late 1970s and 1980s the increasing numbers of passengers and package tours and growing size of aircraft, as well as the need to comply with international safety standards for larger aircraft, made it essential to extend the runway.
This extension was opened in 1985.
The largest aircraft that can now land in Madeira is the Boeing 757.
There are plans to enlarge the runway yet again to enable jumbo jets to land, but at present all this remains on the drawing board.
Such a development would, of course have very significant effects on the tourism of the island.
The position of the runway and the topography of the island means that planes normally land and take off over the sea.
The increase in tourism has meant a dramatic change in the number of hotel beds.
In the 1930s accommodation consisted of a thousand beds in twelve hotels.
By 1960 there were still only 1,300 beds but by 1985 they had risen to 12,000.
This still, however, gives the island a quality tourist trade.
Tourism Today
After 200 years in the tourist business, Madeira provides a service few places in the world could rival.
Tourism, although one of the biggest sources of income to the island, is not oversold.
Indeed, one of the attractions of Madeira is that it does not outwardly appear to be  specifically geared to tourism.
The visitor is not greeted with the sordid ‘home-from-home’ bar or the multitude of signs advertising pots of tea, fish and chips, egg and bacon, smorgasbord, German beer garden etc which are found in Spain, the Canary Islands and even the Portuguese Algarve.
The quality and style of the restaurants here are very Portuguese or Madeiran, offering a taste of local speciality dishes as well as the standard international ones.
Just by stepping out of your hotel, you are more than likely to find a tree-lined road and a hand-made mosaic stone footpath.
A short walk by day or night and you realize you are in a different world.
During the day the main streets are full of activity, as people go about their work or shopping in the supermarkets or in the main fruit and fish market in the centre of Funchal.
Many a road-side café provides a good vantage point to watch the world go by.
But don't sit too close to the road, as some of the old buses and trucks leave a trail of black smoke as they struggle up Funchal's twisting, narrow streets.
At night, after dinner, it is very pleasant to stroll from hotel to hotel or to the many bars and small restaurants or, later, to the discothèques.
You are not likely to encounter any problems on the streets in Madeira, apart from the occasional drunk trying to find his way home.
Nor does the island appear to be over-full of tourists, not even in Funchal where over ninety per cent of the hotels are located.
At present there are some 12,000 hotel beds, nearly all in Funchal, compared with 200,000 in the Canary Islands and over 36,0O0 in the Algarve.
The government policy is to expand the total number of beds in the island to around 20,000 and to encourage this expansion to be outside Funchal, thereby opening up the wonderful countryside and expanding the economy of the many small villages.
A number of new small hotels/pensions have recently opened in Ribeira Brava, Porto Moniz, Santana, Caniço and São Gonçalo.
The government is also opening pousadas (small country hotels) for walkers who wish to visit the scenic beauty of the island.
The existing rest houses (with simple catering facilities) are often filly booked by government employees, so it is best to check with the Tourist Office first.
There are also ideas and schemes to purchase and renovate many of the eighteenth- and nineteenth-century quintas around the island and to re-open them as small hotels.
These quintas are large houses in their own spacious grounds which often include a small farm.
For the size of the island, Madeira must have one of the highest concentrations of five-star hotels anywhere in the world.
Before the 1974  Revolution, as well as having the world-famous Reid's Palace Hotel and the Savoy Hotel, the island boasted a Sheraton, Hilton (now Madeira Palâcio), Holiday Inn (now Atlantis) and the then under construction Casino Park Hotel designed by Oscar Niemeyer — a total of six luxury five-star hotels.
In addition to these, there is a good selection of four- and three-star hotels and apartment hotels from which to choose, as well as pensions .
In recent years a great number of two-, three- and four-star hotels and apartment hotels have opened.
Many of them offer an excellent service at a more economical price than the five-star hotels and most of them have a swimming pool, tennis courts and gardens along with night-time entertainment and a relaxed family atmosphere.
A good example would be the Hotel Duas Torres, a little way out of Funchal, just before the Hotel Madeira Palácio on the road towards Câmara de Lobos.
It has a family restaurant, friendly bar with draught beer and pregos (steak sandwiches), discothèque and swimming pool as well as self-catering facilities.
Also to be recommended are the Hotels Girassol and Quinta do Sol, both close to Reid's, and the Hotel São João in the centre of Funchal itself.
The São João has a varied programme of nightly entertainment and games to amuse its guests.
In the centre of Funchal are a number of relatively inexpensive, budget-priced hotels which, while of a basic and simple nature, are very clean and comfortable.
The Hotels Madeira and Carmo are both used by tourists and Portuguese businessmen from the continent.
Very good value can also be found in a pensão or boarding-house and several of these are situated in Funchal.
These are excellent if you are considering a long stay of two or three months.
Madeira has not been left behind in the present craze for time-sharing apartments.
There are a number of existing and planned developments in this area with, we regret, the usual sales touts pestering tourists on street corners.
Most visitors stay in the hotels, where service is the finest in Europe.
Traditionally, the time to visit Madeira was in the winter months (October to April), to escape the cold northern European winters, and the low season was in the summer months.
This pattern now appears to have been broken, and Madeira experiences an all-year-round trade with those who want summer sun tans as well as those who want to get away from cold winters.
There has also been a change in the holiday habits of the Madeirans themselves, who used to retire to their summer villas at Monte or Santo da Serra to escape the heat or flocked to the rocky shoreline around Funchal to bathe every day.
Today, with the regular air and sea link to Porto Santo, it seems, in the traditional holiday months of August and September, as if the entire population of Funchal has moved to Porto Santo.
Regular faces that greet you in the banks, shops and offices in Funchal are to be seen on the eight-kilometre long beach of white sand.
Apart from these two months the beach at Porto Santo is almost deserted.
There is a good hotel in Porto Santo, complete with swimming pool and garden leading directly to the beach.
There are also small hotels, pensions, private villas and apartments.
Increasing numbers of foreign visitors are finding their way to Porto Santo to stay for one or two weeks (as well as the more traditional one-day visit) and a number of tour operators now offer two centre holidays in Funchal and Porto Santo.
Returning to Madeira, we find that the island is catering for the demands of a new breed of tourists who wish for a more active holiday than the traditional visitor who relaxed in the comfort of the luxury hotels or lazed around the swimming pool or at the lido.
In recent years there have been increasing numbers of visitors who enjoy the facilities which have been developed for windsurfing, scuba diving and game fishing (tunny, marlin, barracuda etc).
There are also many tennis courts, some squash courts and a nine-hole golf course which is very slowly being extended to eighteen holes.
Adam Blandy, at Quinta do Palheiro Ferreiro, is building a new eighteen hole golf course complete with  accommodation .
Horse riding is also now available at Choupana and Sto da Serra.
Over recent years the Tourist Office has re-vamped certain traditional festivals so they appeal more to both tourists and locals.
As well as the traditional Christmas and New Year festivities, the Wine Festival, Flower Festival, Apple Festival and Carnival all now embrace activities to interest visitors.
Christmas and New Year have long been the high point for visitor and Madeiran alike.
During this festive season, the population of the island is swollen with Madeirans returning home for their festivities from all parts of the globe, as well as a vast influx of tourists.
Every hotel, apartment and  pension bed is filled by tourists, and there are hundreds of special planes arriving, culminating on New Year's Eve with eight or nine cruise ships filling the harbour.
The build-up towards New Year's Eve starts around 23 December, when the fruit and vegetable market is open all night, with singing and dancing.
Christmas is traditionally a family time for the local population, but all the hotels put on special Christmas dinners and parties.
By now the whole of Funchal is a mass of colour from over 100,000 coloured light bulbs.
Every tree, building, statue and fountain is a blaze of light, and there are tasteful set-pieces strung across the main thoroughfares.
The public buildings are floodlit and on all the main roads in and out of Funchal appear strings of white light bulbs.
The churches on the hillside are floodlit and, over towards São Gonçalo, appears the year in giant numbers formed by white light bulbs on the hillside, ready to change to the New Year at midnight on 3 1 December.
After Christmas, the build-up towards New Year's Eve continues.
More and more planes and people arrive.
Accommodation is at a premium in hotels and private houses alike.
Bands appear in the streets, and folklore groups are dancing and singing in the central reservations and gardens of Funchal.
As midnight approaches on New Year's Eve, the whole of Funchal is a solid traffic jam as cars, buses and trucks journey from all parts of the island to Funchal bringing everyone, from nought to ninety years old.
Some select vantage points in the town, others in the hills up to Monte, some on the harbour or in the gardens and parks.
Each family group has food and wine.
On New Year's Eve people in long evening dresses or in dinner jackets mingle in the streets of Funchal side by side with ‘mountain men’ in their woollen hats who have come to Funchal with their wives and children in the family's lorry — which is often decorated with Christmas tree, paperchains and balloons.
The householders o& Funchal add to the colourful spectacle by opening their doors and windows to show more lights.
Occasional firecrackers herald what is to come.
Then, at midnight, the ships sound their sirens to welcome the New Year.
What a lovely sight the ships make, decked out with their own coloured light bulbs, the tugs and cargo boats as well as the eight or nine cruise liners.
The year in lights on the hillside changes to the new as the ships sound their sirens and launch their pink flares.
Champagne glasses in hand, people wish each other a ‘Happy New Year’(‘Bom Ano Novo ’).
And then comes the most gigantic, impressive firework display in the world.
From over thirty locations around the natural amphitheatre of Funchal, the whole sky is lit with rockets, cascading Starlights, 3-D effect gigantic flowers, the entire spectacle lasting for over ten minutes.
Then  it s all over for another year.
The crowds begin to disperse — some home to bed, others to drive back to Porto Moniz or Caniçal, and still others to attend the numerous parties, supper buffets, dances and discothèques until time for breakfast and bed.
Carnival in Madeira is not to be confused with Carnival in Rio de Janeiro.
Here it is a much more simple affair.
It is an elaboration of an old tradition when people used to throw soot and flour and eggs on each other in Rua da Carreira.
Nowadays there is a big procession through the streets, on the Saturday night before Shrove Tuesday, of theme groups in fancy dress with bands and streamer-throwing.
This is followed on the afternoon of Shrove Tuesday by processions of individuals in fancy dress — adults and lots of children.
There are also big festivities in all the hotels, and fancy dress parties.
Another famous event is the Car Rally (Rally Vinho da Madeira ) which takes place on the first weekend in August.
It now attracts international drivers from all over Europe and is worth points in the European Championship.
There are.
many special mountain sections and night drives, and the routes cover the whole island.
The old town (zono velha ) of Funchal, which is at the far (eastern) end of Avenida das Comunidades Madeirenses (the sea-front road) past the power station, is the oldest part of Funchal, dating back to the sixteenth century.
The road through this area has been closed to traffic, and many of the buildings have been restored and turned into restaurants and bars.
It all looks very attractive, particularly on a warm evening when you can dine outside.
Slowly parts of Funchal are being given a facelift, partly with tourists in mind and partly just because many of the old buildings are in danger of crumbling away.
It is now very difficult to park a car in Funchal as areas are being made into pedestrian streets and the central reservations in Avenida Arriaga are being restored to walking areas, as they used to be before cars took them over.
In 1983 a questionnaire given out by the Tourist Office asked visitors what pleased them most about Madeira: 35.7 per cent of those questioned said the natural beauty of the island, 13.6 per cent the friendliness of the residents, 12.4 per cent the climate, 8.4 per cent good hotels and 7.8 per cent the flowers.
They were then asked what they liked least about Funchal; 3 1.7 per cent said the pollution and 15.8 per cent the noise and confusion in the city.
There are plans for multi-storey car-parks, the first of which is now open, to get cars off the streets and restore the pavements to pedestrians and for a major ring-road round Funchal.
Maybe in the next few years these projects will come to fruition and achieve the  hoped-for and much-needed improvements in the city of Funchal.
The Great Hotels
Because Madeira has been involved in tourism for so long, a tradition of service in hotels has long been established.
The hotels of Madeira, in particularly the de luxe five-star hotels, are among the best in Europe.
Reid's Hotel is located on Estrada Monumental.
The fame of this hotel was as great amongst those generations of the 1920s to 1950s as Raffles in Singapore, Shepheard's in Cairo and The Ritz in London.
Here in Madeira, at Reid's you can still savour that luxury.
You can enjoy afternoon tea with cucumber sandwiches, lounge in chintz-covered chairs, play billiards or bridge, or dine in tuxedo.
It has over four hectares of terraced gardens leading down to the rocky shore where you can swim in the sea or swimming pool.
At a higher level in the gardens are two more swimming pools and a garden restaurant.
In the main hotel there is a two-level dining-room, elegantly furnished and decorated, plus a separate grill room.
In spite of its international fame, Reid's is still a relatively small hotel by today's standards (165 rooms), with a family atmosphere and many members of staff who have spent all their working lives in the hotel.
Over the years Reid's has been host to many people, and its visitors, book reads like an international Who's Who over the past century.
The famous and the infamous, the wealthy and the powerful, the deposed and the exiled of this century have all stayed at Reid's.
The Emperor Charles of Austria stayed here after he was deposed until he moved into Quinta do Monte.
Lloyd George was another famous guest.
(During a lunch given in his honour by the British in the island, the wife of one of the wine-shippers bit her tongue rather painfully and asked Lloyd George if he ever did that.
His reply was that he often did but not usually soon enough.)
George Bernard Shaw stayed in Reid's in 1927 and, at the age of seventy-one, learned to dance.
He signed a photograph for Max Rinder, the professional dancer who had taught him, with the words: ‘To the only man who ever taught me anything.’
In January 1950 Sir Winston Churchill stayed in Reid's and did many paintings of the island, especially of Câmara de Lobos.
Many of these paintings now hang in Chartwell in Britain.
Whilst in Madeira, Sir Winston was loaned the Leacock family's Rolls-Royce, the boot of which he transformed into a bar.
In 1959 ex-President (General) Fulgênico Batista of Cuba installed his large entourage on a whole floor of Reid's.
Other famous twentieth-century visitors, most of whom stayed at Reid's, include Marshal Pitsudski of Poland, Sarah Bernhardt, Gago Coutinho, Marconi, Princess Helena Victoria, Gregory Peck, Lord Avon, Lord Birkenhead, Lord Halifax, Lord Jellicoe, S.P.B. Mais, Sacheverell Sitwell and Fanny and Johnny Craddock.
A list of famous people who have stayed in the various Reid's hotels, appears in a book on Madeira by W. and A. Reid published in 1893.
Hotel Savoy in Avenida do Infante is one of the leading five-star hotels in Europe.
Occupying a prominent position, it is like a gigantic land-locked luxury liner, with all the services and accommodation you would expect on one.
The original hotel was opened in 1912 and extended in 1926.
In the 1960s it was totally re-built, and at that time no expense was spared.
It is a happy blend of old and, what was at that time, new.
It has 353 rooms, and many of the guests repeat visits every year or several times a year, some for over twenty years and more.
At Christmas the same faces are to be found in the Almeida Bar year after year.
Many of the rich, famous and powerful of this world have stayed in the Savoy but, unfortunately, out of respect for their privacy, no official record has ever been kept.
There is a huge dining-room on the seventh floor, with seating for over a thousand, and the Galaxia Night Club on the ninth floor has panoramic views of the bay of Funchal.
On the eighth floor is the Fleur-de-Lys Grill Room, which is undoubtedly the finest place to eat in Madeira — it is very elegantly decorated and the food and service are superb.
There are also a restaurant and bar at the swimming pool complex, which is reached through the hotel gardens and then down in a lift.
At this level you can sunbathe or swim from a stone jetty (connecting off-shore rocks) or in one of the two swimming pools.
One of the strong points of this hotel has always been the attention of the staff to every detail and the excellence of the quiet, unobtrusive service.
Casino Park Hotel is a modern hotel designed by Oscar Niemeyer, the architect of Brasilia.
It is a long, low, curving building typical of his designs, being some five storeys high with ramps connecting upper and lower floors.
Situated on a cliff top above the harbour, the complex also includes the Casino and a luxurious air-conditioned cinema.
There is a large garden which contains a swimming pool and affords views of the busy harbour below.
The Madeira Carlton Hotel (formerly the Madeira Sheraton) is located between the Savoy and Reid's.
It is a seventeen-storey-high hotel with the luxurious ambience associated world-wide with Sheraton Hotels.
It has direct access to the sea, three swimming pools and a night club situated in a  separate building in the gardens of the hotel.
There are various restaurants and bars, including a British-style pub.
The hotel has recently been extended with the addition if more rooms and restaurants.
It has also developed a time-share group of apartments at sea-level — which makes it a very large complex indeed.
Madeira Palácio Hotel was originally built as a Hilton Hotel, a few years before the 1974 Revolution.
This luxury hotel is located a little way out of town, past Reid's, on the road to Cãmara de Lobos.
There are good views to the sea, as well as of Cabo Girão (Madeira's famous high cliff) to be had from the rooms.
The entrance and main public areas are spacious and tastefully furnished, and in the gardens are located a large outdoor swimming pool, snack bar and tennis courts.
The hotel also has a good restaurant and separate grill room, as well as a discothèque.
The Hotel Atlantis is near the airport, just outside Machico.
It was originally built as a Holiday Inn and is part of a complex of hotel and holiday apartments and villas called Matur.
There are tree-lined roads and paths, with open-air swimming pools and shops.
The hotel itself has 290 rooms in a tower block and is a complete holiday resort hotel.
There is a large heated indoor pool with sunroof in the hotel's main entrance lobby, with a large outdoor Pool designed in a figure of eight for sunny days.
The hotel has many planned activities to amuse its guests and also has a minibus making frequent trips to Funchal and back.
Tours of the Countryside
Introduction
In the first half of this book we have concentrated on the discovery and history of Madeira, its social and economic development, together with a description of its topography.
In the second half we consider the practical side of exploring the island of Madeira.
The archipelago of Madeira consists of the islands of Madeira and Porto Santo, which are the only inhabited ones, the Desertas, which are the islands close to and visible from Madeira, and the Selvagens, to the south-east and nearer to the Canaries than to Madeira.
We hope that, during your stay in Madeira, you will find an opportunity to visit Porto Santo with its eight-kilometre long sandy beach and relaxed way of life.
If you can manage a visit of two to three days (or even just one day) it is well worth it — the modern boat takes 1½ hours and it is only a matter of minutes in the small jet aircraft.
When planning your excursions in Madeira, let the morning sun be your guide in deciding whether you go east or west because it is quite common for one part of the island to bask in sunshine while another is cloudy.
The weather is one thing we cannot plan for as, although Madeira enjoys a good climate all year round, you must remember it is a small island in the Atlantic Ocean.
Given the topography of Madeira, it is understandable that the island roads are full of twists and turns, climbing and descending all the time.
If you are hiring a car in the island, you will need three to four days to cover most of the main roads and to savour some of the breathtaking views.
There are various maps to show you the way, and we recommend you take a picnic with you, as most viewpoints also have picnic tables and chairs and space to pull your car off the road.
Restaurants, with one or two exceptions, tend to be located only in the small towns.
This chapter has been organized so as to describe three main tours of the island, as well as a trip to Curral das Freiras.
The three tours suggested are:
1.
Câmara de Lobos — Cabo Girão — Ribeira Brava — Ponta do Sol — Porto do Moniz (via the coastal towns or Paúl da Serra)— Seixal — São Vicente — Encumeada — Ribeira Brava — Cãmara de Lobos — Funchal.
2.
Monte — Terreira da Luta — Poiso — Ribeiro Frio — Santana — São Jorge — Boaventura — Ponta Delgada — São Vicente — Encumeada — Ribeira Brava — Câmara de Lobos — Funchal.
3.
Caniço — Santa Cruz — Machico — Caniçal — Machico — Portela — Santo da Serra — Camacha — Funchal.
The cumulative distance in kilometres is given for each town from Funchal.
These tours of the countryside should not be viewed as compulsory itineraries.
They are just suggestions for day and half-day excursions to take in the best of the scenery, rather than the villages the tours pass through.
Most of these in themselves do not have a great deal of interest to offer the tourist.
It is, after all, the beautiful and varied scenery which you are setting out to see.
Tour 1.
Funchal — Porto do Moniz — Funchal
On leaving Funchal, climb the Avenida do Infante past the Casino Park and Savoy Hotels and cross the bridge over the Ribeiro Seco.
This bridge, recently rebuilt and enlarged, was built in 1849, thereby opening up the Estrada Monumental (then just called the New Road) past Reid's Hotel and out to the west, through the present tourist zone.
This was the first ‘modern’ road to be built outside Funchal.
After a little while, cross the Ribeira dos Socorridos and reach the main electricity generating station in the island.
This river gets its name from the time of the first exploration of the island, when some of Zarco's men were nearly swept away by the river but were rescued by other members of the party in a small boat.
(Socorridos means ‘helped’ or ‘saved’.)
Shortly after this, we arrive in the village of Câmara de Lobos (9km), an attractive fishing village so named because Zarco saw seals here (lobos means ‘wolves’, i.e. ‘sea wolves’).
Just before a road turns off to the left into the village there is a terrace, the spot where Sir Winston Churchill did his paintings of the village.
The village itself is worth a closer look.
The Parish Church or Church of São Sebastião, stands near the central square and was erected in the eighteenth century.
It has a fine gilded carving on the high altar.
Another church to see in Câmara de Lobos is the Chapel of Nossa Senhora da Conceição, built in the early part of the fifteenth century.
It was one of the first chapels to be built in the island.
It was restored in 1908 and has a very richly carved baroque altar.
Along the side walls are various paintings by Nicolau Ferreira.
This chapel is also known as the Fishermen's Chapel and the annual ‘festa’ of their Patron Saint, Saint Peter, is held here every year on 29 June.
This picturesque fishing village has many interesting buildings and views.
It also has a good fish restaurant in the square by the bandstand.
The drawback to spending time in Câmara de Lobos is the hordes of beggar children who appear nowhere else on the island but are a real nuisance here.
Back on the main road, one kilometre out of the village, it is worth turning off and making the short drive up to the Pico da Torre viewpoint which gives a lovely view of Câmara de Lobos.
All viewpoints in Madeira are marked by signs which show a pair of binoculars.
The main road now climbs and winds towards the village of Estreito de Câmara de Lobos (14km), past many attractive modern villas and vines growing on trellises.
This is the centre of the best vine-growing area on the island.
The village of Estreito has one of the best restaurants in the island for espetada (meat on a skewer)— the menu and seating are simple, but the meat is very good.
From here you can make a side trip to Jardim da Serra (18km) and the quinta made famous by Henry Veitch.
This is a picturesque wooded place.
Onward again and, after more twisting and turning, there is a left-hand turn to Cabo Girão (19km).
This 550m high cliff is one of the highest in the world.
There is a coffee bar here and women selling embroidery and woollens line the path to the viewpoint — for all that they are at a good tourist point, the prices here and at other such places around the island  usually remain reasonable.
Look down from the viewpoint and see the terraced land — minute cultivated pocket handkerchiefs.
The traditional village was centred around the church with its white walls and red or grey stonework.
The better houses with two storeys and the public buildings were near the church.
Most villages had a sugarmill with a tall, slender chimney, or a modest watermill.
Around the village were scattered single storey dwellings with straw roofs and unpainted walls.
The old nucleus is still visible in many of the rural settlements.
The main road begins to level off as we pass through Quinta Grande and Campanário, before descending into Ribeira Brava (31 km).
This is a pleasant town and a major road junction, for it is here that the road forks up to the pass of Encumeada across the centre of the island — and the way we will return.
Ribeira Brava used to be like a Wild West or oasis town where buses and cars stopped for the occupants to take advantage of coffee, drinks and food and to fill their vehicle with petrol before venturing into the ‘Beyond’ or the ‘Outback’.
Nowadays the island is more developed but this is still a favourite and convenient ‘watering hole’.
The Church of São Bento in Ribeira Brava was built in the sixteenth century but completely altered in the eighteenth century.
It has a high altar with fine gilded carving and a sixteenth-century sculpture of Our Lady of the Rosary.
The pulpit and the arch of the Chapel of the Blessed Sacrament are also splendid, as are the blue-and-white checked tiles on the steeple.
There is a tunnel, through the rock at the eastern end of the sea front, which leads to a small harbour.
On the sea front itself you can see the seventeenth century fort built to protect the harbour and settlement from pirate attacks.
There is now a modem three star hotel if you wish to spend the night in  Ribeira Brava.
There is a story about Ribeira Brava which may or may not be true but which is worth the telling.
At one time Ribeira Brava was the only place in Madeira where cherries were grown in large quantities.
In 1822, when a new Portuguese constitution was promulgated, the people of the town refused to recognize it and so the Governor sent soldiers to Ribeira Brava, not to use force but with orders to eat all the cherries.
The soldiers happily carried out their orders and, having lost their fruit, the inhabitants soon lost their desire for rebellion.
In recent years a new coastal road has been built from Ribeira Brava to Tabua.
From here we continue to Ponta do Sol (40km) through a series of tunnels cut into the rock which are lit from the seaward side by sunlit ‘windows’.
This is yet another fishing village where time seems to have stood still.
The ancestors of the famous American writer John dos Passos  emigrated from here, and he visited this village when he came to the island in the 1950s.
Dos Passos described Madeira as both a Paradise and a prison.
A short diversion can be made by continuing along the sea road through yet more tunnels to the tiny village of Madalena do Mar, where the road ends.
This village is noted for the amount of sun it receives and for its long pebble beach.
Its church (1457) was dedicated to Santa Catarina by Henrique Alemão —‘Henry the German’— who is said to have been a Polish king.
Tradition has it that, after King Ladislau lost the Battle of Varna in 1414, he vowed to make a pilgrimage around the world armed as a Knight of Saint Catherine of Mount Sinai.
He eventually came to Madeira where Zarco gave him the large area of fertile land around Madalena do Mar.
This gift was confirmed by Prince Henry and King Afonso.
Henrique Alemão encouraged many people to come and settle to cultivate his extensive land.
He married the daughter of Aunes, one of the early colonists, and died when a landslide at Cabo Girão crushed his boat as he was returning from Funchal.
We now retrace our steps to Ponta do Sol and back up onto the road and continue along to Canhas.
Here there is a large, imposing statue of Santa Teresa of the Child Jesus.
Construction of this was begun in 1955, and it was inaugurated in 1964.
Along the roadside leading to the statue are the fourteen Stations of the Cross.
After Canhas there is a road to the right — which it is very easy to miss — which leads up to Paúl da Serra and one of the alternative routes through to Porto do Moniz.
On the way up we pass the statue of ‘Senhor da Montanha’ which was begun in 1962 and weighs six tonnes.
The plateau of Paúl da Serra itself is an extensive moorland area where there was once a proposal to build an international airport.
There are good or bad weather days here, and nothing in between.
On good days there is glorious sunshine with clear, cloudless skies, and in summer the air is pleasantly fresher and cooler than down at sea-level.
Then you can picnic, play football or cricket or just walk across the moorland and look at the sheep.
On bad days it rains and the mist covers everything in silence — you can see only a few yards in front of you and, if you wander from the road, can easily get lost.
The frequency of such bad weather is hardly surprising given the altitude of 1,430m, of this seventeen by six kilometre plateau.
At the start of the plateau a side road leads to Estanquinhos, a forestry station, from which a new road is slowly being built to Ginjas and São Vicente on the north side of the island.
Just before the forestry house, a rough road leads off to the rest house at Bica da Cana where picnic tables and benches are to be found.
From here the road is slowly being extended to Encumeada.
Returning to the main road, which is very good, we cross  the plateau and pass a small reservoir on the left-hand side with views down to the south side of the island and the sea.
Almost opposite this is a road which turns off to the right down to Rabaçal (64km) at a height of 1,070m.
Here there is a rest house with simple but clean accommodation and cooking facilities.
In summer a man sells a wide variety of bottles — wine and soft drinks — which he keeps cool in the water fountain.
Rabaçal is a popular spot for walkers and close by are the Falls of Rabaçal and the twenty-five fontes .
Return to the main road which now follows the spine of a hill and descends to the main coastal road which leads to Porto do Moniz.
As it winds atop the spine, the road gives superb views now to the north and now to the south of the island.
There is an alternative route from Canhas to Porto do Moniz, particularly to be recommended if the weather is cloudy up on the moor, although it does wind and twist.
After Canhas we pass through Arco da Calheta (immediately above Madalena do Mar) with its Chapel of Our Lady of Loreto which has a sixteenth-century Manueline-style roof.
Calheta (59km), which has been an administrative centre since 1501, has a modified sixteenth-century parish church.
In Estreito da Calheta is the Church of Nossa Senhora da Graça which began as a sixteenth-century chapel, although the present church dates from 1791 to 1793.
From this road it is possible to make small diversions down into the villages of Jardim do Mar and Paúl do Mar, although the roads in and out of them are more spectacular than the villages themselves.
Passing Ponta do Pargo, where the lighthouse was first built in 1922, we come to Porto do Moniz (98km).
This is at the north-west of the island and is probably the furthest village from Funchal.
It is a very popular summer resort, with sea-water swimming pools in the rocks.
There are good fish restaurants and a recently opened camp site with full facilities.
Leaving Porto do Moniz, we are now on the north side of the island, where the road is a narrow shelf cut into the cliffs which rise majestically from the ocean.
Here the road is still cobbled, as were all the roads in the island until the late 1970s.
This area to São Vicente is very sparsely populated and the road Passes through numerous tunnels and past cascading waterfalls, some of which give you a free car-wash, even in the summer when there has been no rain for months.
Near Seixal the road goes into a tunnel, and a waterfall cascades dramatically over the top and into the sea.
The only village on this section of road is Seixal (108km).
Here the vineyards are incredibly steep, and heath tree hedges protect the crops from the wind as well, it is said, as the farmers from falling into the sea below.
The cathedral in Funchal which was built between 1485 and 1514
The mountains at Encumeada illustrating the majestic scenery to be found inland
A typical thatched house in Santana
Fireworks over Funchal on New Year's Eve
The beautiful sandy beach at Porto Santo
The Fort of São Tiago
Pico Arieiro (1,818m): the mountain with a road to the top
On the coast where we turn right and inland to the village of São Vicente (116km) there is a tiny chapel which was built into the rock beside the mouth of the river in 1692.
São Vicente is set a little way inland where the valley is wider and sheltered from the sea winds.
This little town has recently been given a face-lift, and the white walls gleam attractively in the sun above the narrow pedestrianized streets.
The road starts to climb and, to our left, we pass a 14m high clocktower — the Church of Nossa Senhora de Fátima — which was built atop precipitous slopes between 1942 and 1953.
Climbing all the way up the valley now, we pass many colourful flowers and trees growing alongside crops in this fertile valley.
Encumeada (117km) is the summit at 1,004m.
Just off the main road on the right is a good viewpoint to look down on both the north and south sides of the island.
As you start to descend, you pass the Pousada dos Vinhaticos which is a very popular place to spend the night, particularly if you are on a walking holiday.
The valley, as it descends towards Ribeira Brava, is probably the most beautiful in Madeira, and it has many picnic tables and pull-offs for the car.
The valley has wooded slopes and attractive rock formations.
The road into Ribeira Brava has been much improved in the last few years.
From here the return journey to Funchal is via Câmara de Lobos, the total trip, without diversions, being about 165km.
Tour 2.
Funchal — Faial — São Vicente — Funchal
The vistas on this route are no less impressive than on the first one.
We leave Funchal on the Monte road, although more or less any road going up the hill will do, as they nearly all join back en route to Monte.
From here we continue to Terreira da Luta, where we get a good view of Funchal and see how high we have already climbed.
the road leads on up through layers of eucalyptus trees into the pine forest to Poiso, a major road junction with a good restaurant.
The height here, some 14km from Funchal, is 1,400m.
From Poiso we make a short diversion to drive to the top of the mountain, Pico do Arieiro, at 1,818m.
This area is very popular for camping in summer, and the lower part of the road is through moorland crossed by levadas where you may be lucky enough to see small wild pigs or, in the summer months, wild ponies as well as sheep, goats and the occasional deer.
On the left of the road on the way to the summit is a small ice house, built about 1800, which has recently been restored.
Winter snow used to be stored here from nearby drifts and provided a  supply of caked ice throughout the following summer for the wealthy inhabitants and the hotels in Funchal.
The last part of the road to the summit was opened in 1965.
At the summit of Pico do Arieiro (1,818m) there is a snack bar which has been open for many years, and a pousada recently opened.
On a clear day there are magnificent views from all along this road as well as from the summit, and you can look down on all sides of the island, even to Porto Santo.
Alternatively, and no less awe-inspiring, if the cloud conditions are right, you ascend through the mist until you break out into the sun somewhere before the summit from where you look down on a sea of white cloud with many peaks bursting through.
You really feel you are on top of the world.
Pico do Arieiro is well worth a visit.
After all, how many mountains can you drive right to the top of?
There is also a magnificent walk from the top of Pico do Arieiro on the top of Pico Ruivo.
This is a good walk for visitors with strong shoes, and it is protected by railings in various parts.
The walk, which gives magnificent views, takes about two to 2¼ hours to Pico Ruivo which, at 1,862m, is the highest in the island.
We return to Poiso and head downhill through pine forest and sheep pasture to Ribeiro Frio (29km) at 800m above sea-level.
Here there is a  government trout hatchery where you can see the fish in all their stages of growth.
Across the road are some gardens which are intended to perpetuate every species of flower, plant and tree found in Madeira.
Just outside Ribeiro Frio the road is crossed by yet another levada walk, that to the right being a Particularly nice one to Portela which takes about four hours.
On reaching Faial on the north coast, we turn left towards Santana (39km) where you will find the traditional thatched cottages, often with corn cobs hanging out to dry.
The cottage consists of the living space on the ground floor divided up into small rooms, with an attic store for beans, grain, potatoes etc.
The entrance is through a central door flanked by windows.
These cottages (palheiros ) are now preserved in Santana, and many are still lived in — even the public toilets are disguised as a thatched cottage.
Elsewhere in the island most of these cottages have degenerated into cowsheds, and the traditional thatched roof has often been replaced by corrugated galvanized iron.
From Santana a road turns off to the left which winds up into the Pico das Pedras Park.
From here it is possible to walk to the government rest house known as Casa das Queimadas — a very pleasant walk alongside a shady levada .
This is a very popular spot for picnics, and cars are prohibited at the rest house.
The main road continues up from Pico das Pedras to Achada do Teixeira (1,592m) from where it is a relatively short walk to Pico Ruivo or even right through to Pico do Arieiro.
Sunrise and sunset are particularly breathtaking when seen from these summits.
From Santana we continue to São Jorge along a road lined with arum lilies and Watsonia.
São Jorge (49km) has a church with a very imposing interior with decorated gilded carving.
The church was built in 1761, and the images of Our Lady of the Incarnation and the Crucified Christ date from the same period.
The road winds on to Arco de São Jorge and then goes in and round a deep ravine before it reaches Boaventura (65km).
This village has a picturesque setting with the Atlantic rollers below and the mountains towering above.
A good viewpoint is the cemetery where a tombstone, above a jagged cliff, bears the name of Miss Turner.
In the early years of this century Miss Turner came to live in Madeira, and managed the flourishing tea-room at Santo da Serra, where Ceylon tea and buttered toast were served.
In the evening, after her customers had gone, she would listen to the gardener talking about his village on the other side of the peaks.
When she died (about 1925), she left instructions in her Will for her body to be buried in this green paradise about which she had heard so much, and yet which she had never visited except in her  dreams.
There was no road at that time, and so her coffin was carried from Santo da Serra over the rough mountain tracks to Boaventura.
She was buried, as she had wished, beneath the swaying palms in the cemetery of the village whose name means ‘Good Luck’.
The last stop on this route is Ponta Delgada (68km) which has a sea-water swimming pool.
The present Church of Senhor Bom Jesus was built after a terrible fire on 12 July 1908 destroyed the original building.
About the time the original chapel was being built in the sixteenth century, a wooden crucifix was washed ashore in a box.
This was badly damaged in the 1908 fire, and the small part which remains is now carefully protected in a glass case at the back of the church.
This crucifix is the reason for one of the biggest and oldest religious festivals in Madeira.
From Ponta Delgada we return via São Vicente, Encumeada, Ribeira Brava and Câmara de Lobos — the whole round trip back to Funchal being some 130km.
Tour 3.
Funchal — Caniço — Santa Cruz — Machico — Caniçal — Machico — Portela — Santo da Serra — Camacha — Funchal
Leaving Funchal by the airport road, we can take many a backward glance at the town and harbour.
After we at last say ‘goodbye’ to Funchal, turn right for Garajau (so called by the island's discoverers because of the large number of garajaus — terns — which nest there).
Here a tasteful modern development looks out onto the statue of Christ (similar to but much smaller than those in Rio de Janeiro and Lisbon), which was inaugurated in 1927.
The road continues to Caniço (9km) which is situated on a small plateau some 229m above sea-level.
It has a large, imposing church in the recently modernized village square which is complete with fountain and aviary.
Caniço has probably the best selection of restaurants outside Funchal and is very popular with both Madeirans and foreigners.
A small detour takes you down to Caniço de Baixa or Ponta da Oliveira where there is a small modern development (mainly owned by Germans).
You can walk along the pebble beach and watch the Atlantic rollers breaking, before a meal in one of the two very good restaurants here.
From Caniço we go back up onto the main airport road and continue on to Santa Cruz (20km), whose centre is situated off to the right of the main road.
The church of Santa Cruz dates from 1533 and is the largest and architecturally most interesting outside Funchal, with good Gothic arches and pillars.
There is a sixteenth-century town hall which has been modernized but still retains its charm.
The law courts, with their outside  staircase, are also impressive.
There is a shingle beach in the town, with bathing facilities.
We continue on past the airport where the road goes under the recent extension of the runway, which is supported on high pillars many metres above the road.
The road winds along the coast past the Atlantis Hotel and the Matur Holiday Complex.
Just as we enter Machico, we pass the Hotel Dom Pedro on the right, a favourite retreat for a peaceful few days.
Machico (26km) was the first capital of Madeira, and the first landings were made here.
Today it is an important administrative centre and fishing port.
The Church of Nossa Senhora da Conceição dates from the end of the fifteenth century, being built in the Manueline style.
The portal was given by King Manuel 1.
The Cristo Chapel, built soon after the first landing in the fifteenth century, was rebuilt during the sixteenth century and again in 1883.
In 1803 the chapel was very badly damaged by flood, and the image of Nossa Senhora dos Milagres was washed out to sea.
A crewman on an American ship coming to Madeira saw the image floating and recovered it.
It was kept in the cathedral of Funchal until the chapel in Machico was rebuilt and the statue was returned in 1815.
The chapel was again damaged by flood in 1956 and restored in 1957.
This chapel, also known as the Chapel of Miracles (Capela dos Milagres ), is situated on the eastern side of the river which divides the city of Machico.
Nearby, according to tradition, are the graves of Anne d'Arfet and Robert Machim and the harbour is also on this eastern side.
There were once three forts protecting Machico Bay, but only two now remain: the Fort of Saint John the Baptist, near the port; and the Fort of Amparo which is small and triangular and dates from 1706.
This fort is in the centre of the city near the sea-front and in front of it is a very pleasant tree-lined road with an open-air café.
The third fort, the Fort of São Roque, was next to the existing Chapel of São Roque near to where the Hotel Dom Pedro is now situated.
Whenever a pirate attack was imminent a bonfire was lit on the nearby Pico do Facho and the people would flee inland, leaving the soldiers to guard the forts and the city.
This is commemorated every September when hundreds of bonfires are lit on the hillsides and hilltops of the immense valley in which Machico is situated.
The road out of Machico towards Caniçal winds steeply up the mountain side.
Just before the tunnel it is well worth taking the road to the right which leads to Pico do Facho, from where there is a beautiful view of Machico, the Bay of Machico and the new airport extension.
The tunnel through the mountain to Caniçal was completed in the late 1950s.
Before then the only way to reach the last village at this end of the island was by boat or along a narrow path which clung to the hillside above precipitous cliffs.
Caniçal is some nine kilometres beyond Machico.
It has always been a fishing village and trawlers from here and from Machico are used for deep-sea and more distant fishing trips such as to the North African coast.
Caniçal was also once the whaling centre of Madeira, and the old whaling factory is now being converted into a Whaling Museum.
The area between Caniçal and the end of the island is very sandy and, indeed, the only natural sandy beach on the island is to be found at Prainha on the road out to Ponta do São Lourenço at the end of the island.
At the end of this road, walk a short way over the grassy hillside and look down on the turquoise waters of the bay (Baia de Abra).
The Ilhéu de Fora, with the lighthouse on it, is separated from the land by a 165m wide channel through which the boat to Porto Santo passes in all but the roughest weather.
Returning to Machico, we take the road up the lovely valley of the Ribeira do Machico to Portela (35km).
Here three roads meet, all of which are signposted Funchal.
Fine views can be had looking down on the north side of the island to Porto da Cruz and the Penha d'Aguia (the enormous flat-topped rock) which stands between Faial and Porto da  Cruz.
At Portela (625m above sea-level) there is a popular restaurant which specializes in  espetada  and where you can watch your lunch cooking on the fire of laurel twigs.
This is also a popular place to stop for hot drinks in winter, cold in summer or coffee and brandy any time.
From Portela, an alternative route is to go along the north coast through Porto da Cruz and Faial.
At Faial there is a new bridge over the Ribeira Seca as the old one was washed away in a violent storm a few years ago.
We will take the shorter route from Portela to Santo António da Serra, more commonly known as Santo da Serra (41km).
Here there are many quintas which were used by the wealthy Funchal merchants in the summer months.
The interesting nine-hole golf course affords beautiful views of the mountains and out to Ponta do São Lourenço.
The golf course is reminiscent of those in the Scottish Highlands.
You don't have to be a member to play — visitors are welcome, and in the week the course is more or less deserted.
There is also a small park in Santo da Serra with a good selection of trees and shrubs, a children's play area and small enclosures for wild ponies, deer and even kangaroos.
The last stop on this tour is at Camacha (53km).
This village, situated 700m above sea-level, seems to have some kind of festival almost every weekend.
It is the centre of the wicker industry, and on one side of the central square is a large warehouse with thousands of items made from wicker — baskets, trays, chairs and more unusually, elephants, lions and giraffes.
Attached to the wicker warehouse is the restaurant ‘O Relogio’.
Built into this is a clock tower which was constructed by the English doctor, Michael Grabham, in 1896.
The clock and bell were brought from the Parish Church of Walton near Liverpool.
Camacha is also famous for having one of the oldest and best folk-dancing groups on the island, which has performed in many different countries.
Another thing for which Camacha is renowned is its camellia trees, which grow very tall and are covered in blooms.
From here we return to Funchal, a total distance of 63km having been covered.
Tour 4.
Eira do Serrado and Curral das Freiras
This is a short excursion which does not fit in with any of the circuits mentioned above.
From Funchal we take the road out to São Martinho, past the cemetery to Pico dos Barcelos.
From this viewpoint we can see that, although the centre of Funchal is very built-up, there is still a lot of green land around the city.
From here we take the road marked Curral das Freiras for a short but very scenic and awe-inspiring drive.
The whole distance from Funchal to Curral das Freiras is only 15km.
It is worth  going to Eira da Serrado, just above Curral das Freiras, for an amazing view down onto the village of Curral das Freiras which nestles in a spectacular deep valley.
We now descend a winding road into the village.
This was where the nuns from Santa Clara Convent in Funchal fled to during pirate raids in the sixteenth century.
Some time later a small permanent settlement grew up there.
The village was very isolated in the past, and until the road down into Curral das Freiras was built in 1959, the only access was down the narrow, twisting, tortuous path which you can still see from the village.
Television arrived here only in time for Christmas 1986.
Funchal
Funchal: The City
Funchal, like other historic towns and cities, suffers from the problems caused by the internal combustion engine.
Whereas other cities in Europe have tried to combat the disease, little or no progress has been made in Funchal.
At the moment the car reigns supreme in the city, although the days of its reign may be numbered if various plans, at present on the drawing-board, come to fruition.
In the Past few years a number of small streets have been closed to traffic, and car-parking has been prohibited from the four central reservations in Avenida Arriaga.
At the present time the best days to walk around Funchal are Saturday and Sunday when it is much quieter and you will have the chance to stop and view the buildings and doorways, many of which have interesting detail.
With its narrow streets and lack of parking places, this city is best explored on foot.
According to António Arragão (in Subsídios para a História da Cidade do Funchal , 1979), before 1425 a small group of people were living in the area of Santa Maria do Calhau, mainly in single-storey straw-roofed buildings.
They were mainly artisans — carpenters, stonemasons, ironworkers, shoemakers, weavers and fishermen.
The first street in Funchal was more or less the present Rua Santa Maria, and the flat area of beach was where the Largo do Corpo Santo is now.
A tiny chapel dedicated to Santa Maria do Calhau was built here in about 1430 and was enlarged in 1458 to serve the growing population.
Unfortunately this church was destroyed by flood and nothing remains of it now.
In 1455 Luigi Cadamosto, an Italian navigator in the service of Portugal, had sailed to Madeira.
According to him, there were some 800 men living on the island at that time which would suggest a total island population of around three thousand, approximately half living in Funchal.
In general, the buildings in Funchal are of a modest simplicity which make a contrast with the luxuriance of the vegetation.
There are two main styles of architecture: the earlier Gothic and the later Renaissance or baroque style.
The very austere and Pure baroque uses a contrast, in many  buildings, between whitewashed walls and almost black basalt windows, doorways and angle stones at corners.
The traditional colours used in Madeiran houses were white or cream walls, stonework or pale grey paintwork around the windows and doorways, dark green shutters, gates and doors and red tile roofs.
In 1986 there was new legislation to restore these traditional colours to houses in the island and banning the use of unpainted aluminium for windows, gates and so on, which have been spoiling many of the traditional buildings.
The city has few modern buildings in the central area which do not conform to the height or style of their surroundings.
Many modern buildings are in the traditional style and blend in well — as is the case with the Caixa Economica do Funchal building in Rua João Tavira.
There are, however, a few blots on the landscape such as the Centro Comercial do Infante Olimpa on Avenida do Infante and the Centro Comercial do Infante building which towers on one side of the roundabout at the end of Avenida Arriaga.
The large old private houses (quintas ) are usually to be found behind high stone walls, and an open door in a wall can often reveal a charming old garden with bright flowers and shady paths and, perhaps, even a glimpse of the house itself.
Even the smallest garden in Madeira usually has a small courtyard with pergola for vine, passion fruit or rose and numerous pot plants — orchids, anthuriums and ferns.
All the footpaths in central Funchal are made with small black and white stones set in mosaic patterns.
Many of the roads are cobbled and the older streets and pavements have rounded pebbles protruding from the cement in which they are set.
Shoes with thick soles and low heels are to be recommended for walking round the centre of Funchal.
The mosaic work was introduced on the Portuguese mainland in the eighteenth century and it soon reached Madeira.
The methods employed today remain precisely the same.
A piece of stone is held in the cupped palm of the hand and hewn with a special hammer (‘camartelo’) into the required shape.
After cutting it is ready to be set in mortar to make the paved walkways (‘calçadas à portuguesa’).
Look carefully to see how the patterns change in the different streets and squares.
They often incorporate the date when this work was done.
Even now you can find this craft happening somewhere in Funchal.
This chapter on Funchal is written in the form of an itinerary in order to include most of the buildings, streets and places of interest in the city in a logical order as Funchal does not signpost or highlight many of its attractions.
It can be very hard on the feet and on the nerves in the narrow and busy streets on a hot day without some plan to follow.
One or the charms of Funchal, and the island as a whole, is its hidden tourist attractions.
If you are walking down into the centre along Avenida do Infante, after the Savoy Hotel you pass the modern Casino Park Hotel and, behind it, the new Casino.
The previous Casino was in an old quinta on this site.
This new circular building houses a panoramic restaurant, with cabaret and dancing on the top floor.
The gambling rooms are below, and there is a discothèque on the lower ground floor.
In part of the same complex is the Cinecasino a very modern and spacious cinema, complete with air-conditioning and coffee bar, where most of the latest films are shown.
You then pass the official residence of the President of the Regional Government, Quinta Vigia, on your right.
The original Quinta Vigia stood where the Casino now is and no longer exists.
The presidential quinta was originally called Quinta Lambert (after its owner, the French Comte de Lambert) and later the Quinta das Angústias.
It is painted pink, which is also one of the traditional colours used on old buildings here.
Below Quinta Vigia are the Santa Catarina Gardens, where there was a cemetery (Cemitério das Angústias) until the late 1940s.
These gardens have taken many years to complete and now include a children's Play area, a small lake with swans and fountains and a large sloping grassy area surrounded by trees and seats.
At the far end of the gardens is the Santa Catarina Chapel which dates from 1425.
Originally built by order of Constança Rodriguez, the wife of Zarco, it was rebuilt in the fifteenth and seventeenth centuries.
It is the oldest place of worship in Madeira and has recently been converted into a small museum.
The terrace outside is a popular spot for watching the activity in the harbour below.
From here there is a good view of the fortress of Nossa Senhora da Conceição which was built in the seventeenth century on the Loo Rock to protect ships in the harbour.
It contained a chapel, magazine and barracks.
Loo Rock no longer stands alone; it is now incorporated in the harbour mole, and a road tunnel passes through it.
On the opposite side of the road to the gardens is the Hospício Maria Amélia, originally a gift by the Dowager Empress of Brazil, whose only daughter the Princess Maria Amélia died of consumption in Madeira in 1853.
The building was opened on the ninth anniversary of her death in 1862 and was for the consumptive poor.
It was built with two wings, one for men and one for women, separated by a chapel.
The beautiful garden is full of rare and interesting shrubs and trees.
There is a legend that Maximilian, later Emperor of Mexico, visited the Princess during her stay in Madeira and fell in love with her.
It is certainly true that he gave a sculpture of Our Lady of Sorrows, with a gold heart round her neck, to the hospice.
In 1880 an orphanage was built at the side of the Hospício, and there is now a primary school housed in a separate building at the back.
The Dowager Empress made her sister, Queen Mary of Sweden, a trustee of the hospice, and in 1986, on a visit to Madeira, the present King and Queen of Sweden visited the Hospício.
Down the hill and past the Rotunda do Infante (roundabout with fountains) and the statue of Dom Henrique (Prince Henry the Navigator), we pass the Centro Comercial do Infante, which has a large variety of shops and restaurants.
Opposite is the Barbeito Museum and Wine Lodge where examples of the large collection of works relating to Christopher Columbus can be seen.
On the right-hand side of the road (Avenida Arriaga) is the municipal theatre (Teatro Baltazar Dias).
It was opened in 1888, and inside it is reminiscent of the miniature theatre at Versailles.
There is a small circular auditorium with three tiers of boxes rising vertically around it.
Completely restored in the 1970s, it is in very good condition and there are also, in the building, a coffee shop, library and art gallery.
Across the road are the municipal gardens, formerly the site of the Convent of São Francisco which had a chapel lined with over 3,000 bones, mainly skulls and thigh bones, but no one seems to know exactly why.
In 1834 the monks, along with all other members of religious orders, were ejected from Portugal, and the monastery fell into ruins.
When it was demolished, two complete skeletons were found walled up in part of the building.
The coat of arms belonging to the fifteenth-century convent is to be found in the gardens.
A large variety of plants and trees feature here, including many native trees of Madeira — til, dragon tree and Madeira laurels.
At the Avenida Arriaga side of the gardens there is a small pond with ducks and fountains which are illuminated at Christmas time.
Avenida Arriaga was known in former times as the Passéio Público, and there was a tradition of people meeting, talking and walking here.
Until recently the central reservation had deteriorated into use as a car-park.
In the last few years, cars have been banned from parking in the central areas, and seats and plants have appeared in an attempt to return to tradition.
We pass the Madeira Wine Company Lodge, with its museum and tasting room, and the Tourist Office, which also has an art gallery attached, and then comes to the corner of Avenidas Arriaga and Zarco.
Here there is a large statue of João Gonçalves Zarco, by the Madeiran sculptor Francisco Franco, inaugurated in 1934.
Diagonally across from the Bank of Portugal is the ‘Golden Gate’.
Its restaurant and coffee bar are now on the first floor but once were on the  ground floor where the bank is now.
It used to be called ‘the Corner of the World’ as it was said that, seated at one of the tables on the pavement, a Madeiran would eventually see all the people he knew and meet people from all over the globe.
We now turn up Avenida Zarco past the Post Office, which has recently been re-modelled inside in glass and marble and with all the latest computer equipment — but the service has not improved and the stamps still have no glue.
On the other side of the street is the Regional Government Building which, from early times, was a hospital.
It has two very attractive old patios inside.
The alteration of the building into offices was approved in 1946, and the various services of the then Junta began there in 1953.
The Pátio and Vicentes Photographic Museum are reached by entrances in Avenida Zarco and in Rua da Carreira.
On entering the courtyard of the Pátio, one may be reminded of New Orleans by the verandah, supported on wrought-iron columns and with ornate roof valences, which is on three sides of the courtyard above the open-air café.
Vicente Gomes da Silva, born on 12 March 1827, was the first commercial photographer in Madeira and one of the first in Portugal.
On his return from studying photography in France, he founded his own business here in 1848.
In 1866 he was allowed to use the arms of the Empress Elisabeth of Austria, as photographer to Her Majesty.
In 1903 his son was given permission to use the Portuguese royal arms as photographer to the royal family.
In 1978 the Vicentes Studio was acquired by the Regional Government to make a photographic museum.
Helped by Mr Jorge Vicente, they have spent many years sorting and cataloguing the 100,000-plus glass negatives, and further collections from other old photography studios have been added to make a complete photographic history of the island and those who visited it.
Downstairs in the courtyard of the Pátio there is also a record shop, health food shop and a bookshop specializing in books in English and other languages.
The Pátio is an interesting oasis in which to rest from the hustle and bustle of Funchal.
We continue now along the Rua da Carreira, past the many small restaurants and bread and cake shops until we come to a street on the right called Rua do Quebra Costas which will take us to the English Church, hidden behind a high wall in a large garden.
Before the opening of this church in 1822, services had been conducted in the consul's house by the chaplains of ships anchored in the bay.
At a British Factory meeting in 1808 it was agreed to ask the British Consul-General to  arrange a suitable piece of land for building a British Protestant church.
In 1810 the Factory bought the piece of land and opened a fund to raise money for the building of a church.
Several ships contributed to the fund, and the subscription list included King George III, the Princess Royal, the Prince of Saxe-Coburg (later King Leopold I of the Belgians), the Duke of Wellington and the Duchess of Bedford.
The church was designed by Mr Henry Veitch and, according to the stipulations of Portuguese law at that time regarding Protestant places of worship, did not look like a church and had no bells.
The building looks like a library or similar public building with its classical portico and columns with Ionic capitals.
The squat cupola has fan-shaped windows, and the all-seeing eye in the centre of its ceiling suggests a certain Masonic influence.
The inside of the church is friendly and pleasing to the eye.
It is usually decorated with a selection of the flowers in season.
The organ dates from 1841 and was imported in pieces from Britain.
The church is attended by a minority of the foreign residents on the island and relies a great deal on the support it receives from visitors.
The chaplain is nearly always a retired clergyman from Britain.
The church is part of the diocese of the Bishop of Gibraltar in Europe who is based in London and whose diocese stretches from the Azores to Outer Mongolia and from the Canaries to Finland.
In the large pleasant garden there is a bronze bust of Philippa of Lancaster, daughter of John of Gaunt, Queen of Portugal and mother of Prince Henry the Navigator.
The church has a library (with over 2,500 books) that is open to visitors, and informal refreshments are served in aid of church funds after Sunday morning services.
The British Cemetery is a little further up the Rua da Carreira.
Before 1765 Protestants were not allowed to be buried on the island and had to be buried at sea off Garajau Point.
The earliest part of the cemetery, dating from 1765, was where the Largo do Visconde do Ribeiro Real now stands, all the coffins and tombstones being moved into the present cemetery between 1887 and 1890. (t is a beautiful place where visitors are welcome — just ring the bell at the gate.
It is interesting to see the gravestones of the numerous people who came here for a cure for consumptive diseases and remained for ever.
To the left of the gate in the Middle Burial Ground is a brass plaque in memory of the famous Reverend and Mrs Lowe.
On the hillside above is the Pico Fort (Castelo de São João de Pico) which was built during the Spanish occupation.
It has been used by the  Portuguese Admiralty as a radio station since 1925.
A few streets away from the English Church, at the corner of Rua Ivens and Rua do Conselheiro beside the municipal gardens, is the Scottish Kirk.
It dates from 1861 and was built to look like a church as, by that time, Portuguese law permitted Protestant churches to look like places of worship.
If we go back up to the corner of Rua de Carreira and Avenida Zarco and go up Rua das Pretas, we come to the Church of São Pedro which was completed in 1598 and then extensively restored in 1747–8, when the front was altered.
It contains some fine seventeenth-century coloured glazed tiles.
The chancel was built in 173 3.
Across from the church are the Municipal Museum and Aquarium, in a fine old Portuguese house which used to be the home of the Count of Ribeiro Real.
It has a collection of the fish to be found in the waters around Madeira in the aquarium downstairs.
Upstairs are examples of birds, fauna and geological specimens from the island.
The building also houses the Regional Archives.
Between the museum and the Church of São Pedro is a short, steep hill (Calçada de Santa Clara).
A little way up on the left hand side is the Museum Dr Frederico Freitas where can be seen a large exhibition of engravings and porcelain.
Near the top, on the right-hand side, we see a very impressive wrought-iron balcony which is triangular in shape.
This used to be the Hotel Santa Clara but is now used by telephone engineers.
Across the road is the Convent of Santa Clara which was built at the end of the fifteenth century and rebuilt in the  seventeenth century.
It has very interesting old cloisters built in the fifteenth century by order of Zarco's son, João Gonçalves da Cãmara.
In the body of the adjoining church you will find the impressive tomb of Martim Mendes Vasconselos, son-in-law of Zarco.
The tombs of the first three governors of Madeira, including that of the discoverer and first governor João Gonçalves Zarco, still exist under the high altar.
Nothing remains of the original chapel erected by Zarco.
Foremost among the treasures of Santa Clara is the collection of old tiles (‘azulejos’): Hispano-Arabic, Baroque and Flemish.
H.N. Coleridge in his book Six Months in the West Indies (1825) tells the story of a young nun, Maria Clementina, the youngest child of Pedro Anostinho, a well-to-do person, born in Madeira.
She was said to be the most beautiful girl in the whole island, with a fair complexion, blue eyes and golden-brown hair.
She entered the convent at the age of eighteen, at the wish of her Parents, and took the veil the following year.
One year later, Constitutional Government was established in Portugal, and the  Cortes (Parliament) ordered the doors of all religious houses to be thrown open.
Maria was released from the convent and fell in love with a dashing Portuguese officer.
The wedding had to be postponed because she became ill, and before it could take place, the King dissolved Parliament and revoked its laws.
Heartbroken, Maria had to return to the convent and remain a nun for the rest of her life.
When Coleridge saw her, she was twenty-one years old.
She died in 1850, having been allowed to leave the convent for the last few months of her life to be nursed by her sisters.
Many foreign visitors, intrigued by her story, used to visit Maria Clementina.
Just above the Santa Clara Convent is the Museum of Quinta das Cruzes, on the site where João Gonçalves Zarco is thought to have had his house.
The present building dates from the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries and was rebuilt in the early nineteenth century.
It was the home of the Lomelino family, wine-shippers of Genoese origin.
The rooms of the museum are furnished in the style of the period, with important collections of authentic period furniture, silver, china and art.
There are Flemish paintings, British furniture (including Chippendale and Hepplewhite), Portuguese colonial furniture and artefacts, Oriental pieces and lithographs of Madeira.
In the cellars are cupboards which are unusual in that they are made of the wood from the boxes used in the sugar trade with Brazil.
The whole collection shows the many influences on the island of Madeira in the past.
The gardens contain many trees and a large collection of orchids, as well as old tombstones, Manueline windows and a fifteenth-century pillory.
We retrace our steps back down Calçada do Pico and Rua das Pretas and turn left along Rua Câmara Pestana to the Municipal Square (Praça do Municipio).
On the left are the Church of Saint John the Baptist and the former Jesuit College (the Colégio).
The Jesuits came to Madeira in 1569 and started to construct a church, monastery and college.
Although it was begun before the end of the sixteenth century, it was still under construction in 1641.
The Colégio Church has a baroque façade, with four marble statues of saints of the Society of Jesus set into it.
Inside it is richly decorated and of the typical open style dictated by the Jesuit Order.
The gilded retable behind the high altar dates from 1660.
After the expulsion of the Jesuits from Portugal in 1759, the building became used as a barracks, and British troops were stationed here during the occupation of the island.
Later the college became a school, and it is now used for the embryo of a university for the island.
At the head of the municipal square is the City Hall (Câmara Municipal) which was built as a private residence for the Conde (Count) de Carvalhal at the end of the eighteenth century.
It has an agreeable courtyard with an elegant staircase and houses a small museum dealing with the history of Funchal.
By 1863 the building was rented by the City Council of Funchal.
Across the square from the Colégio Church is the Museum of Sacred Art (Museu de Arte Sacra), with its entrance just round the corner in Rua do Bispo.
Formerly the bishop's palace, it was built in 1600 and rebuilt between 1748 and 1751.
Since 1955 it has been used as a museum and now houses many of the best religious paintings, sculptures and vestments from the island's churches, including several fifteenth- and sixteenth-century Flemish works, said to have been obtained in exchange for sugar shipped from Funchal.
Many of the paintings have been skilfully restored and are well displayed.
We will confine ourselves here to mentioning just four of the works on display.
The Triptych of St James and St Philip is sixteenth-century oil on wood.
The central panel shows the two saints, and the two side panels the family of Simon Gonçalves da Câmara (grandson of Zarco) who commissioned the painting.
The Adoration of the Magi is sixteenth-century oil on wood and is probably attributable to the Portuguese master Grão Vasco.
This shows Mary, with the baby Jesus on her lap, and Joseph, with the richly dressed three kings.
The painting was given to Machico church by Branca Teixeira, wife of Tristão Vaz, one of the discoverers of Madeira.
The Triptych of the Descent from the Cross shows Christ being taken down from the cross on the central panel.
The two side panels show Simon Acciaiuoli and his wife (the commissioners of the painting), accompanied by their patron saint.
The fifteenth/sixteenth-century painting of Santana and São Joaquim was originally in Madalena do Mar.
It is thought that the saints were modelled on Henrique Alemão (King Ladislau of Poland — see p.87) and his wife, Senhora Anes, who commissioned the painting.
The sculptures are almost entirely of Flemish origin and date from as early as the sixteenth century.
The very rich religious vestments on display date from the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries and were used for many different ceremonies.
There are also a number of gold and silver pieces from the cathedral treasury.
One outstanding exhibit is the silver-gilt processional cross which was given by King Manuel I who had ordered the construction of Funchal Cathedral and under whose patronage Vasco da Gama discovered India.
We continue along Rua do Bispo and down Rua de João Tavira to the  cathedral (Sé).
Occupying a prominent position in the centre of Funchal, the cathedral was built between 1485 and 1514 by two master builders from Portugal, Gil Eanes and Pero Annes.
The style is early Gothic, the combination of whitewashed walls and dark red basalt (local stone) being simple but imposing.
The portal arch has the Portuguese royal arms on top and a rose window above it.
At one stage two large windows were let into the wall each side of the rose window to give more light, but these were removed when the cathedral was restored in the early part of this century as they were not in keeping with the original design.
The triangular tower has chequered blue-and-white tiles.
The present clock, replacing an earlier one, was presented by Dr Michael Grabham in 1922, and the blessing of the clock was attended by Charles, ex-Emperor of Austria.
The designs in the ceiling of the nave are in the mudejar style — carved cedar or juniper wood (the various descriptions seem unable to agree on which) encrusted with ivory workings in geometric designs.
The carvings depict exotic ideas and discoveries — strange animals, flowers, trees and a round world instead of a flat one.
The stalls, carved in cedar, date from the seventeenth century.
There are many interesting paintings with a medieval theme, by Portuguese artists, behind the high altar.
The sixteenth-century Sacramento Chapel has some interesting work in wood and marble.
The acoustics are particularly good, and in recent years the cathedral has played host to International Bach Concerts in June.
Columbus's House was in the part of Funchal near the cathedral and belonged to Jean d'Esmanault (João Esmeraldo) a Flemish merchant.
There is, in fact, no proof that Christopher Columbus did stay in the house, only tradition.
The house was demolished in 1877, and the windows are preserved in the garden of the Quinta Palmeira.
There are plans to re-site the windows in a square in Funchal, between the cathedral and the sea.
A walk along Avenida das Comunidades Madeirenses — or Avenida do Mar, its former and more popular name — takes us along the sea shore from the foot of the Santa Catarina Gardens to the oldest part of Funchal.
The promenade is being improved and the road being made into a dual carriageway.
At the start of the promenade is a kiosk (a recent construction, based on an old tradition as there were several kiosks in Funchal), open-air café, gardens and seats.
Below us on this first section is the recently opened yacht marina, a very pleasant area to stroll round if you are at all interested in boats.
There are yachts from Madeira berthed here, as well as from most European countries and from North America, for Madeira is the natural  stopping place for yachts en route to and from North America, the Caribbean and Europe.
Before the opening of this new marina, yachts had to detour to the south to the Canaries.
The marina is a colourful sight and has shops and restaurants.
Along one side is the quay, once known as the ‘Entrada da Cidade’(Entrance to the City) with fountains and garden at its beginning, still a popular place to promenade.
On the other side of the quay is the Beatles Boat Restaurant, a large boat which once belonged to the Beatles pop group which arrived in Madeira in a very sorry state but has now been renovated and, along with many small boats, forms an interesting open-air restaurant complex.
Across the main road is the Palácio de São Lourenço.
Construction of this was begun in the first half of the sixteenth century by the Donatory Captain Simão Gonçalves da Câmara.
In 1566 it was still incomplete and easily fell to the French corsairs who attacked Funchal in that year.
At the end of the sixteenth and beginning of the seventeenth century, in the years of Spanish rule, the fort was completed.
Today it is one of the best-preserved examples of Portuguese fortifications.
It still maintains the main architectural design of the original, although there have been some alterations — for example, cutting off part of the north bulwark and the covering of the Manueline towers.
In the eighteenth century it ceased to be needed as a fortress in the military sense, and in the latter part of that century the conversion of the inside into a palace was begun.
It has lofty and spacious reception rooms and a ballroom and has been declared a national monument.
Unfortunately, it is not open to the public.
In the gardens on the sea front, just past the Beatles Boat, are a monument to the War Dead, 1914–18, and a monument to the Madeiran Emigrant.
Recently re-erected nearby is the base of the Pillar of Banger which was rediscovered during road works.
This was an old crane tower built on the shore by John Light Banger, an Englishman, in 1798 to facilitate the unloading of ships.
Soon after it was built, it was left high and dry by a storm and thereafter was used as a signalling tower by Blandy's.
It was Pulled down in 1939 when the Central Government built Avenida do Mar.
On the landward side of the Avenida is the Old Customs House (Alfândega) which has been converted into a new home for the Regional Parliament.
The old Customs House was built at the end of the fifteenth century, having been started around the time Funchal first had its own customs post in 1477.
The first-floor room has one of the finest ceilings in Portugal, made of wood carved and painted with shell volutes in the corners.
It is open to debate whether the small round building built in front as part of the  Regional Government complex detracts from the renovated old building.
The far end of Avenida do Mar is rather a mess, with parked buses, cars and trucks together with fishermen's huts and boats.
Beyond this, and to the left, is the Old Town, where Funchal began.
It is now largely restored into an area of restaurants and bars, with narrow cobbled streets.
This is a good place to rest for lunch or to visit for an evening out, for there is often live music in the restaurants and bars — folk,fado and jazz are all provided for.
Standing in the old town is the Corpo Santo Chapel, dating from the sixteenth century, which is open all day for people to view the interior.
Beyond the chapel and down to the right is the Fort of São Tiago, named after the patron saint of Funchal.
This small fort dates from 1614 and is shortly to be opened to the public as a military museum.
A colourful ending to our tour of central Funchal would be the market at the end of Rua Dr Fernão d'Ornelas.
Fruit and vegetables are on the ground and first floors, with flush on the floor below.
It is a very interesting, if noisy, place in which to view the wide variety of produce available and to observe the fishermen as they sell their daily catch of espada and tunny.
Shopping in Funchal
Shopping in Funchal for gifts can be a very enjoyable Part of your holiday.
The tourist bazaars stock a wide variety of embroidery, tapestry, wicker, ceramics, wine and craft items, as well as Postcards and foreign newspapers.
They will often invite you in to see their stock, and if you make a purchase you may be rewarded with a glass of madeira wine.
There are also specialist shops selling only embroidery or wicker.
These usually belong to one of the factories, many of which are open to visitors.
Flowers are also a popular buy and there are a number of flower shops as well as flower-sellers in the market and by the cathedral.
Flowers such as strelitzias, anthuriums and orchids last a very long time and are well worth taking home — some flower shops will pack them specially for export.
During the orchid season you can visit the orchid houses at Quinta da Boa Vista of Mrs Betty Garton, one of the leading growers, and see the large variety of orchids available.
Also well worth a visit is the Casa do Turista, located behind the municipal theatre, where, laid out in rooms typical of a Madeiran quinta , you will see embroidery, table decorations, flower arrangements and ceramics, as you would use them in your own home.
The Casa do Turista also has a section with old madeiras and port wines.
Shopping for more mundane items in Funchal can be more of a problem.
There are no real department stores as such, most shops being  small and specialized.
You can buy just about everything you ever need in Funchal, but you may have to search to find it — many shops may just recently have run out of the very product you want, so that you have to search for a shop which still has old stock until more is imported.
Or you may return to where you bought an item and the assistant (who served you last time) will tell you that this shop has never stocked whatever it is.
Equally well, rather than disappoint you, the assistant may say (hat the item is not in stock at present but may be in next week — after several weeks of returning to ask about it, you may suddenly realize that the item never is coming in.
As you walk through the streets of Funchal, particularly the small, narrow, side streets, you can see many artisans practising crafts now rarely seen in the mass-production economies of northern Europe and North America.
These craftsmen sit in the open doorways of their small workshops — the tinsmith, the cabinetmaker, the french polisher and the wrought-iron worker.
Funchal: the Environs
Just outside the city centre, on the way up to Reid's Hotel, turn right up Rua do Dr Pita just after the bridge.
A short way up, on the right-hand side, is Quinta Magnolia.
Until 1980, this was the British Country Club; then it was taken over by the Regional Government and reverted to its original name, being opened as a Public park.
The house was built by T.H. March (the then American Consul) who was an avid collector of plants and at the beginning of this century it was the home of Dr Herbert Watney, a great horticulturist.
There is a valuable collection of Palm trees and exotic plants in the gardens which are very spacious and contain a large open-air swimming pool, tennis and squash courts, a keep-fit track and a children's play area.
Just at the back of Quinta Magnolia is a small British school which provides a full-time British-style education for foreign and Portuguese children.
The original house of Quinta Magnolia has recently been restored and is now Part of the Hotel School.
A very good-value lunch can be enjoyed here, cooked and served to a high standard by the students of the school.
Past Reid's along Estrada Monumental, going out of Funchal, and down to the left is the lido complex.
There are very large sun bathing terraces two swimming pools, sea-bathing, showers, changing-rooms and restaurants in this modern complex.
Owned by the municipality of Funchal, the whole facility is kept spotlessly clean.
There is a small entrance charge and it is well worth a visit.
A short bus or taxi ride from the city centre takes you to the Botanical Gardens which, until 1936, were the Quinta do Bom Successo residence of the Reid family.
Opened in 1960, the gardens portray a living museum of plants and trees.
There is a herbarium, as well as a laboratory concerned with scientific research and investigation into plants and crop production.
The gardens are situated between 200 and 350m above sea-level and cover a large area.
There are terraces and greenhouses with many rare and indigenous plants, all of which are labelled in Portuguese and Latin.
There is a terrace with ornamental pools and café which affords excellent views over Funchal, together with a recently opened exhibition of exotic birds in the adjacent ‘Jardim dos Louros’, it is a good half day excursion.
If you are fond of flowers and gardens, you must not miss a visit to the gardens of Quinta do Palheiro.
Situated eight kilometres out of the centre of Funchal on the Camacha road, they can be reached by bus or taxi.
The gardens are open in the morning on weekdays, except for public holidays.
The gardens were laid out in the eighteenth century by a French landscape gardener for the then owner and founder, the first Conde de Carvalhal.
In 1828 he had to flee to Britain when the island was occupied by Miguelist troops but he returned to Madeira in 1834, influenced by British landscape gardening ideas.
He died in 1837 and left all his assets to his nephew, who was very extravagant.
The property was bought by the Blandy family in 1884, and over the years they have farmed the estate and improved the gardens.
Mildred Blandy, mother of the present owner, lovingly supervised the gardens for many years and introduced many plants, many of them (such as Proteas) from South Africa.
A nice half-day excursion would be to Monte and Terreiro da Luta, still within the city of Funchal but a bus or a taxi ride up the hillside at the back of the city.
Monte is six kilometres from Funchal at an altitude of 550m.
The first church here was built by Adão Gonçalves Ferreira (son of Gonçalo Ayres Ferreira who came to the island with Zarco).
In 1741–7 a new church was built but it was destroyed by earthquake in 1748.
In 1818 a new Church of Nossa Senhora da Incarnação (or do Monte) was consecrated.
It is set on a platform reached by seventy-four basalt steps, and its tall twin white towers, set each side of the main doorway, make it a landmark from Funchal way below.
The Emperor Charles I of Austria and IV of Hungary was buried here on 5 April 1922.
He and his wife Zita had arrived in Madeira on 19 November 1921 aboard the British cruiser Cardiff .
They lived initially in Vila Victoria, near to and belonging to Reid's, and then moved up to Quinta Gordon (also known as Quinta de  Monte), in Monte at the invitation of the owner, Luis da Rocha Machado.
This quinta was originally built in the nineteenth century by an Englishman, James David Gordon.
It is now planned to house the new University of Madeira in the quinta and its beautiful gardens.
There are many large quintas in Monte as it used to be favoured by the rich who moved up to their summer houses when it became too hot and humid in Funchal.
George Bernard Shaw being taught to dance by Max Rinder at Reid's Hotel, 30 December 1924
Sir Winston Churchill at Câmara de Lobos, January 1950
Sarah Bernhardt (1845–1923), the French actress, in a hammock
The Casino Park Hotel and the Casino
The entrance to the Savoy Hotel
The Monte toboggan — a form of transport unique to Madeira
The Madeira Wine Company's Lodge in Funchal
The superbly placed Reid's Hotel and gardens
Sunbathing at the Sheraton Hotel
Machico — where the first settlers landed
Funchal from the Santa Catarina Gardens
The fishing village of Câmara de Lobos
The Palace of São Lourenço
Manueline windows in the garden of Quinta das Cruzes
In the main square (Largo do Fonte) in Monte there is a shrine with the Virgin of Monte in it, built in 1897 to replace the original one which had been destroyed when one of the large chestnut trees fell on it.
The gardens were started in 1894 and have been gradually extended since then.
To one side of the square is the former railway station and the bridge over the gardens is a former railway bridge — Monte station was opened in 1894, but the short-lived railway from Funchal closed in 1939.
In 1903 a German syndicate began building the present sanatorium and the Hospital of Marmeleiros.
At first it appeared a good development for the island — the Germans promised to look after poor patients with tuberculosis and, in return, were given many favourable concessions such as duty-free importation of equipment and the right to expropriate land.
However, this turned out to be, in reality, another part of Kaiser Wilhelm's expansionist policy, so the concessions were cancelled in 1905 and in 1914, when Portugal joined in the First World War, all German interests were taken over by the Portuguese Government.
The sanatorium was opened only in 1941.
Terreiro da Luta (nine kilometres from Funchal at an elevation of 876m) is reached after leaving Monte and following the road through the layers of eucalyptus trees and into the level where coniferous trees commence.
This was the terminus of the railway from Funchal, and the Chalet-Restaurant Esplanade was built by the railway company, having been opened in 1912.
This has long been a very popular venue for cruise-ship parties, the descent to Monte or to Funchal being made by toboggan.
(See p.59.)
Somewhere in the middle of the fifteenth century, legend has it that a little girl was tending sheep here when a young lady came to play with her.
Her parents did not believe her story but, when she said it had happened again, her father secretly observed her.
He did not see the young lady but found a small sculptured image of Our Lady.
This was considered to have been a miracle, and the statue of Our Lady of Monte now stands in the centre of the high altar of the church in Monte.
In 1917, after the bombing of Funchal by the Germans, a large procession of people from all over the island walked to Monte to pray for  peace, and the local priest promised in his prayers that, if peace came, he would erect a monument to Our Lady of Monte.
After the war the site for the statue was chosen at Terreiro da Luta, near the Fonte da Telha where the Virgin was said to have appeared to the little shepherdess.
The statue is 5.5m high and weighs 20 tonnes.
Twenty thousand people were present at its inauguration in August 1927.
In November 1927 it took 300 men some six hours to carry the giant rosary which surrounds the statue up from Santo António, in Funchal.
The rosary is made of stones from the Santo António river and anchor chains from the ships torpedoed in Funchal Bay during the First World War.
Funchal by night
After-dinner entertainment is still largely centred around the hotels.
Most have their own band which plays a wide selection of music for dancing.
The larger hotels provide an occasional cabaret, and most hotels are visited on a regular one or two nights a week basis by Madeiran folk-dancing groups.
Also Popular are visits by fado (Portuguese ballad) singers and by instrumentalists who play the mandolin.
Apart from special occasions, this completes the hotel picture.
However, the Carlton Hotel possesses a fine modern discothèque in its nightclub complete with laser beams, flashing lights and coloured smoke.
The Casino houses a panoramic restaurant on the top floor, complete with floorshow and dancing.
On the lower floors, the Casino gambling rooms are open until 3 a.m.
There is also a discothèque in the basement of this modern building.
Some restaurants in the old town feature musical entertainment while you are dining, including fado and piano music.
Behind the Savoy Hotel, in and around the Rua da Imperatriz D. Amelia, you can find a number of pleasant cocktail and piano bars that are open until the early hours, including the Prince Albert Pub which is a replica of a Victorian pub, complete with Victorian memorabilia.
There are a number of pub discothèques in Funchal for the energetic; they tend to be more frequented by local people than by tourists.
People, Folklore and Festivals
The Madeiran is an amalgam of descent from the various areas of northern Portugal and the central area around the Alentejo, as well as southern types from the Algarve, together with Moorish influence from the days of the slaves.
Over generations of intermarriage, this has produced the Madeiran of today with his own personality and pronunciation of Portuguese words.
Like most Portuguese people, the Madeiran is friendly and polite and, on occasions, very formal.
Unless the Madeiran is addressing a close friend or member of his family, he always uses the third person in speech.
Formal letters too always appear excessively polite and somewhat ‘flowery’ to the average British reader.
Family unity is very strong in Madeira, not just amongst the immediate family, but through numerous cousins, aunts and uncles.
In the street, when greeting each other as friends or family, there is much handshaking and backslapping between the men and kissing on both cheeks between women, and between men and women.
The Madeiran is very talkative with his friends and family.
The coffee bars are full in the late afternoon with discussions about football, politics and the family.
Often the women sit separately from the men and discuss their own affairs.
This is especially noticeable at cocktail and dinner parties, and it is still not unusual for the ladies to move to a separate room after dinner.
Since the Revolution in 1974, women have gradually become more involved in the decision-making processes, and no longer are they confined to the teaching and nursing professions.
There are more and more women architects, engineers, journalists, doctors and lawyers.
In the country districts a woman's life is not easy.
Apart from looking after the home and having babies, she is still expected to do most of the manual work on the land as her husband may be working abroad or in Funchal or just resting.
Before television and feminine liberation, when the men were out drinking or at football, the women on their off-duty moments were usually to be seen at the window, where their social life was to be found.
The Portuguese verb janelar (‘to window’) precisely  reflects this condition of the woman separated from social life, which she knew only from her window.
The Madeiran changes personality when he is driving and resembles a rally driver or a laid-back Californian, with one arm out of the window dangling a cigarette.
It is often necessary to drive with close attention to the car in front, especially if the driver appears to have had a little too much wine or is having a highly excited conversation with his fellow passengers and waving his arms about.
It is essential in these cases to toot before overtaking.
The Madeiran does, however, excel at parking his car in what looks to be an impossible place.
Like most people outside Britain, the Madeiran does not like queueing.
When entering shops it is essential to make a mental note of who is in front of you, and it is the custom when entering a shop to ask if they have the items you want in stock to avoid a pointless wait.
When the assistant is serving you, he may also be serving two or three other people at the same time and holding a conversation with yet another.
When you have finally made your purchase, it is nearly always wrapped up in brown paper and carefully tied with string or something more elaborate.
If your purchase is to be a gift, the assistant will normally offer to giftwrap it for you for no extra charge.
Isabella da França states in her book Journal of a Visit to Madeira and Portugal 1853–54 :
The system of washing here is rather different from ours in England…
It is always done in a running stream…the rivers contain in ordinary weather but a very small stream of water, trickling through an immense mass of rocks of all sizes.
Here the washerwomen find, or sometimes make, by moving some of the smaller stones, a kind of basin through which the water flows, and in which they can dip the linen.
When wet they twist it like a rope, and beat some large stone with it, repeating the operation till it is quite clean.
If very dirty they lay it in the stream, securing it with a large stone, and let the water flow through it for some time, after which they proceed as before…the linen is spread upon the rocks in the river, or the walls near at hand, and secured, like everything else by a stone at each corner…
The linen when dry is as white as snow.
Today, in the country, you are more than likely to see women still washing in this way, although they now use lixivia (bleach), sold in bright plastic bottles which, empty and discarded, can often be seen in a river bed or floating out to sea.
The maids in houses also wash up under running water, using all the hot water and soap and running up large electricity bills.
Even if wages are relatively cheap, electricity is not.
At one time each village had its own traditional dress, and it was possible to see the influences of different regions of mainland Portugal, particularly the Minho district, on the women's clothing.
Today the only traditional costumes to be seen are those worn by the flower-sellers and folk dancers.
Women wear a wide red woollen skirt with multi-coloured vertical stripes and a band round the hem, a white blouse with wide elbow-length sleeves, a red embroidered waistcoat, and a small red woollen cloak over one or both shoulders.
The traditional costume of the men is white baggy knee-length trousers, a white long-sleeved and open-necked shirt with a soft collar and a red sash at the waist.
Both men and women wear the carapuça , a small dark blue cap, with red trimming and a long stalk in the middle.
In the last century the length of the stalk varied with the status and elegance of the wearer, although the upper classes always wore the European fashions of the day.
On their feet both men and women wear half-length boots of yellow calfskin trimmed with a red stripe on the turned-down uppers.
One traditional piece of clothing still very much used throughout the countryside, Particularly by the men, is a knitted conical cap with ear flaps (barrete de lã ).
Traditionally this was always natural brown or cream wool, but bright colours are sometimes used nowadays.
Probably the best known Madeira folk dance group is that from Camacha, which was founded in 1948 under Dr Alfredo Ferreira de Nóbrega.
This group is very well travelled and has Appeared at many international folk-dancing events.
They also, as do the other groups, regularly perform in the hotels and some typical restaurants in the island.
Folk dancing is not just a tourist attraction: it is popular amongst all Madeirans, whatever their social background and they start at a very early age to learn the dance steps.
Some of the most well-known folk dances are:
Dance of Ponta do Sol: The dancers move in a circle, taking short steps with their heads bowed in the manner of chained slaves.
This dance is named after Ponta do Sol where there were many Moorish and African slaves in the early days of colonization.
Moorish Dance: This is one of the oldest Madeiran folk dances.
It was introduced to the island by the Moorish slaves of the early colonists.
Heavy Dance: This is a very old dance with music and rhythm reminiscent of African dances and denotes the crushing of grapes with the feet.
Dance of the Romarias:Romaria is the name given to people travelling to church festivals, often many miles across the island.
People travelled in groups, dancing and singing as they went.
The Carrier's Dance: Of all the working dances, this one is the most characteristic and represents men being cheered along by music as they carry fully laden baskets or other heavy loads on their shoulders.
Musical instruments typical of Madeira are on exhibition at the Instituto de Bordado, Tapeçarias e Artesanato in Rua Visconde Anadia.
Although traditional, these instruments are still used to accompany folk dances today.
The rajão is a five-stringed instrument about 66cm long.
It is strung in the same way as a viola and usually has two wire and three gut strings.
It was taken by Madeiran emigrants to various parts of the world, including the Hawaiian islands, where it has become the Hawaiian ukelele.
The viola is 87cm long and is thought originally to have had twelve strings, but now only has nine wire strings.
It is of Arab origin.
The braguinha has four gut strings, although sometimes the first string is wire to give a more strident tone.
This is a very popular instrument which gives a lively and happy sound and is always used to accompany singing.
The brinquinho is a strange but attractive instrument.
Wooden dolls are slid up and down a pole in time with the music, and castanets and bells, on the dolls' backs, make a percussion sound.
The bombo is a small drum which is hit with a leather-bound stick.
The reco-reco consists of pieces of wood on a string which make a sound rather like someone playing the washboard.
Normally a mouth organ or a piano accordion accompanies the music and plays the melody.
The singing is full of strident, screechy voices, and one need never worry about being out of tune in Madeiran folk singing.
Fado is music with Arabic roots which comes from continental Portugal.
This very popular music with its haunting, melancholy and often monotonous melodies is sung in Madeira but has never become as popular here as it is in Portugal.
The songs usually have as themes lamentation, fate, disgrace, love, jealousy, misadventure or saudades , a virtually untranslatable word meaning a mixture of fondness and nostalgia.
Sung originally by ruffians or sailors, the fado of the street is simple accompanied song spontaneously composed, the theme of which is commonly love of mother, town, the sea, etc.
Intellectual fado is a more stylized form and is sung in the salons and by the students of Lisbon and Coimbra Universities.
Sometimes accompanied by a guitar but more often by mandolins, the singer usually has a tremulous voice powerful enough not to need microphones.
The literature of Madeira is dominated, as is the literature of Portugal, by the Lusiads of Luis de Camões.
These stories of the discoveries made by the Portuguese explorers and told in lyric form were published in 1572.
Camões is the Shakespeare of Portugal and 10 June is a public holiday in honour of him and of Portugal.
Also very important are the writings of Fernando Pessoa, dating from the early part of this century.
The flower-sellers outside the Cathedral
Funchal from the harbour
The Municipal Theatre from the Public Gardens
Magnificent poinsettias
En route from Encumeada to Serra de Água
Quinta Magnolia — the ideal setting for lunch or afternoon tea
The swimming-pool and palm trees at Quinta Magnolia
Madeiran literature has mainly concentrated on the legends and reminiscences of the past.
Horacio Bento Gouveia's writings include romantic novels set in Madeira and, although he died a few years ago now, he remains the best known of Madeiran writers.
In Madeira, as in Portugal, poetry is very much alive and popular and there are a number of modern poets who publish occasional volumes of poetry, much of it about Madeira.
Poems are often published in the daily and weekly newspapers and the Regional Directorate of Cultural Affairs (Direcção Regional dos Assuntos Culturais or DRAC) publishes a wide variety of books on Madeira covering history, folklore, reminiscences and poetry.
These are, however, all in Portuguese.
Art and art collecting are both very popular in Madeira.
There are a number of foreign painters resident in the island, although none is internationally well known.
There is also a strong nucleus of contemporary artists centred around the Art College of Madeira (Instituto Superior de Artes Plasticas da Madeira — ISAPM) which has students from Madeira and Portugal taking courses in art, sculpture, graphics and visual art.
The tourist office and the local artists' community are keen to promote art and there are often exhibitions of some art form in the theatre or the tourist office's art gallery.
There are many collectors of modern and classical art in the island.
Paintings and old prints of Madeira are always sought after and sometimes change hands for high prices.
Until their dissolution in 1832, the Militia was the most numerous body in the archipelago.
They were organized into fourteen sections, each under the command of a captain and a sergeant-major, both of whom were chosen by the municipal council from amongst the most important landowners in the region.
The phasing-out of the Militia was not a speedy affair.
In 1844 one auxiliary corps of artillery still stood guard on the city walls at night, and they disturbed many people with their noisy alerts.
On 29 June 1850 Funchal was awoken in the morning by the sound of music.
As the people opened their doors and windows, they saw several uniformed men with four cannons.
They gave a 21-gun salute, played hymns and went on board a coastal yacht, where they spent most of the day alternately at anchor or sailing.
The Squadrons of Land Sailors (Esquadras de Navegação Terrestre ) were formed out of nostalgia for the military service.
They had their own uniforms and military codes, and belonging to one of the squadrons  became a popular Sunday pastime.
The Submarine Squadron (Esquadra Submarina de Navegação Terrestre ) was the oldest, formed in 1880 by Eduardo Sarsfield, its Admiral.
They had many officers, and the uniforms were similar to those of the Portuguese Royal Navy — black uniforms (whites in summer), gold epaulettes or gold braid on both sleeves and gold anchors woven on black cloth on the fronts of their caps.
The houses and quintas of the high-ranking officers became the squadron's warships.
There, gazing out from the balconies and look-out points, they imagined they were on board frigates and corvettes and that they had cannons and decks.
They had a mast on which they raised flags to signal coded orders and instructions.
In the grounds of these houses (many of which displayed an old cannon), the men were instructed in marching and the handling of weapons, and bands rehearsed and played.
There was always much conviviality and enjoyment and plenty to eat and drink.
Sometimes, on Sundays and other holidays, the squadron marched in force, fully armed, through the city to join in some public ceremony or to some quinta on the outskirts of Funchal where dinner awaited them.
At times they imagined they were a disembarked army and went to Santa Cruz or Machico, which they bombarded and took.
They then marched through the village, much to the interest and perhaps fear of the villagers.
Religious festivals (festas ) are held throughout the year.
Nearly every church holds two or three festas a year.
Some are local saint's days, others are more important and attract people from all over the island.
For the festa , the church, churchyard and the street leading to them are all gaily decorated with flags — some are coloured striped flags and others are white with red crosses like those used on the sails of Henry the Navigator's ships.
The poles along the street are decorated with greenery and festoons of paper flowers, and coloured lights cross the street from pole to pole.
The church is also usually decorated with lights.
In the day, there is usually a religious procession consisting of the religious image, the priests, members of the church and other people.
Sometimes the streets are decorated with flower petals, although this custom is dying out.
Sometimes xerolas (vegetables and/or fruits, often in the shape of a gigantic ball and strung on a pole which is carried on the shoulders of two men) are carried in the procession.
There are stalls selling sweets, cakes,espetada and wine.
The silver band plays and there is dancing.
Often there are dodgem cars too.
Fire crackers are let off during the day.
There is much conviviality and noise.
The island has always been predominantly Roman Catholic, ever since the days of the first settlers, and it is still so today.
However, since the  1974 Revolution there has been a weakening of the traditionally very strong family ties and a drift away from the Church, particularly among the young and the intelligencia of Funchal.
The influence of the Church is still very strong among the less well-off in the countryside where it is often allied to superstition.
There are minor followings for other Churches such as Church of England, Baptist, Presbyterian and Seventh Day Adventist as well as some Jehovah's Witnesses and Mormons.
As is increasingly true everywhere, many of the old customs in Madeira are dying out.
However, there are some which remain strong.
On public holidays, including the major religious festivals, carpets are hung over the balconies of public buildings and give a festive air.
Bonfires are lit after sunset on the feasts of Santo António (13 June), São João (24 June) and São Pedro (29 June).
People often still follow the rather dangerous custom of jumping over these bonfires, especially on the feast of São João.
On the eve of the 24 June names are written on paper, folded and put in a bowl of water.
The next day, if one is open, it will show the name of the future spouse.
1 November (All Saints' Day) is Pão-por-Deus (‘Bread for God’) when traditionally bread was given to the poor in the city to obtain a blessing on the souls of the departed.
This has now become a day when children are given sweets, titbits and fruit.
8 December, the Feast of the Immaculate Conception, is the day when the Christmas preparations begin.
The bolo de mel is made, the pig is killed and its blood collected, and small pots of lentils, wheat, maize, barley or any other cereal are planted.
Some days before Christmas, or even on Christmas Eve, the lapinha (grotto) is made.
Rocks are grouped together and then crushed paper is put on top of them and painted, to form the grotto.
The figures of the main characters of the Nativity are then placed on it along with the pots of cereals, now full of green sprouts which symbolize fertility and plenty for the coming year.
Also placed on the lapinha are favourite toys (however old and battered), fruits and nuts and models of Madeiran houses.
The whole thing is usually lit in some way, be it with a night light, small oil lamp or Christmas tree lights.
Christmas trees and other Christmas decorations are popular but the lapinha retains its importance in the home and is also to be found in churches, hotels and restaurants.