

CONTENTS
REGULARS
Editorial The election is a battle between social conscience and social evil
Shoreditch, Roger Woddis
Diary A rhinologically challenged Sean French notes that what journalists leave out is as important as what they put in
John Cole Keep shoving till the end: the most exciting campaign in years hangs in the balance
John Pilger Labour shares the Tories' great power pretensions
Political sketch Edward Pearce is footsore, wet through and feverish
30 Letters
31 Fringe benefits Colin Ward gets away from it all in Dartington
45 Endgames Competition, Cryptic Quiz, Chess
55 Backchat Susan Hayes on Choice
55 Forteana Paul Sieveking goes up in large clouds
FEATURES
The man without substance Sarah Baxter on the hollowness of Majorism
Passive wanking Vicky Hutchings marches off with Class War, and gets a big surprise
100 reasons not to vote Tory Ships have gone down, taxes have gone up, the Home Secretary got a criminal record, John Major said a lot of silly things.
Jolyon Jenkins and Sarah Baxter dish up the dirt
Invisible voters A million people could lose their vote because of mental disability, say Dr Billie Shepperdson and Agnes Fletcher.
Mike George looks at the plight of the physically disabled
Campaign trail diary Mat Coward
At the hustings Dave Hill
New myths for old Paul Hockenos on the past that eastern democracy would rather forget
A severe hangover Whoever runs the economy after the election has a job on their hands.
Wynne Godley assesses the prospects
Send in the clowns Beadle loses the battle at Bognor to the Batband.
Tim Mars reports from the front at the European clowns' convention
Uncertain future Duncan Green on the growing detente between the US and its former foes in Central America
ARTS & MEDIA
Two cheers for democracy The new government will want to smarten up London, but Stephanie Williams warns that democracy and civic beauty don't mix
Music Geoff Dyer laments that Bruce Springsteen's river has run dry: Roderic Dunnett remembers the scandal of Schoenberg
Film Anne Billson digs her claws into Hook 
Campaign TV John Dugdale looks forward to the night of the swingometer
BOOKS 38
Star turns Chris Savage King applauds Angela Carter's grand finale
Ghettoblasters Janet Gorman follows the RSC into Broadmoor; Tony Gould on the hidden history of disability
City lights Rowan Moore looks into the future metropolis; Douglas Kennedy travels down Broadway with Nik Cohn
Travel Robert Carver salutes a benevolent imperialist
Lives Janet Barron praises the good grief of Ted Walker
Poetry Lucasta Miller on a new view of the Renaissance
PrintOut Britain, the undiscovered country
EDITORIAL
Moral absolutes The election is a battle between social conscience and social evil
‘The economic problem is that of doing deliberately in peace that which we are forced to do in war — of creating a community in which [people]have value.
The psychological and political problem is that of persuading the people that this can be done.
They need no persuading that it ought to be done.’
Thus wrote Sir William Beveridge, in a New Statesman pamphlet,Full Employment in a Free Society , in December 1944.
He went on: ‘The main principles which should govern national finance in future are few and simple.
The first rule is that outlay in total, private and public, must always be enough for full employment.
The second rule is that outlay, both private and public, should be directed by social priorities, putting first things first, the prevention of Want, Disease, Squalor and Ignorance before unessentials — bread and health for all before cake and circuses for anyone.
The third rule is that in general it is better to tax than to borrow.
But it is absurd to be unduly afraid of borrowing by the state.
To submit to unemployment or slums or want, to let children go hungry or sick and old unattended, for fear of increasing the internal national debt, is to lose all sense of proportion.’
We have, as a nation, lost all sense of proportion during the past 13 years, as government policy has been determined by the worship of a single economic icon: the conquest of what the Daily Telegraph , in a telling editorial comment, described as ‘the one absolute evil’— inflation.
The one absolute evil .
Not Want, nor Disease, nor Squalor, nor Ignorance, but inflation .
And what sacrifices have been laid at the altar of this latterday Beelzebub!
Bring him your poor, your sick, jobless, homeless and hungry; for they are the ‘price well worth paying’ to get inflation down.
When the Conservatives came to power in 1979 there were 1,087,000 jobless.
Now, calculating the figures on the same basis as then, there are 3.7 million — a million of whom have joined the dole queues since John Major became Prime Minister.
That is a measure not merely of misfortune and waste, but of positive neglect; and nothing so symbolises the Tories' failure as their abandonment of any pretence to commitment towards the unemployed.
In 1987, employment minister Kenneth Clarke still felt compelled to genuflect in the direction of ‘our target of full employment’.
In 1992, the Conservative manifesto makes not even the most platitudinous mention of such a target: its four stated economic aims are ‘to achieve price stability; to keep firm control over public spending; to continue to reduce taxes as fast as we prudently can;[and]to make sure that market mechanisms and incentives are allowed to do their job.’
We should be clear about what ‘allowing market mechanisms and incentives to do their job’ means — the consolidation of the two-thirds society; the perpetuation of the spiral of poverty, by which we are now seeing a generation of young adults emerging whose parents have never known regular employment, and who no longer expect — or even seek — it for themselves; the creation of a permanent underclass, its anger turned in upon itself, its hope for the future devoured in poverty, crime, violence and despair.
In a global context, it means more of the same system that increased the number of the world's poor from 944 million in 1970 to 1,156 million in 1985; the number who are illiterate from 842 million to 907 million; and the number of malnourished from 460 million to 512 million.
A party that will attempt nothing for the unemployed at home will do nothing for the poor and starving abroad.
In 1944, Beveridge wrote: ‘We cure unemployment in war through hate of Hitler; we ought to cure it in peace through hate of social evils…
Whether we can do this depends upon the degree to which social conscience becomes the driving force in a national life.
We should regard Want, Disease, Ignorance and Squalor as common enemies of all of us, not as enemies with whom each individual may seek a separate peace, escaping himself to personal prosperity while leaving his fellows in their clutches.
That is the meaning of social conscience; that one should refuse to make a separate peace with social evil.’
The voters need no persuading that this ought to be so.
This week we will discover if they have been persuaded that it can be so.
The land that democracy forgot
If only because of Scotland, this was always going to be an election not only about who governs Britain, but how Britain is to be governed.
As it was, alongside the battering ram of Scottish public opinion came the well-directed arrows of Charter 88's Democracy Day to force the key questions of liberalising and decentralising the governance of Britain on to the political map.
But that ‘map’ deserves closer scrutiny.
For if Election '92 reminded the cosy home counties that Britain was not simply an extension of them, the renewed emphasis on the specificities of England, Scotland and Wales — and the possibility of new national and regional assemblies — also put in sharper focus a fundamental ambivalence about what ‘Britain’ is.
It is, of course, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland .
The people of Northern Ireland could have been forgiven for believing this to be no longer so.
Unionists in particular will have smiled wryly at John Major's repeated homilies about how, at all costs, we must preserve the union — with Scotland.
This is not to essay any argument as to what the ultimate future of Northern Ireland should be.
It is to say that mental disengagement from the region and its ‘troubles’ is hardly the way to achieve an historic compromise there.
It is, on the contrary, likely only to perpetuate the current stand-off.
It thus passed entirely unnoticed on this side of the water that during the election campaign Northern Ireland had its ‘lack of democracy’ day — the 20th anniversary of the introduction of ‘temporary’Direct Rule from Westminster.
There were only really two interesting questions about the election in Northern Ireland.
They concerned two constituencies only miles apart, yet as sharply contrasting as any in the UK.
The inhabitants of North Down, Protestant and unionist, enjoy a living standard — with low house prices and a scenic environment — that would be the envy of many in the south east of England.
Little more than a handful of people have died there in 22 years of the ‘troubles’.
West Belfast, on the other hand, Catholic and nationalist, has all the indicators of poverty, deprivation and despair.
There, funerals for the martyred and the massacred have been a daily fact of life.
The first question was how well the standard-bearer for the recently established Northern Ireland Conservatives, Laurence Kennedy, would perform in North Down.
Dr Kennedy is an unreconstructed Thatcherite, and the Northern Ireland Tories delude themselves in believing that ‘British’ politics is ‘normal’and ‘non-sectarian’, rather than(in a European context) antediluvian and (in a Northern Ireland context) unionist.
Nor was he likely to win in North Down, despite a substantial district council base, because of the popularity of the maverick unionist incumbent, James Kilfedder.
But it would be wrong to dismiss the underlying aspiration of many in Northern Ireland, particularly amongst the Protestant majority, for an end to their exclusion from British political debate.
It was the Social Democratic and Labour Party leader, John Hume, who called for maximum attendance by English, Scottish and Welsh MPs at the recent special Commons debate on Northern Ireland.
He might as well have saved his breath — a sea of green benches confronted the Ulster members.
The second question was whether an increasingly beleaguered Gerry Adams could hold on to West Belfast.
Adams, president of Sinn Féin, has had to suffer the ignominy of the wholesale rejection of his party in the republic, as well as the embarrassment of IRA killings — such as of eight Protestant workers at Teebane Cross in January — that he feels unable to condone (but, also, unable to condemn).
Yet in West Belfast a different kind of exclusion is equally keenly felt.
It is an exclusion from fundamental rights of citizenship — to walk the streets without harassment, to secure a job without discrimination, to express a cultural identity without stigma, to have a share in the exercise of political power.
And so the streetwise Mr Adams, this time, was expected to keep his seat.
The bookies gave him the tightest odds of any of the outgoing MPs, but he was still two-to-one on to win.
Inevitably, though, these were not the questions that made any impact on the ‘mainland’ electoral agenda.
Rather, as the polls came to trouble the Tories, the ‘troubles’ suddenly became of interest — purely because it appeared the Conservative Revolution might just be sustained with the assistance of that unlikely revolutionary, James Molyneaux, leader of the Ulster Unionists.
The canny Molyneaux has kept his cards close to his chest.
But a deal with the unionists would be an unseemly affair.
While elements of Molyneaux's agenda are unobjectionable — the need, for example, to reform the appallingly undemocratic way in which Northern Ireland business is handled at Westminster — beware his new-found interest in Scottish devolution.
For he will demand that, in any new assembly at Stormont, Northern Ireland's specificity — in particular, its oppressed minority and its unique links with the republic — be ignored.
But Labour, too, needs to tread more sensitively.
Kevin McNamara's gauche exile's nationalism is light years adrift of the post-nationalist Ireland symbolised by President Mary Robinson.
But if it is inconceivable that he could successfully shepherd nervous unionists through new talks with their nationalist counterparts and Dublin, equally his head cannot be sacrificed in a Labour-Unionist deal to take Neil Kinnock to Downing Street.
The solution?
Appoint as Northern Ireland secretary an able civil libertarian, and, in the male preserve of politics, a woman — Harriet Harman.
SMEARWATCH A regular round-up of election smears
1 April : The Sun guns for Jack Straw, for having three houses: ‘I'm alright Jack — Shadow education minister lectures us on the scandal of private education from the luxury of his £300,000 cottage, his £200,000 town house and his £40,000 flat!’
The Mail hammers away at Andrew Graham, an adviser to John Smith and author of the leaked report on public sector pay.
‘The luxury life of a Labour economics guru’ is the headline.
The story reveals that Graham earns £28,000 (which surely makes him a ‘middle earner’, in the Mail 's world) and is a member of the Oxford sailing club where he and his wife ‘are understood to windsurf regularly’.
The Mail also tries to blame Labour supporters for ‘beating up’ a Tory candidate, Owen Paterson, in Wrexham.
It also reports that ‘Labour supporters have been accused of a hate campaign against the Tory candidate challenging Neil Kinnock in Islwyn, Gwent.
Peter Bone said he and his family had suffered terrifying phone calls to their home in Newport.’
2 April : The Sun continues its dubious catalogue of people who are threatening to leave the country if Labour wins.
The latest is comedian Freddie Starr, who also claims to remember ‘working my b******* off for next to nothing under the last Labour government’(can you work out what the asterisks stand for?)
The tabloids try to pin the blame for an assault on Christopher Chope (roads minister) on Labour.
The Sun reckons the man was chanting ‘pro-Labour slogans’.
Seems unlikely: what would they be?
3 April : The Sun reveals that: ‘Labour MP Harriet Harman belongs to a swish leisure centre at a public school — one of Labour's pet hates.’
(The school is Dulwich College.)
‘A fellow member fumed: ‘Labour are dead against fee-paying schools.
I don't know how she dare show her face.’
The Sun also seems to be preparing the ground for a late smear.
Its anonymous diarist writes: ‘Disturbing rumours reach me about one of our political figures…it is said that the man, who has a charming wife, has had affairs with five different women…
I do not know whether there is a shred of truth in the allegations.
But if there is, one thing is certain.
It will destroy the man's political career.’
5 April : The Mail on Sunday sets its sleuths onto Lord (Clive) Hollick, one of Kinnock's advisers and chairman of MAI, whom it had wrongly accused the previous week of paying himself in gold bars to avoid tax.
It discovers, in the insurance chain Safeguard — part of the MAI empire —‘dozens of youngsters who are paid little over £3,000 a year’, less than Labour's minimum wage.
It appears , although this is not quite clear from the MoS , that they are YTS trainees, whose pay levels are set by the government.
SHOREDITCH
Who will feature on John Major's resignation honours list?
It's hard to envisage the usual knighthoods for sycophantic tabloid editors, several of whom pointed out his failings.
From the campaign, there are no more worthy candidates for MBEs than those SWP members who put on rowdy demos wherever Major appeared (the suspicion of collusion still lingers); The Duchess of York, too, deserves an honour (if that is constitutionally permissible) for staging a mid-campaign diversion on the day the unemployment figures came out.
Genuine honours for political services ought to go to Robert Atkins, the Tory MP with whom Major hatched his leadership strategy during a barge holiday in 1986; Alan Duncan, who let his Westminster house be used for the Major leadership campaign; Sarah Hogg, head of the Downing Street policy unit, who thought up the Citizen's Charter; Bernard Perkins, leader of the Conservative group on Lambeth Council in 1968, who gave Major the vice chairmanship of the housing committee, Jean Lucas, formerly Tory agent in south London, and one of Major's early political mentors — and last, but not least, Barbara Laguerre, who deprived Major of a job as a bus conductor, by getting it herself.
Shoreditch can reveal that Neil Kinnock won't need to ‘pick up the phone’ to Paddy Ashdown on the day after the election: the two men have made arrangements to meet in the flesh.
The pretext is the ‘earth summit rally’ to be held at the Central Hall, Westminster, on Friday evening.
Jean Lambert of the Green Party and Des Wilson will also be there.
It seems an odd time to be holding a political meeting, and Neil may have to come straight from the Palace, but the organisers say that all the participants have pledged to attend.
Coalition mongering is the only plausible explanation.
For London readers, Shoreditch offers the following gatecrashers' guide to election night (assuming that some sort of celebration is in order).
Labour's bash will be at 4 Millbank, where it has been holding its morning press conferences.
The building has a swimming pool in the basement — ideal for a victory splash.
Anyone wanting to witness the ruling class's discomfort should head to the Savoy, where the Telegraph and Spectator are holding a wake; the LSE, home of Bob McKenzie's original swingometer, is hosting an ‘election party for alumni and the media’, with a panel of experts providing ‘comment throughout the night on the results and their implications’; and LBC is having a thrash at 72 Hammersmith Road, where you can ‘experience first hand the excitement and tension as Andrew Neil hosts LBC's election special’.
Warning: none of these are officially open to the public.
If you want to celebrate legitimately, a couple of London restaurants — Soho Soho and Bertorelli's — will stay open till 3am with live television coverage of the results.
If the Conservatives are kicked out in Sheffield Hallam it will be no thanks to the Labour Party.
The main challengers to the Tories are the Lib Dems and, with this in mind, and inspired by the NSS tactical voting guide, a group of Labour supporters in the city organised a tactical voting campaign.
They printed 5,000 posters, bearing the words: ‘Labour supporter [in red], voting Peter Gold [with a yellow and black Lib Dem logo].
Tactical voting to get rid of the Tories.’
Alas, they had reckoned without Britain's quaint electoral law, or the Labour Party's officious solicitors, Irwin Mitchell.
Before the posters could be distributed, the latter fired off a letter, claiming that, under the Representation of the People Act 1983, it is illegal to incur expenses in order to promote a candidate without that candidate's permission, and that ‘if you proceed, you and anyone who joins with you may commit a criminal offence.’
It threatened the campaigners with an injunction.
So another 5,000 posters were printed, which simply said ‘Labour supporter, voting TACTICALLY.’
But the campaigners were advised that even this would be illegal.
The only way out would be to get the Lib Dems to take responsibility for the posters — which they refused to do, for fear of alienating Tory waverers.
So 10,000 posters are going spare, and the Tories are laughing.
But all is not lost in Sheffield Hallam.
Shoreditch has received a copy of a chain letter circulating in the constituency, urging Labour supporters to vote Lib Dem.
(The letter has no connection with the people mounting the poster campaign.)
If each person who receives the letter sends it to three more people, it will reach the entire Sheffield Hallam electorate within 11 ‘generations’.
Most chain letters threaten gruesome and fanciful consequences for people who break the chain.
No need for that here: having a Tory MP for five years is a genuine enough disaster.
Final word from the Tick Tack Index until the next election: As of Monday morning, Labour is on 69 per cent(down one point) and the Tories on 31 per cent .
Odds about a Tory overall majority are 8 — 1 with Ladbrokes.
But if Party Politics can win the National at 14–1…
ROGER WODDIS I Shall Vote Tory
(After Christopher Logue's ‘I Shall Vote Labour’ of 1966, wih apologies)
I shall vote Tory because
my paper says I ought to vote Tory.
I shall vote Tory because
Mr Major is a very, very nice man.
I shall vote Tory because
the Tories are purveyors to the quality.
I shall vote Tory because
they have a better class of cliché.
I shall vote Tory because
if I don't Labour will make the Queen
pay income tax.
AND
I shall vote Tory because Robin Cook
wants to throw money at the NHS.
I shall vote Tory because I want
more money thrown at Trident.
I shall vote Tory because it's low wages
that have made this country great.
I shall vote Tory because Labour would
bring in a reign of terror and have
Anna Ford reading the news in the nude.
I shall vote Tory because if God
meant us to vote Labour he'd have
given us all freckles.
DIARY A rhinologically challenged Sean Francis notes that what journalists leave out is as important as what they put in
Last week I read an article about four successful divorce solicitors, two of whom are representing the Yorks in their divorce.
The solicitor acting for the Duchess spoke ‘in polished Eton and Oxford tones’, while the one acting for the Duke was ‘an effervescent 35-year-old blonde’.
I believe that Eton now admits women to its sixth form, but nevertheless there could be no serious doubt about which was the man and which was the woman.
And this was not on the women's pages of the Daily Mail , but an article written by a woman on the Law page of the Guardian .
In his adjacent column, entitled ‘Writ large’(geddit?),
Marcel Berlins writes: ‘I'm pleased to see that the Bar has set up a committee to monitor and research into sex discrimination in the profession.’
Or should I say: ‘Bubbly, vivacious Marcel flirtatiously ignored the beam in his own eye while protesting about the beam in someone else's’?
It is a perverse practice to give us absurd, and even offensive, details that we don't need, while omitting the crucial detail that we do.
I was recently listening to a tape of a ten-year-old radio talk by literary critic Christopher Ricks, called Bob Dylan and the Language That He Used (I should say that this is a reference to the lines, ‘You used to be so amused/At Napoleon in rags and the language that he used’ in Dylan's classic song,Like a Rolling Stone ).
Ricks' talk features a brilliant analysis of Dylan's 1964 song,The Lonesome Death of Hattie Carroll , which tells the story of a woman who was killed by a rich young man, William ‘Zanzinger’.
He was then arrested and sentenced to just six months in prison.
Incidentally, a weakness of Ricks' highly intelligent and detailed analysis is its tendency to ignore the factual context.
I had always assumed that this song was either fictional or referred to events long ago, and Ricks' talk contained nothing to contradict this.
I was surprised, therefore, to read (in All Across the Telegraph: a Bob Dylan handbook edited by Michael Gray and John Bauldie, published by Futura) an essay about the real William Zantzinger (as it ought to be spelled) who committed the murder in 1963 and as of 1984 was a respected and prosperous businessman in the same state, Maryland, where he had committed it.
Ricks shows Dylan's delicacy of suggestion in his angry song, balancing rich against poor, powerful against weak, young against old.
He also points out the song's crucial omission, astonishing in a work of the protest movement: Dylan never says that Zantzinger is white and Hattie Carroll black, and forces the listener to assume that she was because of everything we are told about her: her name, that she had ten children, her position as a maid who ‘didn't even talk to the people at the table’ and, more tendentiously, because of what was done to her and the mild punishment meted out to her murderer who ‘at 24 years/Owns a tobacco farm of 600 acres’.
In a work of art this is a powerful coup because it compels us to think about why we know this woman must be black, and as an act of protest it is far richer and more powerful than an instruction in how to feel.
But in a newspaper report on the trial, such an omission would have been absurd and itself an act of collusion with racism.
In the same issue of the ‘Guardian’ I cited above was a news report headed: Jail for PC who stamped on man.
The policeman ‘assaulted Harold Benn, aged 27, an amateur boxer, after stopping him in Tooting, south London.
After a breathalyser test proved negative, he was arrested on suspicion of driving a stolen car.’
Now, when the Metropolitan Police arrest a man without any evidence on suspicion of stealing the car he's driving then, in the absence of a major industrial dispute being in progress, we all know what's going on.
It's not that he's 27 years old or an amateur boxer, but that he's black.
The policeman stamped on Benn's head three times and then fabricated his notes about the incident.
A woman police constable who reported him has since had to be transferred ‘after being cold-shouldered’.
This is presumably what the police are referring to when they say they should be left to deal with problems in the force themselves.
Only when we get to the seventh paragraph of the story do we hear Benn's statement to the court, which claims that the PC said: ‘You black bastard, this will teach you to mess about with the police.’
And then there is, of course, the photograph of Benn accompanying the article, with a caption that quotes the same statement.
So we all know that Benn is black and yet at the same time the Guardian can maintain the implicit position: ‘Black?
We are so lacking in any form of racism that we never actually noticed.’
This technique seems to have become a habit and not just in the Guardian .
You read an article about the police barging into a flat in the middle of the night for no apparent reason, stripping everyone naked and beating up an old lady, and you have to scrutinise the text for clues.
Is one of the victims called Paddy or Winston?
Is it in Brixton or Kilburn?
What we should notice is how, once again, an argument used against the right has now reappeared in distorted form to haunt the left.
There is the racist argument that blackness is a factor in why certain people commit crimes, and there is the anti-racist argument that blackness is a factor in why certain people have crimes committed against them, generally by people who believe the first argument.
The two contentions can seem analogous, but the second concerns overt motive, the first a highly arguable interpretation.
It has taken too long to persuade the police that racial attacks even exist for the press to adopt some absurd pretence to being colour-blind now.
The live interview on ‘News at Ten’ with John Major by Michael Brunson was a peculiar affair.
It wasn't just that Major appeared to have accepted a dare to go through an entire broadcast without offering a single specific incentive of any kind for people to vote for him, but Brunson, an experienced broadcaster, was even odder.
I am an expert on being nervous while broadcasting.
The things to avoid are principally a sort of subterranean trembling that begins in the body and communicates itself to your vocal chords and even, on occasion, to the chair in which you are sitting, and those long swallows, which you never seem to do at any other time but now occur unstoppably at the wrong point of emphasis in the sentence.
Some correspondent will probably now write to tell me that Brunson is bravely suffering from some life-threatening condition, but he delivered his questions between swallows with the aplomb of Peter Lorre squealing to Humphrey Bogart as the police drag him off to certain death in Casablanca .
The experience made me deeply grateful that nothing of the same kind, at least with current technology, can be deduced from prose.
Who would think from the urbanity of this week's column that I am sitting at my keyboard shivering, sniffing, coughing and streaming like a tubercular poet of the 1890s?
I have hopes that one day this will all change when funds allow me to produce a ‘scratch 'n' sniff’ version of this column.
Then the reader's fingernail will be able to produce the scent of clematis that wafts in through my window, the foie gras that awaits me at lunch, the liquid inspiration that gets me through the final paragraph.
All that would be necessary for a week like this one would be a miniature mucus-filled polythene bag —‘scratch 'n' burst’.
But enough of that.
Karl Marx said that the bourgeoisie would suffer from the carbuncles that afflicted his buttocks as he composed Das Kapital .
The bourgeoisie remained unsuffering, and Marx might have done better to have the carbuncles professionally seen to.
I'm going to have a bath.
John Cole Keep shoving till the end The most exciting campaign in years hangs in the balance
An election campaign in which the two principal parties find it difficult to believe what the opinion polls are telling them is a rum do.
True, politicians are by nature optimists, otherwise they would not persist in a trade that offers more kicks than ha'pence.
But even allowing for that trait of nature, the number of occasions on which both Conservatives and Labour politicians have told me they are doing better than the polls say is now large enough to make me sniff the air suspiciously.
The Prime Minister's view is that this is one election in which the voters will keep the pollsters — and the rest of us — guessing until the end.
It may not be possible to decide who has won until the exit polls are announced on Thursday evening.
If the contest is really close, we may have to await the actual results.
It is this uncertainty that makes the political leaders more than usually tentative in their predictions.
I have spent time with all three parties' leaders during the past ten days.
Although there is much mutual criticism in party speeches about ‘triumphalism’, I detect precious little of this.
A certain nervous expectation, incipient disappointment mitigated by professional Micawberism, is a more accurate description.
This election campaign has been criticised for being negative.
Is this not unfair to the politicians?
In a country whose people so crave economic success, failure to produce it is bound to produce negativism.
Tories and Labour decry each other 's failures to voters who seem to believe, against all experience, that success is their birthright, and that only political stupidity deprives them of it.
In that mood, there is a neat, easy role for the Liberal Democrats: 40 years of the two old, failed parties, etc, etc.
It is thought impolite to accuse voters, sometimes called people, of having in any way failed.
John Major and Chris Patten know that, if the Tories lose office, they will be blamed for fighting a negative campaign, for failing to create a Conservative vision for the nineties.
Much of such criticism comes, directly or indirectly, from the broader shores of the PR industry.
There are now enough people, especially on the Tory side, with a vested interest in the methodology of politics, many of them at any given time out in the cold, to make the lives of incumbents difficult.
How daft do they think the electorate is?
A government that has been in office for 13 years is bound to be judged overwhelmingly on its record.
Of course, it is helpful to fight charges of exhaustion by coming up with ideas for the future.
But the dominant problem for Margaret Thatcher's heirs was a profound political one, which no amount of spin-doctoring could have magicked away.
This was whether they should present themselves to the voters as a continuation of the Thatcher governments; or claim that the election of John Major represented such a fundamental break with what had gone before that there was no need for voters to respond to the classical call of opposition on such occasions: ‘Time for a change.’
It was not much of a choice.
Mrs Thatcher had been such a dominant political figure for so long, her approach to politics so radical, that all who served with her were stuck with a general defence of her record.
Yes, poll tax could be replaced, public spending increased, a more caring face presented to the public.
But Major, Patten, Douglas Hurd, Kenneth Clarke, and even Michael Heseltine, were left with no choice but to argue that Thatcherism had been good for Britain.
If the Tories lose, their valedictory campaign song will be an old potboiler, ‘Spring will be a little late this year.’
Their misfortune was to have to defend its economic achievements at a time when the long-predicted recovery from recession has not begun.
If the Tories lose, their valedictory campaign song will be an old potboiler, ‘Spring will be a little late this year.’
Their other misfortune, or piece of carelessness, was to find themselves defending the changes in health and education, which began under Mrs Thatcher, at a time when their success or failure could not be judged.
In the event of Conservative defeat, one of the great questions never to be answered would be whether a decision to postpone full-scale implementation of the various forms of opting-out, in favour of local experiments, might have saved them.
The Prime Minister believes his overwhelming need in the last week is to overcome scepticism about the government's ability to deliver recovery, restore growth, and resume the increase in living standards that 20th-century electorates regard as a right.
He believes — as any political leader must believe, to keep himself going through the grinding work of electioneering — that victory is out there, but that the voters are making the Tories work hard for it.
The polls have given Neil Kinnock more obvious cause for hope, but even when they were at their briefly euphoric peak last week, he remained soberly satisfied, rather than certain.
He too expects the decision to be made in the final 48 hours.
Although he believes the Labour vote is firmer than that of the Conservatives, the cautious conclusion in his camp is that, in the range of possibilities, a Labour majority government has a slight edge over Labour as the largest party in a hung parliament.
During the last weekend, Liberal Democrats have lashed their foot to the organ pedal that third parties must play loudest:confidentia, con brio .
Paddy Ashdown needs a bandwagon, and has worked hard to set it rolling.
All the parties have lavished money on their leaders' spectaculars.
I had to talk live into the main BBC news programme from Sheffield, as a kind of 1812 Overture burst behind my head, in response to Neil Kinnock's remarkable speech.
John Major's Val Doonican acts may have been adjudged less successful than the soapbox orations which have so cheered up both his party and himself.
But they, and the set-piece speeches to the party faithful, have also done more for Tory morale than they are given credit for.
Paddy Ashdown is an orator who responds to fireworks.
I saw him work the crowd at Leeds.
His stage set, along with the thumping music, flashing lights, and dry-ice clouds that go with it, had just come in from Scotland, and was due to head south as soon as we television camp-followers had done our reports in front of it.
But the Liberal leader did not let its transience spoil the effect.
He advanced up the centre aisle, as the music thundered.
Hands were shaken, waved, and he advanced to the rostrum, as the final extravagances burst around him.
Paddy looked towards heaven — or rather the ceiling of the educational institution in which he found himself.
‘Wow!’ he said, leaving the stolid citizens of that part of Yorkshire feeling that it was remarkably civil of them to put on such a welcome for him.
They are all at it, friends, right up to the end.
What effect it will have on the result, heaven only knows.
In an election as tightly poised as this one, every bit of glitter, every scintilla of excitement could — just could — turn a winning margin.
Apart from that, it is a question of avoiding mistakes.
The danger of apparent breakthrough, Neil Kinnock told his colleagues on what Tories denounce as Red Wednesday, is that you make mistakes.
This rugby fanatic doubtless had in mind the tendency of Welsh forwards, in recent times, to give away daft penalty kicks.
Bind tight and keep shoving, he exhorted them.
These appear to be the tactics in both main political camps.
Understandable, but it is unlikely to make for exciting three-quarter play, players running with the ball.
Yet nobody ought to complain.
It has been the most exciting election for many years, with the issues exhaustively exposed, and the result hanging in the balance until the end.
JOHN PILGER The ghost of Mrs Thatcher Labour shares the Tories' great power pretensions
During the week of the general election, Britain is threatening to take part in an attack on two countries with which it is not at war.
This is of almost no interest to the managers of the campaign, in the parties and the media.
Yet war and peace remains, as ever, an issue of beckoning urgency.
The contingency for attacks on Libya and Iraq are the latest examples of the corruption of the United Nations Charter.
The attack on Iraq will be justified with a resolution whose legitimacy rests on Article 51 of the charter.
This says that a member can defend itself, but in no sense does it endorse a prolonged campaign of counter-attack.
Since the Gulf war, the United States and Britain have used the United Nations to bleed Iraq; and the sufferers have been primarily children, whose death-rate has increased by an estimated 400 per cent.
Now the United States is on the verge of bombing Iraq on the pretext that Iraq refuses to destroy its ‘weapons of mass destruction’— when, in fact, Iraq has asked that some of its military industry be converted to civilian production laid waste by allied bombing.
The bombing would probably finish off Iraq's industrial base.
John Major has said that Britain will support such a demolition ‘if it proves necessary’.
A similar attack is likely against Libya.
Last week American/British manipulation of the UN Security Council produced yet another ‘high noon’ deadline by which Libya must surrender two men accused of the Lockerbie bombing, or face sanctions and worse.
That the evidence against the two is, at best, circumstantial, and their prospects of a fair trial in Scotland or the US remote, are not considered relevant factors.
The Scottish Prime Minister (John Major) has told parliament that the accused Libyans are ‘the perpetrators’ of the outrage.
Alex Carlile MP has similarly described them as ‘these two mass murderers’, who should be brought here for ‘a fair trial’.
As numerous fitted-up Irishmen can bear witness, and not to mention James Hanratty and others, were they able to speak from the grave, hallowed British justice is a myth.
The American campaign against Libya, like its counterpart against Iraq, relies on historical amnesia.
In the US, this is provided by the usual media assumption that the Libyans are guilty — thus providing the Bush administration with the kind of support it needs in a desperate election campaign.
Few doubt that Colonel Gaddafi runs an odious autocracy.
If this was justification for blockading and bombing his country, most of the regimes propped up by the US would be awaiting a similar fate.
The truth is that Libya has been stiched up on several occasions since Libyan oil was nationalised in 1969 and Gaddafi refused to behave like the American client his predecessors used to be.
In 1981, he was accused of sending a team of assassins to the US, armed with surface-to-air missiles and led by ‘East German terror experts’ under orders from the colonel to kill Ronald Reagan, the Secretary of State and Secretary of Defence.
The Soviet Union was said to be behind it.
Comic-book sketches of the would-be assassins were published.
None of it was true.
In 1986,TV Guide published a cover story entitled ‘Why American TV is So Vulnerable to Foreign Propaganda’, in which it claimed that the Libyan hit team story was really a figment of a KGB campaign to spread alarm and ‘to destabilise public opinion in the west’.
The admission came shortly after American warplanes had bombed Libyan civilians from British bases.
Libya's ‘crime’ then was a terrorist bombing in Berlin that was later traced to the Assad regime in Syria.
In 1990, the same Syrian regime was rewarded with millions of dollars worth of arms credits and a go-ahead from the White House to pursue its colonial aims in Lebanon.
‘We have problems with their support of terrorism,’ said secretary of state James Baker, ‘but we share a common goal.’
The goal was the destruction of Syria's old foe, Iraq.
That goal is now drawing closer, along with the goal of finishing off the uppity Gaddafi, a perfect hate figure in an election year.
The UN will provide legitimacy for what are little more than acts of international piracy and entirely consistent with the new world order strategy of ‘destroy and abandon’.
The new world order strategists may, however, come unstuck in Libya.
Arab hostility towards American dominance in Middle Eastern affairs has sharpened since the destruction of Iraq.
The ripple effect on economic and political life in the region has reinforced fundamentalism; recent events in Algeria offer the most striking example.
The Arab world identifies the essential hypocrisy of United Nations pressure on Iraq and Libya.
Edward Pearce's Sketch Footsore, wet through, and feverish
Excuse my preoccupation with this journey around Britain, but it occupies my waking, and indeed sleeping, hours.
We have 1,700 miles on the clock.
There are 15 constituencies down and four to go.
The method of work has been to get going at the time dictated by the candidate's first duty of the day and the time taken to get to him.
Then one works with the candidate, following him on the canvass, the walkabout, the old people's home and the radio studio.
You carry a notebook, like a journalist in a film, and scribble down street conversation — much of it ‘How are you Mrs Jones?’ inanities — in the hope that there will be something at the end of the day to turn into copy.
That end of the day begins any time between five and seven.
It is given over to writing between 2,000 and 2,500 words and it takes from three to four and a half hours to do.
Publication will follow on Monday 13 April.
Somewhere in the middle or at the end, we eat.
Thank God for Asian restaurants.
If I decide to work through from, say, six to ten, the blessed Chinese and the estimable Indians will be open.
Then one sleeps and gets up again.
Incidentally, who, a couple of decades back, would have expected to find high-quality Turkish cuisine in Chorlton-cum-Hardy?
But there is, and, though no Egon Ronay, let me salute the Turkish Delight.
Praise also to the Treasure Garden Chinese in Richmond, Yorks.
Speaking of Richmond, from which the place in south London takes its name, one of the delights of the trip has been the scenic aspect.
I designed the itinerary, of course, for high political resonance, but it seemed a good idea to take in beautiful towns and routes.
Richmond I have known from childhood as an incomparably pretty town, castle keep, sloping irregular polygonal square, houses and big pubs grouped round like something in a model.
The Wye valley is stunning, of course, with marginal Conservative Kingswood at one end of that day's journey and Labour reverse marginal Monmouth at the other.
In between is the bit Wordsworth went on about.
Less known, but possibly even more beautiful, was North Lancashire, the Ribble Valley where Mike Carr for the Liberal Democrats is making an impressive show of defending the sensational gain that cracked the poll tax.
But if Clitheroe at the centre is a pretty town despite a couple of smoke stacks, the villages up the valley, like Waddington and Slaidburn where we slept, are grey stone and beautiful; at Slaidburn there is a look at the 17th century.
As for the valleys they are in; well, woods, hillsides, sheep and tranquillity have their point, not least during an election.
Northumberland has, of course, great beauties, but foul and interminable rain endured there on the Tuesday and in Chester-le-Street, with a lesser downpour in Darlington the next day, have reduced me to the shuddering, feverish condition in which this is being written at the Wheatsheaf, Sandbach.
I don't have a thermometer to hand, but I'll settle for 101.
Much may be blamed on the impermeable Alan Beith, who has been at Berwick since 1973 and thinks nothing to striding round five villages, after starting on Holy Island in the sort of rain that suggests God getting out the strap, and then darting up to Duns in what was Berwickshire, Scotland, to do a broadcast.
So minute are the threads binding a good member in a rural constituency that a woman can run out of her front door waving a cake of lavender soap.
‘Alan I owe you this from a year back.’
‘Oh yes, thank you, I won that in the raffle at the WI do, didn't I.’ Those are the threads of Gulliver.
The broadcast was a killer though.
Duns is a grimly handsome little town and the only place nearer than Selkirk that has a radio studio.
Alan Beith is to debate on the Jimmy Young show that made Mrs Thatcher all those years ago, with John Smith and Norman Lamont.
I am not kidding you: for this high-level encounter he goes to the news-agents' next door and gets the key that hangs behind the counter.
He then spends ten minutes getting radio engineers —‘Here, have we heard of Duns?’— to afford him diplomatic status, and then mend a faulty link.
I meet a nice rough Tory worker in Bury South —‘I hate that Kinnock’— who, nevertheless, loves Monteverdi.
In Chester-le-Street, which has been Labour since Genesis, the Liberal Democrat wins a school mock election ahead of the very pretty Conservative, with Labour last.
I shouldn't worry about it.
IN MEMORIAM The man without substance Sarah Baxter on how the election has revealed the hollowness of ‘Majorism’
‘So long John, it was nice knowing you.’
With these words, the public is preparing to bid John Major farewell, with a small twinge of sympathy, but no real regrets.
Margaret Thatcher once pleaded that it would be the ‘cruellest thing’ for her colleagues to unseat her after she had obtained for them more than a decade in power.
So we all know what her successor can look forward to from his party.
There was a message for Major in last weekend's Sunday Times leader, personally signed by the editor.
It bore the headline, ‘Fit to be hung.’
Nobody wanted John Major to lead the Tory Party in the first place.
During the leadership contest in November 1990, Conservative MPs were split three ways between Thatcherites, Heselteenies and one-nation Tories, who were embarrassed by the poll tax and sympathised with Sir Geoffrey Howe's resignation over Europe.
Thatcher was four votes short of outright victory; she wanted to fight on, but was told to go by her cabinet (the same loyal troupe that now surrounds Major).
Right-wingers voted reluctantly for her heir-apparent while crossing their fingers.
‘I don't know anything about him,’ said one.
‘He seems a decent sort of chap.
I just hope to God he's the right choice.’
In victory, Major sidled up to the MPs who voted for his rivals, including one-nation characters such as Chris Patten, Kenneth Clarke and William Waldegrave, who had rallied to the reassuring establishment figure of the Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd.
Power brought Major a good deal of support, but, in defeat, he has no base in the party to fall back on.
This campaign has already provided a foretaste of what John Major, stripped of power, is like.
He has had to make do without his familiar retinue of civil servants and, as plenty of critics from his own side have pointed out, he neither looks nor sounds like a prime minister.
He does not look or sound like a party leader, either.
Major cannot distinguish between sound advice and sycophancy.
As Sir Alan Walters once remarked, he is a cushion that ‘bears the imprint of the last person who sat on him’.
He was praised for clambering on his soapbox in the streets of Luton; so he vowed never to leave it, turning a moderately successful gimmick into an embarrassing campaign cliché.
He was criticised for being negative, so he resorted to inserting the word ‘positive’ at dreary intervals into his stock responses to questions.
His political career bears out Sir Alan Walter's thesis.
As chairman of housing in Lambeth in the early 1970s, he was every inch the small-minded functionary.
Last autumn,Roof magazine provided the following glimpse of Cllr Major in action: some tenants had taken the liberty of painting the stonework around their front doors and he ordered its removal.
‘The purpose of this, Mr Mayor,’ the future premier wrote stiffly, ‘is to ensure that there is similarity between the standards of exterior decorations for the general benefit of all our tenants.’
This may have been a late flowering of the ‘badinage’ that he used to partake in as a Young Conservative with Brixton locals, but so sensitive is Major about his background, that the public is permitted to hear only the Authorised Version.
He has often claimed, most recently in the Sunday Times magazine, that: ‘I don't like talking about [my background], and I don't like reading about it.
I think it is artificial and horrid…and I just don't pander to it.’
It was a curious comment, when he would have already known that a Conservative Party election broadcast,The Journey , would show him rediscovering his south London roots from the windows of his prime ministerial limo.
But the film itself was neither the conceit of its director, John Schlesinger, nor of Tory Central Office's heavily criticised image-makers.
It was a dramatised version of Major's favourite spiel about himself, used to great effect at the parliamentary selection meeting for his present seat 16 years ago.
‘It's a long way from the back streets of Brixton to the green fields of Huntingdon,’ he impressed on the county set.
The same trusty formula helped him to wrongfoot Squire Hurd in the leadership contest, and, in an interview with the Daily Mail three days before the ballot, the soapbox made a useful appearance.
‘Do you know where I started my politics?’ asked candidate Major.
‘As a Brixton Young Conservative.
And where I learned to speak?
Standing on a soapbox in the middle of Brixton market…
If you learn your politics like that, you get a different experience of life.’
There he was, trotting out the same old tale for the umpteenth time to Sir Robin Day on Thames Television's This Week , when, inspired by a throwaway remark by his interviewer, it dawned on him that the soapbox trick might succeed with the country as a whole.
This is doubtful: the electorate, being composed of ordinary people, is less impressionable than Tory grandees.
Major has been embarrassed by unauthorised revelations: about his engagingly eccentric brother, Terry, who still bears the family's original surname, Major-Ball; and his sister Pat, now retired and in straitened circumstances, who was once taken to court for failing to pay the rates.
Oddly, as foreign secretary, Major asked his old school, Rutlish Grammar, to deposit his records in Surrey county archives and keep them secret; later, as Prime Minister, he was to claim that he could not remember how many O levels he had.
But his background is more mundane than the rags-to-riches story, recounted in numerous tabloid hagiographies, suggests: his circus-artist father was a small businessman by the time Major was born and both his parents were Conservative voters.
His family slipped down the social ladder when his father's garden-gnome business collapsed, but that could explain Major's obsession, less with classlessness than with petit bourgeois respectability.
At 13, he watched Macmillan deliver his Budget speech in 1953 on a trip to Westminster, courtesy of his local Labour MP, Marcus Lipton.
He was immediately enthralled: ‘I don't think there was a moment after that…when the wish to work at the House of Commons wasn't at the back of my mind.’
Major arrived at Westminster with a large crop of newcomers in 1979.
In those Thatcherite times, there was little mention of his sympathy for the one-nation Tory, Iain Mac-leod.
Within two years, he had joined the payroll, first as a PPS, then as a junior whip.
Thatcher reportedly singled him out for promotion when he was honest enough to tell her that backbenchers were uneasy about the state of the economy: like the young George Washington, he trembled, but could not tell a lie.
It was a useful means, anyway, of catching her eye.
A Tory admirer once told the Guardian : ‘John is like a snail.
You don't see him move, but he gets from A to B. And he leaves no slime.’
This was certainly true of his year as social security minister, where Major would prefer to be remembered for dispensing fivers to freezing pensioners in the form of severe-weather payments (even though they received only one each for one week), than for helping to draft the 1988 Social Security Act.
Benefit payments to unemployed 16 and 17 year olds were stopped, resulting in a surge in the numbers of young homeless; DSS grants were replaced by pernicious Social Fund loans; the waiting-period for benefits for the ‘voluntarily unemployed’ more than doubled; and the cut-off period for mortgage interest payments for the unemployed was reduced to 16 weeks.
Later, he would complain irritably about his silver-spooned Tory colleagues: ‘These people have no idea what is like to run out of money at the end of the week.’
He did, but did not let it interfere with his judgment.
With the exception of a brief sojourn at the Foreign Office, Major's other posts have been economic (chief secretary to the Treasury from 1987–89 and chancellor of the exchequer from 1989–90).
These were the boom and bust years, for which Major has conveniently disclaimed all responsibility.
As Prime Minister and First Lord of the Treasury, he has yet to experience a single quarter's growth in output (excluding oil revenues), but nor will he accept any blame for the recession.
It was all Lawson's fault, he ‘confessed’ in this election campaign, and that of the world recession.
It was as if the phrase, ‘If it isn't hurting, it isn't working,’ had never crossed his lips.
His Teflon-coating has been peeling off in the heat of the election campaign.
After 16 months in office, Major has a record second to none in its wretchedness.
Unemployment is up from 1.7 million to 2.7 million; home repossessions are running at 75,000 a year; companies are going bankrupt at the rate of 1,000 a week.
In the trough of the recession, imports are still managing to outstrip exports.
In response, Major has only been able to parrot the phrase that has sustained him since his first day in office: ‘All the ingredients of recovery are in place…’
Labour has dubbed Major the ‘do-nothing’ premier, but that is not the whole picture.
Asked about tax cuts when he was seeking to become leader, he replied tartly: ‘I don't spend money I haven't got.’
As chancellor, he told the Independent that he would consider cutting public spending or raising indirect taxes in order to sustain a balanced budget.
But since the entire British electorate is now sitting on his cushion, he has increased public spending and raised taxes simultaneously, allowing the PSBR to rise to £28 billion.
He complained about Tory colleagues: ‘They don't know what it is to run out of money at the end of the week.’
He did, but didn't let it affect his judgement
The public sector and its workers have benefited from a series of pre-election sweeteners, but Major's one ‘big idea’, the Citizen's Charter, has offered diminishing returns for the Tories from its inception.
It turned out to be nothing more than a charter for busybodies, lacking muscle and new money.
It has been dropped into a black hole for the duration of the campaign at the insistence of the spin-doctors.
The charter explicitly promised the privatisation of British Rail, detailed plans for which were supposed to be set out in a white paper.
The Tories had intended to harness a number of government white papers to manifesto commitments in a rolling election campaign from the New Year onwards.
They hoped it would be a means of convincing voters — and their own restless supporters — that the party was still bursting with initiatives after 13 years in office.
In the event, they were unable to produce them.
Plans to privatise the railways foundered in acrimony beween Transport Secretary Malcolm Rifkind and Major; plans for a white paper on health were abandoned for fear of boosting Labour's agenda.
Thus was the contrary proved: the party was bereft of new ideas altogether.
Even the Tory manifesto wastes space knocking Labour, instead of offering, as in 1987, ‘The Next Moves Forward’.
An early election would have concealed these problems.
Labour leaders were delighted with Major's accession, because they suspected he would not have the nerve to ‘cut and run’ early.
Heseltine, in contrast, would have been obliged to seek his own mandate as soon as the Gulf war ended.
In the course of that war, Major became more popular than Churchill, winning the approval of more than 70 per cent of the public.
Suddenly, Labour wobbled as it appeared that the Tories might have picked a genuine winner.
But Major has never managed to translate his popularity into votes, and even his personal lead over Kinnock has evaporated in the course of the campaign.
Under his premiership, the Conservatives have lost one election after another.
First came Ribble Valley in March, at the end of the war and Major's first 100 days in office.
The 14th-safest Tory seat in the country fell to the Liberal Democrats.
In Monmouth, two months later, the second-safest Tory seat in Wales was captured by Labour.
Kincardine and Deeside in Scotland and Langbaurgh in Teeside completed the Tory by-election débâcle last autumn.
As for the May local elections, their verdict matched precisely today's opinion polls: despite a lacklustre performance, Labour was on course to become the largest party in a hung parliament.
When Major stood outside Downing Street and promised ‘a nation at ease with itself’, he was seen as a leader who would scoop up the votes of ‘don't knows’ and floating social democrats.
For all his efforts — and those of Dr Owen — there remain as many ‘don't knows’ as ever, who are moving, if at all, in the direction of the Liberal Democrats.
Incredibly, he was also hailed as the saviour of the Conservative Party in Scotland, another claim that has been silently buried.
All these rebuffs by the electorate have taken place during a year in which Major has played the role of world leader: the Gulf war; the Soviet coup; the chairmanship of the G7 countries; the Maastricht treaty on European economic, monetary and political union.
It made no difference.
This explains why the general election was delayed time after time: clearly, all that mattered was the recession.
Party chairman Chris Patten, who repeatedly urged caution, was not to know that Treasury forecasts of recovery were baseless.
Without economic revival, the Conservatives have been hard-pressed to identify a single reason that would justify giving them another five years in office.
Major, their prize asset, has crumpled before them.
The term ‘Majorism’, briefly promoted by the Prime Minister's Office, was frowned on by Tory Central Office.
Now we know why: there is no substance to it.
ELECTION WATCH Passive wanking Vicky Hutchings marches off with Class War, and gets a big surprise Saturday 4 April
‘Ooh, look at all the police vans.
I wonder what's happening,’ says a well-modulated female voice in Trafalgar Square.
‘I think it's some sort of demonstration, Moira,’ replies a man with ‘husband’written all over him.
‘How exciting !’ she cries.
He takes her arm as they go for a closer look.
‘I'm June from Bristol.
I'm working class, I'm a woman, I'm a lesbian,’ shrieks the tannoy held in the hands of the woman we are fairly sure is June from Bristol.
But it could be ‘Jane’— the PA system is a little less than perfect.
Credentials properly established, June, a member of Bristol Class War, continues: ‘I'd just like to say, right?
That this fucking election is a complete and utter load of bollocks, right?
The three parties, or whatever fucking parties are standing in this election, we're not fooled by those fucking wankers.
The only way we're going to get anything changed in our lives is by fucking fighting for it as working-class people in solidarity, right?
Yeah?
There is no point in this fucking election.
We've got to get rid of the bastards.’
I feel, rather than see, Moira suddenly remembering that she has an awful lot of things to do somewhere else.
Today is the day for those who think the election is a load of old bollocks to register their presence.
The Anti-Election Alliance is an umbrella grouping, largely energised by the Class War Federation, the direct-action movement that grew out of the paper Class War in the mid-eighties.
According to the leaflet, besides Class War, those backing the rally are London Greenpeace, the Anarchist-Communist Federation, the Direct Action Movement, the 121 Centre, the Anarchist Black Cross & Affiliates, and Haringey Solidarity Group.
The rally has been banned by the Department of the Environment.
In a letter to Tim Scargill, the Class War Federation's national coordinating secretary, the DoE has stated that using Trafalgar Square for this purpose is ‘not appropriate.
We regret that permission cannot, therefore, be granted.’
One of the reasons for the ban, says a press officer at the DoE, even though the police are quite amiable about the rally, is that ‘on the same day Class War applied [to have it], Tim Scargill was quoted in the Guardian as say-ing: ‘Let's get on the streets and start making a few waves.'’
But the rally is going ahead, I point out, and the police have it on their duty-roster.
‘If it goes ahead, it does so without our permission.’
What does that mean, exactly?
‘Well, obviously, we won't have people out there putting up barricades.
On this occasion, the police have the power to move people on, to take names, or, depending on what happens, to make arrests.
Everything is being left to the police's discretion.’
This sounds promising.
Attempting to get in touch with Class War, I hit Trouble.
Not with Class War, but with the Hackney Gazette , which has run a piece on the forthcoming rally.
I speak to the reporter who wrote the piece.
Not having a copy of Class War: Britain's Most Unruly Tabloid to hand, and doubtful of getting one at short notice, I ask if he has the telephone number.
He offers to sell it to me for £25.
When I say I've never, in my life, sold a telephone number or refused to help a fellow journalist, he says it is ‘union policy’, and that I ‘can't be a real journalist’ if I find this surprising.
I put the phone down on the greedy little tyke.
He rings back to inform me that I'm the rudest person he has ever met.
Of course, all I do is ring Verso, which has just published Class War's book (Class War.
A Decade of Disorder , £7.95), and am put in touch with Scargill immediately.
‘Now the rally's been banned,’ says Scargill, who looks nothing like his more-famous uncle, ‘I expect it will attract a lot of people.’
How many?
‘Oh, 1,000 to 1,500.’
Are you expecting any violence?
‘We're not looking for a conflict.
The mad bomber image is no good.’
But what about where it says in the book that peaceful demos are ‘passive wanks’?
‘Oh, we've told the police that under no circumstances will we take any provocative action from them.’
Fighting stuff, eh?
At the rally, numbering about 1,500 as Scargill predicted, I eavesdrop unashamedly.
Up on Nelson's column they're bellowing about how it's the ‘time to destroy.
Now's the time for revolution.’
Down below, they're discussing the election: ‘Do you know, I've noticed a lot less humour at this election.
I've not seen any funny posters.’
‘Yes, everyone seems to be taking it so seriously.’
I swim like a fish through the peaceful, chattering crowd.
Above us, they indulge in fits of nostalgia, remembering the heady days of the Poll Tax riots, and in artificially enlarging the number present with all those who are there in spirit: ‘There are a lot of people who would like to be on this demonstration.
People locked up in gaol.’
Not exactly a ringing endorsement, I would have thought.
Beside me, two London Class War activists moan about the present.
‘There's been quite a loss of momentum lately in my area.’
‘Yes, I've noticed that too.
I'm from Hackney.
What about you?’
‘Lambeth.’
An organiser rushes up and gives a mass of leaflets to a man dressed in combat gear near me.
‘When the march starts, start handing these out to the public.’
Combat Gear appears confused: ‘The public?’ he queries.
‘Yes.
[Pause]Those people who aren't demonstrators.’
The man gazes, bewildered, at the leaflets.
He starts to read one, clearly hoping to find the answer in the small print.
Nelson's column unexpectedly has now been taken over by a large, bearded Welshman, called Davydd.
‘As an astrologer, I must tell you there is a conjunction in Uranus.’
‘Up your anus!’ yells the crowd.
‘You have three years to the revolution,’ shouts Davydd, before being edged off.
The march moves off, the people chanting lustily: ‘Stuff the election up your arse’, watched benevolently by the police.
We are to walk the quarter of a mile to the Commons and then back again for some ‘final remarks’.
At the Houses of Parliament, the cry goes up: ‘Burn it down.’
But their hearts aren't in it.
A few times, the marchers halt for photo-calls.
As we pass one café, the waiters race out to drag tables and chairs inside.
The crowd jeers: ‘Don't be frightened.
We're not going to hurt you.’
Bourgeois plate-glass windows are safe today.
It's becoming increasingly clear that Class War's gone soft, what with the film and the book.
It's to be the usual passive wanks from now on.
Later, I talk to two young Class War paper-sellers.
A jolly white-haired lady in a pale blue quilted coat comes up.
‘I'm going home now,’ she says.
‘Take care,’ the one calledMick replies.
Who's that, I ask.
‘That's my mum.’
Is she a member of Class War?
‘No, she just came along to support me.’
What are you planning next, I demand.
‘Probably I'll go for a pint with my mates,’ he replies.
I explain that I was asking about Class War Federation's next event.
‘Oh, there'll be some things happening on election night.
But I'm not sure I can give you the details.’
I'll take a bet on it being peaceful, however.
Not Class War.
More Class Disagreement.
And not a sausage in the Sunday papers.
Ships have gone down, taxes have gone up, the Home Secretary got a criminal record, John Major said a lot of silly things.
Jolyon Jenkins and Sarah Baxter give…
100 reasons not to vote Tory
Ten ways life has got worse under the Tories
1)
Rats: there are more of them, and not all are members of the Conservative Party.
According to a survey by the Institution of Environmental Health Officers, the rat population increased by 20 per cent in a single year, 1988–89, and it has almost certainly rocketed since.
What can you expect if councils aren't given enough money to collect the rubbish?
2)
Museum charges: the number of people visiting the Science Museum (for example) was 53 per cent lower in 1991 than in 1981 — thanks to the fact that you now have to pay.
3)
First, there was Sunday Sport .
Now You Can Get It Every Day.
Snigger snigger.
4)
Hurricanes: we never used to have them; now they seem to be a regular meteorological fixture.
Blame it on the government's refusal to do anything about global warming.
5)
Higher taxes: the overall proportion of national income taken in taxes has risen from 34.75 per cent in 1978 to 37 per cent, despite Norman Lamont's protestations to the contrary.
6)
Beggars in the streets.
Hell for the beggars, and (slightly less) hell for the ordinary citizen, forced to make a choice every ten minutes between Cheeryble and Scrooge.
7)
Bus deregulation: an absolute disaster, outside London.
One third of all bus services are late (according to Bus Watch), and passenger numbers fell by 20 per cent in the metropolitan and shire counties.
Small operators have been driven into bankruptcy or bought up by the giants, and buses have become older and less reliable.
8)
Cable television: do you want your road dug up so the neighbours can watch pornography?
9)
Libraries: fewer books, shorter hours, more charges.
10)
The disappearance of the word ‘passenger’ in favour of‘customer’.
Now, as a letter to the Times pointed out last week, the word ‘train’ is being replaced by ‘service’— as in ‘Please do not open the doors until the service has come to a complete standstill.’
Ten ideas that even the Tories eventually realised were too daft to implement
1)
The poll tax, of course.
2)
Trying to privatise nuclear power.
The government had hoped to make the private sector take over nuclear power stations, but John Wakeham eventually had to admit that no one wanted them.
Instead, we all pay a ‘fossil fuel levy’ in our electricity bills to keep the nuclear industry going.
3)
Identity cards for football supporters.
One of Mrs Thatcher's personal brainwaves, abandoned after the Hillsborough disaster.
4)
Trying to privatise British Rail.
John Major had a nostalgic vision of old regional companies being resurrected and sold off; Malcolm Rifkind wanted to privatise the individual bits — for example, Intercity.
The manifesto now admits that only freight services will be sold outright, and talks vaguely about ‘franchising’ the rest.
5)
Dangerous dogs.
When little Rucksana Khan was savaged by a pit bull terrier, Kenneth Baker wanted to kill all 10,000 pit bulls in Britain.
He later calmed down, and agreed neutering and registration were sufficient.
6)
Housing Action Trusts.
The government first designated six areas to be turned into HATs, without the tenants being given a say.
When tenants were finally given a vote, they all turned down the idea.
The guilty men: Nicholas Ridley and William Waldegrave.
7)
Withdrawing green-form legal aid for refugees.
Another of Kenneth Baker's little schemes, as Home Secretary.
It all fell apart when UKIAS, the agency that was going to represent refugees instead of lawyers, disintegrated in front of Baker's eyes.
8)
Abolishing the right of silence.
Douglas Hurd, as Home Secretary, proposed this one.
But the Guildford Four were released at just the wrong time, and the government quietly put the scheme on the back burner — indefinitely, it would seem.
9)
Electronic tagging of offenders.
It's in Kenneth Baker's Criminal Justice Act, but after the disastrous experiments with tagging remand prisoners, it seems unlikely that it will ever be implemented.
There's nothing about it in the manifesto.
10)
Testing of seven-year olds.
Once more, Kenneth Baker is our man.
To start with, there were to be 80 attainment targets per child, and the tests were to take 30 hours.
This has gradually been whittled down to nine attainment targets per child, to take 12 to 15 hours, and the tests are to be paper and pencil only.
Testing for 14 year olds has been almost as great a disaster: the first pilot scheme was abandoned halfway through at a cost of £8 million.
Ten Tory atrocities
Major atrocities
1)
Trade minister Tony Newton's visit to Baghdad in 1988 to offer Saddam Hussein £340 million of trade credits — just after he had poison-gassed Kurdish villagers.
2)
The Herald of Free Enterprise , which lived up to its name and capsized; 190 people were killed, thanks to sloppiness in P & O ‘from top to bottom’; at the top, Jeffrey Stirling, chairman of P & O, was given a peerage.
3)
The replacement of single-payment social security grants with loans from the ‘social fund’; unfortunately, those poor enough to need loans are not allowed them because they won't be able to repay them.
4)
The government's support for Pol Pot's Khmer Rouge at the United Nations.
5)
The Home Office's decision to send Kurdish and Tamil refugees back to Turkey and Sri Lanka, where they were tortured.
Minor atrocities
6)
John Selwyn Gummer force-feeding beef to his daughter Cordelia as a PR stunt.
7)
The great Wandsworth Council goose massacre (planned, but never executed).
8)
Wheal Jane: the government refused to provide money for pumping out disused Cornish tin mines.
As everyone involved predicted, the mine flooded, and cadmium and other toxic heavy metals poured into the river Carnon.
9)
The wrought iron gates at the entrance to Downing Street.
10)
Brent Council: a minority Tory administration kept in power by the two-member ‘Democratic Labour Party’, two Africanist former Labour councillors, one of whom has publicly praised Idi Amin and is under investigation by the fraud squad.
Ten people who'll be sorry if the Tories lose
1)
Duncan Nichol, chief executive of the National Health Service, and enthusiastic propagandist for the government's ‘reforms’.
He might like to book a fortnight's holiday, starting 10 April, rather than meet Health Secretary Robin Cook.
2)
Shaun Woodward, Conservative Central Office's director of communications, and former producer on the ailing That's Life , whereto he may have to return.
3)
Lord Griffiths, head of the Schools Examinations and Assessment Council.
A diehard Thatcherite, formerly of the Centre for Policy Studies, imposed on the SEAC in a putsch.
Retirement beckons.
4)
David Owen.
Will Kinnock be offering a seat in the Lords to the former Labour Foreign Secretary?
We think not.
5)
George Bush.
A good Gulf war is no guarantee of success at home.
6)
Lord Rees Mogg, aka the Pornfinder General.
Labour has pledged to abolish the Broadcasting Standards Council, which he heads.
7)
Robin Leigh-Pemberton.
Mrs Thatcher's former banker, and Denis' golfing chum, appointed head of the Bank of England to general astonishment in the world of finance.
8)
Lord Palumbo.
Tory-supporting modernist, and chairman of the Arts Council.
Probably not the first choice of the new Labour arts minister.
9)
William Brown.
William who ?
This little-known company director, chairman of Walsham brothers, may be on the highest salary in Britain: £8 million, according to Labour Research .
Under Labour's tax regime, he'd have been £1.5 million worse off.
10)
Stella Rimington.
The head of MI5, and formerly a member of the ‘domestic subversion’ department, which snooped on Patricia Hewitt and Harriet Harman (who went on to become Kinnock's press secretary at the last election, and Labour's health spokeswoman, respectively).
Will prime minister Kinnock call for the files?
Ten leagues that Britain is at the bottom of
1)
The rate of increase in unemployment in Britain last year was higher than in any other country in the western world, bar Finland.
2)
Since 1979, manufacturing growth has been weaker than that of any other EC country.
Our industrial capacity is now smaller than France and Italy's.
3)
Britain has the least-trained industrial workforce in the EC.
Only 36 per cent of our labour force is skilled; in Spain and Portugal, the figure is more than 50 per cent; in Germany, 62 per cent .
4)
There have been more judgments against Britain at the European Court of Human Rights than there have been against any other country.
From 1959–1990, there were 27 cases involving at least one violation — almost twice as many as that of our nearest competitor, Austria.
5)
Britain has more prisoners per head of population than any other western European country.
Turkey used to be higher, but Britain has now beaten it.
6)
Britain has the worst public provision for under-five year olds in the EC.
Less than a quarter of pre-school children have nursery places.
7)
Only Britain has refused to sign the EC social charter, offering rights to part-time and full-time workers.
At an average of 43.6 per week, we have the longest working hours in the EC.
8)
London Underground is the most expensive metropolitan rail system in any EC capital city.
9)
England and Wales not only have the highest crime rates in Europe — they also have the fastest rates of increase.
10)
Britain has the highest emissions of sulphur dioxide — a prime cause of acid rain — in the EC.
By 1993, we will be producing 28 per cent of the total; France and Germany just over 10 per cent each.
Ten law 'n' order embarrassments
1)
Kenneth Baker, the first known Home Secretary to acquire a criminal record while in office, for illegally sending a Zairean refugee back to Zaire.
2)
Kenneth Baker, once more, who refused to resign after two armed IRA prisoners escaped from Brixton prison, even though the police had given the prison authorities five months' warning.
3)
Asil Nadir, who gave £1.5 million to the Conservative Party, and was then charged with theft and false accounting.
4)
Ernest Saunders, who took the Tories at their word, and went to prison for his trouble.
5)
Gerald Ronson, ditto.
6)
The Strangeways riot, which went on for days longer than necessary because of squabbling between the Home Office prison department and the prison governor.
7)
The crime statistics: recorded crime up 102 per cent under the Tories.
8)
The case of Stefan Kiszko, wrongly jailed nfor 16 years — thanks, in part, to the eccentric defence mounted by his barrister, David Waddington, who went on to become a pro-hanging Tory Home Secretary.
(The prosecuting barrister was one Peter Taylor, recently appointed Lord Chief Justice, to clean up after Lord Lane.)
9)
Pollution laws: Britain has infringed more air and water pollution directives than any other country in the EC; according to the advocate general of the European Court of Justice, it exceeds EC nitrate standards in drinking water; and faces prosecution for 138 substandard beaches.
10)
The strange appearance in Wandsworth gaol of diplomatic mail from the Canadian embassy.
The Foreign Office had a contract with the prison to launder diplomatic bags.
Ten Tory MPs who came and went in mysterious circumstances
1)
John Moore.
Early prototype for John Major, described by Brian Walden as having ‘future leader written all over him’.
He was torn apart as health and social security secretary and suffered demotion before resigning.
When he re-emerged to help Thatcher's leadership campaign, it was obvious she wouldn't last either.
2)
Norman Fowler.
Resigned as employment secretary in January 1990 to spend more time with his family.
Has since resigned from his family to spend more time with John Major.
3)
Peter Walker.
‘Wet’ with a rat's sense of timing.
Resigned as Welsh secretary on eve of Mid-Staffs by-election, fuelling speculation that Thatcher would be ousted.
Quit Maxwell Communications Corporation after four months as chairman-designate with £100,000 in his pocket before the Cap'n's death.
4)
Sir Geoffrey Howe.
Self-proclaimed first cabinet minister to resign because he was in agreement with government policy.
5)
Patrick Nicholls.
Junior environment minister found careering at the wheel after midnight during the Tory party conference in Bournemouth.
Earlier, he had spear-headed an anti-alcohol campaign.
6)
John Browne.
Took his ex-wife to court for suspending his maintenance payments.
Deselected by his party for abusing the register of members' interests.
Attempted to advise Thatcher on the situation in the Middle East while on a secret retainer from a Lebanese company.
7)
Alan Amos.
We have his word that he is not gay, so we will never know what drew him to Hampstead Heath after dark; nor why he wears a wedding ring when he is unmarried.
8)
David Mudd.
Professional Cornishman who resigned the Tory whip in protest at tin mining closures, but was too loyal to tell anyone.
Sebastian Coe is now after his seat in Falmouth and Camborne.
9)
Alan Clark.
Why did this right-wing Tory minister announce that he was retiring from politics just three weeks before the election was announced, when his campaign posters had already been printed?
10)
William Waldegrave.
Will never be seen in public after his press conference in the ‘Jennifer's Ear’ soap.
Don't be fooled by his title: he remains Health Secretary in name only.
Ten embarrassing quotations
1)
‘I do think about it quite a lot, actually.
About picking up the pieces and wondering where we go from there, even though I know there are other things he's interested in.
I think he could cope all right but at the back of his mind will always be the fact that possibly he let the party down.
It does worry me’— Norma Major on the prospect of losing the election, March 1992.
2)
‘Pain there may be, but gain there will also be.
By this time next year, the prospects will be distinctly brighter.’
— Norman Lamont as Chief Secretary to the Treasury, March 1990.
3)
‘I am only too aware I was responsible for the legislation…
When I see how some of the other licences have been awarded, I am mystified and heartbroken…’— Margaret Thatcher to Bruce Gyngell of TV-am, after he lost his franchise, October 1991.
4)
‘We've put the homeless into homes but some just go back on the street begging.
They are the people you step on when you come out of the opera.’
— Sir George Young, housing minister, June 1991
5)
‘A price well worth paying,’ Norman Lamont on unemployment, February 1991.
6)
‘We can't afford to have people lingering around for a recuperative holiday…
We want the minimum beds necessary.
We probably still have more than we need.’
Virginia Bottomley, health minister, February 1992.
7)
‘He should have been a candidate in…
Wolverhampton, where his colour would have been more appropriate.’
— Dudley Aldridge, former Tory Mayor of Cheltenham, on the town's black Conservative candidate, John Taylor, January 1992
8)
‘Under a Labour government, this country would be swamped with immigrants of every colour and race, and on any excuse of asylum or bogus marriage, or just plain deception’— Sir ‘Nicky’ Fairbairn, April 1992.
9)
‘A cheap and cheerful service at one moment in the day for typists, and perhaps a more luxurious service for the civil service and businessmen who might travel…earlier or later than the typists’— Transport minister Roger Freeman's blueprint for the rail service of the future, January 1992.
10)
‘If Neil Kinnock ever became prime minister I would join CND.’— Norman Tebbit, July 1988.
Ten fictitious cover-ups you wish had been exposed (courtesy of Mat Coward)
1)
It was really Denis Thatcher who sired the child Cecil P took the blame for.
2)
The channel tunnel was never intended as a means of communication, but as a storage facility for radioactive waste from Iraq.
3)
It was Mark Thatcher who passed all the North Sea oil money to Robert Maxwell to invest in BCCI, acting on inside information from family friend John Major.
4)
Thatcher really did have a sex change, and the one she changed with was Paddy Ashdown, who used to be a man.
5)
The disgusting truth behind Michael Heseltine and Leon Brittan's simultaneous cabinet resignations, and how the whole Westland affair had to be manufactured as a smokescreen to hide it.
6)
Edwina Currie and Simon Hughes not only have the same face, voice and mannerisms — they are in fact the same person: creations of a con- and drag-artist who dreamed up the idea to draw two salaries, and now wishes he hadn't.
7)
John voted for Michael in the first ballot.
And for Sir Anthony Meyer the time before that.
8)
It's worse than we feared: Chris Patten eats children.
9)
Keith Joseph was blackmailed into retirement by radical genealogists, who proved he's a negro.
10)
So many Tory politicians have mysteriously ‘retired’ over the past 13 years that there must be one massive, undisclosed scandal linking them all, and involving BT shares, Jack Ruby's death, Marilyn Monroe, and the fleshy globes of a Bermondsey boy scout called Hilda.
Ten examples of the wit and wisdom of John Major
1)
‘When I am Prime Minister, I shall have jelly all the time.’
To Jeffrey Archer, on winning the leadership election.
November 1990.
2)
‘Do I look like the sort of person who would glory in anything?’
Asked how it felt to be Thatcher's heir apparent, November 1990.
3)
‘Once I put on a tie, I tend not to change it every day.
I keep it on for several days.’
April 1991.
4)
‘To tell you the truth, I can't remember.
It was round about six, seven, eight I think…
No, I don't think I had even taken any A levels when I left school.’
On his O levels.
April 1991.
He has six.
He was right about the A levels anyway.
5)
‘Unknown to the public, I do have a sense of humour, don't you think?’
Interview in the Sun , June 1991.
6)
‘I do not believe that a recession is likely or necessary.’
As Chancellor of the Exchequer, December 1990.
7)
‘It will take some time, it always does, to change the economy.
It's like turning the Titanic round, as you know.’
Interview in the Financial Times as Chancellor of the Exchequer, October 1990.
8)
‘I don't recall asking the Kurds to mount this particular insurrection.’
His peevish response to the Gulf War aftermath, April 1991
9)
‘I'll tell you about the poll tax.
We were bounced into it quickly.’
During the leadership contest, November 1990.
10)
‘Well, I'm only young.
If I do make a cock-up of it, I can always do something else.’
Interview with Jilly Cooper, April 1991.
We can hardly wait.
The Disenfranchised
Invisible voters A million people could lose their vote because of mental disability, says Dr Billie Shepperdson and Agnes Fletcher.
Overleaf, Mike George on the plight of the physically disabled
‘It would be a travesty,’ remarks the mother of a Down's syndrome man of average abilities, asked if her son will be voting in this election; while the father of a man with serious behaviour problems and below average abilities says: ‘He votes what we're voting.
I put the pen in his hand and he marks it himself and puts it in the box.’
Who can vote in this election?
A 24-year-old university-educated anorexic confined to hospital for his or her own safety?
A person of 18 with Down's syndrome and a mental age of four, living with his or her parents?
A property-owning 55-year-old drunk on his way home from the pub?
A prisoner on remand?
According to the Representation of the People Act 1983, compulsorily detained patients are the only people who are disenfranchised automatically because of mental impairment.
They cannot have their names on the electoral roll and, as a result, cannot vote.
Voluntary patients can register on the electoral roll and can have postal votes.
Similarly, convicts cannot vote, while unconvicted (remand) prisoners can use a postal vote.
Apart from those who have been deprived of their freedom by the state, and at the discretion of the electoral registration officer, anyone over the age of 18 is eligible to register to vote.
On polling day, it is the responsibility of the polling officer to decide whether someone who is under the influence of drink or drugs, or someone who has a severe learning disability, should or should not vote.
In the latter case, it is extremely rare for a potential voter who is in possession of a polling card to be turned away.
An ESRC-funded study at the department of psychology of the University College of Swansea of 52 people in their twenties with Down's syndrome found that there is obviously confusion about who can and cannot vote, that there is clear overlap in the abilities of those who vote and those who do not and that decisions on voting are not made strictly on the abilities of the person with Down's syndrome.
Moreover, in some cases, votes are cast improperly.
Of the 51 people in the study whose voting behaviour was known, 47 were entered on the household electoral form.
Six others were entered, but with an explanation of the person's mental condition.
Only one of these six received a polling card.
(One parent was unsure whether or not a card was sent.)
So at least eight people with Down's syndrome were disenfranchised at an early stage by their parents or their electoral registration authority.
Some carers feel a relatively able Down's person is not sufficiently competent to vote.
‘She's never been allowed to vote.
I put her name on the papers but never got a card back,’ explains the sister of a Down's syndrome woman of average ability.
Others assume a profoundly handicapped person is able to vote.
‘I take her up and they allow me to sign.
If I gave her a pencil she'd chuck it back at you.
I vote as I want,’ says the father of a severely impaired young woman.
Anyone suffering from a mental handicap and who is living in a mental hospital must complete a declaration that he or she wishes to register for the right to vote.
The form must be completed ‘without assistance’— which is a difficult task for many residents — and witnessed by an authorised health authority officer.
At present, people living in mental hospitals are therefore disadvantaged compared with those living at home, who can be registered to vote without any test of competence.
However, from the South Wales study, it does seem that not all those living at home do register, and not all who register vote.
Only half of the young people actually exercised their right to vote.
The reason for not voting was only occasionally the apathy of parents.
For the most part, parents mistakenly thought their children were not legally entitled to vote, despite having voting cards, or they judged that their children would not understand what it was all about.
Other carers are deterred by the Down's syndrome person's physical inability to make the mark, rather than by the lack of understanding: ‘He knows what he likes but he couldn't do the cross.
They wouldn't allow me to.
He hates Mrs Thatcher.
You can't go into the booth with them and I can't tell him,’ says the mother of a very able young man.
Of the 25 who did vote, three were Conservative supporters and four Labour, although two of these asked the advice of their parents.
Seven others made up their own minds, but the remaining 11 simply voted as their parents instructed, or their parents voted for them.
Only one had a postal vote.
Many of the young people in the study had made their opinions known to carers.
For example, this very independent young man: ‘He hates Margaret Thatcher.
At election time we have a talk and he watches TV and then it's up to him where he puts his cross.
He's enjoying himself.
Let him put it where he wants.
He's a proper politician.
He loves Neil Kinnock.
So we tell him who's the candidate for this district.
When he came 18, he had forms.
I explained he was Down's syndrome.
I thought that would be that, but they said he could have a vote, and he loves to go.
If it was a general election, he knows about that.
He's very interested, you know, when they have these party conferences — he'll sit and watch that.
Doesn't matter which conference it is, he's watching it and he's got his own ideas about it.’
While the presiding officer in charge of a polling station has the right to ask questions of any voter whose identity or capacity to vote is in doubt, no one who attended at the station said they had been challenged.
Some parents were allowed to complete the voting forms for their children, and others were certainly allowed to tell their children what party to vote for.
‘It's really two votes for me,’ said one parent.
So who should be allowed to vote in this election?
The range and degree of mental impairment is obviously vast, yet, with the continued erosion of the education and the health services and the shift towards community care, these are people who desperately need a vote.
Disabled people are potentially a significant electoral force.
More than a million people in Britain have some degree of learning disability, with some 160,000 severely affected.
In most areas, the votes of mentally handicapped people may make little difference but in very marginal constituencies, such as Brecon and Radnor, where there are approximately 250 people with a severe mental handicap and where the majority was only 56 at the last election, the voting patterns of even small populations could have a crucial effect.
Disabling democracy
‘I just stopped voting when I came here,’ says a disabled woman in residential care.
‘It's all the same here, so I don't vote any more.’
Another agrees: ‘The world stays the same for me anyhow, being here.’
Some physically disabled people like these may not want to vote, but there are probably far more who would like to, but can't.
A survey by the Spastics Society during the 1987 general election found that half the polling stations surveyed were inaccessible for people with disabilities.
Many disabled people could not travel to the polling station, and few knew beforehand whether it was accessible, or even whether they could get into the booths.
Alf Morris, a Labour MP in the last parliament, estimates that about four million disabled people are unable to vote in person for these reasons (more if some of the million-plus full-time carers are included).
Yet, in 1987, fewer than 900,000 used postal or proxy votes instead.
In any case, proxy votes are a poor alternative.
‘It's the right of every citizen to go to their polling station to vote on the day, but disabled people don't have that right,’ says Richard Wood, head of the British Council of Disabled People.
He adds: ‘We should be able to make our minds up right to the moment when we go into the booth, just like anybody else.
Proxy or postal votes deny us that right, and there is too much scope for abuse when you hand over your vote to someone else.’
Clive Evers of the Alzheimer's Disease Society points to a number of other reasons for the lack of registration and voting among residents.
Some parents or relatives don't think it's important to get their friend or relative registered.
Some home managers or owners say they don't want to bother residents with this sort of thing.
The government recently spent £750,000 on publicity aimed at giving those living overseas a vote — 34,500 registered as a result, nearly £22 a vote.
By contrast, it spent only £14,500 on publicity among older and disabled people in this country, about 0.2p per vote.
Labour's spokesperson for community care, Jeff Rooker, recently produced a survey of electoral registration officers' efforts to establish voting rights for housebound people and those in residential homes.
He found that the proportion of over-70s registered for a proxy/postal vote varied from 0.7 per cent to 25 per cent in different parts of the country; this variation has little or nothing to do with geographical or demographic factors.
Only 14 per cent of registration officers said they had taken positive action to get information to the half million people in homes or hostels.
The Home Office gives officers a list of suggestions about how to contact voters, but there's no formal monitoring of its effectiveness.
Rooker's survey shows that even the most diligent of officers meet with obstruction.
One in Humberside said: ‘We contacted 33 homes and got only nine replies despite post-paid envelopes.’
Another in Hampshire said: ‘Wardens phone to say residents aren't capable of expressing a choice.’
The survey also revealed that some GPs charge sick or disabled people for signing their proxy/postal vote form.
According to the Home Office this practice is ‘frowned upon’, but it is not illegal.
Lack of access to absent voting rights is only one reason for the low take-up of proxy/postal voting.
The Spastics Society survey shows that many dislike this form of voting, especially if they have to get their form signed by a doctor.
Disenfranchisement not only results from these practical difficulties; disillusionment among disabled people is widespread.
‘I don't think any of the parties actually think about disabled people.’
Another agreed: ‘I found that when the canvassers come to the door, and this is true of all parties I think, on the whole they feel embarrassed if a disabled person goes to the door and they always ask for my husband.’
One person commented that when the local MP came to talk to his disability group he told them how good it was that they ‘got on their own feet and did things’— which didn't go down too well with the wheelchair users.
The Home Office appears to have no clear idea why two million voters are not registered, nor why 11 million people did not vote in 1987.
But it seems likely that more than four million disabled people and full-time carers are discouraged, disenfranchised and/or discriminated against when it comes to voting.
That is enough voting strength to change the outcome in more than 100 constituencies.
How about an equal opportunities policy for the franchise?
Mike George
Mat Coward's Campaign trail diary
Tuesday 31 March (continued):
I had no idea that Chris Bastard's wife was called Lavender.
‘Lavender Patten’: is this some sort of joke?
Here in Drearton ward, Harrow West constituency, there's been little sign of the other parties.
Our Tory MP did jump off his LandRover to shake my hand and take one of my leaflets the other day, but as far as I could tell I was the only voter he met that morning.
Today, the election addresses arrive in the post.
Glad to see the Official Liberal Party candidate has both a beard and a funny forename — I'm a bit of a traditionalist, myself.
The Liberal Democrat's leaflet contains the customary barefaced lie: ‘In the last four elections, local and national, we have come a good second.’
In fact, Labour came second in seven out of ten council seats, and in the Euro elections, the SLD came fourth behind the Greens.
The Natural Law Party's document looks jolly interesting.
Doubt I shall ever live quite long enough to read it, though.
A Radio Times election supplement shows the new swingometer.
It has four sections, in ascending order of size: Labour majority, hung parliament, decreasing Con majority and Con landslide.
Can only assume this was designed a long time ago, say roughly 1983; surely even Peter Snow must now realise that a Labour landslide is rather more likely than a Tory one.
Wednesday 1 April It's hard to resist the euphoria that sweeps the nation following the ‘Labour breakthrough’ polls.
But comradely conversation shows that I'm not the only one nervously remembering 1970, when faked opinion polls were used to rally the Tory vote.
ITN's political match-summariser says that ‘individually the polls are all over the place, but put them all together and you get a message you can trust’— not a science graduate, presumably.
The giant Sheffield rally looks great on TV.
I'm all in favour of this rock'n'roll style.
Reminds me of my first branch chair, an ex-miner, who used to give me a lift home in his Jag.
‘Same car Arthur's got,’ he'd note, proudly.
‘Nothing's too good for the workers.’
Thursday 2 April With just a week to go, I start rehearsing my public reaction to the result.
Labour landslide: rushing through Sainsbury's cackling like a demon, zooming up to prosperous-looking people and hurling my head back, opening my throat wide, then thrusting my face right into theirs, screaming terrifyingly into their terrified eyes ‘Ha ha ha!
We're going to take everything you own, suckers, and give it to the black communists in Zimbabwe!’
Conservative landslide: I stand on my doorstep wearing a tired grin, hair boyishly tousled, while a group of neighbours points hand-held tape recorders at me respectfully.
They look more stricken than I do.
I make an impromptu but dazzling speech about the seamless continuum of history and the inevitability of social progress.
There's more, about blips, and the difficulty of achieving perspective within one lifetime, but I haven't written that bit yet.
Decent Labour win: the drinks are on me, as I soberly consider the difficult times ahead, and the paradise that will surely succeed them.
Much talk with friends of what result we would ‘settle for’— as if we have any choice.
What would we be happy with?
In practice, almost anything: after '83 and '87, whatever happens this time is going to be a huge advance.
Friday 3 April Major, asked if recovery has already begun, replies ‘It may well have done.
One can never be sure.’
I'm sorry that the American and UK elections are overlapping.
I usually enjoy the presidentials as a spectator sport — more fun than ours, with nothing invested in the outcome.
But this year, by the time I get through all the British news, I'm too knackered to even glance at the latest adventures of Glistenin' Bill Clinton.
Last time, a friend and I got extremely drunk waiting to hear Dukakis had lost, and when the final result came through, we must have misheard it; certainly, we were quite surprised by the announcement that George Best had been elected president of the USA.
Saturday 4 April Finally get over to Hampstead, for a couple of hours street-stalling; meet lots of old friends and enemies — most agreeable, though highly nostalgic.
Arriving on the Metropolitan Line, I see dozens of Livingstone posters suddenly give way to dozens of Jacksons.
Climbing the hill to the village, spot posters, for both parties, in exactly the same windows as in last three elections: does no one ever move from here?
Hampstead High Street on a sunny Saturday, most exciting political place on earth — throbbing, crackling, but no one 's going to get hurt.
All this, and pubs open all day.
Local comrades very confident, Glenda is obviously the ideal Ham & High candidate.
In the boozer later, non-combatant pals tell me about Hampstead's strange Green candidate, whose campaign is based on slagging Glenda.
His father is allegedly a Tory councillor in Brent, cause of much conspiracytheory nudging and winking.
But what can you expect from a party that promises a 2 per cent tax cut, thus boosting consumerism?
The Green Party is an embarrassment to all serious environmentalists.
General lounge-bar agreement that Ms J will be an excellent MP, provided she doesn't do any more nude scenes.
Defensively, I point out that she was very attractive as Cleopatra with Morecambe and Wise.
True, admits an ex-Tory convert, but that was mainly the sexy wig.
Back home, I watch a TV Heaven of Jackson, in which her character's husband is called Ben Whittaker — same name as last real-life Labour MP for Hampstead.
An omen, or just plain spooky?
Sunday 5 April What they don't understand, the tactical voters, the protest voters, the principled abstainers, the half-way house shilly-shalliers, the cynical sophisticates, is that, without a Labour government, millions of us are simply defenceless: not just the actually poor, but also the but-for-the-grace-of-Bevan-there-go-I potentially poor; those of us who know that the gains of three generations can be undone in the three hours it would take to nod a Disabling Bill through a Lib-Con parliament.
We don't vote Labour because we think it will bring socialism, or because we think it will cure the slump, or even because we particularly admire its policies.
We vote Labour because it's our party, it's on our side, as it was on the side of our forefathers.
When times are good, under Labour they will be good for us; when times are bad, under Labour they will be less bad for us.
Perhaps if I lived in Bath I would have momentary doubts, but anywhere else in the country, I would rather die than not vote Labour.
My Headline of the Campaign Award goes to the Morning Star for Friday's ‘Soap box Major no longer washes.’
Doesn't he, indeed, filthy little bugger?
Can't honestly say I'm surprised.
Dave Hill At the hustings
This is a Blitz.
The shock troops are: Eric, a chartered surveyor with a Doctor Who-length scarf; Edna, a warm-hearted middle-aged lady with a red rose and a walking stick; Jim, who has a cheery north London manner and wears an anorak; Robin, with a mobile phone and a cascade of sculpted curls; and Chris Smith, gay shadow treasury hero, hoping to improve his lead in Islington South and Finsbury.
The target voters inhabit the Market estate, a council block so cunningly customised to ensure its residents' safety that getting in is more exacting than gaining entry to a Tory press conference.
First, Chris sweet-talks a uniformed reception guard, who grins bashfully under the peak of his cap.
Now there's the corridor intercom system to crack.
‘Time for a spot of charm,’ says the candidate, picking out a button: ‘Hello, it's the Labour Party.
Could we have a word?’
He's in like a breeze.
The Blitz crew take a doorbell each, and soon Chris is scuttling across the corporation lino as heads pop out from doors like the stops of a fairground organ.
They emit a collage of accents: Irish, Caribbean, Turkish, Islington-white.
The candidate, faintly clerical, cocks a sympathetic ear.
It's been an encouraging campaign.
Any homophobia?
‘A couple of funny remarks, nothing else.’
Any fear of Kinnock?
‘Mmm…we talk about the team.’
Smith takes a measured line with floaters: ‘I think we need a change of government…’
It's time for a change.
It's time for Labour.
I'm almost believing it could happen.
They may be believing it, too, on the Meadowell estate, North Shields.
But it isn't that easy to tell.
At 8.30 on a weekday morning, with rain swirling spitefully down, the focal point of the joyride riots seems almost devoid of life.
There is only one point of relief.
Bizarrely, it's a pork butcher's shop, and there's more to this business than a bacon slicer and a few trays of pies.
As well as pork, you can buy milk, sweets, crisps and pop.
Shoals of little children reach up to this counter with hot handfuls of change.
They are part of a captive market, for every other outlet in what was once a shopping promenade is now burned out, abandoned or both.
But the grey-haired proprietress is adamant: ‘I've lived over this shop for years, and I'm not moving now.’
This was the day Kenneth Baker smacked his lips and pronounced that Labour are ‘soft on crime’.
The proprietress cares for neither Roy Hattersley's derision nor Baker's strutting conceit.
‘None of them will make any difference.
It's the parents, I think,’ she shrugs.
‘I don't know what it is.’
Her vote will probably go to Neville Trotter, the Tories' imperilled incumbent; elsewhere, in this whirlpool of glum semis, posters for Labour's Paddy Cosgrove make a decent showing.
But Meadowell's air suggests a place where the rhetoric of ‘permanent recession’ takes on a chilling substance.
Its people gripped by an apathy from which the snappiest of TV soundbites may draw no blood at all.
‘Hello everybody, you know why I'm here, don't you?’
Clare Short announces her presence to the inhabitants of two dozen wheelchairs.
Those who can manage it turn their yellowing heads.
Others keep on staring at their pink plastic cups.
A few start calling things out.
It's hard to decipher their words in some cases, so atrophied is their control over the shapes they can make with their lips.
But the long-sitting member for Birmingham Ladywood has a practised ear.
‘Do I remember you?’ she responds to a bad old lad at the back.
‘How could I forget you?’
She works the room like a pro, an affectionate star turn.
‘Do you want a sticker?
You don't have to.
Do you want a leaflet?
You can't read?
Well, look at the pictures!’ she indicates her photograph and makes like Police 5 : ‘Have you seen this woman before?!’
Upstairs, she visits bedrooms, having a word with everyone.
‘Hello.
Are you Labour?
Have a sticker.’
As she leaves, the bad old lad scoots over to intercept.
His arm juts stiffly towards her, fingers furiously quivering.
She takes his hand and gives it a kiss.
‘Goodbye, unforgettable.’
She's pretty unforgettable herself.
‘Well, good morning, ladies and gentlemen,’ says the chair of the Liberal Democrat press conference.
There are, in fact, no ladies in the room at all, while the gentlemen comprise a reporter from NSS and a desultory camera crew.
The chair is flanked by Dr Peter Gold, PPC for Sheffield Hallam, and Earl Russell, a descendant of Bertrand.
Minutes before, a collapsible set had been constructed behind them, a Lib Dem slogan Velcroed carefully in place.
The absence of a throng is incidental.
This is a media event.
It's a different name on the doorstep and an increasingly complex one.
Gold aims to overturn a 7,637 majority in one of Britain's most middle-class seats.
And, with manicured hedges and cross-weave trellis, respectable folk are floating.
In Gold's favour are tactically minded anti-Tories, and the perception by some that local true-blue Irvine Patnick might be a twerp.
Against him is our old friend, fear of Kinnock.
‘I wouldn't want to let him in,’ says a lofty academic.’
I consider him to be an intellectual pygmy.’
A furtive thought occurs — is there still time for Neil to stand down?
‘We were admiring your garden,’ says Denis, the candidate's minder, to the lady on the step.
‘Where did you get those primroses?’
‘From Andersonstown,’ she replies, blushing.
Then she turns to the candidate himself.
‘Hello Gerry, lovely to see you.
Good luck.’
‘Thank you, says Gerry Adams, nodding his appreciation.
‘You're very kind.’
This is Turf Lodge, the Sinn Fein heartland.
Adams is making a snail's progress through the maze of cheap postwar housing where what some call ‘the terrorist community’ resides.
In his wake comes a procession: rough lads having the crack, a woman clutching bundles of pamphlets, kids covered in stickers saying, ‘Proud of West Belfast’.
One little boy remarks, shyly, that his daddy is in England.
In prison, to be precise.
Doing 12 years.
Denis empathises.
He did five himself in Long Kesh in the early seventies for planting a bomb.
Earlier, four British soldiers had eased nervously down the road, with an angry Republican mongrel barking at their guns.
The local army base, a corrugated fortress with a spindly camera tower, is pressed right up against a primary school.
Denis says they're using the children as a human shield.
And so ‘the war’ continues, to polling day and beyond, as back in Britain, Paddy, Neil and John conclude their very different conflict of camera angles and weasel words.
The fact that, for the past four weeks, Ireland has barely been mentioned is an indictment of them all.
EASTERN EUROPE New myths for old Paul Hockenos on the past that eatern democracy would rather forget
Budapest
Milan Kundera opens The Book of Laughter and Forgetting with a parable about the treatment of history under communism.
On a snowy winter's day in 1948, Czech communist leader Klement Gottwald posed for a photo with his inner circle.
Next to him stood Comrade Clementis, who took off his own fur cap and set it on Gottwald's bare head.
After the purges four years later, Clementis was air-brushed out of the photo.
All that remained of him was his cap on Gottwald's head.
When the revolutions of 1989 brought down the eastern bloc dictatorships, they swept away the façade of historical half-truths, distortions and lies on which the ruling élites grounded their legitimacy.
If the struggle of humanity against power is the struggle of memory against forgetting, as Kundera puts it, then in 1989 memory was victorious.
In theory, at least, all Europe's new member-states concur that the dissolution of single-party rule constitutes a clean break with the communist era.
But the eastern Europeans have tried to put the past four decades behind them as if they had never existed.
They have concentrated their collective energy on forgetting.
One aspect of the political transition is that central and eastern Europeans have made little effort to confront the legacy of Stalinism in their countries.
Information that has now come to light about the political gulags and the Gestapo tactics of the secret police has certainly done much to underline the totalitarian essences of even the ‘soft’ regimes.
Yet that examination has stopped drastically short of a searching investigation into the past.
As quickly as Romanian revolutionaries changed Lenin Strada to Strada Demokratiei, the complex questions of responsibility and guilt were brushed aside to clear the way for the new era.
The necessity of a penetrating aufarbeitung der Geschichte , or coming to terms with the past, is nowhere on the young democracies' agendas.
Immediately after the fall of the eastern bloc regimes, even the top nomenklatura professed that they had been closet democrats all along, pushing relentlessly for change from within the structures of power.
For the discontented populations, the fact that the state outlawed political opposition and ruthlessly crushed popular uprisings served as a handy, and not altogether unconvincing, alibi for their political conformism.
Unless one was prepared to sacrifice a normal life, communism forced the citizen into active complicity with the system.
Today, in the former East Germany, weekly revelations about the cooperation of even leading figures in the pre-1989 underground opposition with the secret police has exposed the shocking totality of society's complicity.
In hindsight, the Vaclav Havels and the Adam Michniks stand out as the precious few.
The broad collaboration with the powers-that-were explains the readiness to skip over a full coming to account with the past.
With the single exception of former East Germany, the calls of yesterday's dissidents to open the secret police files have been fruitless.
Nor is it simply a matter of politics that most of the democratic dissident-led parties fared poorly at the polls.
The majority of the populace not only identifies more readily with the careerist-turned-nationalist, but finds its conscience better protected there too.
That uncomfortable conscience demands that somebody from the very top be indicted for the system as a whole.
The trials of Bulgaria's former dictator or a handful of Ceausescu's secret police serve to scapegoat a few of the ringleaders and put the issue to rest.
Perhaps the pinnacle of absurdity is the Federal Republic's demand that former German Democratic Republic (GDR) president Erich Honecker, be retrieved from his death bed — at the moment in the Chilean embassy in Moscow — to face trial for the state's shoot-to-kill order along the former GermanGerman border.
If Honecker is convicted, the majority of the population are implicitly absolved from responsibility for dutifully casting their single-party ballots every year in the GDR's showcase elections.
Czechoslovakia's far-reaching new law that bans all members of the ‘old structures’ from public office for five years tries to solve the problem of the past with a simple administrative stroke of the pen.
The blanket ‘collective guilt’ of the nomenklatura — including reform-minded Prague Spring communists such as Alexander Dubcek — effectively translates into society's ‘collective innocence’.
The release of the individual from accountability lays a precarious basis for a new democratic political culture.
Most important-ly, it fails to replace the individual's consciously hypocritical acquiescence to state power with an active ethic of civic responsibility or political obligation.
Despite the introduction of multi-party electoral democracy, the implication persists that the system and its ruling élite alone shoulder the burden of social accountability.
In Hungary, for example, the Germans are to blame for the Hungarian Holocaust, the ‘Russians’ for Soviet communism and now, in some circles, the Jews for the failures of capitalism.
Turn-outs for local elections in Hungary have dropped from 40 to 20 per cent, and in some recent votes down below 15 per cent .
There are more than a few Hungarians who would happily revert to the good old days of Kadarism, when the Hungarian president, Janos Kadar (1956–1986), offered the ‘cheeriest barracks’ in eastern Europe a relatively high standard of living in return for political passivity.
The illusion of an automatic tabula rasa also undermines the need for society to reflect on the consciousness that evolved under the conditions of the past 40 years.
Since communism as well as‘socialism’ has been forever assigned to history's dustbin, there appears no pressing need for society to come to terms with just what that system was or how it continues to manifest itself.
In depoliticised societies, the totalitarian thought structures of the old systems fuel today's chauvinisms.
In the political sphere, a familiar authoritarianism, intolerance and provincialism persist in the reigning power structures — although now under the name of nationalism, ‘communism's opposite’.
And, by definitively closing the book on the past, the language of socialism also remains trapped in Stalinism's wreckage.
Thus, the possibility of social democracy is also neatly nipped in the bud.
The denial of the communist era has led political forces in central and eastern Europe in two general directions.
In liberal democratic circles, those most strongly identified with the dissident tradition, the 1989 revolutions are seen as the chance to embark on a qualitatively new political future.
Their model is contemporary western democracy, something that most of them admit has never existed in its modern form in eastern Europe.
The second and stronger tendency is a conservative nationalism that views the communist era as a Soviet-imposed interruption of a national democratic tradition that had flourished before the second world war.
The nationalists' rhetoric is of a ‘return to the past’, to the interwar period when Hungarians ruled Hungary and Poles ruled Poland.
Unfortunately, today's elected rulers have sought recourse in historical myths no less perilous than those of their communist predecessors.
The contention that the national culture stands firmly in the tradition of modern democracy enables political conservatives to anchor their own undemocratic ideologies in whitewashed national precedent.
As the much-maligned object of communist propaganda, the fairytales of lost national glory are easily marketed.
In Poland, the interwar second republic and its strong-arm leader, Marshal Jozef Pilsudski, is today held up as a model of Polish democracy.
In fact, Pilsudski came to power in a bloody putsch and presided over gross human-rights violations, the brutal crushing of strikes and virtual civil war with the national minorities.
Hungary's conservative ruling coalition, led by the Hungarian Democratic Forum (HDF), harkens back to the populist political culture of the country's Christian Course during the 1920s and 1930s.
Picking up where that era left off has spelled the restoration of the power of the Catholic Church and the unabashed exaltation of Hungarianism.
The weak interwar democracy serves as the model for an authoritarian rule today in which parliamentary opposition and public criticism are resentfully tolerated at best.
After the humiliation of communism, the positive appraisal of the interwar years soothes many a bruised pride.
First, it absolves the nation from the reality of its often ignominious prewar and wartime past.
Second, it bolsters the logic that ‘we, the nation’ were always democrats, and communism an inflicted aberration.
Any criticism of the popular revisionism therefore strikes a sensitive nerve, ensuring that real debate over domestic nationalism doesn't enter political discourse.
Anti-Semitism, for example, is alive and well in Hungary.
In the government-friendly media, HDF populists continue to manipulate the anti-Semitism that proved so damaging to the intellectual-led Free Democratic Party in the 1990 election.
Yet, in Hungary anti-Semitism itself is not seen as posing an impediment to democracy.
Rather, it is the very fact that criticism of the government's anti-Semitic posturing finds its way into public discussion that supposedly jeopardises the country's ‘return to Europe’.
Elsewhere, leaderships and oppositions alike have bound their fragile democracies to heritages with even darker pasts.
In Romania, the rehabilitation of the second world war fascist military dictator, Marshal Ion Antonescu, has unanimous public consent.
The entire spectrum of political parties are virtually at each other 's throats to claim the legacy of ‘Romania's greatest national hero’.
On 1 June 1991, the 51st anniversary of Antonescu's execution, the Romanian parliament observed a minute of silence for its nation's misjudged son.
‘After 44 years, history has finally allowed the Romanians to shed a tear and light a candle for Ion Antonescu,’ wrote the leading democratic opposition daily Romania Libra .
During Antonescu's 1940–44 rule, 400,000 Jews and tens of thousands of gypsies lost their lives.
In Eichmann in Jerusalem , Hannah Arendt describes the horrors of the Romanian concentration camps as ‘more elaborate and more atrocious’ than anything in Germany.
She writes that in August 1941, before the Final Solution orders were given, Goebbels complained to Hitler that ‘Antonescu proceeds in these matters in a far more radical fashion than we have done up to the present.’
Typically, the revisionists kindle the image of the nationalist leader as the anti-communist patriot, the martyred saviour of their misunderstood and long-suffering country.
It was Antonescu, Romanians point out, who won back Romania's eastern territories in Bessarabia, annexed by the Soviet Union in 1940 under the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact.
The marshal's partnership with the fascist Iron Guard and Nazi Germany was simply a matter of national realpolitik , they say, the unlucky fate of being squeezed between the Soviet Union and the Axis alliance.
As for the Romanian Holocaust, they argue, it is a lie that Antonescu killed the Jews.
In every country, intellectuals, too, have jumped on the nationalist bandwagon.
For many, the new religion serves as convenient therapy for their years of hack scholarship under communism.
The nationalist fervour in Romania has fuelled virulent anti-Semitism, a thriving ultra-right, bloody ethnic violence in Transylvania and regular pogroms against the gypsies.
Yet, even in opposition circles, intellectuals have refused to take a principled stand.
The editor of Romania's leading liberal intellectual journal 22 , wrote: ‘Romanians are a temperate, tolerant and hospitable people.
The presentation of Romania as a country where the extreme right flourishes unhindered, as well as other such charges, is deeply unpatriotic.’
The legacy of the second world war is a painful one for all Yugoslavs.
Of the nearly one million people killed, as many fell in interethnic strife among themselves as died fighting the Nazis.
Today, the Croats insist that the number of Serbs, gypsies and Jews massacred in the camps of the quisling Axis-allied Croatian state was only a tiny fraction of that claimed by the communists.
Rather, Serbian royalist Chetniks were the real butchers.
Croatian President Franjo Tudjman made his name in the 1960s as a maverick historian who charged that only 30,000 people perished at the hands of the Ustashe fascists.
One of Tudjman's first acts in office was to order that the Square for the Victims of Fascism in the capital of Zagreb be renamed the Square of the Croatian Giants.
In the president's nationalist speeches, the words and symbols of the brutal wartime state appear again and again.
For Serbian politicians, meanwhile, Tudjman's nationalist party is synonymous with the Ustashe itself.
Radical historians have stoked the fires, arguing that the bloodthirsty Ustashe slaughtered well over one million Serbs alone.
The real memories and exaggerated horror stories have combined to strike the fear of God into the Serbian minority in Croatia.
It is the legacy of the genocidal Ustashe state, the minority insists, that has driven them to take up arms against an independent Croatia.
The ease with which the nationalists have rekindled historical resentment and traditional chauvinisms bears witness to the communist regime neglect of history.
In the tense climate of postwar eastern Europe, the new powers expediently circumnavigated the full truth of their citizens' wartime collaboration and atrocities in order to consolidate power as quickly as possible.
Since communism represented the final victory over nationalism and fascism, the states simply denied the existence of those ideologies in society but, below the surface, the old antagonisms festered.
At the same time, under the guise of socialist rhetoric, the ruling élites ruthlessly manipulated nationalisms from above and perpetuated many of the totalitarian structures of fascism.
Nor can the majority of the western left escape its responsibility for the situation in post-communist eastern Europe.
The left's blunted criticisms of the eastern-bloc dictatorships only contributed to the tarnished reputation of socialism that exists today in eastern and central Europe.
Western leftists wax indignant about the eastern Europeans' refusal to differentiate between a democratic socialism and Stalinism, when they themselves never drew a clear line.
But, it seems, that part of history is quickly forgotten too.
RECOVERY A severe hangover Whoever runs the economy after the election has a job on their hands.
Wynne Godley assesses the prospects
The main political parties are agreed that the present exchange rate is to be defended within the framework of British membership of the ERM.
This commitment makes any significant reduction in interest rates impossible, particularly since British monetary policy is now determined not in London, nor yet by an independent European Central Bank, but by German interests as seen by the German government.
The commitment also rules out any further fiscal stimulus, particularly as the budget deficit is already so high and rising fast.
These are the reasons why the discussion of economic policy during the election has been so trivial and impoverished, with so much fuss about how the budget deficit limits the scope for tax cuts on the one hand and expenditure increases on the other.
Strategic decisions urgently need to be taken since, as I pointed out in the very first of my articles for NSS in January 1991, the British economy is now in grave peril.
Yet, as things stand, the next government will take office bereft of the instruments that would enable an effective economic strategy to be implemented.
The bipartisan commitment to the existing exchange rate within the ERM, and the endorsement of this by most commentators, would be understandable if the forecasts that the Treasury, the City and all the main conjuncture organisations have been making ever since we joined the ERM had turned out to be anywhere near correct.
Britain would now be in the fortunate position of having had, in 1991, nothing worse than a shallow and short-lived recession, from which a smart recovery would already have been taking place for several quarters, with no balance of payments constraint and little rise in unemployment.
The ‘doomsters’ would have been discredited, and you can be sure that plenty of people would have pointed this out forcefully.
But all those optimistic forecasts have been catastrophically wrong and the doomsters proved right, after all Britain has instead suffered the most severe and unremitting recession of the postwar period: and there is no evidence, even now, that the economy has bottomed out, let alone that a growth rate anywhere near the 2.5 per cent necessary to stop unemployment from rising indefinitely is on the horizon.
I find the serenity of mainstream forecasters in the face of their debâcle discreditable because they now gravely confuse the public discussion as they go on popping up with one optimistic forecast after another, without any meaningful explanation as to why they have been so wrong.
But there is something far more important than the depleted status of conventional econometric forecasting at issue.
Most people who supported the government when it joined the ERM did so not because they believed the forecasters (although they were happy to do this), but because they believed, as a matter of principle, in the ‘New Consensus’— that the active use of macroeconomic policy can only have an adverse effect and that market forces alone can deliver non-inflationary growth and full employment.
So the really important thing that has happened is not that the official forecasts have been wrong, it is that the New Consensus, having been tried in the balance since we joined the ERM and, indeed, during the past 12 years as a whole, has been found wanting.
The implications of this failure are very far-reaching because, it is only if market forces can be counted on to produce good, or even tolerable, results that the abdication from all responsibility for strategic policy-making can for a moment be justified.
The strategic position
The present conjuncture is uniquely dreadful because, as I have been predicting emphatically for at least two years, we now have, all at the same time, unemployment rising towards three million, falling output and investment, and a balance of payments that is still in substantial deficit.
Expansion cannot come, as it has in every previous recession, from the removal of credit controls, since there are none to remove.
Nor can it be generated by easier fiscal policy because the budget deficit is already so high.
Nor can it come from easier monetary policy because of the commitment to the existing exchange rate, combined with the fact that interest rates are being determined in Germany for German reasons.
In any case, growth could never again be based on the expansion of domestic demand, even if this were to occur spontaneously, because, with imports cheap and British manufacturing industry weakened, the balance of payments, which is already in deficit, would rapidly widen to an intolerable extent.
The rate at which the economy can grow is now constrained more directly and immediately than ever before by the extent to which exports rise relative to import penetration.
A large rise in net export demand, of the order of 3–4 per cent, is the essential precondition for achieving simultaneously adequate expansion of the economy and reduction in the budget deficit.
I have always thought that we entered the ERM at a rate of exchange that was much too high, and I have been reinforced in this view by Britain's poor showing in international trade during the past 18 months.
I conclude now, with even more emphasis than before, that the over-valuation of sterling, superimposed on very deeply entrenched adverse long-term trends in overseas trade, will ensure that our foreign trade performance will not warrant a growth rate of more than 1–2 per cent at the very most during the next five years.
In other words, we are now locked into an endemic and deteriorating recession with no recovery in prospect at any stage.
The way forward
But it doesn't have to be like this.
The need for a large devaluation, combined with lower interest rates, is screaming aloud.
This is the only way to achieve sustained growth, based on net exports and investment demand.
I do not believe for a moment that, with unemployment heading towards three million, the benefits would be significantly dissipated by higher inflation, any more than were the benefits of depreciation in the early 1980s.
And the option of devaluation remains open.
We are members of the ERM, not of an EMU.
The difference between the two institutions resides precisely in the fact that currency realignment is possible in one case, but not in the other.
The commitment to the existing exchange rate is not a commitment to an overriding moral principle like the abolition of capital punishment or unilateral disarmament.
It is a commitment to a set of practical arrangements that should not for a minute outlive its usefulness.
It has been said that a devaluation would result in even higher interest rates.
This sounds like an attempt to second-guess market opinion, as impossible as the attempt to guess the outcome of a beauty contest.
I thought we had to have excessively high interest rates in order to keep sterling where it is.
You can't have it both ways.
It now looks a big mistake to have joined the ERM at all, at any exchange rate, without first having created political institutions capable of running monetary policy in a way that takes due consideration of the needs of all members of the European Community.
The justification for participating in international arrangements is that they are mutually beneficial to all participants.
If this proves not to be the case and if, faced with a major unemployment crisis, Britain finds itself with no recourse, then it should not hesitate in seceding before it is too late.
BOGNOR Send in the clowns Beadle loses the battle of Bognor to the Batband.
Tim Mars reports from the front of the clowns' convention
‘I'm glad to see so many clowns here instead of where they should be — in Westminster or back in their constituencies,’ quips Ron Moody, president of Clowns International, at the official opening of the European Clowns' Convention on 21 March.
From the platform he looks out over a sea of clowns of all shapes and sizes filling the incongruously named Place St Maur des Fosses on the seafront at Bognor Regis.
For 51 weeks of the year there's nothing particularly funny about the Sussex seaside resort of Bognor Regis.
But for one zany week in March, the place sheds its stay-at-home Cinderella rags, paints its face and gets itself up in motley as Clown Town.
Bognor has been the unlikely home to the annual clowns' convention since 1985.
The convention is a sort of combined AGM, conference, trade fair, publicity stunt-cum-party of the clowns' trade union, Clowns International.
The early part of the week is the official business bit — clowns in civvies, smoke-filled rooms.
I'm not a card-carrying clown so I wasn't admitted to the AGM, but a usually reliable source informs me that the main issues debated were amalgamation with the US-based World Clowns' Federation — inevitable, I suppose, in the era of superunions — and charitable status.
CI is having trouble with the Charity Commissioners (a notoriously humourless bunch) who take the view that clowning does not contribute to the alleviation of poverty, suffering and want, and is therefore not a charitable activity.
But with business concluded, the convention changes gear and, from Thursday on, everyone is in full motley and a gigantic free-wheeling circus takes over the town, with clowns doing their stuff along the esplanade, at the railway station, on the buses, in the streets, pubs, restaurants and takeaways, as well as under the big top and in the conference centre.
Bognor has clearly taken the clowns to its heart.
Fish and chip shops offer discounts to clowns, signs in pub windows encourage you to ‘come and meet the clowns’, shop windows take a clown theme for the week.
The local chamber of trade sponsors an award for the best-dressed shop window, and everyone from supermarkets to building societies and banks — even firms of solicitors (another traditionally humourless lot)— joins in.
The windows range from minimalist efforts — a hand-written ‘Bognor welcomes the clowns’ poster — to life-size mannequins in full motley surrounded by all the paraphernalia of clowning.
The clowns' convention is now such an accepted feature of Bognor life that you can even buy ‘clown town’ postcards of the event.
The clown convention is to Bognor what the party conferences are to Blackpool and Bournemouth (which tells you a lot about Bognor's position in the seaside resort pecking order).
If Bognor gets publicity and identity — and a lot of fun — from hosting the convention, what do the clowns get from Bognor?
‘I don't know why we keep coming here,’ says an older clown on the bus shuttling us to the big top, ‘all it does is rain on us and blow us about.’
In the pub, a group of young clowns are moaning about Bognor.
‘We ought to go to another town,’ says one.
‘To another country,’ suggests another.
The clowns' convention comes to Bognor for two good reasons.
In the first place, dosh: Arun district council sponsors the event and provides the Regis Centre — Bognor's effort to attract the conference market — at a special rate.
And secondly there's Butlins — or Southcoast World, as it now likes to call itself in the hope that some of the glamour — and success — of Disneyworld might rub off.
The vast Butlins holiday camp just minutes from the town centre (and the Place St Maur des Fosses) offers the clowns self-catering chalets at bargain-basement rates.
The word ‘chalet’ may conjure up images of detached wooden shacks to the uninitiated, but those at Butlins are one-bedroom flats in long parallel two-storey balcony-access blocks packed tightly together.
The difference is that at Butlins a one-bedroom flat makes a four -bedspace chalet.
There's a double bed in the bedroom, and two singles in the kitchen/dining/living room.
It's cramped if there are four of you, but the atmosphere is very friendly and relaxed — neighbours popping in to borrow a cup of sugar or a 50p coin for the electricity meter, children running along the balconies or playing on the thin strip of grass between the blocks.
It's like a fantasy re-creation of interwar slum clearance — happy working-class families rescued from their slum houses and enjoying their new flats.
The presence of clowns at the windows, leaning over the balconies, walking up and down, hands in pockets, fags in mouths adds an additional surreal touch.
Interwar balcony-access flats are the most reviled and degraded of all local-authority housing types, so it's odd to find the Butlins versions still functioning so well for their temporary inhabitants.
On Saturday, the clowns troop out of Butlins for the high point of the convention — the grand parade through the town on foot, stilts or in any number of clown cars — Volks-wagen Beetles mostly, one with four reindeer perched on its bumper, another with wooden hands in place of windscreen wipers.
It seems if you're a clown you can get away with murder when it comes to cars — forget about roadworthiness, don't bother with tax discs, ignore MOTs.
But then most of the police — even the ones in cars — are sporting red noses for the occasion.
At the head of this procession strides The Joker, leading a phalanx of Batbandsmen — that's bandsmen all dressed as Batman.
Behind follow hundreds of children beautifully turned out as clowns — for the chamber of trade offers a prize for the best-dressed boy and girl in the parade.
The pavements are packed to overflowing with spectators and yet more immaculately dressed clown children.
It seems as if half the population of Bognor turns out.
The parade converges on Place St Maur des Fosses to hear a few words from the local Euro-MP, because the EC has stumped up a bit of money to make it a European clowns' convention this year.
He mumbles some nonsense about clowns being the cause of peace — perhaps the money for the convention is the peace dividend?
Then it's time for the adoration of Jeremy Beadle — for Beadle is about in Bognor today as guest of honour.
The Batband choose this moment to strike up with a counter attraction, and our Jeremy has a hard job making himself heard.
‘Alright, that's enough,’ he admonishes, but to no avail, the band strikes up again.
Never in the history of beadling has such a singular public service been performed as by that plucky band of Batmen.
After a bit of Beadle, it's time for the World's Greatest Juggle-in.
The aim is to get in the Guinness Book of Records by beating the current record of 2,463 objects in the air simultaneously from 821 jugglers juggling at least three objects.
In the ensuing chaos and confusion, I am not certain whether a new record was set or not — or how you count such things.
I shall just have to wait for the next Guinness Book of Records for the answer.
Sunday, however, brought easily the most bizarre event of the whole week — the ecumenical church service in the big top, conducted by the Reverend Roly Bain, who is both reverend and clown.
This was not so much a service as a lot of clowning about to biblical themes.
There were gags, spoofs, send-ups, dumbshows, knockabout, culminating in the Rev Bain constructing an absurdly slack and springy tightrope across the ring and managing to cross it with the help of (groan) a cross at either end.
How the Rev Bain gets away with it I don't know.
Look at the fuss over The Life of Brian .
Look at the way the Bishop of Durham gets clobbered every time he opens his mouth.
Yet no one walked out of the big top, there were no fundamentalist pickets outside, no attempts to disrupt the service.
Fools are obviously still licensed, and (Durham please note) in motley you can get away with anything.
The only ‘straight’ parts of the service were the hymns — except for one which, to the tune of ‘O God our help in ages past’, goes:
When we are tempted in our pride
To dizzy heights of sin,
Beneath our feet, O Lord, provide
A ripe banana skin.
And when we yearn, at someone's head,
To let a brickbat fly,
Give us the grace to use instead
A well-aimed custard pie.
When cherished institutions stand
Before your throne of grace,
With good intentions in each hand
And egg on every face,
Teach us to quarry grand designs
With laughter born of tears,
For deep in earth's jam butty mines
Your rainbow still appears.
Along with zeal to do your will
We ask a sense of fun;
A touch of sugar to the pill,
A currant in the bun.
Like him who saw a desert bush
With heaven's glory crowned,
May we, through the incongruous,
Discover holy ground.
Sunday closed with the awards ceremony, where Zippo was adjudged Clown of the Year — an award sponsored by the clown hall of fame in Wisconsin where his name will live forever.
Afterwards an auction of icing sculptures, mostly of clowns but also of flags of the European Community — that EC subsidy again!— and then it's time to pack away clown town for another year.
On his death-bed, George V visited a royal curse upon the town with his famous final utterance ‘Bugger Bognor!’, from which the place has never quite recovered.
Bognor today is a shabby, down-at-heel place.
Like most of the rest of the south east, it's now a satellite commuter dormitory of London.
Its boom days as a royal resort are long gone, its slow downmarket slide sealed with the arrival of Butlins in the late 1930s.
Now Butlins itself is struggling, its customers lured overseas by the package tour companies.
Butlins is busy modernising itself, and the evidence of recent construction is everywhere.
Main Street is being repaved and its peeling shiplap-clad buildings refronted with plywood postmodern porches and porticos.
The older chalets have had facelifts, their corrugated iron roofs replaced by red pantiles, whitewashed boundary walls topped off by yet more red pantiles to give them a Mediterranean resort flavour in hopes of luring their customer back from the real thing.
But the real business of Bognor these days is not holiday fun or conference trade but commuters and retirement.
Many of the seafront hotels on the long esplanade have become nursing homes or been demolished for cliff-like apartment blocks with their individual balconies looking out to sea.
This transformation is not without its enemies — there are posters in the windows of pubs, takeaways and other service outlets proclaiming: ‘Say NO to homes, YES to leisure in Bognor town centre.’
The pier has friends — what pier doesn't these days — but is it strong enough to withstand the seemingly inexorable demographic tides sweeping through the town?
The clowns' convention is, perhaps, Bognor's way of proclaiming itself as something more than just another commuter dormitory and retirement town on the south coast.
CENTRAL AMERICA Uncertain future Duncan Green on the growing detente between the US and its former foes
At night, the lakeside Indian town of Santiago Atitlán is like no other place in Guatemala.
A year ago, the 40,000 population achieved the unique feat of driving out the army, which has terrorised the Indian highlands for more than a decade.
Since that day there have been no killings, shootings or kidnappings in the town.
While the rest of the inhabitants are in bed, citizens' patrols keep the peace — groups of 15 men in cowboy hats, holding aloft the ragged blue-and-white national flag as they walk the cobbled streets.
At intervals, a whistle rings out over the dark lake, giving the all-clear.
The town forced the army to withdraw in December 1990, after soldiers opened fire on a peaceful demonstration, killing 13 villagers, including a nine-year-old boy.
The dead were merely the latest of hundreds of townsfolk murdered or ‘disappeared’ during the 1980s.
But this time, Santiago's mayors stormed off to Guatemala City, alerted the international press, and managed to corner the civilian president, Vinicio Cerezo, forcing him to sign an agreement to demilitarise the town.
Today, Cerezo's letter to the villagers is literally carved in stone; a six-foot-high marble and stone replica stands opposite 13 rough wooden crosses, marking the spots where the villagers fell.
Santiago Atitlán is a frail symbol of hope in Central America's saddest and most beautiful republic.
Outside the town, the killing goes on, despite the transition in 1985 from military dictatorship to elected civilian government.
According to the Guatemalan Human Rights Commission, 764 ‘extrajudicial executions’ took place in 1991, while a further 86 people ‘disappeared’.
On 9 February, armed men stopped a bus outside Santiago, robbed the passengers, and then opened fire, killing six people.
In the past year, serious peace talks have begun for the first time to end Guatemala's 30-year old civil war between the army and a number of guerrilla organisations grouped together in the URNG coalition.
Yet huge obstacles remain to a final settlement.
Elsewhere in the region, the end of the cold war has already brought a semblance of peace in its wake.
Ten years and 175,000 lives ago, Central America was one of the world's killing fields.
The Guatemalan army was launching a scorched earth policy, which laid waste to hundreds of Indian villages; in El Salvador, the death squads were dumping a thousand bodies a month on the streets; in Nicaragua, the Contra war was just beginning to put the Sandinista revolution into reverse.
The violence gathered pace after Ronald Reagan's election in 1979.
The drums of the cold war's final offensive beat loud in Central America as President Reagan fought the guerrillas in El Salvador and went on the counter-attack against Nicaragua's fledgling revolution.
In a decade of recession and debt crisis for the whole of Latin America, Central America was doubly damned by war and economic decline.
Regional income fell by almost a fifth, while the region's foreign debt doubled.
By the end of the decade, more than two million people, 10 per cent of the population, were refugees or displaced by fighting.
The 1990s have already brought peace agreements in Nicaragua and El Salvador.
Now, as Central America struggles from the wreckage of war, Washington and its former foes are engaged in an extraordinary detente.
In El Salvador, US grants are building barracks for demobilised FMLN guerrillas; in Nicaragua, General Humberto Ortega, brother of the Sandinista ex-president, Daniel, recently aroused a storm by pinning the Sandinistas' highest military medal on the chest of the US military attacheé.
Both Washington and the Central American left have changed.
In the new world order, George Bush has abandoned the crude anti-communism of the Reagan period for a foreign policy built on economic pragmatism.
The US now emphasises political stability and the need to decrease the size of Central America's military machines.
On New Year's Eve, when the UN-sponsored peace talks on El Salvador seemed stalled in the dying hours of Javier Perez de Cuellar's presidency, a delegation of US State Department and Pentagon heavyweights burst into the meeting, demanding immediate results, and sat in judgment until a final compromise was hammered out.
In pursuit of a stable peace, Washington sacrificed the Salvadorean army, which will be purged of human-rights offenders and drastically reduced in size and influence.
But it kept the Salvadorean government's free-market economic model intact.
One legacy of the bloodshed and disruption of the 1980s is a desperate need for foreign aid to rebuild the region's crippled economies.
In a nation renowned for its historical amnesia, it is unlikely that the deficit-ridden US government will be prepared to foot Central America's reconstruction bill for long.
Within months of the invasion of Panama, Guillermo Endara, the US-installed president, resorted to a public hunger strike to demand that Washington follow through on its promises.
The left's attitude to yesterday's ‘yankee imperialists’ has also evolved, partly through necessity.
As Cuba is painfully aware, the US is the only superpower left in the Caribbean basin, and no country can afford to be its enemy.
The Sandinistas survived the Contra war thanks to a free lifeline of Soviet oil.
That is no longer on offer, and Sandinista leaders now refer to the US as a ‘natural ally’ of their country.
These days the Sandinistas' party anthem, which refers to the US government as the ‘enemies of humanity’, sounds quaintly out of date.
Other factors have also forced a rethink on the left, making it more palatable to Washington.
Both in Nicaragua and El Salvador, the left has increasingly adopted the electoral road as its preferred route to power and political legitimacy.
In El Salvador, the peace agreement ended a 60-year period of military dominance by forcing the colonels back into their barracks, and giving guarantees to the left that they could participate in electoral politics without being killed.
The coming months will determine whether those guarantees can prevent a right-wing backlash.
For the guerrillas of Guatemala's URNG, peace and a return to party politics are a long way off.
Militarily weaker and less united than their Nicaraguan and Salvadorean counterparts, they are in a poor bargaining position in peace talks, where they face Latin America's most neanderthal armed forces and business élite.
The revolutionary left has been profoundly disoriented by the crisis in state-run economies both in Latin America and, even more graphically, in what were the Soviet Union and eastern Europe.
The discrediting of statism has left a massive vacuum at the heart of the Latin American left's philosophy and the search for an alternative vision to the prevailing neoliberal orthodoxy is one of its most pressing tasks if it is serious about taking power through the ballot box with a radical programme.
The future is uncertain and dangerous.
Peace is a distant hope in Guatemala.
In El Salvador and Nicaragua, the left is preparing to fight presidential elections in 1994 and 1996 respectively amid an atmosphere of chronic political upheaval.
Unable to wait on the vagaries of the election timetable, land-hungry peasants are seizing farmland in both countries, while disgruntled Nicaraguan ex-combatants from both Contra and government armies periodically take up arms and head for the hills.
In Nicaragua, the sandinistas are increasingly divided between groups urging the party towards some kind of parliamentary social democratic path, and others who question an exclusively electoral emphasis, demanding adherence to the more radical policies of the past.
The deepest divisions have centered on demands for greater internal party democracy and the pace of party reform.
In El Salvador, the FMLN is trying to build a party and electoral apparatus in a climate where the killers of the past decade are still at large.
Perhaps for lack of alternatives, the left in both countries is gambling on being allowed to fight fair elections, to take power if they win, and then to be able to implement real reforms in government.
Given Central America's recent history, the odds are poor, but the attempt will show whether, in Washington's suffering backyard, the New World Order is really new.
LETTERS
Alan Bleasdale declined to contribute to NSS 's ‘Look Forward in Anger’ feature last week (‘It's 1997 and the Conservatives are going for their fifth election victory in a row…’) because he says he isn't any good at foreseeing the future: ‘I never thought cassette tapes would catch on.’
A number of our readers are of the opinion that those who did contribute displayed a similar lack of foresight.
James Anderson, of Jarrow, asks how we managed to miss the series of disasters at nuclear power stations that occurred in the former Soviet Union during the mid-1990s, causing the flight of tens of millions of people towards western Europe and triggering the ‘Refugee Wars’ of 1995–96.
And, in more serious vein, David Corrigan, of Newport, asks why we ignored ‘the coming environmental crisis [that]is more certain, and more real, than any of the speculative imaginings of your writers’.
A Wilcock, of London W2, says the articles provided ‘some interesting, if clearly biased, thoughts on the future if the Tories win the election’.
However, he continues, ‘Sir David Widgery's contribution was an utter disgrace.
We have had such a welter of lies about the NHS from people like Robin Cook that it really is astonishing that their campaign of denigration can actually be exceeded by this piece of filthy insinuation from Widgery.’
Sarah Little, of Congleton, on the other hand, writes that the feature displayed ‘a poverty of the imagination…
Would it not have been better to imagine the possibility of a different, better world?
If the intention, in the week before the election, was to scare people about what would happen if the Tories won again, it didn't work.
It only makes people more pessimistic, and is another example of the negativity that has characterised all sides during the election campaign.’
Keith Long, of Kingston-upon-Thames, meanwhile, writes, in relation to our fictional new elector of 1997, Billy Johnson: ‘Er, excuse me…you can be born 41 minutes too late to vote.
But you can't be born 41 minutes too early to vote.’
Long is right, of course, as is Fred Green (see letter opposite).
But they both miss the point.
Education standards had deteriorated to such an extent by 1997 that Billy Johnson couldn't work out whether he had been born a day too early or too late to vote, or whether his birth had been induced or retarded.
At least that's my story, anyway: isn't fiction wonderful?
Strange bedfellows
Adversity — or is it perversity?— certainly makes strange bedfellows.
So Robin Blackburn (Letters, 3 April) is going to vote Lib Dem.
Now I've heard everything.
The reason, cited by the soi-disant editor of New Left Review is that ‘left to itself, Labour will not introduce electoral reform.’
For good measure, and, presumably in case anybody thinks he is indulging in the negative campaigning we have all been hearing so much about, he praises the Lib Dems as offering a ‘more egalitarian, democratic and ecologically responsible [manifesto]than Labour's’.
Well now, it's not that any of us are exactly against egalitarianism, democracy and ecological responsibility, any more than Americans are supposed to be (or were, at least in pre-feminist and less health-conscious days) against motherhood and apple pie.
It's simply that it is not by any means obvious how PR is supposed to deliver all these goodies.
Certainly, there is precious little evidence that a ‘new left coalition’(whatever that might be) is likely to grow from a freshly tilled PR seedbed.
Look at Europe.
Where, across that continent, with enough variants of the proportional system to send Charter 88 junkies into orgasm, is there a working example of a new left coalition?
Christian Democrats and Fascists, Greens and Republicans, Progressives and Conservatives, there are aplenty, as well, certainly, as some who call themselves Socialists and others who gave up the perfectly respectable name of Communist and now shelter under a variety of weasel descriptions, usually featuring words like ‘democratic’ and ‘left’in unconvincing proximity.
But of a coalition of all progressive forces within spitting distance of ushering in the new millennium there is no sign.
Meanwhile, in Britain, we have the sight of the old left coalition, aka the Labour Party, indicating, for the first time in a generation, that it is receptive to the wholesale importation of ideas from outside.
What is more, it might, touch wood, even be in a position to implement some of them.
With that impeccable sense of timing which so distinguishes all Trotskyites, Mr Blackburn wants to jump ship to a party that self-professedly regards the Conservatives as insufficiently vigorous in its pursuit of a free-market economy.
This is no time to desert for some illusory future.
I'm afraid Mr Blackburn has fallen prey to some of the fashionable ideas infecting many on the left, in particular to Europhilia.
There will be tears before bedtime over that one, just you wait.
Sack the lot of 'em
Sometimes I despair at the innumeracy of the left.
Billy Johnson (‘Look Forward in Anger’, 3 April, page 23) may have been ‘fond of saying’ that if they hadn't induced his birth a day early he could have voted in the 1997 election, but then he would have been talking even more crap than the verbals Steve Platt so kindly recorded for us.
What I assume was meant was that his birth had somehow been retarded, so that he was born a day later.
Don't you have any proofreaders or subs capable of picking up this sort of elementary mistake?
Sack 'em all, including the author, say I. 
An apology is due
When, as I expect, Neil Kinnock enters 10 Downing Street as Prime Minister after Thursday, is it too much to expect that the knockers and detractors who said that Labour could never be electable under his leadership will eat their words?
In particular, will your erstwhile political columnist, R W Johnson, apologise for the appalling piece of sexism that appeared in NSS (under a previous editor) on 7 December 1990, when he suggested that the only way for Labour to win the next election would be for Glenys Kinnock to ‘have a word’ with Neil and persuade him to stand down?
Many of us have long thought that anyone who could lead the Labour Party out of the darkness of 1983 would find leading the country relatively easy — and a task for which, despite all the sneering of the snobbish clique that makes up the political élite in this country, it is not necessary to possess a double first from Oxbridge.
Wake up Europe
I feel that the sense of relief implicit in your report on the French regional elections (‘The defeat of socialism?
Not quite’, 27 March) is uncalled-for, if the geographical pattern of National Front voting is analysed.
It is true that the Front did not achieve the widely forecast 20 per cent.
But it achieved 24 per cent of votes cast in communes of more than 40,000, ie, where immigrants and their descendants are concentrated.
If one subtracts the vote of this vulnerable group from the remaining 76 per cent, this means that they have to live with the knowledge that more than one in four of voting co-residents have voted for a party that is rabidly hostile to them.
The fear this must engender day-in, day-out is more important than the minutiae of psephology.
It is a measure of how dangerous the National Front has become in France that so many commentators of impeccable democratic and anti-racist credentials should take comfort from the result.
Wake up, Europe (Britain included).
Support needed
Des Smith (‘Forgotten innocents’, 20 March) rightly points out that the conditions of the Guatemalan refugees have been largely ignored by the world's media.
While Nicaragua and El Salvador were perceived during the 1980s by the US State Department to be on the frontline of the fight against communism (and therefore newsworthy), the larger-scale massacres in neighbouring Guatemala received no attention: journalists wandering around the scorched highlands simply couldn't get their stories printed.
Unless we are more attentive, the Guatemalan refugees are about to be ignored again as they suffer this time not from the cold war, but the ‘new world order’.
The Free Trade Association, which will create a single market between Canada, the United States and Mexico at the end of this year, has jeopardised their refugee status.
The Mexican government has informed them that they have to decide by December whether to return to Guatemala, or to lose refugee status and become Mexican citizens.
As a way of encouraging them to return, food aid to the refugee camps has been withheld since last summer.
This is the real reason for the present malnourishment in the camps.
The refugee organisations have taken the decision to return, in spite of the lack of guarantees for their physical security inside Guatemala.
Meanwhile, it looks likely that most of the official aid to the repatriation process will be channelled through Guatemalan government agencies, given to the very people responsible for the refugee crisis in the first place.
International support is urgently needed, both in terms of economic aid and political support.
In answer to Des Smith's question, yes, there are people who care but we need more articles like his to turn that into effective support.
Black and white issues
If the leaders of Anti-Racist Alliance want to build up an effective anti-racist movement, they should desist from the kind of stupid sectarianism that I witnessed at the recent March for Justice in the London borough of Newham.
Two men were standing in Plashet Park handing out Anti-Nazi League placards to people arriving for the march.
Each placard read ‘Anti-Racist League’ and ‘Stop Racist Murders’.
A group of Asian youths entered the park and each took a placard.
One of the ARA stewards then approached these young men and told them that they would not be allowed on the march if they carried Anti-Nazi League placards.
Later, there was an announcement from the platform about carrying ‘official placards’.
It would appear that when ARA representatives speak of ‘black leadership of the anti-racist struggle’, what they are really doing is asserting their right, as self-appointed ‘leaders’, to dictate to ordinary black and white anti-racists.
FRINGE BENEFITS Colin Ward gets away from it all, submerging himself at Dartington
Forty years ago I saw a friend off at Paddington, bound for Totnes.
‘Back to Lotus-Land,’ she sighed.
And when I confessed the other day in the King's Head that we were off on a trip to Dartington, there were cynical smiles.
It has been like that all through the history of the place.
I have often reflected that if the founders, Dorothy and Leonard Elmhirst, had behaved like any other rural landowners, living it up through judicious stock-market investments, no one would have raised an eyebrow.
It was only the fact that, as Dorothy said, they believed that ‘wealth entails social responsibility’, that made the activities they funded the target of six decades of jeers and sneers.
She was an American, inheriting her father's fortune at 17.
He was a Yorkshire farmer's son.
During the first world war, he worked at the Allahabad Agricultural Institute, and after it, at the invitation of Rabindranath Tagore, founded the Department of Rural Reconstruction in Bengal.
They met at Cornell University, where she was a social work student and he was in the agricultural department.
They belonged to that earnest minority among the privileged, devoted to plain-living and high-thinking.
In 1925, they bought the ruinous Dartington Hall, its acres of woods and two farms in a state of rapid decline, and set about their own experiment in rural reconstruction.
Their aim was to make rural life feasible and culturally viable.
They wanted to restore farming, horticulture and forestry, and to develop a series of secondary industries: sawmilling, building, textiles and cider-making.
They added experimental departments in agriculture, forestry and social research, and the school that was famous for 50 years in the world of progressive education.
Later came the Arts Centre and the Adult Education Centre.
Some of the bewildering range of ventures succeeded.
Plenty failed and were quietly or noisily dropped.
The postwar years saw recurrent crises, and resolutions to be more businesslike and to cut losses.
The magnificent hall itself and its gardens became a tourist attraction.
Dartington Glass became famous.
The College of Art was started as a distinguished contribution to the network of music and art schools and today has the same financial problems as every other higher education institution.
Right from the start, the venture attracted hostility.
At the height of the 1930s depression, Dartington was employing as many as 600 otherwise jobless people at wages meant ‘to equal the best prevailing in similar occupations elsewhere’.
This was unwelcome to other local employers and farmers, as was the news that the Elmhirsts did not hunt, shoot or fish.
A whole journalistic industry spread scurrilous rumours about the school, and neighbours were outraged by the way the Elmhirsts gave a haven to refugees, foreigners, pacifists, socialists and atheists.
I met Leonard Elmhirst a few times in his old age.
He wasn't disillusioned.
It was never his intention, he said, to create a self-sufficient community.
Not because holy poverty was impossible, but because it just wasn't a socially desirable objective.
What he wanted was the growth of Land Trusts to replace both the traditional pattern of landownership and its haphazard modern successors.
Land Trusts, he thought, should be responsible for the proper exploitation of resources and would need to pay attention to the human and social needs of everyone living in the area.
This kind of thinking hasn't featured in election campaigning, so though friends warn me that I'll be submerged in a great placid pool of meditation, I'm off to Dartington to gather a few hints on the ideas that ought to guide our future.
I have a return ticket.
ARTS & MEDIA
Two cheers for democracy The incoming government will have to tackle London's squalor and confusion.
Stephanie Williams warns that the price of a beautiful capital will the loss of local freedom
At the end of March, a 400-page report on the future of the King's Cross railway lands was laid before Camden councillors.
Until, it says, a number of ‘outstanding issues’ are resolved, Sir Norman Foster's masterplan for the 134-acre former goods yard cannot be considered ‘even in principle’.
So begins the next round in a saga that began more than 20 years ago.
Then, the GLC, appalled at the waste and dereliction of this gigantic site in the heart of London, declared the place an ‘Action Area’ and tried to inspire development from the top down.
It failed.
With its demise, British Rail took over the initiative.
Now, after five years of design and public consultation, two planning applications, countless negotiations and revisions, the land still lies derelict.
The next step?
A public inquiry that could cost the London Regeneration consortium and Camden Council up to £4 million each.
King's Cross is just one of London's more conspicuous examples of planning and democracy in action.
Or rather, non-action.
On the south bank of the Thames, plans for the vacant site that will one day become London Bridge City, Part II, recently entered their fifth major redesign in as many years.
At St Paul's, the Secretary of State for the Environment last month called in the popularly acclaimed Renaissance-in-Disneyland designs for Paternoster Square — after five years of competitions, proposals and public consultation.
Battersea Power Station stands open to the rain; the new British Library will have taken nearly 30 years to complete.
Cross town to Spitalfields.
The past nine years have sweated the life-blood out of more than 20 firms of architects and half a dozen developers, absorbed countless years of time in two opposing local authorities (Tower Hamlets and the Corporation of London), and aroused the wrath of a host of community groups.
At least seven master-plans have been produced for the site; three have been given planning permission.
The fate of Spitalfields has exercised a Royal Fine Art Commission, enraged the Georgian Group and obliged the intervention of the Secretary of State.
Plans to develop the market have so far required 100 businesses to relocate and changed the lives of an infinite number of people.
Now, with a lease that requires all new building to be completed by the year 2000, and the crash of the property market making nonsense of plans for yet more offices, the developers stand to lose over £170 million.
Has planning in central London reached a final impasse?
To clarify these difficulties, the Labour Party has called for the creation of an elected Greater London Authority to initiate strategic development.
Can salvation be found in another layer of discussion, expertise, and so-called democracy?
(In the last 16 years of its life, turnouts for GLC elections never averaged more than 45 per cent; in 1973, it was 37 per cent .)
Will a new tier of decision-making help to unravel the sort of deadlock that is already strangling the prospects for any change in London?
Take the most basic site.
Before you can begin to design a single building you have to consider the shape of the site, its ground conditions, its relations with its neighbours, the character of its nearby historic buildings, vehicle access, height restrictions, the means of escape in case of fire, disabled access, rubbish disposal and costs.
To say nothing of the desires of the client.
This is before you move on to environmental impact, the feeling of the community, and what the planners think: considerations whose complexity rises exponentially with the size and prominence of a site, and the number of bodies who have interests in the exercise.
Such complexity is made much worse by dissent.
The problem for any new supra-authority will be to sort out its priorities, which must benefit London as a whole rather than local short-term interests.
By definition, strategic planning is remote; about locating highways and airports.
It is a science that ordinary people feel powerless to influence but which will nevertheless have a bearing on every major site in the London area.
Members of this new authority will have to come to grips quickly with the dilemma that what a city needs, and what its people want, are often two different things.
Who cares where they put the Channel Tunnel terminal when what really makes you cross is having to travel half an hour to find a park in which our kids can play — except, that is, if your street is in the line of blight?
How can any locally elected politician be expected to persuade his community to pay the price of blight and disruption for the greater good of a city on the scale of London?
This division of loyalties put paid to the GLC.
It has to be faced.
It is almost 30 years since central planning enjoyed a vogue in Britain.
Bloodied and shattered by the war, for 20 years the public shared the architects' vision of a brave new world of pristine concrete, of high airy towers set in acres of green park-land.
Tenants moved into those high-rise flats with joy.
It was only as time, the weather, bad management, neglect and poverty took their toll that the dream turned sour.
Today that unity of view, conceived after the destruction of our cities, has died.
The whole process of planning for a better future has become discredited.
Those who commission buildings rarely know what they want; those who conceive grand plans see them reduced to ashes by the planning system.
Public tastes and current architecture have never been so much at odds.
We have seen the results in Paternoster Square: the neo-classical scheme that the public supported but architects decried.
Last month the Inland Revenue announced that Michael Hopkins — who cleverly bridges the divide between high-tech and traditional craftsmanship — had won the competition for its new headquarters in Nottingham.
Meanwhile, in the Nottingham Post there was clear readers' support for the classical designs of Demetri Porphyrios, which looked like school buildings for St Trinian's.
The fact is that democracy is to planning and design as oil is to water.
If you want beauty and perfection in a city, you have to be draconian.
The pleasures of the squares of the Bedford estate in Bloomsbury, the nobility of Regent's Park and the elegant uniformity of Belgravia owe their aesthetic success to ruthlessness.
As Lee Kwan Yew proved in Singapore, you can ban cars from a city centre and revolutionise a city's transport virtually overnight.
But if you stop, as the authorities did in Hong Kong, to listen to the opposition, the system will not work.
Building the beautiful boulevards of Paris, Baron Haussmann demolished more than 20,000 buildings.
The public and professional opposition to I M Pei's famous glass pyramids at the Louvre was of a ferocity that would never have been withstood in England.
The building would simply not have been built.
Neil Kinnock may say he wants London to have some glitzy Parisian-style grands projets .
All I say is: good luck to him.
The finest architecture and the best examples of town planning are conceived with a clarity of vision that brooks no compromise.
To be realised they must be pursued with savage singlemindedness until the bitter end.
To do so, an architect requires a client who is prepared to aim high, has absolute faith in his vision, and nerves of steel.
We have seen such a case with the Lloyd's building.
While the buildings at Broadgate and Canary Wharf are not as wonderful, they have achieved contributions to London's streetscape as fine as the best from our past.
But without wholesale public support, heaven alone knows how London is to be beautified on a metropolitan scale.
For the British are too bolshy, too steeped in the way of democracy, to have an elegant and tidy city.
We would rather be free and live in a mess.
Music 24 songs and nothin' to hear Geoff Dyer goes down to the Springsteen river, and finds that it's dry
Classic ritual of the disappointing album: buy it at the Megastore; go for coffee as a way of prolonging the moment of consumption, rip off the cellophane, remove the card inlay (taking care not to tear it on the little perspex teeth) and scan the lyrics (Giddy-up giddy-up giddy-up whoa/My pony boy’—shit!); tube home (further lyric-skimming); feed it to the CD player, skip to the second track while still halfway through the first, sample that, move on, hop and jump to the end and start wondering about forthcoming birthdays — then back to the beginning in the hope that maybe it is, as we used to say, a grower.
Multiply this by two in the case of Bruce Springsteen's latest, for there are, as we all know, two new albums.
Human Touch (Columbia)is the worst: an hour of express-way roar with only the odd shift down to break up the nose-to-bumper raunch.
Lucky Town has a few reasonable ballads and the odd image strong enough to resist the insistent undertow of formula Boss: a soldier back from the Gulf waking from a dream in which the souls of the dead ‘rise like dark geese into the Oklahoma skies’.
Touches like this emphasise how meagre the rest of the fare is, and remind you of the contrary sensation, years back, when, after much prompting, you listened to Darkness on the Edge of Town and were suddenly converted.
Springsteen was a giant , the creator of a complete imaginative world.
Simultaneously mythic and painstakingly real (‘the giant Exxon sign/That brings this fair city light’), his cityscape was inhabited by characters whose lives were condensed into their names, a few gestures or scraps of dialogue (‘Hey, Eddie, can you lend me a few bucks…
’). And this world was self-generating.
His songs were stories, coloured and defined by the others on the record.
Each album benefited from and enlarged on an understanding of the others.
By the time of The River , the threatening darkness on the edge of town has crept into his father's house (‘Independence Day’).
Darkness ends with the redemptive plan to ‘ride to the sea and wash these sins off our hands’ but such a hope is, by the next album, ‘a curse’, a remembered delusion (‘I know the river is dry’).
And so on.
The mood of the acoustic album Nebraska was bleak, lowering, but even here there was the sustaining immensity of the continent and the possibility of heading off and starting over (no such promise on this grim little rock, of course).
His project reached complete imaginative extension with Born in the USA , a return to full-scale rock ensemble with no loss of immediacy or intimacy.
It was a conscious thematic culmination of everything he had done before, but also represented, unavoidably, a kind of conclusion.
This was confirmed by Tunnel of Love , a palatable, modest collection that had the feel of an interim report.
Five years later, the new albums represent neither an expansion nor a retreat but a hesitant reluctance to set out anew.
They are the opposite of new releases: new captivities.
The problem is a common one for the artist advanced deeply in his oeuvre .
Finding it difficult to tap a new field of creative resources, he draws instead on his own previous imaginative renderings.
This form of self-derivation means that everything is pre-mediated .
Instead of inching his way into new sorties, new lives, he takes what he needs from earlier ones.
Rivers — to return to that earlier example — appear throughout the new albums, but there is no sense of their actually curving through a realised dramatic landscape.
A river is always flowing conveniently by whenever he needs a decorative image or symbolic resolution.
In ‘Soul Drive’ he simply dumps everything from the brooding, apocalyptic storms of Darkness into the first verse:
‘Rode through forty nights of the gospels' rain Black sky pourin' snakes frogs And love in vain You were down where the river grows wider Baby let me be your soul rider.’
Perhaps it's telling that a similar process of self-siphoning is also afflicting Hollywood, for no other song-writer is as steeped in cinema as Springsteen (it is surprising that we had to wait until Indian Runner for a film to be made of one of his songs).
The inextinguishable romance of Springsteen's world is fuelled by the cinema.
His characters depend on the defining promise of the movies.
Movies in the new albums, appropriately enough, are present only as jokes, in ‘57 Channels (And Nothin' On)’ or ‘Real Man’: ‘Sound came up lights went down/Rambo he was blowin' 'em down.’
How Springsteen will script his way out of his own imaginative past is anybody's guess.
In the meantime we have 24 songs (and nothin' to hear).
The TV campaign What a big swingometer Exit polls will spoil Thursday's macho drama, predicts John Dugdale
By my rough calculations, the total amount of election-related television by the four terrestrial networks over the course of the month-long campaign comes to around 420 hours — 260 hours if you allow for non-poll material by subtracting 30 per cent of overall time from news bulletins and 60 per cent from breakfast shows.
(To place this figure in some sort of context, the BBC drama department's output for the whole of 1991/92 is only 275 hours.)
Added together, the BBC1 and ITV election results specials will take up a mere 12–14 hours, depending on the state of play at 4am.
It's superficially puzzling, then, that, right from the outset, the broadcasters placed so much stress on a single night: the BBC started running trailers for its 9 April coverage on day zero, with David Dimbleby mysteriously promising viewers ‘a journey of discovery’.
In fact, there's a simple explanation for the loopily lopsided emphasis, spelled out by the BBC's Election 92 editor, Peter Horrocks: ‘Election night is one of the few occasions when BBC and ITV are in direct competition with the same programming.’
Nothing gets the old testosterone surging like a head-to-head contest.
In the mandatory pre-fight squabbling, ITN's Stewart Purvis lambasted the swing-ometer as ‘a two-dimensional 1970s device’, and Horrocks chose to home in on the opposition's choice of untried Jon Snow as their E-night pivot.
ITN would be unable to overcome the loss of Sir Alastair Burnet, he told TV Times —‘Without him it looks like a scratch team.’
There seems to be a curious confusion of identity here.
The Alastair Burnet most of us recall was a former Daily Express editor with overt links to Margaret Thatcher who was somehow allowed to retain a unique double role as journalist and executive in the monopoly ITV and C4 news operation.
Even his admirers concede that he was ‘not at his best’ when conducting interviews.
In his last years as News at Ten helmsman, he became a national joke-figure.
The idea that Sir Alastair's departure represents a ‘loss’ for ITN — as opposed to an overdue opportunity to regain credibility — is gobsmackingly misguided.
The ever-increasing stature of Snow and Jeremy Paxman, both members of the student ‘class of 68’, has been one of the most significant developments in the media campaign.
In picking Snow as anchor, ITN bosses replaced a Tory royalist with someone sent down from university ‘following political disturbances’; and, equally boldly, they chose to skip a generation.
As a senior radio journalist pointed out to me, the Burnet succession would probably have gone to Peter Sissons if he hadn't defected to the Beeb.
It's not been such a great campaign for those formed by 1969 rather than 1968; in other words, for female journalists who were reared on Greer.
Of the 14 key studio anchor or pundit roles on BBC1, ITV and Radio 4 election night shows, only one has been assigned to a woman.
Julia Somerville, the presenter in question, remarked mildly at ITN's press conference that the imbalance was ‘quite strange’ at the back end of the 20th century.
In the context of such an overwhelming victory for phallocracy, the BBC's weird decision to focus its hype on Peter Snow's giant swingometer seems to have a certain symbolic logic.
The incorrigibly macho character of newsgathering operations is reflected in the abundance of military imagery that can be found in the Radio Times pull-out poll guide: Snow's ‘Battleground’ screen, Horrocks compared to ‘a general at HQ’.
But another string of metaphors is also revealing.
In an exuberant interview, David Dimbleby calls the results programme ‘a drama [in which]heroes and villains rise and fall’; elsewhere in the supplement, Sissons speaks of the excitement of seeing politicians' masks slip, and backroom boss Philip Campbell describes his studio as a ‘theatre-in-the-round’, attracting viewers to ‘gather round David Dimbleby's stage to see the plot unfold through his narrative’.
All three seem to have in mind both the riveting political events of November 1990 and the concurrent BBC adaptation of Michael Dobbs' House of Cards , which owed much to Shakespearian tragedy.
A concern to prevent viewers switching off is normal but, on this particular occasion, broadcasters — particularly those at the BBC — appear to be overdoing it by promising a mixture of melodrama and cabaret (‘a great national party’ is another of Dimbleby's images).
Why so frantic?
I suspect it's because the 1992 election is the first in which the BBC is following ITN's lead by using exit polls.
In 1978, I went over to France for the final day of the parliamentary elections, expecting to stay up for most of the night as one would in the UK.
But French TV pioneered the national exit poll, and the ‘results’ were revealed a few seconds after the last ballot slip was boxed.
I was in bed by 11 o'clock.
There is no ‘unfolding narrative’ in a results programme that begins with an extremely reliable forecast of the outcome: it's like a whodunnit in which the sleuth announces the dénouement on the first page.
That's what the broadcasters are worried about, and probably the reason why the BBC disastrously preferred a ‘voting intention’ survey in 1987.
Exit polls are now a vital part of election night specials — but they are also fatal to the programmes' capacity to grip an audience through suspense.
Music Shocking dissonances Roderic Dunnet asks why espressionist music so outraged its first audiences
The original Vienna Skandalkonzert took place on 31 March 1913.
This was the notorious occasion when the new musical aesthetic of Schoenberg and his pupils led to uproar and the calling of the police.
A reconstruction of the concert formed a centrepiece of Manchester's Festival of Expressionism, which has looked again at the German and Austrian blossoming that anticipated the dominant issues of 20th-century culture.
Cultural shock was a hallmark of the period.
Richard Strauss' explosive Salome fell foul of Vienna censorship.
Mahler's middle symphonies encouraged walk-outs with their acerbic instrumentalism.
Two months after the Schoenberg fracas, the rhythmic violence of Stravinsky's Rite of Spring provoked one of the most celebrated theatrical débâcles of all time at its Paris premiere.
Often the furore stemmed from audiences' unease at being plugged into a musical idiom shorn of familiar signposts.
This problem was not new.
Puzzled successors lamented the complexity of late Beethoven; Mozart fought to liberate opera from an affronted Italian establishment.
The Skandalkonzert 's audience received mollifiers.
Zemlinsky's Maeterlinck Songs , also on the programme, were stylistically close to Mahler's Kindertotenlieder — the closing tribute that the uproar prevented.
And Schoenberg's First Chamber Symphony scarcely rivals the novelty of the Second Quartet, the Sprechstimme (spoken voice) in Pierrot Lunaire or the shadowy glooms of Erwartung .
However, Webern's Six Orchestral Pieces and Berg's Songs to Picture Postcard Texts by Peter Altenberg did pose acute problems for listeners.
Each incorporated elements characteristic of the wider expressionist movement: strong or exaggerated colour; bold, unusually angular lines; a terse, almost obtuse epigrammaticism; an elusive chromatic idiom; and, in the Altenberg, a lugubrious, eroticism akin to Klimt.
The utopian theatre of 1917 Berlin and Vienna was still on the horizon.
This was the era of expressionism's harbingers.
The femmes fatales of Oscar Kokoschka's play Murderer, Hope of Women and Wedekind's Earth Spirit both featured in later operas.
Yet it was neither sexual suggestion nor the defiance of authority, caricatured in different ways by Kaiser and Grosz, that launched this particular scandal.
Music's problem went deeper.
Schoenberg's own fear was that his new idioms might fail to communicate.
Communication was his sine qua non ; it was his (unrequited) yearning that his music be whistled in the street.
He loathed others' emphasis on his ‘method’(the novel serial formula he adopted around 1920 for shaping 12-note chromaticism) in itself.
What mattered was the musical outcome: what you said with it.
Despite a dread of post-tonal anarchy, he remained adamant: ‘musical imagination’ predominated; ‘soul’should rule head.
Even in the atonal phase, before he adopted serialism, he presented obstacles for his listeners.
Though harmonic signposts remained, the flexibility of Wagner and Debussy had now become a dense maze, difficult to chart.
The absence of musical form horrified Schoenberg, and a similar distaste helped to motivate the multifaceted serialism — in duration, pitch and so on— of Webern and, later, of Boulez.
These complex systems earned recurrent jibes at ‘mathematical’ music, as though medieval or Bachian polyphony were somehow spontaneous growths.
Schoenberg was also an expressive painter, admired by Kandinsky and hung in the 1911 Blaue Reiter group exhibition.
In music, both his Aufbruch , or break-out from outdated constraints, and his restitution of form related to wider expressionist trends.
Each baffled critics and audiences alike.
Structural innovation, a horizontal emphasis, marked angularity, splintered melody and the admission on equal terms of difficult intervals such as the tritone signalled a move into uncharted territory.
After melody, harmony is the element that most immediately lulls or fails to allure the listener.
Given the comparative naiveté of popular and vernacular idioms, Schoenberg's liberation of dissonance (‘enlarging the boundaries of the permissible’, as Debussy put it) posed difficulties for the average listener that remain a subject of controversy.
Collapses of communication tend to prod new movements into ghettos.
Breakaway artistic circles, even when isolated, proved fundamental to change in early 20th-century Austria and Germany.
One offshoot of the Scandalkonzert was Schoenberg's new Society for Private Performance.
It barred the critics, but enabled him to premiere works by himself and his pupils to sympathetic ears.
Some of these have not lasted, but the series had a direct bearing on the foundation of the London Society for Contemporary Music, under whose aegis new music continues the same struggle today.
Since Schoenberg's day, modernism has has not been averse to self-serving diatribes.
But now, music faces not ‘formalist’ prescriptions but a new freedom and eclecticism.
A range of synthetic forms, from minimalism to microtonality, produces work that is more readily assimilated by less judgmental audiences.
Perhaps the present age must beware of an alternative ‘scandal’, not without precedent in expressionism's heyday: the flowering of a new indiscriminateness.
Film Crocodile tear-jerker Little Steven has turned into a cynical old showman.
Anne Billson is very cross
Once upon a time there was a little boy called Steven Spielberg who refused to grow up.
One day he found himself in charge of the biggest train set in Never Never Land, and so he made some jolly exciting movies about friendly aliens, man-eating sharks, and an archaeologist who zoomed around the world thrashing Nazis.
And a beezer time was had by all.
But there were clouds in the blue of Steven's sky.
He was a wizard at appealing to everyone's sense of childlike wonder.
He had brought pleasure by the bucketful to millions of people.
But he had always failed to impress the grown-ups in Never Never Land: the ones who handed out the end-of-term prizes, and the folk who decided which movies were important and meaningful , as opposed to escapist fun for all the family.
So he had a go at making some grown-up movies, such as The Color Purple and Always — films dealing with heavy subjects such as relationships, conflict and bereavement.
But Steven had a b-i-g problem, because he had spent his whole life in Never Never, a land not best known for its grasp of real life, and his idea of what went on in the world outside was limited to the hazy notions he had picked up…from the movies .
And so, whenever one of Steven's movies touched upon an adult theme, he was unable to link it directly to his own experience, because he hadn't any.
Everything came out a little bit corny.
He had drained all the childlike wonder from his grown-up movies, but the grown-ups were still sitting with folded arms and stony faces, unimpressed.
‘Hey ho’, Steven thought.
‘What was the point of trying?’
But he still had the run of the train set, so he decided to return to the jolly exciting stuff about pirates and fairies, all rolled into a rollicking family film called Hook (Odeon, Leicester Square, from 10 April).
Alas, no sooner had he started than he realised it was no longer what he wanted.
Times had changed; there was a worldwide recession on, and in the meantime Steven had got married, become a father, and got divorced.
Maybe he had grown up without ever realising it.
But it was too late .
The train set was already chuffing out of the station, so Steven decided to take everyone along for a ride.
The story was about Peter Pan, another little boy who refused to grow up, except that in Steven's film, by some inimitable twist of illogic, he has grown up.
And he has forgotten all about the Lost Boys and how to fly, until his own children are kidnapped by his old adversary Captain Hook.
Tinkerbell helps Peter get to Never Never Land so he can rescue them.
Steven decided that if he couldn't come up with a definitive artistic statement to impress the grown-ups, then at least he could impress them with the definitive bank statement.
At the same time, he could make lots of pocket-money for himself and his best friends Robin (Williams) and Julia (Roberts) and Dustin (Hoffmann).
Robin was Peter, and Julia was ickle-bitty Tinkerbell, with pointy ears and a pixie tunic, and Dustin was Hook, with a curly moustache and a cod English accent.
Dustin won.
His was the only character in the film you didn't want to see garrotted.
The designers designed a terrific pirate galleon and a thrilling Lost Boys' hideout.
But, no matter how much Steven made his camera swoop and glide and giddy-up around the sets, he couldn't stop them from looking like boring old panto scenery, especially since the galleon never put out to sea (which would have been too mega-expensive), and the Lost Boys' camp was crammed full of Starlight Express -style skate-boarding tracks.
As for the Lost Boys, they were cast from a politically correct mix of ethnic groups and blimp shapes, and zipped around in funky MTV gear and Mohican hair-dos, spouting street jargon.
Poor old Steven: he wasn't to know that, while he had been busy trying to make grown-up movies, the trendiest kids had gone off Michael Jackson and the Ninja Turtles and transferred their allegiance to metal-headed dipsticks such as Bill and Ted, or Wayne and Garth from Wayne's World , the year's hotsiest hit-flick (which comes down your way in May).
But he drew the line at including gurls,because gurls were less than zero — J M Barrie had the right idea there.
Wendy (played by Maggie Smith plus wrinkly make-up) has to stay in the Wendy house, while grown-up Peter forgets all about his kidnapped daughter, and concentrates instead on the more important business of bonding with his kidnapped son.
Steven threw in lots of baseball, and tinkle-plunk John Williams soundtrack, and finished it off with one enormous Big Hug.
And, just in case anyone wanted a Regarding Henry message, he threw in one of those as well: don't be a workaholic yuppie asshole, don't lose sight of the child inside you, and don't miss any of your son's Little League matches.
Barf-o-rama!: bring back Jack Torrance from The Shining .
But, in the end, Steven didn't mind at all when discerning folk puked up all over the loathsome Lost Boys and complained of dangerous levels of heartwarming brought on by an excess of Robin Williams.
So what if Hook was a cynical money-spinning exercise full of lacklustre action and meretricious sentiment-by-numbers?
Just because it was all those things, Steven knew it was also proof that, after all these years, he was really and truly one of the grown-ups.
Books
Star turns EXPLETIVES DELETED: SELECTED WRITINGS Angela Carter Chatto & Windus, £15.99
In the introduction to her last book, Angela Carter boasts about how much she swears.
Could this be an old hippie pratfall?
‘Hey man — I'm really free!’?
More likely, once established as a member of the literati and the venerable ‘June 20th Group’, she felt a need to stress her difference from them — as if we didn't already know.
It's sobering to note that while the British have a mass of facetious academics for each real intellectual, and hardly any big fat writers on the lines of the US, Angela Carter, at the time of Nights at the Circus , was both these things to a world-class degree.
Her ability to combine ravishing description with incisive analysis was outstanding.
Her erotic bite and delirious extravagance with language made the pleasure she delivered truly satisfying; not yet tortured into plaisir .
(Barthes, here, is ‘too disingenuous by half’; Susan Sontag ‘worthy but dull’).
She started off as a journalist, and when reading her on the nauseating cult of Elizabeth David, you know you are in the hands of a mistress of rhetoric.
Whooshing on about David's beauty and elegance on the top layer, she carves her and her disciples up a treat underneath.
She always loathed naturalistic and realist writing, and locates in Raymond Carver a ‘grey…glum…discontented acquiescence’ that could be applied to any number of British anaemic depressives.
She has a lot of fun with Vogue 's heartless frivolity, Paul Theroux (‘I'd suggest a vasectomy’) and the Surrealists (‘What did these young people do with themselves when they were not engaged in the revolutionary act of sleep?’).
But when she goes into the economics of food, admits the ‘luxury’ of aesthetic choice, and gets John Berger off the charge of ‘bourgeois pastoral’or ‘the consolatory celebration of a fictive rusticity’, you have a writer for whom politics was never a mere function of style.
Carter remained loyal to the 1960s ethos, and there's an elegiac tone to some of these pieces that suggests the necessary work of iconoclasm had already passed into other hands.
She might seem remote to new readers when she talks proudly about being the last family at school to get a TV set, and the books open on the table at mealtimes in her parent's house.
There's also a tendency to scoop all modern phenomena into her preferred mythological skirts.
But are cinema-goers anything like ancient Greeks?
Are family stories, pub anecdotes, celebrity gossip and US supermarket mags alike the materials of ‘folklore’?
She longs for the anguished desolation of a late capitalism that hasn't quite worked as her generation dreamed.
Quoting Godard —‘fin du cinéma, fin du monde ’— she joins with Robert Coover in describing the modern cinema as ‘a rat-haunted, urine-scented wreck, inhabited only by a lonely projectionist screening reels at random for his solitary pleasure’.
When she calls Hollywood Anecdotes ‘oddly similar to those little Sunday school compilations of the sayings of saints and worthies,’ she is putting cinema and its browse-and-leave-it culture in its place, in an obviously self-serving gesture.
She scorned the ‘literary’ but still believed in the literature she admires here in the work of Christina Stead, Louise Erdich, and in the best discussion of Jane Eyre you will ever read.
Too bad that by the time of her own death, she was one of its few remaining practitioners.
So what of the legacy?
It doesn't look good.
The first wave of British magic realists were open to world literature, flushed by the utopianism of 1968 and also, possibly, by the influence of long-playing hallucinogenic drugs.
They declared fantasy the radical form, and if this made the Marquis de Sade or Edgar Allan Poe less ‘bourgeois’ than Emily Bronte or Dickens, well, never mind: they knew how to enjoy themselves in those days.
But, just as many writers have taken Virginia Woolf as an mandate to waffle in subjective, near-incoherent mode about matters domestic without a sliver of her context, variety of perspective, real innovation and sheer writing genius, so many fey sprites are still dicking around with fairy stories, dry old myths and (oh dear, oh dear) the tale .
This isn't, like Carter, in order to blast through appearances to expose working ideas, but as a twee retreat from soiling their hands with anything real at all.
There is a kind of Leavisism creeping through the back door in this stubbornly middle-class liking for disengaged moralising and metaphysical writing.
Carter mentions Walter de la Mare's recourse to Christian allegory as being ‘as good as putting up a No Trespassers sign’.
The same could be said of the Shakespearean or Homeric frame.
Carter should, of course, have got a Booker for her pains.
But as this noble institution has only ever rewarded women writers for being ladylike —Oldie pin-ups, maybe — or for assuming the pompous, androgynous mantle of — God help us — George Eliot, her exclusion can be read as a back-handed compliment.
She was that rare thing: an educated feminist who could relish what was extraordinary in all women.
In an improbable, but typical, detour in a review of a book about corsets, she asks: ‘How has it come about that feminists have picked up the masculine notion that those women who aren't self-confessed feminists don't known what they're doing, half the time?’
But in her tributes to Colette,Middlemarch 's Rosamund, Baudelaire's Black Venus, Lizzie Borden, Viv (‘Spend, Spend, Spend’) Nicholson and chorus girls elsewhere, she shows she knew the strategies of female outlaws have lacked nothing in resourcefulness or invention.
She was a great writer and a great feminist, and will be read for illumination and entertainment for many years to come.
Good grief THE LAST OF ENGLAND Ted Walker Jonathan Cape, £13.99 Janet Barron
The Last of England is a tender, autobiographical love story of the author's feelings for his dead wife.
Alone on a holiday and trying to come to terms with his grief, he reflects that ‘the most cruel pain of all occurred at such moments, when I tried to face the still unacceptable fact that I could never tell her anything again.
Not about anywhere.
Not about anybody.
Not on the phone, not on a postcard’.
The theme may sound bleak, but this is a fearless book.
It confronts ambiguities, including the guilt feelings of having been unfaithful in transient affairs; casual encounters which now seem a pointless betrayal.
Ted Walker astonishes with his honesty, and this autobiography bubbles with sane optimism, a refusal ever to give in to the temptations of self-pity.
Lorna, his wife, develops cancer.
The operations that follow destroy her beauty.
Her jaw is removed, and then as the disease spreads she loses an eye.
Her death is inevitable, over eight long years, but she remains vital and amusing and can even joke about it.
Her suffering would have overwhelmed anyone with less spirit, as the futile efforts of science to rid her of the growths ravage her body.
The Last of England breaks taboos and frees itself of hypocrisy.
There is no mysticism about it, but rather an acceptance of death and an awareness of all the little moments when the self was inadequate.
There is also, perhaps surprisingly, humour as life goes on.
Ted Walker is a poet and travel-writer, and these skills are immediately apparent in his work.
He observes people and places with a wry and uncanny sense of what it is that matters about them.
This book is a testament of love, and in part, that is a love of life.
It mocks selfishness and the English habit of playing safe.
Reading it, you need no convincing that Walker is a major writer.
Lorna's disease becomes, subtly, a metaphor.
‘Poor old England, too, had long been corroding from within.
Her good looks — in city and town, village and open country — were fading; she was an exhausted country.’
In this way,The Last of England becomes a political work, a protest against an uncaring social ethic.
This is implicit rather than explicit, and written in a controlled rage.
It takes no moralising stance, but is imbued with a generous and entirely human reason.
The things that matter are in this book.
It deserves praise and a high recommendation, and should perhaps be sent to every politician.
Ghost towns THE 100-MILE CITY Deyan Sudjic André Deutsch, £20 Rowan Moore
The thesis is simple: the immense, amorphous city of cars and telecommunication, both many-centred and centreless, and predicated by theorists throughout this century, has finally arrived.
Its most naked forms are such comfortably remote places at Tokyo, Houston and Los Angeles, but it is only a spattering of Victoriana and Wren that obscures London's conformity to the model.
In the 100-mile city, airports, shopping centres, cultural complexes and historic monuments all have equivalent status.
Its influence extends beyond its seeming limits, causing business parks and shopping centres to sprout at a distance — hence the book's title.
The 100-mile city is post-industrial: docks and heavy industry have gone, as has the compression of different trades into dense areas.
With the evacuation of Billingsgate, Covent Garden and the newspapers, inner London has lost fish, flowers and Fleet Street to the suburbs.
‘Community’ is a figment, and those who wish it into being are scornfully withered.
Whether such a city is good or bad is irrelevant.
Sudjic's point is that it exists, and any attempt to plan, ameliorate or build in it has to grasp this fact.
But, although in awe of market forces and at his most vivid in describing the fantastic-bathetic power-plays of politicians and developers, Sudjic does not propose pure compliance.
He is optimistic enough to see some point in directing, harnessing or tempering the largely commercial forces behind the 100-mile city, but not in ignoring them.
You may have thought you already knew all this, but it is hard to think of anyone who has put the case as plainly, or elucidated it with such concrete examples.
Comprehension of the modern city's altered state is rarely apparent in much of the verbiage currently expended on urban architecture.
Issues of the scale addressed in this book — the transformation of thousands of square miles and millions of lives — put quibbles about style into perspective.
Not that perspective — which denotes visual orderliness — is the right word, since the decisive characteristic of the 100-mile city is that whatever order it has is invisible.
It spreads surprisingly, like fungus spores, rather than along regulated lines.
You can no more see its economic and technological wiring than you can see an electromagnetic impulse.
Hence the modern city's disjointedness: the jarring encounters of smoothness and dereliction at Canary Wharf, or of modernity and Olde Englande almost anywhere else in this country.
The invisibility of the forces that shape cities is matched by the evaporation of any link between the appearance of a building and its use.
Sudjic implies this when he explains how architects of office blocks have to dress up the imperatives of mechanical engineers, and when he examines, and rejects, attempts to tie the design of tower blocks to the social ills they can contain.
The problem for any action in the world Sudjic describes, at least by architects, is that it is largely visual, and therefore operates in a different sphere from the one it wants to influence.
It is difficult to address market forces armed only with well-mannered façades.
This has not stopped people trying.
Among the most painful objects of the present are those that tackle the evanescence of contemporary life with something only too material: fibreglass, life-size millworkers in industrial theme parks; Tudor-style triple garages.
A similar urge underlies corporate America's love of the ‘landmark’ building and (executed with more wit) President Mitterrand's grands projets .
The latter are shapes so memorable that knowing they exist matters more than actually seeing them.
Exactly how architecture might come to terms with the invisible is a tricky subject, which Sudjic hints at but does not elaborate.
His interests are in the practical worlds of economics, human behaviour and technology, and he is at his most impressive in unravelling them, and least so when dutifully ticking off a list of earlier urban theorists.
The value of this book is in describing the world as its author finds it, rather than revealing hidden causes.
Wild sides THE HEART OF THE WORLD Nik Cohn Chatto & Windus, £14.99 Douglas Kennedy
There's a terrific scene in The Sweet Smell of Success in which Burt Lancaster — playing an unctuous newspaper columnist — surveys Broadway by night.
The pavements are slick with rain, the twisted array of neon lights turns the gutters to gold, the streets are black with people who don't have any particular place to go, and outside a cheap bar a drunken woman is having a stand-up domestic with her low-life escort.
The camera focuses on Lancaster's eyes as he takes in this tableau of hyperactive sleaze.
Turning to his sidekick (a scuzzy press agent played by Tony Curtis), he says: ‘God, I love this town.’
Of course, the Broadway that Clifford Odets and Alexander Mackendrick captured so brilliantly in that classic film has now vanished.
No longer does this boulevard of broken dreams promote itself as a purveyor of gimcrack theatrical glamour.
The wrecking balls of property developers have obliterated the swank hotels and ornate picture palaces.
Instead, Broadway today has become an architectual jumble sale of monolithic Marriot Inns, fast-food joints, welfare hotels, and porno cinemas (where movies like Rin Tin Tin Gets In still pack them in).
It also functions as the mission control centre for the city's street people.
In short, Broadway is now the symbolic epicentre of Manhattan's new-found reputation as the Calcutta of the New World.
Of course, the street of which I speak is merely the ten or so blocks that comprise the theatre district, and which, in the public imagination, has always been known as ‘The Great White Way’.
But as any New York schoolboy will tell you, Broadway is not merely half-a-mile of down-at-heel glitz.
It is, in fact, one of the longest avenues in the US: a meandering boulevard that winds from Battery Park at the tip of Manhattan straight up to the state capital of Albany, some 150 miles away.
For the first four miles of its existence on Manhattan Island, it serves as a sort of grand metaphor for the exuberant social chaos that characterises New York in its present state of near-disintegration.
Nik Cohn, that indefatigable chronicler of popular culture, set out to walk Broadway in its entirety — but he only got as far as 42nd Street.
That he didn't manage to cover the remaining 146 miles doesn't really matter, for his peregrination from Battery Park to Times Square makes one of the most intriguing accounts of an asphalt jungle to have appeared in a very long time.
Cohn is, of course, an emigré in Manhattan, and still retains the outsider's ability to perceive his new-found-land as a wholly exotic terrain.
So too does his sometime-sidekick on this journey: a ‘Soverican’ jazz drummer-cum-taxidriver named Sasha Zim who is besotted with the unhinged madness of New York and proclaims from the outset that ‘Broadway is mother of all Broadways all over the world, mother of lights of Picadilly Circus and of Place Pigalle and Teatralny Ploschtchad.
Great White Way is greatest white way’.
His absurdly romantic fixation with Broadway is not shared by Lush Life, a Puerto Rican transvestite and junkie (born Geraldo Cruz) who is also a long-term resident of the flea-bag hotel that Cohn checks into near Times Square.
Lush Life is your perennial lost soul — an individual living on the marginal precipice of society and veering quickly towards a grim finale.
He is, in short, the perfect Nik Cohn character.
From the outset, Cohn makes it very clear that he is bent on taking a walk on the wild side, to chronicle the lives of the losers he meets along this small strip of the Great American Nowhere.
And so The Heart of the World is ultimately a collection of encounters; of stories.
Stories like that of the Wall Street broker who is currently sweeping the streets as part of his sentence for possessing controlled substances.
Or the black Broadway actor who always fears ending up in the gutter.
Or the refugee from China who develped a passion for a 21-stone woman from County Clare.
Or the Iranian art merchant who once defaced Picasso's Guernica with a spray can.
In short, this is Nik Cohn's kaleidoscopic variation on the Down and Out in…theme.
And what makes it such an invigorating saga is his ability to let his idiosyncratic Broadway denizens talk for themselves.
Indeed, Cohn resists all the vain temptations that usually beset writers travelling the supposed ‘lower depths’.
He shrewdly steps back from the action, turning his narrative into a clever mosaic of stories from the edgy extremes of urban life.
More importantly, Cohn is a New York romantic who really has a passion for sleaze.
He understands the manic rhythms of a city that borders on the irrational, yet still embodies a nervy humanity.
As a native New Yorker, I can vouch for the fact that he is a classy guide to some very mean streets.
Voices from the ghetto OUT OF SIGHT: THE EXPERIENCE OF DISABILITY 1900–1950 Steve Humphries and Pamela Gordon Channel 4/Northcote House, £10.99 Tony Gould
As a spin-off of the Channel 4 series of the same name, this book is not so much written as compiled.
The linking commentary is often otiose and always plonking.
But the direct quotes from disabled interviewees are vivid and richly imaginative, suggesting that the authors at least have a talent for selecting their subjects, if not for presenting their material in book form.
For example, one of their star turns, David Swift, whose appearance in the first programme of the series staring out at the world through bright blue eyes beneath a battered trilby marked him out as a natural, recalls going to dance halls in the 1950s in search of girls: ‘I mean there were plenty of songs coming out then where they say,Look at the way she walks .
Everything was He walks like an angel…
Just walking in the rain…
Walking my baby back home .
And I'm thinking to myself about all these songs related to walking.
And I couldn't even walk properly.’
Contrast that with this turgid piece of commentary, taken at random: ‘In most schools there was a great emphasis on the importance of sport and competitive team games.
The belief that sport was character forming was adopted from the public schools and achievement in sport became one of the most important sources of status in elementary school life…
’ Nothing wrong with that, you may think — except that it is completely lifeless.
It may pass muster as television commentary but on the page its studied neutrality rings false.
The twin dangers of oral history are either to make the past seem brighter than the present or, more commonly, to paint it darker.
The authors of Out of Sight are uncomfortably aware that their impressionistic survey of the experiences of disabled people born between 1900 and 1950 may carry the implication that things are better now.
They write in an epilogue: ‘This is a very misleading and dangerous assumption.’
Indeed, but the impression remains stronger than the denial and one is left wondering why they chose 1950 as the cut-off point, if not to put a comfortable distance between ‘then’ and ‘now’: the dark ages of the past and present enlightenment, which they rightly insist is illusory.
Some issues are more complex than a television-style presentation allows.
Take sheltered workshops.
Was the government-supported Remploy, for instance, a good thing because it provided sheltered employment for disabled people, or a bad thing because it ghettoised them?
It is mentioned just once in this book in a pejorative reference to ‘segregated workshops’, yet a dozen pages earlier, the authors complain that in the earlier part of the century ‘in some areas there were virtually no sheltered workshops at all for disabled people to attend’.
Maybe it's a question of semantics; ‘sheltered’ can be good: ‘segregated’is always bad.
Nowadays, I understand, Remploy has become a self-financing business and employs able-bodied people: is this a loss or a gain?
If there were no need for sheltered workshops because disabled people were fully integrated into ‘normal’ society, then it would be a gain; but if, as I suspect, in these hard times it is impossible for many severely disabled people to get a job of any sort, surely the lack of opportunity to go to work is a loss — even if the kind of work they do is far from ideal.
The one time disabled people were really encouraged to set their sights higher than the usual occupations reserved for them, such as basketwork, needlework, shoe or watch repairing, was during the second world war.
As this book demonstrates, shortage of manpower (as women also discovered) will work wonders where political agitation falls on deaf ears.
Perhaps the new aggressive political style of what is called here, as elsewhere, ‘the disabled movement’— as if we all spoke with one voice — will force through changes for the better, but I have my doubts.
Unbutton here SHAKESPEARE COMES TO BROADMOOR: THE PERFORMANCE OF TRAGEDY IN A SECURE PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITAL Murray Cox (editor) Jessica Kingsley, £12.50 paperback/£25 hardback Janet Gorman
‘Actors are whores to experience; they love a new experience…
They get their rocks off on that’.
Brian Cox's initial scepticism about the ‘arty, crafty’ notion of taking King Lear to Broadmoor was in the event replaced by respectful admiration.
Any doubts about the wisdom of combining the worlds of Shakespearean tragedy and forensic psychiatry appear to have been blasted away by the recent performances of King Lear ,Hamlet and Romeo and Juliet in the special hospital by actors from the National Theatre and the Royal Shakespeare Company.
This volume of essays and interviews, edited by a consultant psychotherapist at Broadmoor, examines the experience from the point of view of actors such as Brian Cox, Mark Rylance and Claire Higgins, directors Ron Daniels and Deborah Warner, and members of the hospital staff.
The business of importing dramatic madness to Broadmoor was embarked on with enormous misgivings.
Therapists were concerned about the effect of the Bard's psychiatric insights on their patients, while many actors had been seduced by tabloid myths about Broadmoor's ‘evil’ population.
Performing King Lear in the round meant making eye-contact with members of the audience, some of whom may have really been embroiled in mayhem the actors were merely playing at.
‘I suddenly felt that I was doing it to a bunch of people that actually understood what Lear's pain was about, whereas I don't standing on the stage at the National Theatre’: Brian Cox's concerns about audience reactions and the nature of the dramatic experience are echoed by others.
Claire Higgins describes the irrelevance of theatrical posturings and preoccupations in a setting where the conventional, safe and boring contract between actors and audience was non-existent.
All report a passionate directness of response that they attribute to the setting and the pathology of the patients, but which probably has as much to do with social class.
Perhaps those who do not receive their regular dose of culture at the Barbican are more likely to betray a vivid and honest reaction to a performance of Hamlet , whatever their ‘pathology’ happens to be.
(Incidentally, there seems to be an implicit assumption here that everyone in the audience was a murderer or a rapist.
In fact, many people in Broadmoor have never been convicted of a serious crime, or indeed ever committed a criminal offence.)
Actors, directors and therapists all assert the value of the encounter, but lengthy reports from the patients themselves are unavailable.
‘What's in it for them?’ was a question thrown at Murray Cox by the actors.
It remains unanswered from the patients' point of view.
The brief comments recorded here made me long for more: ‘How did Ophelia know to scratch her legs like she did?
All women do things to themselves like that here; cut their wrists, scratch their faces.
Men hurt other people, women hurt themselves…
King Lear was like my father, an old bigot.
It was like home.
All the fighting and noise.’
As one patient ironically points out: ‘It's really strange for you to bring a play about madness to Broadmoor — we are so protected from it here.’
The therapeutic objective of holding the mirror up to nature and confronting people with themselves is further explored in the final section of the book, which looks at the wider implications of drama in secure settings and its role in therapy.
Despite the somewhat glowing tone of the editorial commentary, I am left with some doubts about the efficacy of such therapy in Broadmoor, where at least some of the patients experience the regime as distinctly untherapeutic and repressive.
Doing good THE DUKE OF PUDDLE DOCK: TRAVELS IN THE FOOTSTEPS OF STAMFORD RAFFLES Nigel Barley Viking, £16.99 Robert Carver
Which 19th-century worthy, once much revered, hailed the British imperial presence in India as beneficial, progressive and leading to the greater good of the benighted Indians?
Some reactionary panjandrum, for sure: Carlyle?
Nietzsche?
Curzon?
Actually, it was Karl Marx.
It is hard to recollect how 19th-century notions of progress, science, socialism and the guiding light of western colonialism were once all intertwined.
Stamford Raffles was exactly the sort of British imperialist Marx approved of: a product of the Enlightenment, a scientific positivist, humane social reformer, emancipator of slaves and suppressor of abuses.
His brief tenure of power in Java in the early 19th century saw more reform than the centuries of Dutch oppression.
And, whispers an politically incorrect imp, than the pre-colonial and post-independence eras as well.
Nigel Barley has several advantages as a serious travel writer in the Malaysian archipelago.
He speaks Bahasa Malay fluently; he is an astute and perceptive professional anthropologist; and he genuinely likes the Javanese and their culture.
Although cautious from years in the PC minefield which is contemporary academia, he has a mind of his own and does not necessarily accept contemporary cant.
Even ten years ago, the simple imperialist equals bad, third world equals good dichotomy ruled supreme in left-liberal circles.
A ‘good’ western imperialist was a contradiction in terms, and ‘bad’third world leaders, if they existed, were better elided as understandable national teething troubles.
Now, even those who sincerely hate capitalism find it hard to believe that the example of the third world will save us all.
The unspoken subtext of Barley's amusing odyssey in search of Raffles is this: was all western imperialism really so bad, and were not men like Raffles far better rulers than the exploiters, white and brown, who came before and after them?
Barley is much too astute to state this baldly, but it informs his every strategy as author.
For no apparent reason, the sane, progressive ideas of Raffles are balanced by quotations from the writings of the Indonesian nationalist hero Sukarno.
Readers are left to judge for themselves who did more for the Javanese people.
Barley is exceedingly delicate in his treatment of the great Bung Karno, the man who once stated, to wild applause from an audience of Indonesian economists, that ‘Inflation can be good — as long as it is inflation for the Indonesian revolution’.
Delicacy is essential, for the Javanese are still touchy and Sukarno, though under a cloud, is still perceived as a great national hero.
Sukarno's repressive nationalist regime led directly to the massacre of perhaps a million of his communist supporters, gross civil rights abuses, torture, the illegal invasion of East Timor, and the current police state.
Raffles abolished torture and slavery, restricted the powers of the rajas and landowners, and spent his own money buying land for a Javanese botanical garden.
He retired to England a broken man, his wife and children dead of tropical disease.
He did not loot, nor did he squeeze a fortune from his oriental subjects, as so many of his British and Dutch East India Company contemporaries thought quite normal.
All he brought back to England were specimens, manuscripts, and rare books which now form a fine museum collection in London.
After Desert Storm, many thought that the attackers should have shouldered the responsibility of occupying Iraq, restoring democracy and temporarily administering the country under some UN mandate.
But why should any western power go to the trouble of administering a third world country when these can simply be milked dry?
The questions that Barley poses so obliquely, so engagingly, will increasingly be asked by those on the left who are appalled at third world regimes of exploitation and corruption, abetted by rapacious patron-states in the rich first world.
In the future, it may well be that the western interventionist-imperialists will be on the liberal-left, not the laissez-faire right.
How many African millions should be tortured or starved to death before the sacredness of national sovereignty loses its lustre, and UN intervention becomes a moral imperative?
Think about it.
If you don't support the sovereign right of, say, an Islamic regime to deny women their human rights, you too might just be the closet, Stamford Raffles-type of do-gooding western imperialist.
Freed verse THE PENGUIN BOOK OF RENAISSANCE VERSE David Norbrook (selecter); H R Woudhuysen (editor) Allen Lane, £25 Lucasta Miller
Reviewing a poetry anthology can be a perilous business.
The reviewer is likely to get hot under the collar if a personal favourite has been left out and can easily end up merely drawing up a rival selection.
Luckily, David Norbrook has, in his own words, been ‘greedily inclusive’ in his Penguin Book of Renaissance Verse , so I'm spared the temptation to bore you with a shopping-list of titles that should have gone in but didn't.
There's something wonderfully Renaissance about Norbrook's depiction of himself as a glutton for poetry, cramming in as much as possible.
Reading and eating were always metaphorically linked at the time.
You get Du Bellay, in the 16th century, playing the cannibal and ‘digesting’ his literary forebears.
And you get Milton proclaiming the nutritious value of books which are, for him, ‘as meats and viands’.
But unlike Du Bellay, whose visceral fantasies of sinking his teeth into Homer and Virgil are frankly rather nasty, Norbrook isn't out to appropriate past authors for his own devices.
Of course, he isn't so naive as to suggest that he has some privileged hot-line to the 16th and 17th centuries.
In his introduction, he reveals himself to be only too aware of the ‘complex transactions between past and present’ in which he is involved.
It is exactly this historical awareness that makes his anthology something special.
Previous anthologies have centred on ‘timeless’ lyrical love poetry.
In a sense, there's nothing wrong with that, since some of the very best verse of the period (from Shakespeare to Donne to Marvell) falls into this category.
But Norbrook points out that our conception of this poetry as the intimate expression of personal feeling might itself be anachronistic.
Our distinction between the private and the public is a relatively modern invention.
Think about Elizabeth I, for instance, flirting with her ministers and conducting affairs of state as if participating in a ritualised love affair.
Norbrook also recognises that the love lyric was not the only type of verse to enjoy popularity in the Renaissance.
Hence, to reflect Renaissance preoccupations adequately he has to include a wider variety of genres — and a wider variety of poets, for that matter — than the traditional canon allows.
As a result, although there is a section devoted to ‘Images of Love’(some of its most fascinating and impressive poems are by women, whom we're used to seeing as the silent objects of love), it is only one among many.
Norbrook arranges his selection not so much by genres as by historical themes, which include ‘Topographies’, ‘Church, State, and Belief’ and ‘Writer, Language, and Public’.
These categories do at times seem a little artificial, and can become contentious.
Milton's Lycidas , for example, goes conventionally enough into ‘Elegy and Epitaph’, but the poem's preoccupations could easily have qualified it for ‘Church, State, and Belief’.
But these are just quibbles.
Norbrook offers such a spirited apologia for his methodology that you will forgive him most things.
He writes with masterful facility, and succeeds in making his subject accessible to an audience of non-specialists without patronising their intelligence.
He completely avoids the leaden prose which so many academics affect as a misguided means of demonstrating their high-minded seriousness.
One thing about the book's apparatus does irritate: the absence of an index of titles in addition to the index of first lines.
Trivia aside, both the introduction and the selection of the poems project a rich and varied portrait of the Renaissance in England that is both historically convincing and imaginatively impressive.
PrintOut Home affairs Boyd Tonkin
Thursday's poll will bring down the curtain on the Campaign Sketch.
This election-time press speciality has its own fixed rules.
Pluck a London-based journalist out of the office; put him or her on a train with a party heavyweight; and wait for a slice of prime grassroots ham to arrive.
Will the folks in the tripe market at Clogtown, Lancs trust Labour again?
Has the C2 baseball team in Grasping, Essex, turned against the Tories?
The Campaign Sketch reveals with painful clarity that many metropolitan pundits need a compass and a sherpa anywhere beyond the M25.
As with newspapers, so with books.
Publishers are pure NIMBYs: they adore exotic travelogues but take fright at ‘state-of-the-nation’ narratives from nearer home.
The latter sell sluggishly, and seldom have a happy story to tell.
They do make up a minor genre: the expedition into Darkest Britain, as trekked by George Orwell and a trickle of disciples up to, and including, the Belfast writer and photographer team of Robert McLiam Wilson and Donovan Wylie, who publish The Dispossessed (Picador) this week.
For the most part, though, an extraterrestial browser would deduce that readers prefer Tierra del Fuego to Telford.
Within a fortnight, the firm of Sinclair-Stevenson is launching two prize specimens of the ‘what I did on my holidays’ book into an already crowded market.
Larky jaunts to the back of beyond returned to fashion with the 1980s boom in travel writing.
Nick Middleton's The Last Disco in Outer Mongolia and Simon Vickers' Between the Hammer and the Sickle: across Russia by cycle both show the form at its genial, gormless best.
Among the essential ingredients are well-bred young authors (Vickers' pedigree includes Bedales and Sotheby's), godforsaken destinations, strenuous modes of transport, cheery chit-chat with funny foreigners and spoonfuls of potted history.
It's also necessary to feign surprise when you notice that global culture falls like rain into deepest jungle or wildest steppe.
Middleton finds Rocky on at the Mongolian flicks; Vickers listens to Elvis and Buddy Holly on a Kazakh collective farm.
‘It was a most unlikely scenario,’ he writes.
Sorry, chum: in your kind of book, it's more or less compulsory.
To be fair, the same company does publish David Widgery's remarkable chronicle of a GP's East End,Some Lives!: almost unique in that it speaks from within the culture described, rather than taking day-trips to deprivation.
But when it comes to peddling a synopsis, Ulan Bator will usually thrash Bethnal Green.
So writing about contemporary Britain never seems to change as much or as fast as the country itself.
No wonder the scribblers on the hustings have so much stale garbage blowing around their brains.
ENDGAMES WEEKEND COMPETITION
No 3221 Set by Naomi Marks You were asked for Which -style guides to everyday objects — like cookers, fridges, etc — written in kulcher-babble.
Report by Grace Elegy
This attracted a medium-sized postbag, but rather less substandard work than usual.
All entries showed imagination and, more to the point, a keen enjoyment in the task of cramming in as many obscure and erudite words as you could find in the dictionary.
Pippa Legg decided to grade the NSS 's columnists.
Full marks for an excellent idea.
However, I didn't think that the descriptions of Colin Ward and Sarah Baxter (‘Chip butties and crème de menthe consumed to the accompaniment of the Beautiful South’ and ‘The thinking man's Jaci Stephen’) bore even the slightest relation to the truth, or were in kulcher-babble, come to that.
Sean French's definition was suspiciously spiteful and John Cole's incomprehensible.
I liked her Mat Coward and Edward Pearce (‘Socialism's answer to Ezra Pound, only more confused’ and ‘A sort of sober Dylan Thomas’), and confidently expect to see more of her in the future.
After Ms de Meaner's attack on those whose thoughts rarely leave the subject of sex, I was glad to see that only two entrants picked condoms.
The rest stuck to safe things such as kitchen equipment, washing-powders, motorcars, carpets and toothbrushes. £10 to the winners, plus an extra five to Katie Mallett.
I have had a letter from Margaret Rogers, one of our most loyal comp setters.
She thinks that we may have sent her too many book tokens, ‘but can't check.
Love M R.’ Ah well…
What is a fountain pen?
A fountain pen is a writing instrument, metonymically ‘fountain’ relative to its reservoir, non-dip implicitly in its connotation, constituting a magnetic focus of cascading libido to the last drop, paradigmatically self-dipping in a Reichian sense.
Tout court,it is a semiotic machine.
The right machine for the job Choice necessarily addresses the pluralistic codes culled from the lexical playgrounds of ‘taste’, ‘functional’ or ‘aesthetic’text.
There seems little risk of a fountain pen causing ill-health, though black, blue or brown ink hue may induce Angst in certain cases.
If in doubt, consult a Lüscherian specialist.
Best buy If you want to buy just one fountain pen to cover most tasks, a Parker is a good all-round performer.
If you wish to enlarge Weltanschauung , the maxi Mont Blanc will fill both self-image and fist.
Each of our experts had his or her concept.
Choice entails, ultimately, a Kierkegaardian leap.
Given an open arena in which to function, the Marvel 100 Super gave a superb performance, separating the detritus of human disintegration from the cohesive integrity of the carpet with an almost nonchalant ease.
There was no need for it to re-cover old ground.
What it had done it had done, immaculately, consummately, flawlessly, without unseemly protest or undue noise.
Pushed into a corner, however, the machine appeared less confident.
Its efforts to ingest the last scattered parings of modern existence seemed half-hearted, as its voice rose to a crescendo as if to bewail its incapability and incompetence.
Up against a wall it was happier, as long as it could assume a lateral stance, to mark the edge of its territory with a swathe of clean pile.
In contrast, the Cleanazoom Upright behaved capriciously in all the tests, its fevered whine a symptom of impotence rather than strained efficiency.
The Frigido deep-freeze has an indefinably Antarctic quality (unlike the more Arctic Norfrigge).
It produces an ice quite Ben Nicholson in the uniformity of colour, and there is an almost Rodinesque sumptuousness about the lumps and knobs that accumulate at the ends of the shelves.
Its defrosting is subtle, gradual: but Eisenstein rather than Antonioni: grainy, gritty even.
Frigido, not afraid to cooperate with Time, exists, more than any other freezer, in the fourth dimension.
Yceland , with its squat gangster shape and its unsettling top-opening, has the brash charm of Runyon.
Whether it is quite trustworthy must remain in doubt.
Ice creams and lollies seem to benefit from the sharp wit of its frosting.
Stews, though, and soups do not improve in its importunate embrace.
Coldstar is without nuance.
An Ur-freezer, it goes directly to zero and beyond without narrative deviation.
Cold, inexpressive, Checkland.
A freezer whose time has come.
Since the publication of Boris Shalotsky's The Semiology of Lawn-Mowers: inflections of the genre , nothing has more graphically encapsulated bourgeois Angst than the disputed merits of different lawn-mowers.
Since the models under consideration are made by the same firm (Fleck and Drucker), the politique des auteurs is inescapable.
Certainly the discreet green colour of these cultural icons makes a powerful ecological and aesthetic statement.
Essentially, the Kultur-kampf is between the phallo-centric cylinder mower (that thrusting motion combined with the crushing rollers) and the innovative hover — however mimetic of traditional scything — with its more spatially flexible style.
Unreconstructed premodernists regard the hover as effete and arriviste , citing the quasi-male purposeful movement of the cylinder mower and the pictorial geometries it creates as proof of its superiority.
Gender-based judgments are, of course, suspect, and those torn between classical symmetry and radical-chic may find Sunday afternoon catharsis with the compromise rotary version.
The Mountfield petrol-driven lawn-mower
It stands, alert in its inscrutable knowing that this is its proper season, primed to rebuke the dysfunctioning human subject, a riddling, aleatoric text of querulous combustion.
We approach it, grasping the inverted cone that will be the conduit of liquid energy, seeking its perplexing centre, moving with an unbearable fluency.
It is a Lacanian moment, a refusal of closure, a moment of terrifying cosmic insight into the savage presence of other contingencies, which haunts the moment of decision.
We pull the cord and know the meaning of Steiner's post-Auschwitz silence, the refusal of noise, the desperate urgency of nothingness,le néant .
Derrida would understand this moment.
Cola
Lugubrious lubricant, luxury incarnate, a sable cascade teasing tongues with mordant mystery and risqué romance (Rating 5).
Lilt
A xanthic mellifluous melody, pouring a pulsation of paradise on the palate transcending the swallows of summertime thirst (Rating 4.999).
Tango
Pithy jest humorously imbued with orange-blessed blossom, tempting the tastebuds while risibly rippling the throat (Rating 4.998).
Tizer
Rosy-hued libation, like Phoebus suffusing somnolent skies with home-warmth glow and silently signalling sweet insouciant satiation (Rating 4.997).
7-Up
Spirally well sprung, whispering translucent primal promises of purity to synthesise the synapses with marcescent memories (Rating 4.996).
The new Braun 5100 Cafetière is to coffee what the world's greatest orchestras are to a symphony by Mozart, Mendelssohn or Mahler.
That is, it is simply (and yet, how far from simple!) an enabling mechanism, a device designed to give the fullest possible expression to its subject without unwarranted attempts at ‘interpretation’.
It empowers, one might say, but does not overpower.
That said, there is a playful yet authoritative personality here, which makes the quasi-erotic experience of pressing down the plunger (an action that the semiotician of coffee Pierre Beaudidlez has described as having an ‘ecstatic rightness’) especially piquant.
My point is, though, that the Braun's powerful ‘thisness’, that idiosyncratic sensibility, which makes it such a complex pleasure to use, does not transfer to the coffee itself.
Once poured, the brew is pristine, transparent, utterly unmediated.
‘Hier seine Heimat,’ announced Rilke, ‘sprich und bekenn.’
And who'd deny the Hoover Logic 1300 its rightful niche in the universal home?
Not for the Logic a uxorious diminuendo, like the Zanussi ZFL 1023 ; rather, its gingered spin delivers brilliant cachinnations, racketing uproars rivalled only by the cacophonous Indesit Omega W1130 .
The Logic neither strives for the predictably balanced loads of the Hotpoint Micro Profile 1400 De Luxe , nor offers the cheap frill of an accessible pump like the Philips Elite .
Instead it snaffles the careless gaze with thermoluminescent indicator lights, and eschews the xerophilous, post-cyclical papyrus effect that (say) the Creda Superspeed gives cotton — eschews it for a delicate, touch-dampness.
Its detergent dispenser may be recalcitrant, but observers applaud the Logic's ability to sprint like an electrified gazelle across washday's endless savannah.
The Creda 17221 Micron outpaces it, but cannot match the Logic's capacious belly.
It is laundry's Pavarotti.
Those of us who remember Pitoeff — elegant, etiolated, exquisite — in the eponymous roôle of Enrico IV, know the secret of Pirandello is to manage with the smoothness of fluid transmission those grating gear-changes between different levels of reality.
In the preview of the Slimline Pop-up Toaste r (RRP £24.99), despite the promise of the elaborate programme, there was an absolute dichotomy between singed bread and burnt offerings — no happy mean, nothing to sustain the gravitas of Oxford marmalade with its acerbic subtext, nor the more rechercheé exigencies of Gentlemen's Relish.
The mise-en-scène showed a sad confusion, too, between a coup de theéâtre and a mere coup de tête : over-emphatic projection meant that each piece was ejaculated with the abruptness — but neither the insouciance nor the demotic wit — of the slices in Morecambe and Wise's justly celebrated performance,The Stripper .
This was automated catch-as-catch-can.
No 3224 Set by Margaret Rogers Can we have a lament in verse, or an epitaph for Punch , please?
Prose entries to be no longer than 250 words.
All entries to be in no later than Thursday, 23 April.
CHESS
Two more games from the Category 11 event in Reykjavik of 1–15 March, which was won by Hjartasson and Shirov.
Plaskett vs Arnason
1.
d4 Nf6 2.
Nf3 e6 3. e3 b6 4.
Bd3 Bb7 5.0–0 Be7 6. c4 0–0 7.
Nc3 d5 8.
Qe2 Ne4.
White's quiet opening may still lead to a slight edge for him if Black permits e4.
Arnason chooses the only method of blocking it.
9.
Nd2…
Continuing what is so often the crux of the Queen's and Nimzo Indian defences; the struggle for e4. 9…
Nxc3
We both thought that following 9…f5?! 10. f3 Black had somewhat weakened himself 9…Nxd2 10.
Bxd2 dxc4 11.
Bxc4 c5 12.
Rfd1…
Hoping to revive the position with a pawn sacrifice.
12…cxd4 13. exd4 Qxd4 Accepted! 14.
Bg5 Qc5 15.
Ne4…
Each of us consumed quite a bit of time on the complications.
The line 15…
Qc7 16.
Rac1 Bxg5 17.
Nxg5 Qe7 struck me as one of the most plausible defences.
After a long look I had made up my mind to continue 18.
Nxf7 Kxf7 (18…
Rxf7? 19.
Qxe6 wins instantly because next move White penetrates decisively with his rook on d7 or d8) 19.
Bxe6+ Qxe6 20.
Rc7+ Kf6 21.
Qh5 where I expected White's threats to grant him at least adequate compensation for the two sacrificed pieces, an assessment borne out by post-mortem analysis.
However, in this line Black has a far sturdier defence in 16…
Nc6! when White would have to start fishing around for his play with, for example, 17.
Qg4 15…
Bxe4 This was a surprise.
16.
Qxe4 Nd7  On 16…
Qc6 White plays 17.
Bd3, and, after Black weakens his position with 17…f5, has good compensation with 18.
Qh4.
I saw no clear advantage now from 17.
Bxe7 Qxe7 18.
Qb7 Qh4 but, anyway, there is a much better move.
17.
Be3 Qc7 18.
Bxe6!
18…
Nc5  Arnason admitted that he had overlooked the reply to this, but curiously this oversight worked out in his favour!
Had he spotted it he would probably have opted for 18...
Nf6 but then White's advantage is indisputable after 19.
Qc4.
As play went, things are not so clear cut.
19.
Bxf7+!
Kxf7 20.
Qd5+ Kg6 On 20…
Ne6 21.
Raul White is doing splendidly after either 21…
Qb8 22.
Re6 or 21…
Bc5 22. b4  21. b4 …
Thus White regains his piece, for none of 21…
Na6 22.
Qd3+; 21…
Nd7 22.
Rac1; 21…
Na4 22.
Rac1 Qb8 23.
Qc6+; or 21…
Nb7 22.
Rac1 Qb8 23.
Qe4+ Kf7 24.
Rd7 are palatable.
Perceiving this, Arnason sets about returning it while simultaneously coordinating his game.
This willingness to return gained material is the first principle of defence.
21…
Rad8 22.
Qc4 Rxd1+ 23.
Rxd1 Rd8 24.
Qc2+?!…
White had handled things well up to here but should now have played 24.
Rc1 when he is likely to keep an edge.
The rash check just assists Black in getting his act together.
24…
Kf7 25.
Rc1??…
And this is an appalling howler! 25.
Qe5??
Had he not been so short of time he might well have found 25…
Ne6! when White is lost.
26. bxc5 Bxc5 27.
Bxc5 bxc5.
Things are now too simplified and Arnason dodged all the traps I set him to reach the drawing haven.
28.
Qb3+ Qd5 29.
Rc7+ Kf8 30.
Qa3+ Kg8 31. h3 a5 32.
Qg3 Qd1+ 33.
Kh2 Qd4 34.
Rb7 Rf8 35.
Qb3+ Kh8 36.
Qe3 Qd6+ 37. g3 Qd5 38.
Qxb6 Qxa2 39.
Rb8 Kg8 40.
Rxf8+ Kxf8 41.
Qd8+ Kf7 42.
Qc7+  Drawn.
Plaskett vs Renet
1.
c4 g6 2.
Nc3 Bg7 3. d4 Nf6 4. e4 d6 5. f3 0–0 6.
Bg5 c5 7. d5 h6 8.
Bc3 e6 9.
Qd2 exd5 10. cxd5 Re8.
Via transposition we have a Modern Benoni.
The h6 pawn is not en prisebecause of…
Nxe4.  11.
Nge2 h5.
I think I am right to claim that I was the first to adopt this plan vs Rudi Douven at Charlton in 1983.
Subsequently, it caught on and, for example, led to a fabulous struggle in the third game of the 1989 Timman-Speelman match.
12.
Nc1 Nbd7 13.
Be2 Nf8 14.0–0 Nf6-h7 15.
Nd3 f5 16.
Kh1 g5.
Really going for it, but the advances also led to weaknesses around his king and if the kingside files become open, then it is far from clear who benefits most, as the game shows.
17. g3 Ng6 18.
Rae1 Rf8 19. exf5 Bxf5 20.
Nf2 Ne5 21. g4 Bg6 22.
N/fe4 hxg4 23. fxg4 Nf6.
Now the heavy action starts.
24.
Nxg5 N/fxg4 25.
Rg1 Nxe3 26.
Qxe3 Bh6 27.
Rg3 Rf5 28.
Nce4 Qe7 29.
Qg1!
Sidestepping the pin and increasing the force in the g-line.  29…
Bxg5 30.
Nxg5 Raf8 31.
Ne6?!…
White's build-up has proved the more effective and he should now have won with the simple  31.
Bd3! 31…
Rf8-f6 32.
Bg4 Nxg4 33.
Rxg4 Qh7 34.
Qg3 Qh5 35.
Rg1…
Here 35.
Nf4 wins  35…
Rf1! 36.
Rxf1 Rxf1+ 37.
Kg2 Rf6 38.
Ng5?…
Again Nf4 was the move.
After this error the win is no longer clear.
Time trouble! 38…
Kf8 39. h3 Bf5! 40.
Ne6+?
Bxe6 41. dxe6 Qd5+ 42.
Kg1 Qd1+ 43.
Kh2 Qe2! 44.
Qg2…
One last prayer.
44…
Qxg2+  No such luck.
On 44…
Rf2?? 45.
Rf4+.
Now it's just a lost ending and no more time scramble.
45.
Kxg2 Rxe6 46.
Kf3 Rf6+ 47.
Ke3 Kf7 48. h4 Rg6?
The last mistake.
49.
Rxg6!
Kxg6 50.
Ke4 b5 51.
Kd5 c4 52. a3! a5 53.
Kd4!…
The only way.
53…
Kh5 54. a4 bxa4 55.
Kxc4 Kxh4 56.
Kd5.
Drawn.
BACKCHAT Susan Hayes
Okay, so I lied.
I do it often, but not usually in print.
The real reason that I jumped the pond last week was not to escape the E-word, though that would have been cause enough.
If it had been, at any rate, I picked the wrong destination.
The real reason was death and love.
Love and death.
E-words, regardless of how bizarre and distressing, as in the States, or how passionate and climactic, as at home, come and go.
So do prime ministers, and when Major goes Minor no one will be happier than I.
Parents are different.
Their coming, unlike ours, is shrouded in mystery and obscure infant memories.
But their going is all too clear — ambulances and ICUs, nursing homes and narcotics, hospitals, wakes and innumerable well-wishers.
My father died last month.
The only thing I share in common with Princess Diana is the date of our fathers' deaths.
My mother hovers on the brink of life, not knowing whether her heroic struggle will be worth even a fraction of the effort she expends.
I am little comfort to her, but in this scenario little things mean a lot.
I am, but cannot foretell the future.
I cannot ask her to suffer further for what may never be.
Neither can I ask, or expect, her not to.
But at just thirtysomething, I am too young to be an orphan.
Or perhaps I am too old.
I want to find a hole and crawl into it, to escape this ultimate psychic double-whammy.
Fate is cruel, or perhaps it isn't, but it doesn't answer to me.
Does freedom have anything positive to offer?
If she is released from her suffering, does that release me too?
From expectation, responsibility, guilt?
Is this misplaced optimism in the face of overwhelming fear?
Do I pass to a rootless, wandering, no-woman's land, or is this a new beginning — the natural, though perhaps premature, order of things?
Women are marching in Washington today for Pro-Choice.
I would like to be marching with them.
I would like to salute Desiree Washington — the Heavyweight Champion of the World — for choosing not to be a faceless, nameless victim of the former Mighty Mike Tyson, now Indiana Prisoner 922335.
At 5' 9’ and eight stone, Desiree took Tyson out for the big count and put him down where he belongs.
I want to salute Anita Hill, who chose not to remain silent and who, despite ‘loosing’, has confirmed as a fact what many suspected — that Clarence Thomas does not deserve a seat on the US Supreme Court.
And the woman of Chicago, Illinois, who chose to punish the incumbent senator from that state, Alan Dickson, for voting for Thomas in the Senate hearings.
If his challeneger, Caro Mosley Braun, wins the seat in November, she will become the nation's first black woman senator.
At a time when Affirmative Action is under fire and the Bush administration conveniently looks the other way while the ultra-conservative Supreme Court dismantles school desegregation to ensure that minorities stay and are educated in their place, the nineties look increasingly like being the decade of the black woman.
Statistics already show that black women, less susceptible to the street violence and drug problems that undermine their brothers, are now more likely than black men to matriculate and graduate from university.
But I am suspended in a state of No Choice.
Despite political struggle, scientific advances and social battles, some things cannot be changed, marched for or campaigned against.
Some things even the best lawyers and lawmakers, the best women and mothers cannot overturn.
Today, I have No Choice.
Tomorrow, perhaps, will be different.
FORTEANA A hand-picked review of the weird and wonderful by ‘Fortean Times’ editor Paul Sieveking
After observing the industrious building of castles in the air in the past few days, I thought it would be appropriate to look at an odd phenomenon that has puzzled meteorologists for the past ten years: the series of giant mushroom-shaped cloud formations round the periphery of the Siberian land-mass.
The last one I have information on was observed heading from the Barents Sea towards northern Finland on 4 July 1990.
Weather analysts and radiation monitors described the cloud as about 60 miles long and 9,900 to 16,500 feet above the ground.
It was warmer than the surrounding air, and seemed to be emitting steam or smoke.
‘It could have been caused by some sort of disaster or accident.
But it could also have been just an ordinary large cloud,’ said Markku Konttinen of the Finnish Meteorological Institute.
The cloud formed just north of the Soviet Kola Peninsula, where there are four nuclear power plants.
The rumour that it was radioactive arose after the Soviet authorities requested some civilian aircraft not to fly their usual routes from Japan to Europe for 48 hours for ‘technical reasons’.
Those routes would have brought the flights near the area of the cloud.
The Dutch meteorological institute KNMI announced, after studying satellite pictures of the cloud, that it was an uncommon but quite natural phenomenon.
‘If the cloud was due to an explosion, it should appear dark on infra-red pictures,’ said a KNMI spokesperson.
‘It did not, it was light’(Reuters, AP, 7 June 1990).
In early 1983, infra-red images from a US NOAA (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration) satellite showed a large cloud, similar to the plumes of gas that rise over volcanoes, off the north coast of eastern Siberia.
The plume was six miles wide, 155 miles long and nearly 23,000 feet high.
At the next pass of the satellite several hours later, it was gone.
A similar plume was logged two weeks later.
The CIA ordered a surveillance plane to the area.
There was some speculation that the plumes were caused by the release of methane, but this was unlikely, as the rock formations of the area were pre-Cambrian, and thus too old still to hold methane.
Volcanic eruption was also unlikely, as the area had not experienced volcanism for nearly 80 million years.
In 1984, the first of eight massive plumes were detected by the NOAA over Novaya Zemlya, the Arctic island long used by the Russians for nuclear weapons tests.
There were no correlations between the clouds and known weapons tests, and in any case the 200-mile-long plumes were far too large.
Further speculation included Soviet ‘weather modification’ tests and research into the ‘nuclear winter’hypothesis.
The most dramatic cloud of all occurred on 9 April 1984 somewhere between the Soviet Kuril islands and Sakhalin, a sensitive military area not far from where the Korean airliner was bombed from the sky.
It was reported independently by four commercial airliners, who saw the mushroom erupt, expand to a diameter of 200 miles, well above 65,000 feet at an estimated 500 mph, thin out and disappear.
No radioactivity was detected, and there was no disruption of aircraft electronics.
A theory for this cloud was proposed by Chang and Burnetti in Nature (vol 314, page 676): that a meteor had encountered the cloud deck just as it shattered, producing heat that warmed the cloud layer over a large area.
It is possible that the weird clouds are not unprecedented.
In 1810, the Russian industrialist Jacob Sannikov stood on the New Siberian Islands, looked to the north and thought he had discovered a new land-mass.
This sighting and similar reports from the 19th century fuelled the belief in a vast polar continent.
Expeditions were mounted for Sannikov's Land, and two parties of explorers perished for their troubles.