

CONTENTS
REGULARS
5
Editorial Starting again
7
Shoreditch, Roger Woddis
8
Diary Sean French on unwise promises
9
John Cole For politicians, junking one's roots can be dangerous
10
Political column Sarah Baxter says Gould deserves a vote of thanks
11
Political sketch Edward Pearce on the drawbacks of celebrities
30
Taking liberties Jolyon Jenkins on Major and terrorism
31
Letters
33
Fringe benefits Colin Ward samples what wasn't in the manifestos
53
Endgames Competition, Cryptic Quiz, Crossword
55
Backchat Ms de Meaner loses her knickers
55
Forteana Paul Sieveking on why you need hands
FEATURES
12
It's not my party and I'll cry if I want to Vicky Hutchings gets the blues at the Telegraph 's election night bash
14
No new vision Stuart Hall says that Labour reverted to its traditional doctrines
16
The real world?
Jeremy Seabrook on mendacity and the election
17
Coming from behind Christopher Harvie on how the Scottish Tories played the electoral game for all it's worth
18
Not of this world Our politicians have their heads in the sand, says Fred Halliday
19
Business as usual Robin Wilson on Northern Ireland and the election
20
I told you so Labour and the Lib Dems betrayed democracy, says Stephen Howe
21
Terminal hubris Labour's agnosticism about PR backfired, argue Stuart Weir and Patrick Dunleavy
22
Did Essex know best?
Labour needs to be more persuasive about wealth creation, says Will Hutton
23
Campaign trail diary Mat Coward winds up Conservative Central Office
24
A small earthquake The collapse of postwar Europe's status quo is not such a disaster, argues Denis MacShane
25
Return of the right Paul Hockenos charts the steady electoral progress of the German ultra-right
25
Bosnia means bad news for Balkans Misha Glenny on continuing chaos
28
Silenced spring Malawi's dissidents are in trouble, reports Julie Flint
29
Smoke gets in your eyes Brandon Robshaw on the false romanticism of smoking
ARTS & MEDIA
Building for fun
Beverly Russell talks to Euro Disney's creators, heralds of the age of showbiz architecture
Film
Geoff Dyer finds joy in Volker Schlöndorff's tragic vision
Television
Martin Bright looks at Bertrand Tavernier's film of the trauma of French Algeria; John Dugdale delves behind the hype of Sean Hughes' ‘postmodern’ sitcom
SPRING BOOKS 39
Culture and society in Tory Britain
Peter Scott assesses Perry Anderson's verdict on English intellectuals; Tony Parker on Thatcherism's casualties; Stephen Howe looks for new life in the unions; Conor Gearty cross-examines a defender of the Bar; and Geoff Dyer wades through Ted Hughes' Shakespearean fantasy
Spring fiction
Carole Angier on Alice Thomas Ellis; Maya Jaggi on Zulfikar Ghose; Anthony Quinn on Kingsley Amis; Robert Carver on Peter Conrad
Plus
Marek Kohn on drugs and literature; Loraine Fletcher on life after Byron
PrintOut
From Cambridge to Basildon
EDITORIAL
Starting again
Labour needs to regain its working class support as well as modernising itself
The people who will suffer most as a result of the Conservative election victory are not, by and large, readers of this magazine.
Nor are they, by and large, members and activists of the defeated opposition parties, media commentators, pundits, academic analysts or psephologists, all of whom have representation aplenty in these pages this week.
As ever, the people who will suffer from Labour's failure are among those who are furthest removed from the political process; who are most likely to believe that the outcome of the election has little to do with them; and, hence, who are least likely to be taking part in the election postmortem on why Labour lost.
The losers, let us remind ourselves, are the old, the sick, the jobless, the low paid, the homeless and badly housed, the ill-educated, the deprived, the discriminated-against — that third of our society that never shared in the maldistributed prosperity of the Thatcher years, and will at best gain little, at worst lose further, in John Major's ‘classless’ Britain.
It is important to begin with this sense of perspective, lest the impression be given that politics exists only for the benefit of those who practise it — a kind of hobby (or, better still, paid profession) for an educated élite who compete among themselves for the ‘prize’ of being on the winning side that forms the next government.
Consider, for example, the columnist Robert Harris' reflections on the election result in this week's Sunday Times .
He quotes Evelyn Waugh's vision of hell from A Handful of Dust : ‘A jungle clearing in which a man is trapped forever, forced to read aloud the entire works of Dickens to a lunatic, over and over again.’
Harris goes on: ‘This is roughly how I feel this morning contemplating my future career as a political columnist: 1,200 words a week, week in, week out, stretching into the 14th, 15th, 16th, 17th and maybe even — God preserve us — the 18th successive years of Conservative rule…
I ask you: what kind of a life is that?’
Twelve hundred words a week, week in, week out, at a rate something in excess of £1 per word — well, not too bad a life, actually, would be the most likely response of those facing the 14th, 15th, 16th…years of Conservative rule in rather more straitened circumstances —if , of course, they were to read his column.
But they are most unlikely to do so — and herein lies part of the explanation for Labour's election defeat, and one of its greatest problems for the future.
While the political literati lay waste to vast tracts of newsprint in their musings about the causes of Labour's failure, and the shortcomings of the political system that compounded it, those people who constitute what ought to be the bedrock of oppositional electoral support are becoming increasingly alienated not only from the Labour Party, but from the entire political process.
Leave aside, for the moment, the social, economic, demographic and other shifts that continue to operate to Labour's disadvantage, shrinking its traditional electoral base.
Labour's failure is not simply due to the fact that the ‘old’ working class — those who work in manufacturing industry, live in council housing and are members of trade unions — is declining.
It is also that it has failed to regain the support of the working class — old and new — that it lost in 1979.
When Harold Wilson took Labour to power with 48 per cent of the national vote in 1966, he commanded the support of 70 per cent of manual workers and their families.
In this election, according to Gallup, Neil Kinnock won the backing of only 44 per cent— virtually the same as in Labour's disastrous election performance of 1983.
This shortfall, in a group that still comprises more than half of the electorate, is more than enough to make the difference between defeat and a convincing Labour victory.
Mori's analysis of the voting intentions of some 22,000 people reveals a similar pattern of Labour failing to gain ground among those who would be most likely to benefit from its policies.
Among the unemployed, Labour actually did less well than in 1987.
Among social groups DE, it polled barely half of total votes cast (the Tories polled 30 per cent), virtually the same as in 1987.
Among council tenants, a 56:22 split in Labour's favour in 1987 narrowed to 55:24 in 1992.
Pensioners, the beneficiaries of the biggest public spending pledge in the Labour manifesto, swung away from Labour, with the Conservatives enjoying a staggering 20-point lead (51 to 31) among women over 65.
In contrast, Labour did gain ground among social groups AB (up from 14 per cent in 1987 to 20 per cent in 1992), C1 (up from 21 to 25 per cent) and in the supposedly crucial ‘swing’ group, the C2s, among whom a 40:36 split in favour of the Conservatives was turned into a 41:38 Labour advantage — still not an election-winning gain, but more in line with the sort of swing that Labour needed, but failed to achieve, among the working class as a whole.
The evidence, then, does not lend itself to the ‘Labour must abandon its class roots’ thesis of electoral advancement.
On the contrary, there is much to suggest that, in this election, Labour moved too far away from its traditional base; that its attempts at reassuring those outside its ‘natural’ core of supporters meant it did too little to mobilise support among those who would benefit from its policies.
The social groups C2DE still make up 57 per cent of the electorate; if Labour had enjoyed the same dominance among these voters as do the Tories in social groups ABC1, they would have swept to power with a big majority.
This is not to say that the simplistic socialist argument — that all would be well if only Labour stood up for its class interests with the same vigour that the Tories stand up for theirs — is correct.
Rather it is that Labour needs to defend — and, on these figures,regain — its traditional class base at the same time as completing the process of modernisation and colonising the new political territory of the 1990s.
The ‘one-last-pushers’ of the Labour movement need to be reminded of the electoral mountain that remains to be climbed (a mountain which, thanks to the Boundary Commission, will be some 20 or so Tory seats higher by the time of the next election).
As we show on page 21, Labour is now second to the Tories in 186 seats (compared to 145 for the Liberal Democrats).
But in only 42 of these is the Tory majority less than 4,000 (there are 11 more where the main challenger is a Liberal Democrat).
If Labour took all 42, it would still be 13 seats short of an overall majority.
The effects of the Boundary Commission changes would be enough to keep the Tories in power.
An overall Labour majority is not beyond the realms of possibility.
But, even after this year's advances, it would still require the biggest swing to Labour since 1945 to achieve it: the odds remain stacked heavily against it happening.
So we are left once more with the need for some form of realignment of the opposition forces to ensure that the non-Tory majority in votes is better reflected in seats in the House of Commons.
It is no consolation in defeat to reflect upon the correctness of NSS 's psephological analyses over many years, expressed most recently in our view that this election would be decided on a small number of votes in a handful of crucial decider seats.
But it is worth pointing out that of the 40 seats where we called upon ‘no-hope’ third-party candidates to stand down to maximise the chances of defeating the Tory incumbents, just seven were captured by the opposition parties.
Of the remainder, 27 (including Bristol West, now the most marginal seat in England, which the Tories held by just 45 votes) would have been won had the third-party candidates withdrawn.
That would have been sufficient to deprive John Major of a majority and bring down his government.
The campaign to maximise the impact of the opposition parties' votes in terms of seats won in the next election should begin now.
In particular, there are 125 Tory MPs who have less than 50 per cent of the votes in their constituency, and who could be susceptible to removal by tactical voting.
Labour is second in 92 of these, the Liberal Democrats in 30 and the SNP in three.
Of the seats where the Liberal Democrats are second, there are 16 where Labour is a poor third and a switchover by the bulk of the Labour vote would give the Lib Dems victory.
Of the seats where Labour is second, there are 31 where it is behind by 5 per cent or less and a further 11 where the Liberal Democrat vote is more than twice the Tory majority and a differential split in Labour's favour would produce a Labour gain.
Seeking local agreements that third-party candidates will not stand — possibly by means of twinning arrangements with other constituencies — is a long, difficult process.
Hence the need for it to begin now.
Even if it does, few formal agreements are likely to prove practicable — while a national pact between the parties seems, at present at least, like whistling in the wind.
But in the search for such pacts or agreements, the opposition parties will necessarily be drawn closer together, and the campaign for tactical voting will gather force and develop a presence that will make it better placed to make a major impact in the next election.
There is no panacea for the failure of the left in the past four elections.
There are no instant fixes, either in terms of an absolutist retreat to the class-based socialism of the past, or in a headlong rush to the classless social democracy that has so often been portrayed as the only future.
Still less is there an easy solution to be had from Labour's new leadership contest.
Neil Kinnock's gravest mistake as Labour leader may prove to be his decision to announce his departure before the election postmortem had even got underway.
Whether or not there was an attempt to ‘bounce’ the Labour Party into accepting John Smith as its leader, there was a profoundly undemocratic — and unthinking — whiff in the air about Walworth Road this week.
The party has been placed in the impossible position of choosing a leader to fight the next election when it has not yet had the opportunity to discuss why it lost the last one.
That does not augur well for the future.
FOURTH ESTATE A regular monitor of the Tory press
10 April : The revels commence.
The London Evening Standard is the first tabloid off the mark with: ‘Knives out for Kinnock’.
11 April : The cutlery metaphors continue.
The Mail reports that ‘Furious left wingers plunged their knives into Neil Kinnock last night.’
The Express , by contrast, detects unsheathed Conservative blades: ‘Tory knives were out for the BBC…the Prime Minister is said to have told friends: ‘my views on the BBC's coverage are not printable.’
The Sun congratulates itself on securing a Conservative victory: ‘It's the Sun wot won it!…
Our polling day front page, showing Neil Kinnock's head in a lightbulb…alerted people to the dangers of Labour.’
Similar triumphalism pervades the rest of the paper —‘Bye Bye Boyo’, and so on.
It also reports that it is refusing to pay ICM for an exit poll that showed Labour ahead: ‘We're not paying good money for shoddy goods.’
13 April At last, some magnanimity in victory: the Express publishes a eulogy to Kinnock, written by Fiona Millar, ‘a personal friend of the Kinnocks’.
‘Throughout his eight and a half years as Labour leader he has shown the sort of courage in reforming the party which few politicians are capable of — and which, it must be said, John Major has never been called on to demonstrate in his effortless, virtually unchallenged glide through the great offices of state.’
No such grace from Robert Kilroy Silk, who lays into ‘the naked, the real Neil Kinnock — swaggering and triumphalist boyo’.
The Evening Standard 's headline is: ‘Knives are out to stop Smith’.
14 April : The Mail reports that disagreements over the Labour leadership election ‘are likely to see knives flash among top policymakers’.
The Star agrees: ‘Now knives come out for Smith…the left seemed poised to turn the party back to red-blooded socialism after being forced to hibernate by Mr Kinnock.’
The Express has the original headline: ‘Knives out in war of succession’.
The Sun rejects Kinnock's claim that the tabloids were responsible for Labour's defeat, despite having said just that three days previously: ‘It is flattering for him to suggest we have so much power.
It is also untrue.’
15 April : The Mail backs Bryan Gould for the Labour leadership.
What Labour needs, it says, ‘is a radical rethink.
Is the buttoned-up Mr Smith capable of that?
The less orthodox in the Labour Party doubt it.
So do we.
Whisper it not too loudly in Walworth Road.
But, just this once, the Left could be right.’
The Sun reports (under the somewhat tasteless heading ‘BOOM BOOM BRITAIN’) that ‘cash registers are ringing as High Streets’ spring back to life.’
People are even buying more fruit: a greengrocer says his takings are up by £300 a week.
SHOREDITCH
We may have looked pretty silly last week, with our cover predicting Major's disappearance, but at least we were on sale two days before the election.
The Independent on Sunday, published three days afterwards, carried a long article about the prospects for local authority compulsory competitive tendering under the Labour government the writer assumed would be in place once the paper was published.
‘A Labour administration will be faced with a dilemma,’ it warns.
‘It will not be able to repeal the legislation instantly…
’ Indeed not.
Now that Kinnock has announced his resignation, a partial rapprochement between Labour and the Sun is in the air.
The paper's political editor, Trevor Kavanagh, has been suggesting at Westminster that John Smith is the kind of man they can do business with.
The story goes that, after Wapping, Kinnock treated the Murdoch papers with such disdain that he deserved all he got.
Relations with Smith, in contrast, have mostly been cordial.
The same goes for Bryan Gould, whose Antipodean origins, according to Kavanagh, would not be exploited.
(Pause for raised eyebrows.)
Labour's policies would be mercilessly attacked, but the personalities would receive the ‘Ashdown treatment’— in other words, sex scandals apart, they would be regarded as far too bland for a no-holds-barred hatchet job.
Speaking of which, it's time to knock a fashionable theory on the head.
This is that Basildon only swung 1.3 per cent to Labour (and so stayed Tory) because it has the highest Sun readership in the country (half of all households there take it), whereas Hampstead fell to Glenda Jackson because it is top of the Guardian's league (14 per cent of homes).
Nonsense.
Labour took Thurrock, Gravesham, and Feltham and Heston, in all of which the Sun's penetration is over 40 per cent, and had one of its biggest swings, 6.8 per cent , in Hayes and Harlington, where 42 per cent of homes buy it.
It failed to gain Kensington, Battersea, or Westminster North, all Guardian strongholds.
In fact, the top eight Guardian constituencies had an average Labour swing of 3.8 per cent, and the top eight Sun constituencies had a swing of 4.7 per cent .
Let's hear no more about it.
But who believes this data anyway?
The utter failure of the opinion polls to measure public opinion has plunged a stake through the heart of the market research industry — those people responsible for junk mail that is supposed to be perfectly targeted at your lifestyle and habits, and who gather their information in exactly the same way as opinion pollsters.
One anxious practitioner asks Shoreditch: ‘How can I sell this data now?’
It's an ill wind…
Say what you like about the first-past-the-post system, but it does let you know who has actually won each seat.
In the German regional elections earlier this month, not even that was clear.
Under German electoral law, a party needs to get 5 per cent before it is represented.
When the votes for the Schleswig-Holstein parliament were counted, it looked as if the Green Party had achieved exactly 5 per cent.
This meant that the Social Democrats would not be entitled to any extra seats allocated from the party list, and as a result, did not have a majority.
After midnight, when the results had already been published, someone noticed that the Greens had actually got 4.97 per cent.
The computer program had automatically rounded the figure up to 5 per cent.
The Green votes were discarded, the seats recalculated, and the SPD found itself entitled to one extra seat.
And got its majority.
Let it not be said that the government rushes into legislation without consultation.
Its thoughts on squatting were published in a paper earlier this year: it was in favour of making squatting a criminal offence.
But it was open to argument, and invited responses, to be returned by the end of March.
Two weeks before the deadline, the Conservatives published their manifesto.
It contained the pledge: ‘We will create a new criminal offence of squatting, to give greater protection to the owners and occupants of shops, commercial premises, houses and flats.’
Isn't democracy wonderful?
The National Front says it is ‘very pleased’ with its ‘softly softly approach’to the election, even though it was trounced by the British National Party.
It reports being ‘marginally swamped with enquiries’.
From people worried about the country being marginally swamped by immigrants, no doubt.
The final half sentence of last week's column was inadvertently omitted.
It should have read: ‘If Party Politics can win the Grand National at 14–1, the Conservatives can win the election at 8–1, and, indeed, they certainly will.’
Anyone who, like Shoreditch, didn't quite get round to placing that bet on the Tories, may like to know that the bookies are now quoting odds for the next election.
William Hill have the Tories at 1–2 and Labour at 6–4.
Shoreditch's tip: don't put any money on either party at these boring odds.
Wait till they get more dramatic, and bet against the polls.
Anyone who did this last time would have been guaranteed a win.
ROGER WODDIS Recessional 92
(Apologies to Kipling)
The ‘poisoned chalice’ of a fundamentally weak economy actually constitutes an inhibition on the sort of spontaneous recovery the government is looking for — William Keegan in the Observer
God of our fathers, known of old,
Lord of our party's battle-line,
Who granted us, as we foretold,
Our victory on April Nine,
Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet,
Lest we forget — lest we forget!
The cheering and the spouting dies,
The Bakers and the Kings depart;
Still stands the vainly hoped-for prize,
The frantic kick that fails to start.
Remind us, Lord, we're still in debt,
Lest we forget — lest we forget!
The telly pundits melt away,
The egg-faced pollsters now retire:
Today reveals, as yesterday,
Britannia deeper in the mire.
Lord of Recession, spare us yet,
Lest we forget — lest we forget!
Trust not the dollar, yen or mark
To give our sagging sales a boost:
The sky tomorrow will be dark
With chickens flying home to roost.
For all the bankrupt, broke or bored —
Thy mercy on Thy People, Lord!
DIARY Sean French confesses his secret fear of The Thing He Hoped No One Would Remember He Promised
At the time of the Conservative Party's removal of Margaret Thatcher, I wrote a column — in the ‘NSS’ of 26 November 1990 — about the absurdities of punditry.
I had been particularly struck by William Rees-Mogg's column in the Independent on the day after the first leadership ballot.
Mogg had hailed her victory: ‘Although Mrs Thatcher's majority was not quite large enough to avoid a second ballot, the victory was clearly a decisive one.’
He concluded that ‘a mandate is a mandate and that she will derive real strength from having overcome so tough a challenge’, a stirring endorsement, weakened only by Thatcher's withdrawal from the contest at about the time the column reached the chattering classes' breakfast tables.
I concluded my own column of that week as follows: ‘After sneering at Lord Mogg, I suppose I should commit myself to a conclusion of my own from the last ten days' dramas.
Here it is: Neil Kinnock will never win an outright parliamentary majority as leader of the Labour Party.
And I'm not going to pretend I haven't said this.
If he does become prime minister (with the aforementioned majority), I will eat one copy of the edition of the New Statesman in which you are reading this article.’
I can't claim to have been entirely candid about my promise after making it.
The idea had come from a short documentary I saw years ago called Werner Herzog Eats His Show .
The crazed director had vowed to eat his show if a friend ever raised the money for a particular project.
He eventually did, and the film recorded Herzog fulfilling his promise.
As the campaign proceeded, I kept quiet as I began to have a vision of some grisly post-polling day ceremony in which I would be on a platform like a performance artist from the sixties, vomiting and gagging while attempting to ingest yet another page: ‘You're doing okay.
Roger Woddis has gone down, so has Jolyon Jenkins, but unfortunately Sarah Baxter has come back up.
Let's have another go.’
There is a famous story from the fifties about the discovery by nutritionists that you were better off eating the box than the cornflakes inside it, and I was wondering hopefully whether it might be better to eat my column than to read it, or alternatively whether it might be toxic.
Perhaps the NSS paper had been acquired in a job lot from Chernobyl.
It was not to be.
Simon Gray has a wonderful description of the failure of a play of his on Broadway.
After the first night there was the traditional party at Sardi's while the reviews were awaited.
When they arrived, showing that the play was a flop, the people just melted away and the waiters removed the champagne.
Suddenly everyone had gone except for one man, the show's principal backer, who sat crying at the table.
The emotional trajectory of my election night was similar.
We manoeuvred the TV in front of a couple of sofas.
Some family and friends arrived — someone brought a bunch of red roses — and we drank sparkling wine and beer and cheered at the screen.
The uneasy moments came early.
The first was just 20 minutes after the polls closed when, during a sample of random live interviews in Manchester, a man with a business on the verge of bankruptcy cheerfully admitted that the Tories had got him into this and he relied on them to get him out.
Then came Guildford, where the sitting Tory MP got about 7,000 more than he was meant to, and then Basildon.
Suddenly I realised I was drunk and alone.
I listened to the Tories achieving their majority while putting away bottles and doing the washing up.
I made my original prediction because I believed that, whatever people said, once they got into a polling booth, lots of them simply wouldn't vote for Kinnock.
But if only I had been right, if only it were just Kinnock, or for that matter a couple of remediable policies or the voting system, that were the problem.
What now seems necessary is, what Brecht said the East German government wanted, to dissolve the population and elect a new one.
Still, not all was gloom.
I was cheered up by Barbara Amiel's suggestion (in the ‘Sunday Times’) that the winners should have a good gloat.
If she were Norma Major, she would say to John: ‘We could take the Jaguar and chauffeur, and cruise through Ealing.
Or what about replaying the speech conceding defeat?
We could take that new thingamajig and freeze frame on Glenys' face when he talks about how the sick and old will suffer dreadfully under your government.’
It may surprise readers but, since I wrote about her recently, Barbara and I have become good friends, so I rang her up to tell her that I would join her for a good gloat.
First, I went round to her pad with my video and we had a great laugh looking at Glenys Kinnock on the verge of tears contemplating the ruin of her husband's career.
I'd also recorded Neil Kinnock's speech after his count and I managed to freeze the frame on the exact moment when she almost cried as he paid tribute to his wife for her dignity under the onslaught of the tabloid press.
It was, of course, hilarious in itself but then I got this bit of smoked salmon (coloured red of course !) and draped it across her upper lip and it looked a bit like a moustache.
That palled after an hour or two.
The chauffeur had the night off, he was celebrating down in Basildon, so Babs and I got into my Porsche and headed off to Ealing.
By this time it was the middle of the night and there were no lights showing, so I doubt whether anyone saw me mooning out of the window as we sped past but my car horn has been adapted to play Andrew Lloyd-Webber's arrangement of Purcell at deafening volume and we had fun with that for a bit.
But you need real people for a proper gloat so we headed for the cardboard suburb in the Strand.
You know when you're waterskiing with a really powerful boat and you slant your skis as you curve to send up a whole curtain of water?
Well if there is water in the gutter, as there was in the Strand, you can create a remarkably similar effect with a fast sports car.
I sent this amazing jet of spray on to the sleeping bags and then I said to Babs that we should next get Andrew to do a version of Handel's Water Music.
Oh, how we laughed.
Easter is with us and it is good to be reminded for a while about the eternal religious traditions, such as a really stupid controversy.
I've just seen a tape of the BBC's The Gospels , produced by Jack Emery, which is being shown every day during Easter week.
Six actors in a television studio, including Paola Dionisotti, Timothy West and Paul McGann, tell the story using texts from the Authorised Version of the four gospels.
It's gripping, moving and unexceptionable (although purists might object to the interweaving of the very different gospel stories).
But the Venerable George Austin, Archdeacon of York, has described it as ‘offensive and deliberately provocative.
Why do they have to do this sort of thing during Holy Week?
They wouldn't dream of causing offence to Muslims.’
It may not seem intrinsically puzzling why the story of Jesus should be broadcast in Holy Week.
The problem is, as the headline in the Daily Telegraph put it: ‘Jesus to be played by women in TV dramas’.
What would it matter if this were so?
But in this case it's not even true.
All that is happening is that the story is taken over at various points by each of the members of the cast.
There seems little doubt about who is being foolishly insulting.
And this is at a time when the debate about sexual politics in the press concerns a couple of commercials that allegedly mock men.
I suppose I should be grateful to be a white man.
What would it be like to be black and watch the election result in Cheltenham?
Or to be a woman and hear people claiming that men are victims in advertising when the generic term for a whole category of TV commercial is ‘Two Cs in a K’?
The K stands for kitchen.
John Cole A dose of conservatism Junking one's roots can be dangerous
If it is politics you are interested in — as distinct from government, which is something quite different — the place to look from now on is the opposition.
Doubtless in time normal politics will be resumed in the Conservative Party.
But this week, the members of John Major's new administration, whether reappointees or freshmen, will simply emit a long sigh of relief and satisfaction, and think of England (or in a few cases, Scotland, Wales or Northern Ireland).
Labour is now embarked on a leadership election.
Before that engulfs us completely, the old Kinnock-Hattersley partnership is worth what Milton called ‘the meed of some melodious tear’.
It was a formidable, and remarkably harmonious combination.
Two men who fought each other for the leadership after the disastrous defeat of 1983, settled down well together.
Roy Hattersley knew that Neil Kinnock, from his starting point on Labour's left, was able to take on the ultra-left in a way he never could have done.
Neil Kinnock was happy that his deputy should spell out his commitment to equality as Labour's objective.
Some thought Labour would have had its ideal leader, a courageous genius in party management, and with a streak of inspiration in philosophy, if it could have bred from the two of them.
With the Tories elected for a fourth successive term, the politics of the opposition are obviously up for radical examination.
But — if readers will excuse the paradox — there is also some merit for Labour in a steadying dose of conservatism.
The parade of hobby-horses that began on Saturday morning requires a little study before we assume it is The Shape of the Future, rather than an Easter divertissement , designed to cheer up Labour supporters after a defeat they had not expected.
The radical agenda runs something like this: Labour ought to begin talks with the Liberal Democrats on PR; negotiate electoral pacts with that party, so that they can achieve a majority in 1996, not just in order to form a government, but to introduce PR; abandon links with the trade unions, eschew egalitarian tax policies, perhaps even abandon the name ‘Labour’, so as to disavow any claim of being a party that primarily represents a working class that, in self-identification, is constantly dwindling.
Nineteen ninety-six, by the way, not 1997.
John Major had no real choice of date this time, but March and April gave him such a nail-biting experience that he will never again postpone an election until so near the terminal date.
So the opposition have not quite as long for their inquests and recuperative action as the bleak dawn of last Friday may have made them think.
When you examine the logic of the radical agenda, its good sense becomes less clamant.
For a start, and leaving aside the merits and demerits of PR — on which the NSS and I are at variance — one obvious fact ought to be hammered home.
If every party in Britain except the Conservatives embraces PR, the next election will still be conducted by — wait for it!— first past the post.
But are there electoral advantages for the opposition to have declared themselves for PR?
Everyone will have their own ideas about what lost Labour the election, or when its campaign began to lose its cutting edge.
An improbable combination of Kenneth Clarke, the new Home Secretary, Peter Mandelson, the new Labour MP, and Denis Skinner, voice of the old left, dates the decline from the Thursday before polling day.
We can safely assume they reached this common position without collusion.
The argument, expressed in various ways by these three doughty politicians, is that when Labour's morning press conference raised the constitutional issues, especially PR, and appeared to hold out an olive branch to Liberal Democrat voters, the Labour message became blurred.
This was aggravated when Neil Kinnock, in order not to convert PR at Westminster into an issue involving loyalty to his leadership, even before the Plant Committee has begun its consideration, refused to say which way he leaned.
The whole strategy, apparently conceived at a leader's policy committee meeting the previous Sunday, as a way of marking Charter 88's day of constitutional action, was bungled.
It enabled John Major to revive his version of the constitutional agenda.
The Disunited Kingdom suddenly became a potent slogan, and helped the Tories staunch the haemorrhage against them in Scotland.
A common front in favour of PR between Labour, Lib Dems and, possibly, others is only of any practical significance if it is accompanied by an electoral pact.
Presumably this could be contemplated only in a limited number of constituencies, since anything more ambitious would knock the stuffing out of local activists in one party or the other.
The only long-term logic of such pacts is that which Sir David Steel adumbrated in the aftermath of the Alliance's 1987 election disappointment.
It is merger.
But if Paddy Ashdown embraced Neil Kinnock's successor, what would be the consequences for his party and policies?
Would those who supported the SDP last Thursday — not to mention the huge number, perhaps three-quarters of a million, who drifted back to the Conservatives for fear of a Labour government — still support it?
And would it make much difference if the pact only covered a limited number of seats?
That device might bring some benefits for the internal morale of both opposition parties.
But it would still leave the Tories, both locally and nationally, free to argue that the voters' choice was between a Lib-Lab pact and a Conservative government.
But would that lead inevitably to defeat?
Perhaps not inevitably, depending on the state of the economy, and on how John Major's burgeoning love affair with the electorate had gone by then.
But it is wise to take seriously Paddy Ashdown's judgment during this election.
He made it his golden rule never to attack the Tories without attacking Labour, to keep equidistant between the two parties, to declare constantly that he was appalled by the thought of coalition with either, and would only undertake this under what he saw as a clear (if only mathematical) directive from the voters.
Does this not suggest that the concept of a nation divided between Conservatives (43 per cent) and anti-Conservatives (the rest) is meaningless mathematics?
It is at least equally easy to conceive of a divide between Labour (35 per cent) and anti-Labour (the rest).
The long fight of the old Liberal Party, from the thirties to the eighties, to maintain its independence, the various formats of the third party since then, are the affirmation of a belief that there is a distinct position from those of Tories and Labour.
For example, Paddy Ashdown has made the Liberal Democrats much more of a free-market party than the old Alliance, with its occasional excursions into corporatism, ever was.
He believes his competition policies are more radical than those of the Tories.
Liberal Democrats have little sympathy for the trade union traditions of the Labour movement, which gave that party its moral raison d'être as protector of the working class.
That connection does not go down well with many people who vote Liberal Democrat.
Nor are the two parties close together on egalitarian taxation.
Paddy Ashdown broadly accepts the Conservative emphasis on incentives for middle-income, middle-management people.
Labour's preoccupation in future will be to begin the long task of reconverting such people to the view many of them held in Clement Attlee's day: that it was worth paying more in tax to produce better public services and a more just postwar society.
So pacts or arrangements still look improbable.
That leaves Labour with its problem of finding an identity that can win elections.
The argument for a conservative, rather than a radical approach to this problem, is reinforced by the long-standing dilemma of the American Democrats.
Since 1968, after all, they have had four years in the White House, compared with Labour's seven in Downing Street, not an encouraging precedent for too radical an abandonment of roots.
Political column Gould deserves a vote of thanks for standing Sarah Baxter
Thank God for the leadership contest.
For a few months, the Labour Party's bruised and battered members can stir, intrigue and factionalise — and raise their spirits in the process.
The contest might just be enough to halt temporarily the remorseless shrinkage in numbers that another four or more years in opposition will bring.
Once the summer is over, the picture will look different.
The hard slog will then begin in earnest.
This not the early 1980s, when new members entered the party to the left; old members exited to the right; and Labour voters deserted.
A straight fight between John Smith and Bryan Gould will never be able to generate that level of fall-out.
The manner in which the contest was called, however, will have already cost the party dearly.
All those voters who shamefacedly backed the Tories in the secrecy of the polling booth are probably feeling vindicated.
It was only fair that Neil Kinnock should be allowed to relinquish his post quickly, although the possibility of Roy Hattersley stepping in as deputy for a few months was ruled out too early.
Kinnock, however, must be regretting the firmness with which he declared in his resignation statement that the elections for the leadership and deputy leadership ‘will take place in the second half of June’.
Already his power to sway the national executive has diminished.
Persuading the soft left to back him through thick and thin on the national executive was one of Kinnock's greatest achievements.
It is for this that he was so praised by the right for his managerial qualities.
This soft-left grouping has now re-emerged on the national executive, with David Blunkett as its standard-bearer.
Its first act, on Tuesday, was to oblige Kinnock to remain in his post until 18 July.
That way, constitutional niceties will be respected.
As the rule book insists, 12 weeks will elapse before the electoral college is convened.
There will be just enough time for some semblance of the democratic process within the party to operate.
It is only because Bryan Gould is standing for leader that the soft left of the Labour Party has found a voice.
For this alone, Gould deserves a vote of thanks.
The right has had the cheek to suggest that the same iron discipline should apply in the aftermath of defeat as in the anticipation of victory.
That notion needed rejecting from the very start.
The letter to the Guardian by Labour's former chief press officer, Colin Byrne, complaining of a grubby, old-style leadership fix in support of John Smith, has drawn praise and astonishment in equal measure.
Astonishment, because Smith has suffered his share of the off-the-record rubbishing by party cliques that Byrne refers so selfrighteously to.
One thinks immediately of the article in the Guardian in the run-up to the Budget claiming that ‘a small whispering campaign has started that Mr Smith is not only less clever than he thinks, but less busy that he should be.’
As was only to be expected, the Tory press eagerly took up the cry.
Jack Cunningham, one of Smith's most prominent supporters, has also fallen foul of these anonymous briefings.
Last summer, he was falsely accused of inciting Kinnock's displeasure by going fishing in Norway instead of attending to his duties as campaign coordinator.
Both these stories were widely seen as an attempt to ‘shoe-in’ Gordon Brown rather than Smith in the event of a leadership vacancy, although Brown, it must be said, had no part in them.
One reason why Smith enjoys the respect of many MPs on the left is that, like them, he was unpopular with the red-rose brigade.
He was not one of the so-called ‘beautiful people’.
So it is with some surprise that the soft left has found itself endorsing Byrne's view of the conduct of those around him.
Byrne's letter was very nearly counterproductive, as it convinced Smith's trade union backers that the sooner this contest was over the better.
A prolonged contest, they argued, would lead to more public splits.
The letter was over the top; there was never an elaborate pro-Smith conspiracy, although the possibility of his replacing Kinnock was discreetly canvassed at one time.
But it did highlight the trade unions barons' basic disregard for democracy.
Within hours of defeat on Thursday, trade union leaders reverted instantly to type.
In one weekend, Bill Jordan and Gavin Laird of the AEU and John Edmonds of the GMB blew away years of self-denial.
The T&G, which may yet be shamed into balloting its members, has made no secret of its backing for Smith on the basis that he has a ‘movement background’.
Of all the major unions, only Nupe has emerged with much dignity, vowing from the start to ballot its members on the succession.
A clear difference between Smith and Gould on the question of trade union influence emerged at the two men's rival press conferences on Tuesday.
Gould, for many years an advocate of one member one vote, vowed that if he were to become leader, he would seek to ensure that this was the last contest under the existing electoral college arrangements.
Asked for a similar pledge, Smith replied guardedly, ‘That is a matter for the party to decide.’
At the launch of Smith's campaign, it soon became clear that he intends to encourage rather than to lead the debate about the party's future.
He talked a great deal about ‘listening’, about ‘deep’ consideration of the issues, about ‘re-examining policies and philosophy.
As ever, he talked very little about his personal beliefs.
Smith's campaign manager, Robin Cook, appears confident that his candidate will come round to endorsing electoral reform.
Smith's aide-de-camp, Jack Cunningham, is another electoral reformer.
It also looks as though Kinnock is close to announcing his personal support for changing the electoral system.
In the interim, Smith has at least acknowledged the constitutional agenda by pronouncing in favour of devolution, regional government and a Bill of Rights.
There is scope in this period of defeat for a benign leader-figure who lets others make the ideological running.
Gordon Brown, who has been squeezed out of the leadership race by Smith (although he is said to be consoled by the fact that he is ten years younger and can wait a generation) will have an important contribution to make.
Although famed for rattling off statistics on the recession, rather than the ‘vision thing’, his Sovereignty Lecture for Charter 88 at the start of the election campaign set out some useful parameters for the debate that must now take place: on citizenship and community, ‘not just tidying up our constitution but transforming it’.
Brown cannot be deputy leader for the straightforward reason that an all-Scottish ticket would put off the English.
He was sensible not to contest the leadership as he commands less support across the party than Smith.
Memories of the Benn-Healey contest now count against him.
With hindsight, the left would have preferred Healey to Kinnock as leader: like all old-style right-wingers, Healey would have known how to accommodate himself to the left; whereas Kinnock felt obliged to root it out of the party.
Smith is seen as today's Healey figure, a conservative consolidator; Brown as a more radical, more hostile and more dangerous rival.
A measure of Bryan Gould's courage is his decision to put himself forward for both leader and deputy leader.
By running for deputy, he has left himself open to the accusation that he has no hope of becoming leader.
It is probably true; he is unlikely to win the votes of too many trade union delegations on a manifesto that promises to reduce their power.
However, by running for leader, he is jeopardising his chances of becoming Smith's deputy.
Already, there is talk of the ‘nightmare ticket’— uniting as leader and deputy two candidates who have little in common.
After the 1987 general election, Gould was considered Kinnock's natural successor.
He topped the poll for the shadow cabinet elections and played a leading role in the policy review process.
His willingness to rethink everything aroused the hostility of the left; but he remained too leftwing for the right, and his shadow cabinet ratings sunk.
As he told the NSS last year, ‘All the great reformers and responsible people didn't dare pop their heads above the parapet when I was saying, ‘Let's junk some of the rubbish, let's talk, let's get some real debate back.'
Having dared, with one or two others, to open the door, I feel I've been trampled in the rush and I'm now standing up and waving a little flag saying, ‘No, no, this is where we should be.'
I'm desperately keen for the party's radical edge to be retained and sharpened.’
Gould's opening statement on Tuesday certainly set him apart from Smith.
He talked of the need for an economic policy as well as a tax policy; he reintroduced the notion of full employment into Labour's vocabulary; and he stressed that workers needed not just rights, but also the opportunity to become wealth producers.
In referring once again to employee share ownership schemes, an idea that got him into trouble after the last election, he signalled that he still believed in the ‘popular socialism’ that he had advanced in those days as the answer to Thatcher's ‘popular capitalism’.
He also spoke of the need to redress the ‘gender gap’ between men and women voters.
Although Gould is a member of the Plant Commission on electoral reform, he refused, like John Smith, to express a personal view on the subject.
He still nurses the hope that devolution and the decentralisation of power to the regions will stave off the need for changing the voting system.
Decentralisation is also his way of coming to terms with the European Community: he is a Eurosceptic who will not hasten economic and monetary union.
However, he is genuinely enthusiastic about the establishment of a constitutional convention, which would bring together churches, voluntary groups, trade unions and other parties in a great national debate.
Deep down, Gould remains a conservative on constitutional matters, which is why Robin Cook is backing Smith with an easy conscience.
But Cook has disappointed many on the left by siding so rapidly with the advocates of a quick contest.
The left has only a small window of opportunity in which to put its views across; it needed every week and month it could get.
Gould deserves great credit for opening this window; despite the talk of a ‘nightmare ticket’, he would be a useful counterpoint to Smith.
His presence as deputy leader would also help the left to breathe beyond this immediate post-election period.
He ought to do well in both elections, but the main prize looks out of reach.
Edward Pearce's Sketch Celebrities should be seen and not heard
I once heard a recording dating from the American election of 1948.
A succession of right-wing Hollywood personages, James Stewart, John Wayne and the like, were climbing onto a platform to bawl into a microphone, ‘I am mounting the bandwagon of Tamas Eee Dooey.’
And a lot of good it did him.
‘The man on top of the wedding cake’, as Dorothy Parker called Governor Dewey, with the snobbery of the rich left, had much the same experience of fallacious exaltation at the hands of the polls as poor Mr Kinnock.
The picture of the great Harry Truman holding above his head a paper with the banner ‘Dewey Wins’ gives pleasure yet.
But what is it that persuades artists (music hall or oils), comedians, actors, deep think-ers, burlesque queens and ‘significant novelists’ that they should contribute to the political debate?
What persuades politicians that having Margaret Drabble or Kenny Everett come down on your side is in any way advantageous?
It is being said with some conviction that Labour inflicted a serious blow on itself with that Sheffield monster rally.
I believe it.
The rally I went to in Leicester in 1987 was neither so gross nor so damaging, but as a reasonably sympathetic onlooker, I was irritated by the frantic urgency and the artificial and inflated mood of tension, good for nobody's judgment.
I remember two things about that rally.
Neil Kinnock made a very good, warm, amusing and emotional speech whose merits applied exactly to this venue.
Any aspect of it reproduced on TV would be starkly unhelpful.
To the atmosphere generated by the yearning faithful, add the element of competing with or complementing showbizz, and a leader performs , where the marginal voter wants to be talked to.
The other recollection was a speech by Hanif Kureishi, the film-maker, about which I recall only how much I disliked it.
A sententious, self-righteous approach as the artist-legislator spoke a mixture of scorn and complacency that most politicians know how to avoid, suggested that keeping Mr Kureishi off one's bandwagon was the beginning of wisdom.
Politicians, unlike actors and especially writers, know that their opinions have to be sold, that they must please.
Ironically, better than actors and playwrights, they understand Johnson's words, written at the conclusion of a prologue to a play by Garrick at Drury Lane:The stage but echoes back the public voice/The drama's laws the drama's patrons give/For we that live to please must please to live.
The trouble with Labour-supporting celebrities is that very largely they want to pronounce.
With Conservative stars no such difficulties emerge.
Apart from‘Let's bomb Russia’ and ‘Let's kick Michael Foot's stick away’, they are not long on political analysis.
Cilla Black once got into a shouting match at a charity show when she tried to cry up her beloved Thatcher and met with voluble consumer resistance.
The thought of Cilla Black admiring Ma would settle most people's doubts on either subject.
But it is a happy thought that Glenda Jackson probably affects Conservative supporters in much the same way.
From what I hear, Ms Jackson should be excluded from strictures on political celebrities.
Her pre-emptive and impressive words to a senior politician were ‘The people of Hampstead don't want an actress, they want a member of parliament.’
So armed, she should prove truly valuable.
Equally, to be fair, I don't think the Commons will lose by acquiring Sebastian Coe.
Compared with Roger Evans, the frothing masher from Monmouth, he is a very private person.
I went a couple of years back to the Coe political launch, the only political journalist among a bunch of ‘'ere Seb, woss this then?’ tabloid sports mackintoshes.
He was quiet, shy and helpful.
Asked, when Our Lady of Finchley was still in her niche, all candles blazing, if he were a Thatcherite or a liberal, he modestly admitted to being a liberal.
He will be all right.
There is no risk, thank God, of Andrew Lloyd Webber wanting to enter the Commons, a place of meagre payment, but the Guardian created a fearful frisson when it wickedly asked Bernard Manning to fill the first of its ‘How I am Voting’ slots, and drew a mouthful of club-night nastiness.
With rare exceptions, artistes, jockeys and writers of thoughtful committed novels do terribly well, like club comedians, to shut up.
Since politicians anyway now speak words written for them by androids, why should these glittering extras demand speaking parts?
ELECTION WATCH It's not my party and I'll cry if I want to Vicky Hutchings gets the blues at the ‘Telegraph's’ election-night victory celebrations
Thursday 9 April
Strolling down the Strand towards the Savoy for the election-night bash thrown by Conrad Black, right-wing Canadian owner of the two Telegraph s and the Spectator , I meet the dark, unfathomable eyes of a woman over the top of her sleeping bag.
I look away, for all the reasons that people like me, with homes and an income, look away: a mixture of helplessness, guilt and the desire not to stare at a perfect stranger, as it were, in bed.
But suddenly the sheer numbers of people quietly bedding down in doorways strikes me as an augury of Labour defeat.
For is this not how such a story should begin, with the cliché of the poor and disenfranchised of the earth, huddling for warmth just a few feet away from champagne-swilling plutocrats glorying in their ascendancy?
The correct beginning to a piece on tears flowing over the lobster would be for the Strand street-dwellers to be doing something — rioting, dancing in the fountains at Trafalgar Square, anything but this calm resignation.
Entering through the massed ranks of hotel staff and police at around 11.25pm, the first famous faces I encounter are Peregrine Worsthorne and a gloomy John Mortimer.
The ITN exit poll, reversing the pretty consistent polls of the past three weeks showing Labour ahead, gives the Conservative Party a 4-point lead.
The BBC has picked up a similar trend.
Everyone seems to have cheered up enormously even though, because of big problems in Tory marginals, both channels are predicting a hung parliament, with only a small Conservative lead over Labour.
Neil Kinnock, according to both ITN and the BBC, could still be at Number 10 tomorrow.
The laughter and clinking sound ominous, however, and Mortimer looks exceedingly depressed.
The Basildon result is starting to sink in.
I hear murmurs all around me of ‘If they can't win Basildon.
..’ Mortimer confesses that he thinks Labour won't be near large enough to form the next government.
Worsthorne looks horrified: ‘My despair never reached those proportions.’
He adds: ‘Actually, I hope the Tories don't win an overall majority.’
Just enough to govern with the help of the Ulster Unionists, perhaps, and teach John Major a bit of a lesson.
Three days later, in the Sunday Telegraph , he will admit to being ‘appalled at how un-Thatcherite the Tory leaders have sounded’ throughout the campaign.
In fact, there are one or two other well-known names, besides Mortimer, who are Labour supporters: Anthony Howard and Alan Watkins, of the Observer , and Anthony Sampson.
All have past relationships with the New Statesman .
The fact that they have been invited shows me how stone-cold almost sure Conrad Black had been of a Tory victory.
After all, you don't invite the left in to gloat at your own failure.
Why they are staying on this sad occasion is unclear.
The famous enter in droves: those like Richard Ingrams, Keith Waterhouse, Michael Grade, Auberon Waugh, Jeffrey Archer, Cecil Parkinson, Sue Lawley and Jilly Cooper are known to most people.
Others are less so: like Eve Pollard, editor of the Sunday Express , Lord Harris and Patrick Robertson of the Bruges Group, Julian Amery, Barbara Amiel, who single-handedly keeps Sean French's word-processor dipped in arsenic, the Duke of Marlborough and John Profumo with his wife.
Chatting to the photographer from Vogue , I discover that writing about this event is distinctly frowned upon, unless it is for one of Black's papers.
‘We at Vogue weren't invited.
So I rang up Conrad Black's secretary for an invitation.
‘You're not a photo- journalist are you?
You're not going to write about this?'
I told her I just was just going to take photographs.
That seemed to be all right.’
Among all these grand people, I see a small woman in a figure-hugging black number with fringes.
Yes, it's the controversial Ms Jaci Stephen, former television critic of the NSS who never wrote about anything but sex and teeth, and sometimes in the same anecdote.
What is she doing here?
‘Oh, I'm terribly right-wing.
Didn't you know?’
No, I didn't, but now she comes to mention it…
Jaci says she was having lunch with Keith Waterhouse and he got her in.
‘You're not writing about this party, are you?’ she asks suspiciously.
A tall urbane man comes over and ruffles her hair.
He's something ‘important in PR’, Jaci tells me later.
She asks about his daughter.
‘Oh, she's at Newnham,’ he answers.
He pauses.
‘Newnham,Cambridge .’
He pauses again.
‘The all-girls college.’
So, okay, he's a patronising pig.
Can't he say anything amusing?
Yes, he can.
We discuss having fun at university.
‘I think it's so important to have fun.
And so hard to do.’
I tell him how hard I've always found it.
A real life's work.
He fingers my red rose brooch.
‘I hope this has no significance.’
Er…
‘No, no,of course not,’ he hurriedly corrects himself, aware he may have caused offence.
Worsthorne appears nearby.
‘Yes,’ he is saying, ‘I stopped worrying as soon as I saw John Mortimer's face.’
Poor John Mortimer.
I go across to commiserate.
He looks as if he is about to burst into tears.
‘What's there to smile for?’
Indeed, the huge TV screen set up for the occasion is now predicting that the Tories will be shy of an overall majority by a mere eight seats: John Major will surely be back at Number 10.
Tory holds come thick and fast: Portsmouth South, Putney, Battersea.
The prediction changes rapidly from the Tories being short of a majority by three seats to a majority of three seats.
The most famous face of all has slipped in during the seemingly inexorable rise in predicted numbers of Conservative seats.
Mrs Thatcher plus Denis and son Mark enter to the accompaniment of cheers and flash guns.
Mrs Thatcher has mastered the sound-bite, to be repeated at intervals like a mantra: ‘So very pleased with how it's going.’
Mrs T has just stepped off Concorde, from a lecture tour of the US.
You can tell she's in a good mood from the number of bitchy remarks: from Glenys Kinnock's dress sense (‘Silly girl to be wearing Yves Saint Laurent’) to the election campaign (‘It's been just like an American election:no ideas’) to John Major's now certain victory (‘It's conserved everything we've stood for’— we, doubtless, in the sense of I).
The Tory recapture of Kincardine and Deeside flashes across the screen.
To cheers in the room, Auberon Waugh punches the air with his right fist.
Chris Patten's overthrow is announced.
‘Good bloody riddance,’ snaps a male voice behind me.
‘Look, he's crying,’ responds a sorrowful female one.
A more conciliatory man remarks how ‘he's a nice man.
It's always the nice ones who get defeated.
He's a Roman Catholic you know.’
Well, there you are.
The group begins discussing some of the other wets they hope will now get the push from Major's cabinet: ‘William Waldegrave,he'll be out.’
But, again, the women seem to be more forgiving: ‘I think he's quite sweet.’
The men are disgusted: ‘Give you a smile and curly hair, you think anyone's sweet.’
Kenneth Clarke appears above us, saying how sad it is about Chris Patten.
Jaci Stephen heaves into view.
‘Now, I fancy him ,’ says Jaci, before rushing off to flirt with Michael Grade.
How anyone with such appalling taste in men lasted so long at the NSS is quite staggering.
I ask Anthony Sampson why he is here: ‘I came to laugh.
I stayed to weep,’ he says.
‘I can't stand much more of this.
I shall go soon.’
The 68-year-old Peregrine Worsthorne appears yet again, still gleeful: ‘Have you seen young Howard's face?’
I make my excuses to Jaci, saying I must go and speak to Anthony Howard.
‘Who's Anthony Howard?’ she asks.
I wander across to where ‘young’ Howard (58) is sitting slumped at an isolated table with his wife and Alan Watkins, their backs turned on the glittering throng.
They are eating determinedly.
Howard says drearily if Labour can't do it this time they never will.
‘It's the end of the Labour Party as we know it.’
He introduces me to Watkins, the man who predicted Labour would get 330 seats.
He waves his left hand near mine, while continuing to fork food into his mouth.
What else is there to do, but pig oneself at Conrad Black's expense?
‘Such a relief !’ is the way most of the guests greet each other.
‘Yes, I'm so relieved.’
Two people discuss ‘the great wisdom of democracy’.
Yet, as the champagne flows and the cheers resound, as diamonds and pearls shimmer on black dresses and white-gloved waiters slice their way through the crowd with continuous supplies of Bucks Fizz or just straight champagne, there doesn't seem to be much love for particular MPs.
As Kenneth Baker appears on the big screen, also lamenting the loss of Chris Patten, the revellers chatter among themselves: ‘Now I don't like him .’
‘I don't like him either.’
‘Come to that, I don't like my MP.’
‘I don't like mine, but I wasn't voting for him.
I was voting to keep Neil Kinnock out.’
Glenda Jackson's acceptance speech talks of the poor, the old, the infirm.
People just look faintly embarrassed at this bad taste.
Charles Moore, one-time editor of the Spectator , merely looks bored.
Now he will be able to carpet the bare boards of his house, something he predicted in last week's Spectator would be impossible under Labour, so mortgaged to the hilt is he.
His children will no longer have ‘splinters in their feet’.
According to the Guardian , he earns a measly £95,000 a year.
Moore is also the man who holds fixedly to the belief that it is solely because he lives in a Labour borough that his pavements have broken and cracked paving-stones.
A trip to Tory Wandsworth would cure him of this delusion.
But perhaps not.
Faith can be impervious to mere facts.
There is something sexy about Sue Lawley in real life, much as there is about Mrs Thatcher.
Sycophants surround her: ‘Tell me, when did you decide to support John Major?
Was it after you had him on Desert Island Discs ?’
Lawley looks coy: ‘My lips are sealed.’
An hour after I last saw him, I spot Anthony Sampson again.
‘What on earth are you doing at a right-wing party like this?’ asks a city type.
‘I came to laugh,’ says Sampson.
‘I stayed to weep.’
It is clearly time to leave, now that the second showing has started.
Upstairs there is another party going on, to the accompaniment of background election noises.
I ask the swaying member of the hotel staff who comes towards me who is giving it.
‘Oh it'sh a shtaff party, celebrating the loverly Tory victory,’ he smiles.
The average hourly rate for hotel staff is £2.90.
POSTMORTEM
No new vision, no new votes Stuart Hall says that Labour desperately needed to address the changing aspirations of the British electorate, but reverted to traditional doctrine instead
If Labour cannot win when the country is in the deepest recession since the war and the Tories have ditched their greatest electoral asset, can it have any hope of ever again forming a government?
The Liberal Democrats are implicated in this question too, since they are as far away from their ‘breakthrough’ as Labour is from office.
What we are staring at for the moment is a ‘permanent’ Conservative ascendancy, rooted in the Thatcher ‘revolution’and the sea-change in the political culture that has been in progress throughout the eighties.
In the end, we were seduced by the polls, against our better judgment.
We forgot the size of the 8 per cent swing required to give Labour an overall majority; that the Tories had held their private leadership election 18 months before; that recessions steel hearts rather than change them, driving people back to the devil they know, to secure their own base-line rather than pushing them towards adventurous alternatives.
It seemed fitting for Thatcherism to end, not with a bang, but with the protracted whimper of a ‘hung’ parliament; with the Tories struggling on for days trying to patch up some squalid deal with the Ulster Unionists, before Neil Kinnock and Paddy Ashdown were driven to 10 Downing Street in their Daimlers.
Some clues as to why this failed to happen lie in the campaign itself.
Heralded by the media (for whom it was largely designed), it was at best a mixed success.
It was fought on the narrowest of political agendas.
For example, not a word was said about Europe — the factor most likely in the next decade to change the terms of the British political and economic game.
Labour has failed to build a popular consensus around educational reform and was trumped by Ashdown's penny on income tax.
Health — Labour's winner — was disastrously mishandled; lumbered by the term ‘privatisation’, which had proved troublesome before, and a grossly ill-judged and badly researched party election broadcast.
I doubt if they made a single convert on the health issue during the campaign.
John Smith's shadow budget was not the triumph it was touted to be.
Courageous in taking on the over-spending bogey that did such havoc in 1987, it nevertheless opened the floodgates to a fortnight of ‘we can give away more tax than you’, and exchanges between the two parties of a staggering triviality that effectively supplanted any wider debate about the economy.
When, in desperation, one tried to recall what exactly Labour's alternative economic strategy was , all one could remember was ‘training’.
Labour still either lacks, or cannot communicate, a concrete vision of a modestly successful post-industrial British economy.
The shadow budget's tax bands gave Labour the look of punitive vindictiveness: it drew the line where, realistically, it reckoned people could afford it, forgetting that in post-Thatcher Britain, people calculate their tax liabilities not on what they actually earn, but how much they hope, desire or aspire to earn in the very near future.
Labour was playing the economics of realism and fiscal rectitude.
The Tories played the ‘sociology of aspirations’.
Mr Kinnock fought a good campaign.
But in an election that, as Vernon Bogdanor wrote in the Independent on Sunday , ‘enables the elector to give expression to those hopes and fears no opinion poll can be sensitive enough to register and reflects the way the nation perceives itself’, he embodied exactly those things that the constituency that Labour was trying to woo back — the new working class — is trying its damnedest to escape from.
The Welsh working-class bonhomie and the ‘boyo’ body-language kept breaking through.
Kinnock is resolutely of his place — principled, passionate, sentimental — and, by that token, he is not for these times.
Here we come to more difficult ground.
The decent community solidarity and welfare socialism that Mr Kinnock embodied was caught on the horns of a terrible contradiction, which Labour in opposition did nothing to resolve, since it did not tackle early enough the low tax/public spending anti-welfare consensus that Thatcherism built.
The strongest reason for voting Labour was indeed its commitment to improving welfare, repairing the damage Thatcherism has done to the social fabric.
However, this can only be done by increasing public expenditure or redistributive taxation.
Limited by what, in a recession, it could realistically claim to be spending, and obliged to exaggerate its fiscal rectitude to appear electable in the City, Labour had either to trim its sails to an economic situation it assured us was dire — thereby undermining the main reason why people supported them — or hold to its promises, confirming the impression that, once the party was in power, taxation and spending would soar.
The Tories not only kept batting Labour back and forth between these untenable positions, but played directly on the historic fears of Labour regressing to its old habits.
In terms of an automatic ‘welfare consensus’, the social contours of British society have been altered irrevocably, partly by the Thatcher revolution, partly by deeper economic trends, which Thatcherism did not create but successfully harnessed to its political project.
Labour's historic constituencies on this question no longer constitute a majority.
People want a ‘caring society’, which is different.
The majority do not as yet want to pay to make it a reality.
Bland and colourless as he is, Mr Major may indeed be finely tuned, as a political symbol, to these intricate (and perhaps self-deceiving) attempts to square the circle, and to the other underlying sociological and aspirational shifts in the electorate that have taken place.
His meritocratic ‘decency’ registers with extraordinary precision exactly that balance between the desire for a more ‘caring’self-image, which led committed Thatcherites, with heavy hearts, to ditch Mrs Thatcher, and that deeply self-interested calculation, which remains her enduring contribution.
This combination of old and new elements is precisely what ‘Majorism’— if it exists — is.
Under his benign regime, Thatcherism as a model of social transformation will continue to work its way through the system.
By the time we are allowed to vote again, education, public transport and the welfare state will have been reconstructed along the two-track lines of the NHS, and broadcasting will have succumbed to the brutalism of David Mellor.
Everything in life will be ‘private’(‘I have, of course, no intention of privatising the NHS’)— in the sense of privately owned, run, or managed, driven by the short-term model or powered by the self-interested, profit-motivated goals of British bosses, the most philistine and least successful ruling class in the western world.
In this sense, Mr Major is child and heir of Thatcherism, smile and smile as he may.
However, at a different level — the level at which this long-term strategy has to be harnessed to the interests, aspirations and self-images of an electorate — he represents a significant adaptation of the post-Thatcher world.
Like Mrs Thatcher, he is able to reach out beyond the middle-class, private-sector bastions of Tory support to wider social echelons, and to ground the Tory philosophy deep in the changing social contours of the ‘new Britain’.
But, whereas Mrs Thatcher gave the Tory construction of this new political subject a rampantly individualist inflection, Mr Major gives it a decent and respectable mobile working-class voice.
He not only comes from Brixton but, for many years, inhabited the landscapes and shared the hopes and anxieties of the indigent respectables living in a largely Labourist collective ethos.
He understands Labourism from the inside.
What he learned from that experience is that the aspirations and ambitions, for which Labour could not stand, has not yet found a voice; to these aspirations the right kind of Tory message could be addressed.
‘The Labour Party were prepared to try, with their very benevolent intentions, to give people good housing, but they did put a stop to people being able to do things for themselves,’ he told the Observer .
‘There was no conception of opening up a capacity for you to do things for yourself.
You felt you were locked into a particular stratum of society, that that was your place and that was where you stayed.
There was no mobility between income groups, backgrounds…’
Mr Major embodies the growing number of people who, though not mystified about their humble class origins, no longer believe they should remain, as he put it, ‘boxed in’ to them forever.
He articulates this attitude, not in terms of the reality of, but the aspiration to , social mobility, and the ethic of personal achievement.
During the election, for the first time, he enunciated this as a national vision: in memorable, simple, evocative terms; as graspable in its clarity as Mrs Thatcher's, but sufficiently orientated towards ‘safety nets’, ‘decency’, the ‘citizen's charter’ and ‘effective delivery’themes to distance itself from the harsher extremes of Thatcherite social gospel.
Choice, opportunity to rise, mobility within one's lifetime, the power to decide your own fate, where anyone, whatever his or her background, can become anything, provided they work hard enough; this is what Mr Major means by ‘classlessness’ and a ‘society at ease with itself’.
The claim appears ludicrous to more egalitarian folk.
But it is exactly the kind of ‘accessible classlessness’ that millions believe to be desirable and realistic, and exactly the low-powered motor that takes Majorism beyond traditional Tory areas into a new arena where new constituencies are there to be won.
This is the voice that was heard in Basildon and a thousand new ‘classless’ working-class and suburban communities across the country; the heartland of the new ‘sociology of aspirations’.
It is not the only message capable of reaching them.
But, in the long years of policy revision and image revitalisation, Labour has not found another, effective way of voicing these changed realities.
There still is a constituency, and there is certainly a need, for the old, traditional, welfare Labour vision, but it is a permanently declining sector of the electorate.
It could only be given a new lease of life by grounding its themes in a transformed image of a much more efficient, modernised, client-centred public sector, to which Labour has not yet seriously directed itself.
It would carry conviction only if located in a convincing scenario for sustained modernisation and growth — which no one is convinced Labour has.
This is what we hoped Labour's ‘rethink’ was about.
But the adaptation has been too shallow; painful without cutting deep enough.
More the kind of face-lift marketing men give an old product when launching it with a new package, less a shift of political culture and strategy rooted in the configurations of modern social change.
The ‘rethink’ failed as well to grasp the dynamics of growth in a new style Europe-oriented economy.
It has not shifted the old Labour image and habits towards the new kind of social-democratic space that has begun to emerge in some European countries, and which represents the only real alternative for the left that wants to govern in the next post-Maastricht decade.
Above all, it has been unable to bring the highly differentiated elements of strategy and social constituencies together behind a convincing vision of a more deeply democratic and at the same time thoroughly 20th-century, socially just society.
Without some historic realignment on the left, it is impossible to see any serious moves in this direction being made in the next five years.
But the chances of such a realignment happening seem slight.
A deal with the Liberal Democrats that did not reflect a more organic change in the political culture of both parties (the Lib Dems recognising their historic place as a party of the left, giving up their balancing-act illusions) would be regarded as a cynical manoeuvre by the electorate.
The shift of leadership to John Smith may seem temporarily convincing, but it is in the last analysis cosmetic.
Mr Smith is an able technician.
He does not have any feel for how strategy and the construction of social constituencies of support match up, or for wider social and cultural themes.
He is unlikely to drive through the party the change in the culture of Labourism that would give any realignment depth and substance.
There are good men and women, with their hearts in roughly the right place, in the shadow cabinet.
But they have signally failed so far to build an intellectual constituency in wider circles of the kind that gave Thatcherism — which had little intellectual depth of its own — the basis on which to construct a new kind of politics.
An understanding on PR, which would change the electoral terrain, may come, but is likely to be stubbornly resisted, above all amongst loyalists at the grass-roots constituency level, which is exactly where the dialogue with the Liberal Democrats and other political forces who stand to gain from a more democratic electoral system needs to begin.
It is difficult to see how an anti-Tory majority could be built without a realignment.
But when one understands how deeply rooted and historically entrenched are the forces likely to resist it, it will be neither swift or certain.
This is the year the Thatcher nightmare might have ended.
Instead, a somewhat more benign Major nightmare has only just begun.
The real world Where were the global issues in the election debate, asks Jeremy Seabrook
Why do so many people apparently tell opinion pollsters one thing and then, in the sober setting of the voting cubicles, do another?
It may be that we felt this time we ought to have voted Labour, that this was the more altruistic, moral, even noble, choice.
But at the last minute, self-interest takes over; in the stark presence of the perforated piece of paper and a stub of pencil on a string, we realise that we have to live in the ‘real world’, and our courage fails us.
The truth is that we are now condemned to live with a dual consciousness.
No one can escape the knowledge that we occupy that ‘real world’, defined by profit and loss, the bottom line of an accounting system that is inflexible and unappealable.
At the same time, we have also to exist with the knowledge that the planet and its poor are breaking under the strain of that same economic system to which there is, nevertheless, no alternative.
There was, of course, no glimpse of this epic contradiction during the election.
The central question ought to have been how to reconcile the economic system with the resource-base that it plunders with accelerating and reckless indifference.
But we were not taken into the confidence of those who determined media-generated arguments between agendaless and ideologically bankrupt parties.
A claustrophobic world-view was promoted by the commentators and opinion-formers, those trusty custodians of the unthinkable, the cleansers of ideas and filterers of the admissable.
If, as the Guardian said, ‘the campaign barely touched on the issues that will engulf us’, this is because we, the people, have been treated like small children, and protected against upsetting debate; like those news bulletins that warn that scenes we are about to witness may prove disturbing.
This is perhaps understandable, but it is stretching credulity to expect us to bless it as the highest human freedom.
Or, perhaps all our democratic rights have now been superseded by an even more compelling one — the right not to know.
We have heard echoes of Bush's ‘kinder gentler America’ in the temper of the new Tory government.
There has been a reject-ion of the folly of the radical free-market experiment of the 1980s.
The caring nineties have been announced.
We are assured that the landscape will be less socially rugged for the sick, the weak and the vulnerable.
Repentance is in the air.
The Guardian can now declare: ‘No successful capitalist economy has been developed without the state sponsoring an entrepreneurial class, designing and encouraging a network of supportive institutions and actively intervening in the management of the economy.’
What we are not told in this benign dispensation is that the modest freedoms that permit us to oscillate between radical free-marketeering and limited state intervention apply strictly to the rich countries.
There has been no such softening in the rest of the world, which the west has now taken under its protective tutelage.
The small, frightened freedoms that we enjoy are underpinned by a global system that requires that they be paid for by rigorous and intensifying dispossession of the poor of the earth, the destruction of the resource-base, the ousting of indigenous peoples who happen to occupy the last remaining deposits of ‘raw materials’ to which the global market now stakes its superior claim.
If western free-market fundamentalism has been faintly relaxed in the west, this is because it has been intensified in its export version.
Whether in Ghana, the Philippines, Peru, Poland, India or Brazil, the same inflexible, totalising and unreasonable prescriptions are proffered by the experts of the IMF and the World Bank; the aims of Gatt are to impose the same programmes —‘macro-economic correctives’, ‘structural adjustment plans’— a more intensive use of resources, more exploitation of the people, a competitive demolition of the very elements of life, in order that countries may ‘survive’ the universal reign of the market.
We are in the presence here, not of art or science, but of an ideology, harsh as any revealed creed, and the more damaging to the world for being unable to name itself.
It is an ideology that calls itself pluralism when it imposes monoculture; that speaks of choice as it snuffs out the biodiversity of the earth; that cries democracy when it eclipses and denies all alternatives.
This is why we appear to be witnessing a new round of military coup attempts in those happy places where western prescriptions have been carried out with such fidelity: for example, Fujimoro in Peru last week, and the events in Venezuela in February.
The neo-colonial wheel has almost come full circle.
In the seventies, there were military dictatorships all over Latin America.
These implemented western economic bidding with ruthless obedience, resulting in social disorder, disappearances, violations of human rights.
Then, in the eighties, there was the overthrow of the military, and the joyful return to democracy.
The IMF and World Bank experts moved in, and recommended identical policies to those pursued with such relentless vigour by their military predecessors.
This has led only to further impoverishment, loss and social upheaval, with, in the eighties, the added rigours of drug culture.
The call for ‘strong men’ is heard once more.
We can see our own ‘freedoms’ caricatured in the south: the ebb and flow of free-market economics in the ‘metropolitan’countries is matched by the alternation of democratic and authoritarian regimes in the south, in which the economic policies scarcely vary in any particular, and in which the steady flow of wealth from poor to rich is consistently maintained.
The global economic system has now become the conduit for the western universalising mission.
No longer through Bibles, sacred texts and holy writ is the world conquered, but by the promise that if the poorest countries will carry out the prescriptions — indeed, the orders — of the western financial institutions, they too will achieve the levels of affluence and ease that they see in the western world.
Such promises are, of course, disingenuous.
The western experience simply cannot be replicated in those places where it is now being recommended.
The wealth of the west depended absolutely on colonial domination, territorial expansion and the import of cheap commodities, including, when it required them, human beings, whether as slaves to the Caribbean and North America, indentured labour in the plantations of Malaysia and Africa or migrant workers to Europe.
For industrial society has made a strange covenant with humanity: it has promised us that we can exist independently of nature, in the gilded cocoon of a technosphere that is no longer tuned to the archaic necessities of seed-time, harvest and the vagaries of the seasons.
The iconography of this promise pervades the global media, and attracts the peoples of the whole world to the delusive and treacherous creed of the west.
And this belief claims to be built on reason, pragmatism and common sense.
That all this should have disappeared from the politics of the west creates deep unease at the elision of so many vital questions.
Labour's promises of a better life depended absolutely and solely on the further success of the global economy further to enrich the people of Britain by means of the same flow of wealth from the poor to the rich of the world.
Labour offered a deeply dependent and conservative culture, one that derives from acceptance of the unalterable laws, not of the universe, but of a market economy.
And here is the central paradox: the system that no mainstream party now challenges continues to tear open the fabric of the planet to gut it of resources; a process that sets in movement streams of developmental refugees, waves of environmentally displaced persons, those economic migrants for whom the west repudiates all responsibility.
The transformation of all the richness, diversity and plenitude of natural wealth into commodities is the highest purpose of the global economy; and it requires intensifying and continuous dispossessions, in one form or another.
Those who seek to repair the damage caused by the creation of more wealth are only locking us more deeply into the source of the evil; and Labour's submission to this cruel belief robs it of any claim to significant opposition to the existing order.
The multiple disturbances caused by these developments afflict not only the south, but the north too.
If 5,000 people ring the Samaritans each day, within 15 years half the adult population of this country will have been at their wits' end.
The five million crimes recorded in Britain last year suggest serious social disorder, but they scarcely figured in the election.
And does the fact that one in four people in Britain now lives alone mean that we have finally achieved the highest aspirations of humanity, or that we are victims of an ideology of individualism that has distorted even our deepest relationships?
Present levels of breakdown, isolation, fear and violence are evils that cannot be separated from the economic system that delivers the goods.
The goods always cost more than the mere monetary price; and it is the object of the system to externalise these costs, by passing them on to the poor or to the impaired resource-base of the earth, and by inviting even the rich to live in collusive dissociation from the costs they, too, must pay.
We have yet to make a balanced assessment of the real price exacted from humanity for those things which all politicians promise in ever greater abundance.
In the meantime, what happened to dissent?
The hermetic atmosphere in which the election was conducted was a celebration of the monotheistic religion of the market system, the diminishing of our capacity to change the world, the extinction of social hope.
The fact that the system is no longer challenged by any mainstream party does not mean that there is nothing to challenge.
But capitalism has dwindled into the economy, and its management has become the sole area of dispute: an autonomous, uncontested economic system whose necessities are increasingly disarticulated from human need.
What William Morris said, a century ago, when he spoke of ‘humanity, wasted in one way or another by poverty or superfluity’ has even greater urgency now.
It is not only that our version of poverty — a mean and ragged insufficiency — is destructive, but so, also, is our version of wealth.
Why are we expected to be stunned into admiration each day by the media, which invites us to ponder the fortune and greatness of those who are the most voracious consumers of the precious treasures of the earth?
Should we not rather be appalled at their heedless and destructive course through a world where people daily perish within sight of their conspicuous profligacy?
What inversion of values makes us to look upon such aberrations as though they were a reflection of natural laws?
If what we have seen in this election is the real world, then the sooner we find a way out of it the better.
Coming from behind Christopher Harvie on how the Scottish Tories played the electoral game for all it's worth
Remember the bit in Citizen Kane when Orson Welles stands for election as congressman, but is felled by a ‘Kane in Love Nest’ scandal?
Kane lifts up the galley-proof of a newspaper bill reading ‘Kane Elected!’ and drops it, then lifts up another: ‘Fraud at Polls!’
It's only natural for defeated parties to grab at such explanations, but there are some reasons for believing that the result of the general election in Scotland owed more to Conservative skill at exploiting the mechanics of registration and demography than to any ‘principled’ decision-making by voters.
It was the Wester Hailes housing scheme in Edinburgh Pentlands that first gave me the notion that something was up.
A very new register was showing only two or three voters on stairs that ought to accommodate ten or 12.
Slackness in the official compilation and in-between-election-activity by the Labour Party has always carried a penalty of up to 10 per cent for Labour, but what emerged from a comparison of the electorates of 1987 and 1992 in the six Edinburgh constituencies was a drop of 14,737 electors.
Edinburgh East, for example, lost 2,721 electors, or nearly 6 per cent of the 1987 figure; it's a safe bet that few of such ‘lost electors’ would have voted Conservative.
And, indeed, Gavin Strang's poll fell from 18,257 to 15,446, a reduction of 2,811.
If the poll tax really became a tax on voting, was it non-registering residents, rather than any enthusiasm for Major or Lang, that pushed the Tory percentage in Scotland up from a poll average of about 21 to an actual 25.5 per cent, and proportionately diminished the impact of the Labour and SNP campaigns?
The ‘Lang comes back from the grave’ phenomenon makes the whole election seem a disaster for the anti-unionist forces, but it was much less of one than 1979.
Not long after he took office, John Major spoke of taking 30 seats in Scotland.
Ian Lang and Malcolm Rifkind have amazed everyone by surviving, but they have only marginally improved their party's position, from nine to 11 seats.
They are still nowhere near their 1983 level of 21.
In the eight in which they are second (Edinburgh Central and South, Angus East, Banff, Fife NE, Renfrew West, Strathkelvin, and Tweeddale), their percentages are down as much as they are up.
Give the Conservatives the credit of having played a very weak hand with great expertise, but they are still less of a threat to Labour than the SNP, now second in 35 seats.
The SNP's strategy was as cunning as in 1979, and as full of long-term risks.
Both it and the Tories took on a joint gamble when the Sun talked up the ‘independence in Europe’ line.
The SNP thought that if the ‘independence-union’ alternative was stressed, the crumbling of British Labour support would be to its benefit.
This scheme was shrewd, but for the fact that the ‘crumbling’ in England came too late, when much SNP support had already drifted to Labour in expectation of a hung parliament, and wasn't registered at all in the polls.
The Sun , whose pro-nationalist propaganda was intelligently put over — in comparison with the sub-literate coverage of the Daily Record — quickstepped back into line with its main headline (the same as in the south) on polling day.
We have yet to see whether, with no Jim Sillars, it will urge the Scottish case on John Major.
The Conservatives also employed the classic advantage of the minority and manoeuvred well, sensibly concentrating on the seats that could best be held or putatively captured.
The Scottish ‘haves’ can mobilise when they have to, and get their Volvos to the polling stations.
This obviously did the trick in Stirling, Ayr, South Aberdeen and Kincardine — but not in Edinburgh South, Fife NE, or Strathkelvin.
Why?
I suspect the answer lies in the demographic changes of the 1980s, which showed a substantial and unexpected in-migration to Scotland, on the same scale and pattern as the ‘incomers’ to Wales who were selling off expensive property in south east England and settling down on the proceeds.
The Tory vote in the areas where it polled well were elderly, well-off, and often English in origin.
Of course, divisions among the anti-unionists helped frustration on its way.
But if we allow for registration and demography, this election hasn't changed the structure of Scottish politics much.
This is what the Tories have yet to do.
The regions have to be abolished, the health service, education and transport broken up or privatised — and in a period when the natural anti-government reaction, allied to an already-perceptible bitterness, will produce hefty hostile majorities in local government, and a narrow Commons majority will take its toll.
Mounting economic problems in Japan and Germany, and the London property crisis, could mean that economic revival will be long deferred; a party whose record made the Financial Times refuse to back it is going to have its work cut out to keep in control.
Once again the officers have taken over the ship by some nifty footwork, and the mutineers have been battened down in the fo'csle.
But this time the breakers are closer and the engines are slowing…
Not of this world British politicians are still burying their heads in the sand, says Fred Halliday
The international is like the unconscious: you may try to avoid it; it will not avoid you.
Nowhere was this more evident than in the recent election campaign.
In contrast to all previous postwar elections, where nuclear issues, and a range of post-colonial questions from Suez and South Africa to the Falklands were raised to promote or attack party images, international issues appeared to play little or no role.
Controversy was absent; hardly a headline marked their presence.
In the US election, commentators are bemoaning the lack of international issues, but they are still markedly more present than here: President George Bush and Bill Clinton are arguing over how and when to help the former Soviet states, Clinton is proposing to allow Japan and Germany on to the Security Council of the UN, all candidates have a figure for American troop presence in Europe, ranging from Bush's 150,000 to Jerry Brown's 1,000, with a European force of 1,000 stationed in the US.
Here, insularity seemed to prevail.
No one thought there were many votes to be gained in talking about the UN or Nato.
Tom King did try on one occasion to attack Labour's defence policy — but mainly on the grounds that it would lose jobs.
Labour committed itself to immediate acceptance of the Maastricht social charter, with implications for low pay and for women, and to meeting the UN's target for aid as a percentage of GNP within five years.
But these were glancing shots, and, what is perhaps most significant, did not draw any return fire.
In the three pre-election day interviews conducted by Jon Snow with the party leaders, there was one brief mention, a throwaway by Ashdown about internationalist commitment.
About the only occasion on which a question was put to Kinnock about foreign policy was on the election eve Spitting Image .
As with the unconscious, of course, what is not said tells us as much as, or more than, what is said.
This is particularly marked on the matter of the last major international crisis faced by this country, the Gulf war.
The Conservative manifesto makes much of the 13 years' record in foreign policy, but is silent about the great motto of two years ago ‘the new world order’, which the Gulf war was supposed to promote.
While it makes much of the commitment to solving the Cyprus and Kashmir problems, presumably in deference to immigrant communities, it says rather less about what the Tory party plans to do about the greatest immediate challenge it will face, the level and duration of the commitment to the Iraqi Kurds.
On the Labour side, what seemed to be a golden opportunity was not taken, nor was it when it first arose, namely to pin responsibility for the Gulf war, and the sufferings of British hostages in it, on the government's blunder in not seeing that Saddam Hussein would invade Kuwait.
In countries not threatened by invasion, foreign policy is rarely prominent in election campaigns, but there is more to the UK silence than that.
There is still a strong sense in Britain that even to discuss foreign policy is somehow unpatriotic or obscene, and this certainly made it more difficult for Labour to raise international questions.
On the Tory side, too much invocation of the international record would have run the risk of reminding people of Thatcher, and for that reason had to be avoided.
But there were several other reasons for this repression of international issues in the campaign.
The first and most obvious reason is that the public differences between the major parties have indeed got less: there seems little point in attacking on areas of large agreement.
Ireland, an issue that resurfaced with a vengeance the day after the election, is a case in point.
Most attention focuses here on shifts in Labour policy, on armaments and on the EC, to which may also be added another less publicised shift, namely on attitudes to the US: when Foot became leader of the Labour Party in 1979, he had not been to Washington since the 1940s; Kinnock and his associates were frequent, and informed, visitors.
But a combination of international change and policy alteration has meant that, on some issues, the Tories changed too.
They are now more in favour of the UN, though not of re-entering Unesco.
On a range of third-world issues their policies have taken a turn for the better and are broadly the same as those of Labour — support for the Palestinians, dialogue with the ANC, endorsement of the ‘safe haven’ for the Kurds.
The attempt to galvanise the Commonwealth at last October's Harare summit into playing a more active role in support of human rights also represents a welcome if belated shift.
The second reason for the silence on foreign policy is that the big differences on it run within the parties rather than between them.
This is evidently so on the EC — it was this issue that brought down Thatcher and accounts for Major's sideways approach to Maastricht.
The convoluted language to argue in favour of national control in the Tory manifesto can be explained by anxiety not to use the technical, but too foreign-sounding, EC term ‘subsidiarity’.
On the Labour side, the big divider is still nuclear weapons.
Kinnock's success in altering party policy was made easier, if less meaningful, by the end of the cold war, but a public onslaught on the Conservatives' military record, including the maintainance of Trident, would have opened up debate within Labour ranks, as well as risking alienating voters on the question of defence employment.
But there is a third reason for the silence on international issues, namely the fact that there is very little Britain can or will do.
Unlike the US, Japan or Germany, it cannot affect the outcome of events in the former Soviet Union, since it does not have the economic resources to play a significant role.
On the two biggest international issues confronting the UK — the resurgence of German power and the ecological threat — there is equally little that any party is prepared to do: the former is the basis for a future stability of the EC, the latter has already reached such ominous proportions that, as is evident in the evasions preceding the Rio summit, governments the world over are hiding their heads in the sand.
In that sense, the most important thing to say about this British election, and all the other electoral carnivals taking place in the developed world this year, is that they are frivolous evasions of the threat that is now menacing all of mankind.
The ‘absence’ of international issues is, however, in many ways an illusion: one can say that if formal controversy over foreign policy was markedly absent from the campaign, international factors played a major role in shaping it, and, even more so, to affect the future course of British politics, whatever the incumbent government does.
This is evident in at least three spheres: the economy, migration, the EC.
The recession Britain is now enduring is, above all, the result of a failure to compete internationally, while hardly a day went by during the campaign without some ‘jitters’ on the stock or money markets reflecting fears in the international financial community of a Labour victory.
That immigration remains a potent moulding force was evident in the outburst of racism in the Tory camp, and in the way that the respective manifestos sought to meet the requests of particular ethnic communities.
For all the reservations about Maastricht, the British government is increasingly limited and affected by EC policy.
The biggest issue of all, in which the EC plays an important part, is how the political and social processes in the UK are increasingly being shaped by international trends.
The depleting ozone layer is the harshest example of this, but international determination of British society was always important and the idea of some insulated, ‘British’, history is a nonsense: the reformation, the industrial revolution, the spread of universal suffrage were all international processes.
In this election this universalisation of trends, the central theme of Fukuyama's End of History , was visible in at least three marked respects.
One is that, in all the more developed countries, alternation of ruling parties has virtually ceased — from the US and Japan to Germany and Spain.
Perhaps Italy will be an exception, perhaps France: but the failure to unseat the Conservatives is certainly paralleled by processes elsewhere.
The element of exceptionalism, and a welcome one, was that, in contrast to France, Italy and Germany, Britain is for the moment at least free of a significant right-wing racist element.
A second international trend present in the election and one that needs to be recognised as a global, not uniquely British, phenomenon is the decline of clear, ideologically based, alternatives to right-wing capitalism, a crisis of the social-democratic model that, far from being reversed by the disappearance of authoritarian socialism in the east, has been accentuated by it.
No Labour rethink that ignores this will stand a chance of success in the future.
The third area of international conformity is the issue of constitutional reform — proportional representation, regional devolution, and the depreciation of the monarchy.
Nowhere was the stolid exceptionalism of the British more evident than in the rejection of constitutional reform and in the way in which Conservatives sought to portray this reform as the road to chaos — as if the US, Australia, Germany, Spain and other developed democracies had not prospered with more representative systems.
Yet international pressure to change will continue, beginning with the growing insistence of the EC that elections to the European Parliament be carried out under proportional representation.
The lesson of the story is clear: re-established in Downing Street, John Major may feel he has steered the British political system away from contamination by the international.
There are others — the IRA, the world financial markets, the EC, Helmut Kohl and, not to be forgotten, Saddam Hussein — who will be sure to remind us that they are still there.
A ‘national’ election, like a ‘national’economy, is an illusion.
Business as usual The election led to a few significant changes in Northern Ireland, but mostly it's more of the same, says Robin Wilson
Seventeen Ulstermen — yes, to a man — entered the general election lists as incumbent MPs.
And, apart from one change, those same 17 came out again.
Amongst them, four party leaders — they had been in place for 12, 13 and 21 years.
Yet Northern Ireland is like Italian politics used to be: dominated by its partyocracy and political blocs, shifts of a few percentage points represent an earthquake.
Such a seismic event was the removal of the Sinn Féin president, Gerry Adams, from the republican movement's citadel, West Belfast.
The secular decline in the Sinn Féin vote — from a peak of 13.4 per cent in 1983 to 10 per cent on April 9 — meant that Mr Adams' seat would surely fall at some point.
But, it seemed, not this time.
And indeed his own vote fell by just 36.
What tipped the balance was a decision by some 3,000 Protestant electors to desert the Ulster Unionist candidate — for whom all nationalists were the same — and vote tactically in favour of the non-violent nationalism of the Social Democratic and Labour party victor, Joe Hendron.
A few weeks earlier, at his party's conference, Mr Adams had studiously referred to Ulster Protestants as ‘our people’.
In the wake of the election, however, they had evidently become ‘their people’.
Mr Adams said: ‘The seat was stolen from the people of West Belfast.’
The SDLP leader, John Hume, told NSS wryly: ‘I thought they wanted to unite Ireland.’
Mr Adams is caught between a rock and a hard place.
He has already pushed the boat out a long way in distancing Sinn Féin from the IRA, yet to no electoral avail.
And Sinn Féin believes that disowning the IRA would be ‘counter-productive’.
In a new book on the history of the IRA by Conor Foley (Legion of the Rearguard , Pluto), Mr Adams, in a telling phrase, remarks: ‘We will move as a movement or we will not move at all.’
Some have speculated that the setback for SF will lead to increased IRA violence.
But the massive post-election bomb in London is likely to have been an each-way bet planned well in advance.
And in reality Mr Adams' efforts in recent years to put a check on the IRA have come to nought.
Foley interviewed an IRA spokesperson after the killing of eight workmen at Teebane Cross in January — unlike Mr Adams, he expressed no regret.
The militarists have had the upper hand for some time.
Yet the Adams group worked their way to power in the republican movement in the late 70s out of recognition that the IRA campaign was teetering on defeat unless a political front was opened.
And while the IRA leader said how the weaponry received from Libya in 1986 had been ‘beyond our wildest dreams’, it is very doubtful whether the political conditions for the military campaign can be maintained for many more years.
Giving Sir Patrick Mayhew the Stormont post will help, however.
Sir Patrick's role as attorney general in ensuring there would be no prosecutions of Royal Ulster Constabulary officers for alleged conspiracy to pervert the course of justice in the ‘shoot-to-kill’ episodes investigated by John Stalker, as well as his insensitivity to Irish concerns on extradition, will give Sinn Féin ammunition for claiming he will not be a man to understand the force of argufment.
The SDLP would certainly have wished for ‘a more neutral figure’.
But now with four seats — exactly reflecting its 23.5 per cent support — the party has every reason to feel cheerful.
Its tally of 184,445 was its highest ever and it is likely that the personal vote for John Hume, its leader, in Foyle, and the conversion of Eddie McGrady's marginal in South Down to a 600-plus majority, will have been boosted by some Protestant crossover.
Mr Hume certainly believes that his strongly pro-European line —‘the only union that matters is the European union’— may have wooed some liberal Protestant voters.
For the cross-sectarian Alliance party, it was a frustrating election.
Dented by the newly-established Northern Ireland Conservatives, the Alliance vote slipped back from 10 to 8.7 per cent.
Also disappointed were Rev Ian Paisley's Democratic Unionists, who, despite being released from the constraints of an earlier pact with the Ulster Unionists of James Molyneaux, secured only 13.1 per cent(retaining three seats), against 34.5 (and nine seats) for the UUP.
The Ulster Popular Unionist, James Kilfeckler, withstood the Conservative challenge in North Down.
Which leaves us, ultimately, with the two great blocs of SDLP and UUP support, who will principally determine the outcome of renewed talks on Northern Ireland's future, a process which Sir Patrick inherits from Peter Brooke.
The SDLP need not now worry about Sinn Féin breathing on its neck, and Ulster Unionist sources now speak with a little disdain of Mr Paisley's ranting style.
But an historic compromise remains a long way off.
While in theory all parties are agreed that the talks should cover three ‘strands’— Northern Ireland, north-south and Anglo-Irish relations — one UUP source said: ‘It seems these three strands mean different things to different people.’
In particular, the determination of the SDLP and the republic's government to put on the north-south, ‘strand two’ table the 1920 Government of Ireland Act establishing partition makes unionists very jittery.
For if the act is put in question then so is subsequent British legislation, as well as article one of the Anglo-Irish Agreement, which enshrine the principle that there can be no change in the status of Northern Ireland without majority consent.
Equally, the insistence by Mr Molyneaux that there can be no distinction between the treatment of Northern Ireland and any (highly limited and purely administrative) devolution conceded to Scotland, when Mr Major finally ‘takes stock’, rules out any power-sharing or north-south ‘Irish dimension’— minimum requirements for the SDLP.
And finally there is Sir Patrick.
The unionists hope that he will be less receptive to ‘Irish blarney’ and Balliol, the Dragoon Guards and the Bar hardly offer the political socialisation required to understand Ulster's Catholic dispossessed.
After his election, Dr Hendron stressed how army harassment provided ‘the lifeblood of the Provisionals’ in his constituency.
Yet at his first press conference last Monday, Sir Patrick airily asserted that the security forces deserved ‘full co-operation’, the criminal justice system had ‘unshakeable integrity’ and Stalker was ‘plainly a thing of the past’.
With enemies like this, for a time Sinn Féin won't need so many friends.
Terminal Hubris Labour's agnosticism about PR backfired, say Stuat Weir and Patrick Dunleavy
Generals are often derided for fighting their last war all over again.
The politicians of Britain's two centre-left parties are already re-digging the trenches of 1987 and 1992.
Yet the case for a fundamental re-appraisal of Labour's strategy is a simple matter of arithmetic.
The party's share of the vote crawled up to barely 35 per cent, thanks largely to Lib Dem deserters.
The Conservatives were returned to power for the fourth election in a row with 42 per cent or more of the popular vote.
If Labour's petit Bourbons fail to recognise at last that the division of the non-Tory vote has for two decades made majority Labour government impossible, and that the Liberal Democrats are not going to disappear, then at least a disunited rump of the UK will be consigned forever to that category.
In May 1987, we pointed out in New Socialist that Labour's leaders would have to take on electoral reform and come to a pre-election accommodation with the Alliance if they seriously wanted to win the election.
(Actually they didn't.
They wanted finally to see off the third party; predictably, they failed.)
Self-delusion could easily once again cloud the judgment of the shadow cabinet and Labour could go it alone at the next election, perhaps with the same misplaced confidence in a ‘safety first’ stance that will deliver success if the dangers inherent in new initiatives are avoided and new ideas anathemised.
This stance left Labour with nothing to say in the last week of its campaign and unwilling to communicate with anyone outside its own ranks, except through the media.
Hence the folly of the triumphalist Sheffield rally.
It is the conservative culture of Westminster, the television studio and lobby that encourages this attenuated political thinking.
There they sit on reserved seats in the Commons, Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition, only metres away from their government counterparts, knowing they could do so much better.
Outside the chamber, they are asked constantly for their views on this or that issue.
Power is so seductively close that it is easy to forget that in British politics the winner takes all, or to believe that this time it all will come right and they can themselves grasp power without conceding any.
For the sake of clarity, it is important to analyse what role electoral reform could have played, and did play, in the election campaign.
First, opinion polls since the mid-1970s have shown a consistently stable majority for proportional representation (see ‘Waiting for reform’ by Stuart Weir in the April Political Quarterly ).
It is not simply ideas of fairness that move the public, but a desire for representative government.
Second, several recent polls demonstrated that Labour (or the Tories) could gain a 2-3 per cent electoral bonus if they committed themselves to reform; but one of them (for the Rowntree Reform Trust) carried the warning that a fudged position would not do; the commitment had to be whole-hearted.
Labour moved some way towards electoral reform with the Plant Committee, but while Kinnock himself favours change, he feared that a commitment to electoral reform would split the party.
And so Labour went into the election on a fudged policy designed more to placate Roy Hattersley than to win over voters.
At the same time, though Kinnock drew back from endorsing tactical voting, candidates in marginals were given the go-ahead to make the personal commitments to PR in order to encourage it.
There is evidence that this tactic had some effect in marginal seats and, indeed, made the overall result far better for Labour than it would have been had people not voted tactically.
The Harris/ITN exit poll shows that, overall, one in five people who voted Labour had done so tactically (nearly a third of Lib Dem voters also did so).
In 22 of the 40 seats Labour won from the Tories, the swing in the constituency was higher than the regional average, and there was a significant cluster of above 6 per cent swings.
We can only speculate on what might have been had there been a full-hearted commitment to PR and a working agreement with the Lib Dems.
For example, the Conservatives held a further 24 seats with majorities over Labour or Lib Dems of under 1,000.
Mandelson is probably right when he argues that the sudden salience of electoral reform hurt.
It wasn't the issue that did the damage, however, but Kinnock's apparent shiftiness, mocked as it was by the celebrated Patten-Heseltine Hinge and Bracket act.
Labour's agnostic compromise was too clumsy and seemed more like cynical calculation to voters.
But if Labour's leaders misplayed their hand in the last week, Paddy Ashdown's behaviour was more damaging by far.
Over the last weekend, he single-handedly managed to create a 3-4 point drop in his own party's support, with a knock-on effect against Labour.
He did so by rubbishing the only viable goal of any Liberal Democrat election campaign — a hung parliament.
In the 1970s, Jeremy Thorpe played the hung parliament question simply and cleanly, urging voters to embrace it, confident in the knowledge that Liberal MPs' votes would be a force for moderation and common sense, curbing the excesses of whichever major party formed a minority government.
Ashdown could have done the same.
Instead, through TV, radio and the press came his reiterated warning of economic chaos and instability in a hung parliament, triggering more recession, delays in investment, and raised interest rates.
These images were precisely the same as those invoked by Tory propaganda.
He instantaneously demolished years of careful Liberal/Alliance efforts to educate people to think in terms of‘balanced parliaments’ and more representative government.
Convinced that a hung parliament was inevitable, Ashdown had begun to make demands for an immediate commitment to PR from a minority Labour government that a more sensible (and sensitive) politician would have left until after 9 April.
His unspoken message was: ‘If you don't do a deal with me, you will be blamed for the economic chaos that will result.’
But his party had done nothing substantial to prepare for serious post-election negotiations.
And during the campaign, Ashdown's ceaseless inflating of coalition conditions made the insistence on PR seem more self-interested calculation than a principled policy for a more plural and representative political system.
Reports of Lib Dem demands for four cabinet posts in a minority Labour government, apparently floated by Des Wilson, only aggravated the damage he was doing.
In the aftermath of the election, Ashdown's analysis of his party's crushing defeat and Labour's rise in votes, beggars belief.
The Lib Dems are far weaker politically than the party he seeks to replace.
They performed far worse in their own target seats (see table) and in two of their four gains — Bath and Cheltenham — had a strong following wind that wasn't of their making.
In the ten ‘three-way’ marginals — in which they were the main challengers just ahead of Labour — Labour won one (Cambridge) and pushed them into third place in another seven.
With just 20 seats, his party is within 1,000 votes of the Tories in only five, and within 4,000 votes in only another six (see table).
They are now second to the Conservatives in 145 seats (against Labour's 186); but while 90 per cent of Lib Dem second places are in seats with massive Tory majorities, mainly in the south-east, Labour now has double the Liberal Democrat popular vote and is lying second in 144 seats where the Tory lead is less than 4,000 votes.
A Liberal Democrat surge at the next general election could not conceivably net more than 34 MPs.
The sooner the Liberal Democrats accept that they too need a pre-election deal to avoid extinction, the sooner some viable opposition to the Tories can begin to be created.
Yet the argument against Ashdown's triumphalism has to stop short of encouraging the same fatal hubris among Labour politicians.
Labour did better in 1992 than in 1983 or 1987, but otherwise it is the party's worst performance since the dark days of 1931.
At least then they knew they were in trouble.
Now fear of Labour makes the ‘feel bad’ factor almost as strong a force for Major as the ‘feel good’factor was for Thatcher.
Labour is much the stronger of the two main opposition parties.
If the new leadership makes common cause with the Liberal Democrats around a programme for modernsing democracy in Britain, they could be the principal beneficiaries of reform.
The model for John Smith is not Earl Haig, but François Mitterrand (the early version).
Did Essex know best?
Labour need to be more persuasive about wealth creation, says Will Hutton
I was invited to write this article before the election, around the proposition that the policy differences between the parties were so narrow that it did not really matter who won — a political worldweariness with which I sharply disagreed.
Judging by the jubilation in the City and the despond among non-Conservatives at the actual result, I suspect my view is widely shared.
Even if it is likely that a Labour administration would have failed in the round to solve Britain's fundamental problems, there is little doubt that at a minimum there would have been a substantial redistribution of income and some attempt to reform the City, regulate public utilities more strongly and determinedly tackle the homelessness problem.
The counter-argument rests on the Bruges Group's proposition that everything important is now decided in Brussels, and that Westminster has been reduced to the status of a rate-capped local authority.
That is both a misreading of what European Union implies, even if the Maastricht treaties go forward; and, because Maastricht is unravelling, it is a misreading of what will now happen.
The federal project in Europe would in some respects have enlarged Westminster's competence, because of the capacity it accorded Europe's national governments to take on the world's financial markets and thus broaden the taxing, spending and borrowing options that have been, up until now, in the shadow of highly conservative directors of international capital flows.
In fact, there is little doubt that the ‘hard’ ERM — in which there is never a realignment — will now revert to its old status of being a system of fixed but flexible exchange rates, and that the process to monetary union will be slower and more gradual than envisaged by Maastricht.
That will give back EC governments some autonomy over interest and exchange rates, while enjoying the advantage of having some framework to resist the vagaries of international financial flows.
Anybody with a better idea about how to manage exchange rates, please step forward.
Remember the wild oscillations of the pound under floating rates?
Is that the alternative?
Leave it to Patrick Minford and William Rees-Mogg.
Let us dispense with the argument.
Europe is not the bogeyman.
Which invites the question of why Labour lost.
Put bluntly, it did so because it failed to convince enough people it could deal with the Conservative legacy and had a plausible philosophy of wealth creation of its own.
In this respect the electorate's view should be trusted.
Who can honestly say that Essex man was completely misguided?
A Labour government would have clung to the current parity in the ERM while suffering continual assaults on its aims and methods by a business and financial establishment wholly converted to the values of Thatcherism.
The National Economic Assessment would have been boycotted, loans from the Industrial Investment Bank accepted under duress, and the Technology Trusts lampooned.
To hold the parity, high interest rates would have snuffed out any natural upturn, and there would have been continual rounds of spending cuts and damaging tax increases to keep borrowing from exploding into the stratosphere.
Labour had not won the argument over how to run a capitalist economy better than the Conservatives, so it could not take on its detractors — and that was because it had not thought through how it should be done.
Essex man, despite FT editorials, was not prepared to take the risk — and pay higher taxes in the process.
End of story.
But the irony of the current position is that the Conservatives have all the same problems — but with a policy mix that will make them worse!
As the years unfold, the penny will drop in the general council of the CBI, as much as on the commuter trains from Basildon, that the whole market-based experiment has gone as far as it can — and the new need is for a government and policies that actively manage the instability and short-termism of the British economy.
That there has to be a programme of national development in which the state is a crucial partner.
In short, Labour and the Liberal Democrats will have the argument won for them on the ground — and as long as they locate their policies in terms of wealth creation, rather than punitive redistribution, the current election election result has given them a platform from which effectively to challenge for power next time round.
And to go on in government to succeed, for a chastened Tory party, industrial establishment and media will have no counter-argument.
It might even be conceded that borrowing long-term loans from a long-term bank has advantages — and that discussing choices over wages and public spending in a national forum makes sense.
Old-style socialism believed that wealth came solely from the toil of exploited workers.
That was never true — and has been recognised, even by socialists, as only a fraction of the explanation.
New-style Conservatism looks to the likes of Lord Hanson to do the job — but amassing a personal fortune is not creating national wealth.
A market economy constructed around communitarian values and proactively managed is the engine of wealth creation — and the race is on to see which party adopts that credo as its own.
Don't worry.
Enough Essex men and women will vote for it when it's on offer — and even accept the case for some redistribution of income.
It is still worth fighting elections — and winning them.
Mat Coward's Campaign trail diary
Wednesday 8 April
Woke up this morning certain that we'd lost: must stop eating cheese before going to sleep, or, for that matter, going to sleep before eating cheese.
Nightmare wore off somewhat during the day, but still feel things have gone awry since the weekend.
Can't quite put my finger on what's happened — just something in the air.
Giving out eve-of-poll leaflets at the tube station, I get the same subliminal message as from the past few nights' TV: increasingly confident Tories, and puzzled, frustrated socialists.
The Lib Dems seem to have given up altogether.
The dunnos aren't just newspaper talk, either; I'm meeting a lot, as well as Week One defectors to Labour who now say they'll vote Green.
Neil's flirtation with Paddy — albeit largely a deliberate media invention — seems crazy, frightening to soft Tory voters, and unnecessary; we'd already won.
There again, I always get gloomy just before polling day.
There again, we do always lose.
My finest hour of the campaign came on the night the Conservatives broadcast Labour HQ's phone number.
I made 27 calls to Central Office, of which the best was the last.
In an elderly upper-crust voice, I complained about ‘This business of trying to jam the other chaps' telephones — y'know, it hasn't done us any favours at all, frankly.
Not the sort of thing one expects from our side, a childish prank, more suited to the Liberals.
It's going to be very tricky to explain on the doorsteps tomorrow, and things are hard enought in this marginal seat already.’
My aim was to undermine their confidence, and distract their efforts on a crucial evening.
Every time the gel on the other end tried to bring the conversation to a polite close, I'd crank up with another round of exasperatingly slow, repetitive, thread-losing, stammering ramblings.
She sweetly punctuated every pause with ‘Actually, we have had quite a few calls saying the same thing,’ and ‘Actually, I must say, I do rather agree with you.’
‘I'm very glad to hear it, my dear, perhaps you'd pass my comments along the chain of command, because, you see, my wife's been in the party for 47 years and now she says she's going to vote for that Natural Law doo-dah.
‘Course, I shan't allow that, but you do take my point?’
Wish I'd thought to tape the call; could have been a bootleg bestseller.
Thursday 9 April
Number-taking outside polling stations is a fine occupation for the elderly, the infirm, and the lazy (clue: I am young and reasonably fit).
The traditional trust between the party representatives is a fascinating bit of sociology.
Cooperation is essential, thus contentious talk is discouraged; gardening, the weather, and the mindless venality of the voting classes predominate.
Political comment is restricted to: ‘I think it's going to be very close, don't you?’
I had nice Tory ladies saying that to me in 1983, and me vigorously nodding my agreement.
Some voters always refuse to give their numbers, because ‘It's a secret ballot.’
This year, a new twist: some believe we want their numbers for a direct mailing operation.
Not a bad idea, really.
One nice Liberal lady is embarrassed to read on her instructions from head office: ‘Beware opposition volunteers giving you false numbers.’
Don't judge others by yourselves, I think (though, of course, do not say).
One nice Tory gentleman tells me ‘I've done this for all the parties in my time, you know,’ as if it were something to be proud of.
The staggeringly high turnout causes much comment.
The nice Tory ladies are all pessimistic, which makes me pessimistic — the nice Tory ladies I met in '87 all thought they'd lost, too.
For the first time since then I'm convinced we won't win, and start mentally realigning myself to the joys of a hung parliament.
That's until I clock the boat races at the Basildon count, and realise in a horror flash that the Cons are going to do an over-aller; perhaps even increase their maj.
Finally get to sleep at five, thinking: ‘I don't care who runs the country, as long as he doesn't wake me before noon.’
Friday 10 April
Morning Star devotes its front page to the collapse of capitalism in Tokyo, a development which doesn't cheer me as much as it might once have done.
Even so, I don't feel suicidal.
Perhaps I'm missing something, but I don't see how swapping a huge Tory majority for a small one is a triumph for them and a disaster for us — a relief for them and a disappointment for us, perhaps.
I'm fearful for my personal short-term future, but that is due as much to the world situation as to last night's numbers.
Surely, I'm not alone in thinking the defeatism/triumphalism overdone?
Half-empty glasses: do you measure what is against what might have been, or against what was?
If the latter, we're a lot better off with a restrained government than with a rampant one.
Having cut the natural party of government's majority by more than three-quarters, we are disappointed only because our expectations were too great.
We'd have killed for an outcome like this at any time since 1975.
The next election (boundary changes aside) is easily winnable on a normal swing: we don't need any unworkable pacts, or unprincipled Heath Robinson PR systems.
My vote will go to the least self-flagellating leadership candidate.
Neil Kinnock, preferably.
Final thoughts: great pity that Neil and Glenys won't be in Number Ten — never have a couple been more made for that job.
Kinnock had all the best jokes: sad fact that this no longer seems to be considered important.
The national humiliation of being represented by Major will continue; he is such a poor specimen.
Bright spots: Gerry Adams; Hampstead, at last; the terminal collapse of the centre party; achieving our local ambition of second place; watching the scum-boy bleed in Bath, the Patrick Gordon Walker de nos jours .
Man of the Match: Griffin of the Mirror , a peerless cartoonist who leads his rivals by three laps and an innings.
Hardest unimportant question to get out of my mind: that Nalgo ad about the poll tax — how come she's got a staircase in her kitchen?
Brightest spot: the final, disgraceful death of the opinion poll industry, which I have been campaigning for since 1983.
Every single psephologist, political pundit and pollster must now resign, be sacked, or better yet, commit suicide.
These morons set up meaningless polls, people like me tell them that they're meaningless, and then, when they turn out to be meaningless, they cry ‘Amazing triumph for the Tories!
They've confounded the polls!’
This will also be the BBC's last election in its present form, something I will struggle to feel sad about.
The corporation thinks that, by selling its soul to Chris and John, it's saved its life, but it hasn't: the Tories will stuff the Beeb like they stuffed the Notts miners.
‘And now, the Today programme, sponsored by Hanson plc…’
My ghetto-blasterette, loaded with Chuck Berry, is constantly by my side today (apologies to the neighbours), not so much to lift my spirits, as to keep me awake.
Memo to world liberaldom, re: realignment —‘It's gotta be rock'n'roll music, if you wanna dance with me.’
EUROPEAN POLITICS A small earthquake The collapse of postwar Europe's status quo is not such a disaster, argues Denis MacShane
Lyon, France
What a pleasure it has been to read the posh English papers in the past fortnight.
‘Elections across the Channel — Europeans Cut Themselves Off’ has been the collective headline.
The most provincial press pundits in the world have been busy reassuring their readers that fickle Europeans have voted for ungovernability, fascism, loony greens and other denizens of the Continent's political funny farm, while sturdy British yeopersons opt for sensible majorities in the mother of parliaments.
Living on the Continent and checking in with friends in Milan and Stuttgart, the English vision of Europe about to collapse into Weimar-style chaos is pure nonsense.
There are no stormtroopers in the streets, the water remains more drinkable than in England, the new French government has been greeted with cheers, not jeers, in the French press.
It is rather Britain that has chosen the Italian road and opted for a one-party state that may soon have more difficulty in government than it imagines.
It is true that there has been a small electoral earthquake in Europe, but not many people have been hurt, and those that were thoroughly deserved it.
Far from voting for ungovernability, the French, Italians, and Germans have voted very clearly for government, but of a different kind from that on offer since 1945.
Their signals have paid off.
France has taken notice of the 15 per cent Green vote in the regional elections and stopped nuclear testing in the Pacific.
The southern German Christian Democrats are talking of an alliance with the Greens — a marriage of convenience certainly, but a progressive, positive one, that corresponds to what Europe's richest voters want.
Italy is now looking at taking into government the reformed social-democratic communists, an injection of incorruptibility (well, more or less, and certainly far sea-greener than Craxi's cynical wheeler-dealer pocket-liners) long overdue.
The vote for the extreme right is depressing, but not the beginning of a trend, let alone das End .
When Hitler and Mussolini stormed to power 60 years ago, they were angry, hungry, young 40 year olds leading mass parties of 20 year olds.
France's Le Pen, Germany's Schönhuber and their comrades are mainly pension-age Nazis with power-bases in Nice, the Tyrol, and other costas geriatricas in Europe.
Their skinhead followers are horrid but, in the French elections, the majority of 18-24 year olds voted Green, and Le Pen's support came from an older and jobless proletariat — the 10 per cent of Europe's have-nothings for whom no mainstream party offers more than kind words and strict membership of the European Monetary System.
The other positive vote was for regionalism.
Regionalism, like Tom Nairn's nationalism, is Janus-like, one face bringing government closer to the governed, the other favouring me-firstism and client status in one locality.
France's regional structure, one of the glories of the Mitterrand years, quickly became government of the local bigwigs, for the local bigwigs, by the local bigwigs, and it was rage against patronage and pork-barrelling that led to the rejection vote in the French elections.
Indeed, across Europe there is a common rejectionist front against the parties and political systems in place since 1945.
They have had a 50-year run for their money, but as in Europe at the end of the 19th century (a more appropriate historical comparison than the endless 1920s/1930s imagery) there is a great hunger for new forms of governance.
Neither France nor Italy is happy with either its form of election nor its organisation of executive and legislative power.
In France, the voters appear to want a socialist president (though no longer Mitterrand) and a non-socialist National Assembly.
An American model looms with presidency and legislature held by opposing parties.
Belgium and Italy do not know how to distribute governing power.
Germany, the one country whose governance was the result of genuine compromise and conceived in an era when the Christian Democrats regarded capitalism as a beast to be tamed and trained, not let loose on the world, is still a model for power-sharing and consensus between centre and regions, between conservatives, social democrats, liberals and greens.
German economic theoreticians now talk of konfliktpartnerschaft , permanent but not mutually destructive struggle, as being the key to the country's remarkable economic performance.
No side gives up its principles or priorities but no side pushes to the point of total victory.
The idea of Europe 1992, or was it 1993, launched with such élan by Jacques Delors in the mid-1980s has now run its course.
But the pendulum had swung so far that some return to less than enthusiasm was inevitable.
Yet the reconstruction of the nation is not part of the new politics as evidenced in all the recent elections.
The National Front in France, the most explicit of the nationalist parties (as opposed to the mainly racist German rightists) of the extreme right, did considerably worse than its opinion poll predictions.
Black European residents, especially those denied civic rights, as in Germany and France, will be the main victims of the recent elections, as all the parties have turned their backs on the need to make Europe welcome for all its inhabitants, not just white ones.
The clear message sent is that voters have lost faith in existing governing parties that enjoyed riding the long boom of the 1980s, but have no policies for a post-Berlin Wall Europe.
The failure of imagination to embrace the needs and possibilities of reuniting Europe and to support the democratic change in the former Soviet Union have exposed the shallowness of current leaders and the outdatedness of existing political systems.
Europe has voted for something new and something greener and closer to the community.
Now politics has to be reinvented to make parties and programmes and politicians capable of understanding the message that has been sent to them in the spring of 1992.
The old is dead.
Where is the new?
The economic programmes of the left parties are found wanting everywhere.
In Germany, while profits in industry have increased by 206 per cent since 1980, wages have gone up by only 45 per cent.
Chancellor Kohl has placed the heaviest burden of paying for unification on the average wage-earner.
Unfortunately, the SPD, like Labour, has been nervous in calling for a complete recasting of public financing and altering both tax and expenditure profiles to fit with a post-cold war world while attempting to relate to an electorate that believes it is paying too many direct and indirect taxes as well as ever-rising social security and health insurance payments.
Despite all the hurrahs about Europe from marquandistas in London, the plain economic fact is that Europe has the worst unemployment record in the industrial world, and the construction of Europe with an enduring 10 per cent out of work leaves a permanent 10 per cent unlikely to vote at all, or, if they do vote, to vote racist.
Labour, like other left parties, does not do well in a recession, but prospers when the economy is booming, unemployment is going down, and redistribution favours me-firstism.
Paradoxically, Labour should wish Major well in all his efforts to get Britain out of recession and to decrease unemployment, as this will unleash other pressures that could help the party.
But there is a natural barrier of around 40 per cent, which appears to be the maximum vote for any European party of the left, based as they are on earlier 20th-century political formations arising from industrial production.
A breakthrough can happen when there is a purely presidential contest, as in France, but otherwise the European left is condemned to seeking alliances or coalitions to win power.
Right now, there is a de-alignment of European politics, but there is not, so far, a realignment.
The challenge for Europe's left parties will be to overcome party patriotism and work out how to construct majorities in the new era, for traditional parties of the right, also, can manage only about a 40 per cent turnout, if that.
Social democratic ideas took 50 years to form this century, and then had 40 years of government, including the Christian democratic variations applied in Europe.
They have now run out of steam.
Any new nonconservative alliance, although based on the old parties of the left, requires new theory, new spokespersons, new models of economy and society.
Europe has asked for these to be provided.
Where are the providers?
GERMANY Return of the right Paul Hockenos charts the steady electoral progress of the German ultra-right
Most Germans looked on stunned as the results from the two state elections on 5 April flashed across their television screens.
In northern Schleswig-Holstein, the extreme-right German People's Union (DVU) captured 6.3 per cent of the vote, while in southwestern Baden-Wurttemberg, the like-minded Republican Party pulled in 10.9 per cent— both dramatic increases over their showings of 1 per cent and less in those states four years ago.
On the heels of the National Front's success last month in France and the triumphs of similar xenophobic right-wing parties in Belgium, Austria and Sweden, the ultra-right's gains in the two former West German states were hardly surprising.
In the mainstream parties, incessant wrangling over the country's political asylum law, implicitly ‘the foreigner problem’, had conveniently paved the way for the ultra-right.
With demagogic slogans, such as‘A German platform for German citizens’, the ultra-right simply takes the logic of the Bonn establishment one step further.
The only real element of surprise lay in the fact that little had been seen or heard of the extremists since the Republicans' dramatic rise on the West German political scene in 1989.
With unification, history overtook the ultra-right parties for a while, delivering them pounding defeats in most of the 1990 and 1991 elections.
The theme that the right alone had espoused for years — German unification — had overnight become official state policy, leaving the extreme right temporarily disarmed.
In the late 1989 and 1990 West German elections for the state legislatures, the Republicans' support sank below the 5 per cent hurdle necessary for parliamentary representation.
In the east, ‘The Unification Chancellor’, Helmut Kohl, and his ruling Christian Democratic Union (CDU) rode the wave of nationalist euphoria against the backdrop of billowing red, black and gold flags.
In the first all-German federal elections in December 1990, the Republicans managed only 2.1 per cent of the total vote.
Yet the electorally oriented ultra-right's slide in Germany had far from spelt the end of the ‘new right’ that emerged throughout western Europe in the past decade.
Until the 1980s, the majority of nationalist conservative and ultra-right elements in West Germany made their homes in the right wings of the mainstream conservative parties, the CDU and its Bavarian sister-party, the Christian Social Union (CSU).
But the CDU/CSU's early 1980s policy of rapprochement 
with the GDR proved more than the conservatives' right wing could stomach.
The time was finally ripe, they decided, to strike out on their own.
The stated goal of West Germany's early new right thinkers was to bring the German right ‘out from the shadow of Auschwitz’, to distance the movement from the damning stigma of its Nazi past.
The right-wing intellectuals sought to influence postwar political culture in a way that would destigmatise their fascist ideas.
They argued that an ultra-right political movement could be possible only when its language and assumptions had first become an accepted part of the Federal Republic's political discourse.
US President Ronald Reagan's visit to the military cemetery at Bitburg in 1985, and the subsequent Historian's Debate, for example, were exactly what the new right thinkers had in mind.
The new right's second front was the construction of a modern image for the movement.
It replaced the brown shirts and swastikas of the past with a professional, young veneer.
It dropped terminology such as‘Aryan supremacy’ and ‘blood and soil’society for its own no less reactionary versions of ‘European unity’and ‘environmental protection’.
The clear aim of its guarded critique of National Socialism was to exonerate German fascism from the Nazi regime's two most ignominious crimes, the Holocaust and world war.
In exchange for overtly racial theories, the new right embraced cosmetic theories of ‘national identity’ and ‘ethnic specificity’, which distinguished a similar hierarchy of peoples.
The result was slogans such as‘Germans be proud to be Germans, Turks be proud to be Turks — United against Communism and Racial Mixing’.
The Republicans' meteoric rise in the late 1980s formally announced the new right's arrival in West Germany.
Founded in 1983, the new party rallied behind the 60-year-old local radio journalist and former Waffen SS man Franz Schönhuber.
Schönhuber manoeuvred around the ‘old Nazi’ tag, while making plain that not only was he proud to have been in the Waffen SS, but that there was indeed something worthwhile that Germans could salvage from the Nazi era.
His two favourite slogans were ‘I'm proud to be a German’ and ‘We want to stay German.’
At first to receptive crowds in Bavarian beer halls, and then across the Federal Republic, Schönhuber peddled his message that the German petite bourgeoisie were the real losers in modern post-industrial society.
The traditional German family's sense of security and closeness had been lost, he argued.
In virulent tirades against the Federal Republic's ‘liberal’ immigration and political asylum statutes, the Republicans tapped a potent mix of nationalism, racism and social frustration.
Only drastic curbs on foreigners would prevent the misuse and injury of German citizens, and ensure their safety and their gemeinwesen (communal essence).
The Republicans' initial rise and fall occurred within the space of one year.
In January 1989, the party captured a shocking 7.5 per cent of the vote in West Berlin's municipal elections.
In some working-class districts, the extremists got 20 per cent of the vote, and similar successes followed.
In June, two million West Germans voted for the party in the European Parliament elections, sending Schönhuber and five colleagues to Strassburg.
Analyses of voting patterns revealed that it was primarily the racist demagoguery against foreign nationals living in West Germany that accounted for the party's victories.
Yet, although the Republicans crassly linked the country's economic and social problems with the presence of foreigners in Germany, those districts that voted heavily for the party had only minimal numbers of foreign residents.
Republican voters were not anti-foreigner because their neighbours were Arabs.
In fact, in city districts where high concentrations of foreigners resided, the party's turn-out sank below average.
Nor did the party rally large ranks of the unemployed or underprivileged.
The average Republican voter boasted a middle-class or higher standard of living.
Small business people, bureaucrats and wage earners who backed the party did so more out of their fear of unemployment than because of actual unemployment.
A disproportionately high percentage of its voters were male (three times more than women), young (many between 18 and 23 years old) and with lower levels of education than other voters.
Republicans also scored exceptionally well among people living in the urban social housing projects.
The new right's success in charting a course between the old-school neo-fascists and the CDU/CSU failed to eliminate the array of openly radical factions from the right-wing scene.
Unlike the National Front in France, the Republicans were unable to unite the spectrum of ultra-right forces around their campaign.
Revamped neofascist parties, such as the DVU, also rely upon primarily electoral strategies, although not to the exclusion of courting skinheads or expediting violence.
With the exception of the size of their recent triumphs, the ultra-right's victories offered few surprises.
During the campaigns, the parties maintained next to no profile in the states, running with virtually non-existent programmes.
The DVU ran its multimillion Deutschmark ‘cellar campaign’ with 20 to 30 people.
Most burghers who voted for the right did so to express uncertainty and fear about the looming costs of unification.
Their vote constituted a clear protest against the major parties, which, they feel, have left the ‘little people’ out.
Amid the raging debate around the asylum law, which the CDU has manipulated to account for Germany's plight, voters also pinned the source of their frustrations and fears on the presence of ‘too many’ foreigners in Germany.
But the major political parties have yet to get the real message, namely that the people know full well that someone, somehow, is going to have to pay for German unification.
YUGOSLAVIA Bosnia means more bad news for Balkans Mike Glenny says the civil war in Bosnia-Hercegovina may drag the whole region into bloody conflict
The warning by a deranged Muslim guerrilla that he would blow up the Visegrad hydroelectric dam unless Serb militiamen ceased their artillery attacks on Visegrad and Foca was not the only liquid that threatened to flood Bosnia-Hercegovina this week.
The sluice gates holding back a bottomless reservoir of blood are creaking open, spattering the country with thick, viscous dollops.
The war has begun.
If it is not stopped quickly, pent-up hatred will force open these gates of hell, flooding much of the Balkans.
There is more than one conflict under way in Bosnia-Hercegovina.
The central struggle, but not as yet the bloodiest, is being fought by Serbs who are opposed to the independence of Bosnia-Hercegovina.
They are determined to keep 68 per cent of the republic's territory within either Yugoslavia or Serbia by force.
In this struggle, they are fighting largely against Muslims in central, southern and eastern Bosnia.
A separate territorial struggle has broken out, which remains confined within Hercegovina, between Croats in the west of the region and Serbs in the east.
Here the most notoriously violent clans of the two tribes are fighting along the Neretva river.
The Croats here are not fighting on behalf of Bosnian independence.
Indeed, Croats from western Hercegovina are insulted if you call them Bosnian.
As Dinko Krajin, a policeman from Krusevo said this week, ‘We, Hercegovinians, are what you might call radical Croats.
We are a shade more Croat.
We have more heart and we love our homeland just that extra bit.’
These people do not want to remain in Bosnia-Hercegovina, they wish to join Croatia, a dream they share with the Croat president Franjo Tudjman.
There are two problems with the Neretva front.
Many of the towns in the middle are mixed, like Kupres, scene of some of the worst fighting this week, and both the Serbs and Croats want to get their hands on them.
The Croats drove out the Serbs from Kupres this week and, according to eye-witnesses, wished them well with a few genocidal strokes.
The gruesome response from the Serb-dominated army was predictable — several hundred Croat fighters gathered in a village near Kupres, unaware that federal army tanks, hidden in corn stacks, had set a trap — the result was an appalling massacre.
A second complication posed by the Neretva front is the large presence of Muslims in the region around the capital, Mostar.
They have been caught in the crossfire of this particular Serbo-Croat war and have responded by fighting against the Serbs whose reservist soldiers in the Mostar barracks have behaved atrociously over the past six months.
In Mostar, the first, central war has intersected with the Serbo-Croat war.
There is a third struggle under way— the battle for the army.
The federal army and its bloated officer class cannot exist without Bosnia-Hercegovina, where more than 100,000 soldiers are stationed, and 65 per cent of Yugoslavia's remaining military industries are there.
Of those, some 60 per cent are in Muslim or Croat territories.
In addition, now that the army has evacuated its personnel and equipment from Macedonia, Bosnia is an essential source of revenue for the army.
The army had three choices in Bosnia.
It could have recognised Bosnia's independence and offered its services to the new state, turning its back on Serbia.
It could have recognised the independence of Bosnia and begun a negotiated withdrawal to Serbia and Montenegro.
Or it could have refused to recognise Bosnia, stayed on the territory of the newly independent state and fought.
In the run-up to recognition, the commander of the Second Military District, General Milutin Kukanjao, hinted strongly that he wished to opt for the second option.
Leading Muslim and Croat politicians simultaneously stated that, following the proclamation of independence, the army would be considered an occupying force and as such must leave Bosnian territory.
This insistence pushed the waverers such as Kukanjao towards the clutches of unashamed Serb nationalists like the acting Yugoslav defence minister, General Blagoje Adzoic, and the acting chief of staff, General Zivota Panic, who said baldly this week that the army will stay in Bosnia to prevent ‘the genocide of any nations, especially the Serbs because they are the most threatened’.
Nonetheless some elements of the army in Bosnia are trying to keep lines of communication open to the Muslim president, Alija Izetbegovic.
The army is avoiding open conflict with the Muslim militias.
There is genuine confusion among the army commanders in Bosnia despite the enormous pressure from Belgrade for them to work openly with the Serb paramilitaries.
Because it is not just one war, but at least three, being waged in Bosnia, it will be exceptionally difficult to bring the fighting to an end.
We can only hope that a combination of international intervention and dawning sanity among the fighters will silence the sound of the guns.
There is no doubt that the Serbian attempt to conquer 68 per cent of Bosnian territory is the immediate cause of the war.
It was an inexcusable act of aggression.
But there is a great danger that this fact, so dazzlingly clear, will blur our vision of the deeper causes of the Bosnian nightmare.
It would be wrong to suppose that the Serbs bear sole responsibility for the violence.
They do not.
Supporters of Croatian and Slovene indpendence blithely state that the Germaninspired EC recognition of the two republics brought the war to a halt in Croatia.
In fact the war intensified on certain fronts after Bonn's announcement in December last year that it would recognise Slovenia and Croatia regardless of the opinions of other European Community members.
The war was frozen by the ceasefire, which the United Nations' special envoy Cyrus Vance negotiated in early January, and by the prospect of a UN peacekeeping force being deployed.
Not only did recognition not stop the fighting, it made no contribution to the solution of the central generator of the war, the Serbian question in Croatia.
The mixed territories are still disputed and, by accepting the UN plan, Bonn has acknowledged that Croatia does not enjoy an unchallenged right to control them.
Recognition has solved the constitutional issue of Slovenia (although not the economic problems that independence has either created or failed to solve).
But what the Slovenes have legitimately gained for themselves, the people of Bosnia are having to pay for, although this is not to attach any special blame to the Slovenes.
Once Slovenia and Croatia were granted their independence, Bosnia's Croat and Muslim leaders, above all the republic's president, Alija Izetbegovic, had no choice but to apply for recognition.
To stay in the Yugoslav federation would have meant surrendering any political power to an authoritarian, corrupt and nationalist administration in Belgrade.
But just as Muslims and Croats had very good reasons to leave Yugoslavia once recognition was granted, so, too, did many of Bosnia's Serbs have very good reasons not to.
Serbs passionately believe that their people offered up enormous sacrifices during two world wars, both times on the side of the allies, so that they need not be divided again.
In the current atmosphere of nationalist lunacy, which spans the entire Balkan peninsula, a majority of Serbs has come to believe firmly in this.
We are not talking of a few fanatical terrorists, we are talking of a nine million-strong nation in the heart of the Balkans.
One may believe they are wrong or mad, but if war is to be avoided, they cannot be ignored.
The problem is that in a region with such a deeply troubled history, the spread of minorities, be they Serb, Albanian, Turkish or whatever, is likely to provoke violent conflict during a time of profound political and constitutional change.
If you cannot reach a consensual agreement concerning the status of rights of both the majority and the minority population, then you must reckon with a strong possibility or war.
Recognition of Croatia and Slovenia forced the issue dramatically in Bosnia-Hercegovina.
The Serbs gave ample warning that they would not tolerate an independent Bosnia.
The circus of barricades that they erected after the referendum on independence contained an unambiguous message — leave Yugoslavia and we'll kill you.
Every economy in Yugoslavia has been gutted.
None of the causes of the conflicts has been solved.
The Bosnian war might undermine the UN peacekeeping operation in Croatia and rekindle the flames there.
The position of all minorities in all the former Yugoslav republics is deteriorating.
Macedonia is being throttled.
The threat of a full-scale Balkan war has not been averted — since the fighting in Bosnia began, it has increased.
What a crackingly effective policy recognition has turned out to be.
MALAWI Silenced spring Dissidents challenging Hastings Banda's rule are in trouble, reports Julie Flint
One of Malawi's most active exiles sounded close to desperation this week.
Armed envoys of Life President Dr Hastings Banda had apprehended Chakufwa Chihana, the British-educated trade union leader mandated to sow the first seeds of a Malawi spring, and the Catholic church, a powerful ally, had fallen silent.
‘We need help,’ he said.
‘The whole thing is coming apart.’
In the past month, Malawi's embryonic pro-democracy movement has seen its hopes rise and almost immediately fall, much as those of Iraq's Kurds did last year.
From the high of an extraordinary pastoral letter in which Catholic bishops called for reform, in unprecedented criticism of Dr Banda's 28 years of one-party rule, there is now the low of Chihana's arrest, the church's silence, re-establishment of government-by-fear and doubts about western bite once the barking stops.
For the time being, western governments are voicing outrage over the threats to church and Chihana, and are threatening to use the aid weapon to open Malawi to the region's wind of change.
But Malawians fear a gesture will suffice to end the pressure.
‘They think we will blink,’ a US official acknowledges privately.
‘And I can't blame them.
That's how it's always been.’
Malawi's spring began on 8 March, the first Sunday in Lent, when the pastoral letter was read in every Catholic church.
It began by quoting Pope Paul VI —‘the church is certainly not willing to restrict her action only to the religious field’— and continued with a critique of Malawi as fashioned by Dr Banda: ‘A growing gap between rich and poor…a struggle for survival…deplorable wage structure…a deplorable price paid to farmers for some of their crops…bribery and nepotism…an atmosphere of resentment…a climate of mistrust and fear.’
as if anticipating the storm, the bishops concluded: ‘People will not be scandalised to hear these things; they know them.’
The people were not scandalised.
(The Independent reported that ‘even non-Catholics attend Mass in Malawi these days, hoping for a repeat of the attack by the bishops.’)
The regime, predictably, was.
The bishops were ‘invited’ to police headquarters and questioned for eight hours.
The inspector general of police declared the pastoral letter seditious and possession of it a crime.
Dr Banda accused the bishops of ‘double-crossing’ him.
His red-shirted Young Pioneers burned down the church's printing press.
‘What is even more disturbing,’ the Foreign Affairs Committee of the US Congress said in a letter to Dr Banda dated 3 April, ‘we have been told that several members of the Malawi Congress Party have called for the bishops' death by an orchestrated mob.’
The pastoral letter ushered in a week of anti-government protests that found the regime less than monolithic.
Western diplomats said army chief General Melvin Khanga permitted his chaplain to read the letter in barracks.
Even the police showed unhappiness: according to reports reaching Washington, the inspector general, a devout Catholic, warned his men against harming any Catholic.
At a protest march in Zomba, students won the release of seven friends by demonstrating outside police headquarters — something previously unimaginable.
Popular anger focused on John Tembo, Dr Banda's heir-apparent.
Washington received ‘iron-clad information’ that protesters had destroyed crops and warehouses belonging to Tembo and his niece Mama Cecilia Kadzamira, the life president's ‘companion’.
The church received reports of youths boarding buses and singing anti-Tembo songs.
Dr Banda, who led Malawi to independence, remained above the tumult.
‘The majority revere him in spite of all he's done,’ said a US official.
‘No one will move against him while he's alive.’
A fortnight after the pastoral letter, exiles and reformers met in Zambia, and Chihana, secretary general of the South Africa Trade Union Coordinating Council, was mandated to return to organise a ‘national conference of democratic forces’.
Warnings from western diplomats that he would ‘not only be imprisoned but perhaps killed’ failed to deter him, despite the trouble encountered on his way out of Malawi.
As a US diplomat tells it, ‘He was driving from Lilongwe [the Malawian capital]to Lusaka when he was stopped near the border by police.
They told him to get out.
His driver and an assistant were told to leave; the police would accompany him to the border.
But he saw through this.’
Recalling no doubt the fate of Vera and Orton Chirwa, kidnapped near the border 10 years ago and still imprisoned, Chihana bluffed his way back to Lilongwe and from there flew to Lusaka.
He predicted his fate on the eve of his return to Malawi.
‘It is highly likely I will be detained.
I then expect I will be tortured, and if they see I don't die they will poison me.
But I belong in Malawi.
I have a message of hope: the time has come to join hands.
The one-party state must give way.
Dr Banda is not the same Dr Banda: he's a tired man.
There is a mood, a cry for democracy.
There is open dissent.
People should not be afraid at all.’
On 6 April, Chihana stepped off the plane at Lilongwe airport carrying a statement, but was unable to read it.
Security men seized him, disregarding western observers.
A US diplomat followed until he too was intercepted and chased off.
The word from Lilongwe now is that Chihana will be charged with sedition, a capital offence.
His wife has been fired from Malawi University's College of Nursing and has lost her accommodation.
There has been no lack of international protest.
Washington sent ‘a very strong statement’ that made it clear that ‘this is going to affect bilateral relations very negatively.’
The Foreign Office deplored ‘the infringement of human rights in Malawi’.
The European Community demanded Chihana's immediate release ‘to continue his trade union and political activities’.
Scores of churchmen, including the Archbishop of Westminster, Cardinal Basil Hume, demanded his unconditional release.
No word of all this, however, reached the people of Malawi, subjected to an absolute government monopoly on the dissemination of information.
What did reach them, over Malawi radio, was Dr Banda's assertion that ‘what you should know about the bishops is this: to be fair to the bishops, they have apologised.
One must be fair; I give them credit for being sensible enough to apologise.
They have apologised to me.
It means at least they are men of good sense.’
The bishops are reported to be ‘absolutely furious’.
This was not, they say, the import of a memorandum stating that ‘the pastoral letter is intended to…invite the Catholic faithful and all men of goodwill to respond in their lives to the teaching of the Gospel.’
They were not forewarned of the final paragraph, added by a Vatican envoy: ‘There is no way the Bishops could want to be disrespectful to His Excellency the Life President of the Republic, whom they hold in high esteem.’
Priests inside Malawi are pressing for a new statement from the bishops.
‘Otherwise,’ they told their superiors last weekend, ‘the people will be misled into thinking the bishops have withdrawn the letter.
Significant people and groups who have risked much in support of the bishops will be disappointed and disenchanted.
The bishops…will never again be taken seriously in their leadership.
Their commitment to justice will be doubted.’
The unstated fear, says one priest, ‘is that the Congress Party will let things settle and then start cleaning the place up — beginning with ordinary people’.
There is talk in Washington of cutting all aid to Malawi.
The Foreign Office promises the EC ‘is not going to let this drop’.
However, Washington is urging exiles to ‘interest the media’, acknowledging privately that ‘it is pretty clear that whatever we do will have no impact on the Banda government.’
But, as an exile friend says, threatening to throw himself in Chihana's footsteps, ‘It seems the only way the media will be interested is if something happens to someone else.’
IMAGE Smoke gets in your eyes Brandon Robshaw on the left's phoney love affair with smoking
It is time for a new ‘Hamlet’ advertisement.
Neil Kinnock, 13 years in opposition,knows that he is finally about to become prime minister.
We see the newspaper poll figures, the Sheffield rally.
But then, nemesis: the exit poll, the Basildon result.
Neil's world crumbles.
We see him dejected, outside Walworth Road.
But the strains of Bach's ‘Air on a G String’waft over the scene.
Out comes the cigar: the consolation of tobacco bears all our cares away.
Neil Kinnock doesn't actually smoke, and neither do I. I gave up smoking on 1 January; since then I have smoked well over 100 cigarettes.
That is much better than the 3,000 I would otherwise have got through, but much worse than the zero I set out to achieve.
And the trend is dangerously upwards.
I have now slipped into the comfortable habit of accepting proffered cigarettes in pubs or at parties without even token agonising.
I am dallying on the brink, and for an ex-smoker, the brink is a perilous place to be; for an ex-smoker of the left, it is more perilous still.
Of course, stories of ex-smokers drifting back to the fold are commonplace.
One thinks of Groucho Marx's quip: ‘Giving up smoking is easy — I've done it hundreds of times.’
A period of stress, a new job, moving house or a family row are all trusty pretexts for returning to the tobacconist's; even minor crises, such as missing a bus, can do the trick.
Why is this, when the arguments against smoking are so widely known?
The majority of deaths from lung cancer happen to smokers; smoking causes heart disease, bronchitis and emphysema; many more suffer years of debilitating illness that would certainly kill them if some other cause of death — crossing the road to go to the tobacconist first, perhaps — did not intervene.
No one is so well-acquainted with these facts as the ex-smoker; yet the lure remains.
It has nothing to do with the physical addiction.
The nicotine craving might be intense but it is short-lived.
Not a trace of nicotine remains in the body after 14 days of non-smoking.
To understand that stupid, stubborn, eternal desire to light up, it is necessary to understand the special romantic pull that smoking exerts for the left.
In the first place, the left has a strong tradition of defying authority, and smoking fits neatly into this.
There is something free, reckless, vaguely counter-cultural about it; it ignores the voice of prudence and takes us back to the days of our youth when we defied authority by taking it up.
(How strange that teenagers think smoking is adult!
The truth is quite otherwise — adult smokers are simply ex-teenage smokers who haven't managed to kick the habit.)
That it is dangerous probably adds to the attraction.
To smoke is to dissociate oneself from the middle-class health fascists, to say no to jogging and yoghurt and yoga.
Moreover, a romantic feeling persists that to smoke puts one on the correct side of the political divide, along with the exploited rather than the exploiters.
How cheering it is to read the assurance of that humane, decent and democratic socialist George Orwell that, when down to his last pennies, he would always spend them on tobacco rather than food.
For smoking is traditionally the consolation of the oppressed.
In prisons, in the trenches, in the factory canteen or down at the dole office, it helps to cushion the harshness of life.
Hence smokers feel a great loyalty towards the practice of smoking and towards each other.
Smokers form a kind of club; they understand one another; they have their addiction in common and they mutually reinforce it by handing cigarettes around like little, ritualised gifts.
Sharing fags when you haven't got much else to share is a way of asserting solidarity.
Hence smokers' etiquette: ‘Have one of mine, it's my turn’; ‘No, I can't take your last one.’
(This latter was used to good effect by the hard-up Gordon Comstock in Keep the Aspidistra Flying ; he would go to a party with a single cigarette in a packet and get free smokes all night long on the strength of it.)
‘Do you mind the third light?’
The superstition that the third light from a match brings bad luck apparently originates from the first world war, when German soldiers in the opposite trench would notice the first light, take aim at the second and fire at the third.
Whether this is true, I cannot say.
The interesting thing is every smoker knows it.
To leave the smoking club feels like a desertion.
Some cope with their guilt in the traditional manner of apostates — that is, they turn on their old faith and revile it.
Others, however — like me — cope with their disloyalty by accepting the odd fag.
It makes them feel true to their past, not too much of a prig, and demonstrates solidarity to their still-smoking friends.
But, inexorably, each atoning lapse is easier than the last.
They become more and more frequent until they lose all meaning as acts of atonement and become simply acts of smoking.
And here smokers' etiquette exerts its force again.
It simply isn't on to scrounge other people's fags all night.
You have to buy some of your own.
And there you are.
Smoking, then, is a communal activity.
‘The blue smoke rising and the brown lace sinking/In the empty glass of stout’— thus Louis MacNeice, eulogising the working-class pub in his poem Autumn Journal .
It is also, rather vaguely, thought of as a revolutionary activity.
Images of desperate freedom-fighters handing the packet round behind the barricade.
Look at Fidel Castro and his cigar.
This is why union meetings and Labour Party meetings are always conducted in a haze of smoke — or were, until my local party banned it.
as if there weren't enough problems for the leftwinger trying to give up, we also face the same difficulties as the ordinary, apolitical smoker does.
There are all the pleasurable things that the ex-smoker has learned to associate with smoking, and which now have to be faced alone.
Smoking after sex.
Smoking on your tea-break.
Smoking on a train journey, looking out at the countryside whizzing by.
These things don't really lose their snap and savour without smoking, but thinking that they might do can distract one from enjoying them properly.
Perhaps worst of all, there are those stressful situations where one is accustomed to turn to tobacco for support.
Smoking during a tricky phone call.
Smoking before an interview.
Smoking when writing a difficult letter.
(Norman Mailer gave up smoking for a year and wrote not one word in that time.)
Again, these things aren't really impossible to handle without a cigarette.
But they can seem that way.
What I am doing at the moment — pretending to have given up while backsliding every chance I get — is marginally better than full-time smoking; the trouble is that it runs every risk of turning into it.
Besides, meanwhile, I'm still smoking more than is good for me.
And it must be intensely annoying for my friends.
It would suit the tobacco industry (annual profits worldwide £4 billion) to blur the distinction between smoking and non-smoking.
But it doesn't suit people who wish to give up.
Fortunately, there is a battery of leftist anti-smoking arguments to buttress flagging resolve, which the rightwinger can't call upon.
Because smoking is, in fact, the cleverest, the most fiendish, the ultimate of all capitalist con-tricks.
Capitalism specialises in producing useless things, but cigarettes really are the absolute acme of uselessness.
The pleasure smoking brings is simply the satisfaction of a craving that, if one didn't smoke, one wouldn't have in the first place.
As well buy a packet of itching powder and a backscratcher, if that's the kind of satisfaction you want.
Just ponder for a moment the idea of persuading people to buy a product that they don't need (quite the reverse), which they then literally burn up in smoke and have to replace every single day.
You'd have to admire the elegance of it if it weren't such an outrage.
If is, furthermore, a con-trick that is increasingly being played on the developing countries; the third world is a still-growing market for the tobacco industry.
Don't forget, either, that tobacco is a cash-crop: intrinsically worthless, taking up land that could be put to far better use.
It could hardly be put to worse.
Tobacco has a strong claim to being America's most pernicious export ever.
Remember, too, the history of tobacco-growing and its intimate associations with colonialism and slavery.
It wasn't only to toil in the cotton fields that negros were stolen from Africa.
The attractions of smoking mentioned above will not go away.
But concentrating on the true politics of smoking will help us to see them for what they are: romantic illusions.
After all, Fidel Castro managed to give up smoking, and urged his people to do the same.
George Orwell died at the age of 47, from tobacco-assisted tuberculosis.
TAKING LIBERTIES The government has nothing to offer on home affairs but toughness, says Jolyon Jenkins
The IRA said it with Semtex.
As a piece of theatrical violence, a 100lb bomb blast in the heart of the City of London, 23 hours after the polling stations had closed, was a triumph of the terrorist's craft — more eloquent a comment on the election than any number of Sinn Féin leaflets.
(It was also, of course, disgusting and deplorable: that's what made it such a success.)
By comparison, Kenneth Baker's response was bathetic.
In his last public statement as Home Secretary, he announced: ‘Once again the terrorists have tried to make their point through violence and not through the ballot box.’
The first part of the remark was tautologous (show me a peaceful terrorist); and the second was untrue: Gerry Adams had just lost his West Belfast constituency.
The IRA may have been defeated at the ballot box, but it can't be accused of not trying.
Ah well, maybe Kenneth Clarke, the new Home Secretary, will talk more sense.
The dispatch of yet another deadbeat Tory, Sir Patrick Mayhew, to Northern Ireland is a warning not to expect much political progress in the province.
‘Security’ solutions — or rather, non-solutions, will continue to be uppermost, and it is Clarke, not Mayhew, whom we will see on television.
That's true over the whole ‘home affairs’ agenda — crime, immigration, drugs, and so on.
The absence of political initiatives (as opposed to operational ones) from the Tories is so total that it was a relief that these subjects were mostly ignored during the election.
Conservative ministers, whatever their private thoughts on these subjects, talk only crowd-pleasing nonsense on them in public.
Northern Ireland is one area where the removal of Mrs Thatcher ought to have made progress possible.
She and the terrorists were locked into a personalised eyeball-to-eyeball confrontation, both sides glorying in stalemate.
They tried to assassinate her; and killed off two of her closest political friends, Airey Neave and Ian Gow.
It knew that the welfare of young British soldiers was close to her heart (they having saved her career in the Falklands), so it murdered them too.
The motive was to unhinge her completely — to provoke her into making a political miscalculation, such as reintroducing internment, in the hope of reaping a public relations reward.
The only clear case where this strategy succeeded was when Thatcher introduced the Sinn Féin broadcasting ban.
With John Major in Downing Street for at least five years, and probably longer, it is likely that the IRA will try to put the psychological thumbscrews on him too.
One hopes that the Prime Minister's political allies, particularly the lower profile ones who do not warrant police protection, are regularly checking the undersides of their cars.
On the face of it, Major is less likely than Thatcher to be goaded into over-reaction.
Policy will continue as before.
On the one hand, terrorist suspects who are caught, rather than shot dead, will continue to be treated within the framework of the ‘rule of law’.
This means pretending that IRA members are no more than ‘common criminals’.
The danger with trying to shoehorn the IRA into this category is that the criminal justice system has had to be stretched almost to breaking point to accommodate them — Diplock courts, the abolition of the right of silence, rigged inquests, detention without trial, and so on.
If the IRA are common criminals, why all these uncommon provisions to deal with them?
It is hard to see how the system can be deformed further without losing both face and more cases at the European Court of Human Rights.
On the other hand, Major's strategy so far has been to initiate a secret review of intelligence gathering in Northern Ireland.
As part of this, MI5 has made a bid to adopt a more proactive intelligence-gathering role in dealing with the IRA (now the cold war is over, it has to find something else to do).
The current level of intelligence is so poor that over half the members of active service units on the mainland have no previous police or intelligence ‘form’(which is one reason why internment would not work).
But given the quality of MI5's intelligence displayed during the Gulf war, when it was used as evidence against alleged Iraqi fifth columnists, increased involvement by the agency does not inspire confidence.
The only new techniques it could offer would be illegal ones.
Civil liberties are most threatened when governments address symptoms, rather than causes.
For the refugee crisis, all that is on offer is the Asylum Bill again, and somewhere down the line, identity cards — with no thought about how to alleviate the pressures that cause migration.
For crime, the appearance of toughness, with no thought about what social conditions breed crime.
For Northern Irish terrorism, more MI5 surveillance and dirty tricks.
Prepare for five more years of blundering gamely on.
LETTERS
Sarcasm does not become you, dear readers, but I will permit it to enter these columns on just this one occasion.
‘Many congratulations to Sarah Baxter for her perceptive item on John Major (‘The man without substance', 10 April),’ writes Rodney M Bennett, of Richmond.
‘This must be just about the most far-sighted piece of journalism since Alistair Cook's notorious ‘Portrait of a Failure' on Harry Truman appeared in the Manchester Guardian after the United States Presidential election of 1948.
Of course Truman always kept a framed copy of that hanging in his office.
Perhaps John Major will do the same with Ms Baxter's piece.
Which room will be most suitable I leave to him.’
Truman's victory in 1948, like that of Edward Heath in the UK election of 1970, and now John Major in 1992, confounded the opinion pollsters, who, right up to the last minute, were predicting a different result.
NSS , in common with virtually every other publication in the country, got its fingers burnt last week as a result of giving too much credence to the pollsters' consistent message that we were heading for a hung parliament.
The difference between us and those other publications, however, was that NSS was still on the newsstands almost a week after everyone knew that the Tories were back with an overall majority.
A week can be an awfully long time in political journalism.
In fact, it was not as bad as some correspondents — and the Sunday Telegraph , which described NSS as one of the ‘election losers’— seemed to think.
Despite the dateline, our 10 April issue was published on the Tuesday before the election .
It was, as ‘100 reasons not to vote Tory’ and other features implied, a specia l pre-election edition.
If the result had gone differently, there would, no doubt, have been some sarcastic offerings concerning our previous week's cover (‘It's 1997, and the Tories are going for their fifth consecutive election victory…
’). Honesty compels me to admit, however, that in the circumstances of a Conservative defeat such sarcasm would have been considerably easier to bear.
And finally, a last word on our election coverage to all the Lab-our activists in the new seat of Milton Keynes North East, who proved us wrong in our assessment that the Lib Dems were the main challengers to the Tories there.
In fact, Labour's Maggie Cosin came second, with 23.7 per cent of the vote, 343 votes ahead of the Liberal Democrats.
I'm donning the sackcloth even as I write…
What socialism means
Whatever the results of the election, the issues of constitutional reform will continue (rightly) to occupy the political centre-stage.
Robin Blackburn (Letters, 3 April) has argued in favour of proportional representation because he sees that it will enable a New Left Party to ‘stand under its own colours’.
This risks sidetracking the issue.
For some questionable assumptions are being made.
First, that any British government will ever introduce a type of PR that will permit the easy representation of small groupings (from the Greens to a hypothetical New Left Party).
The experience of the recent French experiments in PR (after 1966) suggests that many governments will, by contrast, try to make sure that splinter groups and marginal threats to their support will be eliminated.
There is a very simple method: in France's case, setting a 10 per cent barrier for representation.
Would Labour and the Liberal Democrats, even under the aegis of an independent Commission, do otherwise?
The fact that the French system has enabled the National Front and Greens to gain local influence would seem to make a Commission even more inclined to reduce the influence of potential newcomers.
Second, that a New Left Party, created in order to stand in a PR election, will be free of the kind of ‘obscure’ conflicts Blackburn describes of as endemic on the Labour left.
Unlike Blackburn, I have actually been a member of just such a ‘new left grouping’, the ‘Alternative 86’ Alliance (of greens and reds) set up in Paris in 1986 with just such an anti-sectarian aim in mind.
Not only did it fail to achieve representation (not surprising at under 1 per cent of the vote) but it has since fallen apart in a long series of internecine conflicts (which are too complex to describe here).
The present state of the British left, on which disagreement exists precisely about this idea of a New Left Party (as debated at the Socialist Society AGM on 21 March), would suggest similar problems.
I am in favour of PR, out of a simple democratic belief in representing the wishes of the population as fairly as possible.
But I cannot see it solving the crisis of the socialist left.
Which has everything to do with redefining a realistic socialist alternative rather than electoral representation.
It would perhaps be better to concentrate on giving support for the newly elected socialist MPs, and trying to refound a clear sense of what socialism means today.
Seriously dismissed
Let's admit straight away that Robin Blackburn has a point (Letters, 3 April).
Socialists have no role to play in being ‘last-ditch partisans’ of the existing electoral system or, indeed, the existing structure of the British State.
That, however, is very different from arguing that the introduction of PR or the demands of Charter 88 will at the very best, provide anything but the most marginal relief to those who are unemployed, without a home or can't pay the poll tax.
Equally, the relationship of something like PR to socialism is purely abstract.
Socialists should be in favour of maximum democracy.
But, in that case, why not call for the election of newspaper editors (even the editor of the NSS , or company boards)?
A vote for Labour is a class vote and a barometer of how confident workers are in fighting back against the system of which Blackburn talks.
In my union branch, as in many others, I expect the best activists to be voting Labour.
Blackburn has been associated with the New Left Review 's analysis of the Labour Party, which saw it as a Labourist trend in politics with no connection to socialism.
In 1970, he refused to vote Labour from a frankly ultra-leftist position.
Now he has switched to calling for a vote for the Liberal Democrats.
It is an interesting political trajectory, and one that deserves to be taken seriously, and seriously dismissed by socialists.
A more subtle purpose
On 20 February, you published my letter, which proposed that Labour and the Liberal Democrats should each withdraw from 50 seats that they had no chance of winning, and encourage their supporters to vote for the other party.
A month later you refined this argument by identifying ‘40 people who could change the face of Britain’.
If this advice had been taken, we would now have a Labour government with Liberal Democrat support, and the two parties would jointly be working on reforms to the voting system to ensure that it more accurately represents the will of the people.
The advice came too late.
The Liberal Democrat leadership had no mechanism to prevent candidates standing.
For Labour, the proposals would have gone well beyond conference policy.
But there was a more subtle purpose behind these proposals, fully vindicated by what subsequently happened.
This was to promote the cause of anti-Tory tactical voting, and to bring it home to Paddy Ashdown and Neil Kinnock that they needed each other.
Instead, by sticking inflexibly for instant PR, claiming all the credit for constitutional reform, and continuing to rubbish Labour, Paddy Ashdown did his own party, and the cause of constitutional reform, a disservice.
Much of the British public thinks that PR means weak government and undue influence for small parties with axes to grind.
When the alternative seemed to be squabbles and point-scoring, many of these people decided at the last minute to give John Major the benefit of the doubt.
If this fear about the unworkability of hung parliaments (which are inevitable under any sort of PR) are to be overcome, then the British public needs demonstrations that the Liberal and Labour parties can work sensibly together.
The two parties manage this in many hung councils, but it will be more difficult to make it work with cabinet government and in the cockpit of the Westminster parliament.
Refuse to play games
Is there an alternative for Labour to the introspection of leadership contests and inquests?
The answer is clearly yes.
An all-UK convention should be promoted on the Scottish model with as wide-ranging representation as possible and the aim of agreeing a comprehensive programme of constitutional change, including, of course, a form of PR.
If this can be achieved, and assuming a refusal by government to legislate, the next aim will be a limited pre-electoral pact with, I suggest, the following features.
1.
A commitment to maintain the ‘Pact for Democracy’ for as long as is necessary.
2.
The fielding of a single candidate chosen from the participating party with the most votes in the 1992 election (or any other generally acceptable means to achieve the same result).
3.
An agreed programme for a coalition government for (say) a two-year period of office during which the constitutional changes will be legislated.
This will enable the following election to be contested in the ‘normal’ way by the separate parties.
We should refuse to be ‘good sports’ and to ‘play the game’when the deck is so stacked against us by a baroque system of government so ludicrous and infantile as to beggar description.
It is not a game.
Neither is it impossible to change.
With the political will we could begin to change it from the time of the first by-election of the present parliament.
Unwanted humour
We write to express astonishment at the standard of writing that has featured in much of your pre-election coverage.
It has come as a shock to realise that your magazine can no longer be relied on to present the relevant information in a straightforward factual manner.
Instead your journalists (Mat Coward, Sarah Baxter, Jolyon Jenkins to name but a few) have taken to injecting large amounts of humour into their copy.
We subscribe in order to have our consciences pricked, not to be amused and entertained.
Where will it all end?
New ideas needed
I am writing to reply to your correspondent H Wilson (Letters, 10 April) who attacks my advocacy of tactical voting published in your issue of 3 April, and my contention that there was little to choose between the Labour and Liberal Democrat manifestos.
He argued that the hopes placed in tactical voting were misplaced and that there would be ‘tears before bedtime’.
This prediction was borne out, though the tears that were shed rolled down the cheeks of Labour loyalists — or better Labour chauvinists — as well.
If Labour had accepted PR, and the possibility of an agreement with the Liberal Democrats to introduce it, then it could have ensured defeat for the Conservatives by giving the Lib Dems a clear run in as few as 20 seats.
Walworth Road was quite willing to remove David Nellist and Terry Fields, despite the wishes of the local party.
If they had really wished to do so, they could have found enough constituencies where Labour was a bad third and where the candidate him- or herself was willing to step down just before nominations closed.
Most Labour voters would have known what to do, and the example of Bath would have been multiplied, so denying Major victory.
Many belated advocates of a Lib-Lab agreement argue that it must also encompass both the standing down of Liberal Democrat candidates and negotiation of a full-scale policy for coalition government.
But actually neither of these are necessary.
There would be little need or purpose for Lib Dems to stand down, first because Lib Dem voters would be less likely to vote Labour than Labour voters would be to vote Lib Dem, and secondly because the Lib Dems are, anyway, greatly underrepresented by our system.
In my view Labour's stunning defeat requires of it much more than a commitment to PR and a pre-electoral arrangement with the Liberal Democrats.
In his letter, Wilson claimed that Labour was ‘open to new ideas as never before’.
Prior to the election, this was simply not true.
Still less would it have been true if Labour had formed a government.
But today, after the disaster that has befallen a very traditional Labour strategy, things may change.
One-nation myth
As John Major stood outside No 10 Downing Street speaking to the press on 10 April, I was helping a friend put together a letter addressed to the housing department of Brighton Council.
My friend is a single mother who lives with her two children on a local council estate.
She is unemployed and depends upon benefits to make ends meet.
When her children require new clothes, she both visits local charity shops and finds out if there are jumble sales being held in the area.
When she requires a new cooker, she begs for a small loan from the Department of Social Security.
There is a high rate of wife battering and child abuse on the estate, and a concentration of problems such as drug addiction and alcoholism.
The house she lives in is infested with cockroaches, and damp is coming through the ceiling.
Thirteen years of Tory rule have not helped my friend and many women like her.
She is beginning to think the word ‘holiday’ is an exotic Greek meal.
She can't afford to buy records and books, she can no longer afford the rent on her black-and-white TV, and she is now in debt after paying the final instalment of her poll tax for 1991.
When John Major talks of a ‘nation being at ease with itself’, which particular nation is he speaking about?
Is he addressing his comments to all those who have become marginalised and dispossessed as a result of right-wing Conservative policies over the years?
Or is he speaking about that nation of complacent and indifferent shopkeepers who long for nothing other than a return to the days of imperial hegemony?
The shopkeeper as the centre around which the social world revolves is a commercial image hammered into English consciousness by Mrs Thatcher.
Self reliance, individual enterprise, ‘what's in it for me’, as opposed to‘how can we help our neighbour’, was the message.
This theology slipped over the iron hand of the capitalist market like a silk glove.
England became one nation again, a land of hope and glory, Elgar, teacakes and cricket.
This England is not one recognised by many of my friends.
We understand why Labour didn't win the election.
It had nothing to do with its policies, Neil Kinnock or its campaign.
It had to do with the success of the one-nation myth.
Of course, if there is only one nation, one leader, one theology, why vote for division, why vote for another leader?
Labour didn't work hard enough at prising off that glove; at challenging Thatcher's theology of individual self-sufficiency; instead it rejected the radical compassion of international socialism for the gloss and shine of Thatcher-style politics.
The magazine Marxism Today did the same.
And they called it ‘New Times’.
Manifest contempt
Dear Steve Racist Liar Prat, your theft of my copyrights and your brief ‘celebration’ of your ‘scoop’, which you paraded to your fellow racist crooks at my expense, has been noted and you shall be, believe me, very sorry that you sought to persist in gloating in your backward, immoral capacity to confect racist lies on the assumption that I shall not be able to retaliate in kind.
What you must never forget is that I am not and never have been an ethnic of any description, and that I have never found any evidence that justifies any cretinous claim by you, or by any of your co-morons in the sewers of lofty racist Neanderthal, that Eurocentrism warrants any positive attention from those like myself who inherit — and consciously — a civilised tradition and philosophy going back millions of years.
Remember your moral crime: that you have now lied twice about why I had written to you in the first place (Letters report, 5 December), and you have lied on purpose and you have done so with manifest contempt and disregard for any say or rights that I may have against your sick sense of ‘editorship’.
Your conduct has confirmed that I was utterly correct to abbreviate your filthy title to NewSS — as you represent, by your conduct, the new form of fascism.
It is curious and yet inevitable that you, of all people, should have dared write a piece in the NewSS claiming to shed crocodile tears for the alleged disunity among, or between, the opportunistically ‘revived’ banners of the ARA and the ANL.
Going by your ‘concern’ for the ‘targets of racist violence’, not to speak of your capacity to understand what constitutes racism or why the ‘ANL and the ARA’are both anti-black, I would not be surprised if one day you are hauled before the black community as a prime suspect involved in a series of racist attacks against the image of the black person in the street.
I wait to see how long you can control your imbecile temptation to violate my copyrights on this letter and once again untruthfully take words and phrases from it to show your ‘powers’ to match those boasted by your kind in the NF and the BNP, whose performances are different from yours only in that instead of using your limbs to physically assault us like they would, you have acted by wearing the ‘civilised’guise of being the ‘editor’of the ‘left’NewSS , and have written to assail my integrity, my capacity to think, my freedom to defend and speak for my constitutionally organised members at the Stratford school.
I almost mistook one of your NF/BNP cousins as being you on the evening of 24 February 1992 outside the Stratford school when I, and my colleagues from the Stratford school governing body, heard a big scream of ‘Pakis, go back’ coming from a car passing by.
We were ready to take a breath test on you and determine if you stank as bad as you ‘write’.
FRINGE BENEFITS Colin Ward samples alternatives that weren't in the manifestos
Our last supper was of mushroom-and-tofu stroganoff, followed by a virtuoso performance by a Dutch clown.
We had barged in on an 18-day course on Bioregionalism at Schumacher College, in the Old Postern at Dartington, conducted by Kirkpatrick Sale.
He's a seasoned American decentralist in that broad tradition of dissent from Thoreau to Mumford, who, in a series of books, notably Human Scale (a thoroughly documented US equivalent of Schumacher's Small is Beautiful ),Dwellers in the Land (about regionalism), and The Conquest of Paradise (about the European exploitation of the Americas from Columbus on), has attempted to contradict received opinion.
Since his theme was that of organising communities according to natural formations, not political boundaries, the task he set course members was an investigation of the Dart Valley, the watershed or catchment area of the river from Dartmoor down to the sea.
They were to explore it ‘as a cohesive, regenerative, sustainable ecological region’, according to their interests in geology, botany, agriculture, history, demography and human settlement patterns.
For geographers, of course, this was a fieldwork exercise in the great tradition of Vidal de la Blache, Elisée Reclus and Patrick Geddes, with his concept of the ‘Valley Section’.
For the participants, it was a chance to map ideals and aspirations on physical realities.
They worked through the night so as to produce a document to deposit with the local planning officer, the library and museum in Totnes.
Sale insists the issue in sustainable development is not one of morality, but of scale.
He argues that people will apply ‘right behaviour’ when ‘abstractions and intangibles give way to the here and now, the seen and felt, the real and known.
Then people will do the environmentally ‘correct' thing, not because it is thought to be the moral , but rather the practical , thing to do.’
He is one of a series of Scholars in Residence who have run courses there since Schumacher College was started two years ago, with the support of the Dartington trustees, by Satish Kumar, the ever-busy founder of the Small School in north Devon, and editor of Resurgence magazine .
Fees paid by British participants subsidise those from the poor world and from eastern Europe.
That's how I met Bela, one of two Hungarians, who is bent on building a new village, and Aman from Rajasthan, who is involved in local campaigning to resist government plans to remove inhabitants and divert scarce water resources for the sake of a tiger park for tourists in his part of India.
I asked Satish if, to succeed, the courses were guru-oriented, since big names seemed to be needed to draw in attenders.
‘Not at all,’ he smiled.
‘They're only invited if they don't behave like gurus.’
We shifted up the hill to Dartington Hall itself, for the conference of the Human Scale Education Movement, on ‘Education as if People Matter’.
No gurus there either, simply 70 teachers, scandalised by the whole concept of a National Curriculum, and by the fact that no party opposes it.
If we had stayed longer we would have caught up with the three-day Dartington Conference on Building a Sustainable Future for Rural Britain, addressed by such luminaries in this field as Marion Shoard, Malcolm Moseley and David Lock.
A return trip to Dartington didn't ensnare us into the esoteric cults that flourish in those parts.
It confirmed that the preoccupations of the founders of the experiment in rural reconstruction, started there in the 1920s, remain important for their successors.
Which is more than can be said of the successors of the first Labour government, elected just when the Elmhirsts arrived at the bankrupt farms and derelict buildings of Dartington.
ARTS & MEDIA
Building for fun Eurodisney is the spearhead of a movement that aims to turn architecture into a branch of show-business.
Beverly Russel meets its pioneers
While the official celebration of Columbus' voyage goes on in Seville, the true extent of American influence on world culture may be seen at Marne-la-Vallée outside Paris, where Euro Disney opened this week.
Enough statistics have been circulating about this venture to sink the Titanic .
Nevertheless, the juxtaposition of a mega-theme park and hotel resort beside President Mitterrand's efforts to establish a serious architectural archive of grands projets in Paris must be noticed.
When the archeaologists dig up the ruins in France at the turn of the next millennium, they may well be confused about what was going on in our time.
Disney's contribution to the built environment has superimposed North American regional vernacular architecture of the 19th and early 20th century on the Ile de France: a Pacific North West national park lodge, a South West pueblo, a Far West cowboy town, an East Coast seaside club, a South East Victorian resort, and a piece of 1930s Manhattan — albeit somewhat distorted, as if seen through the lens of a Hollywood movie camera.
This is not surprising, since the supervision of the Magic Kingdom, its six adjacent resort hotels and shopping-entertainment complex (complete with Buffalo Bill rodeo) comes under the responsibility of the 3,000-strong team of Disney Imagineers from the Burbank studio backlot.
They represent a kind of hybrid architect, designer, engineer, set builder and scenario maker, all rolled into one.
Imagineers are dedicated to maintaining the fantasy element of architectural experience by employing a kind of pixie dust that includes reducing — or increasing — the scale of buildings (as in movie cartoons) to give a feeling of make-believe, and by dribbling a large amount of twinkling, carnival-like lighting throughout.
Prince Charles could never have dreamed of this twist to his call for respectful allegiance to the past.
Despite this stirring up of architectural disorder into what one unkind French critic called a ‘cultural Chernobyl’, the powers at Disney, led by its dashing chief executive Michael Eisner, have managed to persuade a handful of élite and influential American architects to participate.
They include Michael Graves from Princeton University, Robert Stern from Columbia, and the winner of the Pritzker Prize for architecture, Frank Gehry.
As only intelligent and articulate people can, they are deftly defending the Disney premise by inventing a new genre: the Architecture of Entertainment.
‘I think there is something wonderful about make-believe,’ says Robert Stern.
‘People of integrity can approach this objective.
The fact that architecture can be entertaining and provide pleasure to the public is not in direct conflict with the art of architecture.
In the Paris of the 19th century, it was a pleasure to go for a stroll and to be delighted by the public buildings.
I think we lost that pleasure principle; and this is what we have regained, from a different point of view, with Disney.’
Stern, who is known for his sometimes brash self-promotion, anchored a television documentary series in the early 1980s, in which he attempted in a Bronowski-like way to explain the ascent of architecture in America.
It was hotly argued that the cameras zoomed in more often on his Gucci loafers and Hermes ties than on the buildings.
Sartorial details aside, such efforts stood him in good stead with Disney.
To date, he has received the most commissons of any architectural ‘mousequeteer’: three at Disneyland, Florida, one in Burbank, California, three at Euro Disney.
Last month, he was elected to the Board of Directors of the Disney company — no Mickey Mouse operation, with US$6 billion in assets, and investors in New York, London, Brussels and Paris.
‘The real message about Disney,’ Stern continues, ‘is that building must be fun.
And this is quite appropriate since the company's business is entertainment.
It is not just evident in the theme parks, but in the design of back offices, too, where they are giving a message to employees that this is what the company is about.’
Getting this ingredient off the drawing boards and into bricks and mortar — not to mention details such as Donald Duck doorknobs — was indeed the stuff of dreams for Stern, who has always stood up for emotional content: ‘In my view, whether you are engaged in a theme park, a hospital, or a court house, the building should elicit some excitement.’
Michael Graves, whose nine-storey Hotel New York at Euro Disney presents a cartoonesque version of Manhattan in its Art Deco heyday, is equally eloquent in his support of the Disney architectural philosophy.
‘All good architecture is themed,’ he affirms, ‘even modern architecture with its emphasis on the machine aesthetic.
As long as architecture does not express a theme prosaically or literally, then it can have a multi-dimensional and enduring value.
Unfortunately, a lot of contemporary architects have been influenced by the Gropius school of thought which maintains that architects should allow a building to be what it wants to be, rather than imposing any character or theme upon it.
Modernism has therefore become very limiting to the extent that individual expression has been frowned upon.’
Graves has also reaped the benefit of design for Disney: two hotel commissions in Florida, the company headquarters in Burbank (noted for its over-scale plaster images of the seven dwarfs propping up the temple-like roof pediment) as well as the blockbuster at Euro Disney.
And in contrast to other Disney architects, he gets right down to the specification of interiors, controlling the design of carpets, fabrics, furniture, accessories and even restaurant tableware.
For example, the bedside light in rooms at Hotel New York is in the form of a miniaturised skyscraper.
According to Euro Disney's senior vice president, Philippe Bourguignon, the architecture of entertainment is not only a distinct asset for the theme park, but a major contribution to the development of a new style of hotel architecture in Europe.
Until now, only the modern vocabulary — the basic concrete/glass box — was served up to developers.
‘We've opened the doors to new possibilities for everyone in the hotel industry,’ he declares.
‘We take design very, very seriously.
Each piece of Disney is a landmark.
We want each one of our hotels to be taken as architecture in its own right, as opposed to being just another Disney hotel.’
Given the economic climate, can architects who may be reluctant to embrace the entertainment mode afford to take a negative attitude?
The travel and leisure industry is still a remarkably buoyant market place, with Euro Disney forecast to generate US$1 million in revenue each day.
Everywhere, outings are in.
Just consider the public interest in taking the kids to visit an aquarium.
A total of 70 oceanic recreations, complete with state-of-the-art fish tanks, coral reefs and rainforests, have just opened or will soon open around the world.
One, in Chicago, was designed by Dirk Lohan, grandson of Modernism's founder Mies Van Der Rohe.
While past generations of architects built cathedrals of faith, later succeeded by cathedrals of commerce, today's and tomorrow's master builders are more likely to provide cathedrals of entertainment.
Exuberance will characterise them, according to Robert Stern, simply because ‘unlike the corporations of more recent times, the owners are not on a theological mission’.
He cites IBM, which led a crusade for a rigid, high-tech statement in its buildings around the world, in order to convert people to a total vision of the new technological order.
‘Every building cannot be a thunderclap of artistic and moral cataclysms,’ he says.
Many will not argue with Stern's wish to ‘uplift’ through entertainment architecture, but perhaps the presentation calls for inquiry.
Two examples suggest that designing for Snow White and Sleeping Beauty are not the only scenarios left to explore.
Michael Manser's Sterling Hotel at London Airport neatly defies the pedestrian glass box, refers to its context, and certainly creates emotional excitement both outside and in — without compromising its modern aesthetics.
The French architect Philippe Robert's new Terra Museum at Giverny, due to open in June, is another fine and thoughtful example of a building that does not pander to a public born with a Mickey gene.
It incorporates planting on its roof, and does not impose its presence in Monet's still undefiled village home.
The architect, however, was bemused when his American client insisted on hiring a movie-publicity signage expert to provide the billboards along the autoroute.
In 1893, when American celebrated the 400th anniversary of Columbus (a year late), the robber barons who banded together to support the Chicago exhibition went on to found the American Academy in Rome.
They endorsed a culture of learning, and the intervening century has seen a knowledge expolosion.
Today, fun and the pursuit of Hollywood provide the cues — even in the Oxford Union, where Warren Beatty was  recentlyquizzed on his sexual preferences.
Life in the Third Millennium should be just a bundle of laughs.
Television Why Sean loves Lucy In the world of sitcom, argues John Dugdale, ‘postmodern’ means ‘antique’
In the course of an item on The Late Show,viewers were confidently told that Sean's Show is ‘the first postmodernist sitcom’, that it goes out on Thursdays, and that it's a Channel 4 programme.
Only the last of these pieces of information is accurate.
The series' basic premise is that entertainer Sean Hughes discovers one morning that his living room has become a television studio and an invited audience has turned up (‘I've got some people round…about 450 of them, actually’).
When he switches on his TV set, the show is going out live.
His entire neighbourhood (a pub, a corner shop, a forlorn bench) is now a set, with cameras, floor managers and unconvincing backdrops.
This broadly corresponds to the usual sloppy style-mag definition of postmodernism, ie, as surreal, self-conscious, convention-mocking.
But then so did It's Garry Shandling's Show , a US import aired on BBC2 four years ago.
Like Hughes, the toothsome Shandling switched to-and-fro between acted scenes and mini-monologues, nattering to the viewer about his family and sexual relationships.
In doing so, he broke the ‘fourth wall’ rule, which assumes that an invisible wall separates the studio/TV audience from the home of the sitcom family.
Both are only playing with the conventions of the mainstream domestic sitcom of the past 30 years, when writers have looked to the theatre (notably the work of Neil Simon and Alan Ayckbourn) as a model.
Throughout the first decade of television, the dominant influence was what would now be called stand-up comedy.
The earliest shows in both the US (Jack Benny, Phil Silvers) and the UK (Dickie Henderson, Eric Sykes, Tony Hancock) involved stars playing themselves.
For example,The George Burns and Gracie Allen Show , which ran from 1950 to 1958, made no attempt to construct bogus personas for the eponymous couple.
Burns topped-and-tailed each episode with a monologue, and relished making asides to camera.
So if one picks fourth-wall busting as the decisive criterion, the first big sitcom was also the first postmodern sitcom.
In I Love Lucy (currently viewable on Channel 4 on Friday afternoons), the heroine's living room is blatantly a theatrical set.
The show itself dealt undisguisedly with Lucille Ball's troubled marriage to Cuban band leader Desi Arnez, the birth of their son, the twin tugs of showbiz and domesticity, and so on; just as Sean's Show overtly takes on the hero's difficulties with women, and his tendency towards depression and paranoia.
In both programmes, spectators happen to be present, peering in at a comic version of the star's life.
Ball never addresses or acknowledges them, unlike Hughes, but there would be no point in doing so.
In all sitcoms, the laughter of the studio audience — and its obvious effect on actors' timing and delivery — eliminates any possibility of illusion.
The secondary premise of Sean's Show , as described by producer Katie Lander, is that ‘he's being controlled by scriptwriters who treat him as a sitcom character.
But all the time he tries to regain control and meet the love of his life, Susan’.
The supposed author of the first episode is Samuel Beckett, and the hero hopes that the storyline devised by his fellow-countryman will restore his dignity.
In fact, the godfather of gloom comes up with a plot that takes in Windsor Davies (the ghost of sitcoms past), a bathtub and a big box of concentrated jelly.
It's a cute wheeze that arguably owes more to Flann O'Brien (the rebellion of the fictional characters in At Swim-Two-Birds ) than to James Joyce's other literary heir.
But it was Beckett who invented bedsit absurdism, and occasionally went in for theatrical fourth-wall busting (‘What is there to keep us here?’
‘The dialogue’).
And the nihilistic Nobel laureate has a surprising affinity with sitcom pioneers such as Burns and Allen, in that his comedic roots are also in vaudeville.
Each episode of Sean's Show (Wednesdays at 10.30pm, Channel 4) contains enough ideas to sustain an inferior sitcom through an entire series, and at its best the writing achieves an admirable marriage between poignant experience and a cartoon concept for expressing it humorously.
The ache of Sean's unrequited longing, for example, is accentuated by chancing to hear his story told by Simon Bates, and by seeing local newspaper billboards proclaiming ‘Susan Doesn't Love You’.
Channel 4's comedy department has at last found the right format for a cabaret star — by going back to the innocent childhood of TV comedy.
SPRING BOOKS
A little learning ENGLISH QUESTIONS Perry Anderson Verso, £12.95 paperback /£39.95 hardback
Towards the end of March, Friedrich von Hayek died: one of the last remaining examples of, in Perry Anderson's words, ‘a white emigration that rolled across the flat expanse of English intellectual life’.
He was a man willing, unlike most of the home-grown right, to confront the left's assumed ethical superiority.
Author of The Road to Serfdom , published — impossibly ill-timed — on the eve of Labour's great victory in 1945, he lived to see the crumbling of communism; the destruction, as no doubt he saw it, of collectivism's inner citadel.
Also last month, four Cambridge dons entered fierce ‘non placets’ to the proposal that Jacques Derrida be awarded an honorary degree.
The story taken up in the press was of the interminable controversies in which the Cambridge English faculty has been embroiled: Leavis, Steiner, Kermode, now Derrida.
It seemed just another episode in the long war of the books between metropolitan, and in this last case global, sophistication and a rooted academic, even provincial, culture.
Perhaps a better explanation is that Derridean ‘theory’, never fully accepted in England, has fallen subtly out of favour.
There may have been queues in the streets when Derrida came to Oxford recently.
However, hints are already being dropped in smart academic circles that the French philosopher is yesterday's man.
Both events, Hayek's death and Derrida's threatened discomfiture, are relevant to the themes of Anderson's latest collection of essays.
Some are old and famous.
‘Origins of the Present Crisis’, published in New Left Review in 1964, and ‘Components of the National Culture’, four years later, were texts of their times that excited a generation which, at least in many of the social sciences and humanities, now commands the heights of the academic system even if their radicalism has been dulled by more recent discontents.
Others are more recent.
‘The Figures of Descent’, published in NLR in 1987, is a reprise of ‘Origins’, and ‘A Culture in Contraflow’(1990) of ‘Components’.
Broadly, Anderson finds little to correct in his survey of Britain's political economy.
The crises he discerned in the mid-1960s are still powerfully visible in the early 1990s.
If his language and intellectual categories are less startlingly novel today, it is because he, and a few others like Tom Nairn, have made them familiar to us.
But the story is essentially the same: England's long aristocratic hangover (the idea of an English ancien régime , outlandish to Whiggish historians, has been taken up on the right by Jonathan Clark and others in interpretations that contest but also defer to Anderson's own); its early industrialisation; a weak-kneed bourgeoisie; an inward working-class addicted to ‘Labourism’; the distraction of empire; the more recent hollow heroics of ‘Ukania’; and the failure to develop a progressive intellectual culture grounded in a radical sociology.
Only in the last respect has Anderson shifted his ground substantially.
In ‘Components of the National Culture’ he surveyed, remorselessly and depressingly, the reactionary influences that gripped English intellectual life.
The empiricism that had come out of the 19th century as the dominant intellectual mode had been twisted to the right, so to speak, by the ‘white emigration’ from Europe.
Arnoldian values, paternalist but progressive, had been transformed by the twin forces of capitalism and imperialism into an openly conservative code.
Even back in 1968, this interpetation had its critics.
Admittedly, Lewis Namier was reactionary by temperament, but was his influence on historiography also reactionary?
After all, his disavowal of high political narrative paralleled the preoccupations of the later Annales school across the Channel, and even those of the postwar Marxist historians in England.
Interestingly, it is the right that now demands the return of narrative.
And surely Isaiah Berlin was better seen as a liberal of the old school, a classic Millian, while Karl Popper arguably opened the way, via Lakatos, to Thomas Kuhn?
An off-white emigration, perhaps?
In any case, Anderson has revised his judgment of England's intellectual culture.
If our political economy remains backward, our intellectual economy has leaped ahead.
The new progressive icons are Anthony Giddens, Quentin Skinner, History Workshop and feminist writers of all kinds.
Sociology, Anderson's missing keystone in 1964, has become overarching.
Empiricism and positivism have been put to flight in anthropology, philosophy, aesthetics, economics.
Today, the danger — or opportunity?— is no longer collusion between political and intellectual powers but ‘a marked disjuncture between high culture and politics in Britain’.
An oppositional intelligentsia has been born.
A politicisation of the thinking classes has taken place in the Thatcher years, echoing the revolt of intelligence in the 1930s.
Perhaps Anderson overstates his argument.
Certainly, fewer and fewer university and higher education teachers vote Conservative, while a generation ago the Tory don was a common species.
But the reasons for this shift to the (not very) left are largely mundane.
The Thatcher government waged unceasing war on the professional state.
The dons resented their punishment as much as the doctors — but neither can fairly be described as radical on that account.
Also, higher education has been democratised (or deprivileged, as some would have it).
Universities have expanded and the polytechnics have come to play a more significant role.
The system is rapidly shedding its élitist clothes and attitudes.
A gradual shift towards a broadly social democratic position is just what you would expect to accompany a move towards a mass system.
A more serious objection to Anderson's account is that it assumes consistentalignment between left and right in politics, and ‘progressive’ and ‘traditional’in intellectual life.
In practice, there are many confusing cross-currents.
In the US, post-structuralism, post-modernism, post-almost anything tend to be regarded as anti-American, sinister theories that underpin ‘political correctness’.
On this side of the Atlantic, they are seen in a different light, as ideologies that justify the playful eclecticism of democratic politics and free-market economics.
The left, even Gramsci's heirs, prefer the solidities of the Enlightenment and of modernism.
Look at an actual example of disjuncture between politics an ideas, although very different from the ones analysed by Anderson.
Two years ago Allan Bloom, author of the notorious The Closing of the American Mind , visited London to conduct a seminar.
It was attended by several right-on Thatcherites, in and out of the government, expecting to be impressed by this darling of the American right (although Bloom hotly denied being the Oliver North of the academy).
They were not.
Not because Bloom was liberal sweetness-and-light, but because he praised the good, the true and the beautiful in useless splendour and denounced relevance, accountability and the rest; the very qualities these Thatcherites wer bullying British higher education to adopt.
It was painfully clear that, although ‘right’ and ‘left’might have approximately equivalent political meanings on opposite sides of the Atlantic, their intellectual meanings were too fragile to survive the ocean passage.
So Anderson's thesis for all its fascination, is non-proven.
His accounts of our political and our intellectual economy are rooted i a belief in England's exceptionalism.
He may use tools of analysis developed within a wider European tradition, but he applies them to a special problem: the uniqueness of our nation's formation; the condition of England.
But is England such an oddly deformed place, even if judged in the left's own terms, especiall if Scotland and Wales are added to make up modern Britain?
The Labour Party is one of the continent's most powerful and enduring social democratic parties.
The welfare state has survived Mrs Thatcher's hand-bagging.
Civil society is in reasonable shape.
Racism is low-intensity by European, and world, standards.
And, for all the trials of the Tory years, a healthy critical tradition has been maintained: a tradition to which Perry Anderson and New Left Review have notably contributed, both as component and critic.
Nice times THE RUSSIAN GIRL, Kingsley Amis, Hutchinson, £14.99 Anthony Quinn
It has been a principle championed in the fiction of Kingsley Amis, from as long ago as Luck Jim , that ‘nice things are nicer than nasty things.’
Yet that note of sweet reasonableness has often been muffled, not to say drowned out, by his thunderous overtures of obloquy and symphonies of disgust.
What Amis has also acknowledged as a writer is that nice things aren't necessarily as funny as nasty things.
If anything in the Amis corpus has validated his penchant for the poison dart, it was last year's Memoirs : indiscreet, at times indefensible, but nevertheless a book to leave you giddy with laughter.
The recent novels of the elder Amis, however, have given cause for concern.
While he can usually be relied upon to offend whichever sacred cows the liberal consensus happens to be grazing, the satirical armoury has shown dismaying signs of fatigue.
One could overlook the slack pacing and low joke-count of The Folks That Live On The Hill .
What really disappointed was Amis' decline as one of the great modulators of everyday speech.
Amis nudged along his suburban ensemble with typically unhurried assurance, but he didn't seem to notice or care that each character spoke the same jocular bloke-in-the-pub idiom: long, broken-backed sentences that thrive on small qualifications.
Everyone talked like Amis wrote, and the dialogue slumped into an undifferentiated brawl of voices.
That problem has been assuaged, if not actually solved, in The Russian Girl , whose eponymous heroine, Anna Danilova, converses throughout in her native tongue.
So we entertain the illusion of hearing much of the dialogue as if it were second-hand.
Arriving in London on a mission of mercy, Anna seeks the help of Richard Vaisey, a fortysomething professor at the School of Slavonic Studies and a noticeably kinder, if not wiser, incarnation of the Amisian scholar-gent.
Richard is persuaded to bring the plight of Anna's brother, incarcerated in Moscow, to the attention of the western media.
With the able support of a toff QC friend, Crispin, he sets about organising a petition.
A flurry of complications ensues: Richard falls for the winsome Anna, though not even love can blind him to the realisation that her poetry is ‘absolutely bloody awful’.
Can he lend his name to the petition without compromising his professional integrity?
In the meantime he has to deflect the  suspicionsof his wife Cordelia, whose pretentious tastes, callous manipulation and faux -aristo accent Amis gives a thorough doing-over.
The action proceeds at a leisurely clip, filtered through Richard's bemused and occasionally befuddled consciousness (a disabling hangover gets a welcome tick on the checklist).
Amis has taken time to rehearse the arguments about politics hijacking literature, and in the end the novel may even surprise some readers with its air of amused tolerince: ‘Even bad poetry had to exist, if only to heighten good poetry by contrast, to make the good poets shine out as even bette.’
The new-found spirit of glasnost hasn't unlocked all the doors, though.
What goes on in the bedroom remains strictly off-limits.
The reluctance to write about sex is curious in a writer who has been gleefully unreticent on the demands and delinquencies attending other forms of physical exertion.
The Russian Girl hasn't the frisky insouciance of the early work, nor the vituperative energies of his infamous middle period.
Yet it boasts plenty of familiar pleasures — in particular the ‘silent parentheses and unuttered footnotes’ of a troubled conscience — and an unexpected warmth in its resolution of those perennial difficulties with girls.
Comrades' comedown Labour's halted march Stephen Howe
From the 1930s to the 1950s, a whole slew of outline histories of the British Labour movement appeared.
Their titles tended to be variants on phrases such as‘the onward march’.
It is, no doubt, a sign of the times that the flow has long since dried up.
There have been competent academic overviews of the Labour Party's evolution from people such as David Howell and James Hinton; and a whole 1960s and 1970s genre of Marxist accounts, following Ralph Miliband, on the lines of ‘the uselessness of Labourism’.
But it is a very long time since anyone attempted a popular history of the left in Britain.
It was, no doubt rightly, assumed tht there wasn't a readership any more outside academia for this kind of thing.
Even more off-putting, though, must have been the permanent doubt about what kind of narrative such a history would be: a celebration or an obituary?
Andrew J Davies hasn't exactly constructed either.
His lively stroll from the Chartists to Kinnock (To Build a New Jerusalem: the Labour Movement from the 1880s to the 1990s , Michael Joseph, £18.99) is almost always affectionate towards its subjects.
It's a chatty book, full of such observations as the fact that Charles Bradlaugh and Annie Besant ‘were simply good friends, though ineviably ablythe gossips and scandalmongers soon got to work’.
But it's no uncritical endorsement of any part of the socialist tradition, or of the New Model Labour Party.
The revolutionry legacy is dead, he says; the social-democratic one alive but visionless.
A new radicalism (not necessarily calling itself soci list) is needed, centred on democratic and international issues.
Davies still looks to Labour as the likeliest carrier for such ideas.
Inevitably simplifying and a touch superficial, this is a fine piece of ‘old-fashioned’ popular narrative history.
Would a renewed Labour Party imply a revived trade union movement?
The spectre of reanimated union power was inevitably trotted out again in the Tories' election campaign.
But even they seemed to be going through the motions, quite without conviction.
As opinion polls have been showing for years, hardly anyone believes the stuff about overmighty robber barons and wildcat shopfloor militants now.
And trade unions, though obviously weakened by Thatcherism, are indubitably more popular institutions than they have been for decades.
Indeed, they have probably risen in public sympathy precisely because they have been attacked and weakened.
As for their role within the Labour Party (exhaustively analysed in Lewis Minkin's admirable recent book,The Contentious Alliance , fesw sensible observers have talked the language of control and manipulation.
John Grant , in Blood Brothers: the division and decline of Britain's trade unions (Weidenfeld & Nicolson, £16.99), wants to convince us that Brieish trade unions are in a hopelessly enfeebled state: divided directionless, dithering, but still lingeringly dictatorial.
Their only viable future lies with the kind of measures proposed by the early-1980s SDP — industrial partnership and incomes policies — plus the sort of trade unionism proposed by the electricians' union, EETPU.
But hold on — wasn't John Grant an early defector to the SDP and the architect of their industrial relations policy?
And isn't he now the EETPU's head of communications?
Isn't there just a touch of special pleading here?
Yes, of course.
In principle, there's nothing wrong with it.
Grant could have used his experience as industrial reporter, MP and union official to produce an interesting argument about the unions' future.
He hasn't.
He never seems to have made up his mind what kind of book he's trying to write: a slice of autobiography, a potted history of government-TUC relations, a polemic about union decline, or an extended advertisement for the EETPU's version of ‘business unionism’.
So we get bits of all these: all superficial, all framed around the most drearily predictable judgments.
Who needs to hear again about Harold Wilson's deviousness, Norman Tebbit's aggression, Arthur Scargill's misguided fervour and poor old Norman Willis' weakness?
Who needs another hymn of praise to plucky little Eric Hammond and his lonely struggle against the wicked General Council?
Who needs to be told that ‘partnership and cooperation could prove to be the watchwords for the 1990s’?
Well, if that is what you feel you need, Grant's is the book for you.
If you want to hear something different, though, go for David Marsh 's far more original as well as scholarly survey (The New Politics of British Trade Unionism , Macmillan, £10.99).
He gives a thorough and useful dissection of Thatcher's industrial policies, the impact of her legislation on the unions and the labour market, and the shifts in labour-union relations.
And he carefully attempts to draw up a balance-sheet of union power, politics and prospects, going far beyond the clichés in which Grant deals.
The conclusions may come as a surprise.
They are that, while a ‘top-down’ view of industrialrrelations might suggest that almost everything has changed — the unions' political role virtually destroyed, govenment authority decisively asserted, and the balance of power shifted massively towards employers — the view from the shop floor is very different.
Far less has altered there, and the unions' potential power remains considerable.
That's good news for the unions themselves, and probably for their members.
It may be less welcome to Brian Gould.
This week's manoeuvres underline again how great the political power of a few key general secretariers remains.
Translations THE TRIPLE MIRROR OF THE SELF, Zulfikar Ghose, Bloomsbury, £15.99 Maya Jaggi
Zulfikar Ghoe, born in what became Pakistan, moved to England as a teenager, married a Brazilian, and now lives in Texas.
Himself a creature of translation, in Salman Rushdie's sense of having been borne across the world and across cultures, Ghose is among the Indo-Anglian writers of the diaspora whose work chronicles 20th-century displacement and migration.hThis novel, his eleventh, is a complex, fragmentary and at times obscure exploration of the relationship between memory and identity, and the fractures wrought in both by expatriation.
A traveller describes his stay in a small settlement of the Amazonian rainforest, suspended in an indeterminate borderland between Brazil, Peru and Colombia.
Urim, ‘the scattered one’, as the locals dub him, has arrived at this ‘still centre’ after a lifetime of successive exiles, each spawning a new name, a new self.
The novel traces these lives backwards in time, across four continents: from Zinalco Shimomura, a poet and academic in Arizona, to Shimmers, the schoolboy turned member of the bohemian ‘Highgate set’ in England, to Urim's origins as Roshan, a Punjabi Muslim in British India.
Urim's narratie, e for all its philosophical portentousness, reads as magicalrrealist pastiche, complete with mythic jaguars, lascivious priests and, most tediously, silent, nubile natives.
Yet it forms onlyan initial fragment.
This manuscript, it emerges, has been placed in the hands of a Californian academic, Jonathan Pons, by the ‘master of Latin American realism’, Valentin Sadaba, whose dismissal of it as possibly ‘one more sad attempt by an Englishman to emulate the Latin storytellers’ alerts us to its dubious status and authorship.
It is the absurdly pompous Pons who ostensibly pieces together the scattered evidence of Urim's past.
While Zulfikar Ghose's textual playfulness can be vexatious, even baffling, it insists on the partial, unreliable nature of memory itself, or, as Urim puts it, ‘the enormous accumulation of fragments, lik images in a shattered mirror, which constituted my life’.
Lethargically slumped in a hammock during the rainy season in the settlement of Suxavat, Urim's recollections distort time and conflate personal memory with history, while some are indistinguishable from dreams and desires.
Memory, he says, authors ‘fabulous fictions of the self’.
Yet Ghose also remarks the continuities of the self, those images of lost homelands carried by the exile that find echoes in new surroundings.
Forced to depart from Suxavat by its apocalyptic destruction, Urim's final journey to the Andes reveals to him the mirror-image of the Hindu Kush of his origins.
The source remains within, like the Indus River ‘re-visioned on the banks of the Thames, the Mississippi and the Amazon’.
As the novel's second part charts Shimomura's exploits in his adopted western lands, the third reflects Roshan's childhood in Punjab and Bombay, among Hindu, Sikh and Parsee friends.
Amid the boy's triple obsession with sex, cricket and poetry, incidents prefigure insurgent communal hatreds, from Roshan's ambivalence at kissing the pok-tainted lips of a Christian to a Hindu teacher's beating at her brothers' hands for her affair with the Muslim schoolboy.
As such ‘ancient prejudice’ spills into the violence of partition, Roshan takes flight into his first exile.
Finally, it is the oppressive continuities of history that reverberate in the novel.
As Suxavat is overrun by agents of a ministry intent on resuming imperial conquests in a renewed search for El Dorado, Urimecomes face to face the the ‘repetitions of barbarism’.
Despite his flight across continents, he finds himself an ‘eternal witness to massacre’.
The orange caps worn by Hindu mobs baying for Muslim blood in the final section ominously recall the orange overalls of Suxavat's more clinical exterminatos.s
In an absorbing, epic quest for the self, the humour, occasional nostalgia and vibrancy of the novel's language fail to deflect from an undertow of melancholy and the sense of irrecoverable loss.
The final beautiful, though despairing, image is of smashing the surface of a wall of mountain ice in a futile search for some missing link of meaning or belonging.n But from such exile, we are told, ‘there is never an emancipation.’
His darker purpose SHAKESPEARE AND THE GODDESS OF COMPLETE BEING Ted Hughes Faber & Faber, £18.99 Geoff Dyer
If the first criticism we read is of Shakespeare (an Othello casebook, typically), then the first contemporary poe we come across is probably Ted (‘a black — /Back gull bent like an iron-bar slowly’) Hughes.
Much of the promise of an encounter between Hughea and Shakespeare, then, derives from the sense of a coming together and culmination of two formative experiences of the idea of literature; of reading as a testing activity.
A couple of years of university so familiarises us with this idea that literature dissolves entirely into the drudgery of reading and writing crit.
Later we come to our senses and see how, while Shakespeare is embalmed in academic papers on ‘the logical limits of disintegration’, his linguistic spirit still animates and haunts the Disney-ravaged landscape of Hughes' Crow and the metaphysical wilderness of Gaudete .
All the more surprising, then, to find Hughe, in a mood of clenched determination, declaring that he will virtually ignore the ‘magnesium, pulsing glow of constant metaphorical enthralment’ in pursuit of a darker, vaster purpose.
Instead, like a renegade Casaubon, he will seek the mythological keys to Shakespeare's universe.
Thus unlocked, the plays form ‘a single titanic work…a vast, cyclic Tragedy of Divine Love’ in which ‘the composite myth of the English reformation itself’lies encoded.
The Complete Works can then be revealed for what they are: ‘England's creation story, our sacred book’.
And so, for 500 dense pages, we hang on for grim death as Hughes' locomotive intelligence hurtles down the track he has set himself.
Two myths, says Hughes, operate as the DNA of Shakespeare's poetic organism, providing him with templates for each of the 14 plays from All's Well That Ends Well to The Tempest .
The first is that of Aphrodite and Adonis: Aphrodite, the great Goddess, hides the child Adonis in a chest and gives him to Persephone, Goddess of the Underworld, who falls in love with Adonis and refuses to give him back.
Aphrodite regains possession of the boy, but Persephone emerges from the underworld in the form of a wild boar and kills him.
In some versions, Adonis is killed not by Persephone but by Mars, the usurping warrior who will take his place.
Shakespeare himself first makes use of the myth in his poem Venus and Adonis , where, significantly, Adonis rejects Aphrodite.
These embellishments are crucial, for they give rise to the two forms of the Shakespearian Equation: ‘In the first form, the tragic form, the hero rejects the Goddess and is killed by the boar (arriving as madness), which is to say that he is transformed by it.
In the second form, the Boar is incarnated in the ‘irrational', inferior one of two rival brothers.
He usurps his ‘rational' brother, either by dispossessing or killing him.’
The second myth is also seen in an early poem,The Rape of Lucrece , which has its origins in the story of Tarquin's rape.
He is banished for his crime, she kills herself, and the Roman monarchy is brought to anend.
This historical anecdote is mutated in the plays until, by a curious inversion, Tarquin's crime becomes identified with a kind of puritan or Jehovan rage against licentiousness.
In Measure for Measure , Tarquin's rape is represented by Angelo's ravishment of Isabella; in Othello , rape is modified to killing; in Lear to banishment.
In all cases, though, the symbolic rape is occasioned not by the hero's lust but by his deluded abhorrence of female wantonness (‘What!
Not a whore?’).
In the course of the plays, these elements of the mythic equation ceaselessly combine, entwine, and recombine as the archetypes refract, reflect and fuse into each other(‘and nothing is but what is not’).
The work of tracing this process is arduous, daunting, reductive.
The more mythological growth hacked through, the less likely it seems that a clearing will ever be reached.
No matter: as the Ultra to Shakespeare's Enigma, Hughes continues relentlessly to crack the code of symbolic language and translate it into his own cryptological system: ‘[Othello]plunges into the skein of Iago's Adonis words, and stands up in them transformed, as Tarquin stood up transformed in the skin of Adonis, over the bed of Lucrece.
This sems to be saying that what destroys the Goddess is the Goddess.
It seems to be saying that the Queen of Hell, separating from the Sacred Bride/Divine Mother, becoming the Boar, fusing with Adonis, transforming him to Tarquin, and then destroying the Sacred Bride/Divine Mother under the illusion that she is the Queen of Hell, is the perpetuum mobile of the Equation.’
Got that?
Like an artist adding pencil strokes to a sketch until the likeness is obscured by the graphite in which it is rendered, the harder Hughes tries to clarify his argument, the more impenetrable it becomes.
By the halfway stage he has taken on the slightly desperate, bloodshot aspect of the tragic hero about to be engulfed by the forces he has unleashed: ‘I shall resolutely ignore everything but the skeletal essentials of my theme,’ he declares (‘Off, off you lendings!’).
‘If the X-ray plate moves even slightly out of focus, everything will disappear in the mass of complications.’
This is scorched-earth commentary, razing to the ground everything that might provide some cover for his quarry, stripping the plays of all that renders them humanly habitable.
The fact that his poetic energy here and thre threatens to burst free of the  mstic sticgridloc only enhances the point.
Personally I can't help thinking that we might be better off waving goodbye to these Sacred Brides and Divine Mothers and starting over with women and mums.
But whether Hughes is right or wrong in his overall thesis is less an issue than the incidental , sacrificial cost of an undertaking which — by another twist of tragic irony — shunts aside that which it holds most dear.
Significantly, some of the most illuminating comments in the book would have been excised if Hughes had pursued his task with quite the systematic rigour he commends.
‘From the King's first words: ‘What bloody man is that? ' ugly questions begin to stick to Macbeth.’
This lodges in the mind precisely because it floats free of the mythic grist.
Penetrating and casual, it has the startling, overlooked obviousness of Coleridge's famous marginal annotations.
We should hope that Hughes, having taken his soliloquy, will one day transcribe more of these asides.
In the meantime, the random scatter of insights prompts one to appeal to Hughes with Keats' suggestion, modestly opposed to the schematic might of The Godess essof Complete Being : ‘Wheneer eryou write, say a word or two on some passage in Shakespeare that may have come rather new to you.’
Law's empire ADVOCATES David Pannick Oxford University Press, £15 Conor Gearty
One of the most refreshing aspects of our society is the extent to which it despises lawyers.
There is something spiritually uplifting about the continued failure of these professional advocates to persuade us of their own worth.
One of the joys of late Thatcherism was the spluttering indignation that greeted Lord Mackay's proposal to modify the Bar's closed shop and end other antediluvian work practices.
Lord Lae declared that ‘oppression does not stand on the doorstep with a toothbrush moustache and a swastika armband’; and millionaire QCs, who think legal aid is something once organised by Bob Geldof, spoke movingly about their willingness to take the next indigent client who wandered into their chambers with a blank cheque.
Mistaking articulacy for intelligence and plummy accent for acumen, the lawyers forgot what the public knows: that insincerity is what theytdo for a living.
This book gives some clues, albeit unwittingly, as to why advocates are so disliked.
Its market seems to be the lawyers themselves: ‘If, as is hoped and expected, the Bar continues to thrive and prosper, its future members require an explanation of the characteristics of the unique profession of advocate which theyare to join.’
What follows is a gossipy, racy account of funny incidents in court and counsels' past deeds of daring and defiance.
It is well written and often hilarious.
There is little or no discussion of principle.
The reader feels entertained, but in an excluded sort of way, rather as though he or she were the butler at a particularly lively dessert at Lincoln's Inn.
For the lawyers have it all sewn up.
Pannick takes us through the details.
Barristers may not be sued for negligence if they botch a case in court; nor as a general rule is their incompetence a ground of appeal against conviction.
Litigation is for other people.
Dereliction of duty may lead to disciplinary action — but this is conducted exclusivelyby the barristerstuemselves.
Furthermore, although ‘the advocate owes important duties to his client, even the wishes and instructions of a client form only a partial restraint on the liberty of counsel’.
As one law lord put it in 1967, it can be ‘very unpleasant’ and ‘hard’for the advocate ‘to explain to a client why he is indulging in what seems treachery to his client because of an abstract duty to justice and professional honour’.
It is this sense of losing control of one's life, of handing power over it to lawyers, that so terrifies potential litigants and alienates the rest of society from its advocates.
They seem like a private club of legal beings with a special language and their own incomprehensible codes of behaviour; a body of disinterested arguers, thriving like malevolen parasites on human tragedy and avarice.
Pannick is in many respects a mild reformer: more of a Gorbachev than a Yeltsin when it comes to this version of the one-party state.
He is critical of some of the excesses of self-protection that have occurred in the past, but is firm in his commitment to the cab-rank rule, under which, quoting Rumpole, it is the barrister's ‘sacred duty.
.. to take on anyone in trouble.
However repellent I may happen to find them.’
On the tricky fact that some passengers have more money than others (and Mr Pannick's taxi has been stopped very frequently by the government in recent years; he has had a special sign on it since 1988 that says ‘Junior council to the Crown, common law’), the author declares that the authorities ‘must make expenditre reon legal aid a high priority and that the defects in the structure of legal aid are in need of urgent repair’.
Politicians, whether cynically or not, have so far dismissed such claims as pleas for a lawyers' welfare state.
At present, law's empire is constrained by the domestic sovereignty of parliament.
If the European Convention on Human Rights is incorporated into our law, political power will relocate itself in the Royal Courts of Justice, and advocates will be deciding the law on abortion, on Sunday trading, on political and tobacco advertising, and the like.
We will all be reading this book for tips about our new rulers.
After Byron CLAIRE CLAIRMONT AND THE SHELLEYS Robert Gittings and Jo Manton Clarendon Press, Oxford £20 Loraine Fletcher
Claire Clairmont saw Lord Byron for the last time in November 1821, when her carriage was edged off the road outside Empoli by his magnificent coach and four with its wagon train and travelling menagerie.
Three years earlier they had had a brief affair.
The result was Allegra, whom Clairmont loved but reluctantly gave up to him, since the Shelleys insisted it would be best for the child.
At this final glimpse, he was going to join a new mistress in Pisa, while Clairmont went on to Florence, then shrouded in thick fog.
It's almost too neatly symbolic, and Gittings and Manton make no comment.
But their book redresses the marginalisation in her liftime imeand the obscurity afterwards.
Putting Clairmont at the centre casts a slightly different light on familiar figures: Byron seems more brutal, Mary Shelley more querulous, Percy Shelley more responsible; and for once, her mother gets a decent mention.
Her mother was William Godwin's second wife, and Clairmont grew up in a free-thinking household with her brother, illegitimate like herself, with Mary Wollstonecraft's daughter by Godwin — another Mary of Clairmont's age — and with Fanny, Wollstonecraft's older illegitimate daughter.
The authors pass quickly over Fanny's suicide in Swansea, aged 22.
Godwin never claimed the body, and she was buried as a pauper.
Clearly there were secrets in the family this book doesn't explore.
Mary Godwin and Clairmont got out early when they ran away at 16 with Mary's lover Percy, had themselves rowed to France overnight, and set off towards Switzerland on foot.
Male authorship almost disappears, and the concentration is on loves and friendships, on the Shelleys' marriag, and Allegra.
Byron had agreed to keep her with him until she was seven; instead, he put her in a convent where she died at five.
Clairmont looked for surrogate children all her life.
In the same year, Percy Shelley and Edward Williams drowned when the Don Juan sank in the Bay of Spezia, and Clairmont cared for the widows in the first few weeks.
But she was still only 23 and lived almost another 60 years, surviving into a more censorious world.
Her stepsister settled in England, conformed outwardly, and applied herself to the advancement of her plump, dull son.
Jane Williams found a protector.
Clairmont became a progressive, enterprising governess and language teacher, travelling alone and working in Italy, Austria and Russia, with rare visits to England.
She stayed loyal to what was left of the Shelley circle.
When Mary Shelley, in midle age, wrote compromising letters to a handsome blackmailer, Clairmont paid to have them stolen and destroyed, and she helped her brother's family with money for many years.
Her rages were spectacular and her life was insecure in every way, but sex and cheerfulness ran in her veins.
Her fantasy about the 80-year-old Sir Timothy Shelley, whose death would secure her a legacy, reversing through the ageing process back to sprightly youth while everyone else cracks up around him is as funny as Byron and more good-humoured.
She learne to be philosophic: ‘I was young and poor and vain.
I am too old now to play at any mock repentance.’
This doesn't try to be a smart book, and is probably the last where Clairmont will be Claire, but it is quite unpatronising.
Robert Gittings died two months ago and will be much missed by readers who have enjoyed his biographies since The Living Year.
Claire Clairmont and the Shelleys is scholarly and sympathetic, and makes us feel the growth of Clairmont's mind.
The authors' feminism is unaggressive, but it's there, in deft quotations from her Journal , where the sublime landscapes and satiric humour reflect an essential Regency dichotomy, and in the record of her independence and generosity.
The fog of concealment THE DISPOSSESSED Robert Wilson and Donovan Wylie Picador, £6.99 Tony Parker
It's only the middle of April, but without a doubt this is going to be one of the best books of the year for me.
It's hard to imagine there will be anything more brilliantly conceived and more compellingly presented, unless there's something still to come, which will then have to be the book of the decade.
But it poses a problem.
When I read for review, I don't pause except to note outstanding paragraphs that will be apposite quotes to illustrate the book's content and virtues.
When I come to write them out, the review is planned around them to incorporate the most effective.
In this case, though, when I totalled their length it came to 2,000 words; and the books editor had asked for 700.
So should I put together a truncated anthology and add not an extra word?
That's in fact what I feel I ought to, since nothing of mine could ad to the fire and force and beauy that's here.
I'llsay it simply and clearly: this is a magnificent book.
Written with humility, perception, compassion and anger, each leading into the other, it's a portrayal of some of the unknown and disregarded men and women who live in the poverty of Thatcherite Britain today.c Its author, Robert Wilson, is still a young man, and already a writer of stature.
His first novel,Ripley Bogle , won a clutch of awards.
Now, in this documentary, he uses his powers of description and precision to report his observations of, and long regular conversations with, some of the poor of London, Glasgow and Belfast, and adds his reactions.
‘On top of their practical trials and obstacles,’ he comments, ‘the dispossessed are subject to the moral prodding of the rest of society.
The better-off feel it is their right to make comments and recommendations about how the poor should lead or improve their lives.
‘Why don't they get a job?'
‘Why don't they stop having so many children?'
‘Why don't they take a course of adult education?
Why don't they make adequate provision for their children?'
‘Why do they smoke or drink or bet (or breathe)?'
‘Why don't they improve themselves?’
He continues crunchingly: ‘You might as well advise them to win a gold medal in the Olympic 100 metres.
Self-help has become a vicious and patronising fiction which is deployed to excuse society's neglect of its lowest earners.
Such moral cowardice stems from a refusal to comprehend poverty as a moral or political isue as well as a social one.’
And his collaborator Donovan Wylie's superb photographs don't merely illustrate or complement his text; they give it a further dynamic depth and dimension.
Of all the indictments of the ethos of Thatcherism, this is one of the most scathing and impressive; the more so for Wilson's own discomfort about writing it.
He's unpatronising towards the individuals whose lives and circumstances illustrate his subject, but he continually questions his own attitudes and motivation.
And this is not just a generalised and detached polemic against injustice by an educated man.
Dissecting and describing, he makes you not only know but feel what it's like to live without a phone and be totally dependent on erratically functioning call boxes for the battle-lines on which to fight for late or lost benefit payments.
Remorselessly, he itemises the way the government and its media lapdogs spread the fog of concealment.
‘The increase in hardship for the poor is not happening.
The complaining deprived are liars and parasites.
The witnesses, the bystanders who see and report on the empirical evidence are blind or mad or Marxist.
The poor are better off than ever before.
Titanic pay increases and tax cuts for the wealthy and prosperous are of material benefit to the poor.
Unemployment is falling rapidly.
Housing is fine.
Stae benefit is higher than ever before and provides more adequately for those in need.
Homelessness is a little local difficulty.
The National Health Service is now better than ever.
Marty is a liar: Gabrielle is a fool: Henry isa whinge: Alan had it all wrong’(they were some of those he talked to).
To which h adds four words of his own: ‘The government is lying.’
I've passed 700, but I'd like to add six more.
Buy it; read it; give it.
High theory CRACK WARS: LITERATURE, ADDICTION, MANIA Avital Ronell University of Nebraska Press, £21 Marek Kohn
‘Literature has to be seen wearing something, it cannot simply circulate its non-being, and almost any article will do.
This would affirm at least one value of the book review as that legal force which covers up the work.’
Legal?
Pleasant as it would be, we reviewers enjoy no statutory authority.
We are, of course, at liberty to employ adjectives like ‘legal’ as an inexpensive way of giving our texts the look of authority.
What's sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander.
As for covering up the work,Crack Wars nees that about as much as an Egyptian mummy needs a paper bag over its head.
Its obscurantism is, to use a modish expression thatcfinds predictable favour in its pages,fractal .
So what else is it wearing?
A canon, for one thing: inaugural quotations in large type, like mottoes on statuary, from Heidegger, Beckett and Flaubert.
A lot of white space, the better to emphasise the exquisiteness of its thought, for another.
And most strikingly, an extremely lovely binding of multi-coloured boards and a textured jacket with the title indented, white on white; the finishing touch is not one but three place-marking ribbons, for reading at several different levels.
This is a precious text, its publishers and authors are saying, that gloriously defies vulgar commercial logic.
The title is one of lit crit's more egregious red herrings, since the payload of the book is a reading of Madame Bovary .
‘To gain access to the question of Being-on-drugs we have had to go the way of literature,’ Avital Ronell proclaims.
Not one for false modesty, she cites Hegel on Antigone and Freud on Oedipus Rex as antecedents.
She raises expectations by wondering whether drugs might actually embody ‘the structure that is philosophically and metaphysically at the basis of our culture’.
It's certainly true that drugs are assumed to have a special, morbid logic of their own, rather than to be aspecific case of general patterns of human behaviour.
The problem is that to argue the latter leads rapidly to banal coclusions.lusions Pretty much any habit can be described asa form of addiction; so what?
Ronell avoids the trap by proceeding in ever-decreasing circles — or fractal geometry, as it is now known.
Frustratingly, the habit persists even when she's holding a strong hand.
Yes, drugs are indeed an ‘impacted signifier’; yes, American fears of intrusion and otherness are at the coreof their meaning.
But within a couple of pages, it's back to the hollow sound of random jottings.
Having noticed the fertility ofodrugs as metaphor, what Ronell wants is not to explore the cultural meaning of drugs, but to get a piece of the action for herself.
She seems a little slow off the mark when she asserts that the attempt to control drugs became ‘a War only when crack emrged’.
This is rather like saying the second world war only started when the doodlebugs started falling.
Rhetorically and strategically, the war was in full swing before crack was identified as the principal enemy.
(As for the war metaphor itself, that began to appear not long after the first world war stopped.)
There are certainly pretty aperçus to be found, such as the observation that men objected to women smoking in public because one smokes for oneself: it was the display of female narcissism (that got up their noses.
In the end, though, the verdict on Crack Wars depends not on its insights, but whether you like the style.
It is decadent literature, intoxicated with its own rarefication and artifice, its theatrical élitim mand its lofty decination inationto oblige.
The prose poem is back, posing as theory.
The crack in Crack Wars is between its hauteur and its need to be hip.
Ronell curls the toes with a sequence in the style of a cyberpunk novel, and a series of concluding dialogues, or ‘installations’, featuring Heidegger, Freud, Derrida (‘Stay cool.
I've gotta run’) and Faust as a rock star wearing a virtual reality DataGlove.
The American twang lowers the tone, frankly.
Perhaps the thing to do would be to translate it into French and back again.
Cold cuts UNDERWORLD Peter Conrad Chatto & Windus, £14.99 Robert Carver
Twenty years ago, the grim, dystopian urban setting of Peter Conrad's first novel would have been a Clockwork Orange type of futurist nightmare.
Today it is merely where we live now: sprawling cities with the rich in their high-rise steel and glass ghettos, with a marginalised underclass, pathetic and dangerous, occupying the waste ground and the rotting slums.
All aroun are armed cops, serial murders, hideous rapes, theft as an industry, the random abduction and dismemberment of strangers.
Although precisely observed, the location of Conrad's city is left vague.
The palm trees, freewas sand towers hint at a cross between LA and Nw York; but the underclass characters — Wiff, Clem, Jacko, Horry, Mona, Athol — seem Australian.
Indeed, they might have stepped out of a mid-period Patrick White novel.
One of the wealthy, a nameless businessman, takes a short cut one day through the valley where the low-lifers hang out.
Usually they merely rob their victims; this time, for some unknown reason, one of them decides — or ispersuaded by the victim himself — to kill.
The body is then dismembered, fed to the dogs.
Its severed head is found a few days later, wrapped in plastic, and used as a football by some local kids.
Paul, an architect, and Kate, his artist girlfriend, are quite improbably drawn into the world of the underclass, and almost killed.
The murderer, however, does not get his way.
A reference at the end to Orpheus torn apart by the Dionysian women, his head pulled off, invites us to reinterpret the action in the light of myth and allegory.
Peter Conrad's previous books of critiism ismand autobiography have shown him to be a master of a certain style of brilliant, allusive, penetrating prose.
He is also, in that double-edged English sense, ‘clever’: immnsely selywell-read, cultivated, and knowledgable to a degree rarely found except in such fellow colonial over-achievers as Clive James and Germaine Greer.
This first novelois enviably well-crafted; the learning and breadth of reference are all that one would expect from a fellow of Christ Church, Oxford.
A D Hopeprotested that Patrick White always wrote ‘the ribbon of tea wound through him’ instead of‘he drank a cup of tea’.
Conrad is of the ribbon of tea school; of the arch, striving simile that can sometimes topple over into preciousness.
What is much more serious, however, and what prevents this novel taking flight is the absence of character development or even differentiation.
Kate, Paul, the losers and villains, all appear merely as authorial conceits, unreal and without substance.
We are never engaged in their lives; we do not believe in them, and as a result do not care about them.
They never manage to engge gethe reader at any level except the cerebral.
A severed head is, in fact, an apt metaphor for this novel.
It is all scintillating word-play, dazzling but lifeless.
There is a sort of self-regarding coldness about these bravura pyrotechnics that brings Martin Amis to mind, although Conrad is the brighter and more perceptive writer, as well as possessing the maturer mind.
Both of them seem to have decided to become novelists with teeth gritted, by sheer force of will.
Neither seems remotely interested in the characters they invent as anything more than reflections of authorial narcissism.
They may both be the most humble men in Christendom, but their fiction gives off a sulphurous whiff.
‘The novel must tell a story,’ said Stendhal.
‘Stuff you, froggy,’ our brat-pack novelists hooted back years ago.
Character, narrative, plot — only a dogged, dull-witted plodder like Malcolm Lodgebury bothers with that sort of stuff now.
Orwell claimed the novel was an essentially protestant art form; increasingly it appears to me that it must in the broadest sense be a Christian-humanist endeavour.
A novel without any compassion is one without life.
The savage misanthropy of Swift, the bitter cynicism of Waugh do not preclude such compassion, though it may be twisted, bleeding and mutilated by suffering.
In terms of sheer craft, Conrad is as good a writer of prose as Patrick White, which is saying a great deal.
What he lacks, though, is White's flayed Christian moral sense: hs profound, compassionate identification with his characters' sufferings, and through them with the world's.
He lacks, in Norman Mailer's words, the wound.
Left outside PrintOut Boyd Tonkin
What happens to the left when its ideas can ignite professional élites, but leave too many of the people cold?
This is the distance that divides Cambridge from Basildon (to pick two of last week's most neatly symbolic results), and we shall hear more of it soon.
In Britain, it's a worrying gap; in the US, an unbridgeable chasm.
There, the voters' rightward drift has pushed Republicans into the White House for 20 years out of the past 24.
At the same time, radicals have entrenched their small empires of dissent in the universities.
A slightly sinister new book called Anti-Americanism: critiques at home and abroad 1965-1990 (Oxford University Press, £27.50) by the conservative sociologist Paul Hollander reveals the cost of this permanent exile from power.
Hollander is a sort of neo-McCarthyite.
As his title hints, he treats opposition to US foreign and domestic policy on campuses, in the Hollywood of Oliver Stone and Jane Fonda, and in pockets of the East Coast media as tantamount to betrayal of the nation's core values.
Only a fanatic — or a new witch-hunter — could enjoy his sour accumulation of leftist words and deeds.
His trick is to invert cause and effect.
Typically, he will cite the film All the President's Men as one of liberal Hollywood's morale-sapping strikes at US institutions without ever noticing that Richard Milhous Nixon managed more than a bit of subverting on his own account.
Hollander can make his case seem plausible because the right has steered the US state for so long that any non-trivial critique now sounds like treason.
An intellectual opposition walled up inside its PC citadels becomes vulnerable to this kind of attack.
Fatally, it may also lose interest in talking to the vulgar herd outside.
The US experience offers some salutary warnings.
In the old South, for example, Duke University stands as a bastion of what Hollander would call ‘anti-American’ thought.
It gives a plush institutional home to a constellation of left-leaning stars, from the critic Fredric Jameson to the Chilean writer Ariel Dorfman.
Yet Duke sits alone in the right-Republican sea of North Carolina.
For the all the impact it has on the local political climate, it might as well be in Alaska.
Disappointed yet again, the British intellectual left will be tempted to build up its own Dukes — in higher education, local government, scientific research and the arts — and damn the world outside.
For left-liberal ideas, that would guarantee a future of comic irrelevance, on a par with the doctrinal wrangles of the Church of England.
If the non-Tory intelligentsia truly wants to do more than tinker in its own backyard, it must look for a route to power that can connect Cambridge with Basildon.
ENDGAMES WEEKEND COMPETITION
No 3222 Set by Lew Bellringle You were asked to produce a song  writtenby a convert to an unlikely cause: for example, Bob Dylan supporting the Ku Klux Klan.
Report by Msde Meaner Not bad.
Not bad at all.
One or two of you sent in real song titles and ascribed them to particular people.
In the case of Jessica Sproule, the songs were sung by politicians: for example, ‘The Man That I Love’ by John Major about Neil Kinnock.
Andrew Jackson got a bit nearer what I thought we were asking for with his ‘Crazy For You’ from Madonna in support of the Official Monster Raving Loony Party.
But is this really an unlikely choice?
The rest all happily sent in rewritten songs by real song-writers.
Sid Field asked whether dead ones were accepted and John Stanley sent in a Bob Dylan song, saying he was the only ‘modern whose lyrics I coul get my hands on without going back to the Bard, and I thought that wasn't what you wanted’.
And why not?
If James Comyn can send in Tennyson's ‘Come into the Polling Booth, Maud’ in support of Sinn Fein— sadly not a winner — then anything goes.
Ten pounds to the winners, plus an extra fiver for Bill Greenwell and George Simmers.
I'm not sure about rhyming perestroika with balalaika, Chas Garvey, but I'll let it pass.
Hon menshes to R J Pickles for Tom Paxton's ‘Keep the Bomb’ and Simon Herbertson's ‘Let's Bomb Libya’by Joni Mitchell.
No 3225 Set by Watson Weeks Following the TV exposé of the horrors/miracle of being at the school founded by A S Neill, could we have a Speech Day address by the principal of Summerhill; an explanation by a parent of why they have chosen it; or a statement by a former pupil of the advantages gained by a Summerhill education.
Max 250 words and in by 30 April.
George Formby on capital punishment
Now I go hanging felons
To earn an honest bob —
For a Brylcreemed sadist
It's a dead exciting job:
A public hangman you would be
If you could see what I can see
When I'm hanging felons.
I like to chat, a cheerful sap,
But nearly every hapless sap
Insists that I should shut my trap
When I'm hanging felons.
In my profession I'll work fast
To earn a decent cheque
And all you have to have to help
Is just a scrag of neck.
There's women give me right what-for
As they come through the death-cell door:
Their feet, they hardly touch the floor
When I'm hanging felons;
Should fellows ask about my kit
‘Will it be quick?’ my answer's fit —
‘You'll have to hang about a bit’
When I'm hanging felons;
A man they have here in the tank
Says ‘I'm from Yorkshire, may I thank —’
I give his lever such a yank
When I'm hanging felons.
In my profession I am known
For quite a pleasant chap,
But when they want last games of cards
I only play at Snap —
It's a job that just suits me
A public hangman you would be
If you could see what I can see
When I'm hanging felons…
Woody Guthrie defends the Council Tax
This band is your band,
That band is my band;
Yours is a low band,
While mine's a high band.
The Council Tax is
A rather good scheme —
The Tories care for you and me!
I'll pay a high tax,
You'll pay a low tax;
But though it's banded,
No one pays no tax.
It's simpler than rates,
Fairer than Poll Tax —
The Tories care for you and me!
Noel Coward — for Communism
We musn't let those charming Commies down,
A spot of slap and tickle
Neath the hammer and the sickle,
Reminds me when with Marlene
We discovered sweet Joe Stalin.
Knees-upping like some Volga ‘Mother Brown’!
We musn't let those charming Commies down,
It's true we were both tremblin'
When we first entered the Kremlin,
But, heigh-ho,perestroika !,
Tony Benn played balalaika,
As Khrushchev camped it in a georgette gown.
We musn't let those charming Commies down,
The poor dears pulled their belts in,
As demanded by Bo Yeltsin,
Whilst Pete the Painter's Dulux
Was seized by a load of kulaks,
When madly touching up drab Moscow town.
We musn't let those charming Commies down,
From Chichester to Corby,
Folks fret for departed Gorby,
As brooding in his dacha,
Billet-doux-ing Maggie Thatcher,
He pleads: ‘Darlink, don't let us Commies down!’
Sting — a song for Opec
The oil man stands and surveys the field
Mind full of images of earth's rich yield
Soon the thick black life blood will come pumping
through
Pumping its goodness for me and for you
Beneath the sand
Beneath the sea
They drill for you
They drill for me
Time was
When the world was cold
No central heating to warm young and old
Time was
When the world was slow
No cars or planes to speed you as you go
But the time is now
And the oil-producing nations
Deserve our thanks
For their gift to civilisation
Beneath the sand
Beneath the sea
They drill for you
They drill for me
Drilling for our children
Drilling for our friends
Drilling to put the power
In my Mercedes Benz
Bob Dylan comes out for ultra-right Pat Buchanan
Hey, Mr Pat Buchanan, you're the man for me;
I'm just askin' for to go the way you're goin' to;
Hey, Mr Pat Buchanan, you're the man for me;
In the jingle jangle circus I'll come following you.
Take me for a ride on your travels nationwide,
And don't leave me on the side,
For I want you as my guide,
And I'm carried on the tide
Which will take you to the right land that you're seekin'.
I'm ready to go anywhere,
I'm ready for to fade
Into your great parade.
Just tell me what to say;
I won't blunder it.
Richard Rogers and Lorenz Hart back Michael Heseltine
My funny Heseltine,
Sweet comic Heseltine,
Your words reach each Tory heart.
You're quite unseatable,
And almost uneatable,
From lesser men you stand apart.
You possess Max Miller's cheek
And his knockabout technique,
It's no wonder women shriek,
Once you start.
So don't cut your hair for me,
Not if you care for me,
Stay, Michael Heseltine, stay!
Each day is Heseltine's Day.
Johnny Mercer proselytises for the Catholics
Ritualistic, that's my style,
Genuflecting down the aisle.
Ain't worn condoms for a while.
My soul's gotta home.
The only place I'll hang my hat is Rome.
Swing that incense, wear that cope,
So long Baptists, howdy Pope.
'Cause I like a statue that bleeds;
I like Saint Peter's, Rome.
Oh confessor, give a blessin' —
To you I like confessin'
That the only place I'll hang my mitre's Rome.
John Lennon writes for the NF
Imagine there's no crime waves
Imagine that there's jobs
For all the truly British,
Imagine there's no yobs.
Imagine there are homes for all
Who truly do belong
Imagine that we're proud to sing
A patriotic song.
Imagine that all strangers
Are tempted to go home,
To take our British life style
To lands across the foam.
Imagine that Great Britain
May fly its flag again
And raise its head across the world,
A race of gentlemen.
BACKCHAT Morticia de Meaner
I hate flying.
I always have a premonition that something will go wrong: either that the plane will blow up or crash.
So I was quite pleased, at the end of my United Airlines flight to Chicago, to discover merely that one of my two bags was missing.
At Chicago airport, I filled in a ‘missing baggage’ form and set off to my hotel, minus socks, tights, knickers and shoes, except for the ones I was wearing.
The shoes I had on were white plastic trainers in need of polish.
The polish, natur-ally, was in the missing bag.
The text on the form had an ominous tone.
If the search for my luggage was ‘eventually’ unsuccessful, reimbursement would be on the basis of its weight.
Internat-ional rates are approximately US$20 a kilo.
In the event of multiple bags being weighed together, the weight is apportioned equally between them.
It was just my luck to have bags made of light nylon, weighing in at ten kilos in total.
My first tip for the wise traveller is pack as many old newspapers as you can, up to the maximum permitted weight.
My second is never give up hope of eventual restitution.
Even when the bag arrives five days later, several kilos lighter, half the contents having been nicked.
Missing were expensive black leather boots, the white shoe polish, a jumbo jar of Nivea.
The black polish, needless to say, was still in the bag.
You might think, having filled in a claim for US$110 for the missing items, that would be it.
You would be wrong.
After a month, no cheque had arrived.
So I rang United Airlines head office, at my own expense, and spoke to a woman who could find no record of me on the UA computer.
She advised me to ring the free 0800 number in London.
An initially kind-voiced woman took down my details and advised me to ring Chicago.
I said Chicago had told me to ring London.
Could she not ring Chicago for me?
The woman said she wasn't authorised to ring Chicago.
She said soothingly that, really, I shouldn't worry as these things often took three to four weeks to sort out, and I should carry on waiting.
I pointed out that it had already been a month, and there was no record of me on the Chicago computer.
She suggested I might like to write a letter to head office.
I countered with the Nivea, the boots, the polish.
She said, really, it would be better if I rang Chicago.
I asked who was going to pay for the call.
She offered me a number I could ring in Chicago to make a claim for making a call to Chicago.
In the end, she asked me to fax her my details, saying she would fax them on.
A week later, I gave in and rang Chicago.
A woman in the UA baggage claims department checked on the computer, but could find no record of me.
The agent then put me on hold while she consulted a colleague.
The colleague thought she remembered seeing my name somewhere.
And, really, I was sure to hear within ten working days.
Within a week, I received a duplicated form to fill in stating all my details and demanding proof that I had been on that flight.
I was asked to check the items weren't still in my house.
In despair, I did nothing for another week.
But before I had finished this wearisome task, the cheque arrived out of the blue.
Oddly enough, had the whole bag disappeared, UA would have ended up paying US$100.
With only half the contents missing, it has paid me ten dollars more.
In America, the numbers of complaints each airline gets of lost luggage is available from the US Department of Transportation.
UA comes in the middle (with 6.5 complaints per 1,000 passengers).
Here, all is shrouded in secrecy.
When I rang the Department of Transport, a press officer cheerfully said his department hadn't a clue what was happening.
‘The airlines all know, of course, but they tend not to make it public for commercial reasons.’
At least Americ-ans can choose to fly with the airline with the best chance of getting their luggage through in one piece.
FORTEANA A hand-picked review of the weird and wonderful by ‘Fortean Times’ editor Paul Sieveking
Since the 1940s, evidence has accumulated to show the fundamental importance of touch to healthy physical and emotional development.
With the increasing toleration of ‘fringe’ med-icine, orthodox doctors are hesitant to dismiss the laying on of hands as flim flam and the positive results merely the result of the placebo effect.
One gifted person is the 37-year-old Irishman Finbarr Nolan who has featured several times in the Scot-tish press as a result of his ‘clinics’ in Ayrshire and Edinburgh.
Derek Waugh, a Customs officer, tore a tendon in his shoulder play-ing golf in 1990.
His GP referred him to hospital for a whole series of treatments, but nothing worked.
A friend told him about Nolan and, after three visits to his Ayrshire clinic, he was ‘as good as cured’ and playing golf again.
Schoolboy John Stevens from Uddingston suffered from rheumatoid arthritis as a child and spent a year in hospital.
When he suffered a relapse, his parents sent him to see Nolan.
By the time he talked to Ann Shaw of the Glasgow Herald (5 June 1991), he was ‘almost pain free’ and playing football again.
The seventh son of a seventh son has traditionally been able to heal conditions such as eczema and asthma.
Nolan, who has the requisite number of uncles and elder brothers, has treated a wide range of diseases since the time when, aged two, he cured another child of ringworm.
People flocked to him in County Cavan and he became famous in Ireland with saturation media coverage.
Nolan's method is to put his hands on the bare flesh at the point of the complaint for a minute or two.
The patients whisper their complaints: ‘Cancer…diabetes…arthritis…depression…
’ He offers no trimmings, no religious or medical mumbo-jumbo.
After the people have been touched, they drop a £10 note, the usual donation, on the small table.
Three visits are suggested.
Nolan, now married with two children, has tried several times to give up healing, but people won't let him.
Nolan lists some diseases he seems to have more success with than others: arthritis, migraine, bad backs, depression, ME.
I am reminded of another Irishman — or rather an Englishman born in Ireland — renowned for his healing hands: Valentine Great-rakes, known as ‘the stroker’.
Born in Affane, County Waterford, on St Valentine's Day in 1629, he was seized with the notion, in 1662, that he could cure the King's Evil or scrofula.
This hideously disfigur-ing disease was very common, and traditionally thought curable solely by the touch of the monarch.
Greatrakes, however, found he could cure advanced scrofula, and soon extended his treatment to dropsy, ague, rheumatism and many other ailments.
He accepted no payment, and ignored a ban on his stroking by the Dean of Lismore.
The sick flocked to him, and in 1666 he toured England, staying for several months in Lincoln's Inn Fields, where he treated a great number of sufferers with varying success.
He failed at Whitehall before the king, but made converts of Robert Boyle, Andrew Marvell, John Evelyn and many others ‘of known honesty and intelligence’.
Some of his cures were certified by the newly formed Royal Society of Medicine.
Greatrakes became the object of controversy with fierce polemics in the public prints; and it is an impressive testimonial to the veracity of his healing powers that he was not burnt as a witch like many faith healers of the time, or at least arraigned for usurping the royal prerogative.
It was not as if he was protected by politics: he had served in the regiment of Colonel Robert Phaire, a regicide.