

CONTENTS
REGULARS
5 Editorial
Labour's democracy of the dead
7 Shoreditch,
Roger Woddis
8 Diary
What do Benny Hill and Kate Adie have in common?
Sean French on the twists of fame — and prejudice
9 John Cole
Post-election elections pervade the House
10 Political column
Uniting Europe means rejecting its economic policies, says Ken Livingstone
11 Political sketch
Edward Pearce on Madam Speaker — in living colour
15 American diary
Alexander Cockburn on the fear that comes of living through an earthquake
27
Letters
30 Fringe benefits
Colin Ward on the allotment bonfire's ashes
45 Endgames
Competition, Cryptic Quiz, Salamanca
47 Backchat
Mat Coward reveals his deputy leadership platform
47 Forteana
Paul Sieveking on the phantoms of the Beltway
FEATURES
12 The Bolsheviks are coming
Market reforms have revived a left-wing opposition out of the ashes of the outlawed Communist Party, says Roy Medvedev
16 Shut up or get out
Michael Meacher, MP, on the threat to people who blow the whistle on their employees
17 Phoney tapping
The FBI wants to hear all telephone calls.
Jolyon Jenkins reports
18 Vive l'histoire
Is France accepting its part in the Holocaust, asks Lucy Wadham
19 The priests have it
Anti-racists are failing to challenge the iron grip of religion on minority cultures, says Julie Bard
20 Watch this space
Have scientists just made the cosmological breakthrough of all time?
Not quite, says Pat Coyne
21 MAYDAY SPECIAL:
Heydays and low days Trevor Fishlock on the Soviet Union's final throes;The new gulf war Public culture is left; private culture is right.
Sarah Benton minds the gap;The pain in Spain The underclass is striking, the unions are united, and Felipe González has run out of ideas, says Denis MacShane;Hooked on IT Gary Herman on how technology is helping the Labour movement to organise itself internationally
ARTS & MEDIA 31
Back to church?
Marek Kohn looks at TV's brief histories of time and space, and watches God return to science
Film
Anne Billson gazes into the abyss of ‘Grand Canyon’; and Ruth Picardie explores queer, gay and homophobic cinema
Art
Thérèse Oulton has survived art-world fashion to re-direct her career.
Mark Sladen reports
Festivals
Britain's Garden Festivals began as a way of throwing flowers at rioters.
Martin Parker examines their record
BOOKS 37
A new damp course
Stuart Weir finds too much scope for the strong state in Ferdinand Mount's programme for constitutional reform
History
Jan Marsh follows the parallel careers of radical heroines Beatrice Webb and Annie Besant; and Diarmaid MacCulloch enjoys the essays of Hugh Trevor-Roper
Fiction
Andrea Stuart tunes in to the rhythms of black history with Toni Morrison; Carol Rumens glimpses the glamour of old Russia with Tatyana Tolstaya; D J Taylor listens to the rural English past with Adam Thorpe
Ecology
Ruth Pavey wonders if global warming will really prove a gardener's godsend
PrintOut
‘Granta’ and its rivals
EDITORIAL Bringing new life Is John Prescott the man to provide a shake-up of Labour's’ democracy of the dead’?
Arise, Lord Whitty.
Arise, Dame Gould.
If, in that final act of patronage permitted to departing opposition party leaders, Neil Kinnock could be persuaded to put forward for peerage the names of the Labour Party general secretary, Larry Whitty, and its director of organisation, Joyce Gould, he might mark the end of his leadership by making some minor compensation for the mess he has left behind him.
Kinnock did much to knock the Labour Party, if not into the 1990s, then at least into something resembling a political organisation capable of escaping from the 1970s.
But the cost of his doing so has been revealed in all its starkness in the unseemly scramble for the succession that has followed his departure.
Last Friday's shambles, when Joyce Gould effectively re-wrote the leadership contest nomination rules to try to ensure that a leadership contest actually took place, was merely the nadir of a process that has seen the people's party acting according to the slogan of ‘all power to the apparatchiks’, and losing its soul, its sense of purpose, much of its membership — and the general election — along the way.
The problem is not the leadership, but the party.
In the long battle to combat the headbanging tendency of the far left, Labour has become a sterile shell: sanitised of socialism, anaesthetised against activism.
Opinion poll-led policy-making has proven a disaster, yet open policy discussion and theoretical debate remains near non-existent.
Reliance on the media to get across the party message has proven futile, yet party structures and membership have been left to decline.
Internal democracy has been stamped out.
Backbench MPs, and even out-of-favour shadow cabinet members have been sidelined and excluded from decision-making along with the trade unions and constituency parties.
The party is now run under a kind of democracy of the dead, whereby huge nominal majorities can be run up in pre-ordained electoral charades, but the real contests and choices have been fixed in advance by an ever-narrowing circle of a favoured élite.
Don't permit the unions' political levy-paying members a ballot to have their say on the leadership contest, because democracy turns out to be too expensive.
Rig the rules to prevent minority candidates getting nominated, because there's no room for the Campaign Group left even to be heavily defeated in what passes for a free election in the new model Labour Party.
Those party members who have been part of the fight for a fairer electoral system at Westminster may be wiser, for the time being, to turn their attentions to the internal so-called democracy inherited from those internecine struggles of the early 1980s.
Campaign for (Real) Labour Party Democracy, where are you now?
To repeat: the problem is not the leadership.
John Smith may prove to be the man to give Labour its best chance in a 1996 general election (although it cannot be good to have had him all but enthroned as leader before the leadership contest was even underway).
But so long as winning elections is seen as a mere matter of tweaking a market image, or of changing a brand title or logo, the whole enterprise is doomed to failure.
Labour, post-Kinnock, is saddled with a fundamentally undemocratic trade union link-up; an autocratic structure, which, in the absence of the autocrat, sees power pass to the autocrat's (unelected) nominees; and a policy and decision-making process that is as devoid of inspiration and new ideas as it is of input from the wider constituency of party members and supporters.
It is as if the entire party structure and philosophy had been geared towards the exclusion of participation and the discouragement of debate.
Only one person among the nominated leadership and deputy leadership candidates seems likely to be prepared to shake up — and open up — that structure, and to make participation and debate a duel priority.
It may be, then, that the best hope for a modernising, thinking and participatory Labour Party for the later 1990s lies in the election as deputy leader of the man the apparatchiks would like least in that position — John Prescott.
Bryan Gould, to whom is owed an immense debt of gratitude for the injection of some sort of discussion of policy into the leadership contest, would be free to develop the flow of new ideas in the party.
And some life might be breathed into Labour's democracy of the dead at last.
FOURTH ESTATE A regular monitor of the Tory press
22 April :Today (Motto: ‘Proper news not propaganda’) reports that ‘A Labour council has been branded ‘barmy' for sending a sociologist on a £10,000 European tour to study Nazis.
Birmingham city council says the tour will help it find new ways of dealing with racism.
But Tory leader on the council, Reg Hales, said: ‘I can see no reason for spending this type of money on a problem that does not exist in Birmingham.'’
Several papers report Bernie Grant's bid for the deputy Labour leadership.
The Express dubs the Grant-Livingstone team the ‘nightmare ticket’, and reminds us that Grant has sometimes been known to the tabloids as ‘Barmy Bernie’.
23 April : The Sun 's political affiliations continue to surprise.
Having last week announced that it is backing Ken Livingstone for the Labour leadership, it now says it supports the ‘Sun Readers' Party’.
No details are given of this hitherto unknown organisation, but the platform put forward by the paper looks like pure Thatcherism.
According to the Mail , ‘the Militant Tendency is poised to regain its power in the Labour movement by seizing control of the biggest civil service union’, the union being the CPSA.
It does not point out, or perhaps know, that the CPSA is not affiliated to the Labour Party.
24 April : The Sun seems to be having second thoughts about Ken Livingstone: ‘If the Labour Party had been led by John Smith over the last nine years, perhaps it would have been in power today,’ says an editorial.
‘By signalling the end for the trade union block vote he has brought an air of realism which was so markedly absent under Neil Kinnock.’
26 April : The Mail on Sunday comments on the calculation that the cosmos will remain habitable for 10 to the power of 76 years.
‘This must be good news for the Labour Party…
They still have plenty of time in which to get it right.’
27 April : The Express claims that the Kinnocks are moving house.
‘The couple took their daughter Rachel to view a £400,000 five-bedroomed detached house in a West London suburb at the weekend.’
It is surprised that Kinnock would be able to afford such a house on his £30,000 back-bencher's salary.
Robert Kilroy-Silk claims that Bryan Gould ‘has arrogated to himself the exclusive right to speak for southern England middle income groups.’
Once again, he points out that Gould is a New Zealander.
Today , commenting on the Labour leadership election, claims that ‘The only one who has been talking sense is John Prescott.
We do not suggest he would be the right Labour leader, but he is at least an honest and fearlessly outspoken politician.’
SHOREDITCH
More evidence that the general election was rigged has emerged.
Last week, Shoreditch reported on the situation in Exeter, where 1,000 extra votes were ‘mistakenly’ allocated to the Tory candidate.
According to the St Ives Times & Echo , similar funny business happened in Cornwall.
‘The police have been called in to investigate 100 complaints from electors who were denied their votes…
It has been alleged that on the 100 occasions, a vote had been cast by a mysterious proxy voter and therefore cancelled the polling ability of the voter.’
About 20 other people were denied a vote through a ‘computer error’.
The Tory, David Harris, held the seat by a mere 1,645 votes — less than the number of postal and proxy votes (3,355).
The acting returning officer for St Ives says that, to start with, most of the complaints about proxy voting came from the residents of old people's homes, but that other people have since said that they too were denied a vote.
Shoreditch's theory is that MI5 agents were trying to cast proxy votes on behalf of dead people still on the electoral register, but that in some cases they jumped the gun.
Any other similar anecdotes gratefully received.
Those expatriate Conservative voters in Singapore must have choked on their gin slings last week when they opened their copy of the Straits Times .
Above a picture of a grinning Ken Livingstone was the headline: ‘Left winger running for Tory leadership.’
What future is there for Paddy Ashdown?
If he cannot face another five years of leading the Liberal Democrats nowhere, perhaps MI6 can find a job for him.
Paddy-the-warrior and Paddy-the-lover are well known — but Paddy-the-spy?
If you consult Who's Who , you will read that, from 1971-76, Ashdown was first secretary of the UK Mission to the United Nations in Geneva.
But according to a front-page splash in Le Nouveau Quotidien , quoting a Swiss-based intelligence newsletter,Revue de la Sécurité , he was really MI6's Geneva station chief.
In this capacity, it is claimed, he was the main liaison officer with the secret anti-communist underground unit, P-26, set up by right-wingers in the Swiss army and government.
Ashdown, as a former SBS officer, was considered the perfect choice for advising P-26 on training and clandestine operations.
P-26, like Operation Gladio in Italy, has been exposed and disbanded, but the files left behind, according to the report, led Swiss investigators to Ashdown.
If Labour had won the election, it would have abolished the Broadcasting Standards Council, but thanks to the Conservative victory, the BSC has been saved for the nation.
Its priceless monthly bulletins will continue to add to the gaiety of nations.
April's report considers the question of balls and bollocks.
‘Mr Fraser of Wiltshire complained of bad language in an edition of the Channel 4 programme,Tonight With Jonathan Ross …the offending word arose in reply to a question about whether or not Paula Yates was going to have any more children.
She indicated that her husband, Bob Geldof, was not keen on the idea, and illustrated this with a reply which included the word ‘bollock'.
Channel 4 said that the word was used to describe that part of the body rather than gratuitously to offend…
’ The BSC agreed that bollocks [testicular]were OK, whereas bollocks [abusive]were not.
Mrs Bennett of West Yorkshire made a similar complaint about Lovejoy : the character ‘warned an acquaintance that someone looking for him ‘wants his balls on a fork'.’
After due consideration, the Committee thought this remark ‘was not out of context in a programme well known for its fictional exposure of the more dubious side of the antiques trade.’
How reassuring to know that the BSC's chairman, Lord Rees-Mogg, is passing the evening of his days in gainful employment.
Financial Times readers are more interested in sport than Sunday Sport readers, to judge by their television viewing habits.
New figures from the British Audience Research Bureau show that A Question of Sport is the sixth most popular programme among FT readers, but doesn't feature in the top ten Sunday Sport readers' list at all.
But the really surprising thing about the research is how similar the two sets of readers are in their tastes.
FT readers, far from watching The Money Programme ,Business Daily , or Walden , go for One Foot in the Grave ,EastEnders ,Love Hurts ,So Haunt Me ,The Bill ,Antiques Road Show ,Coronation Street and Murder Squad .
Sunday Sport readers, by way of contrast, favour EastEnders ,Coronation Street ,You've Been Framed ,Neighbours ,The Bill ,Murder Squad and Antiques Road Show .
What better evidence could there be of a nation at ease with itself?
Such is the interest in his John Major commemorative mug (as reported in last week's column) that Peter Jones, the Wakefield china magnate, is considering bringing out one of Edward Heath, to mark his Garter knighthood.
(The Thatcher mug has long been a best seller.)
Elements of the Heath design would include the Morning Cloud yacht and a conductor's baton.
Anti-Tories could buy all three and bang their heads together.
DIARY What to Benny HIll and Kate Adie have in common?
Sean French on the twists of fame — and prejudice
The third volume of Michael Holroyd's biography of George Bernard Shaw confirms Shaw's wonderful rejection of Samuel Goldwyn's offer for the rights to all the plays: ‘The trouble is, Mr Goldwyn, you are interested in art, whereas I am interested in money.’
(Infuriatingly, though, the notes are due to appear in a separate volume, which has still not been published, so it is impossible to tell whether the quotation comes from a letter, from conversation or from some unauthenticated report at second-hand.)
If authentic, it was a shrewd observation on Shaw's part.
The problem with the Hollywood film industry was not so much its desire for profit as its concern with other things, such as power, responsibility and morality.
A purely commercial operation would have been happy to finance product-ions by Orson Welles, who repeatedly proved himself capable of producing high quality material on a shoestring.
Nor was it just that he fell foul of the studio system.
If that had been the case, then he could at least have received finance in the eighties when rich and influential independent figures such as Steven Spielberg, Jack Nicholson and Warren Beatty — all of whom professed admiration for Welles — had the chance to help him get a film financed and passed.
Nor was it a matter of money when Thames Television decided to sack Benny Hill a couple of years ago.
I have little interest in the debate about his supposed sexism beyond a feeling that both the praise and the criticism of his small talent have been absurdly exaggerated.
Since Hill was at that time one of the most popular comedy stars in the world, one might have imagined that the company's duty to its shareholders was to maximise profits.
But the television executives had higher motives.
It seems that the ideals of the supposed alternative comedians had filtered through about eight years too late.
The real joke is that, by the time they made the decision, the alternative comedians were appearing in commercials and sitcoms of a kind indistinguishable from those they had once criticised.
By this time, the whirligig of time had actually brought Hill back into fashion, and I hope that his shade had a cackle at the sight of the Thames executives attempting to clamber back on to the bandwagon.
And now Kate Adie has become the Benny Hill of television journalism.
It must be clear to everyone that when the testimony of members of Colonel Gadaffi's government is used in the British press as reliable evidence against a female BBC correspondent, then that person is out of favour.
There is a strange scene in Shakespeare's Antony and Cleopatra that is generally, and wrongly, cut in performance.
Some of Antony's guards hear the sound of music from under the earth.
One soldier observes: ‘'TIS the god Hercules, whom Antony lov'd, /Now leaves him.’
The point of that scene, and of this whole great play, is to examine the strange moment when great people just don't have it any more.
Paul McCartney and Bjorn Borg both know about it.
James Callaghan talked in 1979, in private, of those moments where you feel that the tide of history has changed and cannot be resisted.
And the opposite is equally true.
Struggle as he might, John Major could do nothing to vanquish his own success.
At the peak of her success, Kate Adie was able to stand against Norman Tebbit and the Conservative government at the height of its triumphalism.
Now she is considered seriously under threat from people whose views of women would, under other circumstances, be treated as unworthy of respect.
And suddenly everything counts against her.
The media commentator Michael Leapman, writing in the Independent on Sunday , observed that ‘she has not usually done well in other roles…her Panorama programme on TV violence a few years ago was not judged a critical success.’
Who by?
I consider that programme to be by far the best report on the effects of screen violence to be shown in recent years.
Her only failure was to discover that the facts ran counter to popular prejudice.
Leapman also cited, as evidence of the crisis Adie faces, the preference of John Birt, the deputy director general of the BBC, for ‘specialist reporters over old-fashioned ‘firemen' like Ms Adie’.
By this, he must mean people such as the BBC economics editor, Peter Jay, with his record as chief assistant for Robert Maxwell, who was a fireman in the different, though equally old-fashioned, sense of one who takes pleasure in firing people.
On the rare occasions when I have met television journalists, I have been astonished by the hatred expressed for Adie, as well as by the vitriolic gossip about her, which subsequently proved to be entirely false.
It's the old story that women are still judged — for their looks, temperament, authority — in a way that men are not.
Can any reader imagine a female presenter who dressed like Ludovic Kennedy, postured like Jeremy Paxman, had a nose like Alastair Burnet?
In the next century, a historian will write a major book about Aids in the west that will rank with Norman Cohn's ‘Pursuit of the Millennium’ and Keith Thomas' ‘Religion and the Decline of Magic’.
One of its themes will have to be the confusion in our morality that the epidemic has exposed, and this has been much in evidence in the past few days in response to the ludicrous concert in commemoration of Freddie Mercury, and then the renewal of the controversial theory that Aids may not be linked to HIV at all, but instead, to cite one example, to promiscuous sexual activity that reputedly attacks the immune system.
The problem is not so much our ignorance over the issues relevant to a discussion of epidemiology and risk, appalling though that is, as the confusion of our feelings about sex itself.
Most of us have difficulty working out our own views about sexuality, let alone formulating a public policy.
On abortion, I suspect most people in practice would follow the example of cabinet ministers.
They are against it, except if they, their secret lover or their 14-year-old daughter is pregnant.
We now know that opinion polls are almost meaningless except as a rough guide to the sort of views that people believe they ought to express in public.
However, I would guess that, if there were a referendum on the issue in Britain, there would be a clear majority for making homosexual acts between consenting adults illegal.
The laws legalising homosexuality were a typical example of benign British hypocrisy, but they left us unprepared for much of the debate that would follow a then unforeseeable epidemic.
That part of the Aids debate that concerns homosexuals has been conducted in chaos.
Is promiscuous homosexual sex now wrong:
a)
only in the sense that driving while drunk is wrong, and would cease to be so if medical obstacles were removed?
b)
because it is forbidden by various religious sanctions?
c)
because it is immoral in a secular way, perhaps as a socially destabilising activity or a crude self-surrender to animal lust?,
d)
because many people find the idea of it repulsive?
And how many of the above would apply to a discussion of promiscuous heterosexual sex?
Much discussion of the issue in the press masquerades as a), but is in reality made up of various combinations of the other three.
When a leader in the Independent accuses Freddie Mercury of being a bad example because of homosexual acts committed in strictly guarded privacy before he realised he was at risk, it is using science as a screen for unexamined prejudice.
If a virus had begun to affect people who put crosses against Conservative candidates in general elections, I would presumably be arguing that this proved how immoral it was to vote Tory, but I hope nobody would believe me.
JOHN COLE The Voting must go on The public has done its bit: now MPs get their chance
Some people who are not very interested in politics probably have had their fill of elections.
But not only will real voters be asked to exercise the franchise on behalf of local councillors next Thursday, the Speakership and the Labour leadership elections have offered MPs a chance to play this most invigorating of democratic games.
When one examines the performance of the two latter sets of electors, the words ‘too clever by half’ spring to mind.
True, the way in which the general electorate pulled the wool over the eyes of pollsters, even exit pollsters, suggests sophistication is no long-er the exclusive prerogative of MPs.
But Westminster seems to have converted such mind-boggling sophistication into an art-form.
First, the Speakership.
The ancient tradition that the person elected had to be dragged to the chair by his sponsors dates from centuries when the Speakership was all too often a preliminary to the Tower, and the executioner's block.
Not that it is a post for the faint-hearted, even today.
Attacks on the occupant's blood-pressure can come nowadays, not from an overbearing monarch, but from an apparently limitless number of rebellious back-benchers, trying to establish control, or at least scrutiny, over a series of increasingly overbearing executives.
So, as Shakespeare wrote, ‘the whirligig of time…’
Midway through the last parliament, it was suggested that Speakers in future should be encouraged to resign well before a general election, so that the new appointee to this post of parliamentary referee — not to say paragon of impartiality — might be selected then, and enabled to face his local electorate, not as a partisan, but as ‘Mr Speaker seeking re-election’.
It was not to be.
Bernard Weatherill preferred to serve out his full term.
So Conservative candidates began to emerge.
Ministers were anxious, if they won the election, to have a Speaker from their own side.
This was as much on the ancient principle of ‘to the victor, the spoils’, as in any fear that the new occupant would carry his or her prejudices into the chair.
On the whole, impartiality has been well observed.
The trouble for the Tory whips, and for such organisers of backbench opinion as the Chairman of the 1922 Committee, Cranley Onslow, was that far too many Conservative contenders appeared: Peter Brooke, the former Ulster Secretary; Terence Higgins, a minister as long ago as Ted Heath's government, and chairman of the Treasury Select Committee; Sir Giles Shaw, another officer of the '22; Paul Channon, another former cabinet minister; Dame Janet Fookes, some Tories' hope as the first woman Speaker.
When the 1992 intake of new MPs took their first tentative steps round Westminster on Monday morning, the place was in turmoil.
Upstairs, the Parliamentary Labour Party was wrestling with Labour's serpentine leadership election rules.
Downstairs in the lobbies, Tories were running around in equal bewilderment over the Speakership.
With an hour to go before Betty Boothroyd faced her destiny, I suggested to a leading Tory fixer that his party was in a bit of a pucker over who its preferred candidate should be.
He replied Delphicly: ‘There's still lunch.’
It remains a mystery whether this meant he retained hopes that some deal could be stitched up at the Conservative tables in the Members' Dining Room, or was simply threatening to drown his sorrows.
Whichever, it did not work.
About 70 Conservative MPs decided to back a Labour Speaker, while most of the cabinet voted against her.
John Major, his new Leader of the House, Tony Newton, and the Chief Whip, Richard Ryder, abstained.
All the minority parties joined Labour in supporting Betty Boothroyd, and the Commons had made another piece of history.
The political significance of this is a matter of controversy.
Most MPs see the cross-party support for the new Speaker as an omen of a kinder, gentler House, a suitable legislature for the kind of country, ‘at ease with itself’, that John Major has said he wishes to create.
But some Tories think he might get more than he has bargained for.
Not, emphatically, because of Madam Speaker Boothroyd.
But because, as one inveterate rebel, whose battle honours go back far into Mrs Thatcher's reign, delightedly claimed after the election, there is a new mood abroad.
The vote showed, he said, that Conservative dissidents were no longer prepared to do what anybody — whip, 1922 committee officer, minister, or PM — told them.
The government had better learn to reach compromises with its own MPs before it got into a pickle.
It is always difficult to judge whether a government is better off, in terms of parliamentary safety, with a large or a small majority.
A headstone of Thatcherite granite stands over the ministerial grave of that consensual Tory, Francis Pym — in real life, still happily with us in the House of Lords.
He had the audacity to suggest, during the 1983 general election, that the government might be better off with a modest majority, than with the landslide that Labour's internal troubles seemed likely to produce.
Margaret Thatcher did not like that thought, not one little bit.
It was ‘ex-chief whip's talk’, she said, as if the use of that kind of skill were too sullying for a delicately brought-up gal like her.
When the election was won, most handsomely, Pym found himself on the backbenches.
Yet Mrs Thatcher's later experiences, most notably during the poll tax rebellions, suggested there might be something in the Pym theory of majorities.
The point my modern Tory rebel was making was a different one: that a government with a majority that could be eradicated if 11 of its MPs vote with the other side, or 22 abstain, does well to sound out its own supporters before going too far down a controversial road.
Better an early climb-down in some sheltered private meeting, he argued, than a humiliation on the floor of the House.
Well, we shall see.
Meanwhile, in another part of the forest, or rather Palace, the soi-disant ‘most sophisticated electorate in the world’, was making an equal mess of electing Labour's leader and deputy leader.
To be fair, that ‘MSEITW’ label was attached to the former electorate for the leadership, that is, Labour MPs alone.
The change to the electoral college in the 1980s abandoned sophistication for brute power, and sometimes chaos.
By the time you read these words, more horrors may have emerged.
Alternatively, the joyous sound of bells may be ringing out the tune of 'Those beautiful red roses that once you gave me’, all over sunlit uplands — though I doubt that.
At the moment of writing, Labour seems to have lumbered itself with a system in which thode entitled to nominate — Labour MPs — will have no reliable means of guessing whether they are wasting their nominations on a no-hoper.
Worse, Labour is accumulating fresh odium from having 40 per cent of the votes in its electoral college cast by union barons, after varying unsatisfactory forms of consultation.
It is one of the more exquisite forms of Catch 22 that leaders of the ‘moderate’ engineers' and electricians' union amalgamation, usually praised by the Conservatives as a model for other union leaders, are now available as evidence of the unsatisfactory nature of Labour's electoral system.
This is known by the cognoscenti as the ‘Michael Howard benefit match’.
The only lesson to be drawn from Westminster's two election dramas this week is that sticking-plaster is not a very satisfactory cure, except for minor ailments.
The chaos that preceded the Speakership election is not worth too much worry, since no doubt each one in this long series of contests will turn out differently from its predecessors.
But for Labour, there seems no satisfactory middle way of electing their two top people.
In future, they could either proceed to ‘one person, one vote’, like the Liberal Democrats, with all the problems this creates for a party whose structure is based on affiliated organisations.
Or they could return to election by MPs alone, a system belatedly accepted by the Tories, in place of their former Magic Circle.
Old Bill Shakespeare's whirligig of time again!
Political column Uniting Europe means rejecting its economic policies Ken Livingstone
When the new Parliamentary Labour Party gathered on Monday for its first meeting since the election, I thought we were entitled to an apology.
After all, for nine years, Labour members were told that, if we abandoned every principle we had, we would win.
I knew MPs who couldn't sleep at night because they were going through lobbies voting against their consciences for the Gulf war — to kill 100,000 people — because they believed it would help a Labour victory.
In fact, under the policies and leadership that demanded this, Labour couldn't defeat the government in the worst recession since 1931.
Little wonder Roy Hattersley has now taken to the pages of the London Evening Standard , complaining that the glitz and the glamour hid the message — as though, somehow, he had been a disinterested spectator in the affair.
Monday also saw Labour continuing with ‘guided democracy’.
I don't know if the general public has fully grasped just how undemocratic the present Labour leadership election rules are.
The requirement that a candidate must get the support of 20 per cent of the Parliamentary Labour Party in order to stand is like asking someone to collect 13,000 nominations in a constituency before they can stand for parliament.
Unlike the electorate, apparently, Labour members can't be permitted to decide to reject a candidate by voting for someone else: instead, candidates have to be carefully sanitised.
For that reason, by the time these lines appear, you will no longer be reading about either my campaign for party leader or that of various other candidates for deputy.
The mentality that produces such a procedure is not just unacceptable itself — as well as irksome to would-be candidates.
It directly contributed to our election defeat.
No one could have staged the now infamous Sheffield rally, a turning point in the campaign, unless they were imbued with a belief that electors would appreciate being treated as mere objects to be manipulated.
Party managers arrived at that conclusion because that is the way they had treated their own party for the past eight years.
Aloofness and lack of democracy in Labour during the Kinnock years produced a party that was also aloof and undemocratic and publicly projected itself as such in Sheffield.
But electors can't be ordered around in the way Labour Party members can, and they have made pretty clear they didn't like the result (neither do Labour Party members, which is why they have left in droves).
Until a sane, liberal regime is restored within the party itself, it will not be fully re-equipped either to arrive at the right policy choices or to project itself as a responsive party to the electorate.
When John Smith takes over, it will be the first time for 12 years that the right wing has openly held Labour's leadership.
At a policy level, it is a disaster.
John Smith is personally likeable.
But he bears primary responsibility for tax and economic policies that lost Labour the election.
His dogged refusal to countenance devaluation ensures the economic failure of a future Labour government.
However, the fact that the ‘soft left’ has lost even the illusion that it runs Labour (it lost the reality years ago) opens up the possibility of realignment within the party.
Whether that occurs depends on its responses to the issue that is going to continue to dominate the political scene — the economy in general and the consequences of Exchange Rate Mechanism membership in particular.
The reason the ERM is decisive is that, from the viewpoint of unashamed cosmopolitanism, which is what Labour should espouse, it is evident that attempts to create a progressive and democratic Europe have taken a disastrously wrong turn.
The main rising force in Europe today is no longer democracy and civilised politics, but a racist and fascist right.
Sections of the left may currenty be enthused with the European Parliament and Social Charter, but out there, where it counts, in Europe's cities and countryside, dinosaurs who should have become extinct in the 1930s are making the running.
The source of rising neo-fascism, which in countries such as France has now deeply infected the political mainstream, is the contradiction that has opened up in Europe between democratic aspirations and its economic policy.
The problem is that, as always, economic reality is more powerful than constitutional form.
Whether Strasbourg continues to discuss valuable, irrelevant, or politically criminal proposals, the daily reality of Europe is governed by the ERM.
The high interest rates it dictates strike down, without distinction, small businesses, the family farm, and the unemployed.
Out of the newly desperate and ruined petit bourgeois , and those faced with crushing poverty on the dole, Le Pen, the Lombard League and the German neo-Nazis have refound the classic base of racism and fascism.
We should entertain no illusions.
If the ERM continues to impose on this country an unemployment rate 750,000 above what it would otherwise be — and that is the average for Europe — we have only a short time before the racist and neo-fascist plague descends on us also — which is why launching the Anti-Racist Alliance was so urgent.
To be for a democratic united Europe means to be unambiguously against its current economic reality — and most immediately against the policies dictated by the ERM.
So the first hopeful sign of realignment coming out of Labour's leadership election was when Bryan Gould espoused devaluation — and the first disappointment was how rapidly he retreated when John Smith's camp let it be known that, in their eyes, this disqualified Bryan as deputy leader.
In his Walden interview, Bryan studiously refused to answer whether he would pull out of the ERM if we couldn't get an acceptable exchange rate.
I personally believe Labour could get the devalued exchange rate we wanted within the ERM if we put our foot down.
No major EC country has ever been refused what it wanted when it declared that a vital national interest was at stake.
But, equally, Labour has to state clearly that the productive economy is more important that monetary.
If a Labour government can't get the devaluation it wants, it should pull out of the ERM.
A similar item coming up is the attitude to Maastricht — the first major debate to be held by the new parliament.
Shorn even of the Social Chapter, Maastricht embodies every right-wing economic proposal currently throttling Europe.
We should not hesitate.
Labour should impose a three-line whip to vote against the Treaty.
And if Labour refuses, the left should vote against the Maastricht Treaty without hesitation.
Finally, all this determines the attitude to the Liberal Democrats.
Ashdown has yoked together formal constitutional liberalism with a super-monetarist economic policy — with the Liberal Democratic manifesto pledging the removal of monetary policy from democratic control through an independent central bank, fiercely opposing devaluation, and even opposing national pay bargaining.
Labour had much in common with the old Liberals of the Michael Meadowcroft variety and nothing with the new super-Friedmanism concocted by Ashdown.
If racism and fascism is a serious threat now, it would become rampant under a Labour-Ashdown administration.
Anyone seeking to include the Liberals in realignment on the left is not only misguided.
They are also playing with fire.
Edward Pearce's Sketch When the House is ready to burst into song
It is instructive to see the whole House of Commons present.
One knew theoretically that the chamber held only about 465 members; but it is interesting to watch 651 try to get into it.
The whole show for the election of a new Speaker called for the talents of a W P Frith.
The composer of ‘Derby Day’ would have enjoyed the colour composition.
There are just about the right number of ladies to infuriate the right-thinking and to make effective use of primary colours as highlight and contrast; Kate Hoey in lime, Gillian Shephard in vivid egg custard, Alice Mahon in a fetching cerise, Glenda Jackson in a decent, sombre, high-necked red, Margaret Beckett, that oldtime leftist, even had a floor-cross royal blue.
All of this looked well, spotted among the narrow male spectrum of dark grey to dark blue otherwise relieved only by the odd schoolmaster's check sports jacket on the Labour benches.
One not to be missed was Betty Boothroyd in a black-on-red number trying to be demure and inconspicuous on a day that resounded to cries at the palace gates of ‘We want Boothroyd.’
But before the great affair struck up, one looked around at the new faces: Steve Milligan, who used to be our foreign editor at the Sunday Times , Lady Olga Maitland, nicer than her impossible opinions, whom I chiefly remember for being very good about expenses at the Sunday Express (one wonders if Kelvin Mackenzie might have slipped in late for Chislehurst), Nigel Jones, the Lib Dem from Cheltenham with the Lenin beard, and a man and woman sitting together, pointed out as Gordon and Brigid Prentice who, if they flourish in Labour politics, will be compared in the Sun two elections from now with the Ceausescus.
But at the moment all is good will and bipartisanship.
Ted Heath (I really can't get that knighthood out), looking spot on for Ascot, leads a bunch of frontbenchers and a gaggle of rubber-neckers out of the chamber for ceremonial fraternisation with the Lords and then back.
Finally, behind schedule, he explains, so simply that I can understand, that he is going to take the Peter Brooke nomination, allow a little debate on the topic, then take an amendment to substitute ‘Boothroyd’ for ‘Brooke’, take a vote on that and then see where we are.
We know by now that the Tory whips have held off.
Not being able to deliver, they are into chivalry and breadth of mind, very sensible.
The Brooke case is made gracefully enough, not least by Mr Brooke himself, asked to reply to his bit of the debate.
A man who once talked to a selection committee about the battle of Waterloo, he likes his unexpected allusions and so hits us with Lobenegula (King of the Matabele, was it?)
‘We are,’ said Lobenegula, addressing Queen Victoria, ‘the merest lice at the furthest edges of your blanket’.
Even the whips aren't that proud.
The function of this debate is to allow therapy to those lice, uppity, grudge-bearing backbenchers like Nick Winterton, whom the Tory whips want out of his select committee chairmanship.
He speaks with especial bitterness about the integrity of select committees and their chairmen!
Tam Dalyell makes a fervent plea for Private Notice Questions, especially from backbenchers.
(He is dead right.
All PNQs, spotlighting and throwing into debate issues better draped, are resented by government.
Backbench PNQs are fervently resented.
There should be more, and somebody should be counting.
The present norm is 60 a year.)
The prime stroke of the Boothroydists is to have persuaded John Biffen to propose her.
He is the cleverist speaker in the House, one whose phrases stick like burrs on rough tweed.
Tony Benn had, as he will, quoted Mr Speaker Lenthall of the Long Parliament.
‘Ah,’ says Biffen, ‘Lenthall, the Clause Four of Speakership’.
The case is hard to argue against, and even harder after a couple of Tories just get up and say flatly that they will be voting for the lady.
Betty Boothroyd herself makes one of those up-beat speeches that roll their own psychology.
She even slips inadvertently into the chair's mode, calling Gwynneth Dunwoody ‘the Honourable Lady’, not ‘my Honourable friend’.
This is Speakerspeak, for the Speaker, we are reminded, has no friends.
Which is hooey; for when the thumping result is announced, the House burst into a blast of clapping, happy as a choral society that has just flown through the last tricky chorus.
And so they have.
RUSSIA The Bolsheviks are coming Market reforms have brought hardship and a revival of national left-wing oppostion out of the ashes of the outlawed Communist Party, reports historian Roy Medvedev
It was a Saturday but, on 24 August 1991, the most important employees of the Central Committee of the Communist Party were at their desks.
There was some suspicion that they were busy destroying important documents.
Mikhail Gorbachev had returned to Moscow three days previously, after the failed coup, and, on the Saturday, resigned as general secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU).
As president of the USSR, he signed a special decree, instructing the Congress of Peoples' Deputies to ‘place the property of the CPSU under protection’.
The minister of internal affairs of the Russian Soviet Federated Socialist Republic, who was supervising the seizure of the Central Committee buildings on Staraya Square, received an order to conduct a ‘blitzkrieg’.
Hoping to find important documents, the special ‘capture group’ of the Moscow and Russian departments of the ministry of internal affairs arrived at the central committee buildings at 4pm and ordered all workers to quit the buildings without briefcases within an hour, leaving their doors and safes open.
The instruction to evacuate the buildings came as a complete surprise.
Central committee secretary Valentin Falin immediately contacted Gorbachev, expecting instructions.
However, Gorbachev merely confirmed that the seizure had been agreed with him and answered brusquely, ‘Do you really not understand the position I'm in?’
However, he arranged that, when they had locked their offices and safes, committee secretaries, department heads and Politburo members could leave the building through a secret underground exit so as to avoid the main entrances around which an over-excited crowd was waiting.
All government and party buildings in the centre of Moscow and in the Kremlin are connected by underground passages with secret exits at three metro stations.
But when they descended by special lift from the fifth,nomenklatura floor, they found they could traverse only one passage.
A steel door closed off the second section of tunnel and they could not open it.
They were forced to turn back, part with their briefcases and leave by the main exit, enduring a search and the humiliation of the crowd.
From that moment, the central and all other Communist Party committees ceased to function.
The anti-communist revolution, led by Boris Yeltsin, ended with the victory of democratic forces and the people.
The capture of the central committee building in August 1991 in Moscow, like the seizure of the Winter Palace in Petrograd in October 1917, symbolised the overthrow of the old order.
The CPSU was not an ordinary parliamentary political party.
It was a powerful organisation with a multi-million membership that managed everything, including the economy.
The collapse of this organisation created a multitude of problems and led to the rapid disintegration of the Soviet Union as a unitary superpower.
The majority of the Soviet population, particularly in Russia and the Central Asian republics, certainly did not want the Union to be eliminated — they wanted its democratic transformation.
However, the democratic parties that had begun to form in Russia and other republics after the removal in February 1990 of the CPSU's constitutional monopoly on the ‘leading and guiding role’ in society, were small and weak.
The political vacuum caused by the ban on Communist Party activity was quickly filled, first and foremost by nationalist parties and movements that could relatively quickly, particularly in the national republics, appeal to the broad mass of the population with anti-Soviet and often anti-Russian, and not only anti-communist, declarations.
In many autonomous republics Russia was still perceived as the nucleus of empire.
In Russia, Yeltsin also came to power on a wave of anti-communist feeling augmented by Russian nationalism.
The press, radio, television and, particularly, Orthodox Church and Russian emigrants abroad constantly emphasised that the Russian people were the main victims of the communist, ‘Soviet’ dictatorship.
Yeltsin was rapturously accepted in Russia specifically as the ‘Russian’ leader who had liberated Russia from the communism foreign to it.
However, the attitude to Yeltsin in the national republics of the USSR and in the national autonomies of the Russian Republic itself was either negative or restrained.
The popular revolution of August to December 1991 can be compared with the February Revolution in 1917.
The power of the Russian monarchy rested on a centuries-old tradition, a large nobility, an officer class and a Cossack caste, and on an extensive bureaucracy (not to mention the police and gendarmerie).
In spite of this, Tsarism collapsed in the face of relatively weak political pressure localised to Petrograd and supported by spontaneous popular protest and strikes caused by food shortages and the long war.
The collapse of the CPSU in August 1991 was just as rapid and as general.
The party and its leaders were defended neither by white nor blue-collar workers nor kolkhoz farmers.
Among the intelligentsia, hardly a voice was raised in its defence, with the exception of a few university teachers of Marxism-Leninism.
The most popular leaders (Boris Yeltsin, Anatoly Sobchak, Gavriil Popov) had ostentatiously left the party in 1990 or not long before the 1991 August coup (as Eduard Shevardnadze, Alexander Yakovlev and Alexander Rutskoi had done).
After the coup, the only way leaders who had remained members of the central committee or the Politburo or even of CPSU regional committees could retain their influence was to repudiate the party and leave it as quickly as possible.
This is what Leonid Kravchuk, Nursultan Nazerbayev and Stanislav Shushkevich did.
Only in the republics of Central Asia and in Azerbaijan did communist parties, having changed their names to ‘socialist’ or ‘national-democratic’parties and having supported the independence and sovereignty of their republics, retain their positions.
In the Muslim republics, nationalism was espoused first and foremost by fundamentalist religious groups from which the urban population did not expect a market economy and democracy.
Russia's new leaders were not party people.
In his electoral speeches, Boris Yeltsin had emphasised that the president of Russia should not belong to a political party.
The Russian leadership relied in its work on the authority of one populist leader, Yeltsin, and not on party programmes.
In October 1991, Yeltsin combined the post of President of Russia with that of Prime Minister.
In November, he was given ‘emergency powers’, which gave him the right to issue legally binding decrees and appoint people to any government post without reference to the Supreme Russian Soviet.
Later, he also became Minister of Defence of the republic (renamed Russian Federation in January 1992).
It was thought necessary to have such authoritarian power and to combine legislative and executive functions in one person to implement economic reforms — the shift from a planned to a market economy — as quickly as possible.
In effect, an authoritarian dictatorship appeared in Russia but in parallel with parliamentary democracy.
Political freedoms were not abolished and parliament (the Supreme Soviet) and president both had the right to issue laws.
A new type of dual power arose, reproduced in every region where Yeltsin's ‘regents’(local representatives of the president, later called ‘governors’ at regional level and ‘prefects’at district level) often had more power than the elected local government.
The appearance of two parallel systems of power was justified by reference to the continuing strong influence of the CPSU in elected provincial bodies.
However, it cannot be discounted that the idea is to prepare for a direct dictatorship in case the democratic process again turns the country towards socialism.
In their struggle for power, the ‘democrats’ did not have a clear economic programme apart from vague promises to change to a more effective market economy.
With the exception of western humanitarian aid, none of their hopes of an rapid improvement in the economy was fulfilled.
The disintegration of the USSR caused so many new problems in the food and financial spheres that the economy of Russia soon teetered on the edge of catastrophe.
A real danger of hunger loomed, particularly in large towns.
It was obvious that the policies of the ‘democrats’ did not reflect the interests of blue or white-collar workers or of collective and state farm members.
In the circumstances of the rapid impoverishment of most people and the simultaneous existence of political freedoms, the revival of communist and socialist movements and parties as a legal opposition to the existing regime was inevitable.
The collapse of the CPSU left Russia virtually without national political organisations.
At the 28th Congress of the CPSU in Moscow in the summer of 1990, it was already obvious that the 20 million party members had begun to splinter into fractions.
After the banning of the party, each fraction began to form separate organisations.
The All-Union Communist Party of Bolsheviks (VKPB)
A small Stalinist group arose in 1989 headed by Nina Andreeva who had formulated a ‘Bolshevik platform’.
Even before August 1991, this group had tried to remove Gorbachev from the post of general secretary of the Central Committee.
After the coup, ‘Bolshevik platform’ activists held a founding congress in St Petersburg on 8 November 1991 attended by 164 delegates from 18 regions of the USSR.
The organisers tried to create an ‘All-Union’ rather than a ‘Russian’party despite the fact that it was impossible to register an All-Union party legally.
The congress adopted a name for the party in the historical tradition, calling it the ‘All-Union Communist Party of Bolsheviks’ or VKPB, in an attempt to resurrect the name VKP(b), which is what the Leninist-Stalinist party was called until 1952.
The programme of the VKPB promised to re-establish Soviet power, the dictatorship of the proletariat and to retain the status of the USSR as a great power.
Nina Andreeva was elected leader of the party and 15 full and four candidate members were elected to its central committee.
The party statutes were copied from the statutes of the VKP(b).
Since the party has not been legally registered it has been leading an underground existence.
The Russian Communist Workers Party (RKRP)
If the VKPB brought together the extreme Stalinist wing of the CPSU and had very few supporters, the larger tendency in the former CPSU, conservative as far as the economy is concerned rather than from an historical point of view, formed the Russian Communist Workers Party or RKRP.
This faction began to organise itself in 1989 at the founding conference of the United Front of Workers (OFR) in Leningrad in July 1989.
The OFR was formed as an international response to the nationalist popular fronts in the republics, and united the Russian minorities in the national republics.
The initiative for forming the Communist Party of the Russian Republic in 1990 as a Russian organisation within the CPSU came from the OFR.
The party was formed at a founding congress in November 1991: 525 delegates, from almost all the regions and larger towns of Russia, attended the congress.
The RKRP's statutes are reminiscent of the statutes of the CPSU and the party has retained the principle of ‘democratic centralism’.
The central committee of the RKRP must consist of at least 50 per cent workers and peasants.
It has a collective leadership in the form of an organisational bureau.
The RKRP has been officially registered with the Russian justice ministry and its central bodies are in St Petersburg — referred to as Leningrad in all party documents.
The Party of Labour (PT)
The third party which has its roots in the political movements that arose before August 1991 is the Party of Labour (PT).
It can be traced back to the creation of a committee of New Socialists in 1989, which held a Congress in 1990 and formed a small Socialist Party of the USSR.
Its main ideologist is Boris Kagarlitsky, a young Marxist who has written a number of books that have been published abroad but not yet in the USSR.
Highly educated young socialists, some Trotskyist in orientation, who were influenced by the western New Left, have long aspired to form a New Left party.
Kagarlitsky and other officials of the Socialist Party of the USSR successfully took part in the elections to the Moscow City Soviet and were elected as deputies.
To rid themselves of a purely intelligentsia base the party united with the Moscow Federation of Labour in 1991 and became the Party of Labour.
In an announcement published on 28 August 1991, the PT expressed the intention of becoming the political organisation of the trade unions.
However, the development of the PT has been very slow and it is confined primarily to Moscow.
It is firmly opposed to the Yeltsin government and to the Moscow mayoralty.
The Democratic Platform of the CPSU and the Republican Party of the Russian Federation (RPRF)
Perestroika and the democratisation of Soviet society led in 1989 to the creation of numerous regional party clubs called ‘Communists for Perestroika’, ‘Democratic Platform of the CPSU’ and such-like.
During the selection of delegates to the 28th Congress of the CPSU, these party clubs began to work out new, more democratic statutes for the CPSU that rejected the principle of democratic centralism.
The Higher Party School in Moscow and its rector, Vyatcheslav Shostakovsky, was at the centre of this movement.
Gennady Burbulis, Yeltsin's close friend who had headed the Sverdlovsk Party club and was an elected people's deputy of the USSR, was also an active participant.
Gavriil Popov and Yuri Chernichenko belonged to it until they broke with the CPSU.
Within the CPSU this faction tried to elaborate the principles of ‘democratic socialism’.
It supported a multi-party system and set itself the task of turning the CPSU into a parliamentary party.
About 100 of the delegates to the 28th Congress of the CPSU belonged to the Democratic Platform of the CPSU.
When it became clear that conservatives were dominating the Congress, many members of the Democratic Platform resolved to leave the CPSU and form their own party called (in November 1990) the Republican Party of the Russian Federation.
This party, which had about 20,000 members at the end of 1990, has now joined the Democratic Russia movement and abandoned its socialist programme.
The Union of Communists (SK) and the Russian Party of Communists (RPK)
Believing Gorbachev's policies were deviating from a number of fundamental Marxist principles, a group of members formed the Marxist Platform of the CPSU shortly before the selection of delegates to the 28th Congress of the CPSU.
In June 1990, the Marxist Platform held a large conference in Moscow attended by representatives from six republics and about 40 regions of the USSR.
Unlike the Democratic Platform, the Marxist Platform took an active part in the work of the 28th CPSU congress.
The leaders of the Marxist Platform quickly recovered from the shock of the collapse of the Communists.
Its coordinating council called a small conference in Moscow on 7 September 1991 in which about 30 people took part.
It decided to begin work on the formation of a new communist party called the Union of Communists (after the organisation for which Marx and Engels wrote the Communist Manifesto in 1848).
The founding conference of the Union of Communists took place near Moscow in November 1991.
However, while preparing for its first congress, a split occurred because of disagreements over private ownership of the means of production and land.
More orthodox Marxists objected to any form of private property.
The arguments delayed the convocation of the first congress, planned for February 1992.
Breakaway orthodox delegates to the founding conference held a new conference at which they formed the Russian Party of Communists.
The RPK has not been formally registered: it has 2,000 members and Russian law requires that a new party must present a list of no fewer than 5,000 members to register with the justice ministry.
The Democratic Party of Communists of Russia (DPKR) and People's Party of Free Russia (NPSR)
These two names reflect the political evolution of the parliamentary group led by Alexander Rutskoi, Communists for Democracy, at the Congress of People's Deputies and in the Supreme Soviet of the Russian Republic.
In the March 1990 elections to the Russian Congress of People's Deputies, many Communist Party members, who had been nominated as candidates refused to be part of the official parliamentary fraction of the CPSU.
In the summer of 1990, after the formation of a conservative Communist Party of the Russian Republic under the leadership of Ivan Polozkov, a split occurred among the CPSU members who were Russian people's deputies.
Polozkov headed the ‘Communists of Russia’ fraction of about 300 people, while Rutskoi headed the ‘Communists for Democracy’— about 100 people.
Polozkov's fraction opposed Yeltsin's election as chairman of the Russian Supreme Soviet.
Rutskoi's fraction, on the other hand, supported Yeltsin and ensured his election.
This was why Yeltsin offered Rutskoi the post of vice president of the Russian Federation in 1991.
After he became vice president, Rutskoi decided to form a new political party on the basis of his parliamentary fraction.
The founding conference of this party, called the Democratic Party of Communists of Russia (DPKR), took place in Moscow on 3 August 1991.
At that time the DPKR had only 7,000 members and although they dissociated themselves from the Russian Communist Party, many were still members of the CPSU.
The central committee took the view, however, that there could not be a ‘party within a party’ and they made preparations to expel members of the DPKR and removed Rutskoi from the Central Committee.
The banning of the CPSU at the end of August did not extend to the DPKR and, at the end of October 1991, the DPKR held its first congress.
At that meeting the party changed its name, trying to distance itself from the word that connected it to communism.
However, the party's new name, the People's Party of Free Russia, creates problems.
There is already a People's Party of Russia (PPR), formed by Telman Gdlyan.
The DPKR, often simply called Rutskoi's Party, has about 50,000 members.
The Socialist Party of Labour (SPT)
At the end of 1989 liberal groups that supported Gorbachev's reforms began to form within the CPSU.
They also supported a new programme for the party, rejected its monopoly of political power and wanted it to become more democratic.
Not really radical, these groups formed a centrist section of the CPSU.
After the banning of the CPSU these liberal groups decided to form a new left-wing party based not on a new programme but on the liberal and, in essence, social democratic programme of the CPSU.
The best known supporters of these ideas were members of the Central Committee (elected in 1990) and USSR people's deputies, Roy Medvedev and Anatoly Denisov and also V I Sevastyanov, Russian people's deputy and a well known cosmonaut.
Several other deputies of the Russian Republic and secretaries of Communist Party regional and city committees joined the initiative group.
The initiative group published an announcement in the central newspapers,Pravda ,Glasnost and Sovietskaya Rossiya at the beginning of October 1991, proposing the formation of a new party of ‘left socialist orientation’ on the basis of ‘progressive forces of the CPSU’.
The founding conference of the new party, called the Socialist Party of Labour, took place in Moscow on 26 October.
By March this year its membership had grown to 70,000.
The SPT is opposed to the policies of the Yeltsin government since it considers that, if the transition to a market economy is too rapid, it will be a destructive process.
At the same time, it recognises the advantages of a mixed economy.
Unlike the parliamentary parties which are active only during elections and serve the interests of parliamentary fractions, the territorial sections of the SPT will work permanently in cooperation with the trade unions.
Other left-wing parties of Russia
A Workers' Party of Russia is in the process of organising itself.
Its founding conference took place in Moscow on 15 February 1992.
A Trotskyist party, the Spartakovtsy, is also being formed and intends joining the Fourth International, formed in the 1930s by Trotsky.
Since none of these parties has passed the 5,000-member threshold, they cannot be officially registered, which hinders their organisational work.
At this early stage of self-organisation, the existence of a large number of socialist and left-wing parties in Russia is inevitable and useful.
It is probable that blocs of left-wing parties will soon be created with common platforms and strategies.
The Russian Federation is a new state, which has existed for only a few months.
Its internal political development has only just begun.
Given the extreme economic crisis, the end of which is not yet in sight, it is left-wing socialist parties in particular which may become very strong in the future, on condition, of course, that Russia continues to respect democratic freedoms and the rights of the individual.
Translated by Margot Light, lecturer in international relations at the London School of Economics 
Class divide: if political freedoms continue, a strong resurgence of the left is possible
AMERICAN DIARY April shakes Alexander Cockburn on the fear that comes of living through an earthquake
Petrolia Cats and dogs sense the earthquake's imminence, or so they say.
Euclid, the orange tomcat, veteran of at least two major quakes, snoozed through that golden Saturday morning on my garden step, his mind on mice and the dying squeak of captured vole or bird.
The wind rustled lightly through the cottonwoods and willows alongside the Mattole, not 60 yards from Euclid's peaceful nose.
Across the river from my house, hanging over the road to Honeydew from Petrolia, in far northern California, six hours drive above San Francisco, is a cliff face some 300 feet high, whose face is a constantly changing testament to the subterranean upheavals that make this region the most seismically active on the North American continent.
In the quiet of night I lie in bed and hear the rattle of stones tumbling down this cliff, as, far below, the North American tectonic plate strains against the Gorda plate to its north and the Pacific plate to its west.
The region is Nirvana to geologists.
This summer will see 2,000 Friends of the Pleistocene swarming over the coastal range, whacking away with their hammers.
Back at the start of March there'd been a shake.
I was up in Oregon at the time and got back to find that the tremor had shoved the sewage pipes up a few inches and thrown the water out of the lavatories, a well-known portent of Satan's arrival, if you believe the infernal guidebooks.
The consequence, for me at least, was that I reckoned that the earthquake account for 1992 had, so to speak, been settled, and that we were in the clear for a year or so.
It rained for a few days after that shake of early March.
Dirt and trees slipped down the cliff face the far side of the river, and all day long our remote valley echoed with the crunch and grind of bulldozers and their cautionary whistles, as they backed up to take another bite out of the shale piled up along the edge of the road.
I began to take daily photographs just to see, at the end of the month, how much had moved without one noticing.
Time's footfall can be so stealthy, even in front of one's nose: a tree, already sprawled at an angle on the cliff face, dropping a couple of feet; a tail of scree starting higher on the hill.
A few years ago, some photographers began rephotographing the western vistas taken by Jackson and other pioneers who lugged their eight by tens over the mountain ranges 100 years ago.
For each photograph, they worked out a complicated formula to get their own cameras and tripods in exactly the same positions as the ones adopted by their predecessor a century earlier.
I used to stare by the hour at the old and the new vistas side by side.
Sometimes the photographs seemed exactly the same, or so it appeared until, somewhere in the frame, I would realise that a rock had rolled a few feet or yards, a tree was missing, a scarp subtly altered, and one had the sense of some immensely leisured, tranquil calibration of infinity.
No stone rolled down the cliff that morning, and I left Euclid still snoozing on the old redwood step at about 10.50am and headed off over the bridge to Lighthouse Road, which runs along for two or three miles south of the river, through to the mouth of the Mattole and the northern tip of the King range.
I stopped off at Jim Groeling's place — a fine old barn — to discuss some architectural drawings with him.
We looked at his stone fireplace, cracked horizontally about six feet up from the March quake and moved over to a drafting table.
The first spasm in the shake seemed to come like a pistol crack, or maybe it was a board in Jim's shop that snapped against a wall.
There was a pause and I saw Jim looking at his fireplace.
Then the shake came again, and the barn shook like a dicebox.
It must have been three or four seconds in before we both came simultaneously to the thought: this is not stopping.
We jumped for the door.
It stuck for a moment and then we were outside.
‘Shit,’ said Jim.
‘I only just took out earthquake insurance.’
There's a limbo period before the policy cranks in.
We took a step back towards the house and the ground shook again, strongly.
Later a radio interviewer from KQED asked me if I'd been frightened and I said, truthfully, no, adding that maybe I was just too slow and stupid.
I've been in hurricanes on the Florida Keys and there's plenty of time to flirt around with fear.
The radio keeps telling you that the eye of the hurricane is here or there, getting near anyway, and you try to figure whether to leave the windows open a crack or tape them and you remember that the highest point of Key West is only 16 feet above sea level, and how the great hurricane of 1936 caught a train half way up the Keys filled with refugees from Key West and drowned them all, and you can get nervous.
The earthquake is nowhere, everywhere, gone.
Later, people spend hours reconstructing that brutal transition from the nowhere to the everywhere, when nature can destroy you.
Jim Groeling and I walked back through his house.
The windows were sound, the fireplace worse.
His shop was a mess.
Nothing around us spoke of serious damage.
It was like Brueghel's painting of the fall of Icarus, about which Auden wrote his great poem about suffering and the old masters.
Only we couldn't see that little bit of the tranquil panorama in which Brueghel had shown Icarus drowning.
We couldn't sense that, a few hundred feet above us up the ridge, David Simpson's and Jane Lapiner's house had shaken apart, that rocks had thundered down the cliff face opposite my house, that a mile to the north at the precise moment that we were walking through Jim's house and I was spreading out the blueprints on the hood of my car to continue our conversation, an overturned electric coffee pot in the Petrolia store had already started a blaze that would finish off the store and our adjoining post office in about 45 minutes.
Gabby came bowling down Jim's driveway in a truck.
A boiler had overturned, they couldn't turn off the water.
Did I think that under my house the gas lid from the propane tank had fractured, that gas was accumulating, that the pilot light was on?
I thought of no such possibility.
I drove back towards my house.
Rex and Ruth Rathbun were out in front of their house, Rex with a two-way radio.
He was trying to figure if anyone along the road or up on the ridge had been hurt.
‘Much worse than any we've had,’ he shouted.
Driving towards the bridge I could see a black plume of smoke.
This was the first time I felt a stab of personal anxiety.
Was it my place?
The road twisted and turned, I got my bearings and realised it was north, probably in Petrolia itself.
The ground either end of the bridge had dropped a few inches.
It concentrates the mind when you find yourself walking or driving a final few yards round a bend, up a driveway, not knowing whether your house is up or down.
Mine was up.
The windows were whole.
The redwood garden step was empty.
Euclid was nowhere to be seen.
I remembered my father describing to me what happened after a German V2 rocket had hit and destroyed out house in St John's Wood in London during the second world war.
My mother and I were evacuees in Cumberland, a few hundred miles north.
My father was taking a stroll to the store.
The cat was in sole occupancy.
The rocket destroyed the house and blew the cat's fur off.
My father met the poor creature, who fled at his approach.
Who to blame for the explosion?
In the cat's mind, there was only one candidate.
As the Gnostics feared, God had turned out to be on the wrong side.
Bomb blast does famously strange things.
My mother used to lament the heavy marble table blown to powder by the V2.
Yet, till the day she died, she put the tea tray down on a lighter table, next to the heavy one, that had survived.
The quake had been similarly sportive.
I have 75-pound lead weights on my speakers.
They had been tossed four feet away.
A glass pitcher on a wooden divider had moved five inches.
Nature had been absent-mindedly destructive, sparing a glass bowl, breaking a clay pot from New Mexico, kicking over a hurricane lamp.
Above all, leaving the house up on its pier blocks which, a year before, Bob Shephard had supplemented with bell-shaped concrete piers filled with revar and crowned with metal ties holding the house down.
In 1989, living in a motel between Santa Cruz and Watsonville only a few miles from the epicentre of the Loma Prieta earthquake, I had walked with Frank Bardacke in its aftermath down the streets of Watsonville and counted score and score of the old Maybeck homes, tossed off their piers, broken-backed, red-tagged, finished.
The Loma Prieta quake had a force of 7.1 on the scale.
This new one, it turned out, was rated at 6.9.
Memories of that earlier quake lay on the floor as I walked through the house.
Here were two cups that had survived 1989, smashed at last in a final appointment in Samarra.
Every now and again the house would shudder in an after-shock.
I drove into Petrolia.
At the bottom of the black plume was the Petrolia store, now almost gone, with picture-book red flames framing its remains, against the backdrop of the coastal hills and a foreground fringe of eucalyptus.
The firehouse, a few yards away was intact, its crew away that day at a firefighting clinic.
There was probably nothing much they could have done.
I cleared up, talked to my neighbour Carlos Benemann, who also has a house in Ferndale.
He described the mess over there, and how the Best of the West horse parade had ended ten minutes before the quake hit.
A woman had fallen off and broken her pelvis.
Then, at 7pm, I set off on the drive south to San Francisco.
The day's events took their toll.
Fifteen miles south of Garberville my eyes began to close and I pulled over and slept for half an hour.
I had to take two more roadside breaks and got into the city at two in the morning, taking off for Texas at dawn.
The next morning, Tally called from my house.
There'd been another quake at 4am, a 6.5 shock.
My place was okay.
David and Jane's house was definitely gone and they were in their magnificent new barn, cynosure of the Mattole.
One local woman had said she'd had it with Petrolia, packed up her things and headed south.
Emergency crews and supplies were flooding into Petrolia but there weren't too many customers.
Tally had told them there were plenty of homeless in Eureka.
My plaster of paris plaque of Robes-pierre had smashed in the 1989 Loma Prieta quake, thrown from the wall of my sitting room in the Adobe motel.
I almost asked Tally to check whether the other plaque, of Saint-Just, was still safe in the garage, but let it go.
She said there was no sign of Euclid.
The next evening I was facing an audience at the University of Houston, talking about the election.
I described the grinding of the tectonic plates in Humboldt county.
When the pressure gets too great, you get a quake.
The audience listened with interest.
Petrolia had been on the national news.
I drew a parallel between the grinding plates and the grinding, unresolved pressures underlying this election year.
Reduced to simile, nature was safely on its chain again.
CENSORSHIP Shut up or get out Michael Meacher, MP, reports on the growing threat to people who blow the whistle on their employers
The refusal this week by Virginia Bottomley, the new Health Secretary, to outlaw ‘gagging clauses’ in health workers' contracts raises alarm about the climate of fear in British society that goes far wider than the NHS.
I have seen the secret contract of employment now being operated by one of the new health trusts, at Kingston Hospital.
Part of it reads: ‘Information (about the trust) must always be treated as strictly confidential and further, must not be divulged to any individual or organisation, including the press, without the prior written approval of the Chief Executive or his nominated deputy.’
What protection does Mrs Bottomley offer to people like Graham Pink?
He was a nightshift charge nurse on an acute elderly care ward at Stepping Hill Hospital, Stockport, when in April 1990 he spoke out publicly against poor conditions and staff shortages.
He was suspended from duty and then, in November, found guilty of gross misconduct.
If this were an isolated case, it might simply be put down to an individual health authority overreacting to public embarrassment.
What is disturbing is that it is typical of a new intolerance against whistle-blowers that raises serious questions about free speech.
It is most noticeable in the health service because that is where embarrassment is currently greatest for the authorities.
Medical consultants have traditionally taken it as their right and responsibility to speak out when any resource shortage lowered standards of patient care.
But in February last year, Dr Helen Zeitlin, a consultant haematologist at Redditch, was sacked when she drew attention to a report on nursing shortage and the acute distress caused thereby.
Government enforces suppression of free speech.
When Mr John Guy, an orthopaedic surgeon at the Worcester Royal Infirmary, wrote to people on his waiting list to say that health authority cuts meant that they could not have their hip replacement operations, a patient passed a copy of his letter to Nicholas Ridley.
The latter responded by writing to the then minister of health, saying: ‘It seems to me intolerable that employees of the Health Service should openly criticise their health authorities in this sort of way.’
When the Health Education Council produced a report linking ill-health with poverty, the government-appointed chairman, Sir Brian Bailey, did his utmost to block publication.
When Sir Bryan Thwaites, chairman of Wessex Regional Health Authority, spoke out during an election about the impossibility of NHS funding keeping up with the expectations of patients and doctors, he was promptly told by the government to keep quiet.
Fresh leaks about stifled criticism in the NHS now arise almost every week, but it isn't only in health that gagging is now becoming so oppressive.
When police in Cleveland pinned on station noticeboards photos of people they suspected might be infected with the Aids virus, the two probation officers who disclosed this practice were disciplined.
A senior civil servant, Trevor Brown, a chemist at Aldermaston Atomic Weapons Research Establishment, was severely reprimanded for publicly voicing his concern about health and safety standards there.
Dennis Mitchell, an intelligence officer at GCHQ for 32 years, was compelled to take early retirement because he had argued against the introduction of polygraph tests and the removal of rights of employees to go to industrial tribunals.
What is striking about all these cases quoted is that, in every one, the eventual victim had already pursued his or her complaint exhaustively behind the scenes with the employer and only went public in desperation when the outrage was intense and no other recourse seemed available.
There is evidence that the same trends have begun to permeate the private sector.
One recent example was Vaughan Mitchell, an oil rig welder, who blew the whistle on safety violations by his drilling company on a North Sea oil rig, two months after the Piper Alpha disaster.
He followed Department of Energy advice to report his concerns to them, but received no protection from them when his company dismissed him.
Another example was Charles Robertson, chief accountant in charge of taxation at the Guardian Royal Exchange Assurance Company, who had reported some unusual transactions to the Inland Revenue for which the company had to pay £1.6 million in back taxes.
Later, he refused to certify to the Inland Revenue that the company had not engaged in further similar transactions, and he was sacked.
What we don't know is the plight of those, who are likely to be far greater in number, who have succumbed to the threat of penalties and kept quiet.
Some may be given an ample incentive, like Rodney Brooke, former chief executive of Westminster City Council, who received a £1 million early retirement package for not revealing details of the Council's sale for 15p of three cemeteries.
It would be wrong to exaggerate these trends.
Britain is not yet an authoritarian state.
But uncomfortable signs are growing that the uneasy line between discipline and dissent — and often very justified and necessary dissent — is being more and more breached in favour of the former.
PRIVACY Phoney tapping The FBI wants to be able to hear all telephone calls.
Jolyon Jenkins reports
Imagine this: you want to send a private letter to a friend.
Because you don't want anyone else to intercept the letter and steam it open, you put Sellotape over the envelope flap.
A reasonable way to protect your privacy?
Not according to the government.
It passes a law saying that all envelopes must be left unsealed, so that it can open letters with ease.
An essential weapon in the fight against crime and terrorism, it insists.
It hasn't happened yet.
But in America, something extremely similar is being seriously proposed by the FBI, to the extent that the Justice Department has placed a bill before the Senate.
The Bureau wants the freedom to listen to any phone call, even if it is encoded or encrypted; not only this, it wants to make the telephone companies bear the cost of letting it do so.
The Bureau thinks it is getting left behind by technology.
Its problem was spelled out in an article in the New York Times on 27 March by the FBI's director, William S Sessions.
It is worth quoting at some length:
‘Advances in telecommunications technology promise to deprive Federal, state and local law enforcement officers and the public of the incalculable benefits that can be obtained only by court-authorised wire-tapping.
‘Wire-tapping is one of the most effective means of combating drug trafficking, organized crime, kidnapping and corruption in government.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation does not want the new digital technology that is spreading across America to impair this crucial law enforcement technique.
Thus, after consulting with the telecommunications industry, the Justice Department has proposed legislation that is intended to preserve the ability of law enforcement officers to intercept conversations of people engaged in serious crime…
‘Digital technology makes possible the simultaneous transmission of multiple conversations and other data over the same lines.
The problem is that voice transmission will soon be replaced by an endless, inseparable stream of electronic emissions, making it virtually impossible to capture criminal coversations...
‘It is reasonable for the telecommunications industry to come to the aid of law enforcement.
The proposed legislation relies on it to find technical solutions that are cost effective while permitting the development of its technology.’
Janlori Goldman of the American Civil Liberties Union was given space in the New York Times to contest Sessions' argument:
‘The FBI's solution…is to force the telecommunications and computer industries to redesign their modernized systems to accommodate the Bureau's needs…
The Bureau overstates its concern.
The telecommunications industry says it is not aware of a single instance in which the FBI has been unable to tap a line because of the widespread new technology…
At issue is the FBI's ability to wiretap in future…the FBI is not only asking the industry to dumb down existing software, it wants to prohibit it from developing new technologies that might interfere with the government's ability to intercept various oral and electronic communications.’
The FBI argues that, because it already has the constitutional right to tap telephones, where it has a warrant, no new principle is involved: all it wants is the means to continue doing so.
It's a disingenuous argument.
Long ago, Isaiah Berlin drew a distinction between ‘positive’ and ‘negative’liberty: we all have the freedom to dine at the Ritz, in the sense that no one stops us — Berlin called this ‘negative liberty’.
But in reality, most of us lack the ‘positive liberty’ to do so because we are too poor.
The FBI is trying to slide from one to the other, by stealth.
The subject has been discussed at length over the past few weeks on Usenet, the international electronic-mail ‘noticeboard’(see ‘Taking Liberties’,NSS , 19 July 1991).
One contributor pointed out that there doesn't seem to be any very good reason for the bill.
It's easy enough to tap a telephone line, even if it's digitally encoded, provided you can get to the exchange, or a junction box.
He concluded: ‘It seems to me that the only purpose the FBI has in proposing such a law would be so that it can make telephone taps without the cooperation of the telephone company…in other words, what they are asking for is the ability to make warrant-less taps.’
Another correspondent came up with this analogy: ‘It's comparable to requiring Detroit to produce automobiles that can be overtaken by faster police cars.’
Or, said someone else, it's like insisting that the walls of buildings are made thin enough for the FBI to listen through them.
There are lots of things wrong with the bill.
The business of America being business, the phone companies object to being forced to give up possible commercial advantage at the behest of the state, and feel that American companies will suffer in international telecommunications markets.
But, at root, what is most objectionable about it is the assumption that ‘privacy’ is just a phoney philosophical shield used by drug traffickers, pornographers and terrorists.
As a Usenet writer, Peter Wayner, argued, ‘the sad truth is that the bill will hardly deter criminals.
If anything it will make their lives easier by making it impossible for American companies and citizens to keep anything confidential.’
It may not amount to much yet, argues Wayner, but ‘in the coming years, more and more letters and documents will travel electronically and, in electronic communication, encryption is the equivalent of an envelope.
Although you can't write ‘sealed with a kiss' across it, you can make still make sure that no electronic postmaster is perusing your love letters.
There may be no seal, but the banks and other businesses can use encryption to keep financial statements confidential.
‘The fact is that individual people are the best guardians of their own information.
Privacy is not just an important legal tradition — it is also a good crime deterrent.
The police will always dream of listening to the hidden thoughts of the criminals, but gaining the ability to scan every letter in the country won't make a difference.
Even the stupidest crooks know enough to not to spell out their plans on a postcard.
The rest of us who have completely legal secrets, though, will be left with no protection by this bill.’
What, then, about us in Britain?
Unlike in America, there is no legal or constitutional right to privacy.
But how useful would such a right be anyway, if an intelligence agency can drive a coach and horses through it?
The Americans are, oddly, at a disadvantage in having an FBI that is, compared to our secretive MI5, quite open.
The Bureau can make legal demands that MI5 would find much more tricky.
We are also at an advantage in having a Data Protection Act, which is more use in practice than a vague bill of rights.
But where America leads, we follow.
The principled case for privacy needs to be made.
VICHY Vive l'histoire Is France finally accepting its part in the holocaust, asks Lucy Wadham
Next month, France commemorates the 50th anniversary of the first convoy of Jews to be sent from Paris' Gare de l'Est to the Nazi concentration camps.
The initial wave of deportations followed round-ups carried out by French police in the occupied zone.
Two months later, Philippe Pétain's Vichy government would agree to deliver to the Gestapo 10,000 Jews from the area unoccupied by the Germans, known, ironically, as the ‘Free Zone’.
In total, some 65,000 Jews were deported from France: only about 2,600 returned.
Two weeks ago, the media brought these facts to the attention of the French public in a climate of unprecedented outrage and introspection.
The catalyst was a judgment by the French Court of Appeal in favour of Paul Touvier, the first Frenchman to be charged with crimes against humanity, for his actions as head of information of the Lyon branch of the ‘Milice’.
The Milice was a political police force set up by Vichy to safeguard Pétain's National Revolution and combat enemies of the ‘new moral order’, identified as communists, freemasons and Jews.
It was to become the most enduring symbol of the evils of the Vichy régime.
Touvier was charged on six counts of crimes against humanity; five of the charges pertaining to the arrest, torture or assassination of Jews and one to the torture and deportation of a resistant.
In a 215-page report, three magistrates rejected the charges as ‘insubstantial’.
Intellectuals, politicians and members of the judiciary have called the report a piece of ‘pseudo-history’, verging, some say, on revisionism.
It is not the decision itself that seems to shock the most — after almost 50 years, proving a crime is an uncertain business — but the apparent will to vindicate the Vichy régime.
The magistrates point to the problematical definition of crimes against humanity, which was last modified by the Court of Cassation in 1985 to clarify the Klaus Barbie case.
The crime in question must be committed within the context of a ‘concerted plan’, executed in the name of a state whose policies reflect an ‘ideological hegemony’.
One of the charges brought against Touvier was the shooting of seven Jews against a cemetery wall, in reprisal for the assassination, by the resistance, of the Vichy minister of information.
Touvier admitted having ‘chosen’ his victims from among his prisoners.
This is the only crime for which the judges concede there is sufficient evidence.
But, they argue, the shooting of the Jews was a reprisal, a ‘spontaneous criminal reaction, spectacular, ferocious…’ but ‘relatively improvised’and therefore not part of a ‘concerted plan’.
Furthermore, Touvier was acting in the name of a ‘legitimate government’ that the judges then presume to describe as ‘authoritarian’, but not ‘totalitarian’.
The judges' case for Vichy as an ‘authoritarian’ régime rests on the old argument of German pressure and French passivity.
As to the matter of Vichy anti-Semitism, they refer to an anti-Semitic ‘current’ that sought to ‘seize the controls’of the state, but which apparently failed.
The proof of its failure is demonstrated by the fact that there was no ‘official proclamation’ of the Jew as enemy of the state, as happened in Germany.
That is the most fallacious part of the argument: drawing a distinction between French and German anti-Semitism is not enough to exonerate Vichy of an anti-Semitic policy.
In 1940, before the Germans began to apply pressure, the Vichy government implemented a series of laws to bar Jews from positions of influence, excluding them from the judiciary, the civil and military service, teaching, and the media.
A 1939 law that penalised anti-Semitism in the press was repealed.
Jews were excluded from the department in which Vichy was located.
In July 1941, the Commissioner General for Jewish Affairs, Xavier Vallat, passed a law that aimed to ‘eliminate all Jewish influence in the national economy’, and the forced sale and requisitioning of Jewish property began.
In 1941, the French Police cooperated in the first mass internments on French soil.
Vichy's economic and cultural anti-Semitism, which had singled out Jews for contempt and discrimination, undoubtedly facilitated the German policy of deportation and thence the Final Solution.
The judges' decision to prevent Touvier from coming to trial reflects the long-held belief that it is unwise for France to dwell on this part of her history.
This belief is generally accompanied by the assertion that the Vichy régime was an aberration in French history that finds no roots in the past and no repercussions in the present.
But Jean Marie Le Pen's following, which at the last elections reached 27 per cent in some regions, cannot simply be explained by his charisma.
He is the contemporary spokesman of the enduring tradition that was best represented by the political philosopher Charles Maurras, who was imprisoned by de Gaulle in 1945 and later pardoned.
Maurras' vision of the spirit of ‘eternal France’, sullied by the values of the republic, was characterised by a pervasive anti-Semitism.
This French anti-Semitic tradition has always been cultural rather than racial, Gallic ‘purity’ resting on a vision of ‘national integrity’.
The will to forget the occupation years was provoked initially by the disgust felt by many at the anarchic retribution known as ‘the purge’ in which thousands of Frenchmen accused of collaboration were executed by avenging teenagers, only sometimes under the doubtful authority of resistance tribunals.
In 1947, de Gaulle ended the purge and salvaged the remains of the administration.
This was a magnificent political sleight of hand.
He had transformed a fragmented, factious resistance movement into a monolithic, Gaullist one.
He had beaten the communists in the race to appropriate the resistance and thereby ensure a legitimate power base.
The wilful amnesia surrounding Vichy continued into the seventies under President Georges Pompidou, but for different reasons.
Pompidou's wish was to kick France into modernity.
He dispensed with the patriarchal rhetoric that de Gaulle had used to pamper a nation stuck in the miasma of post-occupation guilt.
Sickened by the endemic one-upmanship of a political system founded on resistance nomenklatura (Pompidou was one of the few politicians who had not been in the resistance), he spoke of the need to look to the future and forget the time when ‘Frenchmen did not love one another.’
It was in this spirit of forgiveness that Pompidou pardoned Touvier in 1971.
The vehemence and the unanimity with which this judgment has now been condemned indicates, for the first time, a wish in this country to come to terms with Vichy.
The amnesia, it seems, was not a matter of political persuasion — politicians on the left and right are now calling for a re-examination of the period — but the reflex of a generation.
This verdict may be the last attempt of this generation to keep intact the myth of a unanimously resisting France, for it is now under review by the Court of Cassation.
Two other Vichy functionaries, Maurice Papon and René Bousquet are also charged with crimes against humanity.
If the present verdict on Touvier is maintained, they are unlikely to be tried, and it is a trial that the French public now seems to want.
If these three individuals are innocent of the charge that they contributed in any way to the Holocaust, then that innocence should be revealed in a trial.
It has been noted that it was for the same crimes that Klaus Barbie was sentenced by the courts in Lyon to life imprisonment.
Today, the French judiciary is prey to the criticism that there is one law for a German and another for a Frenchman.
The attempt by the Court of Appeal to prevent Touvier from coming to trial may succeed but the verdict has led to an alarming rhetorical question posed in Le Monde : ‘Should not these crimes be judged, not in the name of a single people but of the whole of humanity…and should it not be in Strasbourg, under European jurisdiction and not in Paris or Lyon that they be judged?’
The French judiciary is prey to the criticism that there is one law for a German and another for a Frenchman
MINORITIES The priests have it Anti-racists are failing to change the iron grip of religion on minority cultures, says Julia Bard
In Bradford, underground networks of Muslim men try to track down women and girls who have run away from their families, and many Asian taxi drivers carry pictures of missing girls so they can ‘rescue’ them if spotted.
It is a system that works well for the police and for the city's religious leaders.
The police can claim they are responding to the needs of a multicultural society, and the religious leaders become the channel of communication between their community and the state.
The girls, whose already narrow range of options and escape routes are limited still further, are the victims.
Britain's minorities, once described in terms of their national, cultural, religious, and socioeconomic characteristics, are now increasingly viewed as homogeneous groups defined solely by religion.
Priests are using the mosque, synagogue, gurdwara, temple, and evangelical church to edge themselves into positions of political as well as spiritual leadership, defining the community's agenda and power structure, and negotiating with the state for resources.
Most people neither know nor care about tensions and conflicts within minorities, so when a recognisable spokesman (and it is always a man) emerges, they unquestioningly accept him as a legitimate representative.
Multiculturalists (for whom the important task is to encourage harmonious and tolerant cultural diversity) adjust their view according to what the leaders tell them.
More dangerous, however, is the ease with which anti-racists (who see racism as the prime enemy) have largely fallen in behind this new religious definition of community, despite its damaging implications for the most vulnerable groups, particularly women.
Hannana Siddiqui is a member of Southall Black Sisters, an organisation that supports Asian women facing domestic violence, and of Women Against Fundamentalism, a group set up in the wake of the Rushdie affair.
She says: ‘Women are being forced into arranged marriages, homelessness and denial of education.
The multiculturalists fail to intervene and support these women.
For them it is all part of a culture and religion which must be tolerated.
And the anti-racists allow this to continue because they see the fight against racism as the central struggle.’
People engaged in challenging racism are increasingly opting to collude with the clerical agenda.
The Runnymede Trust has for many years been a reliable and valuable resource for anti-racists.
Its March 1992 bulletin, though, took a surprisingly simplistic approach to ethnicity and religion, justifying the setting up of the Muslim Parliament by pointing to the racist press coverage it had received.
Runnymede fails to assess the mechanisms through which competing elements in the Islamic establishment claim to represent their constituencies.
Bhikhu Parekh, a liberal, argues for ‘a properly elected national deliberative body for Muslims’ on a par with other communities: ‘The Church of England has its Synod, the Jews have their Board of Deputies and some Hindu sects have their national councils of temples.’
But with an extraordinary leap he adds: ‘At a different level, the TUC and the CBI too represent national deliberative bodies of their relevant constituencies.’
This jumble of the religious and the secular, the democratic and the dictatorial, illustrates the dangerous muddle that the anti-racist movement finds itself in.
It stems partly from a failure to understand fundamentalism as a modern political force right across the world.
Co-opting radical rhetoric to gain influence, and existing institutions to gain power, fundamentalists are pushing communities and individuals to redefine their identity in religious terms.
Once recognised, they can claim, as they did in response to The Satanic Verses , that their world view and their power are divine and therefore unassailable.
In Britain's Jewish community, the fundamentalist Lubavitch sect has taken over many rabbinical posts in the mainstream United Synagogue.
The Chief Rabbi himself, mistakenly regarded as the community's official voice, is heavily influenced by this group whose view of an appropriate response to anti-Semitism and assimilation is that Jewish women should have as many babies as possible.
Few Jewish people will condemn Lubavitch publicly, partly because they have convinced even many secular Jews that they are the torch bearers of Jewish tradition.
An activist with a long anti-racist record says: ‘They are the real Jews…
I admire them for being so up front about their religious activity because it puts them right in the front line against anti-Semitism.’
Like Runnymede's implicit assertion that being the target of racists is a qualification for leadership, this view licenses oppressive, even tyrannical, groups to take charge of minority communities.
People who understand that the separation of church and state in the majority community is a prerequisite of religious freedom, are nevertheless happy to override principles of equality and human rights in minority communities by handing their political control over to religious leaders.
In the name of keeping the community secure in a hostile world, those leaders gag dissidents, suppress what they define as ‘deviant’ behaviour, and commandeer community resources.
This quest for control of resources caused a row in the London Borough of Newham last week when a council recommendation to fund a refugee centre was — unsuccessfully in the end — opposed by Muslim councillors, who argued for a Muslim centre instead.
They ignored the possibility that tomorrow's refugees might be from China or Yugoslavia; or that, even if they are Muslim, their needs may be material or cultural and not religious.
Newham council has managed to maintain a consensus that equal opportunities override the claims of minority religious leaders, despite pressures from religious lobbies.
Gita Sahgal of Southall Black Sisters is concerned about the way needs are misunderstood and resources misdirected as a result of defining minorities in terms of religion.
‘Groups providing services increasingly refer to ‘the Muslim and Asian community', she says.
This doesn't really mean all Muslims; that's clear from the languages they use.
They don't give information in Turkish, Hausa, Somali or Arabic, for example, if they're offering advice on some practical issue affecting people from South Asia.
It would be ludicrous if they did.’
Pragna Patel, also a member of SBS, says: ‘Muslims aren't bound to a single identity given to them by Kalim Siddiqui and the Muslim Parliament.’
Forcing pluralistic, many-faced groups to march behind a single banner may protect the self-proclaimed leaders, but it's likely to endanger the community as a whole, as well as compounding the difficulties of its most vulnerable members.
In the name of creating a solid defence against a hostile outside world, dissidents or ‘deviants’ are thrown out like sacrifices to the god racism.
But since racism is caused by racists and not by their targets, it doesn't matter how well behaved or united they are: the god turns out to be insatiable.
THE UNIVERSE Watch this space Have scientists just made the cosmological breakthrough of all time?
Not quite, says Pat Coyne
Readers of the British press can hardly have failed to notice the headlines announcing ‘How the Universe Began’, ‘the Holy Grail of Cosmology’ and the ‘Discovery of All Time’.
A sentence or two later — and unfortunately all the evidence suggests that few readers get that far — they would have been informed that the hitherto obscure ‘Cosmic Background Explorer’ satellite, known to astronomical aficionados as ‘Cobe’, had discovered mysterious ripples in the equally mysterious cosmic microwave background radiation.
Just a little more study of such ripples, implied Fleet Street, and all outstanding questions concerning Life, the Universe and Everything would be neatly wrapped up, leaving the heavens free for what they were clearly intended — broadcasting satellites.
Oddly enough, the European press seemed to have ignored the news, which prompts thoughts of headlines of the ‘Ripples in Cosmos, Europe cut off’ variety.
In good old Blighty, however, we knew a big story when we saw one, and they don't get much bigger than the size of the Universe.
The normally staid Independent cleared its front page for a graphic, reminiscent of a medieval woodcut, depicting all stages in the evolution of the Cosmos, while the Sun announced that ‘We Find the Secret of the Creation’ and showed a mysterious egg-shaped blob with the caption ‘AMAZING…the universe with ripples shown in the patchy areas’, presumably in case the readers thought they were patches in the rippled areas.
In science there seems to be an odd inversion of stereotypes.
The British are the ones interested in theory.
Stories about the death of the dinosaurs or the birth of the Universe are guaranteed front-page treatment here, while the Continentals are much more interested in the practical.
Go, for example, to a meeting of the European Space Agency and the place will be crawling with European technical journalists with only a few desultory Brits, as often as not from the show-biz pages.
(Actually, the Brits are right about the European space effort, but that is not the point.)
Now this fascination with scientific theory is no bad thing.
There are, after all, few more important questions than the origins of the Universe.
The problem is that the abysmal ignorance of science in Britain, especially among the educated classes, leads to a complete inability to assess developments.
Take the latest news from Cobe.
It is good, sound science but in a century that has produced General Relativity, Quantum Mechanics and the elucidation of the structure of DNA, among many other things, it comes nowhere near justifying the ‘discovery of the century’ tag.
It is not even the most important development in cosmology.
‘It's probably the third or fourth most significant,’ says John Barrow, professor of astronomy at the University of Sussex.
These rankings are always invidious, but the top honour probably goes to the Amer-ican astronomer Edwin Hubble, with his discovery in 1929 of the expansion of the Universe.
The discovery should have been predicted a decade earlier by Einstein.
The original equations of General Relativity implied the expansion of the Universe, but Einstein was so disturbed by the notion that he introduced another term to eliminate it, an action he later much regretted.
Next in importance would come the discovery in 1964 of the cosmic background itself, by two scientists from the US Bell Labs, Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson, who stumbled on it while looking for ways of eliminating noise in radio receivers.
The one noise they could not eliminate turned out to be the echo of the Big Bang.
After that would probably rank the new Cobe evidence, together with earlier results from the same satellite, which showed that the background radiation was indeed thermal, that is it had come from an explosion and was not produced by some other mysterious microwave source.
Moreover, the Cobe results were expected.
They emanate from a time about 300,000 years after the Big Bang and show the first signs of fluctuations in the density of matter in space.
From these fluctuations galaxies and stars condensed.
Since we know galaxies and stars do exist, such primordial density fluctuations must also have existed.
If they had not, then the greater part of cosmology and theoretical physics would have had to be junked as so much useless scribbling.
The Cobe evidence will flesh out the skeleton of existing knowledge and allow astronomers to begin to chose between competing cosmological theories.
In short, it is good second division stuff, probably worth a Nobel prize, but not in the premier league.
Its real importance lies in the drive to refine the whole of physics into a single question.
Until recently, there were only two questions in physics — the very small (the sub-nuclear domain) and the very large (the Cosmos).
Everything in between was in principle (if not in practice) known.
The real Holy Grail of science is to combine the two into an equation whose writ runs from the instant of creation to the last syllable of recorded time.
That quest seems tantalisingly close to realisation.
The Theory of Everything (TOE) has to combine the four fundamental forces of nature, the strong and weak nuclear forces, electromagnetism and gravity, and use them to explain how the Universe, space and time could come into existence without recourse to divine intervention.
Before that, the first three of these forces have to be brought together in a Grand Unified Theory (GUT).
For some reason, physical theories tend to have anatomical acronyms).
Until now, all sub-nuclear experiments to test such theories were carried out in huge accelerators with diameters of 10 kilometres or more.
However, the energies necessary to test a GUT or a TOE are unimaginably greater than anything that could be achieved on earth.
They would need accelerators the size of our galaxy, several hundred thousand light years across.
Such energies have only existed in the fraction of a second after the Big Bang.
By fraction is meant a very short time indeed.
Existing theories are reckoned to hold good down to about 10  seconds after the Big Bang.
Before that, the incompatibility between General Relativity and Quantum Mechanics overwhelms the analysis.
But the results of the Big Bang are out there.
It is a neat irony that only by studying the largest structures in the Universe can we get an insight into the smallest structure of matter.
Mayday Special
Heydays and low days The Soviet Union's final Maydays had lost their triumphalism, and imperial decay and public dissent were evident, says Trevor Fishlock
Snow as well as catkins, bitter winds and hyacinths: spring in Russia is always a conflict, a brief and violent convulsion.
At last, as if at a secret signal, people leave off their fur hats.
In Soviet times the onset of spring was also signalled by that dismal rite, the publication of official slogans in advance of May Day.
May the deeds of Great Lenin live for ever!
Let universal human values prevail!
Toilers in agriculture, raise production!
Flags and banners reddened the streets and fluttered from trams.
In Moscow, Red Square was made ready for the triumphalist May Day parade.
Immense carmine portraits of Marx, Engels and Lenin were hoisted as witnesses and validators of the pageant.
I never saw Moscow in the heyday of the great parades of May and November.
When I lived there, the Soviet Union was labouring in its final throes and the parades were desperate assertions rather than celebrations.
‘You must be joking,’ a Russian friend said when I asked if he would watch the May Day parade on television.
The slogan-makers still invoked Lenin's name but slogans were ignored.
For all the bunting in the streets there was no sense of a marking of historical achievement, of adding to a sense of continuity.
On the contrary, May Day in 1990 and Revolution Day in 1989 and 1990 were, for the first time since the early 1920s, occasions for protest, for the people's indictment of their rulers.
They marked the beginning of the end.
In 1965, in the Brezhnev era to which many old-style Communists were to look back with fond nostalgia, an Englishman observing the May Day festival on Red Square wrote: ‘The tourists, even the Americans, are delighted: they clap, cheer, photograph, and at the end simply gasp, as if they have just seen the greatest show on earth…
May Day in Moscow might outdo Easter in Seville.’
That was a time of great Soviet confidence and influence, buttressed by military massiveness.
There was a feeling of indestructibility.
But the cracks and contradictions were there, all too evident to men like Andrei Amalrik, the historian and playwright who spent years in prison and Siberian exile.
His essay of 1970, ‘Will the Soviet Union Survive Until 1984?’, analysed the inherent instability and isolation of the USSR, its primitive ideology and ‘decor’ of laws, its bureaucratic élite struggling to retain power as the system decayed.
Not all of his predictions were right (he thought there might be war with China).
But he wrote of the then almost unthinkable independence of the Ukraine and Baltic countries, of the possibility of a Soviet commonwealth, and concluded that while ‘Marxist doctrine has delayed the break-up of the Russian Empire it does not possess the power to prevent it.’
Amalrik was only seven years out.
By the time I first went to Moscow in 1987 the imperial decay had become all too apparent.
Rot and disillusion could hardly be hidden.
There was only the thinnest of pretence that the Soviet Union embodied ideas of socialism or communism or human development.
By the time of the May Day ‘celebrations’ of 1990 there was much writing on many walls.
Each of the problems that beset Gorbachev — the shrinking authority of the Communist Party, the military discontent, nationalist clamour, the dogged demands of the Balts for the return of their stolen countries — each of these was a crisis in its own right; but each was overshadowed by, and interconnected with, the failure of the economy and shortage of food, the failure of government.
Gorbachev was out of touch with a humiliated people.
I still keep as a bookmark my ticket for the 1989 Revolution Day parade in Red Square.
It is signed on the back by Raisa Gorbachev, who came over to chat to reporters.
It was the last but one of the big November parades with the tanks and regiments supervised by generals who were sequinned with medals.
Two miles away, thousands of dissidents marched in protest at the Communist hegemony.
Communism doesn't work, said the placards.
While Raisa chatted in Moscow and Gorbachev emphasised his commitment to reform, the Communist leaders in Moldavia fled their rostrum when nationalist demonstrators waved banners.
In Armenia and Georgia, the parades were not held because of the strength of local feeling.
The slaughter by Soviet troops of 20 peaceful Georgian demonstrators that year had made a secessionist of almost every Georgian.
The May Day parade of 1990, meant to be a celebration of Soviet unity and triumph, revealed the deep frustrations and divisions in Soviet society.
In the weeks beforehand, Gorbachev took tough action to cow the Lithuanians and force them to rescind their declaration of independence.
In Tbilisi, the police had to mount guard over the city's Lenin statue to prevent its uprooting.
Gorbachev ordered a blockade on Lithuania; and he told angry workers in Sverdlovsk not to worry about food.
On May Day itself, in Red Square, the wheel of history turned dramatically.
Gorbachev and Co were jeered and booed as they stood on Lenin's mausoleum.
An unofficial parade, which followed the official one, gave vent to anger and anguish in an astonishing catharsis.
It was almost surreal, an angry crowd waggling protest placards and condemning the seven decades of Communist rule that had beggared and laid waste the vast land.
Gorbachev, before he stalked off, saw for himself that the Lithuanian flags raised by the crowd had become symbols of freedom for Russians, too.
A few days later Gorbachev was back on Lenin's tomb watching the Soviet tanks and legions saluting the 45th anniversary of victory in the second world war.
The parade was a morale booster to an army uneasy about cuts, withdrawal from Europe and unpopularity.
At Gorbachev's side stood Marshall Dmitri Yazov, the defence minister who would later betray him in the attempted coup.
The era of the splendid parades was almost over.
The Revolution Day spectacle that year was an embarrassment that underlined all the divisions and uncertainties in the country.
Just as they had done on May Day, the anti-Communist demonstrators who marched across Red Square, after the official parade, left Gorbachev in no doubt as to his own unpopularity and that of his regime.
There were far fewer flags, a distinct lack of appetite for celebration.
Among my Russian friends there was a feeling of relief when it was over.
It was the last of the big parades.
The new gulf war Public culture is left; private culture is right.
Sarah Benton minds the gap
When Mrs Thatcher chose Mr Major to protect her legacy, she no doubt thought she knew a safe deposit when she saw one.
Perhaps she foresaw the era of government as bank management.
(‘Why vote Conservative?
Your money will be safe with us,’ Chris Patten told one audience.
He deserves Hong Kong.)
Her apparent cry of anguish last week that John Major has treated her legacy without due reverence is not convincing; the old bat cares nothing for the well-being of the Conservative Party or indeed Conservative government.
She has passed beyond, into a world of her own making — Thatcherland, built on her Thatcher Foundation.
She has become a parody of herself, doomed to spend the rest of her life acting out her own mythical qualities.
Like Snow White's wicked stepmother, she has not only abandoned her adopted heir to the company of dwarves; she lives in terror that he might yet be more admired and loved than she.
For, like the most envious of step-mothers, she does not really want to leave anything worth having to John Major at all; she wishes to live in Thatcherland, surrounded by mirrors all perpetually claiming her to be the one and only.
Her contribution to the Conservative cause, which handed Major his victory, was to make John Major seem like a social democrat.
The Conservative election victory did owe something to Mrs Thatcher's past efforts; these efforts included a re-ordering of the social hierarchy, making the poor more down and out, and bringing the lower middle class (as we old Marxists used to say) or C2s in class-free speak, within shopping distance of middle class (B/C1) comfort.
But perhaps her most important legacy was in divesting the public culture of political language and political idealism.
J K Galbraith calls this the culture of content, in which the comfortable can kid themselves that they owe nothing of their comfort to the state, to politics, or the exploitation of others.
In different ways, Mrs Thatcher's gifts did help Major to win, though it is hard to say he won, in the active meaning of the word.
(This disparagement may be a mean-spirited and jealous response.)
John Major's inestimable contribution was to allow people to vote Conservative and still feel they were just about decent human beings.
And that is the paradox of contemporary politics.
Or rather, one of many.
We have a divergence between the political culture and people's private political behaviour.
(If that, too, is a contradiction in terms, then their private voting behaviour.)
We have a political culture that is redolent with rad-ical, republican, democratic and generous opinions.
If you only read, say, the Independent and listen to Radio 4 (and there are some people who do), you would think the entire British nation agreed that the National Health Service was Britain's finest achievement; was indeed a sacred trust that should not be tampered with in any way, but merely fed with the choicest morsels of public spending and worshipped.
You would think we all agreed that acting to end third-world poverty was our number one priority, and that we would all, with barely a sigh of regret, give up our cars, our fridge-freezers and dishwashers, would cease commuting and return to live in the cities we abandoned for the good of our children, and would generally resume our lives as good citizens after 13 years in the desert.
If you assumed this public culture reflected political actuality you would be living in a fools' paradise, the reverse side of Thatcherland.
The gulf between people's voting behaviour and the polls was really a time lag.
To questions about tax and public services, the public responded as it did in the days of Thatcher: by denying her creed of the Rich Samaritan and countering with approval for self-sacrifice and public services.
This was an assertion of decency.
To be decent — an underrated public virtue of bad times — is simply to refrain from behaving badly when one has the incentive to be bad.
So to say yes to higher taxes when one could instead choose a second car or private hospital is to assert the value of decency.
Under Thatcher, to say yes to private health and wealth was to give public approval for values most people felt to be indecent.
As a friend of mine, a young, second-hand car dealer, said, ‘People I know think there is a stigma attached to saying you agree with the Conservatives.’
However, by simply being Mr Decent, ie by not declaring a desire to eliminate his opponents, or referring to expressions of social concern as ‘drooling and drivelling’ and people who care as ‘moaning minnies’, John Major had put down a slender but steady plank for enough people to cross from a public culture of concern and responsibility to a private preference for Conservative government.
This divorce between public values and private desires is dangerous.
John Major will need to do more than provide a discreet crossing from worthy words to anti-social acts.
He has not yet had enough time to close the gap, to find a way of associating Conservative values with a public political culture.
I do not mean decent Conservative values like the Citizen's Charter or dreaming of the classless city; I mean authentic Conservative values, like a social hierarchy in which power follows the rich who do not have to answer for their acts to hoi polloi, in which we do not have to feel responsible for anyone's poverty or ill health, in which we do not have to ask questions about where the rich get their money from, and we can carve up the land to create a sort of apartheid state: each tribe to its own homeland.
Labour voters to Scotland and the north; blacks to the inner cities; wives to the country cottage; Essex man to Essex thank you very much; and Mr Doing-all-right to wherever he can secure a fortress.
In theory, this time lag between people's shame at Thatcherite indecency and the potential emergence of a Majorish (oh, how she would hate the word) conservative public culture, gives Labour its chance.
It is a brief one.
The forces of reaction have won in the United States, claiming a popular mandate for destroying the liberal principles of the last generation.
But that is in part contingent on the peculiarities of political power in the US, which gives what we would regard as disproportionate political power to constitutional courts, made up of persons chosen by the president.
The reaction is also a testament to the strengths and weaknesses of the left.
It is the left that has espoused the causes of sexual and racial equality with enough vigour to persuade the establishment that action needed to be taken (a host of anti-discrimination measures and laws), but without the power to make the sort of widespread social change that would render this sort of fussy, bureaucratic measurement unnecessary.
American liberals have taken the lead in defining equal opportunity as the goal of a decent society, but the European left is following on only for lack of anything better to pursue.
It is finding that the phrase ‘equal opportunity’ is usually a meaningless compromise; if the good things of life are really dependent on opportunity — which everyone knows they are not; would the rich and powerful really be so careless?— what human agency has the hubris to imagine it can deal out opportunity in a fair or even meritorious fashion?
The catch phrase ‘equality of opportunity’ is a delusion, concealing not only the injustice of our social hierarchy but also how much effort is put in by conservative forces to ensure it remains unjust.
Nonetheless, it was Major's readiness to use this language (which, interestingly, Mrs Thatcher, in her effluvial megalomania, regards as Marxist) that allowed people to vote Conservative, albeit not with a clear conscience.
The urgent task for the left is to move to prevent the right constructing a new reactionary but decent edifice on this platform of pretence.
The pattern of people espousing public values of kindness and decency, but voting in national governments of the right which eschew political ideals, is well-established in both Japan and the US, the former having a very weak socialist party, the latter having no socialist party at all.
The difficulty is in deciding whether or not to start with the public culture (pro third world, bicycles, a minimum wage, higher taxes, more women comedians, legal justice for black and Irish people) and tackling popular fears about Labour; or whether to assume that public culture is sanctimonious and self-deceiving and Labour's interest lies in an honest public culture.
In which case it has to find a way of lowering expectations of the public good, limiting damage by the pursuit of private interest, building a different notion of good citizenship and public virtue out of that private interest.
In other words, when the gulf between public values and private interests grows too large, it is Labour that suffers.
The young Labour supporting, Tory-voting car dealer thinks if Labour won power it would use it to support the IRA and gay rights.
Public values and government action would thus remain in opposition.
Perhaps that tension between politicians, people and public culture, with its awesome gulf between beliefs and actions, is the real legacy of the Thatcher years.
Until Labour can close the gap, it's a legacy any decent conservative will inherit.
The pain in Spain!
The underclass is striking; the unions are united; and the government has run out of ideas.
Denis MacShane on the problems of trying to run a socialist administration
Madrid Visitors to Spain this summer — whether for sun, sport (the Olympic Games) or for Seville's Expo 92 — are advised to bring buckets, mops and disinfectants in their suitcases in addition to Ambre Solaire and Jeffrey Archer.
A remarkable revolt by Europe's underclass is threatening, if not to wreck, at least to discolour the modernised, modish Spain that the country's prime minster, Felipe González, intends to present to the world in 1992.
Massive May Day marches in Madrid and other cities will be one symbol that 500 years after Spain ‘discovered’ America, a new group of Spanish workers is discovering their own power and using it against their own government.
It is unlikely that many visitors will peer too closely into the workings of Spain after a decade of socialist rule.
They should.
Spain is a model country in the new Europe.
It reflects, in particular, the difficulties for any Socialist (or Labour) Party seeking to govern in a world of unregulated capital flow.
Walking along Madrid streets a fortnight ago, tourists saw a bizarre sight.
There was a cross and the tall hoods of a traditional Easter procession.
But the cross was made of mops and brushes, the hoods were made of cleaning cloths, and instead of thurible and incense, the ‘celebrants’ swung buckets.
And all of them were women.
They were manifesting their part in a strike in April by Madrid's 23,000 cleaners which turned the city into a dungheap.
Cleaners are the most essential, the most unseen, apparently the least powerful of modern capitalism's new working class.
In Madrid, under the leadership of a singular woman, Antonia Alcaraz, the powerless showed they have power.
No strike since Franco has had such an impact.
After 23 days, the government was threatening to send in the army to clean up the streets.
To use the army as strike-breakers for the first time since Franco (and Spain's universally detested military service would have caused some intersting tests of loyalty) would have provoked a confrontation with an unclear outcome for both sides.
Both government and unions stepped back and set up an arbitration process to try to resolve the cleaners' claim for a minimum monthly salary of 80,000 pesetas (£450).
After the strike by Madrid cleaners, there came a two-day stoppage by workers in the hotel industry.
This left German, English and Nordic tourists making their own beds and dining off paper plates.
The issue — over working hours and job security — remains unresolved.
More hotel strikes are threatened.
As part of a wider resistance, both the main unions are threatening general strikes during the coming months.
The summer that was meant to be a grandiloquent celebration of Spanish glory and its new role in Europe and as a bridge to Latin America is turning sour.
Like an old bull that everyone in the post-industrial world thought was long dead, Spain's new working class is snorting, stamping the ground and ready to fight.
Of particular concern to the government is that the once guaranteed divider of Spain's workers — Stalinism and the cold war — is no longer of any relevance.
In the strikes by cleaners and hotel workers, as well as in a recent important stoppage by Ford workers that had no coverage in the press outside Spain — the UGT (socialist) and CCOO (communist) labour federations were united.
This in in sharp contrast to the 1970s and most of the 1980s when the UGT and CCOO were bitterly at odds.
Now both are affiliates of the European Trade Union Confederation and cooperate inside Spain.
The importance of this development lies in the personal history of the UGT leader, Nicolas Redondo.
Under Franco, he was the chief figure in Spain's Socialist Party.
Offered the general secretaryship, he declined, preferring to stay with the union and ceding the number one post to a young leftist lawyer from Seville, Felipe González.
In the immediate post-Franco era, the older workerist Redondo and the UGT dominated.
Opposed then to collaboration with the communist CCOO, the UGT offered a social pact to González after the Socialists won power in 1982.
Redondo, for the union, and González, for the party, hoped to reproduce in Spain the same kind of social welfare capitalism that similar union-party combinations had introduced in northern Europe between 1945 and 1975.
But Spain in the 1980s was not Sweden of the 1950s.
González could deliver neither the central UGT demand of either full(ish) employment nor adequate welfare protection.
Twenty per cent of Spain's workforce is jobless and welfare payments are minimal.
Instead, González came more and more to personify the new wave of 1980s socialism with the social largely left out.
Redondo and the UGT were excluded from the governing process.
In anger, he turned to his old enemy, the CCOO, to forge a new alliance.
As in Mitterrand's France, Spain's cultural, media and regional life blossomed.
Catholic reaction, so disastrous in Ireland or post-communist Poland, was swept aside as social, sexual and gender taboos were obliterated.
Women figure impressively in González's political scenarios.
External capital flowed in, attracted by the strong peseta and lax controls.
Critics denounce González's programme of technical modernisation and capital formation as una politica thatcheriana .
The jibe is fair.
Yet the politics of regional development — the Socialists have poured billions of pesetas into infrastructure projects in the barren south of the country — or the promotion of Spain's high-speed train, the AVE, put González closer to the European model of public funding for social development, in contrast to the English sterility that, if development cannot be privately funded, it should not be done.
In addition, the politics of capital formation first, modernisation second, and redistributive social welfare nowhere have benefited many workers.
In 1980, Spanish workers earned 40 per cent of German wages, now they earn 69 per cent.
The Spanish car industry pays high enough wages to seek to recruit skilled workers from England.
Full-time employed workers in Spain have seen a rise in their living standards.
However, there is increasing marginalisation for the rest.
In addition to the 20 per cent out of work, contract and part-time employment has tripled in the past five years.
A third of Spain's workers have contracts of employment valid for less than a year, living in permanent insecurity about being laid off.
To make matters worse, the Socialist government is turning the screw.
In a classic example of blaming the victim, the finance minister, Carlos Solchaga, has decided that the best way to cure unemployment is to punish the unemployed.
Unemployment benefit, already the lowest in Europe, is to be cut, and the period of work necessary to qualify for it is to be lengthened.
Spaniards have been told the time of sacrifice is over; now come the years of effort — an effort to make Spain fit to enter European monetary and economic union in 1997.
Spanish Socialists are the most Eurofanatic of the Continental left.
In Spain, the paradox of Europe is that it is both the whip to modernise Spain by destroying structures of corporatism, grandeur and clericalism that held back the country for centuries, and, at the same time, it demands enormous sacrifices paid by the poor as Solchaga and Gonzáles seek to achieve a capitalism and productivity equal to levels set in northern Europe.
The Hispanic fanfare over the World Fair in Seville and the 500th anniversary of Columbus' trip to the Caribbean is flag-waving to disguise this gigantic and painful modernisation project undertaken by González.
The Socialists have no idea what to do with Spain's growing underclass nor the large and discontented public-sector workforce.
One answer is the stick.
González is seeking to introduce laws limiting the right to strike in key public sectors.
This will be applauded by European business, but would be some irony for a man who made his name defending workers who went on strike under Franco.
But there is no carrot, no new model of socialist equality, fairness or industrial democracy to justify the harshness of Spain's modernising Europolitics.
Gonzáles faces the most acutely the pressure that all democratic socialist parties face in the new Europe.
Founded to give political expression to a working class based on industry, what is their role in a post-industrial world?
Redistributing capital from wicked bosses in top hats to a productive proletariat was easy, but how is capital distributed from the company-oriented, employed worker (manual and white-collar) to the poor and unemployed?
Spain lived through a period of being isolated from Europe and the rest of the world; González's biggest card remains the memory of Franco.
But the two-thirds society he is creating in Spain, and which is now, with variations, the European model, is far from the last word.
As this summer's trippers to Spain will discover, the excluded, the powerless, the one-third that are ignored and taken for granted, can still have their say.
Tourist trap?
Rubbish piled up at Madrid airport as cleaners went on strike for more pay
Hooked on IT Gary Herman reports on how technology is helping the labour movement to organise itself internationally
It has become fashionable to lambast the trades union and Labour movement for its apparent backwardness but, in the UK at least, there exists a sort of Luddism based on prejudice that rejects utterly information technology and all its works.
Dyed-in-the-wool Labourites can still be heard muttering oaths into their beards against ‘cellphone socialists’— barely one step up the political rung from those most reviled of all creatures, champagne socialists.
It was, therefore, refreshing to discover a nest of technological progressives, all claiming allegiance to the international Labour movement, gathered together at the General Municipal and Boilermakers' Union (GMB) national training school in Manchester the other week.
They had descended on the former Jesuit college from all corners of the world representing a variety of organisations from the International Labour Organisation, through the Congress of South African Trades Unions, to the Asian Center for the Progress of Peoples, the cross-border American  wo-men's organisation Mujer á Mujer, and the London Hazards Centre.
Their mis-sion — to discuss information technology, electronic communications and the Labour movement.
It was doubly refreshing to hear the GMB's general secretary, John Ed-monds, give a keynote speech under the monumental shadow of an antique branch banner in which he announced the GMB's active (and financial) commitment to the development of new computer-based communications technologies within the union.
The conference itself was a testimony to how electronic communications could improve organisation.
Four years in the making, the three-day event had itself been organised by a team of 15 people based in the US, Hong Kong, South Africa, Brussels, Leeds and Manchester, all communicating by electronic mail (so-called ‘e-mail’, in which messages typed into a personal computer are sent by telephone line to a big, central computer that stores them until they are called up by one or more addressees using their own computers).
Many speakers rose to say that this was the first time they had actually met so-and-so, although they had spent hours communicating with them electronically.
Most people concluded that ‘face-to-face’ was more pleasurable, but e-mail was cheaper and more efficient.
The Labour movement does use electronic communications for more than organising international bean feasts.
Jim Catterson of the International Federation of Chemical, Energy and General Workers' Unions (ICEF) in Brussels, noted how access to high-quality financial information available from more than 1,500 databases has helped affiliates (including the GMB, the TGWU and MSF in the UK) to obtain information on finances, ownership, mergers and acquisitions vital to negotiations.
Shirley Miller of the Chemical Workers Industrial Union of South Africa, explained how she has used ICEF as ‘information brokerage’ in disputes with SA Cyanamid, Johnson & Johnson, Reckitt and Colman, and Ciba Geigy, among others.
The US giant, Dun & Bradstreet, is so concerned about this sort of thing that it has banned unions from access to its databases.
(The solution is to sign up as an individual).
Catterson also observed that e-mail links between plants and subsidiaries of the same company can give union negotiators the advantage of surprise.
In one case, an official was able to announce action in solidarity with a dispute that corporate management was not yet aware of.
As Marc Belanger of Canada's largest union, the Canadian Union of Public Employees, observed, this sort of information can give union officials control of a negotiation.
In a recent South African trial resulting from a rail accident, the drivers concerned denied responsibility on the grounds that they had been working compulsory 18-hour shifts.
Taffy Adler of the South African Work-net system, posted an open international message asking for evidence in support of this defence.
This was seen by workers at the London Hazards Centre who were quickly able to supply exactly the required references.
This sort of action is still infrequent and perhaps not very significant, but it gives hope that the enthusiasm that was much in evidence at the conference can help to revitalise the labour movement — this time globally organised, just like capital.
Most concluded that 'face-to-face’ was more pleasurable, but e-mail was cheaper and more efficient
LETTERS
A few years ago, my predecessor as NSS editor, Stuart Weir, decided to use an article by me about famine in Sudan as his Christmas edition cover story.
Pictures of starving children illustrated the piece; it concluded with an appeal for donations to a UN famine relief fund.
I had previously done likewise at the London magazine,Midweek , which I then edited.
The appeals in Midweek and NSS helped to raise more than £100,000 towards the relief of one of the least reported famines of recent times.
They also prompted some criticism — of our use of ‘starving children’ imagery; and of the very idea of the left seeking to offer ‘aid by charity’.
John Cole's column of 24 April (‘It really takes the biscuit’), which counterposed reports of famine (in Sudan, again, and Zimbabwe) with the domestic political ‘babble’ over ‘Scottish devolution, poll tax, or the privatisation of British Rail’, brought similar complaints.
‘How much longer must we tolerate articles such as John Cole's on mass starvation?’ asks Julie Boston, of Bristol.
‘His solution that we make individual donations to the aid agencies is extraordinary.’
Boston's solution is to look to the example of Cuba, where she recently found it ‘exhilarating to see a third-world nation that is adequately fed and healthy’.
Actually, Cole wasn't proposing donations to aid agencies as the ‘solution’ to mass starvation any more than Stuart Weir and I were doing so a few years ago.
An important, ameliorative act — yes; or, as Cole put it, an ‘ethical duty’.
But not a solution, and no, not ‘like a rapist who plays the role of social worker to counsel his victims’, as Warren Harris, of Oxford, hyperbolically describes it, either.
Harris accuses Cole of ‘stepping away from a system that must face up to the hypocrisy behind pretending to give a helping hand’ and ignoring the way this system ‘(ab) uses the South…and, in the words of Eduardo Galeano, ‘spreads the haemorrage to cure the anaemia'’.
But again, actually he doesn't, and I quote Cole's piece: ‘The fact is that starvation will get worse and worse unless the rich world contemplates a real assault on the causes of third-world poverty, rather than the occasional crisis management.’
Why is it that some people find it so difficult to accommodate the idea that providing immediate relief to human suffering can go alongside campaigning for longer term solu-tions?
In a week when the Spectator could editorialise that economic aid to Africa is ‘counterproductive and profoundly wicked ’(my — incredulous — emphasis), they should ask themselves whose side they are really on.
Partisan spite
Non-Tory voters in Scotland shared in the general disbelief and despair at the election result.
However, there was a final twist of the knife reserved for us — the sight of Brian Wilson and Alex Salmond rounding on each other, each blaming the other for the disaster.
Salmond has since shown himself responsive to calls for cross-party unity among the opposition, but Brian Wilson (‘The Union strikes back’, 24 April) seems still to be revelling in partisan spite.
His vigorous and provocative Unionist polemic against the importance of ‘the constitutional question’ is bracing, but it renders comical his charge that the SNP ‘is a party of no compromise’.
His arguments, on the other hand, give a bizarrely distorted picture of the election result in Scotland.
It was not the electorate that ‘efficiently reduced [the SNP]to three seats’, but the vagaries of the electoral system.
That the party actually increased its vote by half will come as a surprise to any reader relying solely on Wilson's article.
His attempts to explain away SNP support are engagingly loopy — can he seriously account for the 10 per cent increase in Glasgow by a rise in ‘rural Conservatism’, or anti-Tory tactical voting?
Were they mesmerised by the London media?
Or might they have been Tory voters fooled by Labour's billboard poster of John Major wearing an SNP rosette?
(Yes, all you Guardian and Independent readers, that's the sort of thing they wanted your £30 for…)
If Brian Wilson wishes to echo the slurs of Ian Lang by referring to those organising the call for a referendum as ‘headless chickens’, that is his choice, but if he thinks that is the best way to protect health, education and jobs from Tory policies, it is he who will be judged harshly.
Labour (‘the only party that can deliver’) has failed the Scottish electorate as much as has the SNP.
Many in both parties now recognise this, and that unity to bring about change in the way Scotland is governed is the only way forward.
Change of identity
Stuart Hall (‘No new vision’, 17 April) convincingly argues that we face the prospect of ‘permanent’ Conservative ascendancy rooted in the Thatcher ‘revolution’.
But by focusing on the way party leaderships and their organisational structures block the road to realignment on the left, Hall passes over the fundamental weakness of radical culture in British civil society.
In so doing, he pins the blame on the symptoms of our present stasis, not its causes.
Britain, in contrast to the rest of western Europe, is marked by the relative absence of an institutionalised and independent socialist presence in the stuff of everyday life.
It lacks the large and heterogenous left-wing presses, the genuinely mass parties (even after splits and dissolution, the former Italian Communists approach one million members) and the associational networks that root socialism in the crucial spheres of business and leisure.
These institutions provide two-way streets between the organised left and the communities/ identities they seek to represent.
The Euro-Left is now looking beyond traditional social democracy, while the Labour Party struggles to come to terms with the old model.
Hall is right to say that current Labour and Liberal parties cannot take on the task of realignment, but would be equally correct in saying they can't be by-passed.
The overriding task for those who want change must, therefore, be to transform these parties and their identities, by breaking down the ghetto walls between them and the ‘dispersed left’ in academia and the public services, and between these groups and the myriad of collective identities for which they presume to speak.
This means building the institutions, the two-way streets, the ‘meeting-places’ across civil and ‘political’society.
The task is immense, painfully long-term and difficult to ‘sell’, but it has one great merit as a grounding for optimism: there is no alternative, no quick fix.
Specific issues can provide initial meeting places, and open up communication, but that communication must build institutional foundations.
Success with self-consciously modest projects (for example, a non-sectarian daily paper through which the existing left can talk to itself, before attempting a popular tabloid) is the only way to build the confidence needed for any greater shift in the fundamental poles of national political culture.
Intellectual decay
How is it that one of Britain's key black thinkers, Stuart Hall, invokes style as an explanation of Kinnock's failure, even lowering himself to make anti-Welsh remarks?
Phrases such as‘the ‘boyo' body-language kept breaking through’ are reminiscent of the tabloids' anti-Welsh campaign against Kinnock, and it is deplorable that a once-eminent socialist writer should use them.
To further suggest that the supposed Kinnockite qualities of being ‘principled, passionate, sentimental’ are antiquated is to imply that lack of principle, coldness and hard-nosed calculation are ‘for these times’.
What Stuart Hall's new-style analysis of Thatcher, Major, Basildon man,et al , amounts to is old-fashioned pragmatism; in other words, opportunist and unprincipled calculation of the vagaries of the electorate.
This outlook has always been diametrically opposed to socialism, labourism, indeed, all that is still progressive in British politics.
It is sad to see that the Thatcher years have not only wreaked social, economic and political havoc, but also induced intellectual decay, even on the left.
Where is the Labour Party?
In their analyses of the recent election, your contributors have, so far, missed three points.
First, Neil Kinnock and others think the hostility of the press had something to do with the result.
The Sun used to be called the Daily Herald .
In those days it was a pro-Labour paper and once it was owned by the TUC.
Had the Labour movement held on to this popular paper, would we have won the election?
Second, all this talk about alliances and electoral agreements imply one essential step.
The leaders of the non-Tory parties would have to discuss the principles on which they could agree and those on which they could not.
I cannot imagine how this discussion would go, can you?
Third, in all the campaign reports, it is assumed that canvassers do not have the time to discuss politics or local or personal grievances with voters on the doorstep during an election campaign.
This has been dogma in the Labour Party (and probably the other major parties) for some 30 years.
Newcomers such as the Green Party cannot treat the electorate in such a cavalier fashion.
When they canvass, they must explain their programme and, conversely, must listen to all sorts of points put by the voters on their own doorsteps.
They can make progress in no other way.
In the 1988 regional elections, the local Green Party not only hand-delivered leaflets, but did a complete canvass, patiently discussing and listening wherever people wanted to talk.
In each ward, two workers canvassed some 2,000 voters and polled a respectable vote.
If a pipsqueak mob like the Green Party can do it, why can't the mighty Labour Party?
The Lochaber District Labour Party recently mustered all its activists and held a selection meeting where nine members selected six candidates for the May District Council election.
Is this the Labour Party?
Local parties reduced to meagre rumps, activists unable to talk to voters, no clear principles and its manifestos issued by courtesy of Tory press barons?
The ‘simple’ truth
As an extreme right-winger, I have read your recent post-apocalypse editions with more than the usual merriment.
Not that your readers would want — let alone listen to — any advice from these quarters, but here, for the sheer hell of it, are some thoughts.
What struck me, more than anything, from the tone of the autopsy was the outrage felt by most of your writers that ‘they’(the oppressed) somehow decided to vote, much against their best interests, for ‘them’(the wicked, evil Tories).
In other words: it's understandable that those rich bastards vote Tory, but why should anyone who isn't rich do it?
If you guys really want to be anything more than a footnote in the annals of British history get this —‘Egalitarianism is for Losers’.
Say this every night, before you go to bed.
I voted Tory not because I want to earn lots of money (I am on the dole), but precisely because I object to the facile cynicism as witnessed above.
For all your alleged love for the poor and the oppressed, you seem to think that the public ought to be selfish when it votes.
The trouble is, we aren't.
People, believe it or not, and that means Tories, socialists, Liberals and greens, vote by and large for those who they think can run things better.
It's that simple.
Why can't you grasp this?
The problem of Tottenham
I am delighted that Haringey councillor Ian Willmore has rediscovered the problems of Tottenham and has even taken to pondering the question of which candidate for the Labour leadership is best equipped to tackle these problems (Letters, 24 April).
I am sure Mr Willmore will agree with me that the man for the job is Tottenham MP Bernie Grant.
After all, if Labour nationally had achieved the swing that Mr Grant got in Tottenham, Labour would now be in government.
Heart of the matter
At the end of your editorial (‘Starting again’, 17 April) you make the point that the Labour Party has not yet had the opportunity to discuss why it lost the recent election and this is a good reason to put back the choice of a new leader.
But there has been endless comment by members of the Labour Party leadership as well as others about the outcome of the election and it is still going on.
One thing is clear.
No one in the Labour Party seems prepared to consider why more than 14 million people, including many of the very poor, voted Tory.
Perhaps the heart of the matter is that they trusted Mr Major and not Mr Kinnock, especially after the Prime Minister, in his final broadcast, spoke about giving people peace of mind and a nation at ease with itself.
The Tory campaign had been very negative and that's probably why Labour enjoyed its lead in the polls.
The evidence is clear from voting statistics that it was not the rich who refused to vote Labour.
It was people who Labour claimed would benefit from its policies.
Apparently, vast numbers of ordinary folk didn't agree, and that no doubt was connected with taxation policy.
I would add to that the outrageous claims made by Labour that the Tories were going to privatise the NHS.
This was clearly untrue and must have cost votes.
Cold comfort
I don't usually read NSS .
I needed some comfort after the election result so I turned to it for some like-minded thought.
What do I find?
Edward Pearce holding forth, telling us no one should get involved in politics but Edward Pearce — that it should be left to the ‘experts’.
So unless you are armed with a plethora of useless anecdotes or pointless quotations from a host of 19th-century Dead White Males — like Edward Pearce — forget it.
Worse still was the offering from Stuart Hall.
Since about 1985, Hall has done nothing but tell us how great the Tories are: how they've tapped the mood of the nation, set the agenda, turned us all into thrusting entrepreneurs and free-marketeers.
He is like a frightened rabbit staring into the headlights of the Tory juggernaut — he doesn't know what to do about it, so he claims it's unstoppable.
He accuses Labour of offering no alternative, no vision; yet he offers nothing himself, just one predictable analysis after another.
So after ten years of telling us how the future belongs to Thatcher, he will spend the next five telling us how successful Major will be in creating a classless society.
The Labour defeat was a disaster, but it might be a blessing in disguise.
Maybe there can be some real debate now on the way ahead for socialism, without the restrictions that the authoritarian rule of Kinnock and Hattersley imposed.
It's time to stop playing the Tories at their particular game; it's time to produce policies that will fire people's imagination, and a more radical Labour Party that leads in ideas and innovation and doesn't merely follow.
There are people out there who reject the Tory ethos — plenty of them — and plenty more who embrace it only from fear, because capitalism is adept at producing fear and uncertainty.
The Tories are not unbeatable, and it won't need pacts or mergers (or even PR) to see them off.
It will need ideas.
Your publication will no doubt be a forum for such ideas in the future.
Let's hope the pessimism of the last edition is firmly left behind — perhaps with Edward Pearce — and that thinkers like Stuart Hall spend less time applauding the Tories and much more time helping to rid us of what he calls this ‘nightmare’.
Don't blame Lib Dems
Your postmortem analysts, presumably trying to apportion blame evenly between the principal opposition parties, seriously over-estimate the extent to which the Liberal Democrats are in charge of their own electoral fate.
Virtually all their hopeful seats were Tory — not Labour — marginals.
So when Major and his allies in the press succeeded in persuading wavering Tories that voting for Ashdown would put Kinnock into Downing Street, they returned home.
It was the unpopularity of Labour, not anything Ashdown did or said, that sank Liberal Democrat hopes.
The transport question
As part of the continuing postmortem, I note an interesting absence in your ‘Preparing for Power’ series before the election: transport.
I suggest the failure to deal with the problems posed by mass car use — because that is what transport problems, whether pollution, congestion, ‘accidents’, or decline in the possibility of a real public transport system are due to— is both symbolic of, and central to, the bankruptcy of Labourist ideology.
Without detailing these problems and their solutions in a reduction in dependence on car use, one can make certain observations.
The biggest growth in carbon dioxide emissions, implicated in the major problem confronting humanity's survival, is from road transport.
The economy is tied to the production and use of one particular product, with a major war recently to secure its fuel, and the built-in obsolescence and resultant wastefulness of the product itself.
The promise of privatised experience in such a crucial area as travel not only erodes public transport, but also feeds into the individualist selfishness of consumerism.
Above all, discussion of these issues is virtually absent from the agenda.
I disagree that all us members of the literati do not suffer from the continuing triumph of the political and economic status quo.
Many of us feel a profound desperation at the global future.
I feel anger, for example, at the danger I confront when I cycle (or walk).
If there is a future beyond social democracy and state socialism, it lies with an alternative to pandering to consumerism and the status quo.
(Or what I suppose your growth-obsessed contributors would call ‘meeting the aspirations of the working class’).
Playing the Tory game does not work in securing power, and wouldn't do us any good in the long term even if it did.
Realising that means asking some fundamental questions about what we are actually after, with a lot on offer if we get it right, and disaster if we do not.
That kind of debate is one thing that actually gives intellectuals a raison d'etre , quite apart from abandoning the pathetic pseudo-debate about the trivia of managing consumerism.
But it does mean some real self-criticism.
Are you up to it? planned, but the election campaign started before we could publish it — Ed.
Passing the buck
The UN Population Fund's claim (quoted in ‘Too many people?’,
April 24) that ‘population growth is responsible for 79 per cent of deforestation…’ needs to be taken with a pinch of logic.
For it is not a fact, but a judgment.
It may perhaps be true that 79 per cent of trees cut down are cleared by people needing to plant food or gather fuel, and that, if there were fewer people, there would be less need.
But supposing those people had some other form of livelihood; the technology to produce more food from less land; the economic means to invest in conservation measures; the political power to gain access to land planted out to export crops, or the international, political power to get a fair price for their country's exports on the global commodity markets.
In any of these cases, there would be less pressure on land.
Blaming population growth for environmental degradation is, therefore, only one approach.
We could equally blame the prevailing distribution of economic and technologial resources.
It all depends on the level of analysis you want to apply.
So why start the analysis by counting heads?
Your own recognition of improved living standards as key to stabilisation of numbers suggests that it will be more useful to look at livelihoods than fertility rates.
There is, of course, a very good argument for giving women everywhere more control over their fertility; but that argument should be about empowerment, not about keeping down numbers.
This is a particularly ill-chosen moment to start ringing population alarm bells, as it can only threaten the UNCED process.
In the industrialised nations, where numbers have levelled out, their population bomb is perceived as exploding somewhere else, among dark-skinned peoples.
Thus, even though Britain's population density is double that of China, and per capita resource consumption and pollution far greater, it becomes possible to believe that the third world is threatening ‘our’ global environment.
That, of course, is to stand reality on its head, since the industrialised nations are manifestly the real environmental villains.
Shouldn't we now be acknowledging blame rather than passing the buck?
Lost opportunity
After many months of various Balkan wars, Misha Glenny (‘Bosnia means more bad news for Balkans’, 17 April) is trying hard to apportion the blame ‘even-handedly’ and blur the difference between villains and victims.
EC and UN observers, as well as foreign correspondents, have drawn different conclusions: that the bloodiest war is indeed the one ‘being fought by Serbs opposed to the independence of Bosnia-Hercegovina’.
Glenny should go to Bijeljina, Visegrad, Foca and other mainly Muslim towns that have been destroyed by the pro-Serbian Yugoslav army.
Even more surprising is Glenny's attempt to fudge the fundamental issues of the Balkan conflict.
The ‘Serbian question’ in Croatia was not the ‘central generator of the war’.
The war in Croatia was, in essence, an aggression against Croatia by the Yugoslav army.
True, its ranks were swelled by Serbs as other nationalities deserted and the aggressive greater Serbian nationalism dovetailed conveniently into the neo-Stalinist aspirations of the generals, to preserve Yugoslavia.
The facts of the war are simple: about a dozen people died during the Serbo-Croat conflict in Croatia in 1990-91.
When the army got involved in July 1991, at least 10,000 were killed in six months.
As for the ‘Serbian question’, it was to a large extent created and turned into the cause of war by Serbia's President Milosevic and his Hitlerian policy of ‘all Serbs in one state’.
And yet, all Glenny has to say about the army's role in the present, Bosnian war is that they are ‘genuinely confused’, ‘waverers’ pushed by Muslim and Croat provocations into the clutches of ‘unashamed Serb nationalists’.
Who is he trying to fool?
Bosnia's President Izetbegovic has bent over backwards not to antagonise the army, and has tried to find a compromise solution, but the army chiefs refused to cooperate.
Not once has the ‘waverer’, General Kukanjac, hinted that he would be willing to recognise the authority of the democratically elected Bosnian government.
Glenny's most amazing suggestion is that the recognition of Croatia and Slovenia deepened the problem.
He does not explain that the fighting intensified because the army and Serbia wanted to discourage the recognition by escalating the conflict.
It could be argued that the west lost the golden opportunity to contribute to the peaceful solution of the Balkan crisis because it did not de-recognise Yugoslavia (and, with it, outlaw the Yugoslav army), while recognising all the six former Yugoslav republics before the war started in earnest.
This measure may well have to be considered now (as Washington is hinting), as it has become crystal-clear that the Bosnian war is being fomented by Milosevic and the extreme Serb leaders in Bosnia, and is primarily waged by the army.
Can Misha Glenny be so politically naive that he has unwittingly turned into an apologist for aggression?
Positive nationalism
There are two serious faults in Eric Hobsbawm's discussion of nationalism and ethnicity (‘Whose fault-line is it anyway?’ 24 April), one minor and one major.
The minor one is his failure to recognise the function of historians.
He claims that historians ‘supply the essential raw material for the market’ and ‘produce the past’.
The raw materials are the real facts that happened in the past; historians supply manufactured goods in which the facts are processed according to the prejudices of the manufacturers and the demands of the consumers.
The major one is his failure to recognise the positive aspects of nationalism and ethnicity.
He concentrates on the negative aspects — reasonably enough, in present circumstances.
But groups of people are identified not just by language and food, but by location, appearance, kinship, mythology, tradition, custom, music, clothing, symbols, rituals and all the details of everyday life, and all these characteristics serve to unite as well as divide them.
Groups can — and usually do — exist not so much by rejecting outsiders as by accepting insiders.
Wandering scholars or rootless intellectuals may not take such things very seriously.
But they are the real facts about the existence of human groups, and we ignore them at our peril.
Last week we mistakenly referred to a contributor, Dafydd Elis Thomas, as a Plaid Cymru MP.
He stepped down from parliament this year (having served for 18 years).
We apologise for the error.
FRINGE BENEFITS Colin Ward watches the allotment bonfire going up in smoke
The problem with environmental legislation of every kind is that, while we all applaud the intentions, we know automatically that the large-scale offenders have their own scientists, barristers, public-relations campaigns and representation in the House of Lords, that government inspectorates are hopelessly understaffed, and that consequently, at a local level, the enforcers concentrate their attention on the small fry who lack the time and resources to answer back.
I mentioned earlier this year (24 January) the plight of a useful local scavenger, the scrapman, faced by a battery of anti-pollution legislation, intended for the big time operators.
It is simply going to drive him out of a livelihood, and increases the amount of consumer junk left around in lane and layby.
Now, in the very week Greenpeace urged us all to send postcards to Mr Scopes, the chief executive of ICI paints, to say, ‘I won't buy Dulux paints until ICI stops des-troying the ozone layer’, Northampton borough council struck its own blow for the atmosphere.
Allotment holders got a letter from the council's pollution control technician warning them that under the terms of the 1990 Environmental Protection Act, the council would be obliged to take formal action if the smoke from an allotment bonfire amounted to a nuisance.
Helpfully, the council added that: ‘It should be pointed out that this action would be taken against all allotment holders, whether or not any individual holder has had a bonfire prior to the service of a notice.
The maximum penalty for non-compliance with a Notice under this legislation is £2,000, together with a daily penalty of £200, if appropriate.’
Useful tips were enclosed, like the news that ‘Bonfire smoke is 300 times more likely to cause cancer than tobacco smoke’ and the recommendation to ‘compost as much garden rubbish as possible’.
Now, while I'm the nation's most inefficient gardener, I have visited more allotment sites than the pollution-control technician, and I know what a fetish most plot-holders make of composting, for very sound reasons of economy as well as ecology.
On the Northampton sites, they see themselves as exemplary green folk, since they make fewer demands on environmentally destructive goods and services than most of us.
The council's threat bewilders and frightens them, especially as other legislation requires them to ‘destroy by fire’ diseased waste like clubroot infections and potato haulms.
From the standpoint of the ozone layer, there is a quite different way of responding to the allotment phenomenon.
I've been reading a deliciously illustrated pamphlet Allotments: a viewer's guide , just published by the educational charity Broadcasting Support Services.
(Cheque for £1.50 payable to Channel 4 TV, sent to Allotments, PO Box 4000, London W3 6XJ.)
It's the follow-up for a TV programme that keeps eluding us all.
Made by Taghi Amarani, it was to have gone out in February, with the provocative title Earth, Wind and Fire .
It wasn't out of defer-ence to the pollution-control technician that the title and date were changed.
It was simply because the build-up to the general election revealed that policies for reducing pollution were the very last thing on anyone's agenda.
Cut down to size, the film will turn up as Vegetable Plots in Channel 4's True Stories on 14 May.
The really true story is that it is easier to seem busy by employing people to bash every easy target than to challenge our assumptions of consumer sovereignty and the vast, important industries that cater for them.
I have always felt chastened by an academic maxim that there is no greater error than a problem wrongly stated.
If you can't influence the policies of ICI, you can appear effective by putting the wind up allotment gardeners.
ARTS & MEDIA
Joyfully Back to Church?
Television's fascination with the 'new cosmology’ puts man — and even God — at the heart of science again.
Marek Kohn looks at the soul on the box
‘People are always asking me about God,’ remarks Stephen Hawking, as if surprised by their readiness to associate the origin of the universe with a creator.
They will probably keep on asking, as long as he avoids giving them a clear answer.
He points out that his concept of a universe without a beginning appears to leave a putative Creator out in the cold.
But the pay-off line of both the book A Brief History of Time , and Errol Morris' film of the same title, is that ‘the ultimate triumph of human reason’ would be to ‘know the mind of God’.
Hawking leaves the impression that he may be interested in God largely as a means of drawing an audience towards scientific ideas.
His studied ambiguity appeared somewhat cynical in the light of his revelation that he nearly cut the line from the proofs of the book.
‘Had I done so, the sales might have been halved,’ he wrote in the Independent .
The same sort of calculation seems to have been made by the producers of both Brief History and Soul , the recent BBC2 threeparter presented by Anthony Clare.
Excellence, as achieved by Horizon or Scientific American , has its limits.
The only way for popular science to break out of its niche market is for science to be presented as something else.
What appears as a hint in Brief History forms the high concept of Soul : science, it contends, is in the throes of a revolution that is turning it to face the Deity.
Reductionism is retreating on all fronts, cosmological, evolutionary, and neuroscientific.
Scientists, just like former communists, are going joyfully back to church.
The idea of television against reductionism recalls the adage about fighting for peace, and the equivalent activity for virginity.
Instead of simplifying its evidence to suit a simplistic thesis, however,Soul resorts to a spectacular inclusivism.
‘Soul’ is established as a category containing phenomena as disparate as Professor Paul Davies' conviction that what we know of the universe points to a grand design, Miriam Rothschild's delight in the beauty of her biological subject matter, and Oliver Sacks' realisation that his patients' brains do not resemble computers.
All this is so rich, heady and fast-moving that the viewer has to take it on the narrator's trust.
And this is OK,Soul reassures us, because if there's one big idea bubbling up in science, it's awe .
Dominican thinker Matthew Fox informs us that a friend of his has told him that the right side of the brain is all about awe.
This is on a par with Ronald Reagan's dinner-party anecdotes about video games nurturing the skills of future fighter pilots, but the fatuous and the profound are all equal in Soul .
Viewers are excused the demanding task of following the logic of a Horizon exposition; the important thing is to marvel.
Amid the Jungian images of seas at sunset, there is not a trace of the ordinary science practised every day by ordinary people.
Science is a highly disciplined industry that has traditionally taken a very dim view of emotional expression.
Like other occupational sectors, it has loosened up a little.
Nowadays civil servants wear earrings and scientists are freer to talk of beauty, but neither development implies a revolution in the way they actually see their jobs.
At the theoretical level,Soul is more profoundly misleading.
A lot of hand-waving about the overthrow of Newtonian determinism by quantum physics obscures the fact that Newtonian physics remains true enough within the limits in which we live our lives.
Oliver Sacks is hardly putting himself out on a limb when he affirms that the brain is not like a computer: neuroscientists have been telling the Artificial Intelligence buffs that for years.
It doesn't imply the failure of science and the need to recognise the existence of a non-material mind; just that the digital computer is a different sort of system to the brain.
The overwhelming impression of Soul is of a science in retreat, forced to admit the inadequacy of its materialism.
What this disguises, however, is a bid by some scientists to seize the domain of religion.
Both Soul and Brief History include Stephen Hawking's anecdote about being told by the Pope that scientists might properly study the universe after the Big Bang, but that the bang, or Creation, itself, was the province of God.
Scientists themselves have always been able to work in laboratories during the week, and to pray in places of worship at the week-end, by accepting the separation of the domains.
Just like anybody else, they have understood science to be a process of investigation, and religion a matter of faith.
The ‘new cosmology’ promises to replace faith with proof.
As Paul Davies has put it, ‘science offers a surer path to God than religion.’
Putting science next to godliness goes hand in hand with rolling back the Copernican revolution and putting Man back at the centre of the universe, a reactionary project that makes the New Right look like tinkerers.
The key is the ‘anthropic principle’, which draws attention to the fact that, as Hawking says, ‘we see the universe the way it is because if it were different, we wouldn't be here to observe it.’
‘Strong’ formulations of the principle claim that the universe is the way it is in order for us to be here to observe it.
Hawking treats the principle with caution in the book, but these reservations are not apparent in the film.
Nor are any reservations about Hawking's work itself: on this score,Soul is more incisive than Errol Morris' movie, in which the director has substituted a somewhat bemused deference for the confident spirit of critical inquiry that animated its forerunner,The Thin Blue Line .
Although Soul presents the anthropists as shiny new iconoclasts, the same line was being peddled at the turn of the century by Alfred Russel Wallace, Darwin's collaborator, and was duly satirised by Mark Twain.
To conclude that the universe exists because it permits us to exist is an act of faith, not reason.
In its most overweaning forms, anthropism seems to be on the verge of substituting Man for God, by hinting that consciousness, unbound by time's arrow, causes creation.
Like the implication that humanity's destiny is to understand God by replacing theology with science, it is a compensatory power-fantasy.
The pity is that the world we actually live in is so full of evidence for a misanthropic principle.
‘A Brief History of Time’ is on Channel 4 at 8.30pm on 3 May
Art Painter and decorator Thérèse Oulton makes her own way through art-world hype.
Mark Sladen follows her
In the 1980s a lot of noise was made about a supposed crisis in British art.
As the great surge of modernism finally seemed to grind to a halt, artists and public were apparently offered two choices: either to celebrate postmodern confusion, or to turn back to older and more insular traditions.
The conservative response was more widely heralded (notably by Peter Fuller and the magazine he founded,Modern Painters ).
Painting as an art form became news once more, and young artists were said to be rediscovering a Romantic tradition in English painting that encompassed landscape artists from Turner to Paul Nash, and visionaries from Blake to Stanley Spencer.
Much emphasis was placed on painterliness, technique and a renewed sense of spiritual purpose.
On the back of this publicity, a range of young artists arose, set to conquer our hearts and minds.
How different things appear now.
Another generation of artists has emerged (many from Goldsmiths' College in London), which has successfully developed the rival approach.
They are multi-media artists who use video imagery, written texts and a range of unexpected materials to create bizarre objects and unsettling environments.
They take iconic and commonplace elements from modern material culture to create new social metaphors.
At first sight, much of this conceptual art seemed either flip or overly theoretical.
What is now plain is that the best work has a deep capacity for humane, even spiritual insight.
Damien Hirst (several of whose pieces can currently be seen at the Saatchi Collection in London) may create installations from a shark suspended in formaldehyde, or from flies being bred in a sealed glass chamber, but each work is a memento mori as powerful as any Dutch still life.
What has happened to the new painters in the meantime?
One thing at least has become clear: their work often sat uneasily beside the dictums of its would-be publicists.
Just as the new conceptual artists have more passion than they were at first credited with, so many of the new painters amount to more than the sum of their supposed influences.
Thérèse Oulton, an exhibition of whose recent paintings opens at Marlborough Fine Art this week, is well placed to shrug off this doubtful legacy.
She has made an art form out of dodging classification.
Oulton emerged from the Royal College of Art in 1983 at the age of 30, to almost immediate acclaim.
Her early work depicted a dreamy hinterland between landscape and abstraction, like the molten scenes of late Turner.
Her palette of evocative earth and sea tones also seemed to link her to an English landscape tradition, and her work was included in a group show at the Serpentine Gallery in 1984 entitled Landscape, Memory and Desire .
However, from this time she began to eliminate any suggestions of depth and perspective in her paintings.
Her work became more purely abstract, and yet refused to conform to the Puritan style often associated with abstract art.
Her pictures remain richly evocative of natural forms and textures.
In 1988, Oulton moved to the Marlborough Gallery, which was busy assembling a stable of the best of the new painters.
This was the time when Lucien Freud and the ‘School of London’ were being proclaimed as the lost leaders of British art — even of western painting — and were being bought by the Americans.
The encrusted surfaces of Oulton's canvases could be compared to the thick layering and tortured reworking of paint in the art of Kossoff or Auerbach, whose paintings evoke a continuous grappling with doubt, like the late works of Titian or Rembrandt.
Yet from the late 1980s, Oulton started to rein in her painterliness.
Her handling of paint, which had always been close-knit, was redirected in order to build the honeycombed structures that now spanned the surface of her canvases.
The result suggested dogged industry, rather than heroic improvisation.
For her latest exhibition, Oulton has gone even further to distance herself from Old Master traditions and concepts of Englishness.
Out have gone the autumnal shades, in have come bold contrasts of saturated reds and greens.
Where before Oulton teased her interpreters with titles such as‘Lachrimae’ and ‘Vanitas’, her new paintings have sterner names such as ‘Transparence No 7’.
We can now see that Oulton's art has followed a wilfully individual path, avoiding too close an association with any fashionable cause, and managing to remain relevant in a trecherous time.
She may well have a thing or two to teach the Goldsmiths' graduates about handling the demands of the art world and media.
The strength of Oulton's art is now revealed to be its sympathy with decorative rather than‘masterly’ traditions.
Her canvases do not have a flamboyant personal style; instead they assert the principal that all work (even the most self-effacing) has value.
Oulton uses pattern, encrustation and rich colouring to create precious crafted objects rather than personalised artworks.
A good parallel can be found in medieval tapestries, and she has shown an interest in revealing the hidden history of female labour and creativity contained in such works.
Thérèse Oulton is well placed to examine such a subject.
Whereas conceptual art chooses to break the link between art and craft, it is this link that any painting re-enacts.
Oulton has chosen to build her art on this relationship: an ancient, and still contentious, source of human mythology.
‘Thérèse Oulton: Abstract with Memories’ is at Marlborough Fine Art, 6 Albermarle Street, London W1, from 1 May to 12 June
Festivals How green is my valley?
Martin Parker follows the Garden Festival bandwagon into post-industrial Wales
This week, the fifth National Garden Festival opens in Ebbw Vale, south Wales.
More than 140 acres of gardens and theme park have been created for a summer's bloom on the debris of the industrial revolution.
‘Garden Festival Wales is a glimpse of what the future might hold’: from slag heaps to sky rides in one painful decade.
The first festival was held in Liverpool in 1984, followed by Stoke, Glasgow and Gateshead.
In each case £20 million to £30 million of government money was spent reclaiming a site for flowers and later development.
The Garden Festival programme began as a way of throwing flowers at rioters in Toxteth.
As northern cities became symbols for industrial collapse and unemployment, so symbolic solutions had to be proffered.
The West Germans had been using this technique to stimulate postwar rebuilding since the 1950s, and the Department of the Environment clearly saw some parallels.
In 1981, Michael Heseltine gave the go-ahead for Liverpool.
According to government rhetoric, regeneration could be both represented and encouraged by this exercise — a form of pump-priming to stimulate organic and economic growth.
The general theme for all the festivals has been the country and the city.
Industrial remains have been bulldozed and buried under newly laid turf.
A fictionalised countryside comes back to brighten the dark heart of the urban sprawl.
This is not wild, uncontrolled nature, but greenery as artifice and symbol.
The gardens refer continually to an industrial and pre-industrial past, as well as a post-industrial future.
They were temporary arrangements of growbags designed with careful precision to fit between the ice-cream stand and the garden centre, between heritage and science fiction.
From 1987 onwards, slag heaps and coal tips in Ebbw Vale were flattened and rearranged.
The whole operation has cost about £60 million, around half of which has come directly from central government.
One and a half million trees have now replaced the desolation on the valley floor.
Wales' pre-industrial past is represented by ‘history, myth and legend’.
This Land of Our Fathers comes complete with Celtic stone circle, ancient swamps and iron-age huts.
Home cooking is provided in a reconstructed Welsh hill farm which overlooks a wildlife area sponsored by British Coal Opencast — perhaps a belated apology for destroying most of the surrounding countryside.
Wales' future is the usual mix of sky shuttle rides, the technology maze and a futuristic pub.
The Japanese influence is also noticeable: hardly surprising, since it seems that they are saving the land from its current fathers, British Coal and the English.
About four million people, or consumers, are expected to visit the festival between May and October.
The Prince of Wales will open it, and it is clear that a weak environmentalism informs much of the festival's symbolism.
Press releases are printed on recycled paper and the promotion of environmental goods and services is encouraged.
Energy efficient homes are featured, as is Hoover's ‘environmentally aware approach to providing a cleaner world’— whatever that might be.
Ready made greenwash is provided in Welsh crafts: homemade scones and slate dragons replace coal and steel as major Welsh exports.
But what is the future for this pale-green valley?
A summer's bloom is all very well, but the aim is presumably something more perennial.
Stoke's site is probably the most commercially successful.
It now supports a business and retail park, a multi-screen cinema, hotel and conference complex, ski-slope, fun pool and so on.
The latest building completed is a drive-in McDonald's.
Development on the Glasgow and Gateshead sites has been slower, partly due to the effects of the recession, but in each case a mixed economy of houses and offices is planned.
Only Liverpool's site is not yet developed, but here there are plans for an entertainment complex.
In all the sites, part of the reclaimed land is meant to be left as a public park.
As a model of renewal, the festivals have a lot going for them.
Jobs, both temporary and permanent, have been created from industrial debris.
Much good publicity has been given to five areas of Britain that badly need it.
Millions of visitors have had a nice day out and spent a lot of money.
And, most importantly, something has been seen to have been done.
A festival provides a powerful model for a new beginning, a rite of spring.
Just as the Festival of Britain symbolically moved the country into a postwar era of affluence, so the Garden Festivals appear to usher in the post-industrial economy: a green age of leisure.
It would be pleasant to think that, with the stroke of an earth mover, we could create a new world.
Outside the gates, however, the problems seem to be all too familiar.
Unemployment caused by the collapse of coal and steel will not be solved by a garden festival.
Neither will the drain of cultural and material resources down the valleys to Cardiff, Newport and Swansea.
Enduring policies for regional regeneration will need more cash and more political will.
Ebbw Vale won't hurt, and it might even help, but there will undoubtedly be some irony in the hillsides this summer.
Film Postcards from the edge Anne Billson stares into the abyss with Lawrence Kasdan, and starts to panic
Here in the comfier parts of the planet, life's struggle is confined to laying down sandbags.
Insurance policies, wise investments, sensible diets and burglar alarms: if only we can lay down enough of them, the reasoning goes, we can maybe hold the fort against the chaos that rages outside.
But every so often, something will erupt out of nowhere, break through our defences and turn the well-ordered furniture upside-down.
It might be the unexpected death of someone we know, or a mindless crime, or a freak accident, or a hurricane that tears off the roof tiles — any one of these is enough to remind us that total control is a delusion.
If art is an attempt to impose structure and meaning onto this chaos, there is no artefact more deliberately structured than the contemporary Hollywood movie, designed to prise money from the masses and reasssure them that good guys don't necessarily finish last.
Reassurance is the key word here.
You want your audience doped up to the eyeballs in feelgood factor.
You don't want them emerging with the queasy feeling they could get whacked over the head on their way back to the car.
Lawrence Kasdan's latest film,Grand Canyon (Odeon, West End, from 1 May), is not reassuring at all.
Halfway through, I started to worry that an airplane would crash into the preview theatre.
Afterwards, I eyed the other pedestrians in Soho Square with more than usual paranoia, ready for any one of them to turn into a crack-crazed mugger.
And I chewed my lunchtime sandwich thoroughly, being careful not to get my trachea clogged up with cream cheese.
Of course, nothing horrible actually happened.
The whole point about chaos is that it roars down on you when you least expect it, like a motorcycle messenger.
Chaos intrudes into the lives of the characters in Grand Canyon .
Wasp liberal lawyer Kevin Kline takes a short-cut and finds himself plunged into the sort of yuppie nightmare that triggered Bonfire of the Vanities .
Stranded in the middle of a threatening black neighbourhood, he is rescued by a tow-truck driver, Danny Glover, and the two of them embark on a tentative, rather sweet black-white buddy relationship.
Kline's film producer pal (Steve Martin, plus beard) falls victim to a meaningless violent crime similar to the meaningless violent crimes with which he packs his movies.
In its aftermath, he muses on the sort of films he should be making.
Glover's sister is living in the middle of the East LA war zone described in Boyz 'N' The Hood : choppers in the air and bullets bounding off the verandah.
Kline's wife gets a fit of middle-aged broodiness.
His secretary dreams about having an affair with her boss.
Like the same writer-director's best-known movie,The Big Chill , this is an ensemble piece.
But my, how times have changed.
What a solipsistic lot those Big Chillies were, and how you itched to slap them out of their self-obsession.
The characters in Grand Canyon are no less solipsistic, but there is one big difference — fate administers all the slaps on your behalf.
‘One thing you can be sure,’ says Glover in his calm, homespun philosopher kind of way, ‘is that if you're alive, some terrible shit is going to happen to you.’
Oh yes,just what we want to hear.
Every so often he gets to do the movie's Grand Canyon metaphor, musing on the sort of terribly big, terribly ancient landmark beside which humans dwindle to the size and importance of scurrying ants.
And so it goes.
The men get reflective on life, the universe and everything.
The women worry about babies and whether to have them, or about men and whether to go to bed with them: always the sign of a male screenwriter of limited imagination (though Kasdan's wife Meg gets co-writer credit).
I would like to put it in writing that women also like to worry about vast philosophical subjects, such as life, the universe and the price of YSL's Rouge Intense lipstick.
By aiming to depict Life in the 1990s, Kasdan has probably bitten off more than he can chew, but he masticates bravely.
It says much about our conditioning that the brief Walter Hill-style shoot-em-up extract from one of Steve Martin's movies is more diverting than the earnest let's-talk-about-this stuff all around it.
But how can you have a good time when you keep being reminded about ‘the gulf between people who have stuff and the people who have shit’, or that ‘the world doesn't make sense [to me]any more’?
In the end,Grand Canyon is more admirable than enjoyable, and more well-meaning than meaningful.
Like most American stabs at introspection, it's full of exquisitely embarrassing moments, but it deserves marks for effort.
And it's all very Los Angeles.
But then the LA influence drips intravenously, via its most celebrated industry, into the rest of the world, which is becoming more like Los Angeles by the minute.
The Steve Martin character declares that ‘my movies reflect what's going on; they don't make what's going on.’
Though Kasdan appears to disapprove of the Joel Silver style of wham-bam slam-bangers, it's impossible to tell whether he thinks such films have been instrumental in the decline of western civilisation.
Perhaps that's as it should be, because who can know for sure?
The only thing we know for sure is that shit happens.
Keeping out of trouble: Danny Glover in ‘Grand Canyon’
Film 2 Mad, bad and dangerous A dyke with two Ferraris who kills men?
Now that's a positive image, says Ruth Picardie
This autumn, a movie called Swoon will open at the Metro Cinema in London.
Directed by the young American film-maker Tom Kalin, it tells the true story of Chicago law students Nathan Leopold Jr and Richard Loeb.
Young, wealthy, good-looking, gay, and turned on by crime, Nathan and Richard spend their time partying with friends, having sex, reminiscing about arson.
After a while they kidnap and murder a young boy for kicks, bashing him over the head with a blunt instrument.
The blurb reports that the film is about ‘putting homosexuality back into homicide’— all rather similar to Basic Instinct (to be reviewed in NSS next week).
But come September, the papers will not be full of reports about GLAAD (Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation) attempting to get the script changed — by changing Nathan into a female character, for example.
No one will be outside the cinema carrying ‘Tom Kalin, Fuck You, Anti-Semitic, Anti-Gay’ placards, or wearing ‘Richard did it!’
T-shirts.
Kalin is not being pressured to make his next film about a heroic gay cop.
So what is going on?
Kalin, it seems, is fortunate enough to fall into the category of a ‘queer’, rather than‘gay’ or ‘homophobic’film-maker.
Queer artists, following Genet, insist on the absolute difference of gay experience and the interlinked nature of cultural and sexual deviance.
In-your-face and offensive, the work that results is typically experimental in form and preoccupied with the red-light subjects of sex and violence.
In Gregg Araki's The Living End , two guys discover they are HIV positive and abandon themselves to violence.
Todd Haynes' Poison is, in part, a celebration of death and desire in a men's prison.
Queer artists reject the work of assimilationist ‘gay’ film-makers such as Norman René, who says of his Aids-epidemic weepie,Longtime Companion : ‘It was essential that the people we encounter are human and identifiable, so that the film is not about New Yorkers and gays but about people with whom audiences could identify.’
But nice, attractive, desexualised people having a bad time makes for a ‘white bread’ product, a cop-out.
At last weekend's ICA conference on screen censorship and sexuality, even Gus Van Sant's experimental My Own Private Idaho , which stars River Phoenix as a gay rent boy and Keanu Reeves as his slumming bisexual friend, was condemned by one speaker as ‘not a queer movie but a chance for straight actors to prove how lib-eral they are’.
Within this paradigm, the two main criticisms levelled at mainstream Hollywood films are tokenism and homophobia.
The use of gay supporting characters such as Michele Pfeiffer's neighbour in Frankie and Johnny or Susan Sarandon's flatmate in Light Sleeper , who function as sexless conduits for the action, is mere tokenism.
The transvestite serial killer in Silence of the Lambs , or the bisexual anti-heroine of Basic Instinct , are both examples of homophobia; of negative stereotyping.
All of a sudden, the arguments have been turned upside down .
Authentic queer films must have mad, bad and dangerous gay characters; mainstream Hollywood films can only have brave, noble, heroic types.
One could argue that this inverted logic is acceptable because art can't be divorced from its conditions of production and consumption.
Gay film-makers, after all, seek to challenge the assumptions of an élite, postmodern art-house or festival aud-ience, while cigar-puffing moguls are simply selling gay killers to the average American homophobe.
But it's a fatal double standard.
First, because insisting on positive images spells creative death: think of those tedious post-1980s guilt movies such as Regarding Henry and The Doctor , featuring dull-witted professionals gradually realising that Greed is Bad.
More important, to claim that a film can ‘inject’ the gullible, mid-American viewer with homophobia is to interpret the relation between representation and action in precisely the same crude, causal way as a Jesse Helms or a Mary Whitehouse.
For groups like Queer Nation, who have defended the work of such gay artists as Robert Mapplethorpe, this is a disastrous argument in favour of censorship.
In this country, the Basic Instinct furore has been something of a non-event.
At last week-end's ICA conference, the film generated a single comment, from a producer on Channel 4's Out series, Claire Beavan, who had just come back from America where she was making a programme about Hollywood homophobia.
‘I have real problems with the Basic Instinct campaign,’ she said.
‘It's unbelievably naive.
As far as I'm concerned, it's great to have a bisexual woman who likes having sex: the best bits are when Sharon Stone is naked.
In fact the problem with Basic Instinct is there isn't a lesbian scene.
For me, a cute dyke with two Ferraris who kills men is a positive image.’
Compare this analysis with comments made by Chris Fowler of GLAAD, reported in Time Out : ‘It [Basic Instinct ]simply pre-sents even more negative stereotypes, and it's something no self-respecting gay person will put up with.’
Or GLAAD executive director Ellen Carlton, quoted in the Guardian : ‘Most lesbians I know focus on loving relationships.
I don't know any icepick-wielding lesbians.’
Neither do I (I think).
But I do know about Hollywood actors who can't come out without kissing goodbye to being cast as heterosexuals.
I do know about actresses such as Patrice Charbonneau, who didn't work for several years after starring in the lesbian love story Desert Hearts .
Swoon and Basic Instinct aren't real life, remember?
To claim that a film can ‘inject’ the gullible viewer with homophobia is to interpret…in precisely the same crude, causal way as Mary Whitehouse
BOOKS
Voices of the village people ULVERTON Adam Thorpe Secker & Warburg, £14.99 D J Taylor
In outline,Ulverton must have seemed like a very good idea indeed.
A Wessex village seen through 350 years of snapshot history.
A series of fugitive, fictional voices set to illumine the rural microcosm, with a grander national pageant glimpsed fitfully in the distance.
A discriminating poet's eye (Thorpe's Mornings In the Baltic was shortlisted for a Whitbread Poetry Prize) to weld the fragments together.
The blurb talks about ‘traditional English pastoral’ meeting the postmodern, and the stage seems set for a prose version of Geoffrey Hill's Mercian Hymns : history, myth and self-awareness cunningly aligned with maximal sleight-of-hand.
And it is a good idea, up to a point.
For a start, Thorpe's protagonists are carefully chosen.
In a clumsier pair of hands, the novel might have begun with an Elizabethan cartographer, say, or a Caroline poet, and died at birth of irretrievable archness.
As it is, the first contribution comes courtesy of a mid-17th-century shepherd hailing the return of a deserter from Cromwell's Irish campaign (‘At Drogheda…
I shook his hand, like this’) whose wife has married someone else.
The second is from a cleric pitted simultaneously against natural forces and galloping Dissent; and the third from a small farmer bent upon ‘Improvement’.
Wholly self-absorbed, the tone benefits from this inward direction.
Stagey it may be, but in its refusal to grapple head-on with obtrusive national issues it is seldom stage-managed.
There is a plot, too, or at least a series of threads woven through these recapitulations of bygone existence.
A legendary shepherd's doxy who, by supposedly giving birth to a sheep, transposed herself into a creature of myth; an 18th-century joiner's apprentice who saw an angel; odd echoes from the agricultural riots of the 1830s; an imaginative squire's hollowing out of a chalk horse on the downs.
Each of these symbols translates happily enough through time to produce an informal heritage, and the sense of past experience working to shape the modern landscape, where barn conversions harbour computer hardware, is unignorable.
Yet does Ulverton work as a novel, rather than as an immensely partial mental gazetteer?
The answer, I imagine, is no, and the explanation is less to do with Adam Thorpe's abilities as a novelist, or rather as a mimic, than with the particular fictional alleyway he is bent on investigating: one which, after several promising detours and badly disguised exits, shows every sign of turning into a cul-de-sac.
Like Julian Barnes' A History Of The World In 10½ Chapters , the novel is — once the shreds of ulterior motive have been filed away — simply a series of impersonations.
In consequence, the reader's task is limited to deciding which of the voices work, in terms of authenticity, plausibility and interest, and which do not.
Here Thorpe is on shakier ground.
About half of the 12 sections pass the authenticity and interest test with ease.
Others are less successful, in particular the series of letters by the late 18th-century mother to her Newgate-sequestered son, and the Victorian ploughman's stream of consciousness.
The novel is about a third too long, and the second half could decently have been pruned back.
There is also the tiresome coyness over what is already feigned, which leads Thorpe to insert parentheses and question marks in the 1830s rioters' despositions, and footnotes in a 1950s sound recording to the effect that five seconds have been lost ‘due to electrical interference’.
The wider drawback remains.
John Banville has been hauled in to applaud what he calls a ‘wholly successful testing of the limits of literary art’, but all we are really being asked to approve is the author's ventriloquial skill.
This is variable.
An abbess and a cannon ANNIE BESANT: A BIOGRAPHY Anne Taylor Oxford University Press, £25 BEATRICE WEBB: WOMAN OF CONFLICT Carol Seymour-Jones Allison & Busby, £17.99 Jan Marsh
Sidney Webb prophesied that Annie Besant would end her days in a convent, having once fiercely denounced religion.
Harold Laski said Beatrice Webb should have been a medieval abbess, where her organising ability would have gained a spiritual dimension.
One suspects that both remarks testify to the dislike each woman provoked — despite their status as radical heroines — and which their current biographers share.
This is intriguing, for the lives of Besant (1847-1933) and Webb (1859-1943) are comparable in interesting ways.
Born and dying within a decade of each other, both lacked formal university or professional training, both rejected Christian dogma but felt lost without it, both carved out careers for which there were few models, and both preferred to work with men, refusing to acknowledge the personal benefits gained from the feminist struggle.
Indeed, Beatrice is notorious for signing the 1889 women's appeal against female suffrage, though she later recanted.
Annie is notorious for lots of things: leaving her dismal clergyman husband, joining Charles Bradlaugh in defence of birth control, urging the London matchgirls to strike, taking up theosophy and stirring up Hindu nationalism in ways many Indian leaders thought dangerous.
From the evidence here, she was a loose cannon of the left, espousing causes in an antagonistic manner that would be called ultra-leftism, were any principles discernible behind her actions.
Hypatia Bradlaugh said the only constant element was Besant's desire for prominence in whatever party she joined.
An impressive platform performer, she had a gift for attaching herself, making a noise, and then departing.
Her interest in socialism or Bryant & May working conditions was perfunctory.
Yet what alternative was there for a female orator?
Neither parliament nor the law was open, though these provided both soaring fame and a practical anchor for similarly gifted men.
Such fields could have attracted the more plodding Webb, too, who slowly worked her way from relatively High Society — the only one of nine sisters to marry ‘down’— into social research, the Fabian powerhouse and the formation of social policy in committee rather than cabinet.
Reading their lives, one feels angry that women could not be elected as much as not be electors.
Beatrice might have been happiest as a political hostess, however, had she won the marriage partner for whom her heart thumped.
Joseph Chamberlain, not Sidney Webb, was the man of her dreams; but though she has been credited with overcoming romantic desire for the sake of her own independence, it is clear that she desperately wanted him to propose, with her eyes set on his becoming prime minister.
In due course, she entered government as the wife of the President of the Board of Trade in the first Labour administration (where her social background came in useful advising less elegantly born wives on ‘clothes and curtseys’ when visiting the Palace).
There followed a disastrous and ill-termed ‘fact-finding’ trip to the Soviet Union, and a disappointed old age.
‘I have done the work I intended to do,’ she wrote at age 76 on the eve of a major operation.
‘Courage, old lady; count your blessings!’
But, because Carol Seymour-Jones bangs on about her unamiability, there is little sense of Webb's achievements or self-know-ledge in her book.
‘The real Beatrice has gone unsung, unloved,’ says the blurb of a text not within these covers.
Nor do they contain a sound historical analysis, for Beatrice's personal life is set in a matrix of ill-digested sources that show no knowledge of recent 19th-century gender studies, while the minor errors make the reader wince.
Anne Taylor's work is more reliable, as well as more challenging.
To discuss Besant fully, the biographer needs to understand a daunting range of intricate topics such as the radical-secular-socialist jockeyings of the 1880s, or the brands of Indian nationalism in 1900-20.
While one is not always convinced that Taylor has done this, the task is perhaps excessive for any writer.
One persuasive suggestion, in the section on theosophy, is that Madame Blavatsky was really a man.
In Annie's personal life, she shows how shallow were the maternal affections that left her children to their fearsome father for the sake of her own freedom to proclaim on atheism and contraception, loudly defended in court.
This callousness was repeated later when she cruelly promoted the young Krishnamurti as the new ‘Lord Maitreya’, allowing him first to be abused by the theosophical pederast Charles Leadbeater and later sent to Harrow.
Both Taylor and Seymour-Jones tend to believe their subjects' own accounts.
Scepticism would paradoxically produce more sympathy, for one is left rather baffled as to the inner life of both women.
Why was Beatrice so self-punishing?
What impelled Annie to push causes to such doubtful extremes?
My own guess, in the latter case, is that sheer ecstasy came with the discovery that it was possible not only to walk out of a marriage, but to do so and flourish, and that the rest of her life was devoted to recapturing this outrageous, outcast joy.
It was not the convent but the martyr's pyre she desired.
More despressingly, however, it seems that while men can be bastards with impunity, eminent women are still seen as failures if they are not lovable and self-effacing as well as efficient and achieving.
Why do we continue to accept such judgments?
Blue notes JAZZ Toni Morrison Chatto & Windus, £14.99 PLAYING IN THE DARK: WHITENESS AND THE LITERARY IMAGINATION Toni Morrison Harvard University Press, £11.95 Andrea Stuart
In her latest novel,Jazz , Toni Morrison has dipped back into a time before cross-over, when African-American music was all-black, in her quest for a uniquely black literary language.
It's 1926, and Harlem's wonder years are in full swing.
The sun that glitters on the city streets captivates, just like gold.
‘History is over, you all, and everything's ahead at last,’ crows the novel's narrator, with the triumphant born-again optimism that characterised a generation of black people who migrated north in search of new beginnings.
For Joe Trace, a door-to-door salesman of Cleopatra beauty products, and his wife Violet, the good times finally seem to be rolling.
But the sly, unreliable narrator is wrong: history is not ‘over’.
And in Jazz , history, specifically the legacy of slavery, lingers like dime-store perfume.
It is as indelible as traces of the cheap lipstick that Joe sells from his battered case.
So, when Joe shoots to death his teenage mistress, Dorcas, and a deranged Violet decides to disfigure her rival at the funeral, it's no surprise that the past rushes back to take its rightful place.
Jazz shares many themes with its predecessor, the Pulitzer Prize-winning Beloved : the conflict between the interests of the community and the individual's attempts to create and maintain a separate self; the importance of communal responsibility.
But here, the desire for individuation and rebirth collides with another of the author's favourite themes: the futility, even the danger, of jettisoning one's history.
It is the dilemma of city dwellers, of all those refugees from the past in search of the future.
And jazz is the soundtrack of Morrison's urban promised land.
The music is constantly evoked.
It is the sweet street sound that heals the wounds of deprivation; the dangerous music that Dorcas' aunt blames for the 200 black dead in the 1917 St Louis riots; a music of such unbearable sensual possibilities that parents vainly try to prevent their offspring from listening to it.
Morrison isn't the first African-American author to become enamoured with ‘the sound’.
The work of Zora Neale Hurston, Anne Petry and James Baldwin all resonate with the feel of blues and gospel.
Nor is this an entirely new departure for Morrison.
Her prose has always relied on a certain musicality and lyricism to seduce and keep us spellbound.
But what she has come up with in Jazz is wilder, more elusive than in any previous work.
Theolonius Monk would feel at home here, and so would John Coltrane.
The words soar and dip, weave and bop, like some crazy impromptu syncopation, or reverberate like a low-down blues riff.
You do not read this book; you listen to it.
And yet, where Beloved had all the devastating impact of a road accident, the terrifying unexpectedness of random violence,Jazz lacks that novel's eviscerating pull.
It's almost a case of sensory overload.
In Jazz , the complex web of language makes you work just a little too hard, undermining the suspense and revelation that made Beloved so mesmerising and — in the process — losing the reader somewhere down its silken, snaking paths.
It is contexts that fascinate Morrison: the context that history places around the present, the community around the individual, blackness around whiteness (or vice versa).
And it is the latter that preoccupies her in Playing in The Dark , a slim, supple volume of three essays exploring ‘whiteness and the literary imagination’.
Morrison clearly enjoyed this foray into the territory of the literary critic.
It has allowed her to use what she says most pleases her about being a novelist: ‘the capacity to tell other stories, fight secret wars’.
Her assignment here is as gleeful agent provocateur , playing the same role in the context of the literary establishment that those watchful, silent women play in her own fiction — women who wait out their lives in the house of the enemy, gathering information, biding their time.
And her dispatches indeed reveal a bombshell: that despite protestations to the contrary in white American fiction, race has been its subject matter all the time.
By spotlighting Hemingway's taciturn blacks, the shadowy, subdued figures in Faulkner, or the insubstantial and sketchy figure of Willa Cather's slave in Sapphira and the Slave Girl , Morrison reveals blackness as the boundary, the context that defines the ‘mute’ and ‘frozen’world of whiteness: ‘Suddenly I saw the bowl, the structure that transparently (and invisibly) permits the ordered life it contains to exist in the larger world.’
In so doing, she reveals how the literary ‘habit of ignoring race’ came to be understood ‘as a graceful, even generous, liberal gesture’.
And she names it not so much as an act of politesse but of evasion, even cowardice.
‘As a writer I came to realise the obvious: the subject of the dream is the dreamer,’ Morrison remarks, as she points out how unwaveringly the subject of whiteness — what it is and what it isn't — preoccupies the American literary imagination (and, I suspect the European as well).
In Playing in The Dark , it is whiteness that ironically becomes the hidden, the nether world.
And it is blackness, however tortured, manipulated, or distorted, that provides the bright, illuminating torch.
Polished artefacts FROM COUNTER-REFORMATION TO GLORIOUS REVOLUTION Hugh Trevor-Roper Secker & Warburg, £25 Diarmaid MacCulloch
Here is the latest collection of essays from Lord Dacre of Glanton, all with one exception rescued from previous places of publication, but now served up more conveniently and in revised form.
Authors should never be held responsible for their publishers' blurbs, and so one is spared the embarrassment of assessing the claim that Hugh Trevor-Roper is ‘Britain's greatest living historian’.
Aside from the Private Eye resonances of that title, there is no doubt that Trevor-Roper is one of the greatest creative indexers in the business.
One now turns to his indexes with a sense of delicious anticipation, and here there is no disappointment.
‘Cambridge University: incurious of its own history…envious of Oxford's Library…
Peterhouse: a noisy mafia there…unventilated Fellows…a liberal interlude’.
Actually, the Master seems to have mellowed.
There is much else to delight and to be savoured in this collection.
The literary essay is a species always on the edge of extinction, and (unlike most endangered species) it is threatened most by the professionals in the field.
At first sight similar in size and shape to the academic article, it emerges on closer inspection as a very different animal to that often unlovely and cumbersome beast.
Few academic historians seem to care about the literary elegance that sustains the essay form.
Apparently, they consider that their responsibilities end when they have unpacked their baggage of trophies from the record offices and arranged them in a convincing pattern.
Not so Lord Dacre.
The great virtue of his work (although it is not innocent of primary sources) is the presentation, the measured judgment.
Here, he alights on a variety of 17th-century subjects that range from Beijing to Edinburgh, with the centre of gravity somewhere in the West End of London.
The form has both strengths and drawbacks.
The essay works best when it is dealing with people; and most of these are biographical sketches.
There could be few better ways of becoming tolerably wellinformed about Matteo Ricci, Hugo Grotius, Matthew Wren, Prince Rupert or Rapin de Thoyras (among others) than to turn to this collection.
The lazy undergraduate who cannot be persuaded to read Trevor-Roper's magisterial life of Archbishop Laud might fruitfully be propelled in the direction of the 20-page retrospect reproduced here.
Byways of history, particularly might-have-beens, also suit the form well.
Faltering 17th-century attempts at ecumenical dialogue between western Protestants and eastern Orthodox churches are treated here in an entertaining piece, whose footnotes also show with what insolent and deliberate ease Dacre can out-pedant any pedant.
However, the format seems strained in tackling less personal subjects.
Perhaps the most ambitious theme here, ‘The Continuity of the English Revolution’, is also the weakest essay.
What is Trevor-Roper saying beyond the fairly obvious assertion that there were continuities in 17th-century English politics?
The form also tends to distance itself from passion, although there is passion aplenty in the events described.
Trevor-Roper is drawn to the men of balanced judgment, the calm, the open-minded among his subjects: the admirers of Erasmus, the Great Tew Circle of Lord Falkland, or Lord Macaulay, who is here repeatedly if slightly ruefully awarded top marks among historians.
Among historical colleagues, Thatcherite Tories and unreconstructed Marxists alike are firmly snubbed.
Sometimes, such Olympian detachment moves to superciliousness and deliberate archaism, such as in the persistent reference to ‘Scotchmen’ in the final essay, on Anglo-Scottish Union.
The essay becomes such a polished artefact that the unwary reader may miss the loose ends, the untidiness of unanswered questions, the possible alternative perspectives that sustain historical enquiry in such different forms in each generation.
Yet why not?
The cobbler should stick to his last.
There are other workers in the field to ask new questions of old material, to listen to voices previously unheard.
Historians who bring as much enjoyment and illumination to their readers as Trevor-Roper can still conjure up in his essays deserve the historical profession's thanks as well as its envy.
One final note from a pedant: a lethal misprint on page 50 has ensured that a generation of students will be informing their tutors that the Socinians were nationalists, rather than rationalists.
Realms of gold SLEEPWALKER IN A FOG Tatyana Tolstaya (translated by Jamey Gambrell) Virago, £13.99 Carol Rumens
The prolific and versatile Alexei Nikolaevich Tolstoi (born in 1882) began his literary career as a chronicler of the pre-Revolutionary Russian intelligentsia, but by his death in 1945 had been acclaimed a ‘classic’ writer of Socialist Realism.
His grand-daughter, Tatyana Tolstaya (born in 1951), writes sometimes as if she were in direct communication with the ghosts of the world that vanished when Alexei Nikolaevich was still a young man.
These shimmering fables, in which an ageing heroine, a ‘sweet Shura’ or a Zhenechka, guards her faded mementos and sharp, unfinished memories in defiance of history, help us to understand, perhaps, the drive behind the current, terrifyingly fearless race towards 19th-century-style capitalism: that it is not only a hunger for consumer goods, but a kind of nostalgia for a glamour all the more potent because few now remember it.
Socialist Realism has not touched Tatyana Tolstaya.
Neither, in any obvious way, has its antithesis, dubbed by John Bayley ‘the parochialism of protest’.
For so many gifted writers of the Soviet period, this became both liberation and vocation — with all the narrowness the latter term implies.
Similarly, to describe her as a magic realist fails to root her in her own folk tradition, whose poetic fantasy and bizarre humour have nourished a stream of ‘literary’ writers before her, from Gogol to Venedikt Yerofeev.
What, then, is special about Tolstaya?
Does she enrich, by virtue of her gender, this largely woman-starved tradition?
Her virtuosity with language is not in doubt (and all credit to her translator for rendering it with such vitality).
But perhaps her most original gift is her ability to empathise with the everyday disappointments and sadnesses of the most ordinary lives.
‘There was a person; he died’: this banal and universal tragedy is her subtext, and she illuminates it with compassion, humour and, sometimes, a redemptive, almost religious intensity.
The golden age may be pre-Revolutionary, or it may fail to occur altogether, as it fails for plain Natasha in ‘The Moon Came Out’.
Or it may be childhood, as in the wonderful title story of her previous collection, ‘On the Golden Porch’(‘In the beginning was the garden.
Childhood was a garden.’)
There are fewer child-characters in the current volume: a pity, because Tolstaya is absolutely atuned to the prelapsarian wavelength.
It is what leads her to animate the inanimate in her descriptive passages, and it is the child-in-the-adult that moves us in her most memorable characters (often male): Denisov, Kissov, Gruishunya, Peters.
Has the Russian spring been done to death in literature?
Tolstaya buffs it to a new shine: ‘The wind droned in the trees and water flew in the wind, and birds, cawing, bushed in billows in transparent trees, on rusty domes; clear puddles trembled, reflecting the lights of stands selling dumplings, vodka and meat pies; and alarm, life and desire breathed, smiled, and ran in the air — common property, unclaimed, no-one's.’
(‘Limpopo’)
The least satisfying of these new stories, perhaps, are the two longest.
Here the linguistic cocoon is spun to such complexity that the characters and narrative structure sometimes vanish from sight.
But then this feels as if it may be a transitional volume, presaging the larger-scale fiction in which Tolstaya should surely be spreading her brilliant wings.
Carol Rumens is writer-in-residence at Queen's University, Belfast
Oranges from Surrey THE VEGETABLE GARDEN DISPLAYED Joy Larkcom Royal Horticultural Society, £10.95 SPRING FEVER: THE PRECARIOUS FUTURE OF BRITAIN'S FLORA AND FAUNA Phillip Gates HarperCollins, £14.99 Ruth Pavey
In 1941, with such bracing words as ‘Your garden is part of the National Defences’ and ‘Cloches versus Hitler’, advertisements subsidised the first edition of the Vegetable Garden Displayed .
The straightforward, one-shilling manual, with its handsome woodcut of a cornucopia-like trug on the cover, rapidly established itself as the Dig for Victory bible.
Since then, frequently updated, it has always remained in print.
This new version represents a thorough revision, and is in full colour for the first time.
As Joy Larkcom points out, the original text was ‘notable for its clarity and brevity: this was a time for instructions, not explanations’.
She herself manages both to instruct and explain.
Before going into detail about specific crops, she engages in a lucid discussion of gardening principles: how to achieve soil fertility, what to do about weeds, pests and diseases, when to water.
Simple though these may sound, they are very contentious.
Even small-scale vegetable gardeners are faced with far-reaching choices.
They have to decide whether or not to use chemical fertilisers, insecticides, herbicides, fungicides.
And they are gluttons for what currently seems to be a much scarcer resource: water.
This book's advice, backed by the world's most respected gardening society, must be influential.
So, on this showing, how ‘green’ does the Royal Horticultural Society now appear?
Predictably, it has not gone to extremes.
But there is a clear swing away from the spray-happy days.
Joy Larkcom does recommend chemicals, alongside their organic alternatives where those exist, but usually as a last resort.
Like all proponents of ‘organic’ gardening, she favours preventive methods, on the basis that healthy plants, made so by good soil and conditions, are less susceptible to trouble.
To achieve this garden health, she underwrites some of the time-honoured techniques of manuring, weeding and rotating crops in combination with the everdeveloping new materials: fleecy translucent protective coverings, for instance, or improved strains of seeds.
In the section on individual crops, there are also innovations, notably the promotion of oriental vegetables such as pak choi and texsel greens, about which Joy Larkcom is an authority.
Jacqui Hurst's photographs are excellent.
One traditional aspect of Joy Larkcom's book is the calendar of month-by-month instructions.
If Phillip Gates is right in his predictions, however, that calendar may well be obsolete by the middle of the next century.
In Spring Fever , he takes a look at what climatic change could mean for the flora and fauna of the British mainland.
To form a working hypothesis, he makes some assumptions; that global warming is irreversibly established, that the probable result for Britain would be a rise in sea levels, and that while the south-east will become more ‘Mediterranean’, the north-west will get milder and wetter.
The latter, particularly, is not beyond doubt, but that does not destroy the value of his what-if speculations.
Gates is not out to alarm.
The idea of oranges fresh from Surrey gardens, or tender shrubs flourishing in the north, clearly appeals to him.
But he does want to stimulate constructive forward thinking.
Take the policy of making nature reserves.
There are already problems connected with marooning plants and creatures on little islands, surrounded by concrete and pollution.
Genetic diversity is lost, for instance.
If the climate changes too quickly for any adaptation to take place, the response of the flora and fauna will be to move on.
But unless escape routes have been allowed, that response will be thwarted.
Phillip Gates sees the use of surplus agricultural land to make ‘wildlife corridors’ as our best hope of helping the natural world adapt to the changes we have set in motion.
His book comes out at a time when anyone who shares his concerns may be feeling particularly down-hearted.
But as he says, our planet has managed to come through worse cataclysms than any we have so far invented, and there are always winners.
The greenfly, for instance, ‘can enter the era of climate instability with supreme confidence…’
Print Out Cheap Thrills Boyd Tonkin
Last year I got a four-page letter from Bill Buford.
Not that the editor of Granta took any special interest in me, of course; but the direct-mail boffins at Britain's chunkiest literary magazine thought I should subscribe.
It was a strange letter, as Bill told me at numbing length how much he hated literary magazines, and how he knew I did as well.
You don't want any high-falutin' jargon, he assured me; no arty-farty chatter, no nancy-boy poetry: just spiffing yarns by jolly fellows who can crack a joke and spin a tale.
Perhaps I exaggerate — but not by much.
T S Eliot once accused Henry James of possessing a mind so fine that no idea could violate it.
Part of Granta 's secret — on top of its heavyweight marketing and sampling from Viking Penguin's new titles — is that their compatriot keeps his organ similarly undefiled.
Yes, a Steiner, a Kundera or a Várgas Llosa can speculate in its pages, armoured in the glamour of celebrity.
But the habitual Granta piece dissolves thought into narrative, into image, into anecdote.
In spite of its superb production values,Granta remains a kind of up-market Reader's Digest .
However outré , each item emerges looking chewed over and softened up by the editorial enzymes.
In the latest number,The Body (Penguin, £6.99), the John Buchan among editors has turned into a David Cronenberg.
The volume reeks of mortality.
Michael Dibdin attends a post-mortem; Todd McEwen recalls his mother's blindness; a Jeanette Winterson story dissects a lost lover (a real anatomy of melancholy).
The gut duly churns and the flesh duly creeps, but that white-knuckle-ride feeling never goes away: ‘Don't worry!
This stuff has been tested , and you're safe with us.’
For the true little-magazine sense that something wonderful or crass can happen on any page, you have to turn to chancier ventures, such as the new quarterly,Mediterraneans (£7.99 or £22 per year from Didsbury Press, 7 Darley Avenue, Didsbury, Manchester M20 8XE).
The review covers the waterfront, on both the European and Arab sides, and pays homage to Granta 's hegemony with a rip-off format and layout.
Its stories, essays, poems and photos come from a vast array of sources.
It has the odd moment of pure Pseud's Corner cheek (a Catalan sestina with a helpful translation — into French).
But it also dares to touch and stretch its readers in ways that the curiously deadpan Grand Guignol of Granta never will.
The poetry-phobic Penguin flagship would never tell you, for instance, why Athenian shopkeepers closed their shutters when the Greek bard Yannis Ritsos died last year.
Only magazines as risky as Mediterraneans can take us into the sort of culture where the same writer can be both Keats and Dylan.
ENDGAMES WEEKEND COMPETITION
No 3224 Set by M Rogers
We asked for a lament in verse or a prose epitaph for Punch 
Report by Ms de Meaner
Not much to report this week on the home front, except that I have a sneaking feeling I may have broken a bone in my right hand.
It is almost certainly only a sprain, but a week after my little ‘accident’(don't ask!),
I can still barely hold a pen and can type only with two fingers.
I was mildly worried by the large postbag.
In fact, the numbers of Punch aficionados make me worry that the same end will come to the comp complex as came to Punch .
I think back to the letters of complaint I had when a ‘rap’ competition was set.
And now I have had a letter from Katie Mallett, saying she will not be entering no 3225 ‘because I didn't see the TV exposé of Summerhill, and haven't got the faintest clue what it's like’.
As we're on the subject of complaints, I might as well say that we've had one from Naomi Marks.
Ms Marks (as I see I shall now have to call her) is simply livid that in her song about Michael Heseltine, written in the style of Richard Rodgers and Lorenz Hart, Rodgers had lost his ‘d’ and, in the actual song, ‘eatable’had appeared as ‘uneatable’(an understandable mistake I would have thought).
Amid accusations of ‘fuck-ups’, Ms Marks described these proofing mistakes as ‘unforgivable’.
I notice this hasn't stopped her entering this week.
£12 to the winners.
Encyclopaedia Galactica , 112th Edition.
Entry Punch : A humorous magazine created during the Victorian period (qv) and terminating towards the end of the Dark Century (qv).
Founded originally as a vehicle of savage satire — based on the Paris (qv) magazine Charivari (qv)— rapidly became a voice of complacency and Establishment (qv) ideology.
Several golden ages may be cited, under the editorship of Basil Boothroyd (qv), Alan Coren (qv) and Malcolm Muggeridge (qv).
Financially squeezed by the emergence of Private Eye (qv), adopted an attempted ‘yuppie’(qv) image, just before the Great Recession of the Dark Century.
Deprived of a market, drifted rudderless till terminated by United Newspapers.
Best remembered as a vehicle for aspiring cartoonists and phrase ‘collapse of stout party’(No information available).
Title was acquired by terrestrial airline and used as inflight reading under editorship of William Davies.
(No information available).
By the Third Millennium of the Old Calendar had become synonymous with sick bags (qv).
The observation that it had become a sick bag is credited to…
Punch lingered in its autumn days,
The turgid Thames beside,
A magazine that few would praise,
And many would deride.
A triolet by a Herbert clone,
Sufficed in days gone by,
But readers schooled on Rolling Stone ,
Now turn to Private Eye .
Punch aged unseen so none could know,
What features ceased to be,
When death despatched that mortal blow,
To British dentistry.
As Queen Victoria used to say
In 1841,
When, as a girl of tender years,
Her reign had scarce begun,
‘We shall survive, and Punch will thrive
Till life on earth is done.’
But queens and magazines must die,
That fail to top the charts:
Her empire, like the curate's egg,
Was only good in parts.
What gets the laughs today is love,
Fellatio and farts.
You leave the curate and his egg,
Bequest appropriate and droll,
For none would break a shell or leg
To swallow all your contents whole.
They skimmed you in an ante-room
Or scanned you at a maiden aunt's,
And most will stumble on your doom
In 1996, by chance.
So, let us mourn you, Mr Punch,
The tragic closure of your club —
Did number-crunchers come to lunch
When all your wits were at the pub?
We're Judy.
In a crocodile
Let tears file down our folds of skin;
And should your undertakers smile,
Just take it on the pointed chin.
David Morton
Tim Hopkins
Naomi Marks
Bill Greenwell
The death of Mr Punch at the age of 150 years caused a frisson of indifference in the publishing fraternity, though a few voiced tributes to his celebrated past.
Born into the challenging world of mid-19th century Britain,Punch soon displayed a robust originality.
Sadly, a gradual decline towards terminal respectability began in early adulthood, when the self-indulgent habit of literary lunches began to undermine an otherwise sound constitution.
Appropriately, for one named after a wife-murderer, Mr Punch remained a misogynist to the end.
He never married, though he is understood to have received a number of proposals.
His chief pride lay in the talented cartoonists he fostered and encouraged.
In recent decades, afflicted with the loss of bite, partially caused by loose-fitting debentures, Mr Punch's health was further weakened by circulation problems.
As he grew more feeble, his followers were left prey to seduction by lusty upstarts, viz private eyes with all their teeth.
He will be remembered as a mild prankster and anaemic lackey to the establishment, though the flavour of individual cartoons and cartoonists will be savoured long after their foster parent is forgotten.
M E Ault
No 3227 Set by George Cowley Can we please have imaginary entries for the ‘This England’ column — stories that you think ought to have happened, but somehow haven't yet.
Seventy-five words absolute maximum per entry, but you may submit as many entries as you like.
Entries to be in by 14 May.
BACKCHAT Mat Coward
The first piece I wrote for the New Statesman , almost exactly four years ago, began: ‘People keep asking me, ‘On what platform will you be standing for deputy leader of the Labour Party?'
And I have to explain to them that, although it is now customary for every individual member to contest the deputy leadership, it is not yet compulsory under rule.’
Of course, I'm always glad of an excuse to reprint rather than write, although I didn't intend my prose to be quite so timeless.
After I'd submitted it, I remember, someone rang from the magazine to ask if I minded her feminising 50 per cent of the pronouns.
I didn't particularly, but I did wonder whether perhaps the left's priorities couldn't do with a little sharpening.
Anyway, it's time for another deputy's manifesto.
Central to my 1992 bid is the question of the boundary commission.
If it wasn't for the evil shadow of this wicked body, we could all be a lot happier about Major's slim majority.
I am proposing, therefore, to spend the money the party saves by not commissioning any more opinion polls, on hiring a firm of detectives to prepare dossiers on the private lives of individual commissioners.
These people are businessmen, when all's said and done, and everyone's got something to hide.
Hand in hand with this measure goes an equally bold re-focusing of Labour's strategy concerning marginal constituencies.
Put simply, I want to encourage party members to go and live in target seats, with the unions helping out with relocation expenses.
Just a few hundred votes in the right places could swing it, and I hear there are some very nice properties available in Bristol West, for instance.
Now to policies designed to attract previously unreachable groups of voters.
I believe we can take the suburbs quite easily, by adopting a pledge to refuse driving licences to any male under the age of 30.
Almost all suburban noise pollution and road carnage would therefore be immediately eliminated; if you've ever lost a cat under someone else's wheels, you can be pretty sure the perp was a boy racer.
Which brings us to the Woman Problem.
Let's stop trying to get women to support us by crawling to them — it's obvious they prefer voting for devils or weeds than for decent men (let alone decent women), and bribing them with a Women's Ministry didn't work.
No: if we want them to fall in love with us, we'll just have to ignore them, and hope they don't go away.
I did think of paying them a non-means-tested benefit in exchange for abstention, but I'm sure I'd never get the figures past Margaret Beckett.
Finally — for now — my plans for getting rid of our enemies.
I disagree with Neil about the gutter press: it was the liberal media that did the real damage, over years not days.
Even so, sorting out the tabloids can't hurt.
My solution is so simple, I'm surprised no one has thought of it before: if we kill just one of the knighted editors, the rest will quickly fall quiet.
I'm organising a whip-round to buy the services of a reputable assassin, and don't envisage any problem in raising the necessary funds.
As for undermining the Conservatives, nothing could be easier.
I shall draw up a rota of ministers, each of whom is to be referred to in turn as ‘the next leader of the Tory Party’, thus destroying their careers.
I would have started with Virginia Bottomley, but, on reflection, I reckon her appointment as health secretary has probably done the job for us.
FORTEANA A hand-picked review of the weird and wonderful by ‘Fortean Times’ editor Paul Sieveking
Washington DC, as one might expect, teems with ghosts.
One that has exercised columnists' pens in the past year resides at Suite 1723 in the Longworth House Office Building.
From January 1991 until recently, the suite was occupied by Representative Bill Orton, freshman Democrat from Utah.
Last summer, the place took on the air of a cheap seance, with ringing bells and flickering lights.
The troublesome lamps flank the couch, where constituents sit and watch their congressman appear and disappear; and the only thing that saved Orton from rushing to the floor to cast phantom votes when his clock buzzer went off was the fall-back alarm system, a personal bleeper.
Electricians could not pinpoint a cause.
Orton and his staff didn't think of a ghost until a reporter from Utah joked about the possibility.
Soon the notion was floating round Capitol Hill.
It gained substance when Representative Susan Molinari, Republican for New York, related what she and her staff had experienced when they occupied the office before Orton.
On four or five occasions in a fortnight in July 1990, the late-night cleaning crew found the doors to Molinari's empty office locked from the inside.
By morning, they were always unlocked again.
Capitol police bolted and locked all the windows, in case a prowler was coming in after everyone had left: no luck.
The Mystery of the Locked Room continued…and then just went away.
Molinari changed the locks anyway.
Electricians began rewiring the wall sockets at the end of August 1991.
Lee Davidson, a Salt Lake City Desert News reporter, was spooked by the lights and bells while interviewing Orton.
He combed the records and learnt that two of Suite 1723's former occupants had died in office and another (like Orton, a Utah man) was driven from Washington by scandal.
The most likely candidate was Bird Vincent, the Saginaw County, Michigan, prosecutor and first world war veteran who died of kidney failure, aged 51, on 18 July 1931, while returning from a congressional visit to Hawaii.
A seat on the powerful Appropriations Committee was coming his way and an office in the just-built Longworth Building across from the Capitol awaited him.
‘If frustration level has anything to do with [creating ghosts], then Bird is our man,’ said Karen Foerstel, who has written extensively on Capitol ghosts.
There are plenty of them.
Two years ago, Capitol police reported seeing a figure who looked like Senator Thomas Hart Benton — thought to have left the premises in 1855 — sitting at his old desk in an historical display.
In 1991, Senator Patrick Leahy (Dem, Vermont) told the Washington Post that furniture in his office, once occupied by Daniel Webster, sometimes moves on its own.
Bloodstains leading to the House gallery, reportedly left in 1890 when Representative William Taulbee (Dem, Kentucky) was killed by a jealous husband, cannot be scrubbed out.
And, say some, you can smell soap near the bathroom where Henry Wilson, US Grant's vice president, caught a fatal chill while soaking in an Italian marble tub in 1875.
Bird Vincent, by all accounts, participated in no national dramas; so why did he come back,if he did?
Someone suggested he might be ‘shocked’ that a Democrat from Republican eastern Utah was occupying his office.
Molinari's press secretary thought the ghost might be angered by the office's ‘lousy location’ on a top floor served by a slow elevator.
These seem insipid, unconvincing reasons.
None of the press reports say any more about the other Utah occupant of 1723 ‘driven from Washington by scandal’; that would surely be more interesting, if equally immaterial to the issue of ghostly origins.
But then, no ghost has ever been definitively ‘identified’, as far as I'm aware.
Why should ghosts have any connection with the dead?
Just because the two have been associated for over 2,000 years, there's no reason to believe in such a link.
‘Fortean Times’ is published bi-monthly by John Brown, and is stocked by all good newsagents