

CONTENTS
REGULARS
5 Editorial
New and old visions for Labour
7 Shoreditch,
Roger Woddis
8 Diary
Sean French ponders the pain and anger of the famous, left in the lurch by time and changes of fashion
9 John Cole
Labour is pure, but powerless
10 Political column
Sarah Baxter on the realignment of the parliamentary left
11 Political sketch
Edward Pearce on newcomers to the House
23 Taking liberties
Jolyon Jenkins on the double standards of judges, pornographers and newsagents
24 
Letters
26 Fringe benefits
Colin Ward on the return of a veteran anarchist
45 Endgames
Competition, Cryptic Quiz, Chess
47 Backchat
Mat Coward on the scourge of the floating voter
47 Forteana
Paul Sieveking on ABCs — Alien Big Cats in Britain
FEATURES
12 THE DISPOSSESSED: Not paying, not voting
Steve Platt finds that the people who sold their votes are not necessarily Labour supporters;Missing millions Did vanishing voters tip the electoral scales, asks Jolyon Jenkins;Culture of contentment The western world seems set on a course that will lead to great violence in our cities, says J K Galbraith;On the clothes line The Paris fashion industry employs illegal immigrants at knock-down wages, reports Nyta Mann;Symbolic injustice The importance of the Rodney King case is that injustice was done, and was seen to be done, says Alexander Cockburn
20 Who's in and who's out
Fred Halliday reports from America on Russia, the Arab-Israeli talks, the election campaign and lousy food
21 Shots into oblivion
A sober Laurie Taylor encounters a bloody awful drug
22 Licence to kill
Jeremy Seabrook on the murder of a visionary socialist
ARTS & MEDIA 27
Question time
Will Majorism kill or cure the embattled BBC?
John Dugdale tunes in to the arguments
Theatre
Deborah Levy drops in on Canadian maestro Robert Lepage, suspended between worlds in his solo show
Film
‘Basic Instinct’ is very fair to Dutch directors, chants a protesting Anne Billson
Music
Catherine Warren listens to kd lang and charts the revolution in country music
Art
Rose Jennings calls for more passion and less vague sentiment in anti-war art
SOCIAL SCIENCE BOOKS 33
Science, faith and history
Don Cupitt welcomes two studies that warn against science as a secular religion; Robert Wokler looks at the career of Denis Diderot, the Enlightenment's impresario; and Daniel Pick finds that superstitious theories of disease still flourish in the age of Aids
Party politics and beyond
Pat Thane traces the fitful impact of feminist ideas and personalities in Britain, and Giles Radice tags along with Edward Pearce's election ride
Third world perspectives
Nick Young examines the population debate, and Stephen Howe finds that the worlds of Arab nationalism and US anti-war protest never connect
Prisoners of gender?
Julie Wheelwright considers drag as a form of liberation, and Jane Mills takes issue with an anti-dieting moralist
Plus
Elizabeth Young on the Situationist revolt; PrintOut on the literature of race
EDITORIAL
The vision thing Labour needs a synthesis, not a polarity, of new and old visions
‘There is much talk of the need for new radicalism and new vision in the Labour Party,’ said Labour deputy leadership contender John Prescott this week.
‘But what is wrong with the old vision for full employment, for accountable public ownership, for good quality health, welfare and education services, for a fairer distribution of wealth, and to provide housing for all?’
Predictably, his comments were greeted by the tabloids as a call for a return to ‘old-fashioned’, and hence (the unwritten rider was implicit)outmoded socialism.
Even the Daily Mirror reported his remarks with a selective throwaway one-liner: ‘Labour must stick to its old beliefs — like nationalisation, deputy leadership hopeful John Prescott said yesterday.’
Equally predictable, but more depressing, has been the immediately dismissive response of many of the thinkers of the new left, the Marquandistas, the realigners, the constitutionalists and the electoral reformers.
Their response is depressing — and also debilitating — because it creates an instant polarity between what might be termed the old and new agendas of the left, when what is actually required is a synthesis.
Prescott's enumeration of Labour's ‘old vision’was inadequate — because of what it excluded as well as for its needless commitment to public ownership.
(Needless because, as we have argued here before, ownership is unimportant: what matters is control.
This week's threat by Ofgas regulator Sir James McKinnon to take legal action against British Gas if it doesn't reduce its prices is an indication of what can be achieved by forceful regulation of the privatised utilities.)
Missing from Prescott's ‘visionary’ list was any mention of the new wave of ‘green’concerns, or of the democratisation of British society, either in the wider constitutional and electoral context, or in terms of Labour's own internal democracy and its relationship with the trade unions.
But neither the new green and democratic agendas nor the ditching of outmoded socialist dogmas are sufficient in themselves to create a modern vision for the left.
Prescott is right in restating old principles, some of which have become obscured in the rush for the political centre ground.
The Labour Party is nothing if it is not about seeking a fairer, more equal distribution of resources — abroad as well as at home.
It is not, and cannot be, merely a managerialist alternative to the Conservatives.
Beveridge's four social evils of Want, Disease, Squalor and Ignorance must remain as much the primary targets of any party of the left today as when he first wrote about them half a century ago.
At the heart of any vision for the left, therefore — new or old — should be a reassertion of the primacy of full employment as a public policy objective.
Much else follows from this single motivating principle.
Labour's tax-spending dilemmas would evaporate in the face of the increase in wealth and reduction in expenditure that would follow from a fully employed economy.
It would do more than anything else to reduce the disparities of income and other divisions and incohesions within society.
It would make possible the provision of vastly improved public services, while reducing dependency upon them.
It would provide homes for the homeless, hope for the hopeless.
The centrality of full employment as a policy objective is electorally expedient too.
The weakness of the Marquandite ‘new vision’ for a party of the left is that it neglects not only some of the values that underpin Labour's ‘old vision’, but the constituency whose votes can be rallied in support of them.
As we argued here on 17 April, Labour's failure in the 1992 election was more to do with its inability to mobilise its traditional base of support than with any inability to reach out to newer social groupings.
Its share of votes in social groups AB rose from 14 to 20 per cent on 1987; among the unemployed it actually did worse.
If Neil Kinnock had won the same level of support from manual workers and their families as Harold Wilson achieved in the 1960s, he would be in Downing Street today.
It is in this context that we should consider John Prescott's comments — and take the best of his old vision to add to the new.
Disarming strategies
Long before Neil Kinnock let it be known that he had let his membership of Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament lapse, the Labour Party and CND had been growing apart.
It was not just a question of such obvious policy differences as the question of whether Nato should continue to exist — there were differences of emphasis, too.
And Labour did not have a monopoly of CND-leaning members or policies.
The Greens and CND are very close; Plaid Cymru and the SNP share a common perspective on nuclear questions; and many Liberal Democrats, despite their acquiescence in the Ashdown agenda, are privately committed to CND.
(A study undertaken at Loughborough university will shortly show that there is a significant Lib-Dem voting presence among CND's membership.)
Even when Labour policy was close to CND's, the party never had a spokesperson who wholeheartedly agreed with it.
The Conservative election victory weakens any quasi-formal link with Labour still further.
After all, as one CND council member said, less than 48 hours after the election, ‘The only party that can cancel Trident now is the Conservative Party.’
No pressure group can wait around forever for a change of government that may never come.
CND, as an independent lobbying organisation, with a solid membership and healthy finances, must plough its own furrow.
The Labour-CND break was absolutely necessary; but equally, Margaret Beckett's announcement this weekend that she is still a member of the campaign is welcome.
It doesn't mean that she has to agree with every sub-paragraph of CND policy, let alone that the party itself is committed to ‘unilateral nuclear disarmament’— whatever that means, nowadays.
Her ‘coming out’ suggests that, at the least, Labour is prepared to reopen an internal defence debate.
Moreover, both CND and Labour ought to have certain common aims.
One must be to help shape public awareness about how Britain's role in the world has changed.
Labour has to find a defence and foreign policy that rejects the Conservatives' Great Power illusions.
It has to harry the government to take a less relaxed view on international nuclear proliferation.
Vigorous opposition to the international arms trade, in an era of intense regional conflict, could prove to be a popular stance.
(We should hear the question ‘Who sold them the weapons?’ more often.)
One politically achievable target, even under the Conservatives, is to end British nuclear testing (which takes place in the Nevada desert).
The French have just joined Russia in declaring that they will temporarily halt testing; Boris Yeltsin could be under pressure to rescind Russia's test ban in September if there has been no sign of flexibility from Britain and the US.
For CND, the specific campaign against Trident is a way of exposing the government's fantasies (although it is not a campaign that Labour can itself pursue much further).
Far from being ‘independent’, Trident, like the Conservatives' manifesto insistence on Britain ‘leading the way’, is just a hollow shell.
The boats are built in Britain and the warheads are manufactured at Aldermaston, but the missiles are leased from the US, will be serviced in America, and will rely on the US Navstar satellite for targeting.
Trident is far deadlier than cruise missiles ever were.
But it is out at sea, and won't be driven through English thatched villages on farcical midnight manouevres.
It feels British, in a way that cruise never did.
CND has to work to alter that perception.
But within CND, a debate is also taking place about whether the focus of the organisation should broaden out, away from the traditional concern with nuclear hardware.
Marjorie Thompson, the campaign's general secretary, favours a ‘cultural transformation of the peace movement’, allowing CND to campaign about the impact of the militarisation of our society on the environment, support democratisation and human rights worldwide, and oppose all unjust wars (but not, as is sometimes implied, take the line of uncompromising pacifism).
These are also proper concerns for Labour too.
Though formally apart, the two organisations may find they have much in common.
Commendation for NSS writer
NSS writer Saeeda Khanum was honoured this week in Britain's top magazine journalism awards.
She came second in the category ‘feature writer of the year’ on a non-business magazine in the annual Periodical Publishers' Association awards.
At the ceremony, held at the Grosvenor House Hotel in Park Lane on Tuesday, the judges said they were particulary impressed by the ‘clarity and passion’ of Saeeda's writing.
The work submitted to the panel included a report from Iraq on the effect of war and sanctions, an investigation of the ‘road to Basra’ massacre, and a reportage from London on Muslim strippers.
Saeeda, 30, joined NSS in autumn 1990 as a trainee journalist, having previously worked for two years on the Leeds Other Paper .
It is particularly impressive that she was able to win such a prestigious commendation after so short a time in journalism.
We are proud to have worked with her.
FOURTH ESTATE A regular monitor of the Tory press
29 April:The Sun seems to think it's on to something.
‘Were you ever a Tiller girl with the new Commons speaker Betty Boothroyd?
Betty, 62, says she danced with Britain's top troupe.
But none of 225 ex-Tillers interviewed for a book knew her.
If you danced with Betty, call us today.’
The paper's TV critic, Garry Bushell, sticks the boot into Ben Elton for not appreciating the humour of the saintly, late, Benny Hill.
(Labour-supporting Elton is becoming a tabloid folk devil.)
30 April:The Mail 's industrial correspondent, David Norris, writes approvingly of Bill Jordan, leader of the AEU, whom he identifies as the trade union movement's ‘Boris Yeltsin figure’, who will help push through ‘a total split from Labour’.
1 May : ‘Labour's ‘future’ is borrowed and blue,’claims the Mail , reporting John Smith's personal manifesto launch.
Smith ‘set about widening his appeal by borrowing a string of ideas from the Tory party.
In a move more likely to divide the party than unite it, he hinted that the traditional socialist commitment to across-the-board state benefits might be ditched.’
The Star takes a similar line: Smith ‘tore up the party's election manifesto’, but ‘he was set to touch off a left-wing backlash by hijacking Tory policies.’
The Sun claims that the Stonebridge council estate in north London ‘is Britain's tinderbox where Los Angeles-style riots could explode at any time’.
Tariq Ali contributes a feature to the paper, in which he asks ‘could it happen here?’ and concludes ‘the situation is not the same…but it is no time for complacency in Britain.’
The Mail carries another hatchet job on Ben Elton.
Apparently, he's not funny.
4 May:The Express pounces on Margaret Beckett's admission that she is still a member of CND.
She ‘let her mask of moderate respectability slip yesterday’, it says.
‘She confirmed what she has been attempting to gloss over in her bid to become deputy leader — that she is still as left wing as ever…a unilateralist in the mould of Tony Benn himself.
Labour MPs, activists and union bosses would do well to remember that as they consider electing her deputy to a man who's already had one heart attack.’
The Mail uses the same cliché: ‘Moderate mask slips from Labour's lady of the Left.’
5 May:Today reports that: ‘Labour faces the prospect of a damaging exodus from its ranks as disillusioned members leave to join other parties.
Tory chiefs were celebrating last night as a top Labour man prepared to join Tory ranks.’
This is Alan Winmill, leader of Wiltshire council's Labour group.
‘I have decided that what I believed in most of my life was wrong,’ says the famous Mr Winmill.
SHOREDITCH
Here is another addition to the growing Shoreditch anthology of strange election tales.
In Slough, the Conservative candidate, John Watts, held on to the seat by a mere 514 votes.
Oddly, there were two Labour candidates — the official one, Eddie Lopez, and an unofficial one, Declan Alford.
Alford, a former councillor, broke away from the party a few years ago, and has stood as an independent Labour candidate in local elections since.
At this election, he got 699 votes — more than the Tory majority.
Since Alford was described on the ballot paper merely as ‘The Labour Candidate’, it would not be surprising if quite a few voters were confused, and voted for him by mistake.
Some 100 ballot papers were spoiled by having crosses against both Alford and Lopez.
The Tories may owe their victory to him.
Alford himself seems to have cordial relations with the Conservative Party.
One local paper, the Windsor Observer , discovered that almost all Alford's official observers at the count were Tory party members; and another, the Slough Express , photographed him after the count, enjoying a celebratory drink with the former Tory leader of Slough council.
Alford claims to be a staunch Kinnock supporter; but he has an odd way of showing it.
Anyone fancy standing as ‘The Conservative Candidate’ in Slough next time?
In Edmonton, which the Tories also won by a tiny majority (593), there are yet more allegations of electoral hanky panky.
In two Labour-supporting wards, people were directed to the wrong polling station, and in one, polling cards were sent out late.
Ted Hill, the Labour Party agent, has told the Enfield Advertiser that he is taking legal advice about this.
He also objects to leaflets published by the Tories claiming that the candidate, Andy Love, had opposed the Gulf war and supported unilateral disarmament.
This is ‘untrue and libellous’, according to Mr Hill.
Shoreditch wishes Mr Love good luck over any polling card litigation; but surely it's a sad day when the suggestion that a socialist opposes mass slaughter is thought to be libellous?
First, the Labour leadership chaos.
Now, the shadow cabinet election chaos.
Tory party managers are letting it be known that the Commons will rise for the summer recess on 17 July.
Labour's electoral college is due to meet on 18 July.
The shadow cabinet elections cannot go ahead until the new party leadership is in place.
Nominations need to stand for at least a week, but MPs will not be at Westminster to vote.
Will they have to be summoned back?
Will there be a postal ballot?
Will the elections have to be postponed until the autumn?
And wasn't the leadership contest hastily arranged precisely so that a new shadow cabinet could be harrying the Conservatives throughout the summer?
Round two of this fiasco to the Tories.
Countless Labour candidates spent the election defending their passionate commitment to a statutory minimum wage and workers' rights.
Once elected, however, these principles don't seem to count for very much.
The Labour whips have been advising new MPs to offer prospective secretaries only ‘trial’ contracts.
The advantage of this is that the secretaries can be laid off during the summer recess, and MPs can avoid the cost of employing them from the ‘expenses’ allowance.
There are many and varied ways of sensing who's on the up (and down) in the Parliamentary Labour Party.
But with office facilities so scarce in the Commons, one of the most reliable is to see who's been offered what by the Whips.
New boys, however grand they may have been before entering the House, go to the back of the queue.
So it's wrong to read anything into the failure of Peter Mandelson to be given a room — although the fact that he is dossing down in Tony Blair's office is surely evidence of his continuing influence with the Bright Young Things of the shadow cabinet.
But what is one to make of this?
Another new boy, Nick Raynsford, has been given his own single room — an extremely prized possession, even among long-serving MPs — on the shadow cabinet corridor.
Admittedly, Raynsford was an MP for a single year, 1986, as a result of a freak by-election.
Even so, his grand accommodation suggests that great things are in store for him.
Bryan Gould has hired the top floor ofthe Fabian Society's headquarters in Westminster for his leadership/deputy leadership campaign, prompting mutterings from his opponents about partisanship.
Gould is on the Fabians' executive committee, while Smith and Beckett are mere members, and Prescott is not even that.
The Fabians have now written to all the contenders assuring them that the decision was made on a purely commercial basis.
Confusingly, a Gould is in charge of Smith's campaign office at the House of Commons, but she's Jeanette Gould, the daughter of Joyce Gould of Walworth Road fame (and Keith Barron MP's assistant).
Philip Gould of the Shadow Communications Agency has also been spotted at John Smith's press conferences, which perhaps explains why Smith has still been wearing the red rose.
DIARY Sean French ponders the pain and anger of the famous, left in the lurch by time and changes in fashion
Beyond the precincts of my own family, I am far too inhibited to have rows with people.
Yet I did have a row with Arthur Calder-Marshall, so it gave me a pang when I heard that he had died last week.
In fact such contact as we had consisted of nothing but bad feeling on one side (his) and bemusement on mine.
I contacted him because he had been a friend of the novelist and playwright, Patrick Hamilton, about whom I am writing a book.
I sent him a letter asking if I could come and talk to him.
When he rang me he was already cross about his treatment at the hands of a previous biographer of Hamilton.
The first thing he wanted was to see a copy of the other man's book.
Could I send him one?
I took a deep breath and said, yes, all right, he could borrow mine.
The address he gave me was of a nursing home in Kent.
He told me he had been there for a long time dying.
I was encouraged by the location, close to the town to which my thieving removal company had decamped.
In one excursion, I would be able combine the roles of biographer and Nemesis.
I hoped my action in sending him the book would place him under a sense of obligation.
But when we next talked he was even angrier.
He considered the biographer had entirely misunderstood the period and wanted to know my reasons for doing the book and my qualifications for attempting it.
I took another deep breath — I only wanted to see him for half an hour — and said what I could.
This was not enough.
He couldn't see someone about whom he knew nothing.
I must send him something I had written.
I located a couple of book reviews I had done on matters to do with the period, one about writers of the thirties, the other about the Mass Observation project, added a letter in which I wrote a little about the book I was writing and sent them off.
Late one evening I answered the phone and heard the now-familiar dry, metallic voice.
Calder-Marshall pointed out something I had omitted from my (very brief) Mass Observation review, then said he still didn't understand why I wanted to do the book and I needed to write and explain this to him.
I suddenly had the sense that this was going to go on for ever and the conversation became an argument.
I said that this was becoming ludicrous.
I had already sent him a book, examples of my work, a letter about why and how I was doing the book, all for the sake of just one short interview.
He responded that he had never had any wish to see me anyway.
I said that was fine, but could he return me the biography I had sent?
Yes, he replied, if I would send him the postage.
The following day I sent him the stamps and a couple of days later I received in the post not the book but a cheque for slightly less than the value of the book and postage combined, together with the following note, which I reproduce in its entirety: ‘Herewith a cheque for £20.
Please omit any reference to me in what you write of Patrick Hamilton.
Yours, sorry to have been troubled.
A Calder-Marshall.’
The biographer is a strange figure, disinterested literary critic and peeping tom, historian and fabulist, priest and private eye.
There seemed something all too appropriate about my exchange with this survivor of British radicalism in the thirties turning into a demeaning wrangle over a small amount of money.
I wrote a final letter hoping that when he read my book he would see that I was serious.
Now he will never feel the remorse I had hoped he would feel for refusing to see me.
I never got to hear Arthur Calder-Marshall talking about Patrick Hamilton, but just a few days later I was able to read Patrick Hamilton about Arthur Calder-Marshall, in a letter to Hamilton's brother in 1951 about a radio talk Calder-Marshall had given: ‘Arthur C-M's description of me as he first knew me (at the Wells Hotel, Hampstead) makes very amusing reading.
I've got a copy of his talk, which I'll show you when we meet.
He talks of my ‘reticence and charm’ and says that I looked like an ‘office-worker’!
What weird impressions one must always be making upon different people.’
I felt angry and humiliated at the time of the argument but I can guess at how he must have felt.
I know nothing of the circumstances of his illness, but he was dying angrily and his procrastinations could be sufficiently explained by a need to hold on to life, to defer events into the future.
Then there is the pain, like another form of death, of seeing your world chronicled by people too young to have lived in it, with the inevitable distortions this must entail.
Then there must have been more personal anger.
There can have been few more painful moments in Melvyn Bragg's professional life than when he sat in the audience of a public performance where Barry Humphries, in the guise of Edna Everage, asked if anyone had read any of Bragg's novels and nobody raised their hand.
The joke could not be made today because Bragg (in response to that gibe?) has now written more overtly popular fiction, including two bestsellers.
In my copy of Malcolm Lowry Remembered , Lowry's friend, Arthur Calder-Marshall, is introduced as ‘novelist, short-story writer, biographer, memoirist and critic’.
How many readers knew that, or could name a single book of his?
How many know he was a prominent contributor to this magazine?
It was he, writing in the issue of 15 September 1941, who called the thirties the ‘Pink Decade’, which hasn't really stuck, though it seems that he coined the term ‘Greeneland’ to define the peculiar territory of Graham Greene's fiction.
And that perhaps is the final curse.
In 1940, also in this magazine, a discussion was re-produced between George Orwell and Desmond Hawkins about ‘The Proletarian Writer’.
Orwell predicted: ‘Proletarian literature…isn't likely to be permanent or to be the beginning of a new age in literature…capitalism is disappearing.
In a Socialist state, a lot of our left-wing writers — people like Edward Upward, Christopher Caudwell, Alec Brown, Arthur Calder-Marshall and all the rest of them — who have specialised in attacking the society they live in, would have nothing to attack.’
This proved cruelly wrong.
Capitalism survived but the writers have been largely forgotten.
In Margaret Drabble's Oxford Companion to English Literature , only Upward and Caudwell are even accorded entries.
When Calder-Marshall and Malcolm Lowry first met it was the latter who felt flattered, but though Calder-Marshall was a generous friend, there is something poignant in Gordon Bowker's comment in Malcolm Lowry Remembered that he has ‘given a great deal of time to writing and speaking about him’.
And there is something more than poignant in Calder-Marshall's own account that ‘all the boring bits [in Lowry's masterpiece,Under the Volcano ]about Hugh, the Communist, came from me.
I was frightfully, boringly Communist…
Malcolm was listening to it all in order to reproduce what was necessary.’
Valentine Cunningham's excellent study,British Writers in the Thirties , records that, in prolier-than-thou fashion, Calder-Marshall briefly signed himself Arthur Marshall, and had he continued to do so he would have been overshadowed by a later NSS contributor whose speciality was parodying schoolgirl fiction.
What must it be like to have a substantial body of work behind you and yet have the creeping sense that you are being remembered only as a bore in Under the Volcano , as the inventor of a word about Greene, and as the friend of Lowry, of Orwell, of Patrick Hamilton (himself, something of a forgotten figure)?
Is it better to have published and gone out of print than never to have published at all?
I doubt it.
No wonder he was short with me over the phone.
JOHN COLE Pure but powerless Labour still suffers a gap between activists and voters
Inquests and births do not go well together.
That is why the contests for the Labour Party's leadership and deputy leadership sit so ill in the context of the continuing post-mortem — or biopsy, as Neil Kinnock insisted on calling it — after Labour's fourth consecutive election defeat.
Even taking the analogy of biopsy, the doctors cannot be asked to prescribe the remedy until they have received the analysis of the suspect tissue.
If anyone doubts the dangers to an opposition party of a rush to judgment about what needs to be done after election defeat, they ought to dip into some of the memoirs of the 1959 period, the last time that Labour, while in opposition, hoped and expected they would win, but went down to serious defeat (in that case, by 100 seats).
The key text, from within Hugh Gaitskell's inner circle, is Roy Jenkins' book,A Life at the Centre , one of the most engaging political memoirs of recent times, not least because he shows an unusual generosity of spirit to those with whom he was out of tune, most notably Harold Wilson.
(A passing thought: could Jenkins be persuaded to write a memoir of Wilson, on the scale of his Baldwin , perhaps, rather than a full-scale biography like his Asquith ?
Despite the complexities of their personal chemistry, this might produce a more just assessment of Britain's second-longest-serving postwar prime minister than anything else that is likely to appear.)
Jenkins was close to Gaitskell, and shared his bitter disappointment in 1959.
Beginning with the famous, or notorious meeting of the ‘Hampstead Set’ on the Sunday morning after polling day, he chronicles what he amusingly calls the ‘war to the knife and fork’(a quotation from a similar Liberal inquest at the turn of the century).
Over lunch and dinner tables, at parties, and in various informal groupings, the Labour revisionists decided what to do.
Jenkins' quotation of Hugh Dalton's account of the Sunday morning gathering will induce a sense of déjà vu : ‘Dalton recorded that (Douglas) Jay took the lead, and advocated dropping further nationalisation, loosening the link with the trade unions, changing the name from ‘Labour’(as too class-conscious), and making an alliance, and perhaps even a merger, with the Liberal Party.
My retrospective impression is that the talk was less taut than this, and I have no recollection of the last point being raised.’
(Jay himself later denied advocating such an alliance.)
The inquest of that autumn of 1959 ushered in a political battle over Clause IV of Labour's constitution (the common ownership clause), which raged on through 1960, and left Gaitskell like a Great War general, neither victorious nor defeated, but having spilled too much blood over too little ground.
What eventually emerged from Labour's contemplation of the entrails of defeat was an increasingly widespread belief — not, until recently, much shared on the left — that public ownership was not the essence of Labour's case, but that equality was.
Roy Jenkins himself thought his friend Hugh Gaitskell was fighting on the wrong ground, and ought to have concentrated on amending not the party's dogma, but its working constitution, ‘so as, for example, to make the National Executive Committee less the creature of the trade unions and more that of the Parliamentary Labour Party’.
Jenkins allowed himself to be convinced that ‘some battle had to be fought’.
But it is interesting that among the ‘great issues of today and tomorrow’ that he himself wrote as an agenda for Labour, prominence is given to one on equality: ‘whether, as we grow richer, this new wealth is used exclusively for individual selfishness or for the growth of necessary community services, and whether, in consequence, we follow or escape the American precedent of great private affluence surrounding rotting public services’.
It is almost eerie that the same issues, of both organisation and policy, are coming up again more than 30 years later.
At the national executive committee inquest, Roy Hattersley won nods of approval for his argument that an attempt to move towards Liberal Democrat policies, in the hope of winning over Liberal Democrat voters, was politically simplistic.
The truth is that since 1959, Labour thinkers like Jenkins, Anthony Crosland, Hattersley and others have put equality at the heart of the modern Labour Party's philosophy.
The great issue of British opposition politics in the next few years may revolve around this question: is the principal alternative to Conservatism to be a form of consumerism, which might unite many in both principal opposition groupings?
A complicating factor is that John Major —vide the emphasis he has given, most recently through the new responsibilities of William Waldegrave, to his Citizen's Charter — seems unlikely to surrender the consumerist ground to any set of opponents.
The alternative fault-line of British politics might be between a Conservative Party espousing equality of opportunity and a Labour Party dedicated to achieving greater equality of outcome, whether that be through the tax system, social security, improved public services or, more probably, a combination of all three.
If the new leadership of the Labour Party decides to put greater equality at the heart of its policies, huge questions remain to be answered about how it can achieve democratic support to bring this about.
Much will depend on how it seeks to solve the long-running debate about merging income tax and the national insurance system; whether benefits, including pensions, are to be universal or selective; and, if selective, how the state is to deal with obligations to people who have been contributing for many years to what they were told was national insurance .
And at the end of the reform agenda would be the electoral question: how does John Smith persuade the two-thirds of the British population who are, as he says, ‘doing all right’ to pay more in taxes in order to support the under-privileged one third about whom he speaks with such genuine passion?
That may become the central issue of democratic socialist politics, not only in Britain, but elsewhere in Europe, in the nineties.
The question of Labour's constitution also has to be addressed.
It is not as simple as some pundits suggest.
Denis Healey, that brutally muscular intellect, sums up the problem in his memoirs,The Time of My Life .
The heart of his argument is that Lab-our activists, at least since Ramsay MacDonald's betrayal in 1931, have distrusted their leaders, and he quotes Sidney Webb's analysis of the problem this causes: ‘The constituency parties are frequently unrepresentative groups of nonentities dominated by fanatics, cranks and extremists.
If the block vote of the trade unions were eliminated, it would be impracticable to continue to vest control of policy in Labour Party conferences.’
Healey himself, at the traumatic Labour conference of 1959, pointed to a growing gap between the Labour activist and the voter.
He derided those who thought it was ‘all right to stay in opposition so long as your socialist heart is pure’, and argued it was not they who suffered, but the poor in Britain and in the third world: ‘We are not just a debating society.
We are not just a socialist Sunday school.
We are a great movement that wants to help real people living on this earth at the present time.
We shall never be able to help them unless we get power.
We shall never get power unless we close the gap between the active workers and the average voter in the country.’
Thirty years later, Healey says in his book, he is still making the same speech.
That is a sober background to the arguments about one member, one vote, the nature of the trade union connection, a drive for mass Labour Party membership, and relationships with other opposition parties.
Political column Labour's would-be deputies sup with the left Sarah Baxter
The last election for the Labour leadership was fought on fairly straightforward left-right lines.
Neil Kinnock was no Bennite, but he was a member of the Tribune Group.
He was expected to sell out, but not to the last shilling.
To satisfy the right and hold Kinnock's left-wing impulses in check, Roy Hattersley was elected deputy.
By April 1992, Hattersley the Rawlsian was looking the more radical.
The suffocating impact of Kinnock's leadership on the left of the party cannot be exaggerated.
On his accession, the soft left that had broken away from Tony Benn appeared triumphant, but its ascendancy was shortlived.
Its members were used as voting fodder in the Parliamentary Labour Party and on the national executive and then cast aside.
The Tribune Group became stocked with Kinnock loyalists.
Members of the right-wing Solidarity Group picked up so many shadow cabinet posts that they no longer needed to organise.
The left-wing Campaign Group, anathematised by Kinnock, shrivelled and split.
During the Gulf war, the remnants of the soft left regrouped and began to meet weekly at the Westminster Arms.
The Supper Club, as it became known, gained notoriety when secret minutes of its deliberations were left on a Commons photocopier and reported to Kinnock.
All three challengers for the deputy leadership are members of the Club.
Club members oppose electoral slates as these proved so destructive of the Tribune Group and Campaign Group.
The Tribune Group voted against John Prescott's challenge to Hattersley for the deputy leadership in 1988 after ruling that he should not be permitted to speak.
That was the extent to which the group had become the policeman of the left.
At the same time, the Campaign Group divided over Benn and Heffer's candidacy.
Margaret Beckett, Jo Richardson, Clare Short and others resigned in protest.
The present contest has further weakened the Campaign Group.
Not all the 14–15 people who nominated Ken Livingstone and Bernie Grant wanted either of them to run (Benn of all people argued that policies would be obscured by personalities) and some members of the group sided with Gould or Prescott.
Stalwarts claim that five or six new MPs are interested in joining the group, but only two, Malcolm Chisholm and Lynne Jones, publicly backed Livingstone.
The invidious 20 per cent rule change has fulfilled its purpose: the group has been prevented from operating, even at the level of gesture politics.
So leadership elections are as much a threat as an opportunity for the left.
On the face of it, it is hardly promising that the soft left has immediately split over the post of deputy.
However, the left, broadly defined, is being courted rather than spurned.
The arch-Kinnockites in the Tribune Group have shifted entirely into John Smith's camp and are thus considered to have come out in their true colours as right-wingers.
Supper Club members now reflect with satisfaction that they did not invite Robin Cook, Smith's campaign manager, to their dinners.
The ever-cautious Margaret Beckett is no longer on the left by any definition but her own, but she knows that she cannot win the votes of a majority of MPs, let alone constituency members, without reminding them of her leftwing roots.
The unions, including her own Transport and General Workers' Union, are no longer looking like a pushover for her.
The T&G would like to support her with a clear conscience and every left-of-centre statement from her helps.
Long after breaking with the Campaign Group, Beckett was still offering comradely greetings to its supporters in its party conference newsletter.
She remains a member of CND and the Common Market Safeguards Committee.
She is among the most steadfast opponents of electoral reform on the Plant Commission.
However, her position as Treasury spokesperson has given her an excuse to stick doggedly to her brief.
Thus, she has been able to move steadily rightwards while maintaining old links.
Not that it has done her much good.
While Smith can claim to have the votes of some left-wingers (all but one Scot, at any rate), Beckett's nominations come almost exclusively from the right.
Her previous rival, Ann Clwyd, and her small band of supporters, including Brian Sedgemore and Dale Campbell-Savours, are backing her on the grounds of her sex, trapped by their propaganda about the need for a woman in the post.
But Gould still has more nominations from women than Beckett does, which explains why she is now pursuing a decidedly feminist course.
Gould, always a nimble tactician, has also moved leftwards in the course of his campaign.
To the great irritation of John Smith's supporters, Gould has presented himself skilfully as the ideas candidate.
He has certainly beached Smith on the trade union question.
Once Smith finally began to criticise union influence in the party and voiced his preference for an electoral college composed solely of MPs and individual members, Gould penned a letter to the Guardian promising to strengthen rather than loosen union links.
Members of the Campaign Group read this approvingly.
Initially marketed as a man who understands the south-eastern voter, Gould is now being promoted as the MP for Dagenham and the giant Ford motor works (T&G members, take note).
He has yet to deliver his promised speech on the relationship between the party and unions, but he is thinking along similar lines to Tom Sawyer, Nupe's deputy leader and a national executive member.
In last week's Tribune , Sawyer suggested that ballots of affiliated members in leadership contests might be made compulsory and that block votes could be split, although he expressed himself more cautiously than Gould intends to.
John Prescott has made the clearest pitch for the left's support by defending the ‘old vision’ of socialism.
There is no need to run to outside bodies such as an extended Plant Commission or Commission for Social Justice for new ideas, he argues; strength can be found within the party.
Prescott believes that the argument between Smith and Gould is largely technocratic.
But his own strict emphasis on party organisation could count against him, since the message is that his views on policy do not really matter.
However, MPs who wish to satisfy their constituency parties could vote Smith-Prescott and still retain some left-wing credibility, while ordinary party members understand better than anyone the need for an organisational shake-up.
Both Beckett and Gould are firmly of the view that Prescott's vote will be squeezed, although, contrary to predictions, he easily passed the 20 per cent nominations mark.
However, his support was among mostly male, northern MPs.
Gould's nominations were more broadly based and he is gaining momentum by contesting the two posts at once.
Come the special conference on 18 July, votes for the third-placed candidate for deputy will be transferred and Gould and Prescott's supporters are broadly interchangeable.
Some Prescott votes will transfer to Beckett, but the left should still be able to muster a sizeable block.
The next question is whether the left will be able to sustain that strength.
The election of a unashamedly right-wing leader, John Smith, should free its members from the loyalty oaths of the Kinnock era, particularly if shadow cabinet jobs are crudely dished out to his supporters.
Look out for realignment of the left — within the parliamentary party — this autumn.
Edward Pearce's Watch Netherwaite — a future leader of the opposition
Are things now so bad for Labour that glancing over the assembled new talent, one says ‘Watch Netherthwaite, he could be a future leader of the opposition’?
The estimation of intakes can be peculiar.
Notoriously, there are people like Sir Peter Tapsell, headhunted for the cabinet and beyond in their early days, with no defect of character in terms of ability, whom bad time-tabling (the Tory defeat in February 1974) and abrupt changes to a malignant east wind (the arrival of Mrs Thatcher), have succinctly done for.
It was funny to hear Sir Bernard Ingham telling us on that delayed programme about the recession, which Samir Shah so bravely defended, that Mrs Thatcher was too nice to sack people (bless you, Bernard, she got through more company than Sweeney Todd).
But Mrs Thatcher's other speciality lay in keeping them out.
Unless, like Chris Patten, she needed you for what she couldn't do herself (write a decent speech), any wet, however bright, was kippered on the back benches.
In Labour's case, no such invidiousness applies.
Just as the poor are often good to one another, Labour tends to huddle affectionately to keep warm.
There is talent in this intake, though.
Chief on the Labour side, discounting retreads, is probably Malcolm Wicks (Croydon North West).
The man he displaced, Humfrey Malins, used to shake his head and say, ‘I do wish Malcolm would go away.
He's far too good.’
Such praise from an unimpeachable source derives from Wicks being one of those High Technicians who actually know about something.
Having worked on deprivation at the Home Office, he became head of the Family Policy Studies Centre.
The view is that Wicks is Frank Field without God.
Watching him and Peter Lilley, the new overseer of the poor, could be very instructive.
Another, quite different, talent is Jane Kennedy who replaced Terry Fields, the Militant with the Caudillo glasses.
She is not what might have been feared, a colourless nominee of Walworth Road, but a personal victim of Militant in its great days when Labour politicians used to mutter feebly about this being a Broad Church.
It was a single speech by Jane Kennedy at the conference of her union, Nupe, spelling out the nature of Militant's attention if they didn't like you, that caught the eye.
She is very brave, which is plenty to be going on with.
Andrew MacKinlay at Thurrock was praised to me by someone who knew him well, not for any sort of high-flying, but for through and through decency: and anyone removing Tim ‘I propose to call these people ‘the Ethnics'’ Janman has instant appeal.
Alan Milburn in Darlington I have seen in action.
He is a chapter of my Election Rides (available now from all good stockists)— enormous energy, rough north-eastern geniality and very bright.
All sorts of things can happen to bright young figures in a Labour intake.
Back in the seventies, there was a very promising chap from Newcastle called John Horam, the inventor, as a marketing man, of the After Eight mint, early a junior minister, not long afterwards an SDP founder.
Today, Orpington, home of a thousand Fleet Street sub-editors, is represented for the Conservatives by John Horam.
The Conservatives should be pleased also with Eric Pickles.
Despite much monstering as a sort of Thatcher Terror man, Eric Pickles is essentially rather decent, and very stuffy about racial prejudice.
Also, in what will probably be a monochrome house, he has a dash of that odd vividness with which Yorkshire, while talking about its dourness, often comes up.
Another Conservative with kind words said about him is Raymond Robertson, retriever of Aberdeen South.
Unusually, he is not an investment analyst, but a former history teacher.
He may not run to leather elbow patches, but during the Kincardine by-election, reports from several sides were very approving.
Another pleasant, non-right-wing Tory is Peter Luff who, in spite of being a PR man, is actually quite pleasant.
He once had the impossible job of being PA to Ted Heath in sulphurous exile.
It should have been a ticket to the less cheerful part of Novaya Zemlya.
But the whirligig of time brings in his revenges, and years spent with Ted look quite good on a chap's CV.
Finally, reverting to Labour, Greg Pope, the new non-apostolic Labour man for Catholic Accrington unseated the Catholic Tory, Ken Hargreaves, not least by appearing on the ballot as Pope Gregory.
Missing millions
Did vanishing voters tip the electoral scales?
Jolyon Jenkins looks at the figures
In retrospect, perhaps the community charge, far from damaging the Tories, was the party's hidden weapon.
And perhaps Labour's greatest ever mistake was to saddle it with the label ‘poll tax’, thereby fixing in the public mind the link between voting and taxation.
It is beyond doubt that the introduction of the tax sent the numbers of registered voters plummeting.
In Scotland, the big drop occurred in 1988, when the poll tax registers started to be compiled; in England and Wales, it was a year later, when their registers came in — persuasive evidence that the poll tax was the key.
The people who removed themselves from the register to avoid paying the tax were unlikely to be Conservative voters (although they were not necessarily pro-Labour either).
In normal times, about 97.5 per cent of eligible people register.
By the 1992 election, this was down to 95.3 per cent.
But these figures aren't at all certain.
No one knows exactly how many eligible people there are, because the last firm data comes from the 1981 census; there have been extrapolations from those figures, but inevitably there is an element of guesswork.
The next set of census figures is due out this year.
(But even they may not be accurate: census-takers last year reported that, in some areas, they found it hard to get people to fill in their forms, because they thought the census had some connection with poll tax.
It is likely that the number of people in the country will officially have ‘fallen’.)
Registration figures went down when the poll tax was introduced, but — at least nationally — they staged a marked recovery in 1992, more than compensating for the 1989 drop.
This was largely thanks to a concerted registration campaign by local councils.
Even so, the Electoral Reform Society estimates that there could be as many as a million missing voters, and Mori made the assumption that the figure was nearer two million.
But it is hard to blame Labour's 1992 defeat on poll tax-related non-registration.
The missing voters are largely concentrated in urban seats the party would win anyway.
The fall in the marginals is what counts.
And there are very few marginals that the Conservatives retained with a majority smaller than the drop in the number of people registered — only four, in fact: Coventry South West, Kensington, Edmonton, and Eltham.
In Kensington, for example, the register fell by 6,129 from 1987-92, and the Conservative majority was 3,548.
If all the people who deregistered had stayed and had voted Labour, Labour might have won the seat.
But it is a big ‘if’.
Before the election,World In Action did a survey of 250 unregistered people in Hampstead and Highgate.
They found that only about half would have voted Labour if they had been registered.
Besides, in some areas, registration worked in Labour's favour.
Students, who tend to the left, can choose whether to register in their parents' homes or where they live in term time.
In Cambridge, there was a campaign to persuade students to register in the city, which was a marginal Conservative seat.
Five thousand did so, and may have played a decisive part in turning a 5,060 Tory majority into a 580 Labour one.
The long-term effect of deregistration is more damaging to Labour.
As everyone knows, the boundary commission, which decides how many constituencies an area needs, is likely to come up with recommendations that will deprive Labour of as many as 20 of its urban seats at the next election.
The commission estimates the population on the basis of the electoral register — but is working with the artificially low 1991 registers.
The poll tax, then, will continue to hurt Labour for a decade after it has vanished.
There is a strong incentive for local Labour parties to get everyone registered, even in safe urban seats, to avoid the seat disappearing altogether.
Some local authorities have been very effective at this — in Greenwich, people who registered were entered in a prize draw.
One of the odder aspects of the 1992 election was the anecdotal evidence from polling station officers who reported to the Market Research Society that many people tried to vote, but only discovered that they were not on the register when they got to the polling station.
It is hard to know what to make of this.
Every election, some people discover that they are unregistered, and in most cases it is because they either forgot to fill in the form, or they moved in too late in the year to qualify.
If it happened more this time, it may simply be that, with a higher-than-average turnout (sunny weather, and so on), more people who normally wouldn't have bothered to vote, did so — and such half-hearted democrats are precisely the ones unlikely to have filled in the form.
It may be that, in some areas, registration officers were less than assiduous in chasing up the laggards.
Or it could reflect an increasingly mobile population.
At the moment, the register remains valid for a whole year; any changes during the year do not count.
The poll tax experience, though, shows that in some working-class areas, the population is extraordinarily mobile, and people are quite likely to change address during the year — effectively disenfranchising themselves.
The poll tax registers, unlike the electoral registers, are updated monthly.
Now that all the poll tax register computer equipment is installed, there is a strong case to let it be used to compile the electoral roll on the same basis.
THE DISPOSESSED
Culture of contentment
The western world seems set on a course that will lead to great violence and conflagration in our cities.
J K Galbraith wonders whether it can be averted
On no matter is American social thought in its accepted and popular manifestation more insistent than on social class or, more specifically, the absence thereof in the United States.
We have a classless society; to this we point with considerable pride.
The social mythology of the Republic is built on the concept of classlessness — the belief, as President George Bush once put it, that class is ‘for European democracies or something else — it isn't for the United States of America.
We are not going to be divided by class.’
Yet presidential oratory, however well-intended and even eloquent, does not serve entirely to suppress the truth.
Determinedly and irrevocably into the American language has come the modern reference to ‘the underclass’.
There are individuals and families who, it is conceded, do not share the comfortable well-being of the prototypical American.
These people, this class, are concentrated in the centres of the great cities or, less visibly, on deprived farms, as rural migrant labour, or in erstwhile mining communities.
Or they are the more diffused poor of the Old South and of the region of the Rio Grande in Texas.
The greater part of the underclass consists of members of minority groups, blacks or people of Hispanic origin.
While the most common reference is to the underclass of the great cities, this is at least partly because its presence there is the most inescapably apparent.
So much is accepted.
What is not accepted, and indeed is little mentioned, is that the underclass is integrally a part of a larger economic process and, more importantly, that it serves the living standard and the comfort of the more favoured community.
Economic progress would be far more uncertain and certainly far less rapid without it.
The economically fortunate, not excluding those who speak with greatest regret of the existence of this class, are heavily dependent on its presence.
The underclass is deeply functional; all industrial countries have one in greater or lesser measure and in one form or another.
As some of its members escape from deprivation and its associated compulsions, a resupply becomes essential.
But on few matters, it must be added, is even the most sophisticated economic and social comment more reticent.
The picture of an economic and political system in which social exclusion, however unfortunate, is somehow a remediable affliction is all but required.
Here, in highly compelling fashion, the social convenience of the contented replaces the clearly visible reality.
Appreciation of this reality begins with the popular, indeed obligatory, definition of work.
Work, in the conventional view, is pleasant and rewarding; it is something in which all favoured by occupation rejoice to a varying degree.
A normal person is proud of his or her work.
In practical fact, much work is repetitive, tedious, painfully fatiguing, mentally boring or socially demeaning.
This is true of diverse consumer and household services and the harvesting of farm crops, and is equally true in those industries that deploy workers on assembly lines, where labour cost is a major factor in the price of what is finally produced.
Only, or in any case primarily, when this nexus between labour cost and price is broken or partly dissociated, invariably at higher income levels, does work become pleasant and, in fact, enjoyed.
It is a basic but rarely articulated feature of the modern economic system that the highest pay is given for the work that is most prestigious and most agreeable.
This is at the opposite extreme from those occupations that are inherently invidious, those that place the individual directly under the command of another, as in the case of the doorman or the household servant, and those involving a vast range of tasks — street cleaning, garbage collection, janitorial services, elevator operation — that have an obtrusive connotation of social inferiority.
There is no greater modern illusion, even fraud, than the use of the single term work to cover what for some is, as noted, dreary, painful, socially demeaning and what for others is enjoyable, socially reputable and economically rewarding.
Those who spend pleasant, well-compensated days say with emphasis that they have been ‘hard at work’, thereby suppressing the notion that they are a favoured class.
They are, of course, allowed to say that they enjoy their work, but it is presumed that such enjoyment is shared by any good worker.
In a brief moment of truth, we speak, when sentencing criminals, of years at ‘hard labour’.
Otherwise we place a common gloss over what is agreeable and what, to a greater or lesser extent, is endured or suffered.
From the foregoing comes one of the basic facts of modern economic society: the poor in our economy are needed to do the work that the more fortunate do not do and would find manifestly distasteful, even distressing.
And a continuing supply and resupply of such workers is always needed.
That is because later generations do not wish to follow their parents into physically demanding, socially unacceptable or otherwise disagreeable occupations; they escape or seek to escape the heavy lifting to a more comfortable and rewarding life.
This we fully understand and greatly approve; it is what education is generally meant to accomplish.
But from this comes the need for the resupply or, less agreeably, for keeping some part of the underclass in continued and deferential subjection.
To see these matters in the clearest light, one must first look at their resolution in western Europe.
In the past 40 years in Germany, France and Switzerland, and in lesser measure in Austria and Scandinavia, the provision of outside workers for the tasks for which indigenous labourers are no longer available has been both accepted and highly organised.
The factories of the erstwhile German Federal Republic are manned, and a broad range of other work is performed, by Turks and Yugoslavs.
Those in France are similarly supplied by what amounts to a new invasion of the Moors — the vast influx from the former North African colonies.
Switzerland has long relied on Italian and Spanish workers.
The industrial north of Italy, in turn, has depended heavily on a reserve army of the unemployed from the south — the more backward Mezzogiorno — and now increasingly from North Africa.
The British economy has been sustained in no small part by migrants from the former dominions — India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and the West Indies.
The employment of these workers goes beyond manufacturing establishments and factory assembly lines to a wide range of jobs.
Restaurants, household and other personal services and less elegant public employments are all their conceded domain.
In the large and generally excellent Swiss hospitals, decline and death would, it is said, be probable, if not inevitable, in the absence of the menial foreign staff.
Swiss highways would not be repaired without them, or snow or city garbage removed.
This is work that the older Swiss workforce does not do.
Nor, to repeat, do native workers man the assembly lines or undertake the non prestigious tasks in Germany, France or elsewhere in western Europe in any nearly sufficient way.
There are marked further advantages in this arrangement — in the availability of this admitted underclass.
If it becomes unneeded, it can be sent home or, as more often, denied entry.
This has been accomplished in Switzerland with such precision in the past that involuntary unemployment has been often in the low hundreds.
Most important of all, these workers, coming as they do from countries and occupations (mostly poor and tedious peasant agriculture) with much lower incomes, are impressed by their new comparative well-being.
They are not, accordingly, as assertive as to wage and other claims as would be local workers, and their assertiveness is further tempered by the fact that they are not, with some progressive exceptions, voting and participating citizens.
Many, once a certain financial competence is acquired, plan to return home.
And some may have entered the country illegally, which usefully enforces their silence.
Not much has been made of this migration, some ethnic tension apart, and even less of the fact that in the years since the second world war it has been essential for western European economic life.
That is because the offspring of the traditional older working class have gone on to the more pleasant and remunerative employments, the employments that are also called work.
Still less has been made of a functionally similar underclass in the United States.
Here too it has one of the uncelebrated but indispensable roles in modern capitalism.
Both its character and also its uses are, however, rather more ambiguous and diverse than those of the foreign workers in Europe, those who are often called guest workers to emphasise their seemingly temporary role.
In the latter years of the last century and until the first world war, American massemployment industry and the less agreeable urban occupations drew their workforce extensively from eastern Europe as well as from the labour surplus of American farms.
As this supply diminished, poor whites from the Appalachian plateau and, in greatly increasing numbers, blacks from the south moved to take their place.
The assembly plants and body shops of Detroit were once staffed by workers from the adjacent farms and small towns of Michigan and Ontario, as well as by immigrants from Poland and elsewhere in Europe.
As that generation went on to personally more attractive or socially more distinguished occupations, the assembly lines there reached out to more distant refugees from poor farming and mining areas and to the erstwhile sharecroppers and other deprived rural workers of the Deep South.
With the latter recruitment, Detroit became a city of largely black population; the automobile industry would not have survived had it had to rely on the sons and daughters of its original workers.
Nor would many other public and private services have been available in tolerable form.
In more recent times, migration from Mexico, Latin America and the West Indies has become a general source of such labour.
For many years now, legal provision has been made for the importation of workers for the harvesting of fruit and vegetables, there being very specific acknowledgement that this is something native-born Americans cannot be persuaded in the necessary numbers to do.
There is here, somewhat exceptionally, a clear legal perception of the role of the underclass.
In the US immigration legislation of 1990, there was at last some official recognition of the more general and continuing need for immigrant labour.
Although much of the discussion of this measure turned on the opening of the door to needed skilled workers (and compassionately to relatives of earlier migrants), the larger purpose was not in doubt.
There would be a new and necessary recruitment of men and women to do the tasks of the underclass.
Avoided only was mention of such seemingly brutal truth.
It is not thought appropriate to say that the modern economy requires such an underclass, and certainly not that it must reach out to other countries to sustain and refresh it.
It is important to note and emphasise that the contribution of the underclass is not confined to disagreeable industrial and agricultural employment.
In the modern urban community, as noted, there is a vast range of tedious or socially demeaning jobs that require unskilled, willing and adequately inexpensive labour.
To this need the underclass responds, and it makes urban life at the comfortable levels of well-being not only pleasant but possible.
There is, however, the darker side.
In the inner cities of the United States, as less dramatically in Europe — Brixton and Hackney in London, areas in France where North African migrants are heavily concentrated — there is a continuing threat of underclass social disorder, crime and conflict.
Drug dealing, indiscriminate violence, other crime and family disorientation and disintegration are now all aspects of everyday existence.
In substantial part, this is because a less vigorously expanding economy and the movement of industry to economically more favoured locations have denied to the underclass those relatively stable and orderly industrial employments once available in the large cities.
But also, and more importantly, the normal upward movement that was for long the solvent for discontent has been arrested.
The underclass has become a semipermanent rather than a generational phenomenon.
There has been surprisingly little comment as to why minority communities in New York, Chicago, Los Angeles and elsewhere, once poor but benign and culturally engaging, are now centres of terror and despair.
The reason is that what was a favouring upward step in economic life has now become a hopeless enthralment.
Yet, considering the sordid life to which the modern underclass is committed, and especially when their life is compared with that of the contented majority, it is an occasion for wonder that the discontent and its more violent and aggressive manifestations are not greater than they are.
One reason, evident in Europe and also important in the United States, is that for some of the underclass life in the cities, although insecure, ill-rewarded and otherwise primitive, still remains, if tenuously, better than that from which they escaped.
The great black migration to the north after the second world war was from a rural existence, classically that of the sharecropper, with rudimentary shelter and clothing; no health care; hard farm labour; exploitative living costs; little in the way of schooling; no voting rights; forthright, accepted and enforced racial discrimination; and, withal, extreme invisibility.
Urban life, however unsatisfactory, was an improvement.
So also for those moving in the recent past from Latin America.
For many the comparison is not with those who are more fortunate but with their own past position.
This latter comparison and its continuing memory in the culture unquestionably has had the same tranquillising effect on the American underclass as it has on that in Europe.
It is one unnoted reason, along with ineligibility because of recent arrival or illegal presence, that underclass voter turnout in elections is relatively low.
While the urban areas inhabited by the underclass have seen outbreaks of violence, notably the widespread riots in the second half of the 1960s in the US, with the recent echo in Los Angeles last week, the more surprising thing, nonetheless, is their relative tranquillity.
This, however, it will be evident from the foregoing, is something on which no one should count in the future.
It has existed in the past because, as noted, the underclass has been in the process of transition — that from a lesser life, and with the prospect of generational escape.
As this process comes to an end — as membership in the underclass becomes stable and enduring — greater resentment and social unrest should be expected.
A blockage in the movement upward and out of the underclass will not be accepted.
However, although it will not be accepted, it will not in the ordinary course of events be anticipated.
It is not in the nature of the politics of contentment to expect or plan countering action for misfortune, even disaster, that, however predictable and predicted, is in the yet undisclosed future.
Such planning, involving as it always does public action — provision of good educational opportunity, good public housing and health care, competent attention to drug addiction, family counselling, adequate welfare payments — is systemically resisted by the contented electoral majority.
In what is the accepted and, in-deed, only acceptable view, the underclass is deemed the source of its own succour and well-being; in the extreme view, it requires the spur of its own poverty, and it will be damaged by any social assistance and support.
The reaction of the community of contentment to the miseries and violence of the urban slums, and the probable reaction if the violence becomes more extreme, is readily predictable.
Aiding prediction, as ever, is the fact that the future, in some measure, is already here.
The first development, one we can already see, is resort by the contented in the larger cities to a laager mentality — the hiring of personal, neighbourhood or apartment security guards or the escape to presumptively safe suburbs.
In Manila in the Philippines, affluent urban enclaves — the golden ghettos — are distributed over that poverty-ridden metropolis, each with its own impenetrable fence and stern security force.
In less formal fashion, something of the same can now be seen in the modern American city, and this development could be, and one can doubtless say will be, greatly extended.
In contrast with steps to tackle and ameliorate the economic and social forces shaping the despair and violence of the slums, such a protective remedy has an appealing element of immediacy and practicality: seemingly far better and surer the effect of outlays for security guards than the more distant hope from some rehabilitative expenditure in the inner city.
The second reaction is the likelihood, indeed near certainty, of what will happen if urban discontent, crime and violence increase: this will be attributed not to the social situation but to the inferior, even criminal, disposition of the people involved.
Such is already the case.
A major answer to crime, disaffection and disorder in the central cities is now a call for heavier law enforcement, including a more extensive use of the death penalty and more facilities for detention.
No other current situation produces such inflammatory rhetoric.
This mood, in the event of still worse violence, could, in turn, lead readily to armed repression, first by the local police, then by military force.
The obvious fact that people of comfortable circumstance live peacefully together and those afflicted by poverty do not goes largely unnoticed.
Or, if noticed, it is not discussed amid the clamour for a clampdown on what seems an intrinsically ill-behaved and violent citizenry.
Were one permitted one confident prediction, it would be of the likelihood of an increasingly oppressive authority in areas of urban desolation.
Articles of this genre are expected to have a happy ending.
With awareness of what is wrong, the corrective forces of democracy are set in motion.
And perhaps they would be now were they in a full democracy — one that embraced the interests and votes of all the citizens.
Those now outside the contented majority would rally, or, more precisely, could be rallied, to their own interest and therewith to the larger and safer public interest.
Alas, however, we speak here of a democracy of those with the least sense of urgency to correct what is wrong, the best insulation through short-run comfort from what could go wrong — a democracy run by and for the contented majority, in which those who do not share in its benefits do not participate.
There is special occasion here for sadness — for a sad ending — for what is needed to save and protect, to ensure against suffering and further unpleasant consequence, is not in any way obscure.
Nor would the resulting action be disagreeable.
There would be a challenge to the present mood of contentment with its angry resentment of any intrusion, but, in the longer run, the general feeling of security in well-being would be deepened.
The central requirement cannot be escaped: almost every action that would remedy and reassure involves the relationship between the citizen and the state.
In the communist world in the long years before collapse all concessions to the market were resisted as concessions to capitalism; they were inconsistent with the accepted principles of socialism.
It was, however, almost certainly by such concessions, especially in the diverse world of consumer goods and services and agriculture — economic activity beyond the reach and competence of the command system — that communism cum socialism might have been saved.
In a perverse way, the same is now true of modern capitalism.
Although intervention by the state on a wide and varied front once saved capitalism, there is now a resistance to the state action that is necessary to ensure an economically successful and socially tranquil future.
The dialectic of the modern capitalist, or more precisely the modern mixed, economy, all but exclusively involves the role of government.
In the dialectic this is extensively ideological; in everyday manifestation it is highly pragmatic.
And, to repeat, no subtlety conceals the needed attitude and action.
But on nothing has the culture of contentment been so successful as in shaping the accepted attitude toward the state.
In some areas — the armed services, the procurement of highly technical weaponry — the state's performance is, to be sure, approved.
In the conduct of foreign policy, real and rhetorical, the provision of social security and the rescue of failing financial institu-tions, its adequacy is assumed.
Where, however, regulation to forestall the socially damaging or self-destructive tendencies of the system or to rescue the poor is involved, state action is held to be deeply inadequate and seriously counterproductive.
The required change in policy begins with the overall or macroeconomic performance of the economy.
In a time of economic recession such as that of the early 1990s, there is a strong case not only for low interest rates but also for increased public expenditure, especially on roads, bridges, airports and other civic needs, and on unemployment compensation and welfare payments, all to employ or protect the unemployed and those otherwise adversely affected.
But there is here a conflict with the tenets of the age of contentment: it is not the comfortable who would thus be aided.
And lurking also is the eventual tax effect.
During the 1980s, the burgeoning years of contentment, there was large continuing deficit in the US federal budget.
Though a topic for voluble discourse, it was less of a threat to the contented than the taxes that would have reduced it.
In the ensuing recession, a deliberate addition to the deficit, primarily for those outside the community of contentment, which might renew the call for higher levies on those inside, became unthinkable.
The controlling role of taxation continues.
The only effective design for diminishing the income inequality inherent in capitalism is the progressive income tax.
Nothing in the age of contentment has contributed so strongly to income inequality as the reduction of taxes on the rich; nothing, as has been said, would so contribute to social tranquillity as some screams of anguish from the very affluent.
That taxes should now be used to reduce inequality is, however, clearly outside the realm of comfortable thought.
Here the collision between wise social action and the culture of contentment is most apparent.
The present and devastated position of the socially assisted underclass has been identified as the most serious social problem of the time, as it is also the greatest threat to long-run peace and civility.
Life in the great cities in general could be improved, and only will be improved, by public action — by better schools with better-paid teachers, by strong, well-financed welfare services, by counselling on drug addiction, by employment training, by public investment in the housing that in no industrial country is provided for the poor by private enterprise, by adequately supported recreational facilities, libraries and police.
The question once again, much accommodating rhetoric to the contrary, is not what can be done but what will be paid.
This article is based on J K Galbraith's latest book, ‘The Culture of Contentment’, published last week by  9Sinclair-Stevenson 
On the clothes line In Paris, the fashion industry employs illegal immigrants at knock-down wages.
Nyta Mann reports
Le Sentier, Paris, is in the heart of Europe's thriving and expanding ready-to-wear clothing industry.
Here the fashion designers' latest collections are translated into the affordable ware that high-street stores everywhere will be offering.
But the industry's success depends on a different kind of fashion slave to the one that updates his or her wardrobe every season:travailleurs clandestins , immigrants working illegally in sweat shops and erratic casual labour.
It's 10am and the Slaves' Market is bustling.
Dozens of Pakistanis, Indians and Turks huddle in groups on the pavement, stamping their feet against the cold.
Anyone in search of hired help for an hour or two can take their pick.
Sanjay, 41, is one of those touting his wares.
‘I've been here since 8am, and nothing.
This is worse than being a slave.
Slaves are fed whether they work or not.’
He looks like the sort of slave sold for a knock-down price; skinny and stooped, wearing nylon trousers, damp plimsolls, and cringing in his thin anorak against the wind.
It's hard to imagine him manoeuvring hefty cargoes through Le Sentier's teeming streets, but that is how he makes his living.
When he gets the chance.
Officially known as the Place Du Caire, the Slaves' Market has been a feature of Paris' Le Sentier quarter for years.
It is here in the tiny, pumping heart of Europe's ready-to-wear industry that hundreds of sans-papiers , immigrants without work permits, come to be taken on for errands that could last half an hour or a day.
‘In good times, I've earned 5,000 francs (£500) a month.
But then not a sou for four months in the dead season.’
For the past five years, Sanjay has worked in the warehouses, workshops and streets of Le Sentier.
Once hired, he might have to work a 15-hour stretch, perhaps into the night.
Paid by the job, when he finally knocks off, he has no idea if he will be working the next morning.
But today Sanjay strikes it lucky at 11.30.
He is hired to move bales of cloth from a warehouse to a seamstress' workshop a few streets away.
When he asks how long the job is expected to take, his new-found employer answers: ‘It's work.
Do you want it or not?’
An indignant rebuke, not a question.
For 50 francs (£5), he'll take it.
He disappears into the constant traffic of delivery vans, porters and shoppers.
Like a coolie in the wrong continent, he's on to his first wage of the day.
The fabric he is shifting will be taken to one of the many ateliers in Paris to be cut up and sewn into ready-to-wear, middle-market fashion.
The deal between the wholesaler and manufacturer will have been sewn up only minutes before Sanjay accepted his orders.
Another sans-papiers will shortly transform his cargo into something that, in a couple of days, will be on sale in high streets across Europe.
It will probably be done by someone like Canan.
She came to Paris from Turkey with her three children eight years ago.
She works in a basement in Cha\t4eau Landon, a rundown part of Paris with a large immigrant population.
Her day is spent sewing together trousers ordered by any of the thousands of buyers that come to Le Sentier for their stock.
It is piece-work, so she is paid per item.
The going rate is ten francs (£1) per pair of trousers.
But Canan is an illegal worker.
She gets eight francs (80 pence) per pair.
It is survival not exploitation that worries her.
‘I am a sans-papiers .
We have to accept any price because otherwise we will die of hunger.’
It's not only the wages that are Victorian but the working conditions too.
‘If they're easy trousers, I can do maybe 30 pairs a day, as long as I start at eight in the morning and finish at eight at night.
Sometimes I work six days a week, but usually seven.
I can't afford to turn it down when it's offered.’
The unpredictable nature of the fashion industry means Canan can expect her work to be anything but regular.
Frenzied production one week gives way to nothing the next.
‘It's full speed ahead for the seasons, and, if I can, I work 12 or 14 hours a day then, because otherwise I can't see myself through the quiet times.
I've had weeks with no work at all, and as a sans-papiers there is no such thing as social security for me or my children.’
She lives a life of constant anxiety; over money, job security, and also of being caught by the authorities.
If found working, the sans-papiers can be fined or imprisoned, but deportation is the most likely result.
‘I work with 15 other Turks, and we don't talk about our work or way of life to anybody.
We don't even talk among ourselves.
And we especially don't talk about it at the workplace.’
Her employer is perfectly aware that she is a sans-papiers .
He is Turkish as well, but the common nationality of his workforce has little to do with solidarity and more to do with limiting the risk of being caught.
Canan and her boss know exactly what to expect from each other: ‘It's far easier for me to work for another Turk because I can talk about pay rates and things like that more openly.
But just because your boss is Turkish doesn't mean he treats you any better.
Above all else, he's a businessman and he knows I'll do the work for less than someone with papers because he knows I have no choice.’
To call the sans-papiers' unofficial job centre the Slaves' Market is no exaggeration.
Ahmed arrived in Paris in 1990.
His first job was as a cloth-cutter and sewing machinist in a factory.
‘I didn't step outside that basement workshop for two months.
Ten of us worked in there, mostly Turks but also two Chinese sans-papiers .
The boss said we couldn't go outside because employment inspectors would catch us, and so everyone was fed and slept in the factory.
We worked 12 hours a day, and for this he paid me 200 francs (£20) a week because, he said, he had to take our board and lodging from our pay.’
These are the invisible sans-papiers , the ones nobody sees because they work through the daylight hours or are virtual prisoners.
Ahmed had to leave the job after a raid by an employment inspection team.
‘I was lucky, they didn't see me escape through another door.
Five of the others who were working there have been deported, I know that.
But what happened to the others, I have no idea.’
Employers of sans-papiers insist their businesses cannot survive unless they flout official employment codes.
Moise, a businessman typical of Le Sentier's clothing industry entrepreneurs, has no time for criticism of his employment practices: ‘Of course we employ workers in conditions outside the legal norms.
So what?
Without them this industry would collapse.
Nobody else can produce 200 skirts in two days.
How else are we expected to compete with our rivals in Hong Kong or India?’
Legislation introduced at the end of last year, for the first time, imposes strict penalties on those who employ sans-papiers .
If convicted they now face heavy fines, confiscation of goods, and even imprisonment.
If they themselves also happen to be immigrants they can be deported.
The attitude of employers is one of annoyance at what they see as government interference for electoral purposes.
Before the current recession, France's ‘parallel economy’ of immigrant workers was a tacitly accepted sector of the French economy.
But now, with unemployment touching 10 per cent and rising, undeclared work and workers have become a political scapegoat.
As in any country of immigration, though, the sans-papiers do the work the French would rather not do.
And ironically, the countries that Le Sentier's businessmen worry might undercut their production are often the very places sans-papiers come from in their search for jobs.
Galal, from Egypt, has fetched and carried goods round Le Sentier for more than three years.
‘It's simple,’ he says, ‘they couldn't get a legal worker to do the things that we would.
Moving heavy deliveries up six flights of stairs, running through the streets with cartons of clothes at 30 seconds' notice, for maybe ten francs (£1) a time.
We're here when they need us and aren't paid when they don't.’
Whenever he can, he sends money back to his wife and children in Luxor.
He says it's the only way they can survive.
There have been months when he hasn't found any work at all and so he returns home for short periods.
But he always comes back to Paris.
‘I don't like living like this, but I will be doing it for ever.
Even if they send me out, I will return.
I am a clandestin .
What else should I do?’
From his pocket, he pulls out an exercise book and turns to a page with a map of the world on it.
With his finger he draws a line across the middle, roughly dividing the north from the south.
‘Here,’ he says, pointing to Europe and America in the north, ‘you have small problems like sans-papiers .’
Then he points to the south, to Africa and Asia.
‘But here, we have big problems the north has given us.
This is the reason I am a sans-papiers .
Because I have no choice.’
Symbolic injustice The importance of the Rodney King case, says Alexander Cockburn, is that injustice was done, and seen to be done.
Los Angeles
A couple of days after the riot was over, the streets of South Central, Los Angeles, offered a visual detective story, in which final chapters and final questions often came in the form of a shattered plate window or a burned-out shop front.
Here was a Burger King, untouched, though the crowd must have swept past it as they hastened to torch (loot is too optimistic a word for these foul establishments) the Winchells Do-nut restaurant a few yards further on.
There was a Belizean restaurant, its ethnic and national origins frantically advertised in a looping scrawl of spraypaint, looted and trashed nevertheless.
Here again, hopefully protected with a ‘Black Owned’ sign, was a McDonald's that had been spared.
Korean establishments were the first the crowd seems to have made for.
African-Americans in South Central mostly hate Korean store owners and there's no getting around the fact, as Jesse Jackson tried to do when he said the assaults on Koreans were not racist.
A purist could argue that it was class and function that set these store owners up for assault, but on the streets, in the full fury of those 48 hours, stretching from the mid-afternoon Wednesday verdict in Simi Valley, any Korean would have been fair game.
It was the acquittal of the four policemen who beat Rodney King that touched off the most lethal urban riot in American history (50 dead, the majority of them black and Latino), but the memory of the killing of Latasha Harlins was as potent a spark in igniting the intifada .
In 1990, Harlins, a teenage black girl, was shot to death by Soon Ja Du, a Korean store owner in South Central.
She had suspected Harlins of stealing a carton of orange juice and shot her in the back of the head.
A judge put Mrs Soon on probation.
Almost the first store that went up in the rioting was, predictably enough, that of Mrs Soon.
But why the Korean store owners?
South Central residents claim they are rude, racist, parasitic.
Probably many of them are, as they carve out their living in those dangerous neighbourhoods.
But racism is exactly that transfer from the particular — Mrs Soon — to the universal, all Koreans.
That weekend, Koreans were marching under peace banners, handing out free sodas on Vermont Avenue, trying to make a fresh start in community relations.
In the wake of the riots, the federal Centers for Disease Control announced they were sending investigators to Los Angeles to ‘help local health officials chart the epidemiology of the riots’, as the press release put it.
These Sherlocks could stay at home and save the tax payers some money.
Everyone knows why the riots began: 27 years after the Watts rebellion, 12 years after Ronald Reagan took office, south central LA has been drained of jobs, services, and hope.
At the elementary level of existence, many of them were desperate for basic necessities.
An analogy would be a 19th-century bread riot.
Entire neighbourhoods headed for the unexpected one-way potlatch.
Parents returned home with bundles of Pampers, packets of hamburger meat.
As always, the post-riot rhetoric is suffused with terms like ‘animals’ and ‘savages’, but the rioters were more complex than that.
For one thing, they included in their numbers not just the Boyz 'N' The Hood — in fact, gangs like the Crips and the Bloods sank their lethal differences during the upsurge — but middle-class blacks, Latinos and some whites.
Latinos surged up to Hollywood Boulevard, one of the few breakthroughs from south of the Santa Monica Freeway, and trashed better-bred temples of consumption, such as Fredericks of Hollywood, the famous knicker store.
Many a Latino bosom and loin is now adorned with peekaboo lacework and crotchless panty.
The irony that the rioters mostly destroyed their own pathetic neighbourhood infrastructure has been widely noted, but it was not always for want of trying to take it out on the redoubts of the better element, stretching north up through Beverly Hills, over Mulholland, down into the San Fernando Valley and north again towards the suburban fastnesses of Simi Valley and of Ventura County.
The rioters did make the occasional foray, but north of the Santa Monica Freeway the thin blue line swiftly grew thicker.
Around downtown, where some shock guerrilla troops had managed an attack on the Parker Center (police headquarters) and the Los Angeles Times , the federal and enforcement presence was, by the weekend, immense.
Downtown LA, with its glittering towers and walled-off enclaves, is the outward and visible sign of the corruption the detectives from the Centers for Disease Control should properly be probing.
This is where the money went, where the redevelopment funds ended up.
Meanwhile, South Central rotted.
In the mid-1960s, 31 per cent of all blacks in large cities were living in poverty.
In 1990, the number had risen to 34 per cent(as against the respective 11 and 14 for whites).
In Los Angeles in 1989, black infant mortality — deaths in the first year, per 1,000 births — was 21, as against eight for whites.
The national figure for black infant mortality is 18.
As Maxine Waters, the US congresswoman for South Central put it, in a sermon in the First American Methodist Episcopal Church last Sunday, ‘People want to know why I'm not saying exactly what they want me to say.
They want me to walk out in Watts, like black people did in the '60s, and say ‘Cool it, baby, cool it.'
Well, I'm sorry.
The fact of the matter is, whether we like it or not, riot is the voice of the unheard.’
The white man, as is his habit, acted as though it all came as an immense surprise, and having registered his perturbation at the undamned reservoirs of fury from those previously ‘unheard’, called for reconciliation and mutual forgiveness and understanding.
Bill Clinton, writhing amid the dilemma that most of his election campaign has been an attempt to persuade the white middle class that he does most emphatically not speak for the poor or the coloured, announced, after much shilly-shallying, that ‘We have refused to confront our differences…and for this neglect, we have all paid.’
The truth was less alluring.
The Republican strategy of the past generation has been to confront such differences and accentuate them.
Take Ventura County, whence came the 12 jurors — six men, six women, six Republicans, six Democrats, 10 white, one Hispanic, one Asian-American, eight having served in the army — who acquitted the cops.
Though one third of the county's residents are from minorities (26 per cent Latino, 5 per cent Asian, 2 per cent African-American), their representation on city councils, school boards, Board of Supervisors, is minimal or, on the Board, zero.
The sheriff's department is 86 per cent white.
Simi Valley is home to the Ronald Reagan library.
(One of the uplifting consequences of the riots was the overshadowing of the visit of Mr and Mrs Michael Gorbachev, who arrived on the Forbes jet ‘The Spirit of Free Enterprise’ aka ‘Capitalist Tool’, and who repaired to the ranch of the man in ample measure responsible for the riots, where the Russian couple were given cowboy hats.)
Recently, Ventura County saw a rancher charged with slavery, having turned his migrant labourers into imprisoned serfs.
The post-riot air is thick with good will, but it won't last long.
Whites, miles from any danger, panicked during the riots and don't want to experience that unpleasing emotion again.
Whole supermarkets in the Valley were stripped of their provender in a decorous food riot by the affluent, loading up their Wagoneers with Porterhouse and T-bone as they headed for the hills.
Perry Anderson, who lives part of the year in Sherman Oaks while he teaches as UCLA, was reminded of what his parents saw in December 1941, after they landed in San Francisco after three years of being bombed in South China.
In the days after Pearl Harbor, streams of panic-stricken burghers headed east out of the city towards Sacramento and the safety of the Sierra Nevada, their cars similarly loaded with provender.
Then, calm restored, they went about the business of confiscating the property of Japanese-Americans and sending them to concentration camps.
Last year the federal government finally said it was sorry and handed out some compensation.
The man now charged with being the supremo of rebuilding, Peter Ueberroth, is the unattractive entrepreneur who delivered the Olympic Games to commerce in Los Angeles in 1984 and who introduced the timeclock into baseball, the better to convenience advertisers.
And the bottom line?
Injustice was not only done, but seen to be done and this is something all thoughtful citizens should applaud.
The jurors considering the beating of Rodney King had two options.
They could have accepted the arguments of the prosecution and the apparent evidence of the video footage and convicted the four Los Angeles police officers.
Amid rousing cantatas to ‘the basic fairness of the system’, life would have continued on its usual unfair course.
Or the jurors could have taken the path they did in fact elect, which was to go to the very heart of the matter and conclude that these officers were only doing what they have been trained to do and that all the famous video footage demonstrated was that they had indeed gone by the book.
Many people supposed that because Rodney King's violent beating had been captured on video tape, his uniformed assailants would be unable to fix the reports and lie their way out of trouble.
But such people forgot that for most Americans television is an inherently incredible medium, and to the extent that in the King case it might be believable, demonstrated merely that Los Angeles police officers were subduing a human who, out of sight of the video camera, might have been threatening these officers with fists, machine pistol or portable Scud missile.
Just as there is life and television, with scant connection between the two, so also there is justice and symbolic justice.
Symbolic justice was what the system was supposed to produce in Simi Valley.
Had the jurors followed the prescribed menu, George Bush and Pete Wilson and Tom Bradley and Darryl Gates would today be applauding the essential soundness of the judicial machine, and the inherent fairness of America.
But a bit like Harris' execution, whose ugliness prompted calls for decent ‘lethal injection’, it didn't work like that.
The judicial system was indeed demonstrated to have worked soundly — in favour of policemen with clubs and against black men with the temerity to drive around Los Angeles in their cars at night.
The next morning, so it was reported from the White House lawn, President Bush was ‘vexed’ and ‘frustrated’by the verdict, presumably because he would now have to evince symbolic ‘concern’and make well-publicised calls on the attorney general to see if Rodney King's civil rights had been abused.
Of course it would have been very satisfactory to have seen King's assailants behind bars.
Relatives of the boys murdered by Harris found it similarly gratifying to stand the other side of a thick glass window and watch Harris choke to death on cyanide gas.
Soon a video of this execution may well be available and people will be able to pop it into their video machines every time they feel the need to have ‘justice seen to be done’.
But we have to look at the larger picture, and welcome here the fact that the jurors of Ventura County did not disguise their true feelings or their forthright acknowledgement of the realities of law enforcement against African-Americans in 1992.
This is a big year for symbolic politics.
We have George Bush symbolising the resolve and purpose of a mighty nation by placing an embargo on little Libya.
We have Bill Clinton calling symbolically for Americans to ‘take their country back’, while his entire political career demonstrates abject surrender to the big corporate interests of Arkansas.
And we now have the final symbolism of Ross Perot, the white knight set to storm Washington, who has in the not-so-distant past said that it might be necessary to suspend the constitution and cordon off black neighbourhoods and place them under martial law.
The society is in gridlock and people snatch fitfully at such symbols before realising their inadequacy to the situation.
A week ago, I watched a store burn brightly and swiftly to the ground.
Some 600 miles to the north of south-central Los Angeles, it was the general store in Petrolia, the small town in Humboldt County where I live.
The store burned because, some minutes after 11am on 25 April, a 6.9 earthquake heaved the town, our houses and the store briefly off the ground and, in the store, an electric coffee pot overturned.
The earthquake was unusually violent and somewhat unexpected, because we had already had a strong one at the start of March.
But no one was really surprised because our area is the most seismically active in North America.
Prudent homeowners build their houses on continuous foundations rather than rest them on pier blocks from which they can be bucked when the big shake comes.
Amid seismic pressures threatening American society, the jurors of Simi Valley upheld the only defences they respect: boots, clubs, electric stun guns and other appurtenances of society's present sure foundation.
Footnote: NSS readers have apparently been enquiring about the welfare of my cat, Euclid, who, as I reported last week, went missing after the earthquake.
No sign of Euclid, but the general view is that he's somewhere out in the wood, recovering his composure
DRINK Shots into oblivion A sober Laurie Taylor comes face to face with a bloody awful drug
There's been no shortage of excuses in the past few weeks for getting thoroughly ratted, for going down to The Lamb, finding a spot in the corner and spending the entire evening doing nothing more intellectually taxing than sinking five pints of Special.
The bald election result was bad enough, but then there were the personal touches: that brave but shattered look on Glenys' face as Neil announced his resignation, the dreadful picture on the back of the Independent of a group of City dickheads celebrating their unexpected winnings, and the downright irritating news that my fellow chatterer on Stop the Week , Milton Shulman, had made a packet at Ladbroke's predicting the correct result.
And to top it all off there were the dispiriting revelations that Liverpool's manager Graeme Souness, had not only phoned his congratulations through to John Major from his private hospital bed, but also, allegedly for mega-bucks, allowed himself to appear on the front of the Sun on the anniversary of the Hillsborough disaster with his tongue down the throat of a former TV hostess.
(Would anyone out there like to form a Liverpool without Souness Supporters Club?)
But even with that clutch of reasons to be glassy-eyed, I've stayed almost sober for an entire month, sitting miserably at the bar wondering why low-alcohol lager has an after-taste like floor polish, and disturbing old friends with the rapt attention I give to such enquiries as: ‘Ice and lemon in your tonic water, sir?’
I blame the BBC.
Six weeks ago they sent me off to Paisley College in Scotland to make a radio report on a new course at its Alcohol Studies Centre: the intoxication workshop.
From what I had heard in advance, I expected to see nothing much more than four or five students on the course drinking regulated amounts of alcohol and then being subjected to a variety of tests that would show how their motor skills deteriorated.
As far as I could gather from the producer, my job would be to record this deterioration and then, without sounding too pious or moralistic, point out its implications for people who drink at work or when they're driving.
But it turned out to be a very different experience.
Watching people you hardly know getting progressively drunk in front of your eyes while you soberly and precisely monitor the way they change is unexpectedly disturbing.
I'd never before realised so clearly how drinking makes you want to drink.
Two people in the group didn't fancy their first at all.
You could see why.
They were standing in the middle of a lecture room surrounded by breathalysers, reaction timers, and tachistoscopes, and being offered nothing more tantalising than a double vodka dispensed into glasses via a chemical measuring jar, and served with a shot of orange juice from a carton.
And, after the first drink, they were still no keener.
‘Do I have to,’ they asked.
But after the third double Vladivar, they were eager, almost desperate, to get back at the bottle.
The setting didn't matter any more.
When I reminded them that only an hour ago they were saying they didn't fancy any more, they looked genuinely irritated.
‘Well, I do now.’
And they insisted that they didn't want more drink simply because they'd been drinking but because they just, well, wanted it.
And quickly please.
What were we waiting for?
After you've coldly observed the way in which three large shots of alcohol chemically transform reluctant drinkers into eager tipplers, the traditional Saturday night round-buying somehow doesn't seem the same.
Even more disconcerting were the personality changes.
Until they started drinking, I didn't have much of an impression of the Paisley students.
Ron was large and friendly; Vic small and spiky; Eileen kind and cheerful.
After they'd downed two large vodkas, they began to open up.
Their conversation became more animated.
They were altogether sharper and funnier, liable to dash off on little fantasy runs.
They began to tease each other and the experimenters with self-conscious relish.
They were fine people to be with.
All good friends and jolly good company.
But just two drinks later the fun dried up.
The conversation started to take a vaguely paranoid turn.
One person stopped speaking altogether and sat looking grim.
Another went into a long self-serving solo.
Moods and attitudes were no longer volatile but fixed, slightly dogmatic, monotonous.
And these feelings were not recognised by the students as the straightforward product of four large vodkas.
How they felt was how they felt.
There was nothing more to say.
I know how context influences the effects of alcohol and realise this was a highly artificial situation, but it was still difficult to ignore the terrible predictability of the road to drunkenness: its fixed stages — a brief and seductive period of social effervescence and then the rapid departure of self-consciousness and the ugly appearance of righteousness.
As Aldous Huxley more or less said 40 years ago in The Doors of Perception , as he turned away from the exploding Red Hot Peppers: isn't alcohol a bloody awful drug?
But I'm probably using the whole Paisley experience for my own ends.
I should know by now that heavy drinkers are awfully fond of high-flown rationalisations for any brief spell of abstinence.
Last time I stopped, my friend, Stan, asked me why.
I was equally well prepared.
‘It's a sort of intellectual decision.
I saw this piece some time ago by Richard Burton in which he was talking about what happened to him when he gave up booze.
He said it took about a month to get all the alcohol out of your system but once you'd done it, and this was his main point, you suddenly realise that, for the first time for years, you can see the world like it really is.’
‘Who the fuck wants to see the world like it really is?’ said Stan.
There's no answer to that.
Certainly not one that can be dredged out of a half-filled glass of flat tonic water.
INDIA Licence to kill Jeremy Seabrook reports on a visionary socialist with murderous enemies
Bhilai, in the central Indian state of Madhya Pradesh, is the site of Asia's largest steel plant.
With its ancillary industries, it employs 100,000 people.
The 30-year-old plant, a Russo-Indian collaboration, sends its pollution over the countryside, filtering the sun through perpetual cloud.
Core workers at Bhilai have regular employment, but for those on the periphery and in support industries, the work is casual, dangerous and ill-paid: factories, where women are locked in for the night; opencast iron-ore mines where workers' deaths by rock-falls are concealed by unscrupulous owners.
The people of the area, known as Chattisgarh, are tribals and untouchables.
They remain poor among some of India's richest natural resources.
Bhilai's workers were organised by AITUC, the trade union of India's Communist Party, but it proved indifferent to the conditions of casual labourers — the majority.
Shankar Guha Niyogi had begun work in Bhilai in 1962, but was dismissed for organising the workers against the AITUC.
He turned his attention to the exploited — and, it was believed, unreachable — casual workers in the iron ore mines, women and men earning only a few rupees a day, living in squalor in dusty shacks on devastated hillsides.
For 30 years, Niyogi fought for the social and economic improvement of oppressed people.
From the mid-1970s, he formed the base of an alternative that would avoid ecological ruin as well as exploitative labour, which provided health care, eliminated alcoholism, raised women's status, devised technology to enhance not supplant human labour.
The movement became the Chattisgarh Liberation Front.
Not only a trade union, it also offered protection to those released from bonded labour, to the slumdwellers of Raipur, child labourers, farmers, women deserted or abused for the sake of dowry.
Several hundred thousand people benefited and, today, the red-green flag flies all over Chattisgarh.
It dominates Rajhara, a town with the richest iron deposits in India.
The dust has turned rivers red, and transformed the trees into rusty metal sculptures.
Rajhara is like a tropical mid-19th century Rhondda — a frontier town of chaotic shacks and cheap hotels.
But there is tension and suppressed energy in the air.
It is Republic Day weekend, and tomorrow there will be a demonstration of the red-green movement; a protest against the inertia of the authorities in tracking down those who killed Niyogi last September.
He was shot with six bullets through the window of a hut as he slept.
Everyone knew his life was in danger.
Attempts to jail him on false charges, to bribe and threaten him had failed.
Anonymous letters had named the likely assailants.
Niyogi left an audio-cassette, in which he recorded the identity of the conspirators; the owner of Bhilai's biggest liquor company, and the owners of the steel factories with their armies of thugs.
He had made enemies, starting with the struggle against the liquor lords.
Women had been the principal agents of this effort, which had badly affected the profits of the alcohol industry.
Then the industrialists of the ancillary factories had been forced to observe the law of India, by granting minimum wages and basic safety facilities to the casual workers.
The ruling industry-controlled BJP Hindu party in Madhya Pradesh also had good reason to hate Niyogi.
Niyogi had made the police's work of extortion and intimidation more arduous.
The authorities have taken pains to represent Niyogi's murder as a factional fight between extremists.
But the union was always non-violent.
Inspired in part by Gandhi, Niyogi drew on Marx and Mao to create a non-dogmatic popular movement that integrated the work, social and cultural aspects of its members' lives.
A fierce solidarity was forged of a kind that has become archaic in the west.
One of its proudest monuments is the hospital, built by the workers of Rajhara.
Next door to the hospital is the union hall.
It has been turned into a shrine to Niyogi's memory.
His portrait and chair have been garlanded with marigolds and strewn with crimson rose petals.
On the office walls are the shoes and work tools of those killed in police shootings over the past two decades.
Chattisgarh has had its martyrs before.
In 1856-57, in a time of drought, Vir Narayan Singh mobilised peasants in the interior forest.
When landlords refused to open their granaries, he went with an army of tribal people to loot them, promising to return what they had taken in a better season.
He was hanged by the British in 1857.
On the day before Republic Day, the police presence around Bhilai and the neighbouring towns is heavy.
They are closing the road to trucks and buses bringing people to the city.
In spite of this, 25,000 are on the streets, with about 6,000 in Rajhara.
They walk solemnly, exhibiting the discipline that even the industrialists concede has been one of Niyogi's great contributions to their factories.
Workers carry provisions and tools on their heads.
A barefoot procession of injured humanity, their common purpose the only weapon of the dispossessed.
Niyogi had resisted total mechanisation of the mines, which would have thrown thousands out of work.
He devised a compromise: the most arduous manual labour was eliminated, while safeguarding jobs.
Now he is dead, and ‘liberalisation’ is growing, pressure is being renewed for mechanisation.
The testimony of those whose lives have been transformed by his work is very affecting: bonded labourers, now members of the union, some bonded for three generations for the sake of a loan of Rs200 (£5) and a few kilos of padi; now learning a trade through the ‘polytechnics’ established by the Chattisgarh Liberation Front.
In the slums of Raipur, the green-and-red flag flutters from rickshaws.
Driving is the only work open to the men — degrading labour.
The women work as domestic servants or vegetable sellers.
The people here migrated from Orissa 20 years ago, displaced by environmental degradation.
‘We were weavers there,’ they say, ‘but the demand for handwoven cloth has gone.
In Orissa we were happy.
Here we are not happy, but we can eat.’
Child workers tell of ten- and 12-hour days: Pramila, 11, working as a domestic servant, Sukhnam, 10, sole family wage-earner, working in a vehicle repair shop until 10pm, children helping their parents make bidis or agarbatti at home for Rs5 a week (9 pence).
Some of the most inspiring work of Chattisgarh Liberation Front has been the formation of a women's organisation that has set up a popular tribunal to deal with wrongs against women — desertion, rape, abuse.
A committee deals with each case.
Parties to the dispute make their depositions.
The committee makes recommendations, which are shared at a public meeting.
If the people agree, they undertake to implement the recommendations.
A recent case, where a woman was murdered for her dowry, was registered by police as suicide.
The women established that it was murder.
The committee's verdict was that the family should be socially boycotted and the man not permitted to marry again; punishment enough in an Indian village.
This initiative is unique in India — a mix of popular justice, tempered by the movement's deep humanitarianism.
Since Niyogi's death, new members have come to the trade union.
In one industrial estate in Raipur, where the workers of only one company were affiliated, there are now 12 whose employees have sought the protection of the red-and-green flag.
But today's India, which has been busily conforming to the prescriptions of the IMF, World Bank and Gatt, is against them.
To service its US$70 billion foreign debt, India is desperate to be competitive in world markets.
This means the price of its cheap labour must be maintained.
Paradoxically, the west, with its dedication to human rights, has inspired policies of ‘liberalisation’ that lead to the persecution and abuse of those who defend the poor and unprotected.
Social activists and human-rights workers gathered in the neighbouring city of Nagpur on the weekend of 14-15 February, to create a national movement of solidarity with the people of Chattisgarh.
They are asking whether the assassination of Niyogi is not the supreme act of a ‘liberalisation’ to remove all obstacles to the free play of market forces.
Does that much-trumpeted ‘death of socialism’ mean it is legitimate to do away with socialists, as they have done away with Shankar Guha Niyogi?
TAKING LIBERTIES Jolyon Jenkins on the double standards of judges, pornographers and newsagents
I once worked on a magazine about the law, called, imaginatively,Law Magazine .
In our first issue, we carried an article about the work being done on alleged victims of child sex abuse by child psychiatrist Arnon Bentovim of Great Ormond Street Hospital.
Dr Bentovim had pioneered an approach using ‘anatomically correct’ dolls, which allowed children to demonstrate, rather than describe, their experiences.
To advertise the article on the cover of the magazine, we ran a picture of a small girl, clutching two of these dolls — one male, one female.
The male one, necessarily, had a penis.
It was made of cloth, and, as printed on the cover, was about three millimetres long.
Too late, we realised that we were breaking a taboo of British publishing: never before (it was thought) had a penis of any kind been printed on the cover of a mainstream magazine.
Would W H Smith stock it?
Our distributors were worried; so were our publishers.
But the covers had been printed, and there was nothing we could do.
We went ahead; nothing happened.
An imperceptible blow against censorship had been struck.
The issue is currently germane with the publication, last week of For Women , a new magazine which, as everybody knows, shows pictures of naked men.
The advance publicity has been stupendous, and the first issue is alleged to have sold out straight away.
Despite this, W H Smith has refused to stock it.
A spokesman told me this week: ‘It's a top-shelf title.
We have a very small range of such titles and we have no plans to expand it.’
(The titles are:Playboy ,Penthouse ,Mayfair , and Health and Efficiency .)
He admitted that the company had been accused by some customers of sexism, but rejected the criticism.
‘We make no distinction whether such magazines are for men or women.
There are 120 adult magazines legally for sale in Britain.
The four that we have, we have stocked for years.
We used to stock Playgirl , which had a similar content, but it did not sell.
There is no policy as such against depicting naked men —Health and Efficiency already prints such pictures.’
W H Smith, apparently, has guidelines about what pictures may or may not appear in its titles and, especially, what may appear on the covers, although the content of this rule book is ‘something I can't reveal to you — although I'm sure you can imagine what may or may not appear’.
No need to imagine.
In Shock!
Horror!— the tabloids in action , by S J Taylor (Bantam Press), the author interviews a photographer's agent, Shelley Lawrence.
‘Holding the labia apart in the US market is ‘quite acceptable', but not OK in Britain,’ according to Lawrence.
She confirms that: ‘It isn't so much the law as what the shops will stock.
What happens is that two companies virtually control distribution — Menzies and W H Smith.
If they don't like it, they will take it off the shelf.’
The labia law presumably applies only to the W H Smith/Menzies titles, since it is routinely breached by the magazines in corner shops and the smaller chains.
The law is notoriously vague about obscenity, with its ‘deprave and corrupt’ test.
In the mid-seventies, porn magazine publishers, notably the arriviste David Sullivan, found they could get away with far more explicit pictures of women than before.
Publishers found themselves forced into a downward spiral of competitive explicitness, and formed a bizarre trade association, drawing up voluntary guidelines to avoid continually courting prosecution.
The tactic seems to have worked.
An officer at Scotland Yard's Obscene Publications Squad tells me there isn't much interest in magazines these days: videos are where the action is.
The end result is curious.
In practice, there are no limits as to the pictures a magazine can publish of a naked woman (‘We would start to take an interest if the pictures were of what you might term kinky sex — bondage and so on,’ says the Scotland Yard officer); yet only the mildest pictures of naked men get into high-street newsagents.
To print a penis is one thing; to print an erect penis is to invite legal action, and For Women certainly won't be doing it.
(Whether women, or gay men, want to see both, either, or neither is not an argument I want to get into here.)
The reason for this legal double standard is, I suspect, to do with the way the law is enforced.
It is quite uncommon for a pornographic magazine to come before a jury, because publishers are rarely prosecuted.
Normally, their stock is simply seized and forfeited.
The forfeiture proceedings take place before magistrates and are often uncontested.
The only appeal is to a crown court judge.
The result is that the practical definition of obscenity has been decided by middle-aged-to-elderly professional men.
Whatever you think of pornography and censorship, the fact of the double standard is a tribute to the solidarity of the male sex.
LETTERS
Educating Ken
Why is it that when Ken Livingstone (Political column, 1 May), one of the wittiest sparks in the rather dullish firmament of contemporary Labour, leaves the safe sound-bite pages of the Sun and ventures his hand at joined-up paragraphs, he goes so badly awry?
On internal British politics, Ken speaks for more than the Labour leadership might imagine, but when he leaves England for abroad he starts to get very muddled-up.
He lumps together, for example, the Lombard League with French and German neo-fascists.
Wrong; there are fascist parties in Italy, but the Lombard League is more akin to the SNP — an expression of regional separatism.
Livingstone argues, correctly, that the attempts by the European left to create ‘a progressive and democratic Europe’ are incomplete, but then back in Wapping mode he argues that a ‘fascist and racist right’is now replacing ‘democracy and civilised politics’in Europe.
This is inaccurate, and unjustified by any international comparison.
There are, for example, no elected fascist representatives in the United States, the dollar has been steadily devalued in recent years, the country's borders are more open, and unemployment is significantly lower than in Europe.
Yet all these conditions have produced not harmony, but civil war.
Livingstone's attacks on Europe reflect a 1970s provincial prejudice and populist demagogy unworthy of a politician who hoped to offer himself as Labour leader (and who should have been allowed to run).
More importantly, Ken's invitation to Labour MPs to vote against the Treaty of Maastricht is dangerous populism indeed.
In Europe, the main opponents of ratifying Maastricht are all on the hard or extreme right or are a handful of Stalinist leftovers.
Jean Marie Le Pen denounces Maastricht as a plot by European fédérastes, as he homophobically calls them, to penetrate French identity and take over Paris from Brussels.
Elsewhere, the racist Euro right is making the running in hostility to Maastricht.
There is a powerful case for Labour to put down amendments condemning the Tory opt-out of the Social Charter and forcing a division to demonstrate to the rest of Europe how John Major's ‘classless’ government is grotesquely out of line with Christian, let alone Social, Democratic politics on the Continent.
There is also a case for Labour to outline a vision of Europe utterly different from the EC sought by the Tories and the City.
But to campaign against Maastricht is political posturing in the most foul of company.
The devaluation debate also needs careful examination before Labour or Livingstone set off down another dead end.
The stated object of devaluation is to make Britain a manufacturing nation again.
Yet the dominant productionist manufacturing economies have extremely strong currencies — Germany and Japan.
Twenty-five years ago, you could get nine Swiss francs for one pound sterling.
Now you get about 2.5 francs for a pound.
Has this 72 per cent devaluation of the pound helped British exports to Switzerland or has the strong Swiss franc crippled Swiss manufacturing?
On the contrary, it is Switzerland that has the world's biggest food manufacturing multinational (Nestlé), the world's biggest pharmaceutical manufacturer (Ciba-Geigy), a leading power-engineering conglomerate (ABB), as well as leading niche machine-tool manufacturers and, in Swatch, a product that took on and beat the Japanese in a sector that they were thought to have won forever, the watch industry.
And Switzerland, with its strong currency and supply-side oriented industrial policy has had, until recently, full employment.
Britain's currency was devalued in the mid-1980s, but there was no corresponding export boom or re-investment in manufacturing.
Instead, as the Financial Times reported at the time, Ford was making more money out of currency trading than it was from selling cars.
There may be a case for downward movement inside the ERM as the French achieved in the mid-1980s, or even a case for a one-off devaluation as the Swedes undertook in 1982.
There is certainly a case for insisting on the democratic control of the EMS, but that means getting more, not less involved in European politics, messy, complex and frustrating as they may be to those who long for simple black-and-white, left-and-right simplicities.
Devaluation as a quick-fix — a new political Ecstasy that the left is invited by Livingstone to swallow — needs much more careful analysis.
Democratising pension funds, putting workers on the boards of companies, sponsoring the international worker networking described by Gary Herman in last week's issue (‘Hooked on IT’), and making foreign-language training obligatory for company executives (as well as MPs, especially left Labour MPs) would do more to make the economy socially progressive and productionist than any campaign to turn the pound into a peseta.
Legitimate target
In addition to her other problems, Kate Adie has achieved the status of someone you can't write about without attracting the wrath of the soft-left establishment (aka your own Sean French and the Independent 's Reggie Nadelson).
Part of my job as a media commentator is to slag off other journalists — it's what makes it all worthwhile — and I've put knees into the groins of such eminences as Alastair Burnet, Peter Sissons and Donald Trelford, without so much as a raised eyebrow in Kingsland or City roads.
In fact my Independent on Sunday piece about Kate Adie was not unfriendly.
I pointed out, for instance, that a lot of the criticism of her is founded on jealousy.
But she must know that it isn't clever to be asked to leave a country while on assignment.
A reporter's job is to stay put and tell us what she can, even if it means crawling to objectionable people.
Front-line correspondents in their late forties face the problem of what comes next.
They don't generally move up to become executives.
Adie's job grows ever harder because she is Britain's best-known reporter, so that what happens to her is often a better story than the one she is covering.
In the end, I expect they'll make her read the news.
Hijacking ethnicity
I agree with Eric Hobsbawm's assertion that nationhood need not arise exclusively from the past (‘Whose fault-line is it anyway?’, 24 April).
With modern propaganda techniques, it is possible for a past to be fabricated to fit a myth.
The connection between language and lineage can, however, be prised apart in order to combat crude nationalism.
Exclusiveness used to be based on separation (villages, tribes, clans).
Latterly, separation is claimed as a consequence of feelings of exclusiveness.
The distinction is between ‘apart’ and ‘different’.
It is possible to be apart and similar, to be together and different.
But difference is not enough to trigger separatism.
Nationhood can subsume ethnic groupings.
What may vary is the need for homogeneity.
Ethnic conflict is not explained by competition for limited resources; it seems to have an ideological basis.
But the ideology is a construct.
French Canadians are not really French.
And Bretons and Basques tell us that being French is not a unitary condition, but rather a state of dynamic equilibrium between unity and diversity.
For a long while, Spain included Jews and Moors as well as Christians; then it no longer tolerated them.
Belonging to a group does not inevitably produce hatred of others.
Racists use the group of which they claim membership.
They hijack Englishness and do not really speak for most English people.
Ethnic identity may serve to reinforce or to replace religion.
Cults grow when insecurity develops.
An ethnic group may supply what was once offered by village, kibbutz, club or other association.
When chaos threatens, people retreat into smaller and smaller bastions.
Eric Hobsbawm suggests that we patiently await the coming of better times.
But we can, meanwhile, challenge hatred.
Original thinking
Pat Coyne says that there are ‘few more important questions than the origins of the Universe’(‘Watch this space’, 1 May).
This is surely wrong, for two reasons.
The first is that there are very many far more important questions, even if this is an interesting one.
The second is that this may not be a proper question at all, because it can't be answered.
For one thing, theories about the beginning of the present phase of the Universe can never be more than theoretic; and for another thing, there is no reason to think that the Universe, as such, can be said to have ‘origins’.
Positive thinking
Keith Flett is right to claim that Labour needs active grassroots supporters to defeat the Tories (Letters, 24 April).
But the ‘people on the ground’ are already there — Labour Party members.
Labour lost, and can only win a general election, in the community.
From village green to inner-city street, Labour needs to be seen as a respected, radical, and creative presence.
That means fearlessly engaging with all parts of the local community — church, school, business, union, farm, voluntary organisation and opposition political party.
Such a role entails the belief that Labour has something of value to say to everyone: the party's future natural constituency is the whole community without class or political boundaries.
The next election will be lost or won not as the result of a few weeks' electioneering, of media events, of soundbites, but as a result of four years of radical but sensible campaigning in our towns and villages.
Over the next few weeks, contenders for the leadership will, no doubt, nod in the direction of ‘the grassroots’.
They should instead produce clear policies and programmes for reinvigorating the local parties and be judged on them.
That, given the negative role of many constituency parties in the past, will be an act of courage and of faith.
But to realise the blossoming of those parties is Labour's most important challenge, the key to power in four years' time.
Who rules Scotland?
Brian Wilson's analysis of the general election result (‘The Union strikes back’, 24 April) must have been cheered to the echo by Ian Lang and the rest of the Tory rump now running Scotland.
His talk of the Tories in Scotland winning back seats and increasing their votes and their majorities is exactly the kind of spin on the election result that Tory apologists are desperate should gain political currency.
Let us be clear about the facts of the election that they tend to neglect.
Three out of every four voters in Scotland voted against the Tories.
Yet this is now the fourth general election in a row in which Scotland has had a Tory government imposed upon it against the wishes and the votes of the overwhelming majority of its people.
Now, a true Brit like Brian may delude himself that this is of no great consequence since Scotland is just a part of Britain and no different from a region of England.
He advises us to be like anywhere else in Britain and go back to our constituencies and ‘prepare for the next time’.
I hope he will understand why I, and many other Labour supporters in Scotland, will enthusiastically ignore such a clarion call to inaction and resignation.
Scotland is now effectively trapped inside a political union that denies Scottish voters the right to decide for themselves how they are governed and by whom they are governed.
The sober reality is that in Scotland, the Westminster system has rendered the ballot box redundant.
If the choice now is between shoring up a democratically bankrupt Westminster or standing up for the restoration of Scottish democracy, then I am for Scottish democracy.
Such arguments may well be dismissed as ‘pseudo-nationalist rhetoric’ by Wilson and other adherents of the Westminster way.
But let them think on this.
When was there one occasion when a government of any colour was imposed upon England against the wishes of three out of every four English voters?
The answer, of course, is that it has never happened, and if it ever did there would be immediate and radical constitutional change to ensure it never happened again.
Like most Labour activists, my main political concern is to bring about a redistribution of wealth and power in society that will end the twin scourges of mass poverty and mass unemployment.
It is precisely because I want to see political changes of this kind that I support Home Rule for Scotland.
I remain convinced that a democratic majority exists in Scotland for higher spending on public services and on our infrastructure.
I believe that such a Home Rule settlement remains the most credible and practicable goal for Labour in Scotland to aim at.
The alternative, of course, is to buckle down and get on with playing the game by Westminster's rules.
This means accepting that the Westminster majority — the Tories — will set the agenda for the next four to five years; and that Labour's role is simply to legitimise the Tory programme by playing our part as Her Majesty's official and loyal opposition.
Of course, at the heart of the division between Labour's nationalist and unionist wings is a fundamental disagreement over the concept of sovereignty.
For those who put their faith in the existing Union, sovereignty lies with whoever can command a majority in the House of Commons.
So long as there is the prospect that a majority Labour government can be elected to a position of absolute power at Westminster then our unionist wing is content not to question the democratic credentials of such a route to power.
It is ironic that Brian Wilson should make use of the Brigadoon myth.
That was a mythical representation of Scotland that owed everything to the prejudices of people who lived in the past and knew nothing of the realities of the Scotland that then existed.
Brian and his fellow Brits equally know next-to-nothing of Scotland today.
They still see Scotland as north Britain, an appendage that can be guaranteed to play its part in the Labour unionists' drama of periodically legitimising long periods of Tory rule by brief interregnums of Labour control.
No such Scotland exists.
The real Scotland of today knows exactly where it stands: on its own in defence of its national rights and determined that Scottish votes will count in future.
If Labour is to have a role in Scotland, then it surely must be to be in the forefront of that fight with the Scottish people.
Male pride
Congratulations!
Two weeks in a row for an all-male letters page and a Keith Flett double!
Please send me a subscription so I can cancel it in disgust.
Or should I just change my name to Keith?
Stick, no carrot?
Your contributor Denis MacShane (‘The pain in Spain’, 1 May) says Spain's Thatcherite socialists use the stick — anti-strike laws and so on— but offer no carrot in the shape of a ‘new model of socialist equality, fairness or industrial democracy’.
Yet earlier in the article he mentions that car workers' wages have risen from 40 per cent to 69 per cent of German workers' wages.
A bit of a carrot, surely?
He has not grasped that world experience in the past 70 years has empirically proved that ‘models’ of the kind whose absence he notes — generalised socialist visions — are so many mirages.
No ordinary person wants them any more, though they will for years to come provide talking points for the chattering classes.
FRINGE BENEFITS A veteran anarchist's return visit gets a welcome from Colin Ward
When Murray Bookchin came clattering into our living room 25 years ago, in a period now seen with a misplaced nostalgia by the left, his urban guerrilla appearance belied his message.
This was that successive waves of fashionable radicalism failed to address the crisis of American cities.
‘Far more than the flowers of the mid-sixties,’ he claimed, ‘the angry clenched fists of the late sixties were irrelevant in trying to reach an increasingly alarmed and uncomprehending public.’
The next time I met him was under an awning in the Campo San Polo in Venice, where he was quietly discoursing to a bunch of very young German anarcho-punks.
To me it's good news that, in spite of fragile health, he's landing at Heathrow today to give four lectures around England this month.
Bookchin has tried hard, while most of us haven't tried at all, to forge a political ideology that links the old socialist traditions of the 19th and early-20th centuries, with the ecological preoccupations that are bound to dominate the politics of the 21st century.
It wasn't a shift by any means typical of his generation.
Plenty of those New York Marxists found Reagan, or God, or sometimes both.
The fact that his books of the 1950s and 1960s, like Our Plundered Planet , had examined environmental issues that few people, other than Rachel Carson, were concerned with then, gave Murray a forerunner status in the emerging American green movement, and he linked this with the tradition of home-grown anarchism: ‘What we are trying to do,’ he wrote, ‘is to redeem certain aspects of the American Dream.
There are, of course, several American dreams: one is the John Wayne tradition of the cowboy going out to the west and the whole notion of pioneering individualism; another is the immigrant American dream, this being the land of opportunity where the streets are made of gold.
But then there is a third American dream, which is the oldest of the lot dating back to Puritan times, which stresses community, decentralisation, self-sufficiency, mutual aid and face-to-face democracy.’
Here he came into conflict with yet another American dream.
For as ecological awareness spread among the affluent, the national guilt over the genocide of indi-genous peoples led to an exultation of the Noble Savage, a worship of Nature, and consequently a misanthropy , in the form of deploring the existence of fellow humans.
Deep Ecology became fashionable among those affluent enough to Get Away From It All and pursue every kind of mystical belief.
Bookchin responded, just in order to rescue the new environmental consciousness from itself, with the notion of Social Ecology, aiming at advancing ‘a serious challenge to society with its vast, hierarchical, sexist, class-ruled, status appa-ratus and militaristic history’.
He is talking about social ecology on Tuesday 12 May at Lady Mitchell Hall, Sidgwick Avenue, Cambridge; on 14 May at Bristol University Students' Union in Queens Road; on Monday 18 May at the Beckett Lecture Theatre of Leeds University in Woodhouse Lane; and on Thursday 21 May at St James' Church, Piccadilly, in London.
Turn up by 7pm.
You are only obliged to pay at the London venue.
I think that disillusioned people on the political left, noticing the absence of environmental issues from electoral campaigning, even though they are clearly, for all of us, the conditions of survival, could spend an evening quite usefully taking notes of Murray Bookchin's rearrangement of priorities necessary ‘if we are to survive the ravages of a totally irrational society that threatens to undermine the fundaments of life on this planet’.
Is he wrong in his priorities, and if so, how?
ARTS & MEDIA
Question time The BBC is still under attack from old Thatcherism that sapped its morale and split its audiences.
John Dugdale asks whether new Majorism will kill or cure
According to its brochure, Lucknam Park is ‘a magnificent country house hotel situated on the south edge of the Cotswolds between Chippenham and Bath’.
The minimum 24-hour cost per guest is £140.
On 20 May, the BBC's Board of Governors and Board of Management will meet there to decide the corporation's strategy in the run-up to 1996, when the charter will be renewed.
It's fitting that P D James will be present, in her capacity as governor.
The setting is right, and some feel that a murder is about to be committed.
One outcome of the Cotswolds summit will be a paper responding to the ideas of the 15 task forces charged with looking at the BBC's future.
The discussion process has been overseen by Howell James, director of corporate affairs, who as an adviser to Lord Young helped to write the 1987 Conservative manifesto.
Leaks indicate that his former master's heart would be gladdened by many of the proposals on the table: shedding 10,000 jobs; ending union recognition; closing regional production centres; increasing the contribution of independent production companies to 40 per cent; privatising BBC Education; leasing TV morning airtime; and abolishing Radio 5.
If some of these proposals come to pass, they will confirm the trend of BBC policy over the past five years.
November 1986 : Douglas Hurd appoints Marmaduke Hussey as chairman of the BBC governors, presumably in recognition of his record as a union-bashing newspaper executive.
His previous experience of broadcasting consists of a year chairing an ILR station.
January-February 1987 : Hussey sacks director-general Alasdair Milne.
The chosen replacement is head of resources Michael Checkland, rather than left-of-centre Jeremy Isaacs, the widely admired Channel 4 boss.
March 1987 : Hussey and Checkland woo John Birt of LWT to become deputy director-general, with the special task of revamping news and current affairs.
Like his suitors, he has never made a BBC programme.
April 1991 : Kenneth Baker reappoints Hussey, now 67, for a further five years.
July 1991 : The BBC governors appoint Birt director-general designate, to start in March 1993.
As when he was head-hunted to become deputy DG, the post is not advertised and there are no formal interviews.
Hussey reportedly swings the crucial meeting round from 7-5 against to 7-5 for.
Rightly or wrongly, the Tories evidently see Birt as ‘a man we can do business with’.
He looks at the BBC with a cold outsider's eye, makes the right sort of noises (stressing ‘impartiality’, lambasting sloppy Lime Grove journalism) and is unafraid to alter or cancel potentially controversial programmes.
It's arguable, of course, that he has simply performed a political balancing act, making gestures towards the centre-left as well as the right (for example , in finding senior positions for Peter Jay and Polly Toynbee, and hiring Peter Mandelson, a former LWT colleague, as consultant).
Or even that he is conducting a stealthy operation to ensure the BBC's survival that depends on elaborate deception.
But for a man who used to prowl around LWT in a kaftan, commissioning series such as Gay Life , Birt has acquired some rather surprising supporters.
When his BBC transfer was announced, the Sunday Telegraph carried an article entitled ‘Birt: Good News For the BBC’ by a former Weekend World producer.
It declared him to be ‘in no sense party political’; despite having ‘roots on the left’, he had become fascinated from the mid-1970s onwards (like Jay) by Thatcherite economics.
An interesting piece of evidence was adduced: regular walking holidays in Wales with the government economic advisor to the government, Terry Burns.
The author of the article was Bruce Anderson (aka ‘il Bruce’ or ‘the Brute’), who last year brought out a John Major hagiography.
A recent Spectator piece by John Simpson provided a snapshot of the Brute at Tory HQ on election night: ‘Anderson was heard to describe how the BBC would now be dismembered — as though he were a 17thcentury judge sentencing a regicide.’
For someone like Anderson — or for the Tory activists Simpson heard chanting ‘Privatise the BBC’ outside Central Office — the case for dismemberment is clear.
The corporation is a huge, cumbersome bureaucracy-cum-factory, all too reminiscent of a nationalised industry.
It is funded by a poll tax called the licence fee, although a) the consumer is thus charged for services he/she does not require; b) the output often parallels that of TV and radio stations supported by advertising, and c) its audience share is dropping.
The corporate ideology is public service broadcasting: this entails the provider deciding what the purchaser ought to listen to or watch, rather than being led by the latter's clear preference.
A natural target, then: a nationwide monopoly, compelling the public to buy from a single supplier.
But the Tories have found it easier to reform providers of ‘hard’ products and resources (industry, energy) than providers of ‘soft’services (health, education).
Broadcasting falls into the latter category; and there is an awareness that the BBC reform campaign must be conducted cautiously.
Even Rupert Murdoch and Andrew Neil, significantly, are not out-and-out privatisers.
As with the NHS, the caution is partly attributable to public loyalty, occasionally reinforced by ministerial affection for particular programmes (Major intervened personally to preserve Test Match Special on Radio 3 ).
But it also reflects a tension within post-Thatcherite ideology between conservatism and neo-liberalism.
The views of Kenneth Baker, for instance, are an opportunistic mélange of both strands of Tory thinking.
In an interview in the Observer , granted in somewhat sinister proximity to the election, the then home secretary questioned the status of Radios 1, 2, 3 and 5; averred that BBC TV should stop attempting to ‘do everything’; and advocated a search for additional revenue from subscription and advertising.
Some of his remarks chimed with the ideas of the Adam Smith Institute; others (querying whether Auntie should be involved with pop music and popular television) smacked of Carlton Club élitism.
When the new heritage minister David Mellor was last in charge of broadcasting, he similarly sought to have his cake and eat it.
As it looks towards 1996, the BBC is open to the charge that its current strategy is an awkward amalgam of commercial and public service values.
But it is entitled to complain that it has to defend itself against attacks from an equally uneasy fusion of Daily Telegraph Toryism and free-market radicalism — so that it gets criticised both for going downmarket, and for not going far enough downmarket.
The Beeb can reasonably ask the government to recognise these latent contradictions, and to get its ideological act together before it unveils (in a paper scheduled for the summer) its own proposals for the corporation's future.
One of the key planks of Majorism, for example, is an insistence on the integrity of the United Kingdom; a view set out in his election speeches, though to his reported annoyance not given due weight in TV campaign coverage.
But just as the concept of a ‘classless society’ clashes with backing for private education and health care, so the concept of an integral Britain is at odds with the Thatcherite penchant for demolishing or weakening existing national structures.
The effects of this strategy on the broadcasting industry are well known.
TV deregulation in the 1980s led to the growth of satellite and cable, gradually eroding the viewing figures of the major channels.
ILR has cut into the audience for network radio, and the new national commercial stations will reduce it further.
The side-effect of enhanced choice is thus to diminish the number of people sharing the same broadcasting experience — splitting radio listeners between fans of Simon Mayo or Chris Tarrant, and TV viewers between Sky Movie subscribers and ITV/BBC1 devotees.
Any moves towards dismantling the BBC by jeopardising the status of the licence fee, or ‘privatising’ particular services, would inevitably accelerate the process of fragmentation.
And a switch towards subscription would make society less ‘classless’, and more stratified.
Each year, UK citizens would have fewer common experiences and references.
It may seem absurd to talk in such terms of snooker, or David Jason, or Gold Blend commercials, but much of what there is of a British national culture consists of (or is mediated through) broadcasting.
Anarchists will welcome the steady sapping of the nation's glue, as a first step towards the eventual crumbling of the state.
But the prospect must presumably appal anyone who calls himself a Conservative.
Theatre Hung up on toxic shocks Jean Cocteau meets Miles Davis in Robert Lepage's solo show.
Deborah Levy reports
In this bleak and reduced England, it's good to see the Canadian performer and director Robert Lepage's latest multi-media meditation on love, loss and art,Needles and Opium .
Inside this flawed, and somehow centre-less, one-man show are some poignant questions.
What do you do with pain that won't go away?
Will there come a time when our dreams will be examined?
A time when ‘the act of dreaming itself will be punished’?
Needles and Opium is a collage of physical and visual images, film footage and low-key monologue.
Supported by a sublime melancholy soundtrack by Robert Caux, Lepage creates a nocturnal, yearning world of dreams and addiction.
A cinema screen fills the small stage of the Cottesloe, framed by steel scaffolding and lit with red beacons.
Lepage's head appears above the screen.
He tells us that there are three things he does not think acupuncture can cure: existential Angst , low self-esteem and love sickness.
Suddenly he is suspended in the air, between two whirring propellers.
The screen becomes a galaxy of stars.
In 1949, Jean Cocteau, the poet, dramatist and film director, wrote a letter to the American people when returning on a plane from New York to France.
In the ‘Lettre aux Americains’ he suggested that ‘superfluity lightens the mind’.
So does cocaine, to which Cocteau was addicted.
Lepage performs some of the text from this letter, and with dizzying theatrical vertigo tumbles down the skyscraper blocks projected onto the screen behind him.
This image of being between worlds — suspended between earth and sky — is apt for Cocteau, who was trained as an acrobat and whose imagination was fabulous and other-worldly.
But it also describes the experience of being caught between the imagined world of art and the everyday world of loss, pain and survival.
Lepage's counterpoint to Cocteau is Miles Davis, who made his first trip out of the United States to Paris in 1949.
We see old film footage of him meeting Juliette Greco and Sartre.
Davis had such a good time in Paris that when he got back to the US, he was so depressed that ‘before I knew it, I had a heroin habit that took me four years to kick.’
Forty years on, Lepage plays a jilted lover making international calls to his New York partner from the same Parisian hotel room in which Greco and other existentialist stars practised anguish and amour.
Lepage's visual magic and technical wizardry get metaphysical.
Suspended in a harness against a spiralling screen, he asks a hypnotherapist to take away the pain of loving someone who does not love him: to detox him.
The hypnotherapist sends him (literally) diving into the spiralling vortex, into the hell of his own pain.
It will either burn or heal him, and it is here one feels the evening has begun; that here is the enquiry that needs to deepen.
If the hour and 25 minutes sometimes drags through moments that are spun out for too long, and through some unnecessary tricksiness with the screens, that's because it seems Lepage hasn't yet quite found what he wants Miles Davis and Jean Cocteau to reveal to him.
The vertigo of hanging between cultures is something Lepage has obsessively explored in all his work.
In the Dragons Trilogy , created with Theatre Repère and last seen at the Riverside Studios, two Chinese sisters disappear into the bowels of ancient China, buried under a car park in contemporary Canada.
In Tectonic Plates , he tackled identity and geography, inventing a theatrical vocabulary that fits the experience of straddling a number of different realities at the same time.
In Needles and Opium,he's attempting something less epic and more intimate.
He conjures up compelling atmospheres and situations, but they leave us suspended, like his central image, because the controlling idea feels incomplete.
Nevertheless, it is his questions, his ways of telling and, for want of a better phrase, his search in life that make Lepage the avant-garde artist he is.
His voices, insights, personae and images feel truthful and contemporary in a way that most theatre does not.
In July, he will direct A Midsummer Night's Dream in the National's Olivier Theatre.
It will be interesting to see how Lepage, the artistic director of Canada's National Theatre, with his commitment to collective creation and experimental theatre, will unravel the Bard's most popular tourist attraction.
‘Needles and Opium’ continues at the Cottesloe Theatre to early June
Film Revenge of killer bimbos Anne Billson writes a few new placards for the 'Basic Instinct’ protesters
You already know about Basic Instinct (Odeon, Leicester Square, from 8 May).
You know it's supposed to be a glossy, upmarket thriller with sex.
You know this because it has one of the vaguely portentous two-word titles in the tradition of Fatal Attraction ,Presumed Innocent and Final Analysis .
You may also have read something about the furore surrounding the production.
First, there was the record US$3 million paid to Joe Eszterhas for his screenplay.
Then there were the enraged gay groups who deemed this screenplay to be politically incorrect, and who disrupted filming by encouraging passing motorists to ‘honk if you support our boys in the Gulf’.
With the film's release, the same gay groups have been picketing cinemas in the US, accusing Hollywood of promoting negative gay stereotypes, and confronting prospective filmgoers with placards on which they — aaagh!—reveal the identity of the murderer .
Endearing as this is, it can be no more than a futile gesture, since any seasoned thriller addict will immediately finger the culprit the second she walks into frame.
There is a good case to be made for her not being the culprit anyway, so determined are the film-makers to provide one of those yawn-making, last-minute is-she-or-isn't-she twists that ride roughshod over logic, psychology, and 99 per cent of the plot.
But the protesters have a point.
In future, all movie gays will be law-abiding citizens with healthy relationships, no repressive hang-ups, and a glitter-free wardrobe.
Farewell then, Gutman and Cairo from The Maltese Falcon , Rupert and Brandon from Rope , Bruno from Strangers on a Train , Leonard from North by Northwest , Peter Ilyich Tchaikovsky and Petra Von Kant.
Farewell to Eleanor from The Haunting and the Countess Bathory from Daughters of Darkness .
Say a big hello to the positive role model.
Placard-wise, however, the gays have some way to go.
I should like to suggest a few alternatives to the MICHAEL DOUGLAS, FUCK YOU, RACIST, SEXIST, ANTI-GAY school of sign-writing.
For example:THIS FILM IS UNFAIR TO WOMEN .
Fritz Leiber once wrote a terrific book called Conjure Wife , in which it was revealed that all women were witches.
The premise of Basic Instinct is that all women are homicidal maniacs.
(I can't remember if they're all bisexual as well— I lost count.)
Whereas, as we all know, all women are really giant centipedes from outer space — no sorry, that's The Naked Lunch .
But tell me, Joe, how did you guess our little secret?
THIS FILM IS UNFAIR TO MICHAEL DOUGLAS .
I missed his semi-erect dick, because I was furiously scribbling down detailed descriptions of his buttocks, but only a severely learning-impaired person would consider the character he is playing to be representative of normality.
This is a cop who is in therapy because of his habit of shooting innocent bystanders dead.
This is a man whose idea of love-making is to mash his partner against a wall, rip off her knickers, and then throw her head first down on the sofa.
This is a person who quite likes the idea that the woman he is mashing might stick an ice-pick into his jugular at any second.
I am sure it adds an extra frisson , but I can't say I'm keen to try it.
THIS FILM IS UNFAIR TO MEN .
The most hilarious scene in the movie is when Sharon Stone, who plays the bestseller-writing, bisexual, blonde number-one murder suspect, is taken down to the cop shop to be interrogated.
We already know she is wearing no underwear , and she keeps crossing and uncrossing her legs quite brazenly in front of Douglas and his colleagues.
Instead of telling the silly tart to go and put some knickers on, as you or I would have done, these guys go all sweaty and hot under the collar, and stare at her, gobsmacked and embarrassed.
Typical male reaction.
On the other hand, one could give Sharon the benefit of the doubt and conclude she hasn't bothered to wear knickers because she knows Michael will probably mash her against a wall and rip them off anyway.
THIS FILM IS PERFECTLY FAIR TO DUTCH FILM DIRECTORS .
Paul Verhoeven has a track record of movies so offensive they are perversely beguiling.
Who can forget the Catholic homosexual dipsomaniac being hit on the head by a dead seagull in The Fourth Man ?
Or the gay gang-bang and wheelchair suicide in Spetters ?
Or Jennifer Jason Leigh falling in love with her rapist in Flesh and Blood ?
Robocop and Total Recall had bags of violence but very little sex, but with Basic Instinct Paul's back on his home territory: sexandviolence .
In Verhoeven's book, these two things are inextricable.
I worry about him sometimes, really I do.
THIS FILM IS FAIRLY FAIR TO SHARON STONE .
Sharon gets to wear nice clothes, live in two swankyhouses (one of them by the beach), chainsmoke, and be enigmatic about whether or not she's a killer bimbo.
On the downside, the poor girl has to endure endless mashing scenes with Michael Douglas.
HAVEN'T WE SEEN THIS PLOT SOMEWHERE BEFORE?
No wonder Eszterhas was able to rake in three million — he's had lots of practice at this story.
Jagged Edge ,Betrayed and Music Box are all about characters whose loved ones may or may not be slimeball murderers.
Basic Instinct is such preposterous, pernicious trash that I laughed and laughed.
On his television programme last week, Barry Norman advised viewers not to take their wives to see The Hand that Rocks the Cradle .
Well, my advice is that on no account should you take your husband to see Basic Instinct .
Art Complaining agit-properly Rose Jennings longs for fury and tenderness, instead of sentiment, in anti-war art
Bookworks, the publishers of artists' books, recently held an exhibition of print works by women artists.
The show included poster works by the Guerrilla Girls, the New York artists who work via anonymous flyposter art.
The following is from the Guerrillas' recent ‘Letter to Uncle Sam and the News Media’:
‘The way we won that war was a BLAST, but compared to Rambo or even Vietnam, it was a real SNORE!…
Come on, man, 250,000 people got BLOWN AWAY!
Why couldn't we see the pieces???
Next time we get to KICK ASS, you'd better show some COLLATERAL DAMAGE, or else DON'T HOG PRIME TIME!!!’
Later in the month I visited Strains of War at the Greenwich Citizens Gallery.
Curated by Amanda Sebestyen, it shows work by six artists, together with a changing display of single works for sale, with proceeds from these — and an exhibition book — going to charities such as the Kurdish Disaster Fund and the Iraqi Victims of War Appeal.
Back home, I took down a catalogue of works by Leslie Hakim-Dowek, one of the artists exhibiting in the show.
Of her early upbringing in Beirut, the text notes: ‘Leslie Hakim-Dowek's work is about loss, loss of life and liberty in the Lebanon, that sad, strife-torn country in which she was born, and by extension mourning for the loss of natural life on this planet caused by the malice or ignorance of man.’
Comparing this text to a copy of the Guerrillas' ‘Letter’, I sat and puzzled over their enormous difference of tone.
How should the arts community protest about the Gulf war?
Sebestyen recalls wanting ‘to counteract the aesthetic of technologised murder which was filling our TV screens’.
So how do you render disbelief?
Perhaps as a run-on from that initial revulsion,Strains of War largely eschews graphic snap, or the use of techniques purloined from the media.
No gear in this show: none of that high-concept malarkey with lightbox or neon; no looks-like-abstract-art landsat images; no audio effects.
Roxane Permar, for example, shows bedsteads bound in white bandaging.
Beneath the bandages, you can just discern small buckles, as on a toddler's harness.
The image is one of generic, clinically premeditated cruelty, of muffling, of seepage.
There's something of the same blankness of effect, too, in Ismail Saray's white sheet hung against red, the white perforated with large burnt holes.
Allan de Souza shows prints roughly collaged onto a cruciform display of found boards.
With broken images showing hands and feet and faces, the whole is heavily varnished so the images appear almost sealed into the wood.
The changing display of works for sale currently includes pieces by John Keane, Mike Peel, Chila Burman (Bombay movie heroine meets Public Enemy in a reworked comic strip) and Jo Spence.
At the opening, you could also watch Michael Dixon's excellent video about opposition to the war.
A few of these works I like a lot: Burman's, and another by Tassaduq Sohail, who makes small, rather beautiful and often quite scurrilous pieces, frequently at the expense of all brands of religious leaders.
But many more I found so general in their sentiments as to be, for me, almost meaningless.
Much the same goes for the prints and poems in the exhibition book.
Is this to miss the point?
Is it unfair to wish for some appropriate visual counterpoint to Dixon's video, to the precision and eloquence of — for example— Edward Pearce speaking of ‘the men whose fingers itch from the things against which there are now no checks, and no restraints’?
I don't think so.
It can be done.
But maybe you have to choose.
If you want to do agit-prop, well, agit- properly , then flay your opponents' logic, like the Guerrillas.
If, on the other hand, you want to bear more conventional witness to rupture and evil, then one way to do so is to seek out its opposite, to seek out all the distracted detail of things, the tucks and creases.
It was predictable but a little sad that you didn't get any of this sense of detail at Strains of War .
‘Strains of War’ is at the Greenwich Citizens Gallery, 151 Powis Street, London SE18, until 30 May
Music How kd KOd Nashville Catherine Warren traces C&W's progress from backwoods to mainstream
She made her film debut playing a gay Eskimo.
She collected her Canadian music award dressed as a dishevelled bride.
She countered Nashville's big hair and bosoms with bare-faced androgyny.
Today, kd lang is changing her tune again, forsaking country music for torch songs and giving free range to a voice that reaches from Alberta to Berlin.
At 30, the Canadian singer-songwriter is a lesbian icon, a country-and-western iconoclast and a Grammy award-winning performer.
She is one of the successful new generation of country artists brave enough to stretch the genre, and talented enough to take its audience along for the ride.
Hitched no more to the hay-bale and wagon-wheel trappings long associated with country, and without so much as a yee-ha, these performers are selling albums by the million and crooning all the way to the bank.
‘If Crosby, Stills and Nash or James Taylor came along now they'd call themselves country just to get airplay,’ observes London-based publicist Richard Wootton.
Indeed, US country music stations, which number more than 2,500, are more abundant than any other format, including rock and news.
Topping even the pop charts is the balding country singer Garth Brooks, who currently outsells Michael Jackson and Guns'n Roses.
Country Music Television offers round-the-clock sessions to its 15.7 million subscribers.
And with two TV networks now competing for a UK cable channel, a similar service is set to take off here by the year's end.
(For a more direct line, UK country fans might soon be able to fly non-stop from Stansted to Nashville, if a Tennessee congressman has his way.)
Even without much airplay, kd lang managed to strike a chord with country fans around the world.
Her own voice and word of mouth were enough to outmanoeuvre the rock stations, which shunned her steel guitars, and the country stations, which gave her sexual persona a wide berth.
But it was her vocal anti-meat stance that turned the country establishment's down-home snub into redneck outrage.
A long-time vegetarian, lang did a televised announcement on behalf of People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals, and cattle country was up in arms.
From her home town in Alberta through America's heartland, she was blacklisted by everyone within spitting distance of a ranch.
Others were unruffled.
When Madonna first heard her sing, she proclaimed, ‘Elvis is alive — and she's beautiful.’
In fact, it was reincarnation of sorts that helped lang's career to rise in the late 1980s.
Billing herself as the spirit of Patsy Cline, she (and her band the Reclines) cut the album that established her country claim.
Coaxing Cline's former producer Owen Bradley from retirement, she mesmerised country music traditionalists with Shadowland , her soaring vocals backed by no less than Loretta Lynn.
Then she performed alongside Sting and Springsteen in the 1988 Amnesty International Tour.
In 1989, she released Absolute Torch and Twang , which has since sold more than a million copies.
But it is lang's eclecticism that defines her career, and this is likewise the hallmark of many new country performers.
‘The personalities are diverse and extreme,’ says Wootton.
‘That's why there is room for kd.’
The industry's insularity has cracked wide open since the Blues Brothers first walked into a bar and demanded to know what kind of music was played.
The barmaid's enthusiastic response was: ‘Both kinds — country and western.’
Today's country sound is just as likely to embrace the electronic drum machine and organ as the spoons and washboard.
Country's clean appeal is particularly seductive to the over 35s, who buy more records than any other demographic group.
One theory for its growing mainstream popularity is that contemporary values are merging with country sentiments.
In an era of sexual monogamy, ‘Stand by your man’ takes on vital new undertones.
The music is crossing the race barrier, too.
Once the preserve of the white Bible belt, today's country speaks to rap-weary black audiences.
In fact, the hidden soul within the new sound owes much to the black southern blues masters of the early 20th century.
Many new acts are using country as a means to an end, neatly crossing over into other styles, even other media, once they have established a solid following.
Lyle Lovett is giving jazz a go, and Nanci Griffiths has turned to folk.
And lang refers to her new music as ‘post-nuclear cabaret’.
Ingénue , the album she released in March, has more of the evocative purity of a Judy Garland than the relentless drawl of a Dolly Parton.
Recently lang starred in Percy Adlon's nod to post-cold war culture,Salmonberries .
Here she plays a boy/girl foundling from Alaska who falls in love with a middle-aged female émigré from East Berlin.
Sort of Twin Peaks meets Gertrude Stein, and somehow everything clicks.
As an actor, lang is at her best when her passion is given space to soar.
With her love scene, as with her love songs, she has that rare ability to enrapture.
At other times her minimalist approach seems vaguely stilted, and even her immensely watchable face can't carry the day.
However, this is her first film role.
And, because Adlon, like Allen, writes multiple movies around his female stars, chances are it won't be lang's last.
If the range of talent that country stars exhibit is heterogeneous, so too is the profile they project.
The never-very-fetching image of a middle-aged guy in a fitted, powder-blue suede and rhinestone cowboy outfit, accessorised with white shoes and wide belt-buckle, is mercifully dying.
But as Monday night's Channel 4 showing of the Country Music Association Awards proved, most things don't clash.
Garth Brooks (affectionately described by Time magazine as dressed to look ‘dorky’) was the star, bagging trophies in the top three categories of entertainer, single and album of the year.
When the programme was broadcast live in the US last October, it had an audience of 33 million.
While considerably fewer folk watched this week's edited version, Brooks' hit single,Friends in Low Places , could become the anthem for Britain's classless society: ‘Blame it all on my roots/I showed up in boots/and ruined your black tie affair.’
Outlaw kd lang didn't show up.
However, President George Bush did, although his footwear wasn't featured.
He made his way to Nashville, no doubt to solidify a country-music vote thought to be lost by his rival Bill Clinton ever since the Democrat's wife made a flip reference to a song by Tammy Wynette.
If country in the US means big business, it also means big politics.
But while Bush continues to campaign with country music stars, the spectre of John Major at a tarted-up hoe-down here remains elusive.
kd lang plays at the Hammersmith Odeon on 8 and 9 May
ENDGAMES WEEKEND COMPETITION
No 3225 Set by Watson Weeks We asked you, following the TV exposé of Summerhill, for a Speech Day address by the principal, an explanation by a parent of why they sent their child there, or a statement by a former pupil of the advantages of a Summerhill education.
Report by Ms de Meaner Aside from Katie Mallett who, early on, informed me she wouldn't be entering this comp (she'd never heard of Summerhill), most of the regulars entered.
Speaking of regulars, the comp complex has had a letter from G Douglas Vaisey pointing out what we all know, viz that ‘the compers club is a mite exclusive’.
He goes on to say he's ‘curious to know whether it is open to a wider and perhaps more aggressive audience with access to fax machines’.
The answer is that we do not discriminate against anyone, even fax-toting sociopaths like Watson Weeks.
We don't even discriminate against those who send in their entries in their own handwriting , however much I have been urged to do so by the typesetters.
Mr G Douglas Vaisey also suggests that others should start setting the comps: ‘I'm sure we [we?]can do much better than Katie Mallett.’
And back we come to poor old Katie Mallett, who seems to be getting a lot of airtime for not even entering.
For the millionth time: those who would like to set a comp, stop whingeing and send your ideas in — there's even a £10 prize if it's chosen.
Which brings me to the prize money for this week; £15 to Bill Greenwell and Gerard Benson £12 to Nicholas Murray and a tenner for the rest.
Summerhill's the best match for real life.
It's got me where I am today.
Other schools pigeon-hole you, something on the timetable grid, fed in at one end and popping out a set number of years later, certified.
Not Summerhill.
I'd never do what I do now if it wasn't for Summerhill's free-wheeling, timeless, non-routine approach to getting through when life's off the rails.
Me, I manage British Rail's timetable, down to the last 66-minute hour.
Who needs structures?
And Old S showed me how to deal with whingers and complainers.
Sorry?
You wanted 250 words?
Well, you know what you can do with that.
I got here, didn't I?
What more d'you want?
D A Prince
Yes, I think Amanita is very happy at Summerhill.
I don't think the other children bully her too much or make fun of her because of her eye patch.
And she can't be the only young girl in the school with a full set of false teeth.
Can she?
That was just exuberance on the part of the children and teachers when they chopped off all her hair and Super Glued it to her chin.
I'm certain that her nickname of fungus-breath is a sign of affection.
I don't think she's being shunned because of her impetigo.
Summerhill children are so natural.
All right, nine was a little young for her first sexual encounter, but now she's come to like it she's become such a friendly child.
Everyone in the nearby town seems to like her anyway.
Of course, it was a shame about that incident when she assaulted the headmaster, but he shouldn't really have laughed at her for being the only child there who doesn't take drugs.
He's recovering nicely from his injuries, though he still does walk bent double.
The teaching is excellent.
During the last lesson she attended — about seven months ago — she actually managed to get the round peg into its correct hole.
But no, I don't think she's destined for Oxbridge.
Pippa Legg
And now, I am afraid, I must turn to less happy matters.
There has been a marked and regrettable increase in reports from the town over the past year concerning the behaviour of students.
In April two students from this school stood back to let an elderly disabled woman enter the Post Office before them and in June another student, who I am glad to say had been with us only two weeks, was spotted by two seniors through the window of the tap room of the Throstle's Nest, helping a blind woman across the road.
I am sure I do not need to remind you that it is through incidents of this kind that Summerhill is judged and these thoughtless individuals have caused me considerable embarrassment.
The spectacle of young people deferring to others and flagrantly performing small selfless acts of charity in the local area leaves a very bad taste in the mouth and gives an entirely distorted view of the standards which obtain at this school.
So fuck off back to your dormitories now before I'm tempted to pontificate even longer.
Nicholas Murray
Actually, I sent Felicity to Summerhill because I saw this awfully exciting film called The Alamo , starring John Wayne, whom I adore, and he makes this absolutely glorious speech in it which goes ‘Freedom, I like the sound of the word’, actually it's ‘Republic’ he says, I know that because it was on the television last week, but I've always heard it as ‘Freedom’and I read that A S O'Neill positively breathed Freedom, as indeed do all the Irish, I find, and one has to have pots of money to go there, which gives one — what's the word?— sachet, which you do absolutely need to get into Society these days, and Felicity (her name means Freedom, too, from the Latin, you know) was frightfully keen to go, and doesn't the name simply drip June in, say, the Cotswolds, and Felicity says there are teachers there with nothing to do at all, so you can tell the staff must be tip-top — I mean, what luxury! spare staff!— and Felicity's always been such a tearaway and I know it's jolly hard but I do think one needs Discipline to get one's Freedom, I've always had it, and Republics too, and now I gather she's been on television, and Felicity was absolutely swearing by the school or something, Angela says, and where is it — somewhere pretty — she goes by train…
Bill Greenwell
I come now to the Roll of Honour; and I think I can say that we can boast as remarkable a list of names as any school in the country.
Foremost, perhaps, is Eric Ansavery, print designer and public calligrapher.
His unique style of lettering, using aerosols, will bring enormous distinction to our Honours Board, when he eventually delivers it.
We had been hoping to display it today.
On it we would have found the names of other distinguished old Summerhillians…unfortunately, Eric has been delayed at Stonehenge, and has not yet got to grips with the design.
However, my secretary, ex-pupil Peter Vroomking, was to have provided me with a typed list, which has not materialised…on the other hand, Peter has recently been discovering himself as a human being…and I am sure those of you who are still here will wish to join me in congratulating…could somebody stop that door banging?
..
Er…
Others (from memory) include Joyce Bravitt, whose outstanding and typical contribution to the Mothers' Union all must applaud…and Fiona Bachstein who, of course.
.. or was it her sister?
Don't go away.
And if memory serves (what was she called, that girl who did the PR for Windscale, Sellafield I should say, and Aldershot FC?), oh yes, Daphne Grierson, who has now moved on to greater things and is image adviser to Nigel Canada (is that correct?) the teenage fiddle-player.
All these and myriad more, whose names…
Who put the light out?
Gerard Benson
Chewing the fat before this meeting in that shit-hole of a place some berks will tiresomely insist on dignifying as a ‘foyer’— frenchified bloody nonsense — a parent quizzed me on my attitude towards the teaching of English.
As I somewhat impatiently explained, we don't actually teach English.
If the little sods want to experiment, that's fair enough; we scatter a widely varied selection of ephemeral matter around the common room for them to browse over or deface — the Daily Express ,Lancet ,Exchange & Mart ,Viz …that sort of thing.
Conversely, we are very strong on the study of reading impairment.
Few establishments can boast, as we can, that there are those who enter here classed as ‘normal’ in that regard, yet leave us fully fledged dyslexics.
Susan Hampshire herself was invited to become a governor, and who knows, might have accepted, had she been able to suss out what we were on about.
Another parent asked how many of our pupils have matriculated.
‘Search me, squire,’ I replied, ‘But off the top of my bonce I'll hazard a guess how many have masturbated !’
The little darlings certainly have no hang-ups in that department.
Anyhow, they say it beats nose-picking and nail-biting — yes, you're ahead of me — hands down!
In any event, our main aim is to stimulate the imagination, and if there's a more delightful way of achieving that goal, I'm open to suggestions.
No 3228 Set by Watson Weeks 
Chas F Garvey
This is tribute week to Benny Hill or Frankie Howerd.
Could we have a typical performance from either of them in an unlikely setting: for example, Howerd making his maiden speech in the House of Commons or delivering a lecture to students on English lit, or Hill interviewing Germaine Greer or giving a sermon.
In by 21 May and 250 words max.
As usual, if you can think of anything better, go ahead.
BACKCHAT Mat Coward
Floating voters tend to say things like ‘Of course, being in carpets, what I'm really looking for from the parties is a firm pledge on European weaving quotas,’ and they tend to sound like Hurd and look like Gummer.
I hate them.
I hate the fact that, during election campaigns, we all have to suck up to the idiots, pay court to them, treat them as if they were intelligent, thoughtful stalwarts of democracy, careful weighers of pros and cons, when in point of fact they're just idiots.
Voting floaters are the only people who actually read manifestos; certainly, candidates never do, much less canvassers.
The floaters trawl through every page, hunting their hobby-horses, marking various passages with three different shades of day-glo highlighter, underlining bits here and there and writing ‘No, No, No!’ in the margins.
What the hell do they think they're doing — picking a bloody horse?
You can always tell when you've got a floater on the doorstep.
Normal, rational, decently partisan punters open their doors just enough to get their noses through, growl a quick ‘Yeah, you're all right, mate’ or ‘Sod off,’and disappear back to the snooker before you've got time to scribble a tick on your clipboard.
Floaters, though, they fling their portals wide and usher you into the hall, crying ‘Ah-ha — just the man I wanted to see!’
You won't get a cup of tea, although you might be OK for a Garibaldi if there happens to be one lying around, but you'll quickly be strapped into the beige and orange sofa, and invited to ‘Convince us why we should vote for your lot.
Go on, take your time.
We've already had the National Front and the Liberals round, and they were very interesting, so now it's your turn.
Before you begin, let me just ask you one little question: how much do you know about the world of the contemporary carpet…?’
A canvasser thus entrapped is lucky to escape inside four hours; lucky, indeed, to escape before the polling day after next.
It is a terrifying condemnation of the universal franchise that the nation's government is determined by a few thousand self-satisfied oafs who can't tell a general election from the Eurovision Song Contest.
‘I thought the Labour candidate was very pretty, didn't you dear?
Mind, she'd got a nerve wearing that costume with those legs.’
Thickest bastard you'll ever meet, your average floater.
I mean, how can people possibly not know which party they support?
Do they forget?
Do they take a blindfold and a pin into the booth with them, and then spend four years boasting that nobody had better take their support for granted if they want to get re-elected?
Give me blind tribal loyalty over careful discrimination any day.
Voting behaviour is something you're born with, like a taste for aubergines or an aversion to Bristol City.
You don't go mucking about with things like that.
Never trust anyone who votes differently from their parents — they're either perennial students or upwardly mobile, and in either case deserve to have their bodies ground into animal feed.
‘I think we'll give the Maoists a go this time.
They're very sound on wind.
No, on second thoughts, we gave the Maoists a go last time, and they didn't get anywhere.
I think we'll give Cornish Home Rule a go this time.
There again, we haven't given the Conservatives a go since the by-election; we could swing back to them, that might be fun.
And it would certainly send a message to the Independent Ratepayers…’
FORTEANA A hand-picked review of the weird and wonderful by ‘Fortean Times’ editor Paul Sieveking
At least since the early 1960s, the British countryside, from the Isle of Wight to the Scottish Highlands, has been host to what we Forteans call ABCs (Alien Big Cats).
The Surrey Puma and the Exmoor Beast are only the most famous of these.
They seem to have taken over from the large black dogs with glowing red eyes to be found in most local folklore collections.
Here are a couple of recent sightings.
On the morning of 9 April, which you may recall was election day, two businessmen saw a Labrador-sized golden-brown cat.
It was climbing along the branch of a tree next to the church in West End Lane, West Hampstead, London.
The animal, ‘definitely not a fox’, climbed onto a flat roof nearby, where they lost sight of it.
Neither witness wished to be identified for fear of ridicule.
A police search was made of the area, but no cat was found.
No registered exotic animal in the borough had gone missing, but, according to one source, there were no registered big-cat owners in Camden anyway.
‘From the size, I would say it could be anything from a jungle cat to a puma,’ said Doug Richardson, cat expert at London Zoo.
‘The area has been thoroughly searched.
But a cat like that could stay hidden for months.
There are three railway lines nearby with plenty of rabbit warrens — so it would not go hungry.’
Indeed, the Hampstead ABC didn't seem to be hungry: two rabbits in a hutch ten yards away were not touched.
[Camden & St Pancras Chronicle, Camden New Journal , 16 April 1992.]
Exactly two weeks earlier, Mrs Kathleen Topliff, 68, returned to her house in Hayfield, in Derbyshire's Peak District, to be confronted by a large, jet-black cat.
It was described by the police as ‘having a smooth black coat, muscular appearance, approximately four-feet long, with a long tail and pointed ears, green-yellow eyes, and fang-like canine teeth’(Guardian , 3 April).
This differed from the description in the High Peak Reporter (2 April): ‘Two- to three-foot long with a thick tail, green eyes, pointed ears and fang-like teeth.’
Anyway, this two-three-four-foot-long black cat was growling and spitting in the dining room.
It ran upstairs and hid under a bed, then leapt on top of a wardrobe as Mrs Topliff confronted it with a broom handle.
The cat bit her, leaving two wounds in her hand, one of which needed two stitches, and then shot downstairs, disappearing through an open window.
It had probably entered by the large cat-flap.
The cat had visited Mrs Topliff before.
She had chased it out of the house in February when one of her grandchildren was visiting; and it is possible that it spent the night in the house during the week of the March sighting, as there was a very strong smell in the dining room the following morning.
Mrs Topliff has a cat of her own, which was shut in one of the bedrooms when the wild animal went in.
The ‘Peak Panther’ has been sighted for more than ten years, with several reports of a big black cat in and around New Mills.
A farmer said that some of his lambs had been horribly mauled at Weathercotes in the spring of 1988; there were huge bite marks on the lambs and paw prints nearby.
A large cat was seen in November 1989, and police marksmen hunted the animal for several days.
It was sighted twice, but the search was called off.
The police believed it could have been a very large feral cat, or a puma or panther released after legislation on dangerous animals.
The probable reason for a wild cat entering a house is to look for food; but this was the lambing season with plentiful big-cat food in all directions.
Furthermore, local farmers had not reported any stock losses since the 1989 sightings.
A correspondent knows of one witness to the February 1992 sighting in Mrs Topliff's house, and this person stated that it was merely a large domestic cat.
Fortean Times is published bi-monthly by John Brown, and is stocked by all good newsagents