

CHAPTER EIGHT
QUINN AND SAM spent almost three hours in each other 's arms, alternately making love or talking in low whispers.
She did most of the talking, of herself and her career in the Bureau.
She also warned Quinn of the abrasive Kevin Brown, who had chosen her for this mission and had established himself in London with a team of eight to ‘keep an eye on things’.
She had fallen into a deep and dreamless sleep, the first time in a fortnight she had slept so well, when Quinn nudged her awake.
‘It's only a three-hour tape,’ he whispered.
‘It's going to run out in fifteen minutes.’
She kissed him again, slipped on her nightgown and tip-toed back to her room.
Quinn eased the armchair away from the wall, grunted a few times for the benefit of the wall microphone, switched off the tape-recorder, rolled on to the bed and genuinely went to sleep.
The sounds recorded in Grosvenor Square were of a sleeping man shifting position, rolling over and resuming his slumbers.
The engineer and two FBI men glanced at the console, then went back to their cards.
Zack called at half-past nine.
He seemed more brusque and hostile than on the previous day, a man whose nerves were beginning to fray, a man on whom the pressure was mounting and who had decided to exert some pressure of his own.
‘All right, you bastard, now listen.
No more sweet-talk.
I've  had enough.
I'll settle for your bloody two million dollars but that's the lot.
You ask for one more thing and I'll send you a couple of fingers — I'll take a hammer and cold chisel to the little prick's right hand.
See if Washington likes you after that….’
‘Zack, cool it,’ pleaded Quinn earnestly.
‘You got it.
You win.
Last night I told them over there to screw it up to two million dollars or I'm out.
Jesus, you think you're tired?
I don't even sleep at all, in case you call….’
Zack seemed pacified by the thought that there was someone with nerves more ragged than his own.
‘One more thing,’ he snarled.
‘Not money.
Not in cash.
You bastards would try to bug the suitcase.
Diamonds.
This is how….’
He talked for ten more seconds then hung up.
Quinn took no notes.
He did not need to.
It was all on tape.
The call had been traced to one of a bank of three public booths in Saffron Walden, a market-town in western Essex, just off the M11 motorway from London to Cambridge.
It took three minutes for a plain-clothes policeman to reach the booths, but all were empty.
The caller had been swallowed in the crowds.
At the time Andy Laing was having lunch in the executive canteen of the Jeddah branch of the SAIB.
His companion was his friend and colleague, the Pakistani Operations Manager, Mr Amin.
‘I am being very puzzled, my friend,’ said the young Pakistani.
‘What is going on?’
‘I don't know,’ said Laing.
‘You tell me.’
‘You know the daily mail-bag from here to London?
I had an urgent letter for London, with some documents included.
I need a quick reply.
When will I get it?
I ask myself.
Why has it not come?
I asked the mailroom why there is no reply.
They tell me something very strange.’
Laing put down his knife and fork.
‘What is that, old pal?’
‘They tell me all is delayed.
All packages from here for London are being diverted to the Riyadh office for a day before they go forward.’
Laing lost his appetite.
There was a feeling in the pit of his stomach and it was not hunger.
‘How long did they say this has been going on?’
‘Since one week, I do believe.’
Laing left the canteen for his office.
There was a message on his desk from the Branch Manager, Mr Al-Haroun.
Mr Pyle would like to see him in Riyadh without delay.
He just made the mid-afternoon Saudia connector flight.
On the journey he could have kicked himself.
Hindsight is all very well, but if only he had sent his London package by regular mail….
He had addressed it to the Chief Accountant personally, and a letter so addressed, in his distinctive handwriting would stand out a mile when the letters were spread across Steve Pyle's desk.
He was shown into Steve Pyle's office just after the bank closed its doors for public business.
Nigel Cramer came round to see Quinn during the lunch-hour, London time.
‘You've closed your exchange at two million dollars,’ he said.
Quinn nodded.
‘My congratulations,’ said Cramer.
‘Thirteen days is fast for this sort of thing.
By the way, my tame shrink has listened to this morning's call.
He takes the view the man is serious, under a lot of pressure to get out.’
‘He'll have to take a few more days,’ said Quinn.
‘We all will.
You heard him ask for diamonds instead of cash.
They'll take time to put together.
Any leads on their hideout?’
Cramer shook his head.
‘I'm afraid not.
Every last conceivable property rental has been checked out.
Either they're not in residential accommodation at all, or they've bought the damn thing.
Or borrowed it.’
‘No chance of checking outright purchases?’ asked Quinn.
‘I'm afraid not.
The volume of properties being bought and sold in south-east England is enormous.
There are thousands and thousands owned by foreigners, foreign corporations or companies whose nominees — lawyers, banks, etc. — acted for them in the sale.
Like this place, for example.’
He got in a dig at Lou Collins and the CIA, who were listening.
‘By the way, I talked with one of our men in the Hatton  Garden district.
He spoke to a contact in diamond trading.
Whoever he is, your man knows his diamonds.
Or one of his colleagues does.
What he asked for is easily purchasable and easily disposable.
And light.
About a kilogram, perhaps a bit more.
Have you thought about the exchange?’
‘Of course,’ said Quinn.
‘I'd like to handle it myself.
But I want no concealed bugs — they'll probably think of that.
I don't think they'll bring Simon to the rendezvous, so he could still die if there are any tricks.’
‘Don't worry, Mr Quinn.
We'd obviously like to try to grab them, but I take your point.
There'll be no tricks from us, no heroics.’
‘Thank you,’ said Quinn.
He shook hands with the Scotland Yard man, who left to report progress to the one o'clock COBRA committee.
Kevin Brown had spent the morning secluded in his office beneath the embassy.
When the shops opened he had sent out two of his men to buy him a list of items he needed: a very large-scale map of the area north of London extending fifty miles in all directions, a matching sheet of clear plastic, map-pins, chinagraph pencils in different colours.
He assembled his team of detectives and spread the plastic across the map.
‘OK, let's just look at these phone-booths the rat has been using.
Chuck, read 'em out one by one.’
Chuck Moxon studied his list.
‘First call, Hitchin, county of Hertfordshire.’
‘OK, we have Hitchin right…here.’
A pin was stuck in Hitchin.
Zack had made eight calls in thirteen days — the ninth was about to come in.
One by one a pin was stuck in the origin of each call.
Just before ten o'clock one of the two FBI men in the listening-post stuck his head round the door.
‘He just called again.
Threatening to cut off Simon's fingers with a chisel.’
‘Hot damn,’ swore Brown.
‘That fool Quinn's going to blow it away.
I knew he would.
Where'd the call come from?’
‘Place called Saffron Walden,’ said the young man.
When the nine pins were in place, Brown joined up the perimeter of the area they bounded.
It was a jagged shape, involving pieces of five counties.
Then he took a ruler and joined the extremities to their opposites on the other side of the pattern.
In the approximate centre a web of criss-cross lines appeared.
To the south-east the extremity was Great Dunmow, Essex; to the north was St Neots, Cambridgeshire; and to the west Milton Keynes in Buckinghamshire.
‘The densest area of the crossed lines lies right here’— Brown pointed with his fingertip —‘just east of Biggleswade, county of Bedfordshire.
No calls from that area at all.
Why?’
‘Too close to base?’ ventured one of the men.
‘Could be, boy, could be.
Look, I want you to take these two country towns, Biggleswade and Sandy, the two closest to the geographic centre of the web.
Get up there and visit all the realtors who have offices in those towns.
Make like you are prospective clients, looking to rent a secluded property to write a book or something.
Listen to what they say — maybe some place coming free soon, maybe some place they could have let you have three months back but it went to someone else.
You got it?’
They all nodded.
‘Should we let Mr Seymour know we're on our way?’ asked Moxon.
‘I mean, maybe Scotland Yard have been in that area.’
‘You leave Mr Seymour to me,’ said Brown reassuringly.
‘We get along just fine.
And the bobbies may have been up there and they may just have overlooked something.
Maybe so, maybe not.
Let's just check it out.’
Steve Pyle greeted Laing with an attempt at his usual geniality.
‘I…ah…called you up here, Andy, because I just got a request from London that you go visit with them.
Seems this could be the start of a career move for you.’
‘Sure,’ said Laing.
‘Would this request from London have anything to do with the package and report I sent them, which never arrived because it was intercepted right here in this office?’
Pyle dropped all semblance of bonhomie .
‘All right.
You're smart, maybe too smart.
But you've been dabbling in things that don't concern you.
I tried to warn you off, but no, you had to go playing private detective.
OK, now I'll level with you.
I'm transferring you back to London.
You don't fit in down here, Laing.
I'm not happy with your work.
You're going back.
That's it.
You have seven days to put your desk in order.
Your ticket's been booked.
Seven days from now.’
Had he been older, more mature, Andy Laing would probably have played his cards more coolly.
But he was angry that a man of Pyle's eminence in the bank could be ripping off client money for his own enrichment.
And he had the naïveté of the young and eager, the conviction that Right would triumph.
He turned at the door.
‘Seven days?
Time enough for you to fix things with London?
No way.
I'm going back all right, but I'm going back tomorrow.’
He was in time for the last flight of the night back to Jeddah.
When he got there he went straight to the bank.
He kept his passport in the top drawer of his desk, along with any other valuable papers; burglaries of European-owned apartments in Jeddah are not unheard-of, and the bank was safer.
At least, it was supposed to be.
The passport was missing.
That night there was a stand-up row among the four kidnappers.
‘Keep your bloody voices down,’ hissed Zack on several occasions.
‘Baissez les voix, merde.’
He knew his men were running to the limit of their patience.
It was always a risk, using human material like these.
After the screaming adrenalin of the snatch outside Oxford, they had been penned up day and night in a single house, drinking beer from cans he had bought at motorway service stations, keeping out of sight all the time, hearing callers at the door ring and ring before finally going away without an answer.
The nerve strain had been bad, and these were not men with the mental resources to immerse themselves in books or thought.
The Corsican listened to his French-language pop programmes all day, interspersed with news-flashes.
The South African whistled tunelessly for hours on end, and always the same tune, ‘Sarie Marais’.
The Belgian watched the television, of which he could not understand a word.
He liked the cartoons best.
The argument was over Zack's decision to close with the negotiator called Quinn and have done with the whole thing at two million dollars ransom.
The Corsican objected and, because they both spoke French, the Belgian tended to agree with him.
The South African was fed up, wanted to get home and agreed with Zack.
The main  argument from the Corsican was that they could hold out for ever.
Zack knew this was not true, but he was aware he could have a very dangerous situation on his hands if he told them they were beginning to show cracks, and could not take more than another six days of numbing boredom and inactivity.
So he appeased them, placated them, told them they had done brilliantly and would all be very rich men in just a few more days.
The thought of all that money calmed them down, and they subsided.
Zack was relieved it had ended without blows.
Unlike the three men in the house, his problem was not boredom but stress.
Every time he drove the big Volvo along those crowded motorways he knew that one random police check, one brush with another car, one moment of inattention would have a blue-capped officer leaning in his window, wondering why he wore a wig and a false moustache.
His disguise would pass in a crowded street, but not at six inches' range.
Every time he went into one of those phone-booths, he had a mental image of something going wrong, of a faster-than-usual trace, of a plain-clothes policeman being only a few yards away, taking the alarm on his personal radio and walking up to the phone-booth.
Zack carried a gun, and knew he would use it to get away.
If he did, he would have to abandon the Volvo, always parked a few hundred yards away, and escape on foot.
Some idiot member of the public might even try to tackle him.
It was getting to the point that whenever he saw a policeman sauntering along the crowded streets he chose for his phone calls his stomach turned over.
‘Go give the kid his supper,’ he told the South African.
Simon Cormack had been fifteen days in his underground cell, and thirteen since he had answered the question about Aunt Emily and known that his father was trying to get him out.
He realized now what solitary confinement must be like and wondered how people could survive months, even years of it.
At least in Western prisons inmates in solitary had writing materials, books, sometimes television, something to occupy the mind.
He had nothing.
But he was a tough boy and he determined not to go to pieces.
He exercised regularly, forcing himself to overcome the prisoner's lethargy, doing his press-ups ten times a day, jogging on the spot a dozen times.
He still wore his trainers, socks, shorts  and running-slip, and was aware he must smell awful.
He used the toilet-bucket carefully, so as not to soil the floor, and was grateful it was removed every second day.
The food was boring, mainly fried or cold, but it was enough.
He had no razor of course, so he sported a straggly beard and moustache.
His hair had grown; he tried to comb it with his fingers.
He had asked for, and eventually been given, a plastic bucket of cold water and a sponge.
He never realized how grateful a man could be for the chance to wash.
He had stripped naked, running his shorts halfway up the ankle-chain to keep them dry, and sponged himself from head to foot, scouring his skin with the sponge to try to keep clean.
After it he felt transformed.
But he tried no escape manoeuvres.
The chain was impossible to break, the door solid and bolted from the outside.
Between exercises he tried to keep his mind occupied in a number of ways: reciting every poem he could ever remember, pretending to dictate his autobiography to an invisible stenographer so that he could go over everything that had ever happened to him in his twenty-one years.
And he thought of home, of New Haven, and Nantucket, and Yale and the White House.
He thought of his mom and dad and how they were; he hoped they weren't worried about him, but expected they were.
If only he could tell them he was all right, in good shape, considering….
There were three loud knocks on the cellar door.
He reached for his black hood and put it on.
Supper-time, or was it breakfast…?
That same evening, but after Simon Cormack had fallen asleep and Sam Somerville lay in Quinn's arms while the tape-recorder breathed into the wall socket, five time-zones further west the White House committee met in the late evening.
Apart from the usual Cabinet members and department heads, Philip Kelly of the FBI and David Weintraub of the CIA also attended.
They heard the tapes of Zack on the phone to Quinn, the rasping tones of the British criminal and the reassuring drawl of the American trying to appease him, as they had done almost every day for a fortnight.
When Zack had finished, Hubert Reed was pale with shock.
‘My God,’ he said, ‘cold chisel and hammer.
The man's an animal.’
‘Yeah, we know that,’ said Odell.
‘At least now we have an agreed ransom.
Two million dollars.
In diamonds.
Any objections?’
‘No way,’ said Jim Donaldson.
‘This country will pay that easily, for the President's son.
I'm just surprised it's taken two weeks.’
‘Actually, that's pretty fast, or so I'm told,’ said the Attorney-General, Bill Walters.
Don Edmonds of the FBI nodded his agreement.
‘We want to rehear the rest, the tapes from the apartment?’ asked Vice-President Odell.
No one needed to.
‘What about what Mr Cramer, the Scotland Yard man, told Quinn.
Any comments from your people?’
Don Edmonds cast a sideways glance at Philip Kelly, but answered for the Bureau.
‘Our people at Quantico agree with their British colleagues,’ he said.
‘This Zack is at the end of his tether, wants to close it down, make an exchange.
The strain in his voice is coming through, hence the threats most probably.
They also agree with the analysts over there on another thing.
Which is that Quinn appears to have established some kind of wary empathy with this animal Zack.
It seems his effort, which is what has taken two weeks’— he glanced at Jim Donaldson as he spoke —‘to portray himself as the guy trying to help Zack, and all the rest of us here and there as the bad guys making problems, has worked.
Zack has an element of trust for Quinn, but for no one else.
That may prove crucial at the safe-handover process.
At least, that's what the voice analysts and behavioural psychiatrists are saying.’
‘Lord, what a job, having to sweet-talk scum like that,’ observed Jim Donaldson with distaste.
David Weintraub, who had stared at the ceiling, dropped an eye towards the Secretary of State.
To keep these politicians in their high office, he might have said but did not, he and his people sometimes had to deal with creatures just as nasty as Zack.
‘OK, people,’ said Odell, ‘so we go with the deal.
At last it's  back with us in America, so let's make it fast.
Personally I reckon this Mr Quinn has done a pretty good job.
If he can get this kid back safe and sound, we owe him.
Now, diamonds.
Where do we get them?’
‘New York,’ said Weintraub, ‘diamond centre of the country.’
‘Morton, you're from New York.
You got any discreet contacts you could tap into fast?’
Odell asked the ex-banker, Morton Stannard.
‘Certainly,’ he said.
‘When I was with the Rockman-Queens we had a number of clients who were high in the diamond trade.
Very discreet — they have to be.
You want me to handle it?
How about the money?’
‘The President has insisted he will personally pay the ransom, won't have it any other way,’ said Odell.
‘But I don't see why he should be troubled by these details.
Hubert, could the Treasury make a personal loan until the President can liquidate trust funds?’
‘No problem,’ said Hubert Reed.
‘You'll have your money, Morton.’
The committee rose.
Odell had to see the President over at the Mansion.
‘Fast as you can, Morton,’ he said.
‘We want to be talking two to three days here.
Tops.’
In fact it would take another seven.
It was not until morning that Andy Laing could secure an interview with Mr Al-Haroun, the Branch Manager.
But he did not waste the night.
Mr Al-Haroun, when confronted, was as gently apologetic as only a well-bred Arab can be when confronted by an angry occidental.
The matter gave him enormous regret, no doubt an unhappy situation whose solution lay in the lap of the all-merciful Allah; nothing would give him greater pleasure than to return to Mr Laing his passport, which he had taken into nightly safekeeping only at the specific request of Mr Pyle.
He went to his safe and withdrew with slim brown fingers the green United States passport, and handed it back.
Laing was mollified, thanked him with the more formal and gracious ‘Ashkurak’ and withdrew.
Only when he had returned  to his own office did it occur to him to flick through his passport's pages.
In Saudi Arabia foreigners need not only an entry visa but an exit visa as well.
His own, formerly valid without limit of time, had been cancelled.
The stamp of the Jeddah Immigration Control office was perfectly genuine.
No doubt, he mused bitterly, Mr Al-Haroun had a friend in that bureau.
It was, after all, the local way of doing things.
Aware there was no going back, Andy Laing determined to scrap it out.
He recalled something the Operations Manager, Mr Amin, had once told him.
‘Amin, my friend, did you not mention once that you had a relative in the Immigration Service here?’ he asked him.
Amin saw no trap in the question.
‘Yes, indeed.
A cousin.’
‘In which office is he posted?’
‘Ah, not here, my friend.
He is in Dharram.’
Dharram was not near Jeddah, on the Red Sea, but right across the country in the extreme east, on the Arabian Gulf.
In the late morning Andy Laing made a phone call to Mr Zulfiqar Amin at his desk in Dharram.
‘This is Mr Steve Pyle, General Manager of the Saudi Arabian Investment Bank,’ he said.
‘I have one of my officers conducting business in Dharram at this moment.
He will need to fly on urgent matters to Bahrain tonight.
Unfortunately he tells me his exit visa is time-expired.
You know how long these things can take through normal channels….
I was wondering, in view of your cousin being in such high esteem with us….
You will find Mr Laing a most generous man….’
Using the lunch-hour, Andy Laing returned to his apartment, packed his bags and caught the 3 p.m.
Saudia airline flight to Dharram.
Mr Zulfiqar Amin was expecting him.
The reissue of an exit visa took two hours and a thousand riyals.
Mr Al-Haroun noticed the Credit and Marketing Manager's absence around the time he took off for Dharram.
He checked the Jeddah airport, but only the international departures office.
No trace of a Mr Laing.
Puzzled, he called Riyadh.
Pyle asked if a ‘block’ could be put on Laing boarding any flight at all, even internal.
‘I'm afraid, dear colleague, that can not be arranged,’ said  Mr Al-Haroun, who hated to disappoint.
‘But I can ask my friend if he has left by any internal flight.’
Laing was traced to Dharram just at the moment he crossed the frontier on the causeway to the neighbouring Emirate of Bahrain.
From there he easily caught a British Airways flight staging through from Mauritius to London.
Unaware he had obtained a new exit visa, Pyle waited till the following morning, then asked his bank staff in the Dharram office to check around the city and find out what Laing was doing there.
It took them three days and they came up with nothing.
Three days after the Secretary of Defense was charged by the Washington committee to obtain the package of diamonds demanded by Zack, he reported back that the task was taking longer than foreseen.
The money had been made available; that was not the problem.
‘Look,’ he told his colleagues, ‘I know nothing about diamonds.
But my contacts in the trade — I am using three, all very discreet and understanding men — tell me the number of stones involved is very substantial.
‘This kidnapper has asked for uncut rough ‘melees’ of one-fifth of a carat to half a carat, and of medium quality.
Such stones, I am told, are worth between two hundred and fifty dollars and three hundred dollars a carat.
To be on the safe side they are calculating the platform price of $250.
We are talking here some eight thousand carats.’
‘So what's the problem?’ asked Odell.
‘Time,’ said Morton Stannard.
‘At a fifth of a carat per stone that would be forty thousand stones.
At half a carat, sixteen thousand stones.
With a mixture of different weights, let's say twenty-five thousand stones.
It's a lot to put together this fast.
Three men are buying furiously, and trying not to make waves.’
‘What's the bottom line?’ asked Brad Johnson.
‘When can
they be ready for shipment?’
‘Another day, maybe two,’ said the Defense Secretary.
‘Stay on top of it, Morton,’ growled Odell.
‘We have the deal.
We can't keep this kid and his father waiting much longer.’
The moment they're in the bag, weighed and authenticated, you'll have them,’ said Stannard.
The following morning Kevin Brown took a private call in the embassy from one of his men.
‘We may have hit paydirt, Chief,’ said the agent tersely.
‘No more on an open line, boy.
Get your ass in here fast.
Tell me to my face.’
The agent was in London by noon.
What he had to say was more than interesting.
East of the towns of Biggleswade and Sandy, both of which lie on the A1 highway from London to the north, the county of Bedfordshire abuts Cambridgeshire.
The area is intersected only by minor ‘B’ -class roads and country lanes, contains no large towns and is largely given over to agriculture.
The county-border area contains only a few villages with old English names like Potton, Tadlow, Wrestlingworth and Gamlingay.
Between two of these villages, off the beaten track, lay an old farmhouse, part-ruined by fire, but with one wing still furnished and habitable, in a shallow valley and approached by a single track.
Two months earlier, the agent had discovered, the place had been rented by a small group of supposed ‘rustic freaks’ who claimed they wanted to return to nature, live simply and create artefacts in pottery and basket-weaving.
‘The thing is,’ said the agent, ‘they had the money for the rental in cash, they don't seem to sell much pottery, but they can run two off-road jeeps which are parked undercover in the barns.
And they mix with no one.’
‘What's the name of this place,’ asked Brown.
‘Green Meadow Farm, Chief.’
‘OK, we have enough daylight left if we don't hang around.
Let's go take a look at Green Meadow Farm.’
There were two hours of daylight left when Kevin Brown and the agent parked their car in the entrance to a farm track and made the rest on foot.
Guided by the agent, the pair approached with extreme caution, using the trees for cover, until they emerged from the tree-line above the valley.
From there they crawled the last ten yards to the edge of a rise and looked down into the valley.
The farmhouse lay below them, its fire-gutted wing black in the autumn afternoon, a low glow as from an oil-lamp coming from one window of the other wing.
As they watched, a burly man came out of the farm and  crossed to one of the three barns.
He spent ten minutes there, then returned to the farmhouse.
Brown scanned the complex of farm buildings with powerful binoculars.
Down the track to their left came a powerful Japanese off-road four-wheel-drive.
It parked in front of the farm, and a man climbed out.
He gazed carefully around him, scanning the rim of the valley for movement.
There was none.
‘Damn,’ said Brown.
‘Ginger hair, eyeglasses.’
The jeep-driver went into the farmhouse and emerged a few seconds later with the burly man.
This time they had a big Rottweiler with them.
The pair went to the same barn, spent ten minutes and returned.
The burly man drove the jeep under cover in another barn and closed the doors.
‘Rustic pottery, my ass,’ said Brown.
‘There's something or someone in that damn barn.
Five will get you ten it's a young man.
They wriggled back into the line of trees.
Dusk was descending.
‘Take the blanket from the trunk,’ said Brown.
‘And stay here.
Stake it out all night.
I'll be back with the team before sun-up — if there ever is any sun in this damn country.’
Across the valley, stretched out along a branch in a giant oak, a man in camouflage uniform lay motionless.
He, too, had powerful binoculars, with which he had noted the movements among the trees on the opposite side from his own position.
As Kevin Brown and his agent slithered off the rim of the high ground and into the woodland, he drew a small radio from his pocket and spoke quietly and urgently for several seconds.
It was 25 October, nineteen days since Simon Cormack had been kidnapped and seventeen since Zack's first call to the Kensington apartment.
He called again that evening, burying himself in the hurrying crowds in the centre of Luton.
‘What the hell's going on, Quinn?
It's been three bloody days.’
‘Hey, take it easy, Zack.
It's the diamonds.
You caught us on the hop there, ol' buddy.
That kind of package takes a wee while to put together.
I laid it on them over there in Washington — I mean, but hard.
They're working on it fast as they can, but, hell, Zack, twenty-five thousand stones, all good, all untraceable — that takes a bit—‘
‘Yeah, well, just tell them they got two more days and then they get their boy back in a bag.
Just tell 'em.’
He hung up.
The experts would later say his nerves were badly shot up.
He was reaching the point where he might be tempted to hurt the boy out of frustration or because he thought he was being tricked in some way.
Kevin Brown and his team were good and they were armed.
They came in four pairs from the only four directions from which the farm could be assailed.
Two skirted the track, darting from cover to cover.
The other three pairs came from the trees and down the sloping fields in complete silence.
It was that hour just before dawn when the light is at its trickiest, when the spirits of the quarry are at their lowest, the hour of the hunter.
The surprise was total.
Chuck Moxon and his partner took the suspect barn.
Moxon snipped off the padlock, his partner went in on the roll, coming to his feet on the dusty floor inside the barn with his handgun drawn.
Apart from a petrol generator, something like a kiln and a bench with an array of chemistry glassware, there was no one there.
The six men plus Brown who took the farmhouse fared better.
Two pairs went in through windows, taking the glass and the frames as they went, came to their feet without a pause, and headed straight upstairs to the bedrooms.
Brown and the remaining pair went through the front door.
The lock shattered with a single blow of the sledgehammer and they were in.
By the embers of the fire in the grate of the long kitchen, the burly man had been asleep in a chair.
It was his job to keep watch through the night, but boredom and tiredness had taken over.
At the crash from the front door he came out of his chair and reached for a twelve-bore shotgun that lay on the pine table.
He almost made it.
‘The shout of ‘Freeze’ from the door and the sight of the big crew-cut man crouched over a Colt.45 aimed straight at his chest caused the burly man to stop.
He spat and slowly raised both hands.
Upstairs the red-haired man was in bed with the only woman  in the group.
They both awoke as the windows and doors crashed in downstairs.
The woman screamed, the man went for the bedroom door and met the first FBI man on the landing.
The fighting was too close for firearms; the two men went down together in the darkness and wrestled until another American could discern which was which and hit the redhead hard with the butt of his Colt.
The fourth member of the farmhouse group was led blinking out of his bedroom a few seconds later, a thin, scrawny young man with lank hair.
The FBI team all had flashlights in their belts.
It took two more minutes to examine all the other bedrooms and establish that four people was the limit.
Kevin Brown had them all brought to the kitchen where lamps were lit.
He surveyed them with loathing.
‘OK, where's the kid?’ he asked.
One of his men looked out the window.
‘Chief, we have company.’
About fifty men were descending into the valley and towards the farmhouse on all sides, all in kneeboots, all in blue, a dozen with Alsatians straining at the leash.
In an outhouse the Rottweiler roared his rage at the intrusion.
A white Range Rover with blue markings jolted up the track to stop ten yards from the broken door.
A middle-aged man in blue, aglitter with silver buttons and insignia, descended, a braided peaked cap on his head.
He walked into the lobby without a word, entered the kitchen and gazed at the four prisoners.
‘OK, we hand it over to you now,’ said Brown.
‘He's here somewhere.
And those sleaze-balls know where.’
‘Exactly,’ asked the man in blue, ‘who are you?’
‘Yeah, of course.’
Kevin Brown produced his Bureau identification.
The Englishman looked at it carefully and handed it back.
‘See here,’ said Brown, ‘what we've done —‘
‘What you've done, Mr Brown,’ said the Chief Constable of Bedfordshire with icy rage, ‘is to blow away the biggest drug-bust this county was ever likely to have and now, I fear, never will have.
These people are low-level ‘minders’ and a chemist.
The big fish and their consignment was expected any day.
Now, would you please return to London?’
At that hour Steve Pyle was with Mr Al-Haroun in the latter's office in Jeddah, having flown to the coast following a disturbing phone call.
‘What exactly did he take?’ he asked for the fourth time.
Mr Al-Haroun shrugged.
These Americans were even worse than the Europeans, always in a hurry.
‘Alas, I am not an expert in these machines,’ he said, ‘but my nightwatchman here reports…’
He turned to the Saudi nightwatchman and rattled off a stream of Arabic.
The man replied, holding out his arms to signify the extent of something.
‘He says that the night I returned Mr Laing his passport, duly altered, the young man spent most of the night in the computer room, and left before dawn with a large amount of computer printout.
He returned for work at the normal hour without it.’
Steve Pyle returned to Riyadh a very worried man.
Helping his government and his country was one thing, but in an internal accounting inquiry that would not show up.
He asked for an urgent meeting with Colonel Easterhouse.
The Arabist listened to him calmly and nodded several times.
‘You think he has reached London?’ he asked.
‘I don't know how he could have done it, but where the hell else could he be?’
‘Mm.
Could I have access to your central computer for a while?’
It took the Colonel four hours at the console of the master computer in Riyadh.
The job was not difficult, since he had all the access codes.
By the time he had finished all the computerized records had been erased and a new record created.
Nigel Cramer got a first telephone report from Bedford in the mid-morning, long before the written record arrived.
When he called Patrick Seymour at the embassy he was incandescent with anger.
Brown and his team were still on the road south.
‘Patrick, we've always had a damn good relationship, but this is outrageous.
Who the hell does he think he is?
Where the hell does he think he is?’
Seymour was in an impossible position.
He had spent three years building on the excellent co-operation between the Bureau and the Yard that he had inherited from Darrell Mills.
He  had attended courses in England and arranged visits by senior Metropolitan officers to the Hoover Building to form those one-on-one relationships that in a crisis can cut through miles of red tape.
‘What exactly was going down at the farm?’ he asked.
Cramer calmed down and told him.
The Yard had had a tip months before that a big drug-ring was setting up a new and major operation in England.
After patient investigation the farm had been identified as the base.
Covert Squad men from his own SO Department had mounted surveillance week after week, in liaison with the Bedford police.
The man they wanted was a New Zealand-born heroin tsar, sought in a dozen countries but slippery as an eel.
The good news was he was expected to show up with a large coke consignment for processing, cutting and distributing; the bad news was he would now not come near the place.
‘I'm sorry, Patrick, but I'm going to have to ask the Home Secretary to have Washington bring him home.’
‘Well, if you must, you must,’ said Seymour.
As he put the phone down he thought: You go right ahead.
Cramer also had another task, even more urgent.
That was to stop the story appearing in any publication, or on radio or on television.
That morning he had to call on a lot of goodwill from the proprietors and editors of the media.
The Washington committee got Seymour's report at their first — 7 a.m. — meeting of the day.
‘Look, he got a first-class lead and he followed it up,’ protested Philip Kelly.
Don Edmonds shot him a warning glance.
‘He should have co-operated with Scotland Yard,’ said Secretary of State Jim Donaldson.
‘We just don't need to foul relations with the British authorities at this point.
What the hell am I to say to Sir Harry Marriott when he asks for Brown's recall?’
‘Look,’ said Treasury Secretary Reed, ‘why not propose a compromise?
Brown was over-zealous and we're sorry.
But we believe Quinn and the British will secure Simon Cormack's release momentarily.
When that happens, we need a strong group to escort the boy home.
Brown and his team should be given a few days’ extension to accomplish that.
Say, end of the week?’
Donaldson nodded.
‘Yeah, Sir Harry might accept that.
By the way, how is the President?’
‘Bucking up,’ said Odell.
‘Almost optimistic.
I told him an hour ago Quinn had secured further proof that Simon was alive and apparently well — the sixth time Quinn's got the kidnappers to prove that.
How about the diamonds, Morton?’
‘Ready by sundown,’ said Morton Stannard.
‘Get a fast bird standing by and ready,’ said Vice-President Odell.
Defense Secretary Stannard nodded and made a note.
Andy Laing finally got his interview with the Internal Accountant just after lunch that day.
The man was a fellow-American and had been on a tour of European branches for the previous three days.
He listened soberly and with growing dismay to what the young bank officer from Jeddah had to say, and scanned the computer printouts across his desk with a practised eye.
When he had finished he leaned back in his chair, puffed out his cheeks and exhaled noisily.
‘Dear God, these are very serious accusations indeed.
And yes, they appear to be substantiated.
Where are you staying in London?’
‘I still have an apartment in Chelsea,’ said Laing.
‘I've been there since I arrived.
Luckily the renting tenants moved out two weeks back.’
The accountant noted its address and phone number.
‘I'm going to have to consult with the General Manager here, maybe the President in New York.
Before we face Steve Pyle with this.
Stay close to the phone for a couple of days.’
What neither of them knew was that the morning pouch from Riyadh contained a confidential letter from Steve Pyle to the London-based General Manager for Overseas Operations.
The British press was as good as its word; but Radio Luxembourg is based in Paris, and for French listeners the story of a first-class row between their Anglo-Saxon neighbours to the west is too good to miss.
Where the tip-off really came from could never be later established, except that it was a phone-in and anonymous.
But  the London office checked it out and confirmed that the sheer secrecy of the Bedford police gave credence to the story.
It was a thin day, and they ran it on the four o'clock news.
Hardly anybody heard it in England, but the Corsican did.
He whistled in amazement and went to find Zack.
The Englishman listened carefully, asked several supplementary questions in French and went pale with anger.
Quinn knew already, and that was a saving grace because he had time to prepare an answer in the event Zack called.
He did, just after 7 p.m. and in a towering rage.
‘You lying bastard.
You said there'd be no cowboy antics from the police or anyone else.
You bloody lied to me…’
Quinn protested he did not know what Zack was talking about — it would have been too phoney to know all the details without a reminder.
Zack told him in three angry sentences.
‘But that was nothing to do with you,’ Quinn shouted back.
‘The Frogs got it wrong as usual.
It was a DEA drug-bust that went wrong.
You know these Rambos from the Drug Enforcement Agency — they did it.
They weren't looking for you, they were looking for cocaine.
I had a Scotland Yard man here an hour ago and he was puking about it.
For Chrissake, Zack, you know the media.
If you believe them, Simon's been sighted eight hundred different places and you've been caught fifty times…’
It was plausible.
Quinn counted on Zack having spent three weeks reading miles of inaccurate nonsense in the tabloid papers and having a healthy contempt for the press.
In a booth in Linslade bus depot, he calmed down.
His phone-time was running out.
‘Better not be true, Quinn.
Just better not,’ he said, and hung up.
Sam Somerville and Duncan McCrea were pale with fear by the time the call ended.
‘Where are those damn diamonds?’ asked Sam.
There was worse to come.
Like most countries, Britain has a range of breakfast-hour radio programmes, a mix of mindless chitchat from the show host, pop music, news-flashes and phone-in trivia.
The news is up-to-the-minute snippets tom from the agency printers, hastily rewritten by junior sub-editors and thrust under the disc jockey's nose.
The pace of the  programmes is such that careful checking and rechecking, practised by the investigative reporters of the Sunday ‘heavies’, just does not take place.
When an American rang the busy news-desk of City Radio's ‘Good Morning’ show, the call was taken by a girl trainee who later tearfully admitted she had not thought to query the claim that the speaker was the Press Counsellor from the American embassy with a genuine news-bulletin.
It went on the air in the excited tones of the DJ seventy seconds later.
Nigel Cramer did not hear it, but his teenage daughter did.
‘Dad,’ she called from the kitchen, ‘you going to catch them today?’
‘Catch who?’ said her father, pulling on his coat in the hall.
His official car was at the kerb.
‘The kidnappers…you know.’
‘I doubt it.
Why do you ask?’
‘Says so on the radio.’
Something hit Cramer hard in the stomach.
He turned back from the door and into the kitchen.
His daughter was buttering toast.
‘What, exactly, did it say on the radio?’ he asked in a very tight voice.
She told him.
That an exchange of the ransom for Simon Cormack would be set up within the day, and that the authorities were confident all the kidnappers would be caught in the process.
Cramer ran out to his car, took the handset from the dashboard and began to make a series of frantic calls as the car rolled.
It was too late.
Zack had not heard the programme, but the South African had.
CHAPTER NINE
THE CALL FROM ZACK was later than usual, 10.20 a.m.
If he had been angry the previous day over the matter of the raid on the Bedfordshire farm, he was by now almost hysterical with rage.
Nigel Cramer had had time to warn Quinn, speaking from his car as it sped towards Scotland Yard.
When Quinn put down the phone, it was the first time Sam had seen him appear visibly shaken.
He paced the apartment in silence; the other two sat and watched in fear.
They had heard the gist of Cramer's call and sensed that it was all going to fail, somehow, somewhere.
Just waiting for the flash line to ring, not even knowing whether the kidnappers would have heard the radio show at all, or how they would react if they had, made Sam nauseous from stress.
When the phone finally rang Quinn answered it with his usual calm good humour.
Zack did not even bother with preambles.
‘Right, this time you've bloody blown it, you Yankee bastard.
You take me for some kind of fool, do you?
Well, you're the fool, mate.
'Cos you're going to look a right fool when you bury Simon Cormack's body…’
Quinn's shock and amazement were convincingly feigned.
‘Zack, what the hell are you talking about?
What's gone wrong?’
‘Don't give me that,’ screamed the kidnapper, his gruff voice  rising.
‘If you didn't hear the news, then ask your police mates about it.
And don't pretend it was a lie; it came from your own sodding embassy…’
Quinn persuaded Zack to tell him what he had heard, even though he knew.
The telling caused Zack to calm down slightly; and his time was running out.
‘Zack, it's a lie, a phoney.
Any exchange would be just you and me, pal.
Alone and unarmed.
No direction-finding devices, no tricks, no police, no soldiers.
Your terms, your place, your time.
That's the only way I'd have it.’
‘Yeah, well, it's too late.
Your people want a body, that's what they're going to get.’
He was about to hang up.
For the last time.
Quinn knew if that happened it would be over.
Days, weeks later, someone somewhere would enter a house or a flat, a cleaner, a caretaker, a real estate agent, and there he'd be.
The President's only son, shot through the head, or strangled, half-decomposed…
‘Zack, please, stay there just a few more seconds…’
Sweat was running off Quinn's face, the first time he had ever shown the massive strain inside himself these past twenty days.
He knew just how close it was to disaster.
In the Kensington exchange a group of Telecom engineers and police officers stared at the monitors and listened to the rage coming down the line; at Cork Street, beneath the pavements of smart Mayfair, four men from MI5 were rooted in their chairs, motionless as the anger poured out of the speaker into the room and the tape-deck wound silently round and round.
Below the American embassy in Grosvenor Square there were two ELINT engineers and three FBI agents, plus Lou Collins of the CIA and FBI representative Patrick Seymour.
The news of the morning broadcast had brought them all to this place, anticipating something like what they were now hearing, which did not make it any better.
The fact that all the nation's radio stations, including City Radio, had spent two hours denouncing the hoax call of the breakfast hour was irrelevant.
They all knew that; leaks can be repudiated for the rest of time — it changes nothing.
Like Hitler said, the big lie is the one they believe.
‘Please, Zack, let me get on to President Cormack personally.
Just twenty-four hours more.
After all this time, don't throw it  away now.
The President's got the authority to tell these assholes to get out of here and leave it to you and me.
Just the two of us…we're the only ones who can be trusted to get it right.
All I ask, after twenty days, is just one more…
Twenty-four hours, Zack, give me just that…’
There was a pause on the line.
Somewhere, along the streets of Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire, a young detective constable was moving casually towards the bank of phone-booths.
‘This time tomorrow,’ said Zack finally, and put the phone down.
He quit the booth and had just turned the corner when the plain-clothes policeman emerged from an alley and glanced at the bank of kiosks.
All were empty.
He had missed spotting Zack by eight seconds.
Quinn replaced the phone, walked to the long couch, lay on his back with his hands clasped behind his head and stared at the ceiling.
‘Mr Quinn,’ said McCrea hesitantly.
Despite repeated assurances he could drop the ‘mister’, the shy young CIA man insisted on treating Quinn like his teacher.
‘Shut up,’ said Quinn clearly.
The crestfallen McCrea, who had been about to ask if Quinn wanted a coffee, went to the kitchen and made three anyway.
The third, the ‘ordinary’ telephone rang.
It was Cramer.
‘Well, we all heard that,’ he said.
‘How you feeling?’
‘Beat,’ said Quinn.
‘Any news on the source of the broadcast?’
‘Not yet,’ said Cramer.
‘The girl sub-editor who took the call is still at Holborn police station.
She swears it was an American voice, but what would she know?
She swears the man made it sound convincingly official, knew what to say.
You want a transcript of the broadcast?’
‘Bit late now,’ said Quinn.
‘What are you going to do?’ asked Cramer.
‘Pray a bit.
I'll think of something.’
‘Good luck.
I have to go round to Whitehall now.
I'll stay in touch.’
The embassy came next.
Seymour.
Congratulations on the way Quinn had handled it…
If there's anything we can do…
That's the trouble, thought Quinn.
Someone is doing too damn much.
But he did not say it.
He was halfway through his coffee when he swung his legs  off the couch and picked up the phone to the embassy.
It was answered at once in the basement.
Seymour again.
‘I want a patch-through on a secure line to Vice-President Odell,’ he said, ‘and I want it now.’
‘Er, look, Quinn, Washington is being alerted to what just happened here.
They'll have the tapes themselves momentarily.
I figure we should let them hear what happened and discuss —‘
‘I speak with Michael Odell inside ten minutes, or I raise him on the open line,’ said Quinn carefully.
Seymour thought it over.
The open line was insecure.
NSA would pick up the call with their satellites; the British GCHQ would get it; so would the Russians…
‘I'll get to him and ask him to take your call,’ said Seymour.
Ten minutes later Michael Odell came on the line.
It was 6.15 a.m. in Washington, and he was still at his residence at the Naval Observatory.
But he had been woken half an hour earlier.
‘Quinn, what the hell's going on over there?
I just heard some horseshit about a hoax call to a radio show…’
‘Mr Vice-President,’ said Quinn levelly, ‘have you a mirror nearby?’
There was a stunned pause.
‘Yeah, I guess so.’
‘If you look in it, you will see the nose on your face, right?’
‘Look, what is this?
Yeah, OK, I can see the nose on my face.’
‘As surely as what you are looking at, Simon Cormack is going to be murdered in twenty-four hours…’
He let the words sink into the shocked man sitting on the edge of his bed in Washington.
‘Unless…’
‘OK, Quinn, lay it on the line.’
‘Unless I have that package of diamonds, market value two million dollars, here in my hands by sunrise, London time, tomorrow.
This call has been taped, for the record.
Good day, Mr Vice-President.’
He put the phone down.
At the other end the Vice-President of the United States of America used language for several minutes that would have lost him the votes of the Moral Majority, had those good citizens had the opportunity to hear  him.
When he had done, he called the telephone operator.
‘Get me Morton Stannard,’ he said.
‘At his home, wherever.
Just get him .’
Andy Laing was surprised to be summoned back to the bank so quickly.
The appointment was for 11 a.m., and he was there ten minutes early.
When he was shown up, it was not to the office of the Internal Accountant, but to that of the General Manager.
The accountant was by the GM's side.
The senior officer gestured Laing to a seat opposite his desk without a word.
The man then rose, walked to the window, stared out for a while over the pinnacles of the City, turned and spoke.
His tone was grave and frosty.
‘Yesterday, Mr Laing, you came to see my colleague here, having quit Saudi Arabia by whatever means you were able, and made serious allegations concerning the integrity of Mr Steve Pyle.’
Laing was worried.
Mr Laing?
Where was ‘Andy’?
They always first-named each other in the bank, part of the family atmosphere New York insisted on.
‘And I brought a mass of computer printout to back up what I had found,’ he said carefully, but his stomach was churning.
Something was wrong.
The General Manager waved dismissively at the mention of Laing's evidence.
‘Yesterday I also received a long letter from Steve Pyle.
Today I had a lengthy phone call.
It is perfectly clear to me, and to the Internal Accountant here, that you are a rogue, Laing; and an embezzler.’
Laing could not believe his ears.
He shot a glance for support at the accountant.
The man stared at the ceiling.
‘I have the story,’ said the GM, ‘the full story.
The real story.’
In case Laing was unfamiliar with it, he told the young man what he now knew to be true.
Laing had been embezzling money from a client's account, the Ministry of Public Works.
Not a large amount in Saudi terms, but enough; l per cent of every invoice paid out to contractors by the Ministry.
Mr Amin had unfortunately missed spotting the figures, but Mr Al-Haroun had seen the flaws and alerted Mr Steve Pyle.
The General Manager in Riyadh, in an excess of loyalty, had tried to protect Laing's career by only insisting that every riyal  be returned to the Ministry's account, something that had now been done.
Laing's response to this extraordinary solidarity from a colleague, and in outrage at losing his money, had been to spend the night in the Jeddah branch falsifying the records to ‘prove’ that a much larger sum had been embezzled with the co-operation of Steve Pyle himself.
‘But the tape I brought back,’ protested Laing.
‘Forgeries of course.
We have the real records here.
This morning I ordered our central computer here to hack into the Riyadh computer and do a check.
The real records now lie there, on my desk.
They show quite clearly what happened.
The one per cent you stole has been replaced.
No other money is missing.
The Bank's reputation in Saudi Arabia has been saved, thank God — or, rather, thank Steve Pyle.’
‘But it's not true,’ protested Laing, too shrilly.
‘The skim Pyle and his unknown associate were perpetrating was ten per cent of the Ministry accounts.’
The GM looked stonily at Laing and then at the evidence fresh in from Riyadh.
‘Al,’ he asked, ‘do you see any record of ten per cent being skimmed?’
The accountant shook his head.
‘That would be preposterous in any case,’ he said.
‘With such sums washing around, one per cent might be hidden in a big ministry in those parts.
But never ten per cent.
The annual audit, due in April, would have uncovered the swindle.
Then where would you have been?
In a filthy Saudi gaol cell for ever.
We do assume, do we not, that the Saudi government will still be there next April?’
The GM gave a wintry smile.
That was too obvious.
‘No, I'm afraid,’ concluded the accountant, ‘that it's an open-and-shut case.
Steve Pyle has not only done us all a favour; he has done you one, Mr Laing.
He's saved you from a long prison-term.
‘Which, I believe, you probably deserve,’ said the GM.
‘We can't inflict that, in any case.
And we don't relish the scandal.
We supply contract officers to many Third World banks, and a scandal we do not need.
But you, Mr Laing, no longer constitute one of those bank officers.
Your dismissal letter is in front of you.
There will, of course, be no severance pay, and a reference is out of the question.
Now, please go.’
Laing knew it was a sentence; never to work in banking ever again, anywhere in the world.
Sixty seconds later he was on the pavement of Lombard Street.
In Washington, Morton Stannard had listened to the rage of Zack as the spools unwound on the conference-table in the Situation Room, to which the committee had repaired to avoid the Long Tom cameras constantly peering at the windows of the Cabinet Room.
The news out of London that an exchange was imminent, whether true or false, had galvanized a resurgence of press frenzy in Washington.
Since before dawn the White House had been deluged with calls for information, and once again the Press Spokesman was at his wits' end.
When the tape finally ran out the eight members present were silent with shock.
‘The diamonds,’ growled Odell.
‘Where the hell are they?’
‘They're ready,’ said Stannard promptly.
‘I apologize for my over-optimism earlier.
I know nothing of such matters; I thought arranging such a consignment would take less time.
But they are ready — just under twenty-five thousand mixed stones, all authentic and valued at just over two million dollars.’
‘Where are they?’ asked Hubert Reed.
‘In the safe of the head of the Pentagon office in New York, the office that handles our East Coast systems-purchasing.
For obvious reasons, it's a very secure safe.’
‘What about transit to London?’ asked Brad Johnson.
‘I suggest we use one of our airbases in England.
We don't need problems with the press at Heathrow, or anything like that.’
‘I am meeting in one hour with a senior Air Force expert,’ said Stannard.
‘He will advise how best to get the package there.’
‘We will need a Company car to meet them on arrival and get them to Quinn at the apartment,’ said Odell.
‘Lee, you arrange that.
It's your apartment, after all.’
‘No problem,’ said Lee Alexander of the CIA.
‘I'll have Lou Collins pick them up himself at the airbase on touchdown.’
‘By dawn tomorrow, London time,’ said the Veep.
‘In  London, in Kensington, by dawn.
We know the details of the exchange yet?’
‘No,’ said the Director of the FBI.
‘No doubt Quinn will work out the details in conjunction with our people.’
The Air Force proposed the use of a single-seat jet fighter to make the Atlantic crossing, an F-15 Eagle.
‘It has the range if we fit it with FAST packs,’ the Air Force general told Morton Stannard at the Pentagon.
‘We must have the package delivered to the Air National Guard base at Trenton, New Jersey, no later than two p.m.’
The pilot selected for the mission was an experienced lieutenant-colonel with over 7,000 flying hours on the F-15.
Through the late morning the Eagle at Trenton was serviced as seldom in her existence before, and the FAST packs were fitted to each of the port and starboard air-intake trunks.
These packs, despite their name, would not increase the Eagle's speed; the word stands for Fuel And Sensor Tactical, and they are really long-range extra fuel-tanks.
Stripped down, the Eagle carries 23,000 pounds of fuel, giving her a ferry range of 2,878 miles; the extra 5,000 pounds in each FAST pack boost that to 3,450 miles.
In the navigation room Colonel Bowers pored over his flight-plan and a sandwich lunch.
From Trenton to the USAF base at Upper Heyford outside the city of Oxford was 3,063 miles.
The meteorology men told him his wind strengths at his chosen altitude of 50,000 feet, and he worked out he would make it in 5.4 hours flying at Mach.
95 and would still have 4,300 pounds of fuel remaining.
At 2 p.m. a big KC 135 tanker lifted off from Andrews Air Force Base outside Washington and headed for a mid-air rendezvous with the Eagle at 45,000 feet over the eastern seaboard.
At Trenton there was one last hold-up.
Colonel Bowers was in his flying-suit by three o'clock and ready to go, when the long black limousine from the Pentagon's New York bureau came through the main gate.
A civilian official, accompanied by an Air Force general, handed over a plain flat attaché case and a slip of paper with the number of the combination lock.
Hardly had he done so when another unmarked limousine  entered the base.
There was a flustered conference on the tarmac between two groups of officials.
Eventually the attaché case and the slip of paper were retrieved from Colonel Bowers and taken to the rear seat of one of the cars.
The attaché case was opened and its contents, a flat pack of black velvet, ten inches by twelve inches and three inches thick, was transferred to a new attaché case.
This was the one that was handed to the impatient colonel.
Interceptor fighters are not accustomed to hauling freight, but a storage space had been prepared right beneath the pilot's seat, and it was here the attaché case was slotted.
The colonel lifted off at 3.31 p.m.
He climbed rapidly to 45,000 feet, called up his tanker and ‘topped off’ his fuel-tanks to begin the run for England with a full load.
After fuelling he nosed up to 50,000 feet, turned to his compass course for Upper Heyford and boosted power to settle at Mach.
95, just below the shudder zone that marks the sound-barrier.
He caught his expected westerly tail-wind over Nantucket.
While the conference was still continuing on the tarmac at Trenton, a scheduled airlines jumbo jet had taken off from Kennedy for London Heathrow.
In the Club section was a tall and clean-cut young man who had made the flight after connecting from Houston.
He worked for a major oil corporation there called Pan-Global and felt he was privileged to be entrusted by his employer, the proprietor himself, with such a discreet mission.
Not that he had the faintest idea of the contents of the envelope he carried within the breast pocket of the jacket he declined to hand over to the stewardess.
Nor did he wish to know.
He only knew it must contain documents of great corporate sensitivity since it could not be mailed or faxed, or sent by commercial courier pouch.
His instructions were clear; he had repeated them many times.
He was to go to a certain address on a certain day — the following day — at a certain hour.
He was not to ring the bell, just drop the envelope through the letter-box, then return to Heathrow airport and Houston.
Tiring but simple.
He did not drink alcohol; it was the cocktail hour, dinner would not come yet, so he gazed out of the window.
Flying west to east on a winter's day the dark comes quickly.
After just two hours in the air the sky had turned a deep purple and the stars were clearly visible.
As he watched he saw, high above his own aircraft, a small pinpoint of red fire moving through the band of stars, heading the same way as he.
Though he did not know it, and never would, he was looking at the blazing jet-pipe of Colonel Bowers' F-15 Eagle as both men raced on different missions towards the British capital, neither man knowing what it was he carried.
The colonel got there first.
He touched down at Upper Heyford right on schedule at 1.55 a.m. local time, disturbing the sleep of the villagers beneath him as he made his final turn into the approach lights.
The tower told him which way to taxi, and he finally stopped in a bright ring of lights inside a hangar whose doors closed the moment he shut down his engines.
When he opened the canopy the base commander approached with a civilian.
It was the civilian who spoke.
‘Colonel Bowers?’
‘That's me, sir.’
‘You have a package for me?’
‘I have an attaché case.
Right under my seat.’
He stretched stiffly, climbed out and clambered down the steel ladder to the hangar floor.
Helluva way to see England, he thought.
The civilian went up the ladder and retrieved the attaché case.
He held out his hand for the combination code.
Ten minutes later Lou Collins was back in his Company limousine, heading towards London.
He reached the Kensington apartment at ten minutes after four.
The lights still burned, no one had slept.
Quinn was in the sitting-room drinking coffee.
Collins laid the attaché case on the low table, consulted the slip of paper and tumbled the rollers.
From the case he took the flat, near-square, velvet-wrapped package and handed it to Quinn.
‘In your hands, by dawn,’ he said.
Quinn hefted the pack in his hands.
Just over a kilogram, about three pounds.
‘You want to open it?’ asked Collins.
‘No need,’ said Quinn.
‘If they are glass, or paste, or any part of them are, or any one of them, someone will probably have blown away Simon Cormack's life.’
‘They wouldn't do that,’ said Collins.
‘No, they're genuine all right.
Do you think he'll call?’
‘Just pray he does,’ said Quinn.
‘And the exchange?’
‘We'll have to arrange it today.’
‘How are you going to handle it, Quinn?’
‘My way.’
He went off to his room to have a bath and dress.
For quite a lot of people the last day of October was going to be a very rough day indeed.
The young man from Houston landed at 6.45 a.m.
London time and with only a small hand-grip of toiletries moved quickly through Customs and into the concourse of Number Three Building.
He checked his watch and knew he had three hours to wait.
Time to use the washroom, freshen up, take breakfast and a cab to the centre of London's West End.
At 9.55 he presented himself at the door of the tall and impassive apartment-house a block back from Great Portland Street in the Marble Arch district.
He was five minutes early.
He had been told to be exact.
From across the street a man in a parked car watched him, but he did not know that.
He strolled up and down for five minutes then, on the dot of ten, dropped the fat envelope through the letter-box of the apartment-house.
There was no hall porter to pick it up.
It lay there on the mat inside the door.
Satisfied that he had done what he had been instructed, the young American walked back down to Bayswater Road and soon hailed a cab for Heathrow.
Hardly was he around the corner than the man in the parked car climbed out, crossed the road and let himself in to the apartment-block.
He lived there, had done for several weeks.
His sojourn in the car was simply to assure himself the messenger boy responded to the given description and had not been followed.
The man picked up the fallen envelope, took the lift to the eighth floor, let himself into his apartment and slit open the envelope.
He was satisfied as he read, and his breath came in snuffles, whistling through the distorted nasal passages as he breathed.
Irving Moss now had what he believed would be his final instructions.
In the Kensington apartment the morning ticked away in silence.
The tension was almost tangible.
In the telephone exchange, in Cork Street, in Grosvenor Square the listeners sat hunched over their machines, waiting for Quinn to say something, or for McCrea or Sam Somerville to open their mouth.
There was silence on the speakers.
Quinn had made plain if Zack did not call it was over.
The careful search for an abandoned house and a body would have to begin.
And Zack did not call.
At half-past ten Irving Moss left his Marble Arch flat, took his rental car from its parking-bay and drove to Paddington station.
His beard, grown in Houston during the planning stages, had changed the shape of his face.
His Canadian passport was beautifully forged and had brought him effortlessly into the Republic of Ireland and thence on the ferry to England.
His driving licence, also Canadian, had caused no problems in the renting of a compact car on long-term lease.
He had lived quietly and unobtrusively for weeks behind Marble Arch, one of over a million foreigners in the British capital.
He was a skilled enough agent to be able to drop into almost any city and disappear from view.
London, in any case, he knew.
He knew how things worked in London, where to go to obtain what he wanted or needed, had contacts with the underworld, was smart enough and experienced enough not to make mistakes of the kind that draw a visitor to the attention of the authorities.
His letter from Houston had been an update, filling in a range of details that had not been capable of being fitted into coded messages to and from Houston in the form of price-lists of market produce.
There were also further instructions in the letter, but most interesting of all was the situation report from within the West Wing of the White House, notably the state of deterioration that President John Cormack had suffered these past three weeks.
Finally there was the ticket for the left-luggage office at Paddington station, something that could only cross the Atlantic by hand.
How it had got to London from Houston he did not know or want to know.
He did not need to know.
He knew how it had come to him, and now it was in his hand.
At 11 a.m. he used it.
The British Rail employee thought nothing of it.
In the course of a day hundreds of packages, grips and suitcases were consigned to his office for safe-keeping, and hundreds more withdrawn.
Only after three months unclaimed would a package be taken off the shelves and opened, for disposal if it could not be identified.
The ticket he was presented that morning by the silent man in the medium-grey gabardine raincoat was just another ticket.
He ranged along his shelves, found the numbered item, a small fibre suitcase, and handed it over.
It was pre-paid anyway.
He would not remember the transaction by nightfall.
Moss took the case back to his apartment, forced the cheap locks and examined the contents.
They were all there, as he had been told they would be.
He checked his watch.
He had three hours before he need set off.
There was a house, set in a quiet road on the outskirts of a commuter town not forty miles from the centre of London.
At a certain time he would drive past that house, as he did every second day, and the position of his driver's window, fully up, half-lowered or fully down, would convey to the watcher the thing he needed to know.
This day, for the first time, the window would be in the fully down position.
He slotted one of his locally acquired S/M videos — ultra-hardcore, but he knew where to go for his supplies — into his television and settled back to enjoy himself.
When Andy Laing left the bank he was almost in a state of shock.
Few men go through the experience of seeing their entire career, worked on and nurtured for years of effort, scattered in small and irrecoverable pieces at their feet.
The first reaction is incomprehension, the second indecision.
Laing wandered aimlessly through the narrow streets and hidden courtyards that hide between the roaring traffic of the City of London, the capital's most ancient square mile and centre of the country's commercial and banking world.
He passed the walls of monasteries that once echoed to the chants of the Greyfriars, the Whitefriars and the Blackfriars, past guildhalls where merchants had convened to discuss the business of the world when Henry VIII was executing his wives down the road at the Tower, past delicate little churches designed by Wren in the aftermath of the Great Fire of 1666.
The men who scurried past him, and the increasingly large number of attractive young women, were thinking of commodity prices, buying long or short, or a flicker of movement in the money markets that might be a trend or just a flicker.
They used computers instead of quill pens, but the outcome of their labours was still the same as it had been for centuries — trade, the buying and selling of things that other people made.
It was a world that had captured Andy Laing's imagination ten years before, when he was just finishing school, and it was a world he would never enter again.
He had a light lunch in a small sandwich bar off the street called Crutched Friars, where monks once hobbled with one leg bound behind them to cause pain for the greater glory of God, and he made up his mind what he would do.
He finished his coffee and took the Underground back to his studio apartment in Beaufort Street, Chelsea, where he had prudently stored photocopies of the evidence he had brought out of Jeddah.
When a man has nothing more to lose, he can become very dangerous.
Laing decided to write it all down, from start to finish, to include copies of his printouts, which he knew to be genuine, and to send a copy to every member of the bank's Board in New York.
The membership of the Board was public knowledge; their business addresses would be in the American Who's Who .
He saw no reason why he should suffer in silence.
Let Steve Pyle do some worrying for a change, he thought.
So he sent the General Manager in Riyadh a personal letter telling him what he was going to do.
Zack finally rang at 1.20 p.m., the height of the lunch-time rush-hour, while Laing was finishing his coffee and Moss was entranced by a new child-abuse movie fresh in from Amsterdam.
He was in one of a bank of four public booths set into the rear wall of Dunstable post office; he was still north of London.
Quinn had been washed and dressed since sunup, and that day there really was a sun to see, shining brightly out of a blue sky with only a hint of cool in the air.
Whether he was feeling the cold neither McCrea nor Sam had thought to ask, but he had put on jeans, his new cashmere sweater over his shirt and a zip-up leather jacket.
‘Quinn, this is the last call…’
‘Zack old buddy, I am staring at a fruit-bowl, a big bowl, and you know what?
It's full to the damn brim with diamonds, glittering and gleaming away like they was alive.
Let's deal, Zack.
Let's deal now.’
The mental image he had drawn stopped Zack in his tracks.
‘Right,’ said the voice on the phone, ‘these are the instructions —‘
‘No, Zack, we do this my way or it all gets blown to kingdom come…’
In the Kensington exchange, Cork Street and Grosvenor Square there was stunned silence among the listeners.
Either Quinn knew just what he was doing or he was going to provoke the kidnapper into putting down the phone.
Quinn's voice went on without a pause.
‘I may be a bastard, Zack, but I'm the only bastard in this whole damn mess you can trust and you're going to have to trust me.
Got a pencil…?’
‘Yeah.
Now, listen, Quinn —‘
‘You listen, buddy.
I want you to move to another booth and call me in forty seconds on this number.
Three-seven-oh; one-two-oh-four.
Now,go …’
The last word was a shout.
Sam Somerville and Duncan McCrea would later tell the inquiry that they were as stunned as those listening on the line.
Quinn dropped the phone, grabbed the attaché case — the diamonds were still inside it, not in a fruit-bowl — and ran out the sitting-room door.
He turned as he went and roared: ‘Stay there.’
The surprise, the shout, the authority in his command kept them pinned in their chairs for a vital five seconds.
When they reached the apartment's front door they heard the key turn in the lock on the far side.
Apparently it had been placed there in the pre-dawn.
Quinn avoided the lift-shaft and hit the stairs about the time McCrea's first shout came through the door, followed by a hefty kick at the lock.
Among the listeners there was already a nascent chaos that would soon grow to pandemonium.
‘What the hell's he doing?’ whispered one policeman to another at the Kensington exchange, to be met by a shrug.
Quinn was racing down the three flights of stairs to the lobby-level.
The inquiry would show the American at the listening-post in the basement apartment did not move because it was not his job to move.
His job was to keep the stream of voices from inside the apartment above him recorded, encoded, radioed to Grosvenor Square for decoding and digestion by the listeners in the basement.
So he stayed where he was.
Quinn crossed the lobby fifteen seconds after slamming down the phone.
The British porter in his booth looked up, nodded, and went back to his copy of the Daily Mirror .
Quinn pushed open the street-door, which opened outwards, closed it behind him, dropped a wooden wedge he had carved in the privacy of the toilet under the sill and gave it a hard kick.
Then he ran across the road, dodging between the traffic.
‘What do they mean, he's gone?’ shouted Kevin Brown in the listening-post at Grosvenor Square.
He had been sitting in the post all morning, waiting, as they all were, British and Americans alike, for Zack's latest and maybe last call.
At first the sounds coming from Kensington had been merely confusing; they heard the phone go down, heard Quinn shout ‘Stay there’ at someone, then a series of bangs, confused shouts and cries from McCrea and Somerville, then a series of regular bangs, as if someone was kicking a door.
Sam Somerville had come back into the room, shouting at the bugs: ‘He's gone.
Quinn's gone.’
Brown's question could be heard in the listening-post but not by Somerville.
Frantically Brown scrabbled for the phone that would connect his with his Special Agent in Kensington.
‘Agent Somerville,’ he boomed when he heard her on the line, ‘get after him.’
At that moment McCrea's fifth kick broke the lock on the apartment door.
He raced for the stairs, followed by Sam.
Both were in carpet slippers.
The greengrocer's shop and delicatessen across the street from the apartment, whose number Quinn had obtained from the London telephone directory in the sitting-room cabinet, was called Bradshaw, after the man who had started it, but was now owned by an Indian gentleman called Mr Patel.
Quinn had watched him from across the street, tending his exterior fruit-display or disappearing inside to attend to a customer.
Quinn hit the opposite pavement thirty-three seconds after putting down the phone on Zack.
He dodged two pedestrians and came through the doorway into the foodfare shop like a tornado.
The telephone was on the cash-desk, next to the register, behind which stood Mr Patel.
‘Those kids are stealing your oranges,’ said Quinn without ceremony.
At that moment the phone rang.
Torn between a telephone call and stolen oranges, Mr Patel reacted like a good Gujarati and ran outside.
Quinn picked up the handset.
The Kensington exchange had reacted fast, and the inquiry would show they had done their best.
But they lost several of the forty seconds through sheer surprise, then they had a technical problem.
Their ‘lock’ was on the flash line in the apartment.
Whenever a call came into that number, their electronic exchange could run back up the line to establish the source of the call.
The number it came from would then be revealed by the computer to be such and such a booth in a certain place.
Between six and ten seconds.
They already had a lock on the number Zack had used first, but when he changed booths, even though the kiosks were side-by-side in Dunstable, they lost him.
Worse, he was now ringing another London number into which they were not tapped.
The only saving grace was that the number Quinn had dictated down the line to Zack was still on the Kensington exchange.
Still, the tracers had to start at the beginning, their call-finder mechanism racing frantically through the twenty thousand numbers on the exchange.
They tapped into Mr Patel's phone fifty-eight seconds after Quinn had dictated it, then got a lock on the second number in Dunstable.
‘Take this number, Zack,’ said Quinn without preamble.
‘What the hell's going on?’ snarled Zack.
‘Nine-three-five; three-two-one-five,’ said Quinn remorselessly.
‘Got it?’
There was a pause as Zack scribbled.
‘Now we'll do it ourselves, Zack.
I've done a runner on the lot of them.
Just you and me, the diamonds against the boy.
No tricks, my word on it.
Call me on that number in sixty minutes, and ninety minutes if there's no reply first time.
It's not on trace.’
He put the phone down.
In the exchange the listeners heard  the words ‘…minutes, and ninety minutes if there's no reply first time.
It's not on trace.’
‘Bastard's given him another number,’ said the engineer in Kensington to the two Metropolitan officers with him.
One of them was already on the phone to the Yard.
Quinn came out of the shop to see Duncan McCrea across the road trying to push his way through the jammed street-door.
Sam was behind him, waving and gesticulating.
The porter joined them, scratching his thinning hair.
Two cars went down the street on the opposite side; on Quinn's side a motor-cyclist was approaching.
Quinn stepped into the road, right in the man's path, his arms raised, attaché case swinging from his left hand.
The motor-cyclist braked, swerved, skidded and slithered to a stop.
‘'Ere, wot on erf…?’
Quinn gave him a disarming smile as he ducked round the handlebars.
The short, hard kidney punch completed the job.
As the youth in the crash-helmet doubled over, Quinn hoisted him off his machine, swung his own right leg over it, engaged gear and gunned the engine.
He went off down the street just as McCrea's flailing hand missed his jacket by six inches.
McCrea stood in the street looking sorrowful and dejected.
Sam joined him.
They looked at each other, then ran back into the apartment-block.
The fastest way to talk to Grosvenor Square was to get back to the third floor.
‘Right, that's it,’ said Brown five minutes later, after listening to both McCrea and Somerville on the line from Kensington.
‘We find that bastard.
That's the job.’
Another phone rang.
It was Nigel Cramer from Scotland Yard.
‘Your Negotiator has done a bunk,’ he said flatly.
‘Can you tell me how?
I've tried the apartment, but the usual number is engaged.’
Brown told him in thirty seconds.
Cramer grunted.
He still resented the Green Meadow Farm affair, and always would, but events had now overtaken his desire to see Brown and the FBI team off his patch.
‘Did your people get the number of that motor-cycle?’ he asked.
‘I can put out an all-points on it.’
‘Better ‘n that,’ said Brown with satisfaction.
‘That attaché case he's carrying.
It contains a direction-finder.’
‘It what ?’
‘Built in, undetectable, state-of-the-art,’ said Brown.
‘We had it fitted out in the States, changed it for the case provided by the Pentagon just before take-off last night.’
‘I see,’ said Cramer thoughtfully.
‘And the receiver?’
‘Right here,’ said Brown.
‘Came in on the morning commercial flight at dawn.
One of my boys went out to Heathrow to pick it up.
Range two miles, so we have to move.
I mean right now.’
‘This time, Mr Brown, will you please stay in touch with the Met's squad cars?
You do not make arrests in this city.
I do.
Your car has radio?’
‘Sure.’
‘Stay on open line, please.
We'll patch in on you and join you if you tell us where you are.’
‘No problem; you have my word on it.’
The embassy limousine swept out of Grosvenor Square sixty seconds later.
Chuck Moxon drove, his colleague beside him operated the direction-finder (D/F) receiver, a small box like a miniature television, save that on the screen in place of a picture was a single glowing dot.
When the antenna now clipped to the rain-gutter above the passenger-door heard the blip emitted from the D/F transmitter in Quinn's attaché case, a line would race out from the glowing dot to the perimeter of the screen.
The car's driver would have to manoeuvre so that the line on the screen pointed dead ahead of his car's nose.
He would then be following the direction-finder.
The device in the attaché case would be activated by remote control from inside the limousine.
They drove fast down Park Lane, through Knightsbridge and into Kensington.
‘Activate,’ said Brown.
The operator depressed a switch.
The screen did not respond.
‘Keep activating every thirty seconds until we get lock-on,’ said Brown.
‘Chuck, start to sweep round Kensington.’
Moxon took Cromwell Road, then headed south down Gloucester Road towards Old Brompton Road.
The antenna got a lock.
‘He's behind us, heading north,’ said Moxon's colleague.
‘Range about a mile and a quarter.’
Thirty seconds later Moxon was back across Cromwell Road, heading north up Exhibition Road towards Hyde Park.
‘Dead ahead, running north,’ said the operator.
‘Tell the boys in blue we have him,’ said Brown.
Moxon informed the embassy by radio, and halfway up Edgware Road a Metropolitan Police Rover closed up behind them.
In the back with Brown were Collins and Seymour.
‘Should have known,’ said Collins regretfully.
‘Should have spotted the time-gap.’
‘What time-gap?’ asked Seymour.
‘You recall that snarl-up in the Winfield House driveway three weeks back?
Quinn set off fifteen minutes before me but arrived in Kensington three minutes ahead.
I can't beat a London cabbie in rush-hour traffic.
He paused somewhere, made some preparations.’
‘He couldn't have planned this three weeks ago,’ objected Seymour.
‘He didn't know how things would pan out.’
‘Didn't have to,’ said Collins.
‘You've read his file.
Been in combat long enough to know about fall-back positions in case things go wrong.’
‘He's pulled a right into St John's Wood,’ said the operator.
At Lord's roundabout the police car came alongside, its window down.
‘He's heading north up there,’ said Moxon, pointing up the Finchley Road.
The two cars were joined by another squad car and headed north through Swiss Cottage, Hendon and Mill Hill.
The range decreased to three hundred yards, and they scanned the traffic ahead for a tall man on a small motor-cycle and wearing no crash-helmet.
They went through Mill Hill Circus just a hundred yards behind the bleeper and up the slope to Five Ways Corner.
Then they realized Quinn must have changed vehicle again.
They passed two motor-cyclists who emitted no bleep, and two powerful motor-bikes overtook them, but the D/F they sought was still proceeding steadily ahead of them.
When the bleep turned round Five Ways Corner on to the A1 to Hertfordshire they saw their target was now an open-topped Volkswagen Golf GTi whose driver wore a thick fur hat to cover his head and ears.
The first thing Cyprian Fothergill recalled about the events of that day was that as he headed towards his charming little cottage in the countryside behind Borehamwood he was suddenly overtaken by a huge black car which swerved violently in front of him, forcing him to scream to a stop in a lay-by.
Within seconds three big men, he would later tell his open-mouthed friends at the club, had leaped out, surrounded his car and were pointing enormous guns at him.
Then a police car pulled in behind, then another one, and four lovely bobbies got out and told the Americans — well, they must have been Americans, and huge they were — to put their guns away or be disarmed.
The next thing he knew — by this time he would have the undivided attention of the entire bar — one of the Americans tore his fur hat off and screamed, ‘OK, craphead, where is he?’ while one of the bobbies reached into the open back seat and pulled out an attaché case that he had to spend an hour telling them he had never seen before.
The big grey-haired American who seemed to be in charge of his party from the black car grabbed the case from the bobby's hands, flicked the locks and looked inside.
It was empty.
After all that, it was empty.
Such a terrifying fuss over an empty case…
Anyway, the Americans were swearing like troopers, using language that he, Cyprian, had never heard before and hoped never to hear again; then in stepped the British sergeant, who was quite out of this world…
At 2.25 p.m.
Sergeant Kidd returned to his patrol car to answer the insistent calls coming through for him on the radio.
‘Tango Alpha…’ he began.
‘Tango Alpha, this is Deputy Assistant Commissioner Cramer.
Who's that?’
‘Sergeant Kidd, sir.
F Division.’
‘What have you got, Sergeant?’
Kidd glanced across at the cornered Volkswagen, its terrified inhabitant, the three FBI men examining the empty attaché case, two more Yankees standing back and staring hopefully at the sky, and three of his colleagues trying to take statements.
‘Bit of a mess, sir.’
‘Sergeant Kidd, listen carefully.
Have you captured a very tall American who has just stolen two million dollars?’
‘No, sir,’ said Kidd.
‘We've captured a very gay hairdresser who's just wet his pants.’
‘What do you mean…disappeared?’
The cry, shout or yell, in a variety of tones and accents, was within an hour echoing round a Kensington apartment, Scotland Yard, Whitehall, the Home Office, Downing Street, Grosvenor Square and the West Wing of the White House.
‘He can't just disappear.’
But he had.
CHAPTER TEN
QUINN HAD DROPPED the attaché case into the open back of the Golf only thirty seconds after swerving around the corner of the street containing the apartment-block.
When he had opened the case as Lou Collins presented it to him before dawn, he had not seen any direction-finding device, but did not expect to.
Whoever had worked on the case in the laboratory would have been smarter than to leave any traces of the implant visible.
Quinn had gambled on there being something inside the case to lead police and troops to whatever rendezvous he established with Zack.
Waiting at traffic lights, he had flicked open the locks, stuffed the package of diamonds inside his zipped leather jacket, and looked around.
The Golf was standing next to him.
The driver, muffled in his fur hat, had not noticed a thing.
Half a mile later Quinn abandoned the motor-cycle; without the legally obligatory crash-helmet, he was likely to attract the attention of a policeman.
Outside the Brompton Oratory he hailed a cab, directed it to Marylebone and paid it off in George Street, completing his journey on foot.
His pockets contained all he had been able to abstract from the apartment without attracting attention: his American passport and driving licence, though these would soon be useless when the alert went out, a wad of British money from Sam's purse, his multi-bladed penknife and a pair of pliers from the  fuse-cupboard.
A chemist's shop in Marylebone High Street yielded a pair of plain-glass spectacles with heavy horn rims and a men's outfitters a tweed hat and Burberry.
He made a number of further purchases at a confectioner's, a hardware shop and a luggage emporium.
He checked his watch; fifty-five minutes from the time he had replaced the phone in Mr Patel's fruit store.
He turned into Blandford Street and found the call-box he sought on the corner with Chiltern Street, one of a bank of two.
He took the second, whose number he had memorized three weeks earlier and dictated to Zack an hour before.
It rang right on time.
‘All right, you bastard, what the hell are you up to ?’
Zack was wary, uncomprehending and angry.
In a few short sentences Quinn explained what he had done.
Zack listened in silence.
‘Are you levelling?’ he asked, ‘'cos if you ain't that kid is still going to end up in a body-bag.’
‘Look, Zack, I frankly don't give a shit whether they capture you or not.
I have one concern and one only; to get that kid back to his family alive and well.
And I have inside my jacket two million dollars’ worth of raw diamonds I figure interest you.
Now, I've thrown the bloodhounds because they wouldn't stop interfering, trying to be smart.
So do you want to set up an exchange or not?’
‘Time's up,’ said Zack.
‘I'm moving.’
‘This phone happens to be a call-box in Marylebone,’ said Quinn, ‘but you're right not to trust it.
Call me, same number, this evening with the details.
I'll come, alone, unarmed, with the stones, wherever.
Because I'm on the lam, make it after dark.
Say, eight o'clock.’
‘All right,’ growled Zack.
‘Be there.’
It was the moment Sergeant Kidd took his car's radio mike to talk to Nigel Cramer.
Minutes later every police station in the Metropolitan area was receiving a description of a man and instructions for every beat officer to keep an eye open, to spot but not approach, to radio back to the police station and tail the suspect but not intervene.
There was no name appended to the all-points, nor a reason why the man was wanted.
Leaving the phone-booth, Quinn walked back into Blandford Street and down to Blackwood's Hotel.
It was one of those  old-established inns tucked away into the side-streets of London that have somehow avoided being bought over and sanitized by the big chains, an ivy-covered twenty-room place with panelling and bay-windows and a fire blazing in the brick hearth of a reception area furnished in rugs over uneven boards.
Quinn approached the pleasant-looking girl behind the desk.
‘Hi, there,’ he said, with his widest grin.
She looked up and smiled back.
Tall, stooping, tweed hat, Burberry and calfskin grip — an all-American tourist.
‘Good afternoon, sir.
Can I help you?’
‘Well, now, I hope so, miss.
Yes, I surely do.
Ya see, I just flew in from the States and I took your British Airways — my all-time favourite airline — and you know what they did?
They lost my luggage.
Yes, ma'am, sent it all the way to Frankfurt by mistake…’
Her face puckered with concern.
‘Now, see here, they're going to get it back for me, twenty-four hours tops.
Only my problem is, all my package-tour details were in the small valise, and — would you believe it?— I cannot for the life of me recall where I am checked in.
Spent an hour with that lady from the airline going over names of hotels in London — you know how many there are?— but no way can I recall it, not till my valise reaches me.
So the bottom line is I took a cab into town and the driver said this was a real nice place…
Er…would you by any chance have a room I could take for the night?
By the way, I'm Harry Russell…’
She was quite entranced.
The tall man looked so bereft at the loss of his luggage, his inability to recall where he was supposed to be staying; she watched a lot of movies and thought he looked a bit like that gentleman who was always asking people to make his day, but he talked like the man with the funny bird-feather in his hat from ‘Dallas’.
It never occurred to her not to believe him, or even to ask for identification.
Blackwood's did not normally take guests with neither luggage nor reservation, but losing one's luggage and forgetting one's hotel, and because of a British airline…
She scanned the vacancy-sheet; most of their guests were regulars up from the provinces, and a few permanent residents.
‘There's just the one, Mr Russell — a small one at the back, I'm afraid…’
‘That will suit me just fine, young lady.
Oh, I can pay cash, changed me some dollars right in the airport…’
‘Tomorrow morning, Mr Russell.’
She reached for an old brass key.
‘Up the stairs, on the second floor.’
Quinn went up the stairs with their uneven treads, found number 11 and let himself in.
Small, clean and comfortable.
More than adequate.
He stripped to his shorts, set the alarm clock he had bought in the hardware store for 6 p.m. and slept.
‘Well, what on earth did he do it for?’ asked the Home Secretary, Sir Harry Marriott.
He had just heard the full story from Nigel Cramer in his office atop the Home Office building.
He had had ten minutes on the telephone from Downing Street, and the lady resident there was not best pleased.
‘I suspect he did not feel he could trust someone,’ said Cramer delicately.
‘Not us, I hope,’ said the Minister.
‘We've done everything we can.’
‘No, not us,’ said Cramer.
‘He was moving close to an exchange with this man Zack.
In a kidnap case that is always the most dangerous phase.
It has to be handled with extreme delicacy.
After those two leaks of privy information on radio programmes, one French and one British, he seems to feel he'd prefer to handle it himself.
We can't allow that of course.
We have to find him, Home Secretary.’
Cramer still smarted from having the primacy in the handling of the negotiation process removed from his control at all, and being confined to the investigation.
‘Can't think how he escaped in the first place,’ complained the Home Secretary.
‘If I'd had two of my men inside that apartment, he wouldn't have done,’ Cramer reminded him.
‘Yes, well, that's water over the dam.
Find the man, but quietly, discreetly.’
The Home Secretary's private views were that if this Quinn fellow could recover Simon Cormack alone, well and good.
Britain could ship them both home to America as quickly as possible.
But, if the Americans were going to make a mess of it, let it be their mess, not his.
At the same hour Irving Moss received a telephone call from Houston.
He jotted down the list of produce prices on offer from the vegetable gardens of Texas, put down the phone and decoded the message.
Then he whistled in amazement.
The more he thought about it, the more he realized that only a slight change would need to be made to his own plans.
After the fiasco on the road outside Mill Hill, Kevin Brown had descended on the Kensington apartment in high temper.
Patrick Seymour and Lou Collins came with him.
Together the three senior men debriefed their two junior colleagues for several hours.
Sam Somerville and Duncan McCrea explained at length what had happened that morning, how it had happened and why they had not foreseen it.
McCrea as ever was disarmingly apologetic.
‘If he has re-established phone contact with Zack, he's totally out of control,’ said Brown.
‘If they're using a phone-booth-to-phone-booth system, there's no way the British can get a tap on it.
We don't know what they're up to.’
‘Maybe they're arranging to exchange Simon Cormack for the diamonds,’ said Seymour.
Brown growled.
‘When this thing's over, I'm going to have that smartass.’
‘If he returns with Simon Cormack,’ Collins pointed out, ‘we're all going to be happy to carry his bags to the airport.’
It was agreed Somerville and McCrea would stay on at the apartment in case Quinn called in.
The three phone lines would remain open to take his call, and tapped.
The senior men returned to the embassy, Seymour to liaise with Scotland Yard on progress on what had now become two searches instead of one, the others to wait and listen.
Quinn woke at six, washed and shaved with the new toiletries he had bought in the High Street the previous day, had a light supper and chanced the two-hundred-yard walk back to the phone-booth in Chiltern Street at ten to eight.
There was an old lady in it, but she quit at five to eight.
Quinn stood in the booth facing away from the street pretending to consult the  telephone directories until the machine rang at two minutes after eight.
‘Quinn?’
‘Yeah’.
‘You may be on the level about having done a runner, or maybe not.
If it's a trick, you'll pay for it.’
‘No trick.
Tell me where and when to show up.’
‘Ten tomorrow morning.
I'll call you on this number at nine and tell you where.
You'll have just enough time to get there by ten.
My men will have had the place staked out since dawn.
If the fuzz shows up, or the SAS, if there's any movement around the place at all, we'll spot it and pull out.
Simon Cormack will die a phone call later.
You'll never see us; we'll see you, or anyone else that shows up.
If you're trying to trick me, tell your pals that.
They might get one of us, or two, but it'll be too late for the boy.’
‘You got it, Zack.
I come alone.
No tricks.’
‘No electronic devices, no direction-finders, no microphones.
We'll check you out.
If you're wired up, the boy gets it.’
‘Like I said, no tricks.
Just me and the diamonds.’
‘Be there in that box at nine.’
There was a click and the line buzzed.
Quinn left the booth and walked back to his hotel.
He watched television for a while, then emptied his hand-grip and worked for two hours on his purchases of that afternoon.
It was two in the morning when he was satisfied.
He showered again to get rid of the tell-tale smell, then lay on his bed and stared at the ceiling, quite immobile, thinking.
He never slept much before combat; that was why he had caught three hours' rest during the afternoon.
He catnapped just before dawn and rose to the alarm at seven.
The charming receptionist was on duty when he approached the desk at half-past eight.
He was dressed in his heavy-rimmed glasses, tweed hat, and the Burberry was buttoned to the throat.
He explained he had to go to Heathrow to collect his luggage, and he would like to settle up and check out.
At quarter to nine he sauntered up the street to the phone-booth.
There could be no old ladies this time.
He stood in it for fifteen minutes, until it rang on the dot of nine.
Zack's voice was husky with his own tension.
‘Jamaica Road, Rotherhithe,’ he said.
Quinn did not know the area, but he knew of it.
The old docks, part converted to smart new houses and flats for the Yuppies who worked in the City, but with areas still near-derelict, abandoned wharves and warehouses.
‘Go on.’
Zack gave the directions.
Off Jamaica Road down a street leading to the Thames.
‘It's a single-storey steel warehouse, open at both ends.
The name Babbidge still written over the doors.
Pay off the cab at the top of the street.
Walk down alone.
Go in the south entrance.
Walk to the centre of the floor and wait.
Anyone follows, we don't show.’
The phone went down.
Quinn left the booth and dropped his empty calfskin grip into a trashcan.
He looked around for a cab.
Nothing; the morning rush-hour.
He caught one ten minutes later in Marylebone High Street and was dropped at Marble Arch Underground station.
At that hour a cab would be ages getting through the twisting streets of the old city and across the Thames to Rotherhithe.
He took the Underground due east to the Bank, then the Northern Line under the Thames to London Bridge.
It was a main-line railway station; there were cabs in the forecourt.
He was in Jamaica Road fifty-five minutes after Zack rang off.
The street he had been told to walk down was narrow, dirty and empty.
To one side derelict tea-warehouses, ripe for development, fronted the river.
To the other, abandoned factories and pressed-steel sheds.
He knew he was being watched from somewhere.
He walked in the centre of the street.
The steel hangar with the faded painted name of Babbidge above one door was at the end.
He turned inside.
Two hundred feet long, eighty wide.
Rusted chains hung from roof girders; the floor was concrete, fouled by the windswept detritus of years of abandonment.
The door he had entered by would take a pedestrian but not a vehicle; the one at the far end was wide enough and high enough to take a truck.
He walked to the middle of the floor and stopped.
He took off the phoney glasses and tweed hat and threw them to one side.
He would not need them again.
Either he walked out of here with a deal for Simon Cormack, or he would need a police escort anyway.
He waited an hour, quite immobile.
At eleven o'clock the big Volvo appeared at the far end of the hangar and drove slowly towards him, coming to a stop with its engine running forty feet away.
There were two men in the front, both masked so that only their eyes showed through the slits.
He sensed more than heard the scuffle of trainer shoes on concrete behind him and threw a casual glance over his shoulder.
A third man stood there; black tracksuit without insignia, balaclava mask covering the head.
He was alert, poised on the balls of his feet, the submachine carbine held easily at the port, but ready for use if need be.
The passenger-door of the Volvo opened and a man got out.
Medium height, medium build.
He called: ‘Quinn?’
Zack's voice.
Unmistakable.
‘You got the diamonds?’
‘Right here.’
‘Hand them over.’
‘You got the kid, Zack?’
‘Don't be a fool.
Trade him for a sack of glass pebbles?
We examine the stones first.
Takes time.
One piece of glass, one piece of paste — you've blown it.
If they're OK, then you get the boy.’
‘That's what I figured.
Won't work.’
‘Don't play games with me, Quinn.’
‘No games, Zack.
I have to see the kid.
You could get pieces of glass — you won't, but you want to be sure.
I could get a corpse.’
‘You won't.’
‘I need to be sure.
That's why I have to go with you.’
Behind the mask Zack stared at Quinn as if in disbelief.
He gave a grating laugh.
‘See that man behind you?
One word and he blows you away.
Then we take the stones anyway.’
‘You could try,’ admitted Quinn.
‘Ever seen one of these?’
He opened his raincoat all the way down, took something that hung free from near his waist and held it up.
Zack studied Quinn and the assembly strapped to his chest over his shirt, and swore softly but violently.
From below his sternum to his waist, Quinn's front was occupied by a flat wooden box that had once contained liqueur  chocolates.
The bonbons were gone, along with the box's lid.
The tray of the box formed a flat container strapped with surgical tape across his chest.
In the centre was the velour package of diamonds, framed on each side by a half-pound block of tacky beige substance.
Jammed into one of the blocks was a bright-green electrical wire, the other end of which ran to one of the jaws of the wooden clothes-peg Quinn held aloft in his left hand.
It went through a tiny hole bored in the wood, to emerge inside the jaws of the peg.
Also in the chocolate-box was a PP3 nine-volt battery, wired to another bright-green flex.
In one direction the green flex linked both blocks of brown substance to the battery; in the other direction the wire ran to the opposite jaw of the clothes-peg.
The jaws of the peg were held apart by a stub of pencil.
Quinn flexed the fingers of his hand; the stub of pencil fell to the floor.
‘Phoney,’ said Zack, without conviction.
‘That's not real.’
With his right hand Quinn twisted a blob of the brown substance off, rolled it into a ball and tossed it across the floor to Zack.
The criminal stooped, picked it up and sniffed.
The odour of marzipan filled his nostrils.
‘Semtex,’ he said.
‘That's Czech,’ said Quinn.
‘I prefer RDX.’
Zack knew enough to know all explosive gelatines both look and smell like the harmless confectionery marzipan.
There the difference ends.
If his man opened fire now, they would all die.
There was enough plastic explosive in that box to clear the floor of the warehouse clean, lift off the roof and scatter the diamonds on the other side of the Thames.
‘Knew you were a bastard,’ said Zack.
‘What do you want?’
‘I pick up the pencil, put it back, climb into the trunk of the car and you drive me to see the boy.
No one followed me, no one will.
I can't recognize you, now or ever.
You're safe enough.
When I see the kid alive, I dismantle this and give you the stones.
You check 'em through; when you're satisfied you leave.
Me and the kid stay imprisoned.
Twenty-four hours later you make an anonymous phone call.
The fuzz comes to release us.
It's clean, it's simple and you get away.’
Zack seemed undecided.
It was not his plan, but he'd been outmanoeuvred and he knew it.
He reached into the side-pocket of his tracksuit and pulled out a flat black box.
‘Keep your hand up and those jaws open.
I'm going to check you out for wire-taps.’
He approached and ran the circuit detector over Quinn's body from head to foot.
Any live electrical circuit such as contained in an emitting direction-finder or wire-tap on Quinn's body would have caused the detector to give out a shrill ‘whoop’.
The battery in the bomb was dormant.
The original briefcase would have triggered the detector.
‘All right,’ said Zack.
He stood back, a yard away.
Quinn could smell the man's sweat.
‘You're clean.
Put that pencil back, and climb in the boot.’
Quinn did as he was bid.
The last light he saw was before the large rectangular lid of the boot came down on him.
Air-holes had already been punched in the floor to accommodate Simon Cormack three weeks earlier.
It was stuffy but bearable and, despite his length, large enough, provided he remained crouched in the foetal position; which meant he nearly gagged from the smell of almonds.
Though he did not see it, the car swung in a U-turn, the gunman ran forward and climbed in the back seat.
All three men removed their masks and tracksuit tops, revealing shirts, ties and jackets.
The tracksuit tops went into the back, on top of the Skorpion machine-pistol.
When they were ready the car glided out of the warehouse, Zack himself now back behind the wheel, and headed towards their hideaway.
It took an hour and a half to reach the integral garage of the house forty miles out of London.
Zack drove always at the proper speed, his companions upright and silent in their seats.
For both these men it had been their first time out of the house for three weeks.
When the garage door was closed all three men pulled on their tracksuits and masks, while one went into the house to warn the fourth.
Only when they were ready did Zack open the boot of the Volvo.
Quinn was stiff, and blinked in the electric light of the garage.
He had removed the pencil from the jaws of the clothes-peg and held it in his teeth.
‘All right, all right ,’ said Zack.
‘No need for that.
We're going  to show you the kid.
But when you go through the house you wear this.’
He held up a cowl hood.
Quinn nodded.
Zack pulled it over his head.
There was a chance they would try to rush him, but it would take a fraction of a second to release his grip on the open clothes-peg.
They led him, left hand aloft, through into the house, down a short passage and then some cellar steps.
He heard three loud knocks on a door of some kind, then a pause.
He heard a door creak open and he was pushed into a room.
He stood there alone, hearing the rasp of bolts.
‘You can take the hood off,’ said Zack's voice.
He was speaking through the peep-hole in the cellar door.
Quinn used his right hand to remove his hood.
He was in a bare cellar: concrete floor, concrete walls, perhaps a wine-cellar converted to a new purpose.
On a steel-frame bed against the far wall sat a lanky figure, his head and shoulders covered by another black cowl hood.
There were two knocks on the door.
as if on command, the figure on the bed tugged off his hood.
Simon Cormack stared in amazement at the tall man near the door, his raincoat half-open, holding up a clothes-peg in his left hand.
Quinn looked back at the President's son.
‘Hi there, Simon.
You OK, kid?’
A voice from home.
‘Who are you?’ he whispered.
‘Well, the negotiator.
We've been worried about you.
You OK?’
‘Yeah, I'm…fine.’
There were three knocks on the door.
The young man pulled on his hood.
The door opened.
Zack stood there.
Masked.
Armed.
‘Well, there he is.
Now, the diamonds.’
‘Sure,’ said Quinn, ‘you kept your deal, I keep mine.’
He replaced the pencil in the jaws of the clothes-peg, and let it hang from its wires to his waist.
He slipped off the raincoat and ripped the wooden box from his chest.
From the centre he took the flat velour package of gems and held them out.
Zack took them and passed them to a man in the passage behind him.
His gun was still on Quinn.
‘I'll take the bomb, too,’ he said.
‘You're not blowing your way out of here with it.’
Quinn folded the wires and clothes-peg into the space left in  the open box, pulled the wires out of the brown substance.
The wires had no detonators attached to the ends of them.
Quinn twisted a piece of the brown substance off one of the blocks and tasted it.
‘Never could get on with marzipan,’ he said, ‘too sweet for me.
Zack stared at the assembly of household items lying in the box in his free hand.
‘Marzipan?’
‘The best Marylebone High Street can offer.’
‘I should bloody kill you, Quinn.’
‘You could, but I hope you won't.
No need, Zack.
You got what you want.
Like I said, pros kill when they have to.
Examine the diamonds in peace, make your escape, let the kid and me stay here till you phone the police.’
Zack closed the door and bolted it.
He spoke through the peep-hole.
‘I'll say this for you, Yank.
You got balls.’
Then the peep-hole closed.
Quinn turned to the figure on the bed and pulled off his hood for him.
He sat down beside the boy.
‘Now, I better bring you up to date a bit.
Few more hours, if all goes well, we look to be out of here and heading for home.
By the way, your mom and dad send their love.’
He ruffled the young man's tangled hair.
Simon Cormack's eyes filled with tears and he began to cry uncontrollably.
He tried to wipe them away on the sleeve of the plaid shirt, but it was no good.
Quinn wrapped one arm around the thin shoulders and remembered a day long ago in the jungles along the Mekong; the first time he was ever in combat, and how he survived while others died, and how afterwards the sheer relief caused the tears to come and he could not stop them.
When Simon stopped and began to bombard him with questions about home, Quinn had a chance to have a look at the youth.
Bearded, moustached, dirty, but otherwise in good shape.
They'd fed him and had the decency to give him fresh clothes, the shirt, blue jeans and a broad leather belt with embossed brass buckle to hold them up — camping-shop gear but adequate against the chill of November.
There seemed to be some kind of a row going on upstairs.
Quinn could vaguely hear raised voices, principal among them being that of Zack.
The sounds were too indistinct for him to hear the words, but the tone was clear enough.
The man was angry.
Quinn's brow furrowed; he had not checked the stones himself — he had not the skill to tell real diamonds from good forgeries — but now prayed no one had been foolish enough to insert a proportion of paste among the gems.
In fact that was not the reason for the dispute.
After several minutes it calmed down.
In an upstairs bedroom — the kidnappers tended to avoid the downstairs rooms during daylight hours, despite the thick net curtains that screened them — the South African was seated at a table brought up there for the purpose.
The table was covered by a bedsheet, the slit velvet packet lay empty on the bed, and all four men gazed in awe at a small mountain of uncut diamonds.
Using a spatula, the South African began to ‘cut’ the pile into smaller ones, then smaller again, until he had separated the mountain into twenty-five small hillocks.
He gestured to Zack to choose one mound.
Zack shrugged, picked one in the middle — approximately a thousand stones out of the 25,000 on the table.
Without a word the South African began to scoop up the other twenty-four piles and tip them one by one into a stout canvas bag with drawstring at the top.
When the selected pile alone remained, he switched on a powerful reading spotlamp above the table, took a jeweller's loupe from his pocket, a pair of tweezers in his right hand, and held up the first stone to the light.
After several seconds he grunted and nodded, dropping the diamond into the open-topped canvas bag.
It would take six hours to examine all thousand stones.
The kidnappers had chosen well.
Top-quality diamonds, even small ones, are normally ‘sourced’ with a certificate when released to the trade by the Central Selling Organization which dominates the world diamond trade, handling over 85 per cent of stones passing from the mines to the trade.
Even the Soviet Union with its Siberian extractions is smart enough not to break this lucrative cartel.
Large stones of lesser quality are also usually sold with a certificate of provenance.
But in picking melees (mixtures) of medium-quality gems  between a fifth and half a carat the kidnappers had gone for an area of the trade that is almost uncontrollable.
These stones are the bread and butter of the manufacturing and retailing jewellers around the world, changing hands in packages of several hundred at a time without certification.
Any manufacturing jeweller would honestly be able to take over a consignment of several hundred, especially if he were offered a 10 or 15 per cent discount on market price.
Transferred into the settings around larger stones, they would simply disappear into the trade.
If they were genuine.
Uncut diamonds do not glitter and gleam like the cut and polished article that appears at the end of the process.
They look like dull pieces of glass, with a milky, opaque surface.
But they cannot be confused with glass by an examiner of moderate skill and experience.
Real diamonds have a quite distinctive, soapy texture to the surface and are immune from water.
If a piece of glass is dipped in water, the drops of liquid stay on the surface for several seconds; with a diamond they run off instantly, leaving the stone dry as a bone.
Moreover, under a magnifying loupe, diamonds have a perceivable triangular crystallography on the surface.
The South African was looking for this patterning, to ensure they had not been foisted off with sand-blasted bottle-glass or the other principal substitute, cubic zirconia.
Meanwhile, Senator Bennett R. Hapgood rose to his feet on the podium erected for the purpose in the sweeping grounds of the open-air Hancock Center in the heart of Austin and surveyed the crowd with satisfaction.
Straight ahead of him he could see the dome of the Texas State Capitol, second-largest in the nation after the Capitol in Washington, gleaming in the late-morning sun.
The crowd might have been larger, considering the massive paid-for publicity that had presaged this important launch, but the media, local, state and national, were well in attendance and this pleased him.
He raised his hands in the boxer's victory salute to acknowledge the roar of applause from the cheerleaders that began as soon as the eulogy to announce him had ended.
As the chants of the high-kicking girls continued and the mass of the crowd  felt obliged to join in, he shook his head in well-simulated disbelief at such honour and held his hands high, palms outward, in a gesture to indicate there was no need to afford an insignificant junior Senator from Oklahoma such an ovation.
When the cheering had died down he took the microphone and began his speech.
He used no notes; he had rehearsed his words many times since receiving the invitation to inaugurate and become president of the new movement that would soon sweep America.
‘My friends, my fellow-Americans…everywhere.’
Though his present audience was overwhelmingly composed of Texans, he was aiming through the lens of the television camera at a much larger audience.
‘We may come from different parts of this great nation of ours.
We may have different backgrounds, inhabit different walks of life, possess different hopes, fears and aspirations.
But one thing we share, wherever we may be, whatever we may do: we are all, men, women and children, patriots of this great land…’
The statement was undeniable, and the cheering testified to that.
‘This above all we share: we want our nation to be strong’— more cheering —‘and proud…’
Ecstasy.
He talked for an hour.
The evening newscasts across the United States would use between thirty seconds and two minutes, according to taste.
When he had finished and sat down, the breeze scarcely ruffling his snow-white, blow-dried and spray-fixed hair above the frontiersman's suntan, the Citizens for a Strong America movement was well and truly launched.
Dedicated, in broad terms, to the regeneration of national pride and honour through strength — the notion that it had never perceptibly degenerated was overlooked — the CSA would specifically oppose the Nantucket Treaty root and branch, and demand its repudiation in Congress.
The enemy to pride and honour through strength had been clearly and incontrovertibly identified; it was communism, meaning socialism, which ran from Medicaid through welfare cheques to tax rises.
Those fellow-travellers of communism who sought to dupe the American people into arms control at lower levels were not identified but implied.
The campaign would be  conducted at every level: regional offices, media-orientated information-packs, lobbying at national and constituency level, and public appearances of true patriots who would speak against the treaty and its progenitor — an oblique reference to the stricken man in the White House.
By the time the crowd was invited to sample the barbecues scattered around the periphery of the park, and made available by the generosity of a local philanthropist and patriot, Plan Crockett, the second campaign to destabilize John Cormack to the point of resignation, was on the road.
Quinn and the President's son spent a fitful night in the cellar.
The boy took the bed at Quinn's insistence but could not sleep.
Quinn sat on the floor, his back against the hard wall, and would have dozed but for the questions from Simon.
‘Mr Quinn?’
‘It's Quinn.
Just Quinn.’
‘Did you see my dad?
Personally?’
‘Sure.
He told me about Aunt Emily…and Mr Spot.’
‘How was he?’
‘Fine.
Worried of course.
It was just after the kidnap.’
‘Did you see Mom?’
‘No, she was with the White House doctor.
Worried but OK.’
‘Do they know I'm OK?’
‘As of two days ago I told them you were still alive.
Try to get some sleep.’
‘OK…
When do you figure we'll get out of here?’
‘Depends.
In the morning, I hope, they'll quit and run.
If they make a phone call twelve hours later, the British police should be here minutes afterwards.
Depends on Zack.’
‘Zack?
He's the leader?’
‘Yep.’
At two in the morning the over-strung youth finally ran out of questions and dozed.
Quinn stayed awake, straining to identify the muffled sounds from upstairs.
It was almost 4 a.m. when the three loud knocks came at the door.
Simon swung his legs off the bed and whispered: ‘The hoods.’
Both men pulled on the cowl hoods to prevent them seeing their abductors.
When they were blindfolded Zack entered the cellar, with two men behind him.
Each carried a pair of  handcuffs.
He nodded towards the two captives.
Each was turned around and the wrists cuffed behind their backs.
What they did not know was that the examination of the diamonds had finished before midnight to the complete satisfaction of Zack and his accomplices.
The four men had spent the night scouring their living-quarters from top to bottom.
Every surface that might have had a fingerprint was wiped, every trace they could think of expunged.
They did not bother to rid the cellar of its bolted-down bed or the length of chain that had tethered Simon to it for over three weeks.
Their concern was not that others might come here one day and identify the place as having been the kidnappers' hideout; rather, that those examiners would never discover who the kidnappers had been.
Simon Cormack was detached from his ankle-chain and both men were led upstairs, through the house and into the garage.
The Volvo awaited.
Its boot was stuffed with the holdalls of the kidnappers and had no room left.
Quinn was forced into the back seat and down to the floor, then covered with a blanket.
He was uncomfortable but optimistic.
If the kidnappers had intended to kill them both, the cellar would have been the place.
He had proposed that they be left in the cellar, to be liberated later by the police following a phone call from abroad.
That was evidently not to be.
He guessed, rightly, that the kidnappers did not want their hideout discovered — at least, not yet.
So he lay hunched on the floor of the saloon and breathed as best he could through the thick hood.
He felt the depression of the seat cushions above him as Simon Cormack was made to lie along the back seat.
He, too, was covered by a blanket.
The two smallest men climbed in the back, sitting on the edge of the seat with the slim body of Simon behind their backs, their feet on Quinn.
The giant climbed in the passenger-seat, and Zack took the wheel.
At his command all four took off their masks and tracksuit tops and threw them through the windows on to the garage floor.
Zack started the engine and operated the door-opener.
He backed out into the driveway, closed the garage door, reversed into the street and drove off.
No one saw the car.
It was still dark, with another two and a half hours to dawn.
The car ran steadily for those two hours.
Quinn had no idea  where he was or where he was going.
Eventually (it would later be established it must have been within a few minutes of six-thirty) the car slowed to a halt.
No one had spoken during the drive.
They all sat bolt upright in their seats, in business-suits and ties, and remained silent.
When they had stopped, Quinn heard the rear nearside door open and the two sets of feet on his body were removed.
Someone dragged him out of the car by the feet.
He felt wet grass under his cuffed hands, knew he was on the verge of a road somewhere.
He scrambled to his knees, then his feet and stood up.
He heard two men re-entering the rear of the car and the slamming of the door.
‘Zack,’ he called, ‘what about the boy?’
Zack was standing on the road by the driver's open door, looking at him across the roof of the car.
‘Ten miles up the road,’ he said, ‘by the roadside, same as you.
There was the purr of a powerful engine and the crunch of gravel under wheels.
Then the car was gone.
Quinn felt the chill of a November morning on his shirt-sleeved torso.
The moment the car was gone, he got to work.
Hard labour in the vineyards had kept Quinn in shape.
His hips were narrow, like those of a man fifteen years his junior, and his arms were long.
When the cuffs went on he had braced the sinews of his wrists to secure the maximum space when he relaxed.
Tugging the cuffs down over his hands as far as they would go, he worked his cuffed wrists down his back and round his behind.
Then he sat in the grass, brought his wrists up under his knees, kicked off his shoes and worked his legs through his locked arms, one after the other.
With his wrists now in front of him he tore off the hood.
The road was long, narrow, straight and utterly deserted in the pre-dawn half-light.
He sucked in lungfuls of the cool fresh air and looked around for human habitation.
There was none.
He pulled on his shoes, rose and began to jog along the road in the direction the car had taken.
After two miles he came to a garage on the left, a small affair with old-style hand-operated pumps and a little office.
Three kicks brought the door down, and he found the telephone on a shelf behind the pump-attendant's chair.
He lifted the receiver  two-handed, leaned his ear to make sure he had a dial tone, laid it down, dialled 01 for London and then the flash line in the Kensington apartment.
In London the chaos took three seconds to get into full gear.
A British engineer in the Kensington exchange came jolting out of his chair and began to search for a ‘lock’ on the transmitting number.
He got it in nine seconds.
In the basement of the American embassy the duty ELINT man gave a yell as his warning light blazed red in his face and the sound of a phone ringing came into his headset.
Kevin Brown, Patrick Seymour and Lou Collins ran into the listening-post from the cots where they had been lying dozing.
‘Throw sound on to the wall-speaker,’ snapped Seymour.
In the apartment Sam Somerville had been dozing on the couch, once so favoured by Quinn, because it was right next to the flash phone.
McCrea was asleep in one of the armchairs.
It was their second night like this.
When the phone rang Sam jolted awake but for two seconds did not register which phone was ringing.
The pulsing red bulb on the flash line told her.
She picked it up at the third ring.
‘Yes?’
‘Sam?’
There was no mistaking the deep voice at the other end.
‘Oh, Quinn,’ she said.
‘Are you all right?’
‘Screw Quinn.
What about the boy?’ fumed Brown, unheard beneath the embassy.
‘Fine.
I've been released.
Simon's due for release about now, maybe already.
But further up the road.’
‘Quinn, where are you?’
‘I don't know.
In a beat-up garage on a long stretch of road; the number on this phone is unreadable.’
‘Bletchley number,’ said the engineer in the Kensington exchange.
‘Here we are…got it.
Seven-four-five-oh-one.’
His colleague was already talking to Nigel Cramer, who had spent the night at Scotland Yard.
‘Where the hell is it?’ he hissed.
‘Hang about…
Here.
Tubbs Cross Garage, on the A421 between Fenny Stratford and Buckingham.’
At the same time Quinn saw an invoice-pad belonging to the  garage.
It bore the address of the garage also, and he relayed it down the phone to Sam.
Seconds later the line was dead.
Sam and Duncan McCrea raced down to the street where Lou Collins had left a CIA car should the listeners in the apartment need transport.
Then they were off, McCrea driving and Sam map-reading.
From Scotland Yard, Nigel Cramer and six officers set off in two patrol cars, their sirens howling up Whitehall and down the Mall to pick up Park Lane and the road north out of London.
Two big limousines sped out of Grosvenor Square at the same time, bearing Kevin Brown, Lou Collins, Patrick Seymour and six of Brown's Washington-based FBI men.
The A421 between Fenny Stratford and the county town of Buckingham twelve miles further west is a long, almost straight road devoid of towns or villages, running through largely flat agricultural country studded by the occasional clump of trees.
Quinn jogged steadily west, the direction taken by the car.
The first light of day began to filter through grey clouds above, giving visibility that rose steadily to three hundred yards.
That was when he saw the thin figure jogging towards him in the gloom, and heard the roar of engines come up fast behind him.
He turned his head; a British police car, one of two; two black American limousines just ahead of them and an unmarked Company car behind them.
The leading car saw him and started to slow; owing to the narrowness of the road, the ones behind slowed as well.
No one in the cars had seen the tottering figure further down the road.
Simon Cormack had also worked his wrists round to the front of his body, and had covered five miles to Quinn's four and a half.
But he had made no phone call.
Weakened by his captivity, dazed by his release, he was running slowly, rolling from side to side.
The lead car from the embassy was beside Quinn.
‘Where's the boy?’ roared Brown from the front seat.
Nigel Cramer leaped from the red and white squad car and shouted the same question.
Quinn stopped, sucked air into his lungs and nodded forward along the road.
‘There,’ he gasped.
That was when they saw him.
Already out from their cars  and on the road, the group of Americans and British police officers began to run towards the figure two hundred yards away.
Behind Quinn the car of McCrea and Sam Somerville swerved to a stop.
Quinn had stopped; there was nothing more tie could do.
He felt Sam run up behind him and grab his arm.
She said something, but he could never later recall what it was.
Simon Cormack, seeing his rescuers approaching him, slowed until he was hardly jogging at all.
Just under a hundred yards separated him from the police officers of two nations when he died.
The witnesses would say later that the searingly brilliant white flash seemed to last for several seconds.
The scientists would tell them it actually lasted for three milli-seconds, but the human retina retains such a flash for some seconds afterwards.
The fireball that came with the flash lasted for half a second and enveloped the whole stumbling figure.
Four of the watchers, experienced men, not easy to shock, had to undergo therapy as they described how the figure of the youth was picked up and hurled twenty yards towards them, like a rag doll, first flying, then bouncing and rolling in a twisted assembly of disjointed limbs.
They all felt the blast wave.
Most would agree, with hindsight, that everything seemed to happen in slow motion, during and after the murder.
Recollections came in bits and pieces, and the patient interrogators would listen, and note down the bits and pieces until they had a sequence, usually overlapping in parts.
There was Nigel Cramer, rock-still, pale as a sheet, repeating, ‘Oh God, oh my God,’ over and over again.
A Mormon FBI man who dropped to his knees at the roadside began to pray.
Sam Somerville screamed once, buried her face in Quinn's back and began to cry.
There was Duncan McCrea, behind both of them, on his knees, head down over a ditch, hands deep in the water supporting his weight, retching up his guts.
Quinn, they would say, was standing still, having been overhauled by the main group but able to see what had happened up the road, shaking his head in disbelief and murmuring ‘No…no…no.’
It was a grey-haired British sergeant who was the first to break the spell of immobility and shock, by moving forward towards  the tangled body sixty yards away.
He was followed by several FBI men, among them Kevin Brown, pale and shaking, then Nigel Cramer and three more men from the Yard.
They looked at the body in silence, then background and training took over.
‘Clear the area, please,’ said Nigel Cramer.
It was in a tone with which no one was prepared to argue.
‘Tread very carefully.’
They all walked back towards the cars.
‘Sergeant, get on to the Yard.
I want the CEO up here, by chopper, within the hour.
Photographs, forensics, the best team Fulham have got.
You’— to the men in the second car —‘get up and down the road.
Block it off.
Raise the local boys — I want barriers beyond the garage that way and up to Buckingham that way.
No one enters this stretch of road until further notice except those I authorize.’
The officers designated to take the stretch of road beyond the body had to walk, crossing into the fields for a while to avoid treading on fragments, then running up the road to head off approaching cars.
The second squad car went east towards Tubbs Cross Garage to block the road in the other direction.
The first squad car was used for its radio.
Within sixty minutes police out of Buckingham to the west and Bletchley to the east would seal the road completely with steel barriers.
A screen of local officers would fan out across the fields to fend off the curious seeking to approach cross-country.
At least this time there would be no press for a while.
They could put the road-closure down to a burst water-main — enough to deter the local small-town reporters.
Within fifty minutes a Metropolitan Police helicopter swung in across the fields, guided by the radio of the squad car, to deposit on the road behind the cars a small, bird-like man called Dr Barnard, the Chief Explosives Officer of the Met, a man who, thanks to the bomb outrages of the IRA in mainland Britain, had examined more explosion scenes than he would have wished.
He brought with him, apart from his ‘bag of tricks’ as he liked to call it, an awesome reputation.
They said of Dr Barnard that from fragments so minuscule as almost to deceive a magnifying glass he could reconstitute a bomb to the point of identifying the factory that made its components and the man who assembled it.
He listened to Nigel Cramer for several minutes, nodded and gave his own  orders to the dozen men who had clambered out of the second and third helicopters.
The team from the Fulham forensic laboratories.
Impassively they set about their work, and the machinery of post-crime science rolled into action.
Long before any of this, Kevin Brown had returned from looking at the corpse of Simon Cormack to the point where Quinn still stood.
He was grey with shock and rage.
‘You bastard,’ he grated.
Both tall men, they were eyeball to eyeball.
‘This is your fault.
One way or another you caused this, and I'm going to make you pay for it.’
The punch when it came surprised the two younger FBI men by his side, who took his arms and tried to calm him down.
Quinn may have seen the punch coming.
Whatever, he made no attempt to dodge it.
Still with his hands cuffed in front of him, he took it full on the jaw.
It was enough to knock him backwards; then his head caught the edge of the roof of the car behind him, and he went down unconscious.
‘Put him in the car,’ growled Brown when he had recovered his self-control.
There was no way Cramer could hold the American group.
Seymour and Collins had diplomatic immunity; he let them all depart back to London in their two cars fifteen minutes later, warning them that he would want Quinn, for whom there was no diplomatic status, available for the taking of lengthy statements in London.
Seymour gave his word Quinn would be available.
When they had gone, Cramer used the phone in the garage to put through a call to Sir Harry Marriott at his home and give him the news — the phone was more secure than a police radio band.
The politician was shocked to the core.
But he was still a politician.
‘Mr Cramer, were we, in the form of the British authorities, in any way involved in all this?’
‘No, Home Secretary.
From the time Quinn ran out of that apartment, this was wholly his affair.
He handled it the way he wanted to, without involving us or his own people.
He chose to play a lone hand, and it has failed.’
‘I see,’ said the Home Secretary.
‘I shall have to inform the Prime Minister at once.
Of all aspects…’
He meant that the 
British authorities had had no hand in the affair at all.
‘Keep the media out of it at all costs for the moment.
At worst we will have to say that Simon Cormack has been found murdered.
But not yet.
And of course keep me in touch on every development, no matter how small.’
This time the news reached Washington from its own sources in London.
Patrick Seymour telephoned Vice-President Odell personally, on a secure line.
Thinking he was taking a call from the FBI liaison man in London to announce Simon Cormack's release, Michael Odell did not mind the hour: 5 a.m. in Washington.
When he heard what Seymour had to tell him, he went grey.
‘But how?
Why?
In God's name, why?’
‘We don't know, sir,’ said the voice from London.
‘The kid had been released safe and sound.
He was running towards us, ninety yards away, when it happened.
We don't even know what ‘it’ was.
But he's dead, Mr Vice-President.’
The committee was convened within the hour.
Every member felt ill with shock when told the news.
The question was: Who should tell the President?
As chairman of the committee, the man saddled with the task ‘Get my son back for me’ twenty-four days earlier, it fell to Michael Odell.
With a heavy heart he walked from the West Wing to the Mansion.
President Cormack did not need to be woken.
He had slept little these past three and a half weeks, often waking of his own accord in the pre-dawn darkness and walking through to his personal study to attempt to concentrate on papers of state.
Hearing the Vice-President was downstairs and wished to see him, President Cormack walked through into the Yellow Oval Room and said he would greet Odell there.
The Yellow Oval Room, on the second floor, is a spacious reception room between the study and the Treaty Room.
Beyond its windows, looking over the lawns to Pennsylvania Avenue, is the Truman Balcony.
Both are at the geometric centre of the Mansion, beneath the cupola and right above the South Portico.
Odell entered.
President Cormack was in the centre of the room, facing him.
Odell was silent.
He could not bring himself to say it.
The air of expectancy on the President's face drained away.
‘Well, Michael?’ he said dully.
‘He…
Simon…has been found.
I'm afraid he is dead.’
President Cormack did not move, not a muscle.
His voice when it came was flat; clear but emotionless.
‘Leave me, please.’
Odell turned and left, moving into the Center Hall.
He closed the door and turned towards the stairs.
From behind him he heard a single cry, like a wounded animal in mortal pain.
He shuddered and walked on.
Secret Service man Lepinsky was at the end of the hall, by a desk against the wall, a raised phone in his hand.
‘It's the British Prime Minister, Mr Vice-President,’ he said.
‘I'll take it.
Hallo, this is Michael Odell.
Yes, Prime Minister, I've just told him.
No, ma'am, he's not taking any calls right now.
Any calls.’
There was a pause on the line.
‘I understand,’ she said quietly, then: ‘Do you have a pencil and paper?’
Odell gestured to Lepinsky, who produced his duty notebook.
Odell scribbled what he was asked.
President Cormack got the slip of paper at the hour most Washingtonians, unaware of what had happened, were preparing their breakfast.
He was still in a silk robe, in his office, staring dully at the grey morning beyond the windows.
His wife slept on; she would wake and hear it later.
He nodded as the servant left and flicked open the folded sheet from Lepinsky's notebook.
It said just: ‘II Samuel, 18:33.’
After several minutes he rose and walked to the shelf where he kept some personal books, among them the family bible, bearing the signature of his father and his grandfather and his great-grandfather.
He found the verse towards the end of the Second Book of Samuel.
‘And the king was much moved, and went up to the chamber over the gate, and wept: and as he went, thus he said, O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son!’
CHAPTER ELEVEN
DR BARNARD declined to use the services of the hundred young police constables offered by the Thames Valley Police in the search for clues on the road and the verges.
He took the view that mass searches were fine for discovering the hidden body of a murdered child, or even a murder weapon like a knife, gun or bludgeon.
But for this work skill, patience and extreme delicacy were needed.
He used only his trained specialists from Fulham.
They taped off an area one hundred yards in diameter round the scene of the explosion — it turned out to be overkill.
All the evidence was eventually found inside a circle of thirty yards' diameter.
Literally on hands and knees, his men crawled over every inch of the designated area, with plastic bags and tweezers.
Every tiny fragment of fibre, denim and leather was picked up and dropped in the bags.
Some had hair, tissue or other matter attached to them.
Smeared grass-stems were included.
Ultra-fine-tuned metal-detectors covered every square centimetre of the road, the ditches and the surrounding fields, yielding inevitably a collection of nails, tin cans, rusty screws, nuts, bolts and a corroded ploughshare.
The sorting and separation would come later.
Eight big plastic dustbins were filled with clear plastic bags and flown to London.
The oval area from where Simon Cormack had been standing when he died to the point where he stopped rolling, at the heart  of the larger circle, was treated with especial care.
It was four hours before even the body could be removed.
First it was photographed from every conceivable angle, in long shot, mid-shot and extreme close-up.
Only when every part of the grass verge around the body had been scoured, and the piece of turf actually under the body remained the last to be examined, would Dr Barnard allow human feet to walk on the ground to approach the body.
Then a body-bag was laid beside the corpse, and what remained of Simon Cormack was gently lifted from where it lay and placed on the spread-out plastic.
The bag was folded over him and zipped up, then placed on a stretcher, into a pannier beneath a helicopter, and flown to the post-mortem laboratory.
The death had taken place in the county of Buckinghamshire, one of the three counties comprising the Thames Valley Police area.
So it was that in death Simon Cormack returned to Oxford, to the Radcliffe Infirmary, whose facilities are a match even for Guy's Hospital, London.
From Guy's came a friend and colleague of Dr Barnard, a man who had worked with the Chief Explosives Officer of the Met on many cases and had formed a close professional relationship.
Indeed, they were often regarded as a team, though exercised by different disciplines.
Dr Ian Macdonald was a senior consultant pathologist at the great London hospital, also a retained Home Office pathologist, and was usually asked for by Scotland Yard if he was available.
It was he who received the body of Simon Cormack at the Radcliffe.
Throughout the day, as the men crawled over the grass by the side of the A421, continuous consultation took place between London and Washington regarding the release of the news to the media and the world.
It was agreed that the statement should come from the White House, with immediate confirmation in London.
The statement would simply say that an exchange had been arranged in conditions of total secrecy, as demanded by the kidnappers, an unspecified ransom had been paid, and that they had broken their word.
The British authorities, responding to an anonymous phone call, had gone to a roadside in Buckinghamshire and there found Simon Cormack dead.
Needless to say, the condolences of the British monarch, government and people to the President and to the American  people were without limit of sincerity or depth, and a search of unexampled vigour was now in progress to identify, find and arrest the culprits.
Sir Harry Marriott was adamant that the phrase referring to the arrangement of the exchange should include an extra seven words —‘between the American authorities and the kidnappers’— and the White House, albeit reluctantly, agreed to this.
‘The media are going to have our hides,’ growled Odell.
‘Well, you wanted Quinn,’ said Philip Kelly.
‘Actually you wanted Quinn,’ snapped Odell at Lee Alexander and David Weintraub, who sat with them in the Situation Room.
‘By the way, where is he now?’
‘Being detained,’ said Weintraub.
‘The British refused to allow him to be lodged on sovereign US territory inside the embassy.
Their MI5 people have loaned a country house in Surrey.
He's there.’
‘Well, he has a hell of a lot of explaining to do,’ said Hubert Reed.
‘The diamonds are gone, the kidnappers are gone, and that poor boy is dead.
How exactly did he die?’
‘The Brits are trying to find that out,’ said Brad Johnson.
‘Kevin Brown says it was almost as if he was hit by a bazooka, right in front of them, but they saw nothing like a bazooka.
Or he stepped on a landmine of some sort.’
‘On a roadside in the middle of nowhere?’ asked Stannard.
‘As I told you, the PM will indicate what happened.’
‘When the British have finished interviewing him, I believe we should have him back over here,’ said Kelly.
‘We need to talk to him.’
‘The Deputy Assistant Director of your Division is doing that already,’ said Weintraub.
‘If he refuses to come, can we force him to return?’ asked Bill Walters.
‘Yes, Mr Attorney-General, we can,’ said Kelly.
‘Kevin Brown believes he may have been involved in some way.
We don't know how…yet.
But if we issue a Material Witness Warrant I believe the British would put him on the plane.’
‘We'll give it another twenty-four hours, and see what the British come up with,’ said Odell finally.
The Washington statement was issued at 5 p.m. local time and rocked the United States as little had done since the  assassination of Bobby Kennedy and of Martin Luther King.
The media went into a furore, not helped by Press Secretary Craig Lipton's refusal to answer the two hundred supplementary questions they had to ask.
Who had arranged the ransom?
How much was it?
In what form?
How had it been handed over?
By whom?
Why had no attempt been made to arrest the kidnappers at the handover?
Was the package or packet of ransom money bugged?
Had the kidnappers been tracked too clumsily and killed the boy as they fled?
What level of negligence had been shown by the authorities?
Did the White House blame Scotland Yard — if not, why not?
Why did the United States not leave it to Scotland Yard in the first place?
Had any descriptions of the kidnappers been obtained?
Were the British police closing in on them…?
The questions went on and on.
Craig Lipton definitely decided to resign before he was lynched.
The time in London was five hours later than in Washington, but the reaction was similar; late television shows were interrupted by newsflashes that left the nation stunned.
The switchboards at Scotland Yard, the Home Office, Downing Street and the American embassy were jammed.
Teams of journalists, just about to go home around l0 p.m., were told to work through the night as fresh editions were prepared for issue as late as S a.m.
By dawn they were staking out the Radcliffe Infirmary, Grosvenor Square, Downing Street and Scotland Yard.
In chartered helicopters they hovered over the empty stretch of road between Fenny Stratford and Buckingham to photograph the bare tarmac and the last few barriers and police cars parked there at first light.
Few slept.
Impelled by a personal plea for haste from Sir Harry Marriott himself, Dr Barnard and his team worked through the night.
The forensic scientist had finally left the road at last light, certain it had nothing more to yield.
Ten hours of scouring had left the thirty-yard circle cleaner than any piece of ground in England.
What that ground had yielded now reposed in a series of grey plastic drums along the wall of his laboratory.
For him and his team it was the night of the microscopes.
Nigel Cramer spent the night in a plain, bare room in a Tudor grange, screened from the nearest road by a belt of trees, in the heart of Surrey.
Despite its elegant exterior aspect, the old house  was well equipped for interrogation.
The British Security Service used its ancient cellars as a training school for such delicate matters.
Brown, Collins and Seymour were present at their own insistence.
Cramer did not object — his brief from Sir Harry Marriott was to co-operate with the Americans wherever and whenever possible.
Any information Quinn had would go to both governments anyway.
A relay of tapes filled themselves in the machines on the table beside them.
Quinn had a long and livid bruise on the side of his jaw, a lump and a plaster on the back of his head.
He was still in his shirt, now filthy, and slacks.
Shoes had been removed, along with belt and tie.
He was unshaven and looked exhausted.
But he answered the questions calmly and clearly.
Cramer started at the beginning: Why had he quit the flat in Kensington?
Quinn explained.
Brown glowered at him.
‘Did you have any reason, Mr Quinn, to believe that a person or persons unknown might have attempted to interfere in the ransom exchange, to the effect of endangering the safety of Simon Cormack?’
Nigel Cramer was phrasing it by the book.
‘Instinct,’ said Quinn.
‘Just instinct, Mr Quinn?’
‘May I ask you a question, Mr Cramer?’
‘I don't promise to answer it.’
‘The attaché case with the diamonds in it.
It was bugged, wasn't it?’
He got his answer from the four expressions in the room.
‘If I had shown up at any exchange with that case,’ said Quinn, ‘they'd have spotted it and killed the boy.’
‘They did that anyway, smartass,’ growled Brown.
‘Yes, they did,’ said Quinn grimly.
‘I admit I did not think they would do that.’
Cramer took him back to the moment he left the flat.
He told them about Marylebone, the night at the hotel, the terms Zack had laid down for the rendezvous, and how he had just made the deadline.
For Cramer the meat was in the head-to-head in the abandoned factory.
Quinn gave him the car, a Volvo saloon, and its registration number; both men surmised, rightly, that the plates would have been changed for that meeting, then changed back again.
Ditto the road-tax disc stuck on the windscreen.
These men had shown they were careful.
He could describe the men only as he had seen them, masked, in shapeless tracksuits.
One he had not seen at all, the fourth, who had stayed at the hideout ready to kill Simon Cormack on a phone call, or a no-show by his colleagues by a certain time.
He described the physique of the two men he had seen upright: Zack and the gunman.
Medium height, medium build.
Sorry.
He identified the Skorpion submachine-gun, and of course the Babbidge warehouse.
Cramer left the room to make a phone call.
A second team of forensic men from Fulham visited the warehouse before dawn and spent the morning there.
It yielded nothing but a small ball of marzipan and a set of perfect tyre-tracks in the dust.
These would eventually identify the abandoned Volvo, but not for two weeks.
The house used by the kidnappers was of particular interest.
A gravel drive — Quinn had heard the crunching of the gravel — about ten yards from front gate to garage doors, automatic door-opening system, integral garage; a house with a concrete cellar beneath it — the estate agents could help here.
But direction from London — nothing.
He had been in the boot the first time, and masked on the floor of the back seat the second.
Driving-time: one and a half hours the first time, two hours the second.
If they drove by an indirect route, that could be anywhere; right in the heart of London or up to fifty miles in any direction.
‘There's nothing we can charge him with, Home Secretary,’ Cramer reported to the Minister early next morning.
‘We can't even detain him any longer.
And frankly I don't think we should.
I don't believe he was criminally involved in the death.’
‘Well, he seems to have made a complete balls of it,’ said Sir Harry.
The pressure from Downing Street for some new lead was becoming intense.
‘So it would seem,’ said the police officer.
‘But if those criminals were determined to kill the boy, and it seems with hindsight that they were, they could have done it any time, before or after receiving the diamonds, in the cellar, on the road or on some lonely Yorkshire moorland.
And Quinn with him.
The mystery is why they let Quinn live, and why they first released the boy and then killed him.
It's almost as if they were  looking to make themselves the most hated and hunted men on earth.’
‘Very well,’ sighed the Home Secretary, ‘we have no further interest in Mr Quinn.
Are the Americans still holding him?’
‘Technically, he's their voluntary guest,’ said Cramer carefully.
‘Well, they can let him go back to Spain when they wish.’
While they were talking, Sam Somerville was pleading with Kevin Brown.
Collins and Seymour were present, in the manor's elegant drawing-room.
‘What the hell do you want to see him for?’ asked Brown.
‘He failed.
He's a busted flush.’
‘Look,’ she said, ‘in those three weeks I got closer to him than anybody.
If he's holding out at all, on anything, maybe I could get it out of him, sir.’
Brown seemed undecided.
‘Couldn't do any harm,’ said Seymour.
Brown nodded.
‘He's downstairs.
Thirty minutes.’
That afternoon Sam Somerville took the regular flight from Heathrow to Washington, landing just after dark.
As Sam Somerville took off from Heathrow, Dr Barnard was sitting in his laboratory in Fulham staring at a small collection of pieces of debris spread on a crisp white sheet of paper across a table-top.
He was very tired.
Since the urgent call to his small London house just after dawn the previous day, he had not stopped working.
Much of that work was a strain on the eyes, peering through magnifying glasses and into microscopes.
But if he rubbed his eyes that late afternoon it was more from surprise than from exhaustion.
He now knew what had happened, how it had happened, and what had been the effect.
Stains on fabric and leather had yielded to chemical analysis to reveal the exact chemical components of the explosive; the extent of burn- and impact-deterioration had shown him how much was used, where it had been placed and how it had been triggered.
There were some pieces missing, of course.
Some would never appear, vaporized, lost for ever, having ceased to exist.
Others would emerge from the ruin of the body itself, and he had been in constant contact  with Ian Macdonald, who was still at work in Oxford.
The yield from Oxford would arrive shortly.
But he knew what he was looking at, though to the untrained eye it was just a pile of minuscule fragments.
Some of them made up the remnants of a tiny battery, source identified.
Others were tiny pieces of polyvinyl-chloride insulated plastic covering, source identified.
Strands of copper wire, source identified.
And a mess of twisted brass bonded with what had once been a small but efficient pulse-receiver.
No detonator.
He was a hundred per cent sure, but he wanted to be two hundred per cent.
He might have to go back to the road and start again.
One of his assistants poked his head round the door.
‘Dr Macdonald on the line from the Radcliffe.’
The pathologist had also been working since the previous afternoon, a task many would find horribly gruesome but which to him was more full of detective fascination than any other he could imagine.
He lived for his profession, so much so that, instead of limiting himself to examining the remains of bomb-blast victims, he attended the courses and lectures available only to a very few on bomb-making and disarming offered at Fort Halstead.
He wished to know not simply that he was looking for something, but what it was and what it looked like.
He had begun by studying the photographs for two hours, before he even touched the cadaver itself.
Then he carefully removed the clothes, not relying on an assistant but doing it himself.
The trainer shoes came first, then the ankle-socks.
The rest was snipped off, using fine scissors.
Each item was bagged and sent direct to Barnard in London.
The yield from the clothes had reached Fulham by sunrise.
When the body was naked, it was X-rayed from top to toe.
He studied the prints for an hour and identified forty non-human particles.
Then he swabbed the body down with a sticky powder, which removed a dozen infinitely small particles stuck to the skin.
Some were crumbs of grass and mud; some were not.
A second police car took this grim harvest to Dr Barnard in Fulham.
He did an external autopsy, dictating into a recorder in his measured Scottish lilt.
He only began to cut just before dawn.
The first task was to excise from the cadaver all the ‘relevant  tissue’.
This happened to be all of the middle section of the body, which had lost almost everything from and including the bottom two ribs down to the top of the pelvis.
Within the excised matter were the small particles that remained of eight inches of lower spine, which had come straight through the body and the ventral wall to lodge in the front of the jeans.
The autopsy — establishment of cause of death — was no problem.
It was massive explosive injury to spine and abdomen.
The full post-mortem needed more.
Dr Macdonald had the excised matter X-rayed again, in much finer grain.
There were things in there all right, some so small they would defy tweezers.
The excised flesh and bone was finally ‘digested’ in a brew of enzymes to create a thick ‘soup’of dissolved human tissue, bone included.
It was the centrifuge that yielded the last cull, a final ounce of bits of metal.
When this ounce was available for examination Dr Macdonald selected the largest piece, the one he had spotted in the second X-ray, deeply impacted into a piece of bone and buried inside the young man's spleen.
He studied it for a while, whistled and rang Fulham.
Barnard came on the line.
‘Ian, glad you called.
Anything else for me?’
‘Ay.
There's something here you have got to see.
If I'm right, it's something I've never seen before.
I think I know what it is, but I can hardly believe it.’
‘Use a squad car.
Send it now,’ said Barnard grimly.
Two hours later the men were speaking again.
It was Barnard who called this time.
‘If you were thinking what I believe you were thinking, you were right,’ he said.
Barnard had his two hundred per cent.
‘It couldn't come from anywhere else?’ asked Macdonald.
‘Nope.
There's no way one of these gets into anybody's hands but the manufacturer's.’
‘Bloody hell,’ said the pathologist quietly.
‘Mum's the word, matey,’ said Barnard.
‘Ours but to do or die, right?
I'll have my report with the Home Secretary in the morning.
Can you do the same?’
Macdonald glanced at his watch.
Thirty-six hours since he had been roused.
Another twelve to go.
‘Sleep no more.
Barnard does murder sleep,’ he parodied Macbeth.
‘All right, on his desk by breakfast.’
That evening he released the body, or both parts of it, to the Coroner's Officer.
In the morning the Oxford Coroner would open and adjourn the inquest, enabling him to release the body to the next of kin, in this case Ambassador Fairweather in person, representing President John Cormack.
As the two British scientists wrote their reports through the night, Sam Somerville was received at her own request by the committee in the Situation Room beneath the West Wing.
She had appealed right up to the Director of the Bureau, and after telephoning Vice-President Odell he had agreed to bring her along.
When she entered the room they were all already seated.
Only David Weintraub was missing, away in Tokyo talking to his opposite number there.
She felt intimidated; these men were the most powerful in the land, men you only saw on television or in the press.
She took a deep breath, held her head up and walked forward to the end of the table.
Vice-President Odell gestured to a chair.
‘Siddown, young lady.’
‘We understand you wanted to ask us to let Mr Quinn go free,’ said the Attorney-General, Bill Walters.
‘May we ask why?’
‘Gentlemen, I know some may suspect Mr Quinn was in some way involved in the death of Simon Cormack.
I ask you to believe me.
I have been in close contact with him in that apartment for three weeks and I'm convinced he genuinely tried to secure that young man's release safe and unharmed.’
‘Then, why did he run?’ asked Philip Kelly.
He did not appreciate having his junior agents brought to the committee to speak for themselves.
‘Because there were two freak news-leaks in the forty-eight hours before he went.
Because he had spent three weeks trying to gain that animal's trust and he had done it.
Because he was convinced Zack was about to scuttle and run, if he couldn't get to Zack alone and unarmed, without a shadow from either the British or American authorities.’
No one failed to grasp that by ‘American authorities’ she meant Kevin Brown.
Kelly scowled.
‘There remains a suspicion he could have been involved in some way,’ he said.
‘We don't know how, but it needs to be checked out.’
‘He couldn't, sir,’ said Sam.
‘If he had proposed himself as the negotiator, maybe.
But the choice to ask him was made right here.
He didn't even want to come.
And from the moment Mr Weintraub saw him in Spain he has been in someone's company twenty-four hours a day.
Every word he spoke to the kidnappers, you listened to.’
‘Except those missing forty-eight hours before he showed up on a roadside,’ said Morton Stannard.
‘But why should he do a deal with the kidnappers during that time?’ she asked.
‘Except for the return of Simon Cormack?’
‘Because two million dollars is a lot of money to a poor man,’ suggested Hubert Reed.
‘But if he had wanted to disappear with the diamonds,’ she persisted, ‘we'd still be looking for him now.’
‘Well,’ drawled Odell unexpectedly, ‘he did go to the kidnappers alone and unarmed — except for some goddam marzipan.
If he didn't know them already, that takes grit.’
‘And yet Mr Brown's suspicions may not be entirely unfounded,’ said Jim Donaldson.
‘He could have made his contact, struck a deal.
They kill the boy, leave him alive, take the stones.
Later they meet up and split the booty.’
‘Why should they?’ asked Sam, bolder now, with the Veep apparently on her side.
‘They had the diamonds; they could have killed him, too.
Even if they didn't, why should they split with him?
Would you trust them?’
None of them would trust such men a yard.
There was a silence as they thought it over.
‘If he's allowed to go, what has he in mind?
Back to his vineyard in Spain?’ asked Reed.
‘No, sir, he wants to go after them.
He wants to hunt them down.’
‘Hey, hold on, Agent Somerville,’ said Kelly indignantly.
‘That's Bureau work.
Gentlemen, we have no need of discretion to protect the life of Simon Cormack any more.
That murder is indictable under our laws, just like that murder on the cruise ship,Achille Lauro .
We're putting teams into Britain and Europe with the co-operation of all the national police authorities.
We want them and we're going to get them.
Mr Brown controls the operations out of London.’
Sam Somerville played her last card.
‘But, gentlemen, if Quinn was not involved, he got closer than anyone to them, saw them, spoke to them.
If he was involved, then he will know where to go.
That could be our best lead.’
‘You mean, let him run and tail him?’ asked Walters.
‘No, sir, I mean let me go with him.’
‘Young lady….’
Michael Odell leaned forward to see her better.
‘Do you know what you're saying?
This man has killed before — OK, in combat — if he's involved, you could end up very dead.’
‘I know that, Mr Vice-President.
That's the point.
I believe he's innocent and I'm prepared to take the risk.’
‘Mm.
All right, stay in town, Miss Somerville.
We'll let you know.
We need to discuss this — in private,’ said Odell.
The Home Secretary, Sir Harry Marriott, spent a disturbed morning reading the reports of Dr Barnard and Dr Macdonald.
Then he took them both to Downing Street.
He was back in the Home Office by the lunch hour.
Nigel Cramer was waiting for him.
‘You've seen these?’ asked Sir Harry.
‘I've read copies, Home Secretary.’
‘This is appalling, utterly dismaying.
If this ever gets out….
Do you know where Ambassador Fairweather is?’
‘Yes.
He's in Oxford.
The coroner released the body to him an hour ago.
I believe Air Force One is standing by at Upper Heyford to fly the coffin back to the States.
The Ambassador will see it depart, then return to London.’
‘Mm.
I'll have to ask the Foreign Office to set up an interview.
I want no copies of this to anybody.
Ghastly business.
Any news on the manhunt?’
‘Not a lot, sir.
Quinn made plain none of the other two kidnappers he saw uttered a word.
It could be they were foreigners.
We're concentrating the hunt for the Volvo at major ports and airports connecting to Europe.
I fear they may have slipped away.
Of course, the hunt for the house goes on.
No further need for discretion; I'm having a public appeal issued  this evening, if you agree.
A detached house with an integral garage, a cellar and a Volvo of that colour — someone must have seen something.’
‘Yes, by all means.
Keep me posted,’ said the Home Secretary.
That evening in Washington, a very tense Sam Somerville was summoned from her apartment home in Alexandria to the Hoover Building.
She was shown to the office of Philip Kelly, her ultimate departmental boss, to hear the White House decision.
‘All right, Agent Somerville, you got it.
The powers-that-be say you get to return to England and release Mr Quinn.
But this time, you stay with him, right with him, all the time.
And you let Mr Brown know what he's doing and where he's going.’
‘Yes, sir.
Thank you, sir.’
She was just in time to catch the overnight Red Eye for Heathrow.
There was a slight delay in the departure of her scheduled plane out of Dulles International.
A few miles away, at Andrews, Air Force One was landing with the body of Simon Cormack.
At that hour, right across America, all airports ceased operations for two minutes' silence.
She landed at Heathrow at dawn.
It was the dawn of the fourth day since the murder.
Irving Moss was woken early that morning, by the sound of the ringing phone.
It could only be one source — only one source had his number here.
He checked his watch: 4 a.m., ten the previous evening in Houston.
He took down the lengthy list of produce prices, all in US dollars and cents, eradicated the zeros or ‘nulls’ which indicated a space in the message, and according to the day of the month set the lines of figures against prepared lines of letters.
When he had finished decoding, he sucked in his cheeks.
Something extra, something not foreseen, something else he would have to take care of.
Without delay.
Aloysius ‘Al’ Fairweather, Jnr, United States ambassador to the Court of St James, had received the message conveyed by the British Foreign Office the previous evening on his return from the Upper Heyford USAF base.
It had been a bad, sad day: receiving permission from Oxford's coroner to take charge of the body of his President's son, collecting the coffin from the local undertakers, who had done their best with little chance of success, and dispatching the tragic cargo back to Washington on Air Force One.
He had been almost three years in this post, the appointee of the new administration, and he knew he had done well, even though he had to succeed the incomparable Charles Price of the Reagan years.
But these past four weeks had been a nightmare no ambassador should have to live through.
The Foreign Office request puzzled him, for it was not to see the Foreign Secretary with whom he normally dealt, but the Home Secretary, Sir Harry Marriott.
He knew Sir Harry, as he knew most of the British ministers, well enough to drop titles in private and revert to first names.
But to attend at the Home Office itself, and at the breakfast hour, was unusual, and the Foreign Office message had lacked explanation.
His long black Cadillac swept into Victoria Street at five to nine.
‘My dear Al.’
Marriott was all charm, albeit backed by the gravity the circumstances demanded.
‘I hope I don't need to tell you the level of shock that the last few days have brought to this entire country.’
Fairweather nodded.
He had no doubt the reaction of the British government and people was totally genuine.
For days the queue to sign the Condolence Book in the embassy lobby had stretched twice around Grosvenor Square.
Near the top of the first page was the simple inscription ‘Elizabeth R’ followed by the entire Cabinet, the two archbishops, the leaders of all the other churches and thousands of names of the high and the obscure.
Sir Harry pushed two manilla-bound reports across the desk at him.
‘I wanted you to see these first, in private, and I suggest now.
There may be matters we should discuss before you leave.’
Dr Macdonald's report was the shorter; he took it first.
Simon Cormack had died of massive explosive damage to spine and abdomen, caused by a detonation of small but concentrated effect near the base of his back.
At the time he died he was carrying the bomb on his person.
There was more, but it was technical jargon about his physique, state of health, last known meal and so on.
Dr Barnard had more to say.
The bomb Simon Cormack had been carrying on his person was concealed in the broad leather belt he wore around his waist and which had been given him by his abductors to hold up the denim jeans they had also provided for him.
The belt was (had been) three inches wide and made of two strips of cowhide sewn together along their edges.
At the front it was secured by a heavy and ornate brass buckle, four inches long and slightly wider than the belt itself, decorated at its front by the embossed image of a longhorn steer's head.
It was the sort of belt sold widely in shops specializing in Western or camping equipment.
Although appearing solid, the buckle had in fact been hollow.
The explosive had been a two-ounce wafer of Semtex, composed of 45 per cent Penta Tetro Ether Nitrate (or PETN), 45 per cent RDX and 10 per cent plasticizer.
The wafer had been three inches long and one and a half inches wide, and had been inserted between the two strands of leather precisely against the young man's backbone.
Buried within the plastic explosive had been a miniature detonator, or minidet, later extracted from within a fragment of vertebra that had been itself buried in the spleen.
It was distorted but still recognizable — and identifiable.
From the explosive and detonator, a wire ran round the belt to the side, where it connected with a lithium battery similar to and no larger than the sort used to power digital watches.
This had been inside a hollow sculpted within the thickness of the double leather.
The same wire then ran on to the pulse-receiver hidden inside the buckle.
From the receiver a further wire, the aerial, ran right round the belt, between the layers of leather.
The pulse-receiver would have been no larger than a matchbox, probably receiving on something like 72.15 megahertz a signal sent from a small transmitter.
This was not of course found at the scene, but it was probably a flat plastic box pack, smaller than a crush-proof cigarette-packet, with a single flush button depressed by the ball of the thumb to effect detonation.
Range — something over 300 yards.
Al Fairweather was visibly shaken.
‘God, Harry, this is…satanic.’
‘And complex technology,’ agreed the Home Secretary.
‘The sting is in the tail.
Read the summary.’
‘But why?’ asked the Ambassador when he looked up at last.
‘In God's name, why, Harry?
And how did they do it?’
‘As to how, there's only one explanation.
Those animals pretended to let Simon Cormack go free.
They must have driven on a while, circled back and approached the stretch of road from the direction of the fields on foot.
Probably hidden in one of those clumps of trees standing two hundred yards away from the road across the fields.
That would be within range.
We have men scouring the woods now for possible footprints.
‘As to why, I don't know, Al.
We none of us know.
But the scientists are adamant.
They have not got it wrong.
For the moment I would suggest that report remain extremely confidential.
Until we know more.
We are trying to find out.
I'm sure your own people will want to try also, before anything goes public.’
Fairweather rose, taking his copies of the reports.
‘I'm not sending these by courier,’ he said.
‘I'm flying home with them this afternoon.’
The Home Secretary escorted him down to the ground-level.
‘You do realize what this could do if it gets out?’ he asked.
‘No need to underline it,’ said Fairweather.
‘There'd be riots.
I have to take this to Jim Donaldson and maybe Michael Odell.
They'll have to tell the President.
God, what a thing.’
Sam Somerville's rental car had been where she left it in the short-stay carpark at Heathrow.
She drove straight to the manor-house in Surrey.
Kevin Brown read the letter she brought and glowered.
‘You're making a mistake, Agent Somerville,’ he said.
‘Director Edmonds is making a mistake.
That man down there knows more than he lets on — always has, always will.
Letting him run sticks in my craw.
He should be on a flight Stateside — in bracelets.’
But the signature on the letter was clear.
Brown sent Moxon down to the cellars to bring Quinn up.
He was still cuffed — they had to remove those.
And unwashed, unshaven and hungry.
The FBI team began to clear out and hand the building back to their hosts.
At the door Brown turned to Quinn.
‘I don't want to see you again, Quinn.
Except behind a row of steel bars.
And I think one day I will.’
On the drive back to London, Quinn was silent as Sam told him the outcome of her trip to Washington and the decision of the White House to let him have his head so long as she went with him.
‘Quinn, just be careful.
Those men have to be animals.
What they did to that boy was savage….’
‘It was worse,’ said Quinn.
‘It was illogical.
That's what I can't get over.
It doesn't make sense.
They had it all.
They were away clean and clear.
Why come back to kill the kid?’
‘Because they were sadists,’ said Sam.
‘You know these people; you've dealt with their type for years.
They have no mercy, no pity.
They relish inflicting pain.
They intended to kill him from the start….’
‘Then, why not in the cellar?
Why not me, too?
Why not with a gun, a knife or a rope?
Why at all?’
‘We'll never know.
Unless they can be found.
And they've got the whole world to disappear into.
Where do you want to go?’
‘The apartment,’ said Quinn.
‘I have my things there.’
‘Me, too,’ said Sam.
‘I went to Washington with only the clothes on my back.’
She was driving north up Warwick Road.
‘You've gone too far,’ said Quinn, who knew London like a cab-driver.
‘Take a right at Cromwell Road, the next junction.’
The lights were red.
Across in front of them cruised a long black Cadillac bearing the fluttering pennant of the Stars and Stripes.
Ambassador Fairweather was in the back studying a report, heading for the airport.
He looked up, glanced at the pair of them without recognition and went on his way.
Duncan McCrea was still in residence, as if overlooked in the mayhem of the past few days.
He greeted Quinn like a Labrador puppy reunited with his master.
Earlier that day, he reported, Lou Collins had sent in the cleaners.
These were not men who wielded feather dusters.
They had cleaned out the bugs and wire-taps.
The apartment was ‘burned’ as far as the Company was concerned and they had no further use for it.
McCrea had been told to stay on, pack, tidy up and return the keys to the landlord when he left next morning.
He was about to pack Sam and Quinn's clothes when they arrived.
‘Well, Duncan, it's here or a hotel.
Mind if we stay one last night?’
‘Oh, of course, no problem.
Be the Agency's guest.
I'm awfully sorry, but in the morning we have to vacate.’
‘The morning will do fine,’ said Quinn.
He was tempted to ruffle the younger man's hair in a paternal gesture.
McCrea's smile was infectious.
‘I need a bath, shave, food and about ten hours’ sleep.’
McCrea went out to Mr Patel's across the road and came back with two large carrier-bags.
He made steak, fries and salad, with two bottles of red wine.
Quinn was touched to note he had picked a Spanish Rioja, not from Andalusia, but the nearest he could get.
Sam saw no need for further secrecy over her affair with Quinn.
She came to his room as soon as he turned in, and if young McCrea heard them making love, so what?
After the second time she fell asleep, on her front, her face against his chest.
He placed one hand on the nape of her neck, and she murmured at the touch.
But despite his tiredness he could not sleep.
He lay on his back, as on so many previous nights, and stared at the ceiling and thought.
There was something about those men in the warehouse, something he had missed.
It came to him in the small hours.
The man behind him, holding the Skorpion with practised casualness, not the careful tension of one unused to handguns; balanced, relaxed, self-confident, knowing he could bring the machine-pistol to aim and fire in a fraction of a second.
His stance, his poise — Quinn had seen it before.
‘He was a soldier,’ he said quietly into the darkness.
Sam murmured ‘Mm’ but went on sleeping.
Something else, something as he passed the door of the Volvo to climb into the boot.
It eluded him and he fell asleep at last.
In the morning Sam rose first and went back to her own room to dress.
Duncan McCrea may have seen her leave Quinn's room but he made no mention.
He was more concerned that his guests should have a good breakfast.
‘Last night…
I forgot eggs,’ he called, and scampered off down the stairs to get some from an early dairy around the corner.
Sam brought Quinn his breakfast in bed.
He was lost in thought.
She had become accustomed to his reveries and left him.
Lou Collins's cleaners had certainly not done any proper cleaning, she thought.
The rooms were dusty after four weeks without attention.
Quinn was not concerned with the dust.
He was watching a spider in the top far corner of his room.
Laboriously the little creature laced up the last two strands of an otherwise perfect web, checked to see every strand was in place, then scuttled to the centre and sat there waiting.
It was the last movement by the spider that recalled to Quinn the tiny detail that eluded him last night.
The White House committee had the full reports of Dr Barnard and Dr Macdonald in front of them.
It was the former they were studying.
One by one they finished the summary and sat back.
‘Goddam bastards,’ said Michael Odell with feeling.
He spoke for all of them.
Ambassador Fairweather sat at the end of the table.
‘Is there any possibility,’ Secretary of State Donaldson asked, ‘that the British scientists could have got it wrong?
About the origins?’
‘They say no,’ answered the Ambassador.
‘They've invited us to send anyone we like over to double-check, but they're good.
I'm afraid they've got it right.’
As Sir Harry Marriott had said, the sting was in the tail, the summary.
Every single component, Dr Barnard had said with the full concurrence of his military colleagues at Fort Halstead — the copper wires, their plastic covering, the Semtex, the pulse-receiver, the battery, the brass and the leather stitching — was of Soviet manufacture.
He conceded it was possible for such items, though manufactured in the Soviet Union, to fall into the hands of outsiders.
But the clincher was the minidet.
No larger than a paper-clip, these miniature detonators are used, and only used, within the Soviet space programme at Baikonur.
They are employed to  give infinitesimal steerage-changes to the Salyut and Soyuz vehicles as they manoeuvre to dock in space.
‘But it doesn't make sense,’ protested Donaldson.
‘Why should they?’
‘A whole lot in this mess doesn't make sense,’ said Odell.
‘If this is true, I don't see how Quinn could have known about it.
It looks like they duped him all along, duped all of us.’
‘The question is, what do we do about it?’ asked Reed of the Treasury.
‘The funeral's tomorrow,’ said Odell.
‘We'll get that over with first.
Then we'll decide how we handle our Russian friends.’
Over four weeks Michael Odell had found that the authority of acting President was sitting more and more easily on him.
The men around this table had come to accept his leadership also, more and more as if he were the President.
‘How is the President,’ asked Walters, ‘since…the news?’
‘According to the doc, bad,’ said Odell.
‘Very bad.
If the kidnap was bad enough, the death of his son, and done like that, has been like a bullet in his gut.’
At the word ‘bullet’ each man round the table thought the same thought.
No one dared say it.
Julian Hayman was the same age as Quinn and they had known each other when Quinn lived in London and worked for the underwriting firm specializing in protection and hostage release.
Their worlds had overlapped, for Hayman, a former major in the SAS, ran a company dedicated to the provision of anti-crime alarm systems and personal protection, including bodyguards.
His clientele was exclusive, wealthy and careful.
They were people who had reason to be suspicious, or they would not have paid so highly for Hayman's services.
The office in Victoria, to which Quinn guided Sam in the middle of the morning after leaving the flat and saying a final goodbye to Duncan McCrea, was as well protected as it was discreet.
Quinn told Sam to sit in the window of a café down the street and wait for him.
‘Why can't I come with you?’ she asked.
‘Because he wouldn't receive you.
He may not even see me.
But I hope he will; we go back a long way.
Strangers he doesn't  like, unless they are paying heavily, and we aren't.
When it comes to ladies from the FBI he's like shy game.’
Quinn announced himself through the entryphone, aware he was being scanned by the overhead video-camera.
When the door clicked he walked right through to the back, past two secretaries who did not even look up.
Julian Hayman was in his office at the extremity of the ground floor.
The room was as elegant as its occupant.
It had no windows; neither did Hayman.
‘Well, well, well,’ he drawled.
‘Long time, soldier.’
He held out a languid hand.
‘What brings you to my humble shop?’
‘Information,’ said Quinn.
He told Hayman what he wanted.
‘In earlier times, dear boy, no problem.
But things change, don't you see?
Fact is, the word's out on you, Quinn.
Persona non grata , they're saying at the club.
Not the flavour of the month exactly, especially with your own people.
Sorry, old boy, you're bad news, can't help.’
Quinn lifted a phone off the desk and hit several buttons.
It began to ring at the other end.
‘What are you doing?’ asked Hayman.
The drawl had gone.
‘No one saw me come in here, but half Fleet Street's going to see me leave,’ said Quinn.
‘Daily Mail ,’ said a voice on the phone.
Hayman reached forward and killed the call.
Many of his best-paying clients were American corporations in Europe, the sort to whom he would prefer to avoid making laborious explanations.
‘You're a bastard, Quinn,’ he said thinly.
‘Always were.
All right, a couple of hours in the files, but I lock you in.
Nothing goes missing.
‘Would I do that to you?’ asked Quinn amiably.
Hayman led him downstairs to the basement archive.
Partly in the course of his business, partly out of a personal interest, Julian Hayman had amassed over the years a remarkably comprehensive archive of criminals of every kind.
Murderers, bank robbers, gangsters, swindlers, dope pedlars, arms traffickers, terrorists, kidnappers; ‘bent’ bankers, accountants, lawyers, politicians and policemen; dead, alive, in gaol or simply missing — if they had appeared in print, and often if they had not, he had them filed.
The cavern ran right under the building.
‘Any particular section?’ asked Hayman as he switched on the lights.
The filing-cabinets ran in all directions, and these  were only the cards and the photographs.
The main data were on computer.
‘Mercenaries,’ said Quinn.
‘As in Congo?’ asked Hayman.
‘As in Congo, Yemen, South Sudan, Biafra, Rhodesia.’
‘From here to here,’ said Hayman, gesturing to ten yards of chin-high steel filing-cabinets.
‘The table's at the end.’
It took Quinn four hours, but no one disturbed him.
The photograph showed four men, all white.
They were grouped round the front end of a jeep, on a thin and dusty road, edged by the bush vegetation of what looked like Africa.
Several black soldiers could be discerned behind them.
They were all in camouflage combat uniform and calf-boots.
Three had bush-hats.
All carried Belgian FLN automatic rifles.
Their camouflage was of the leopard-spot type favoured by Europeans rather than the streaked variety used by the British and Americans.
Quinn took the photo to the table, put it under the spotlamp and found a powerful magnifying glass in the drawer.
Under its gaze, the design on the hand of one of the men showed up more clearly, despite the sepia tint of the old photo.
A spider's web motif, on the back of the left hand, the spider crouching at the centre of the web.
He went on through the files but found nothing else of interest.
Nothing that rang a bell.
He pressed the buzzer to be let out.
In his office Julian Hayman held out his hand for the photograph.
‘Who?’ said Quinn.
Hayman studied the rear of the picture.
Like every other card entry and photo in his collection, it bore a seven-figure number on the back.
He tapped the number into the console of his desk-top computer.
The full file flashed up on the screen.
‘H'm, you have picked some charmers, old boy.’
He read off the screen.
‘Picture almost certainly taken in Maniema Province, eastern Congo, now Zaïre, some time in the winter of 1964.
The man on the left is Jacques Schramme, Black Jack Schramme, the Belgian mercenary.’
He warmed to his narration.
It was his speciality.
‘Schramme was one of the first.
He fought against the United Nations troops in the attempted Katangese secession of nineteen  sixty to sixty-two.
When they lost he had to quit and took refuge in neighbouring Angola, then Portuguese and ultra-right-wing.
Returned on invitation in the autumn of nineteen sixty-four to help put down the Simba revolt.
Reconstituted his old Leopard Group and set about pacifying Maniema Province.
That's him all right.
Any more?’
‘The others,’ said Quinn.
‘Mm.
The one on the extreme right is another Belgian, Commandant Wauthier.
At the time he commanded a contingent of Katangese levies and about twenty white mercenaries at Watsa.
Must have been on a visit.
You interested in Belgians?’
‘Maybe.’
Quinn thought back to the Volvo in the warehouse.
He was passing the open door, caught the odour of cigarette smoke.
Not Marlboro, not Dunhill.
More like French Gauloises.
Or Bastos, the Belgian brand.
Zack did not smoke; he had smelt his breath.
‘The one without the hat in the middle is Roger Lagaillarde, also Belgian.
Killed in a Simba ambush on the Punia road.
No doubt about that.’
‘The big one,’ said Quinn.
‘The giant.’
‘Yes, he is big,’ agreed Hayman.
‘Must be six feet six at least.
Built like a barn door.
Early twenties by the look of him.
Pity he's turned his head away.
With the shadow of his bush-hat you can't see much of his face.
Probably why there's no name for him.
Just a nickname.
‘Big Paul.’
That's all it says.’
He flicked off the screen.
Quinn had been doodling on a pad.
He pushed his drawing across to Hayman.
‘Ever seen that before?’
Hayman looked at the design of the spider's web, the spider at its centre.
He shrugged.
‘A tattoo?
Worn by young hooligans, punks, football thugs.
Quite common.’
‘Think back,’ said Quinn.
‘Belgium — say, thirty years ago.’
‘Ah, wait a minute.
What the hell did they call it?
Arraignée , that was it.
Can't recall the Flemish word for ‘spider’, just the French.’
He tapped at his keys for several seconds.
‘Black web, red spider at the centre, worn on the back of the left hand?’
Quinn tried to recall.
He was passing the open passenger-door  of the Volvo, on his way to climb in the boot.
Zack behind him.
The man in the driving-seat had leaned across to watch him through the hood-slits.
A big man, almost touched the roof in the sitting position.
Leaning sideways, left hand supporting his weight.
And in order to smoke he had removed his left glove.
‘Yeah,’ said Quinn.
‘That's it.’
‘Insignificant bunch,’ said Hayman dismissively, reading from his screen.
‘Extreme right-wing organization formed in Belgium in the late fifties, early sixties.
Opposed to decolonization of Belgium's only colony, the Congo.
Anti-black, of course, anti-Semitic — what else is new?
Recruited young tearaways and hooligans, street thugs and riff-raff.
Specialized in throwing bricks through Jewish shop-windows, heckling leftist speakers, beat up a couple of Liberal Members of Parliament.
Died out eventually.
Of course, the dissolution of the European empires threw up all sorts of these groups.’
‘Flemish movement or Walloon?’ asked Quinn.
He knew Belgium has two cultural groups within her; the Flemings, mainly in the northern half near Holland, who speak Flemish, and the Walloons from the south, nearer France, who speak French.
Belgium is a two-language country.
‘Both, really,’ said Hayman, after consulting his screen.
‘But it says here it started and was always strongest in the city of Antwerp.
So, Flemish, I suppose.’
Any other woman would have been spitting angry at being kept waiting for four and a half hours.
Fortunately for Quinn, Sam was a trained agent, and had been through her apprenticeship in stake-out duties, than which nothing is more boring.
She was nursing her fifth cup of awful coffee.
‘When do you check in your car?’ he asked.
‘Due tonight.
I could extend it.’
‘Can you hand it back at the airport?’
‘Sure.
Why?’
‘We're flying to Brussels.’
She looked unhappy.
‘Please, Quinn, do we have to fly?
I do it if I really have to, but if I can avoid it I chicken out, and I had too much lately.’
‘OK,’ he said.
‘Check the car in London.
We'll take the train  and the hovercraft.
We'll have to rent a Belgian car anyway.
Might as well be Ostend.
And we'll need money.
I have no credit cards.’
‘You what?’
She had never heard anyone say that.
‘I don't need them in Alcantara del Rio.’
‘OK, we'll go to the bank.
I'll use a cheque and hope I have enough in the account back home.’
On the way to the bank she turned on the radio.
The music was sombre.
It was four of a London afternoon and getting dark.
Far away across the Atlantic, the Cormack family was burying their son.