

The Dawn Raids
At dawn on 27 February 1991 nine Orkney children were taken from their beds by social workers and police, and flown away from their parents and their island homes to ‘Places of Safety’ on the Scottish mainland.
At seven o'clock on a dark and dreary February morning without any warning, several cars arrived simultaneously at six homes in South Ronaldsay, the most southerly of the seventy Orkney islands, and also at a caravan home in Kirkwall.
Between four and six police officers, together with as many as five social workers, descended on each of the homes.
Within minutes they had roused sleeping children from four of those homes and driven off with them into the murky winter dawn.
The children were given no explanations, no assurances; only the oldest of the nine, a fifteen-year-old boy, was told they were to be questioned for a day.
Some of them, wakened by the noise, as what seemed like crowds of people poured into their homes, crept downstairs to eavesdrop.
Terrified, their initial reaction was to make a run for it; but other considerations crowded in.
The fifteen-year-old boy leapt from his bed with escape in mind, but he decided it would be unfair to leave his eleven-year-old brother to face what was to come alone, so he got back into bed and waited for the social workers to come upstairs.
A twelve-year-old, who listened at the living-room door to what was going on, wanted to run, but knew he'd be followed.
He went back to bed and wept until they came for him.
The social workers even followed him into the bathroom.
There was no escape.
The nine children, aged between eight and fifteen, were upset and frightened.
Yet it seems that none of them was completely surprised.
Only four months before, eight South Ronaldsay children, all from one family, had been taken into care from school in front of all the other pupils.
From that moment, all the island children believed that social workers could come and lift children from anywhere at any time.
All of them lived with a nervous expectation that it could happen to them.
The home of those eight children, now occupied  only by their mother and a family friend, was another of the six South Ronaldsay homes visited by police cars at 7 o'clock that morning, and the caravan in Kirkwall was the home of the oldest son of the family.
Involved in offering succour and assistance to the mother of those eight children taken from school was the local minister.
At that time the Reverend Morris Mackenzie, a New Zealander, and minister of the local parish, had invited Mrs W — as we shall call this mother of fifteen children — to use his manse as a sort of sanctuary.
That manse, in sight of the sea, was also raided at seven o'clock on Wednesday 27 February.
Police knocking loudly at the door woke the minister and his wife, demanding entry to search.
The search was thorough and a number of items were removed; there was talk of ritual sexual abuse.
It emerged that the Reverend Mackenzie, in his sixties and far from well, was alleged to be at the centre of such rituals.
A man who may be described as a little eccentric, he suffers from angina, and only a few weeks previously had taken ill with an attack while on holiday in Majorca.
In February 1991 he was still far from well.
This was the man alleged to be leading rituals involving island children.
There was talk of a quarry, ritualistic music, dance and dress.
From the manse the police took away the minister's cloak, a long black cloak with a hood that he used for funerals, Remembrance Day services, and other outdoor events associated with his ministry; they removed a broken cross, waiting in a cupboard for repair; but they did not take the broken-off piece of that cross which was lying at the bottom of the same cupboard.
They had a warrant to search St Margaret's church and the church hall and removed masks normally used in a nativity play, and Mr Mackenzie's work diary from the previous year with all the religious festivals marked in it.
They took other vestments, tapes of services and a camera.
Without a warrant they also searched St Mary's, another church within Mr Mackenzie's parish.
He was, he said, too confused to stop them, although he believed the request to search the church was quite improper, and that the police had acted illegally.
A number of personal papers were taken away too, together with a hot water bottle bearing the name Benji, and clothes that Mrs Mackenzie had purchased for some of the children in the family of fifteen.
Lastly they took the Minister and his wife, Jan, and drove them fast in separate cars across the Churchill Barriers that block the  eastern approaches to Scapa Flow, to Kirkwall, the county town on Orkney's mainland.
Both said the police paid scant attention to Mr Mackenzie's ill-health, only allowing him to get a jacket at his wife's insistence.
At the islands' police headquarters they were detained for questioning for four and a half hours.
The minister said he felt disorientated, the blinds were drawn, and he lost track of time.
The police told him of the allegations from three children, but were, in his words, ‘fairly vague’ about the questioning.
They asked him if there was any truth in the allegations, and he felt they were desperate for evidence.
He believed the authorities had decided what had happened, and were looking for things to fit.
After the questioning, Mr and Mrs Mackenzie were driven home again to the manse on the edge of the village of St Margaret's Hope.
The pattern was the same at each of the four homes from which the children had been snatched.
Some of the parents were taken to Kirkwall Police Station, others to Stromness as Kirkwall was full.
The parents of one family weren't taken in for questioning at all that day, but Mrs W was.
Two days later, the parents told their story at a public meeting in the village hall in St Margaret's Hope, a little fishing village on the edge of Scapa Flow.
At first sight everything seemed normal as boats bobbed at anchor in the little harbour, the wind whipped up the sea, and the mainly farming community attended to early calving.
It was only when no parking places were to be found anywhere near the hall that it became clear that this was not normal.
Nothing in the South Ronaldsay community would approach normality for a very long time, and most people from the village and the surrounding community had turned out to discover for themselves what was happening, and then to lend their support to the stricken families.
Already the national press and media were gathering in this tiny island.
Hard-bitten journalists hot on the heels of a sensational story had flown or sailed to Orkney by any means they could, as the news broke.
Cynical almost to a man, they expected the worst, and had come to write their stories of poor abused children, evil parents, and the things that ‘incomers’ get up to in remote islands.
As the parents in turn told of their experiences that Wednesday morning, so attitudes changed perceptibly.
The descriptions of the dawn raids matched so exactly, and they were given simply and  lucidly, understandably with emotion, but without hysteria.
Sympathy began to flow their way from a normally sceptical press.
The first mother to tell her sad story was clearly upset; Mrs H described the knock at the door that woke her and her invalid husband at seven o'clock.
She told how the police and social workers came into her house, and said they'd come to remove the children.
She asked them why; they said it was because they had information that the two children had been sexually abused.
They were told nothing else; only later they heard the abuse was supposed to have taken place outside the family.
If this was indeed the case, why were those children ever removed from their own home at all?
Apparently there were no allegations at that time against these parents.
Their house was not searched at the time of the dawn raid; they were not driven away to a police station for questioning.
They were followed around the house as they washed and dressed, but the social workers were stopped by Mrs H from going upstairs to get the children up.
She promised violent action if the social workers put one foot on the stairs, and went to get the children up and dressed herself, accompanied and watched by a policewoman; then her eight-year-old daughter and nine-year-old son were taken away without further comment, but the policewoman encouraged the children to take some clothes and other possessions with them.
Next to speak was a father.
Mr T is a tall, distinguished looking man, who, with tears in his eyes, told the same story — at least in the beginning.
When he opened the door and his house filled with strangers, he was told they had the right to take his two children away.
They were, he said, holding papers in their hands.
These were warrants to remove the children, and to search the house.
Bemused by what was happening he moved to go to the bathroom, and was immediately grabbed by two police officers.
‘These people,’ he said, ‘had come into our home and had the right to restrain us.
They had the right to take away our children, and there was nothing we could do about it.’
His wife, followed by social workers, went to get the children, already disturbed by the commotion.
Their twelve-year-old son had crept downstairs and listened at the door.
He had seen children taken from his class at school the previous November.
He knew why so many people had invaded his home so early in the morning.
He  wanted to run, but found himself surrounded.
His eight-year-old sister was calmer; she, too, knew what to expect.
These children were permitted to wash and dress, and even to take with them pendants their father gave them.
After they had gone, he said, he couldn't remember whether they'd said goodbye; whether they had wrapped their arms around their children for a last loving embrace.
He could only remember their mother telling them through her tears to be strong, and to have faith.
This father, an Englishman — like the other parents involved in this affair — then told what happened next.
The phone rang and he moved to answer it, but the flex was pulled out of the wall by the police before he could speak.
The house was painstakingly searched, room by room, drawer by drawer, cupboard by cupboard.
Every leaf of every book was turned — and this in a quiet, studious family with many hundreds of books.
Every child's drawing was scrutinised, every paper and letter read.
He and his wife could not move around their own home without a police escort.
Nor were they allowed to contact their family doctor or anyone else for support or advice.
Mr T told the packed public hall at St Margaret's Hope that he had brought his family to Orkney to get away from the pressures of much of life in mainland Britain.
He said he and his Jewish wife both did a lot of reading and writing.
She also wrote poetry, often reflecting the healthy sexuality of a woman in her early forties who enjoyed a fulfilling family life.
The police, he said, removed all that poetry.
They also took private papers relating to the large South Ronaldsay family Mr and Mrs T had been trying to help, and a library book written by a social worker on sexual abuse.
They removed a detective novel by Dame Ngaio Marsh because it bore the picture of a goat on the front cover.
They took a number of other unrelated objects, and finally they took both Mr and Mrs T in separate police cars, driving them very fast over the adjoining islands where the sea lapped the famous barriers, to the mainland.
There, they too were questioned continually for almost six hours.
Mr T said the police were perfectly civil in their questioning.
He was treated with consideration.
Although they didn't actually mention it, he said, he began to realise they were looking for suggestions that rituals had taken place, that he and his wife were part of it, and that their children were victims.
The police asked  if he and his wife went pot-holing.
He was distressed when they asked about his wife's fidelity, and in her turn Mrs T was accused of infidelity as she was interrogated separately from her husband.
She was told she had had intercourse with an eight-year-old boy.
Mr T said they felt unclean, violated.
He voiced their torment at knowing their children would be medically examined without consent and without any familiar face being present.
They agonised over how their children would feel in unfamiliar and hostile surroundings as they, too, were interrogated.
A mother, Mrs B, was next to stand before the sea of faces gathered in St Margaret's Hope village hall.
Her courage was twofold.
Her husband, working in England, was not with her, and she had had to go through the agony of 27 February alone.
Quietly she gave her version of events, often struggling to hold back the tears.
At ten to seven that terrible morning she had woken her elder daughter, a thirteen-year-old who, with her eleven-year-old sister, was sleeping in a caravan just outside the front door of the family home.
This was their temporary bedroom while the house was being renovated.
After waking the older girl, her mother went back into the house to finish her coffee, and almost immediately heard first one, then several other cars go speeding up the lane past the door.
This family lived between two farms up a narrow, deeply rutted country lane.
Their neighbours in the farm beyond were also raided that morning, and to get to that farm the police cars had to go past Mrs B's front door.
Some of them stopped outside it.
With a terrible dread, she knew at once what was about to happen and ran to the caravan door to prevent her unwelcome callers from entering it.
She was surrounded by police and social workers.
Inside the caravan her elder daughter was pushing at the door to come out.
Her mother opened the door and took her in her arms, still in her thin nightclothes, and screaming.
She still barred the way so the social workers could not get to her younger daughter.
‘You're not taking my children — over my dead body — there's no way I can allow you to take my children’ she shouted.
She was told they had a warrant and there was nothing she could do about it.
The older girl cried ‘Don't let them take me, Mummy,’ and they stood together on the doorstep for several minutes, until a policeman gently reminded Mrs B that her daughter was getting cold in the dreary February morning.
She ushered the girl inside and sent her to the bathroom.
The thirteen-year-old locked herself  in.
Assuming everyone else would go into the house, too, her mother followed her.
Mrs B told the police and social workers that she must telephone her husband in England; she must tell him what was happening to his children.
She was not allowed to make that call or any other.
She was not permitted to call a solicitor, or minister of the church, or even a friend.
She had to cope completely alone.
To the hushed hall she described her feelings of real fear, of helplessness and panic.
She remembered her younger daughter, aged eleven, was still in bed in the caravan and ran out to discover that the child had been wakened and dressed by social workers, and was already in their car.
She ran to the car, leaned in and touched her head.
‘Don't worry, be strong, we'll do what we can,’ she told the frightened child, ‘and the hand of the Lord will look after you.’
To the end of her life, said Mrs B, she would never forget the look on her daughter's face.
She looked petrified, but was blindly obeying the social workers, and silently appealed to her mother to help her.
Her mother described her as a dog waiting for the next command, and all she wanted to do was hold out her arms and say ‘Come here’, but she was completely powerless to do anything at all.
This child is asthmatic.
Her mother feared the trauma of being snatched from her could bring on an attack, and ran around frantically trying to find both the inhaler and the child's tablets.
She was told by the social workers not to worry, they'd look after her.
But they did not know beforehand that one of the children they were about to take suffered from asthma.
They had made no checks with the families' doctors.
In the end the mother discovered the girl had one of her two inhalers.
The tablets she found later and took them to the Social Work Department to be sent to the child.
In all the time the child was away she never received them.
By this time the youngest member of the family, an eight-year-old boy, had got out of bed and was clinging to the bannisters at the bottom of the stairs.
The social workers had gone to his room and woken him, and he followed them downstairs, He had heard what was happening to his sisters, and was very distressed.
His mother was talking to the police at the time, but she insisted on dressing him herself, and told everyone not to touch him.
She tried to make light of the situation by telling the child this would be better than having some teeth out, which was planned for the following day.
She knew she had to let him go, but after buttoning him into  his coat, she wrapped her arms tightly around him, crying almost hysterically.
She knew, too, she had to try and reassure the children, and struggled to control herself.
Two policemen forcibly took her arms from around her son, and led him out to the car to join his sister.
The only child left now was the eldest girl, still locked in the bathroom upstairs.
Her mother ran upstairs, followed closely by a policewoman who hadn't left her side for a moment since they'd arrived.
A policeman attempted to open the bathroom door with a crowbar, denting the wood.
The girl was so frightened by this that she opened the door herself.
Then, as they dragged her away, she clung to the handbasin.
As the elder girl was taken out to the car, with police and social workers on either side of her, she turned round, touched her mother's arm and said ‘Are you all right, Mum?’
This was the final straw for Mrs B who broke down completely at the thought that her daughter could still think of her mother when this horrible thing was happening to her.
The children were allowed no breakfast, the younger two were not permitted to go to the bathroom, and none of them was allowed to take a single personal possession, not even a teddy bear or something to be a link with home.
After the children were driven away, Mrs B was taken back into the house and told the police had a warrant to search it.
As in the other houses, they were thorough.
They even searched between the sheets and under the mattresses, and gave no answer when she asked what they were looking for.
She would, she said, have given it to them, if she'd known what it was.
At that point she was cautioned, and she remembered words like ‘lewd’ and ‘libidinous behaviour’being used.
She heard mention of six months' imprisonment, and was terrified that she'd be locked up for doing nothing.
Having cautioned her, the police were ready to take her away from her South Ronaldsay home for questioning.
She insisted on feeding the cows first, and also on changing her clothes before she went.
She sensed their impatience.
They had issued the caution, now they were anxious to get on with the questioning, and they only had six hours from the time of the caution in which to hold her.
The policewoman, still in Mrs B's words, ‘stuck like glue’ while she washed and dressed.
Then she, too, was driven at very high speed to a police station on mainland Orkney for interrogation.
The questions centred very much on her neighbours.
Who were they?
How long had they been in Orkney?
What were their characters?
Had they belonged to the ‘flower power’ era?
What sort of music did they like?
What did they use the trailer for?
(These people are farmers; they have a variety of trailers, with a variety of different uses, all quite normal on a farm.)
The questions continued: Did Mrs B's neighbours use the quarry on their farm, and if so, what for?
Then the local minister became the subject under discussion.
They wanted to know if he had ever grown a beard?
This question, said Mrs B, seemed to be of particular significance, but she had felt unable to make any sense of it.
Without support or reassurance from anyone, she faced the seemingly endless questions.
She herself had been named as wearing a white robe — and was asked had she ever done so.
She told them that apart from a white jumper she never wore the colour at all.
She had grey hair and didn't wish to emphasise the fact.
She began to piece together the line of questioning.
They were after signs of ritual abuse.
From Mrs B's house and the caravan, police had taken away fourteen cassette tapes.
Some were of classical music, one a relaxation tape she used herself, and the rest an assortment belonging to the children.
In the middle of the afternoon, at the end of the six hours' questioning, Mrs B was driven back through the dark, dreary day, and dumped outside her garage door.
She had difficulty finding her house key in her pocket, but when she did manage to open the door, she ran into the house and up the stairs screaming wildly for her own mother.
Her mother had been dead for twenty years.
There was no comfort, no solace there.
There had been silence in the crowded village hall when she finished.
Tears were rolling down many faces.
What was happening to people living ordinary lives in a so-called civilised society?
Horror and outrage were deeply felt.
for the fourth family, Mr M told a similar tale.
His fifteen- and eleven-year-old sons were removed from their home in the raid.
Six policemen and five social workers arrived at his farm waving Place of Safety orders
Mr M was not completely surprised.
He and his wife had been involved in offering support and assistance to the family whose eight children had been removed the previous November.
In doing so they  had met opposition from the authorities.
Neither they, nor their two sons, had any doubt why these people had invaded their privacy so early in the morning.
The children had also done their share, not always wholly willingly, to help the family whose problems now seemed so closely linked with their own.
Mr M was concerned, however, that the social workers who came to his house had no means of identification.
He checked the police ID cards, and finally had to accept that the police would vouch for the social workers.
They had all just pushed their way into the house, and crowded into the small sitting room.
It transpired later that the social workers were all under instruction to have identification.
The fifteen-year-old heard his mother shouting.
His mother normally never shouted.
He knew at once why she was doing so now; he knew nothing else could have made her argue with people on the farmhouse stairs at that time of day.
A tall, strong, mature boy, he considered ‘doing a runner’ and sprang out of bed.
On reflection, though, he decided it would be unfair to leave his younger brother to face this alone, and he waited till they came for him.
The two boys dressed, with a social worker looking on.
Like their three young neighbours, they were not allowed to take a single personal possession — not a book, a teddy bear, a personal stereo.
Police tried to stop the older boy from saying goodbye to his mother, but he did, anyway.
Then he and his brother were driven away into the cold February morning.
A slight variation in this household was that one social worker stayed behind.
He asked the parents to tell him about the children, their tastes, their likes and dislikes.
This was not done in any of the other cases.
No one knew about the little girl who suffered from asthma; no one knew one family was Jewish and might have different dietary requirements.
No one, it seemed, knew anything at all about the children they were uprooting so mercilessly.
After the two boys left the farmhouse, it was searched as systematically and thoroughly as the other houses.
Police officers opened boxes and bags in the attics where furnishings were being stored for a new extension, and they went through the rest of the house just as painstakingly.
They scrutinised every cupboard, drawer and corner.
Every photograph was examined minutely, and some of these caused apparent concern.
One, of woods on Shapinsay, another of the Orkney islands, had been taken by one of the children on a  school trip.
Woods are rare in Orkney, and this one had proved an attraction.
It was seen as sinister, however, and taken away.
A photograph of an older daughter of the family, then a student, had been taken in the small conservatory that leads into the house.
Behind her, in the picture, were two gas lamps.
The searchers went immediately to investigate, but only one lamp was hanging there.
On enquiry they were told that the other had been lent to a local restaurant when it suffered a power cut.
That lamp was later collected from the restaurant.
Again, every page of every book was turned; drawers full of letters were examined; children's drawings were inspected and some of these were taken away.
Every item in the children's own rooms was closely inspected.
Small coats with hoods, sent to the family from abroad, and long since grown out of, were taken away, together with twenty-eight videos.
These contained recordings of many family films and television programmes.
Mr M asked for a receipt for all the items that were being removed from his home.
The police said they would send one later.
They never did so; it was not, they said, police practice to issue such receipts.
The parents were not shown all the items taken by the police; nor were they able to oversee the systematic search of their home.
The police spent almost three hours going through the house and the farm.
At the same time Mr and Mrs M continued with their daily tasks, feeding the stock, checking on cows ready to calve, assuring themselves that all, at least, was well on the farm.
Every step they took was dogged by police officers.
At exactly 9.58 a.m. they were separately cautioned, and the words ‘lewd’ and ‘libidinous behaviour’were used.
Then they were bundled into separate police cars and driven, again at very high speed, to the Orkney mainland.
They were taken to Stromness police station, and questioned persistently for the rest of the six hours allowed by law.
Their interrogators held a bunch of ‘statements’ in their hands.
These, it appeared, were where the allegations had begun, and these, Mr M told the South Ronaldsay community, could only have come from some of the eight children who had been taken into care the previous November.
The mother of those children was in the crowded hall with some of her older daughters.
She stood up and told the meeting that she agreed.
Whatever was being alleged  against her neighbours must have come from statements made by her children in care.
Mr M continued.
He said the questioning followed a similar pattern to the others.
They were asked about playing music from a trailer, about dancing in a circle, about the quarry on their land.
This is a Quaker family; they were asked about their religion and the form of worship they followed.
Police eyebrows were raised when they described how they prayed sitting quietly in a circle.
It was obvious to them that the word circle had sinister implications.
Equally obviously the questioners were seeking confirmation of the rituals they believed had taken place; rituals that included real or simulated sexual acts between adults and children in the hours of darkness; acts that included ritualistic music, dance and dress.
All the families involved had moved from England to Orkney for a variety of reasons.
They sought peace, tranquillity, and a chance to bring up their children away from many of the pressures of life further south.
By this time they felt accepted into the local community, and part of it.
Now, with no warning, no discussions, their children had been taken away.
Was this the price that these incomers to Orkney were to pay for befriending and attempting to support another family in trouble?
The Root of the Crisis
To understand how these families, regarded by their Orcadian neighbours as good, clean-living people, came to be at the centre of such serious allegations, it is necessary to go back a few years.
In 1986, a father of fifteen children then living in South Ronaldsay was jailed for physically abusing them.
For some years the family had lived on the island of Rousay, where both the Social Work and Education Departments were actively involved with them, having been alerted by the school to concerns over the welfare of the children.
The father, Mr P, also an English incomer to Orkney, had carried out various forms of abuse over a long period of time.
One son, for example, was sometimes not allowed to sleep in the house, but was left out in the garden at night.
The father regarded his children as his enemies.
His wife, often pregnant with a new child, was unable to change things.
Once the father was imprisoned, new and even more disturbing allegations began to emerge from the children.
This time, the stories were of sexual abuse, and again the father was the perpetrator.
It turned out, however, that the police had heard about possible sexual abuse before the father appeared in court on the physical abuse charges.
An older daughter had, in fact, told doctors in hospital of the situation.
Some of the children had been talked to and examined, but nothing was found.
Following the new allegations against her a further action was taken.
Some of the girls were examined again, and this time evidence of abuse was found.
Their father appeared in court from prison, charged with the sexual abuse of his children.
He was sentenced to another five years in jail on top of the two years for physical abuse he was already serving.
The family changed their name to ‘W’.
From the time of that trial, one of the girls, already disturbed, became more and more so.
By December 1990 she had been described as psychotic by a doctor in the Sheriff Court.
She had become a school refuser, and Orkney Islands Education Department  decided to offer her tutoring at home, and this was when one of the families in the case in question entered the picture.
Mr M is a peripatetic teacher.
At that time he travelled on a little inter-island plane to the northerly island of Westray to teach for two days a week; for a while he taught for two days on the island of Sanday as well.
His wife is also a teacher, and Orkney's Chief Educational Psychologist, Peter Shearer, asked them to become involved with the W family.
They were to tutor the child who refused to attend school, but there was to be more to it than that.
‘Get in and socialise with the family,’ Peter Shearer told Mr and Mrs M. You re not just teaching one child, you're taking on the whole family,’this being a family of fifteen children, some with social and behavioural problems, and eight still of school age.
Mr and Mrs M and their family befriended Mrs W and hers.
They offered tuition for the child who was refusing school, and a social relationship which meant inviting the W children to play on the farm.
Here the M family continued the socialising process begun at home with the children by Mrs W and a family friend after their father was imprisoned.
The friendship of the M family helped to reinforce the efforts being made by the children's mother to create a more stable background for her family.
It was a friendship that was to have terrible consequences.
As well as teaching, Mr M and his wife run a farm on South Ronaldsay.
Since they moved to Orkney in 1984, they have invested a great deal in the farm, and work very hard at all hours.
They breed cattle and sheep, and their two younger sons help them.
So do their two older children, a daughter and another son, when they are on holiday from university.
Theirs is a close, loving and caring family.
They have room within it to welcome strangers and make them friends.
This is what they did for Mrs W and her children.
The children were invited to the farm to play, to swim with other local children in the now infamous quarry.
That quarry, it should be said, is not much more than a small hole in the ground with banking around it.
It contains a spring, and the youngsters have a lot of fun there in the Orkney summer, They shout and lark about, the way growing children have always done.
It was into this carefree atmosphere, where hard work and a loving family impose their own disciplines, that the W children came.
It was here they experienced a taste of what normal family life could really  be like.
It was here they learnt to abide by the rules of the house, and the safety rules over the use of the quarry.
It was here they learnt to trade rides on their ponies for rides on other children's bikes.
It was here they learnt to communicate on a more civilised basis than they were used to,
Others in the local community joined in with this socialising process, offering hospitality and a chance to mix wit h adults and children on a day-to-day basis.
The minister and his wife offered the freedom of the manse, and the children started to go to Brownies, Boys' Brigade and Sunday school.
Not all the local families were at ease with this situation.
Indeed, the two M boys themselves were not totally happy at first at having these initially undisciplined children visiting their home and generally being around on a regular basis.
Mrs B, just down the lane from the farm, described them as rather wild.
She wasn't keen on her three rather quieter children being involved, and asked them to return home from the farm if the W children arrived to play.
Inevitably, of course, there were occasions when all the children did play together, and they all knew each other well.
The young Ws began to make some progress socially, and Mr M said he felt all was going well.
The Education Department appeared to be delighted with what they were doing with the family, and any materials required for teaching the one girl were supplied eagerly and promptly.
‘We were the good guys then,’ said Mr M. ‘We were sorting out a problem family for them.’
Between them they taught the girl from February until June 1989.
Then, just before the end of the school summer term, all the W children under the age of sixteen were taken into care by Orkney's Social Work Department.
The uplift came amidst allegations that the younger children were now subject to abuse from older siblings.
These allegations were never tested, and after a month the children were returned home, and the mother resumed the care of her large family.
With the father in jail, and teaching and socialisation in hand, why was it necessary to use emergency procedures?
The children were taken from Orkney to mainland Scotland under Place of Safety orders.
While they were there, complicated moves were made to try and have these orders extended by a Children's Panel Hearing in Inverness, but the case was sent back to the  Orkney Panel.
It was their responsibility to deal with Orkney children.
Orkney Children's Panel, however, with Mrs Katherine Kemp at that time the Reporter, recommended social work help within the family.
At the very least they wanted a home help once or twice a week, to assist this mother with fifteen children to look after.
The panel also hoped that a tutor/carer, possibly an older man, could be assigned to the family to teach the child Mr and Mrs M had taught, and to provide some sort of male role-model.
Mr M was no longer available as he had started a new contract to teach four days a week in the northern isles.
The panel recommendations were never acted upon.
Orkney Islands Council Social Work Department refused to implement the independent decision of the Children's Panel, and blamed the Reporter for allowing them to reach it.
Several hearings were held, and as a teacher involved with the family, and as someone who'd been asked officially to ‘socialise, them, Mr M was asked to give information to the Children's Panel.
He was asked about the girl's progress and about her ability; he was asked for his impressions of the family.
He told them that there was definitely good progress on all fronts.
Mr M was very impressed by the Children's Panel system that, he said, seemed to take so much time and trouble to listen to, and about, the children.
He felt doubly glad he'd brought his own children to live in Scotland where such a superior system of child care existed.
The panel members appeared to him to be very patient, very fair, and very thorough.
What he didn't know was that the local authorities were taking a very different line.
They portrayed the family as hopeless, without possibility of improvement, and wanted the children kept in care.
To complete their picture the local authorities had to discredit Mr M and his work with the family.
Another witness described how a member of the Education Department attempted to play down Mr M's contribution by strongly criticising his character at the Children's Panel Hearing.
He undermined all the work that had been done by Mr M with the W family.
That official now holds a very senior post in the Education Department.
The panel decided that the W children should be returned to their mother.
On their return to Orkney, however, the Social Work Department put them into the Camoran Children's Home  in Kirkwall.
The family solicitor threatened to sue the council for not carrying out the panel's decision and allowing the children to go home.
They were finally released a week later and sent home under a supervision order.
This meant that a social worker would call regularly to check on their progress, and to make sure that everything was all right.
The social worker regularly assigned to the case seemed to call when most of the children were at school, so he was unable to judge their progress at first hand.
By now, with the termination of Mr M's role as tutor to the girl who refused to go to school, she was receiving no education at all .
She then took matters into her own hands.
Daily she went to the M's farm and asked Mrs M to teach her.
Mr M by this time was away on the outer islands for four days a week.
The Education Department didn't like the situation; they did not co-operate with advice or materials as they had done in the past, and in fact the island's Director of Education accused Mrs M of ‘acting illegally’.
In spite of this, the tuition continued until the October school break.
In October, the Orkney weather demands that the cattle have to be brought into cattle-sheds for the winter.
That October, when the M's cattle were brought in, it meant that Mrs M had to spend up to five hours a day working with them as Mr M was away teaching for much of the time.
Mrs M no longer had the time to devote to the girl who sought schooling for herself.
It was then that the local community got together and offered to help.
Mr T, the father of two of the children taken away in February 1991, had been a lecturer before he brought his family to live a quiet and peaceful life on a beautiful island.
He offered to tutor the girl, but after trying to teach her for a while, gave it up as he considered she was unable to focus on what she was being taught.
Mrs T also tried to work with her, but found her very vague.
Mrs Jan Mackenzie, wife of the Reverend Morris Mackenzie, the local minister, also offered to help.
She had trained as a teacher and did supply teaching for Orkney Islands Council.
Music and art teaching were offered by other local people, and they all ferried the girl around from one tutor to another, so she wouldn't miss anything.
It wasn't an ideal situation, but it was educational provision of a sort, and local people thought that was better than nothing at all which was what the girl was being offered at the time by the authorities.
This continued until Christmas.
In January 1990 the Education Department provided her with a new tutor.
Meanwhile Mr and Mrs M's concern over the way the authorities handled the case of the W family grew.
They wrote many letters on behalf of Mrs W. They wrote to the MP for Orkney and Shetland, Jim Wallace; to Winnie Ewing, Member of the European Parliament for the Highlands and Islands, and to the Scottish Office.
They began to realise that many procedures had been wrongly carried out in the management of the case, in particular that the Social Work Department were not implementing the decisions of the Children's Panel.
Mr and Mrs T were writing letters, too, and the Reverend Mackenzie was voicing his concern.
They all wanted to see the case of the W family properly administered.
They all felt injustice was being done, and that the local authority was ignoring the rules.
In December it was arranged, without his knowledge, that Mr M would lose two of his four days' teaching in the outer isles at the end of the academic year.
His work on Sanday was to be taken up by a teacher who already lived there, and had been doing the job before Mr M was sent there.
Why, Mr M wanted to know, had he been sent to Sanday at all?
Was it possible he was being distanced from the large family they were trying to help?
He believed Orkney Islands Council found him an annoyance.
Mr and Mrs M still continued to take an interest in the family, to offer them friendship; they still wrote letters, and sought answers to a number of questions on proper procedures.
Once a new tutor was appointed for the girl who refused to go to school, Mr and Mrs M drew back a little.
At last, they thought, the Islands Council was beginning to get things right.
Then, in March 1990 the Reporter to the Orkney Children's Panel, Mrs Katherine Kemp, was locked out of her office and suspended from duty by the Chief Executive of Orkney Islands Council, Ron Gilbert.
At around the same time the Chairman of the Panel, Philip Cooper, suddenly resigned.
A conscientious man, he took his duties very seriously and was renowned for his independence and fairness.
Some say he was ‘encouraged’ to resign.
Eileen Laughton, a former Panel member who respected him greatly said he was worried about the pressure that was likely to be put on him if he didn't toe the local authority line.
A senior teacher, he was, of course, employed by the council, and he also had six children of his own.
According to Eileen Laughton, a Panel recruitment drive at the time seemed to acquire the services of a number of people who  would not be disposed to argue with recommendations from the Social Work Department.
It began to look as if the way was clear for members of the department to take any action they chose, in the sure knowledge that their decisions on how to deal with problems such as the W family would be implemented.
On 31 October of that year, 1990, the annual review of the case of the W family was held by the Children's Panel.
By this time Gordon Sloan, a Reporter from Strathclyde Region, had been brought in to do the work in Orkney, as the islands' own Reporter, Mrs Katherine Kemp, was still under suspension, and the details of her case were lying on the Secretary of State's desk in Edinburgh.
At the review, Panel Members who knew the children from the previous case were called for the Hearing.
The children themselves appeared, and after a second summer spent playing at the M's farm, and becoming ‘socialised’ by contact with that family, it seemed they had made some progress.
They had been accepted, too, into various youth organisations, and by some of the local community.
Many others, however,(and it's believed this group included Orkney Islands Council) would have liked to see the family leave South Ronaldsay altogether.
The Panel considered lifting the supervision order, but didn't.
They did lift a restriction order that had prevented the children being taken out of Orkney, and this was to prove very significant.
The girl who was being tutored out of school, and was, it must be remembered, a very disturbed child, had made a number of allegations to her teacher.
These implied that one of her younger brothers, an immature boy who hadn't reached puberty, had been sexually abusing both herself and a younger sister.
She further alleged that an older brother had been doing the same.
This brother had been working in Derby for some considerable time.
What the girl was suggesting was probably impossible, but it seems the logistics were never checked.
She alleged, too, that she had an illegal relationship with her mother.
None of these allegations was referred to in the Hearing on 31 October.
The very next day, on 1 November 1990, this girl was taken into care by the Social Work Department.
Significantly, it was the day before her sixteenth birthday and she was the only one of the family to be taken into care that day.
Five days later, on 6 November, her younger brothers and sisters — seven in all — were also taken away.
Social workers went to the  primary school in St Margaret's Hope, a brand new open-plan building, and removed them from there in front of the other children.
Some struggled and cried and tried to escape, which caused a great deal of distress to their watching schoolfriends.
The youngest child in the family, not yet old enough to be at school, was on a shopping trip in Kirkwall with one of her oldest sisters.
She couldn't be found when social workers called at the family home.
News travels fast in Orkney.
It's the sort of place where you can hardly sneeze without your neighbour and their neighbours, and the people in the next village, feeling the breeze.
The news of the school uplift reached the two shopping in Kirkwall before they set out to travel the twenty miles or so back home.
Instead of going home they fled, with their mother, to the manse, and sought a kind of sanctuary with the Reverend Morris Mackenzie and his wife Jan.
After they were finally discovered to be there, the minister pleaded for them to be allowed to stay the night, and guaranteed they would be at the Children's Panel Hearing in Kirkwall the next day.
They were, and a heart-breaking scene took place.
The youngest child was torn, screaming, from her mother, and taken away.
It was even too hard to take for the traditionally cynical press.
One young male reporter left in tears and said he would not cover such a case again.
The eight children from that one family, taken from Orkney in November 1990, remained in care somewhere on the Scottish mainland.
It was many weeks before their mother learnt where they were.
For six months they received no letters, cards or phone calls from other members of their family or from friends.
They did not even receive presents their mother and other people had sent them for Christmas.
The youngest child believed her mother to be dead.
The children were subject to regular ‘disclosure therapy’, and it is from these disclosures that the allegations against the four South Ronaldsay families were made.
When the W children were removed amidst allegations of sibling abuse, there were those in the community who did not dispute this.
Some believed this was entirely possible, but continued to support the family by writing letters denouncing the procedures carried out by Orkney Islands Council.
Mr and Mrs T questioned whether family counselling might have been a better way of dealing with a very complicated situation, or at worst whether an interdict  could be placed on the older boys in the W family.
They asked for all the recommendations for a carer, and home support to be implemented.
After they were removed, Mr and Mrs M resumed their efforts on the family's behalf.
They composed a letter to the Social Work Services Group, a department of the Scottish Office, and to the Local Government Ombudsman.
The letter alleged serious breaches of the Social Work Act, and offered five witnesses prepared to testify in a court of law to that effect.
The letter also specified details of non-observance of the Scottish Office guidelines.
That letter was in draft form, ready to be checked by lawyers, then typed out and sent off on the morning of 27 February 1991.
That was the morning when the police and social workers came to take their children away; the morning when seven other children were also removed from their homes in what many people saw as ‘revenge’ on the part of the local authority.
Practices and Procedures
None of the leading players in this drama doubts the need for child protection.
No one, either in Orkney or beyond, denies that child abuse exists; some say that the sexual abuse of children is rife in today's society.
Others look for evidence of rituals and declare that ritualistic and satanic abuse is happening much more often than most people are prepared to believe.
The initial shockwaves that devastated the Orkney island community of South Ronaldsay following the removal of the nine children from these four families, turned very quickly to disbelief and then to anger.
How could the authorities treat children in this heartless and dispassionate manner?
How could they say, as they all did, frequently and sanctimoniously, that everything they had done was in the best interests of the children?
How could the best interests of the children be served by tearing them from their beds and flying them away from their island home to be completely separated from everything dear and familiar.
How could those managing the case totally ignore so many guidelines issued by the Scottish Office and others to give assistance, particularly to social workers?
Principles of good practice and procedure are laid down in two main Scottish documents.
One is ‘Effective Intervention: Child Abuse Guidance on Co-operation in Scotland’.
The other is ‘Code of Practice — Access to Children in Care or Under Supervision in Scotland’.
Also referred to by many, although it is an English document, is ‘The Cleveland Inquiry Report’ by Lord Justice Butler-Sloss.
This was presented to parliament in June 1988.
‘Effective Intervention’ was produced in Scotland in the same year.
It was sent to directors of social work and others in local authorities in 1989.
The document contains sensible and sympathetic guidelines for dealing with children and their parents in cases of abuse.
Following its publication, regional and island authorities in Scotland were advised to produce new local guidelines that would be relevant in their areas.
Many of them have done so; many continue to monitor and amend them as situations change.
Orkney Islands Council have never developed guidelines of their own.
Neither did they abide by the Scottish Office guidelines; they carried out the dawn raids and removed nine children from their homes in an emergency operation without reference to any of these documents.
It took some time for such an admission to emerge.
The Director of Social Work, Paul Lee, was asked constantly by pressure groups, by the press, and indeed by Social Work Committee Councillors, for a copy of Orkney's own guidelines.
The answer was always that a copy would be made and forwarded.
This never happened.
At last, one very persistent councillor received a copy of ‘Effective Intervention’, and eventually Mr Lee admitted there was no Orkney document.
There was, however, no statutory obligation upon the Council to produce one.
What lies within the published guidelines is very relevant to the actions taken by Orkney Islands Social Work Department.
Or not taken, as the case may be.
The authorities did not approach the local general practitioner in the village of St Margaret's Hope, the village on South Ronaldsay which became the focus of allegations of abuse.
Dr Richard Broadhurst is doctor to all of the nine children who were removed.
Neither he nor his partner was asked about family backgrounds, possible problems, or whether any of the children had been presenting any unusual symptoms.
He said he would have expected to be consulted.
He could have helped to clarity issues, could have done some investigations of his own, and would have then alerted the relevant department to any problems.
An excuse for not consulting him was given much later — as part of this close island community, he may also have been involved.
A director of social work in another part of Scotland, consulted about the actions his authority would have taken in the same set of circumstances, said that before even considering removing children from home, he would have consulted family doctors.
This, he agreed, would have been his first move had such a case landed on his desk, and he would have talked, too, to the local health visitor.
Next, he said, he would have talked to the schools.
The social workers in Orkney did not go to the children's teachers before the removal of the children to find out if there were any problems at school.
They didn't ask if there had been any strange behaviour patterns, difficulties with school work, or inexplicable changes in the usual conduct of any of the children.
Following the children's departure, the Social Work Department did go to Miss McLeman, the Head Teacher of the primary school in St Margaret's Hope.
They asked her for ‘pen portraits’ of the seven children who were pupils at the school.
These were described by the parents later as inadequate and often inaccurate.
The children's class teachers were not consulted.
For the two older children, both pupils at Kirkwall Grammar School, the same sort of ‘pen portraits’ were supplied by guidance staff, and were also considered by the parents to be woefully inadequate.
Normal practice in cases involving the suspected abuse of children, whether physical or sexual, is to hold a multi-disciplinary case-conference.
Those present might include the social work case workers, doctors, teachers, district or community nurses, playleaders, and anyone else directly involved in a family where such problems were suspected.
No multi-disciplinary case conferences were held prior to these children being taken from their homes.
The people who knew them and their families best were never consulted.
The purpose of such case conferences is to consider all the relevant information, evidence and opinions resulting from an investigation and assessment.
The ‘Effective Intervention’ document says:’Parents should be informed or consulted at every stage of an investigation.
Their views should be sought on the issues to be raised prior to a case conference to afford them the opportunity to seek advice and prepare their representations.
They should be invited, where practicable, to attend part, or if appropriate, the whole of the case conference unless, in the view of the Chairman of the conference, their presence would preclude a full and proper consideration of the child's interests.’
This exclusion is generally held to be applicable when a criminal prosecution is in prospect.
In the Cleveland Report, however, Lord Justice Butler-Sloss does not consider this should prevent the attendance of parents.
Social workers, she says, have a primary responsibility to ensure that the case conference has information relating to the family background, and the parents' views on the issues.
It is also important that parents should be present to clarify and challenge information that comes before such a case conference.
These Orkney parents were neither informed nor consulted about anything at all.
Nor were they informed of the outcome of any conference that might have been held.
The guidelines say  they should be so informed, and it should also be confirmed in writing.
The ‘Effective Intervention’ document states that the investigation of child abuse or risk of abuse always requires social as well as medical assessments.
No home or social background reports were prepared either before the Orkney snatch or afterwards.
The Social Work Department had no information about these four families, and in particular about the nine children taken from them.
In the Cleveland Report, the British Association of Social Workers is reported as stating that it is absolutely essential that those involved with the family should conduct the fullest assessment of the family background.
The association maintains that a full family history has proved over and over again to be of vital importance.
They believe that it is necessary to look at the parents individually.
The parents' relationship must be examined, the vulnerability of the child or children assessed, and their situation within the family.
They should look, too, at the family's social situation, their contacts with the extended family, and their perspective of the events which set the referral in motion.
In other words, the investigating authorities should know everything there is to know about such a family, both from inside that family, and from contacts outside.
Social workers in Orkney, it seems, even ignored the guidelines laid down by their own association.
The families were never asked for their own perspective of the events or the allegations.
None of the assessment work was ever carried out.
The voluntary organisation, PAIN — parents Against Injustice — visited Orkney within a fortnight of the removal of the children.
This organisation had worked with parents in both Cleveland and Rochdale.
PAIN is a national charitable organisation which offers advice, counselling and support to parents, children, extended family and professional carers who claim to be the victims of procedural and/or legal injustice within the child protection system.
They had worked widely within the English system, but less within the Scottish one, with its lay Children's Panels, and less emphasis on the courts.
Two members of the PAIN organisation went to Orkney to prepare a report on the events as they had happened up to that point, and to compare the reality with the guidelines.
They stated that none of the background reports or assessments had been carried out, and stressed that these are fundamentally necessary in order to determine what is in the children's best interests.
PAIN'S main concern was that, as with both Cleveland and Rochdale, a social services department of a local authority had failed to carry out good practice in the execution of their work.
Sue Amphlett, director of the organisation, having studied the Scottish Guidelines, outlined nine main areas where Orkney Social Work Department had failed to implement proper procedures and practices.
The failure to carry out assessments and to inform and involve parents has already been covered here.
An even more drastic failure was to deny any form of access between the parents and the children from the time of their removal.
The children were away from Orkney for five weeks.
In that time they were totally isolated from any contact with their parents, or with anyone else they knew or who cared about them.
The two older children had no legal advice.
Although minors, they had legal rights of their own, and could have engaged a solicitor, but they were never informed of these rights.
A solicitor, engaged by the parents to ask these children their views before the Hearing on 5 March, was not allowed access to them.
‘The Code of Practice: Access to Children in Care or Under Supervision in Scotland’ states that ‘authorities should put a high priority on arranging and maintaining close links between the child and his parents (and other close members of the family) while he is in care,.
In Orkney not only did the parents not see or have any access to their children, they were not even allowed to communicate by letter or telephone.
Older siblings living in mainland Scotland were not permitted to see or communicate with their younger brothers and sisters, even though they were in no way involved or implicated in the allegations that had been made against the parents.
A rabbi from Glasgow, who had never met the parents at all, wanted to visit the Jewish children.
He was not allowed to do so until just before they returned home, and too late for Passover.
Quaker Elders visited the Director of Social Work in Orkney, Paul Lee, and the Chief Inspector of Police in Inverness on 5 March.
They asked for access to give spiritual support to the Quaker children.
The parents asked for access to be given to the Salvation Army, Baptist or Church of Scotland ministers, but all such requests were refused.
No spiritual support was allowed to the isolated children, even though, as one parent bitterly commented, ‘even prisoners are allowed this’.
Around three thousand letters and cards were sent to the children while they were away from home in a campaign resembling those organised by Amnesty for political prisoners.
Grandparents, schoolfriends and neighbours all tried to write to the children, to send messages of love and support.
None of these were received by the nine children isolated by the events.
The children were away over Mothering Sunday; they could not send cards to their mothers.
In an expression of community sympathy many local children in South Ronaldsay made and sent cards to the four devastated mothers.
The sideboard in the M's farm living room was covered with Mothers Day cards, but on that day none of them were from Mrs M's own two sons.
The following week, both these boys managed, with the help of those they were staying with, to send cards to their mother.
They were the only ones allowed through in the five weeks the children were away from home.
The children were still away over Easter.
From all over Britain letters and cards poured in to Orkney's Social Work Department for the nine children in care.
They came from complete strangers, from Quaker groups, and from caring people who wanted to help in a small way.
There were hundreds of cards and postcards for each child.
They started to get these the day they returned home.
Then they came back to the families in batches, sometimes several hundred at a time.
Many of the cards were dated two months before they were received.
Some, known about through enquiries from the senders, were never ‘found’.
Easter eggs were sent, too.
Ordinary, commercially-packaged Easter eggs made by all the well-known chocolate companies.
These never reached the children until they went home, either, but the wrappings were torn and removed, and the eggs closely inspected.
Some were smashed, some had holes cut in the top.
What did the social workers expect to find?
An old and much-loved teddy bear was sent by Mrs M to her younger son.
It was never received, and only returned some considerable time after the children went home.
It had been opened up and re-stitched in a different coloured thread.
Teddies sent by Mrs B to her children were never received and never returned.
In the Scottish ‘Code of Practice’ document it further says: ‘It is important that parents feel involved in the admission process and, wherever possible, in pre-reception planning.
Emergency admissions will require particular care if parents are to be reassured from the outset that they have a continuing role in their child's life’.
These parents were allowed no role at all.
It may be surmised that, had these children been away as long as the Rochdale children were, this state of total separation would have continued.
As it was, the five weeks seemed like a lifetime, and it was one that took its toll of parents and children.
Paul Lee, Orkney's Social Work Director, consistently said that what had been done was in the best interests of the children.
At one point he indicated that it was in the best interests of the investigation.
He repeatedly stated they needed to get on with the ‘disclosure’ work as quickly as possible.
He stood by his Department's actions, and said they had had no option but to do what they did, in the way they did it.
He denied that guidelines were not followed.
He eventually suggested that Orkney had used Highland Region's guidelines, but the procedures used did not, in fact, comply with even these guidelines.
Mr Lee was fully supported by the Chairman of the Social Work Committee, Councillor Mairhi Trickett.
She went on record to reassure parents that no children were taken with a revenge motive.
This was already being discussed widely as a possible motive for the action that Orkney Islands Council had taken.
Mrs Trickett said that the police and social workers were ‘in receipt of information’ which made it essential to take these nine children to a Place of Safety.
Not to have taken action, she said, would have laid her department open to a charge of negligence.
Asked by many, particularly those in the national and local press and media, about the need for an early morning raid to remove the children, she said there was no right time to take children.
After school, Mrs Trickett suggested, they would probably be engaged in other activities; at bedtime perhaps only one parent would be at home, and the children would be tired.
At least between seven and eight in the morning, she said, the whole family would be together, and the children would be rested.
This, she thought, would make it easier for them to cope with a very traumatic situation.
She further condemned the press use of the words ‘dawn raid’, describing it as an emotive term.
In contrast to the statements of the parents, Mrs Trickett maintained staunchly that both the children and parents were kept  informed of the situation and what was happening.
The director, Mr Lee, she said, had written to the parents, inviting them to come and talk.
She said too that all questions about their children to the department would be answered courteously.
The families received no explanations, and received no written information regarding the procedures or the law.
They felt they had been abused themselves; they felt impotent against the power weighed against them; they felt they had no way to fight back.
At no time were there satisfactory answers to questions about the lack of background reports.
No reasons were given as to the lack of information the social workers had gathered about the children; why they didn't know about one child's asthma, another's forthcoming dental treatment, or that Jewish children might have special dietary requirements.
At no time could the department justify why they had not allowed a rabbi to visit the two Jewish children in the mainland foster homes, or permitted Quakers to visit the two Quaker children, Can all these refusals really have been in the best interests of the children?
The Orkney parents were never informed by the Islands' Social Work Department of their own legal rights and the statutory powers, duties and roles of the agencies involved.
Because of their involvement with the W family, some of them were by this time quite familiar with the Scottish Office ‘Effective Intervention’ document.
They had read and understood it even before their own children were removed.
They tried to make the Social Work Department follow its guidelines, but some of the parents believed the social workers didn't know much about the document at all.
This was later discovered to be the case.
The department had a copy of the document, but its staff were not familiar with its contents.
‘Effective Intervention’ states that parents need to know the reasons for the professional concern about their children.
They need to be informed of the statutory rights, duties and roles of the agencies involved, and their own legal rights.
The Scottish ‘Code of Practice’ document states again that all such important information should be confirmed in writing.
There was talk of taking this whole matter to the European Court of Human Rights.
One former Orkney councillor suggested this course of action to the Isles Euro-MP, Winnie Ewing.
In ‘Effective Intervention’ the role of the European Court is outlined.
The document states: ‘It is important that parents and/or carers  be informed about the basis of an investigation or intervention.
Agencies need to be aware that the European Court of Human Rights, in finding the United Kingdom Government to be in breach of articles six and eight of the European convention of Human Rights in recent child care cases, cited failure to involve the parents in decision making as a factor in their judgements.’
It continues by saying that parents should be consulted at every stage of investigation.
The Cleveland Inquiry Report endorses this by stating that they should be informed and consulted whether the investigations are medical, police or social.
They are entitled to know what is going on, and to be helped to understand exactly what steps are being taken.
The Orkney parents weren't told about any complaints procedures either.
The ‘Effective Intervention’ document says all agencies should ensure there are clear procedures for parents to follow, and that information about these procedures should be provided.
The Orkney parents were left so uninformed, they believed that all their rights had been removed.
The PAIN report also sharply criticised the fact that children were, once again, taken from their beds.
This action by the Social Work Department only served to compound the trauma the children were experiencing being removed from their homes and families at all.
The report concluded by stating that Orkney Islands Council failed to implement good working practice as required by the Scottish Office.
It drew comparisons between the events in Cleveland, Rochdale, and now Orkney, stating that there had been a consistent failure — if not an outright refusal by Social Work Departments — to carry out proper investigations, pooling of information from the families and all the professions and services involved with them.
Not to do so means that they are not truly working in the best interests of the children.
Councillor Mrs Mairhi Trickett continued to insist that everything they had done was in the best interests of the children.
Social workers and the police would not have taken the action they had, in the way they did, unless they had been absolutely sure there was a reason.
She was scathing in her criticism of the PAIN organisation, too.
She questioned their qualifications and their authority for conducting an independent inquiry into the working of her department, particularly as their report contained no input from that department.
The PAIN representatives had tried repeatedly to see Paul Lee, the director of the Social Work Department.
They were repeatedly told he was too busy, and when finally, at the eleventh hour, they were granted a meeting, some sort of communication problem caused Mrs Sue Amphlett and her associate to be sent from one building to another and then to wait for some time in the wrong one, until they had to leave to finish the report in time for the news conference they had called.
With reference to the PAIN report, however, Mrs Trickett commented on the guidelines which the department had been accused of breaking.
They were just that — guidelines, she said, and each case had to be dealt with on its individual merits.
PAIN, along with parents, lawyers and many others involved in the Orkney case, wanted to see those guidelines given the full backing of the law.
Another aspect of the procedures followed by Orkney Islands Council caused great concern in many quarters.
This involved the role of the voluntary organisation, the Royal Scottish Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Children.
The RSSPCC played a leading role in the Orkney affair.
They were contracted in by Orkney Islands Council to deal with the cases.
They were already involved.
Their social workers were undertaking the ‘disclosure therapy’ with the W children already in care in mainland Scotland.
These were the children from whose statements the allegations had developed against the four families.
RSSPCC social workers were involved in the dawn raids on 27 February; it was mainly to suit their convenience that the children were flown away from their island home to an unfamiliar environment.
There they could be near to RSSPCC centres where interviewing could take place; and in those centres the Society's social workers repeatedly interviewed and questioned the nine children they had taken away.
When two of the Society's officials visited Orkney for consultation with the Social Work Department, the Orkney grapevine ensured that everyone in South Ronaldsay knew they were there within a very short time of their arrival.
The officials were personally invited by the Action Committee representing the families to go to South Ronaldsay and meet the parents.
They were asked to talk to them and find out for themselves about the families who had been thrown into such torment; they were asked to talk about the children and about their lives at home.
The RSSPCC officials refused, saying they were on a ‘special mission’.
They did talk to the media, however.
Raymond Starr, Director of Child Care and Family Services, confirmed that his agency had been called in because Orkney Islands Council did not have the resources to deal with a case of this kind.
It was a unique case, he said.
He was asked about the secrecy involved and the necessity for the early morning raids, and he answered that both the Society's and the Council's major concern was for the interests and feelings of the children, and that necessitated confidentiality.
Mr Starr said the RSSPCC ensured that whatever the children needed in terms of safety and freedom, they would get.
Only in this way would they be able to talk freely about what their experiences had been, and that would happen in a safe situation for them.
But what about the children's primary need, that of contact with their families?
Mr Starr said that had been weighed against other needs apparent in the case.
He also said that talking to the parents was not an objective of the Society, nor should it be.
He refused to comment on whether his organisation was carrying out the interviewing or ‘disclosure’ work on the children;, he merely reiterated that they were involved in offering their assistance in whatever way was required by the department who had contracted them.
‘I know ,’ he stressed ‘that within the rules of the Children's Hearing, that the best interests of the children have been weighed, and on the balance of probabilities, the appropriate action was the right action.
I know that.’
Considerable disquiet was expressed over the Society's involvement in Orkney.
A leading social work official in another part of Scotland said he was concerned that their staff were not properly trained, particularly in the field of disclosure work with children.
It is a fact, however, that lack of resources makes the employment of this agency essential to some authorities.
Lawyers and supporters of the parents in Orkney questioned both the motives and the methods of this once trusted organisation.
They called for an investigation into the RSSPCC's practices and procedures to be included in the terms of reference for the Judicial Inquiry which the Secretary of State announced would follow the legal proceedings.
They called, too, for a full investigation of Orkney Islands Council  Social Work Department, and of how social work officials managed to ignore Scottish Office guidelines in a case of such seriousness.
In fact, they asked for the practices and procedures of all the agencies involved to be thoroughly scrutinised.
CHILDREN'S PANEL HEARINGS
The disposal of almost all matters concerning children in Scotland is in the remit of the Children's Hearing system.
The system was established in 1971, and has attracted the interest of many countries.
It is a system which deals with children and their families away from the formality of the courts.
It is a system which has become known as the ‘Caring Hearing System’ because people are listened to, and problems handled in a sympathetic way.
It is a system where an independent panel takes the decisions, considering the best interests of the children.
In order to understand how the Children's Hearing system works, it is necessary to go back to the beginning and explain how it was established and how it was intended to operate.
There are those who feel that after twenty years the general public should be familiar enough with the rules governing child care and child protection, but perhaps the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the Children's Hearing system in 1991 was an opportune time to go back to its roots, to take a fresh look at how it works, and whether changes in society over twenty years point to the need for changes in the Scottish system of juvenile justice.
The Children's Hearing system grew out of recommendations made by the Kilbrandon Committee in 1964.
The ideas behind the Kilbrandon Report were new and bold.
They would set the treatment of children in trouble in Scotland apart from the rest of the United Kingdom.
It had taken three years for the committee, under the chairmanship of Lord Kilbrandon, to gather and consider evidence from a large number of bodies already dealing with child offenders and child neglect.
Amongst these bodies there was a unanimous desire for changes in the laws that dealt with children.
At that time all cases were dealt with through the law courts, the establishment of guilt or innocence, together with the imposition of punishment the prime aims.
The Kilbrandon Committee recommended that individual decisions should be made regarding the best measures for dealing with each child, and that these should be made separately from decisions about guilt or innocence.
Their other recommendations were radical and changed completely the face of juvenile justice in Scotland.
They said the way children in trouble were dealt with should be decided by lay people.
These people would not be trained in law; they would represent the interests, the social groupings and the nature of the community in which they would serve.
They would, in fact, be local people, able to look at local problems with local knowledge, and deciding on that basis, individual treatment in the best interests of the child .
It was important too, that these lay people should be from all walks of life, from different age and social groups, and comprise an even mixture of both sexes.
Kilbrandon said these lay people would form a panel within each local authority area.
The size of the full Panel would vary with the size of the authority.
Three members of that panel would conduct ‘Children's Hearings’.
These would be either two women and a man, or two men and a woman, and the Hearings would be conducted as informally as possible, in surroundings that would not be intimidating to children.
The panel members would discuss in an informal and concerned manner all the relevant background information on the life of the child before them.
The committee then proposed the creation of a new official to work with the panels.
Like them, this official would be a lay person, and would be completely independent of all other bodies and agencies, The official would be known as the ‘Reporter’, and could be drawn from the legal profession, from amongst social work professionals, or perhaps from administration.
The Reporter would be the first person to whom any child referrals would be made.
He or she would decide whether cases should go on to a Children's Hearing before the Children's Panel, or whether to take no further action.
To support the new system, the Kilbrandon Report recommended that a new type of social work organisation should be established.
Statutory provision for this was made in the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968.
The Children's Hearing System itself was not established until April 1971, to enable the full reorganisation of social work to take place first.
This then linked the juvenile justice system with the overall provision of social work.
The whole child, within the  context of family and school could be considered for the first time, not just the offence.
Kilbrandon didn't remove the courts and the legal system from the picture altogether.
There would be no change in the common law regarding the responsibilities of the Lord Advocate.
Exceptionally serious types of juvenile cases would still be heard in the Sheriff Court or in the High Court.
The Panel would also have recourse to the courts.
If the grounds of referral were disputed by either parents or children, the Panel would have two options.
They could discharge the case if they were convinced that there were no grounds by the disputing party, or they could take the case to the Sheriff Court for a proof hearing.
This course of action continues twenty years after it was instigated by Kilbrandon.
At a Panel Hearing, the three panel members selected from a pool of serving members, one acting as chairman of the session, consider everything about a child's life.
The whole child .
This was an elemental part of Lord Kilbrandon's philosophy.
The child's needs , not his deeds, he maintained, should be the test for intervention.
He also insisted that parents were usually the best people to bring up their own children, and should be encouraged and enabled to do so wherever possible.
Compulsory care, if absolutely necessary, should be in the child's best interest.
If the grounds of referral are accepted by both parents and child at the Hearing, the Panel looks at all the information that has been provided for them.
This includes background reports from Social Work Departments, school reports, and information from any other specialised agencies who have been engaged in helping the child or the family.
If the grounds for referral are denied, then the Hearing either refers the case to the Sheriff Court for proof, or discharges the disputed ground.
At the end of the Hearing the Panel makes one of three decisions.
They may continue the case in order to gain more information; they may make a supervision order, involving the child living at home but under regular supervision, or being sent to live elsewhere in the care of others; or they may discharge the referral altogether.
The Kilbrandon Committee stressed the importance of training for the lay people who would become Panel Members.
After selection by a local Children's Panel Advisory Committee, new members are  confirmed by the Secretary of State for Scotland.
Then a rigorous initial training period begins.
New members must undertake a stretching programme of lectures, discussions, group work — including role play, visits of observation to special schools and assessment centres, meetings with people who work with the Hearing system, and study.
There is a lot of reading material to get through and absorb, and there are cases to attend as an observer before a new Panel Member finally makes up one of the three actually hearing a case.
Even when new members are regularly taking their place on Panels, the training continues into every aspect of children's lives, into care, physical, mental and sexual abuse, criminal activity, and ways of dealing with the variety of cases that come before them in the course of their work.
Throughout the training, which does vary a little from region to region, new members are encouraged to question everything.
They are constantly reminded that they are an independent body, and the decisions they will be called upon to make must be based on their own findings from the information put before them.
They are told they are not there simply to implement the wishes of social workers, or police, or anyone else.
They, and they alone, have the right to dispose of a case involving a child.
The Reporter is, of course, a very important figure within the system.
As already stated, he receives the first referrals.
These may come from many sources; from police, social work, other agencies, parents, or indeed from any private individual who may be concerned about a child.
The Reporter makes the initial decisions about whether to proceed any further with a particular case.
The Reporter, although not necessarily a lawyer, must ensure that the Hearings stay within the legal framework.
He or she must provide the Panel with all the available information, making sure the social background and other reports are to hand.
One of the parents involved in the Orkney case asked Paul Lee, the Director of Social Work, if he was going to prepare a social background report on her family.
He replied that it was the Reporter's job to ask for one.
This, apparently, was not done, but in the majority of Panels this report is expected to be before the Hearing and is provided by the Social Work Department without a request from the Reporter.
The role of the Reporter during a Hearing is described as legal  adviser and clerk.
He or she will note the proceedings and advise members of the Panel on procedural matters and on points of law where necessary.
The Reporter should not direct the Panel regarding their decisions.
There may be three reasons why court proceedings follow the Children's Hearing.
Either, as has already been explained, the grounds for referral are disputed by the parents or the children, or a child may be unable to understand the grounds through age or mental incapacity.
Thirdly, the parents themselves may appeal against the decision of the Panel in the disposal of a case.
In any case it is the role of the Reporter to present the evidence and argue the case before the Sheriff.
Before taking a decision on whether to take a case to a Children's Hearing, the Reporter has to consider the reports from all the appropriate agencies.
He or she will then discuss the case with all those deemed necessary in the best interests of the child.
At this point the Reporter does not have to account to anyone else.
Although financed by the local authority, the appointment of the Reporter must be approved by the Secretary of State for Scotland.
No Reporter can be removed from office, asked to resign, or be employed in another capacity without the consent of the Secretary of State.
Another important element in the system is the Children's Panel Advisory Committee, known as the CPAC.
Here again the Secretary of State must approve the appointment of the chairman and members.
Members of the Advisory Committee are drawn deliberately not only from those who have experience of the system, for example, former panel members, but also from people who have not previously been involved in the Children's Hearing system at all .
The CPAC, as this advisory body is known, is responsible for the recruitment of panel members in their area.
It also monitors the performance of serving panel members and makes recommendations about re-appointment at the end of each panel member's term of office.
The Advisory Committee forms part of the checks and balances which make this Hearing System so unique, and which, since its inauguration in 1971, has kept many thousands of young people out of court.
In Orkney a number of events concerning the operation of the Children's Hearing system caused great concern.
Doubts arose over the competence of the system to cope with cases of such magnitude, Concern was expressed by lawyers, families, councillors, and even Orkney's re-instated Reporter, Mrs Katherine Kemp, over the relationship between Orkney Islands Council's Social Work Department and the Children's Panel.
Some panel members believed that decisions taken by the Children's Panel were not implemented by the Social Work Department, and therefore threatened the independence and integrity of the Panel.
The suspension of Mrs Kemp for over a year with no reasons being given by the local authority, caused grave misgivings in Orkney.
On 27 March 1990 Mrs Kemp, herself a former social worker, was suspended without any prior warning by Ron Gilbert, Chief Executive of Orkney Islands Council.
The locks on her office door were changed to prevent her from gaining access.
She was denied any opportunity to appear before councillors in order to appeal against her suspension.
Her only recourse was to make a formal appeal through her lawyer.
During much of the period leading up to this time the Panel had been considering the case of the large South Ronaldsay family whose father had been imprisoned — the family of fifteen children who so badly needed a positive and sympathetic solution to their problems.
Following Mrs Kemp's suspension in March, in April 1990 Orkney's Chief Executive, without any direct authority from Orkney Islands Council or councillors, and without notifying Mrs Kemp, applied to the Secretary of State for consent to dismiss her from her post as Reporter to Orkney Children's Panel.
Mrs Kemp's lawyer, Robert Shaw, believed that, since the law which governs Reporters and their duties provides that a Reporter may nut be removed from office except with the consent of the Secretary of State, this would also prohibit suspension.
This would make the action of Orkney Islands Council illegal.
The Secretary of State called for written submissions from the parties involved.
In May, 1990 Mrs Kemp received a copy of the submissions of the Chief Executive.
These contained a number of allegations that had never been raised with her at all.
She made full answers to all of them.
She was still awaiting a date for the hearing of her appeal against her suspension.
The Chief Executive had been notified that her lawyer would be on holiday on 11 July so this date should be avoided.
On 4 July Mrs Kemp was told that the hearing would take place on 11 July.
There followed correspondence between Mrs Kemp's lawyer and Orkney Islands Council's Director of Administration and Legal Services, Rowan McCallum.
He indicated that he would introduce whatever evidence he thought to be appropriate, regardless of whether such evidence had formed part of the reasons for the suspension or not.
When Mrs Kemp's lawyer, Bob Shaw, asked what line of questioning he would use, Mr McCallum angrily refused to reveal what evidence would be produced.
Mr Shaw said he had never been spoken to in such a manner by another lawyer.
On behalf of Mrs Kemp he objected to this denial of the rules of natural justice.
On 6 July Mr McCallum cancelled the hearing, which he had no authority to do.
Mrs Kemp strongly protested against his action.
Then the Chief Executive made further submissions to the Secretary of State, who was at that time Malcolm Rifkind.
These submissions contained further allegations which had not been previously raised.
Again these were received and responded to by Mrs Kemp.
She asked the Secretary of State to hold an inquiry at which parties could be heard and witnesses examined.
No further date was set for Mrs Kemp's appeal in Orkney, despite monthly requests to the Chief Executive, Ron Gilbert, to the Council Convener, Jackie Tait, and to the Director of Administration and Legal Services, Rowan McCallum.
Eventually, in a letter to Mrs Kemp's lawyer, Mr McCallum offered 24 December 1990 as the only free date for a hearing, but added it was not the most suitable date.
None of the councillors on the Appeal Committee would want to attend an appeal on Christmas Eve.
Mrs Kemp was left with no alternative but to accept that no hearing could take place.
In a statement issued on 8 April 1991, Bob Shaw said there was little confidence that Mrs Kemp's case was being fairly dealt with.
Justice was neither being done nor being seen to be done.
In this view he was strongly supported by Councillor Spencer Rosie of Orkney Islands Council.
He had fought hard over the year of her suspension to have her case dealt with speedily, and to get at the truth behind the allegations.
He said that councillors had no idea what was going on, and could only rely on the advice of the council's officials.
Mr Rosie, who has since resigned from the council, had contacted Orkney and Shetland MP Jim Wallace and the Scottish Office to try to discover the cause of the delay in settling the matter.
No satisfactory answer was ever received to that particular question.
Another Orkney councillor, Ian MacDonald, believed he was  barred from serving on the Social Work Committee because of his continued support for Mrs Kemp.
He said that certain officials and a councillor were determined to get rid of Mrs Kemp because of the demands she was making, and had consistently made during her whole period in office, for the improvement of child care in Orkney.
Councillor MacDonald remains on the council, outspoken when he sees the need to question the activities of this very singular local authority.
Councillor Spencer Rosie, much to the loss of the community he served, resigned from Orkney Islands Council in April 1991, due, he said to pressure of work, and the wish to spend more time with his own growing family.
The council could ill afford to lose a man of his calibre, who fought for openness and honesty and against secrecy in its affairs.
In the meantime there had been two significant events which affected Mrs Kemp's case.
A new Secretary of State, Ian Lang, had replaced Malcolm Rifkind at the Scottish Office.
And on 27 February 1991 nine South Ronaldsay children were taken into care on Place of Safety orders.
In the opinion of many people, Gordon Sloan, the Reporter on attachment from Strathclyde Region to replace Mrs Kemp, did not inspire trust or confidence, and there was a renewed call for the Secretary of State to deal with her case as soon as possible.
On Tuesday, 23 April 1991, one year and twenty-seven days after her suspension, the Secretary of State refused to allow her dismissal.
In a short statement Mr Lang rejected Orkney Islands Council's attempt to sack her.
He said he had made a full examination of the submissions made to him by the council and by Mrs Kemp.
He concluded that the council had not made a sufficient case to justify dismissing their Reporter.
She would have to be re-instated, and her suspension rescinded.
There was no easy end to this situation, though.
Orkney Islands Council did not give up without a fight.
They didn't just acknowledge gracefully that they'd been beaten, or perhaps even that they had been wrong, and welcome their Reporter back.
Instead a special meeting of the full council was called to decide what action to take following the Secretary of State's decision.
Mrs Kemp and her solicitor were refused access to that meeting, and were only told of the outcome some time later.
A vote was taken on whether she should be re-instated, and by a very narrow margin it was agreed  that she should.
It is hard to see what else they could have done in view of the Secretary of State's decision.
First, though, two Scottish Office representatives, a retired Children's Panel reporter, Alan Finlayson, and an under-secretary to the Secretary of State, travelled to Orkney to review the Children's Panel and Social Work systems.
Then it was agreed that Mrs Kemp would deal with all new cases.
The Acting Reporter from Strathclyde, Gordon Sloan, who had filled in for the past year, would continue to look after the cases with which he had been involved.
This included the case of the nine South Ronaldsay children who had been taken from their homes at dawn on 27 February.
The way back for Mrs Kemp certainly wasn't smooth.
Some members of Orkney's twelve-strong Children's Panel threatened to resign if she was re-instated.
They sent letters to the council's private meeting to try to block her return.
One of the letters was from Jean Robertson, who chaired the Panel at one of the Hearings involving the nine children.
Another was sent by the Chairman of the local Children's Panel Advisory Committee.
Another member of the CPAC in Orkney is the Chairman of the Social Work Committee, Councillor Mrs Mairhi Trickett.
It is, however, usual for the Social Work Chairmen to be on these Advisory Committees.
It is also known that two of the four panel members who complained about Mrs Kemp were employees of Orkney Islands Council.
During the case of the nine children who were taken into care in February 1991, one long-standing member of the Panel resigned because of what she saw as the deterioration in the Children's Panel Hearing system in Orkney since the suspension of Mrs Kemp.
Mrs Eileen Laughton, a passionate believer in the Hearing system as established following the Kilbrandon Report, said her conscience wouldn't allow her to keep silent any longer.
She had tried to put matters right in the proper manner from within the system, but that hadn't worked, and she believed the Children's Hearing system was at risk in Orkney.
A member of the Panel for twelve years, Mrs Laughton had written in November 1990 to the Secretary of State for Scotland, expressing her concerns about the deterioration of the system in Orkney since the suspension of Mrs Kemp.
Her letter was marked private and confidential, but instead of a reply from his office, she received notification from the Social Work Services Group that her  letter had been passed to the chairman of both Orkney Children's Panel and the local Panel Advisory Committee.
She was outraged.
She wanted someone outside Orkney to take a long, hard look at what was happening within the islands.
The Acting Reporter, Gordon Sloan, on loan from Strathclyde, had no local knowledge.
This, said Mrs Laughton, was completely against the ethos and proper practice of the system as established by Kilbrandon.
Mr Sloan had introduced Strathclyde procedures which she maintained had no place in Orkney.
He directed the Panel Members, many of whom, she claimed, now believed their role was to follow his lead.
Mrs Laughton said the Reporter had too much input into the Hearings themselves, and the Panel ceased to be independent.
Mr Sloan took the Social Work Department's line, and the Panel were expected to follow it too.
In other words they had become, in her opinion, a rubber stamp, and not an independent body making decisions for the authority to abide by.
There were other grounds for concern, too.
At a Panel Members' training weekend at the Merkister Hotel at Harray in Orkney, on 10 November 1990, it is alleged confidentiality was breached by the public discussion of an ongoing case.
It was just a few days after eight children from the W family from South Ronaldsay had been taken into care.
Later the Children's Panel Advisory Committee Chairman was informed about this alleged breach of provisions in the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968 relating to the operation of the Children's Panel.
It is believed no action was taken.
Mrs Laughton said that one of the reasons for Mrs Kemp's suspension was that she had objected to the Social Work Department ignoring the decisions of the Children's panel.
She had objected, and she was suspended, Mrs Laughton herself was told that her suitability as a Panel Member would be reconsidered at the end of her term of office in May.
This, after twelve years' dedicated service to the system and all it represented to her.
Mrs Laughton resigned with much regret, saying as she went that Orkney Islands Council didn't appear to know what the role of the Reporter to the Children's Panel should be, and determined to make her concerns public.
Mrs Kemp resumed her duties as Reporter to Orkney Children's Panel on Monday 6 May 1991.
On 10 May, Mrs W, the mother of  fifteen children, eight of whom had been in care since the previous November, began an appeal against the care orders holding them.
She and her lawyers arrived at Kirkwall Sheriff Court, So did the Acting Reporter, Gordon Sloan.
The mother immediately abandoned her appeal.
She called for a formal review of the whole case by Mrs Kemp, now she was back in her post.
She said she could not and would not continue to deal with Mr Sloan.
It was impossible to speak to Mr Sloan, she said, and added that the Panel was never set up to be a court.
She wanted the case dealt with in a proper and fair way; she did not, she said, expect Mrs Kemp to be more sympathetic, but she would be fair.
This incident seems to epitomise what is believed to have gone wrong with the Children's Hearing system in Orkney.
Every region has its own methods of administering the system, and those of a huge area like Strathclyde are seen as being particularly inappropriate for an island community like Orkney.
Yet these were the methods that were used in the South Ronaldsay alleged child abuse case.
The South Ronaldsay Hearings
When emergency procedures are used to take a child into care, the Social Work Department has to obtain a Place of Safety order signed by a Sheriff or a Justice of the Peace.
This is valid for seven days.
In that time a Children's Panel Hearing must be convened, and the options assessed by Panel Members after considering all the information available.
The Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968 says that where a child has been detained in a place of safety, and the Reporter considers that the child may be in need of compulsory measures of care, he shall, wherever practicable, arrange a children's hearing to sit not later than in the course of the first lawful day after the commencement of the child's detention to consider the case.
One of the parents involved in the Orkney case actually asked that the hearing should be held either that day or the next, to comply with this section of the Act.
This parent, Mr M, had studied the ‘Effective Intervention’ document as well as the Social Work (Scotland) Act in his attempts to assist the W family.
His request was not complied with, and the Hearing was not convened on the first lawful day after the children's removal.
In some areas, however, the ‘wherever practicable’ is translated to mean the seventh day, not the first.
In many areas the Hearing is held on the first working day after the removal of the child.
In Strathclyde, the region from which Gordon Sloan, the Acting Reporter in Orkney, came, it is the general practice to hold the hearing on the seventh day.
This is certainly against the spirit of the law.
It may be interpreted to be against the letter also.
The South Ronaldsay children were taken away on the morning of Wednesday 27 February.
The latest possible date for the Children's Hearing was Tuesday 5 March, and that was the date chosen by Mr Sloan.
The families were told to attend at half-hour intervals from ten o'clock onwards.
At a Hearing each parent and each child has the right to be accompanied by a representative.
This may be anyone at all; it may  be a friend or relative; it may be a lawyer, although the Hearing is not a court and the lawyer has no legal status.
On the morning of 5 March, a Queen's Counsel was on his way from Edinburgh to speak as a representative for at least one of the families.
The vagaries of travel to Orkney, however, including the fact that the scheduled flights were all booked up with journalists, meant he could not arrive in time for the ten o'clock start.
He drove through the night to Wick intending to cross the Pentland Firth in a small private plane.
Weather conditions precluded this, so he had to wait for the next scheduled plane from Wick to Kirkwall.
Lawyers for the families asked the Reporter if he would postpone the start time of the Hearing by one hour, He refused.
They asked again, but he remained adamant.
The Hearing would begin at ten o'clock.
The lawyers sent an urgent message to their local MP Jim Wallace in the House of Commons asking for his help in the matter.
Mr Wallace immediately faxed a letter which was delivered by hand to the Reporter, asking for one hour extra to be allowed.
Mr Sloan then agreed to the postponement.
The QC, Edward Targowski, arrived a minute or two before the 11 o'clock deadline.
He went quickly into the unpretentious terraced houses where the Children's Hearing offices in Kirkwall are situated.
With no time for briefing, the Hearing got under way.
As he arrived, Mr Targowski was cheered by a large crowd of supporters and well-wishers, gathered to express their feelings about the situation that had drawn a cloud over their quiet island life.
Many came from South Ronaldsay, and were friends and neighbours of the beleaguered families.
Many more came from other parts of Orkney — Orcadians and incomers together creating an atmosphere of community and caring support.
Many carried placards demanding the immediate return of the children.
One Orcadian woman was quick to retort when asked why she was there.
‘Can ye no read?’ she demanded, holding up her poster.
‘We want our children home.
It's not fair they're away.
They're in prison.
What are the people supposed to have done?
We don't know what they've done.
I live no far away from two of the families; I can see both houses out of my kitchen window.
There's no dancing going on up there.
It's a wee community, everybody knows everybody.’
Another Orcadian was equally adamant that injustice had been done: ‘We're here because we feel it's very wrong the way the bairns have been uplifted, and they're being treated quite like criminals  really.
If there has been any injustice, surely it should be the adults taken away and not the children.
Many more spoke in that vein.
They waited in a dignified and orderly manner outside the Children's Panel offices.
There was no shouting, no hysteria; no mob tactics were used.
Just quiet, controlled anger that the children should have been so arbitrarily removed to places where they had nothing loved or familiar, and no one to turn to.
One supporter summed up the feelings of them all about the authorities who took them away.
‘I don't know whether they feel that a satanic message can be sent in code by a parent to a child saying ‘I love you.
Don't be afraid, it's all right, we're going to be with you sometime,’’ she said.
‘We feel very strongly about that and that the law should be changed for future children, so that they should be spared the anguish of separation and no contact at all.’
This was the children's seventh day away from Orkney.
While they endured the loneliness of the enforced separation, the humiliation of intimate medical examinations, and harrowing interview sessions, their parents were at Children's Hearings in Kirkwall, starting the bitter fight for their return.
They began their fight by refusing to accept the grounds of referral to the Children's Panel.
This meant they denied that the allegations had any foundation at all.
As a result, by law, the Hearing could not continue.
As has been explained earlier, if the grounds of referral are denied by either parents or children, then the Panel has two choices.
They can either discharge the case, or refer it to the Sheriff for Proof.
The latter was the course of action taken that day.
The Panel, as had been expected, extended the Place of Safety orders on all nine children for a further twenty-one days.
The children themselves were not present at the Hearing, as they had a legal obligation to be.
The Social Work (Scotland) Act of 1968 states that ‘where a child has been notified that his case has been referred to a children's hearing, he shall be under an obligation to attend that hearing in accordance with the notification,.
There are exceptions to this general rule, however.
The Act continues: ‘Where a children's hearing are satisfied in a case concerned with an offence mentioned in the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act of 1975, that the attendance of a child is not necessary for the just hearing of that case, or in any case where they are satisfied that it would be detrimental to the interest of the child to be present at the  hearing of his case, the case in whole or in part, may be considered in the absence of the child.’
Children who are too young to understand explanations of their situation, or those who may suffer from learning difficulties understandably come into this category.
So do cases where the trauma may be considered to be too much for the children.
The youngest of the nine Orkney children was eight, the oldest fifteen.
Their presence at the hearing had been dispensed with at a meeting of the Panel four days previously.
The legality of that meeting was later questioned.
Before a Children's Hearing can proceed, it must be established that the grounds for referral to the hearing are clearly understood by both parents and children.
They are explained by the Panel Member chairing the case under consideration.
The only exception to this is where a child is incapable of understanding even a simple explanation of the grounds because it may be too young, or suffer from mental handicap.
In such cases, the Panel would direct the Reporter to apply to the Sheriff for proof, unless they decided to discharge the referral altogether.
That was not the case in Orkney.
The children here were all considered old enough by their parents to understand a sympathetic explanation of the grounds on which the Reporter had referred their case to the Children's Panel.
The Panel decided in advance not to bring them back to Orkney for the Hearing.
It was decided it would be too traumatic for them if they had to be flown away again afterwards.
The children, in their foster homes in mainland Scotland, were not notified that the hearing was to take place.
They were not told of the grounds for referral, and the case proceeded without them.
Although the Act does allow for children to be absent from Hearings under the circumstances already referred to, they should still be notified of the Hearing, and an explanation of why it is taking place should be given.
These nine Orkney children were not informed; they were not told the Hearing was taking place;, they were not given any sort of explanation.
Without any knowledge of the children's understanding of their situation and what was happening to them, the Hearing went ahead on the morning of Tuesday 5 March.
The four sets of parents went in to the Panel separately, although they were to be treated as one case.
In the small room the protagonists were crowded round a  table.
The parents, their representatives, the three Panel Members, the Reporter and two social workers.
Four members of the press were allowed in at a time.
There were so many journalists covering the Orkney story that they set up a pool system and took it in turns to go in.
It may come as a surprise to realise that the press have a right to cover hearings, although they may not, in any way, identify the children who are the subject of those hearings.
They may report on ‘four families’, ‘nine children’, and give the reasons for referral, in this case the allegations against the parents.
At that first hearing in Orkney, on the seventh day after the removal of their children, the allegations of lewd and libidinous behaviour with ritual music and dance were read out to the stunned parents.
Only five minutes before the hearings began they had been allowed to read these for themselves, and in the words of one family friend, the Reverend Derek Edwards, ‘they were devastating…’
‘To witch a mother's face as they're read back to her, even though she's read them for herself…the parent I was sitting with was shaking her head and crying.
The reality that those things were being said of her was just beyond her comprehension, and for myself I have never heard something so outrageous in all my life.’
Mr Edwards was appalled at what could and had been done in the ‘best interests of the children’.
He joined the ever-growing group of people calling for a change in the law.
The parents left the Children's Panel offices looking tense and drawn.
Their lawyers and supporters were grim-faced, although they said the hearing had held no surprises.
The allegations were serious, and it had not been supposed that the children would be allowed home with no further action.
Outside in the street, still waiting in the cold wind were the friends, neighbours and complete strangers who had come to show their support for the families.
The grandmother of two of the children sobbed when she knew for certain they would not be coming home.
She had hoped against hope that somehow the panel would realise that an enormous mistake had been made.
She tried to be a strength for her daughter, but was overwhelmed by the enormity of what was happening to them all.
The quiet sympathy amongst the waiting people was tinged with anger, and an Orcadian farmer voiced the feelings of them all when he said that bureaucracy had gone too far.
‘What we want is the children back home.
We want them looked after in a caring way, and treated as children, not as bits of evidence in some concocted case about satanism or something.’
The crowd, swelled by reporters, photographers and cameramen from the local and national press and media, dispersed quietly after the parents had left.
A lawyer speaking for the families said they would be appealing against the Place of Safety orders, and that the appeal would be heard the following day in Kirkwall Sheriff Court.
The courthouse in Kirkwall is in a particularly picturesque setting.
Set back from the road it faces the south wall of the magnificent St Magnus Cathedral, and is separated from it by the road, and by a peaceful park area and an avenue of trees.
These are the grounds of the seventeenth-century Earl's Palace, described as being possibly the finest example of French Renaissance architecture in Scotland.
A ruin now, although much of it still stands, adding to the beauty of the court surroundings.
On the other side, across a narrow lane called Watergate, is the original Bishop's Palace, built in the twelfth-century to provide accommodation for the splendid new cathedral.
Rich in the history of Norwegian kings and Orkney bishops, the palace ruins add their own poignancy to the day-to-day dramas enacted in the handsome court building.
The friends and supporters of the four South Ronaldsay families gathered outside the court on the morning of Wednesday 6 March.
Young children ran between the trees, their laughter an emotional reminder of the children who weren't there.
The raucous croaking of the rooks amongst the tall sycamores and the ruined palaces seemed an appropriate symbol of the ugly story that was unfolding in these peaceful northern islands.
Again the parents were given encouragement and messages of good luck as they went into the Sheriff Court with their legal advisers.
They were hopeful that things would go their way, but not really very optimistic.
The indications were that the Sheriff would uphold the decision of the Children's Panel, and would support the Place of Safety orders.
The Appeals were heard in private before Sheriff Principal Ronald Ireland.
Again the four families were heard individually, but were treated as one case.
Again they heard the allegations against them on the basis of which their children had been taken away.
They left the court with no decision having been taken.
The Sheriff said he would give them his decision the following day.
This was announced to the waiting press and supporters by Dr Helen Martini, who was to play an important role in the fight to get the children home in the weeks that followed.
A surgeon, Helen Martini was specialising in paediatric surgery when she gave it all up to move with her husband to Orkney.
He is Dr Richard Broadhurst, GP to the four families embroiled in this case.
Dr Broadhurst organised the first public meeting in St Margaret's Hope.
Dr Martini chaired it, and now, a week later, she was becoming the spokesman for the families.
She stood on the steps of the court, and told the crowd gathered there that the parents had been told they would have to wait to hear whether the Place of Safety orders had been confirmed, or whether their children would be returning home.
The families, she said, had asked her to express their gratitude for the warm and caring support from everyone there; they were grateful, too, for the many messages of support and sympathy coming from outside Orkney.
Significant amongst these messages were those from the parents of Rochdale, who were that week awaiting a judgement in their own case.
Their children had been in care for eight months.
Their support and messages of comfort were all the more touching and meant a great deal to the Orkney families.
The Rochdale parents said they were reliving their whole trauma along with the parents of Orkney.
Helen Martini joined the call that was growing louder and stronger for a full judicial inquiry.
She stressed, too, that it should be held in public as families across Britain, from Cornwall to Orkney, were at risk from over-zealous authorities.
As a doctor, she was more than well aware that children needed to be protected, and that abuse existed in many forms.
She had seen it at first hand, treated children who were victims.
As a citizen she was concerned that all too often social workers got an idea in their minds that ritual abuse was taking place, and then set out to look for it, The after-effects, though, were critical, according to Helen Martini.
‘If, at the end of all this,’ she said, ‘no charges are brought, you've got nine traumatised kids.
Who picks up the pieces?’
The next day, the loyal supporters, still holding aloft their banners and placards, were back outside the court in Kirkwall.
They hadn't quite known whether to be optimistic or pessimistic about the overnight delay, but they were adamant in their belief that none of these parents was capable of doing the things stated in the allegations against them.
Many of the supporters were eager to put their points of view to the waiting journalists.
One young woman was particularly bitter about the system that allowed situations like this to develop.
Some people were beginning to talk about retaliation or revenge against the authorities responsible.
This young woman, however, did not believe this course of action would solve anything.
‘I don't really think there's any point in calling for resignations of personalities.
I happen to know that the Director of Social Work, and another of the senior social workers here, have moved here very recently.
They didn't come here to be monsters, presumably.
They came here to settle down and have a happy life.
It is the system that is at fault here, and what 1 think is so appalling is the fact that children can be removed from their families and their environment without one single shred of evidence.
I just think that will have to change, because it is creating utter havoc and misery in the community.’
Others, perhaps less charitable, did call for the resignation of the Director of Social Work, Paul Lee, and they believed the Chairman of the Social Work Committee, Councillor Mrs Mairhi Trickett, should also resign.
The mood of the crowd was turning to anger against those responsible for taking the children of South Ronaldsay away on what appeared to be very flimsy evidence, which had not been checked out through the appropriate channels.
They were angry, too that the authorities, by their actions, had created such a feeling of real fear and impotence in Orkney in general, and South Ronaldsay in particular .
Sheriff Principal Ronald Ireland turned down the parents' appeal that Thursday morning.
The Place of Safety orders were confirmed on the nine children, who would remain in care in mainland Scotland for several more weeks.
Leaving the court the families all tried to put on a brave face.
One mother was distraught, the others said tightly that they had really not expected anything else.
The lawyers, too, agreed that on the basis of what was before him, the Sheriff had no alternative.
They were angry, however, that nothing more concrete than the allegations was available.
Two Kirkwall solicitors were acting for the four families.
One of them, Alistair Bruce, told the waiting reporters that they would have expected any charges to have materialised by this time.
It was over a week since the children had been removed, and both police and the Social Work Department had said they had made independent investigations which had led to their decision to take such drastic action.
If this was the case, then there must be enough grounds for proper charges, said Mr Bruce, but every enquiry he made, to police, social work, or the Children's Panel Reporter, Gordon Sloan, was met with the same answer: ‘Investigations are continuing.’
Mr Bruce said that the Social Work Director Paul Lee had been asked if the families' lawyers could have access to all the interviews and medical examinations of the children that were performed for the Social Work Department.
At this stage, too, he said, he and the other solicitor on the case, John Moir, had applied for legal aid for the four families.
They needed to engage more senior and junior counsel to help them to fight what looked like turning into a very long legal battle.
The fight was just beginning, but they would take whatever steps were necessary to win it.
Action Committee Starts Work
At the first public meeting in St Margaret's Hope, called only two days after the children were taken from their homes, a conscious decision was taken by the parents and the rest of the local community that supported them, to actively' court publicity.
In the face of their impotence to deal with the apparent all-embracing power of those ranged against them, the parents decided this was their only weapon.
These were articulate people, perhaps better able to deal with the press and media than some other families who have found themselves in the same position.
Three families in Ayrshire, for instance, who had eight children taken away in a raid in June 1990; little was heard of their situation until after the Orkney case had been in the headlines for some time.
Little was known, either, about the families of fourteen children taken into care in Aberdeen at around the same time as those in Ayrshire; they didn't look for publicity, speak to the press or generate such wide interest and public concern.
One of the Ayrshire families finally talked to some journalists in April 1991, some ten months after their four children had been removed.
They protested their innocence, and referred to the fact that no charges had been brought against them.
Their only contact with any of their children in all of that time was a monthly visit with their eldest child, in a bare room, accompanied by a social worker who vetted the questions each asked the other.
One of the children taken from this family was only six months old at the time of removal.
The Orkney parents talked to reporters, appeared in photographs or on television with their backs to the cameras, and were unfailingly courteous, co-operative and welcoming.
They must have longed for quiet and solitude, for space to shed their tears in private, or even to vent their anger, but none of them showed it in public .
Support in South Ronaldsay and the neighbouring island of Burray had grown so strong, and there was so much anger, that  it was decided within the community that this strength should be channelled into action.
A second public meeting was called.
This time it was held in St Margaret's Hope School, the newly built primary school in a commanding position on a hill above the village looking out over the sea.
The hall was bigger than the Cromarty Hall in the village; it could accommodate more local people and more of the television cameras that by now were multiplying daily, along with their crews, reporters, producers, and the army of newspaper journalists and feature writers that by this time had gathered in Orkney.
Again the hall was full.
The parents of the nine missing children sat together at the front.
Leading the meeting were the two solicitors, Alistair Bruce and John Moir, together with Dr Helen Martini, and the Reverend Derek Edwards.
The last two had become prominent spokesmen for the families during the ten days since the removal of the children.
Both had supported the parents during the Children's Hearing, and during the Appeal against the Place of Safety warrants.
Both were vehement in their call for an Inquiry into the whole affair.
Both were professional people with a vested interest in helping people — a doctor and a Baptist minister.
Both had come from England to make their homes in unspoilt Orkney and had settled in the South Ronaldsay community.
They were united, too by a common aim; they both wanted to do what they could to restore normal life in that community, to take away the fear and to see justice done.
At the first public meeting the Reverend Derek Edwards had said the Social Work Department was out of hand and out of control, and was able to make up its own rules in an arrogant and arbitrary manner.
He also commented on the worrying growth of occultism in the nation.
This, he thought, was a very disturbing reflection on modern life, and one which led some religious fundamentalists to search for satanism everywhere.
He told the gathered community that he was committed to proving it was not active in South Ronaldsay.
At this second public meeting, the South Ronaldsay Parents' Action Committee was officially formed, with Helen Martini as Chairman, and Derek Edwards its Vice-Chairman.
They were unanimously chosen by the community represented at the meeting, and their commitment was welcomed by the four sets of parents.
The two were the base of a formidable team, and they immediately  declared their purpose was to give emotional, moral and practical support to the stricken families.
They were concerned about the cruel manner of the uplift of the children, and that such action had been taken without proper investigation.
They were outraged at the suggestion, in the grounds of referral, confirmed by remarks made by the Interim Reporter in Orkney, Gordon Sloan, on 6 March that further members of the community were involved in the alleged abuse ring.
The new Action Committee was determined that this allegation should be refuted.
This comment by the Reporter now forms part of Sheriff Principal Ronald Ireland's written note in his ruling following that first appeal: ‘Sloan to prove other members are involved’.
The Action Committee office bearers were confident that the characters of those adults accused, and those of their children, as well as the sort of events that could and did occur in their community, were better known to them than to Orkney's Social Work Department.
When they asked for volunteers to carry out the various tasks of such a committee, the offers came in promptly from all parts of the Hall.
Two people would share the role of secretary; two more with a head for figures would take on the work of treasurer, an area which would necessarily assume vital importance with the huge legal costs that would have to be faced.
One local resident said he would organise free accommodation and transport for all visiting advisers and experts; another two volunteered to get a petition circulated throughout all the Orkney islands.
Others offered to man phones, to work out rotas of helpers, and to provide clerical back-up for the two solicitors.
They came forward eagerly, offering what skills and abilities they had; farmers, a conservation adviser, a photographer, a botanist, a medical practice manager; most of them parents themselves, all of them becoming part of the support surrounding the South Ronaldsay families and determined to fight for them.
Some were native Orcadians.
Some had chosen these northern islands as the best place to make their lives, the best place to bring up their children.
Their tranquil dreams broken, they were united in their resolve to repair the damage.
Once the tasks were allotted to the newly-recruited committee members, the meeting then turned its attention to the lawyers.
It was clear that Alistair Bruce and John Moir would have to devote  their entire time to preparing the case for the four families.
It was clear, too, that they would have to do this together.
At the time the two solicitors worked for different law practices in Kirkwall.
Each had to rely on the support and goodwill of his partners to be able to spend their entire time on the case of the South Ronaldsay children.
Now those same partners gave their blessing to the idea of the two solicitors moving out of their own offices, and setting up a temporary Law Centre where everyone involved could get together and fight for the return of the children; they would fight for justice, and ultimately a judicial inquiry.
But where?
It was Alistair Bruce who came up with the idea.
Just across the road from his office was a building with empty suites of rooms.
The Orkney Tourist Board occupied much of the building, and faced onto the main road, and the Northern Studies Centre was in another part.
It was right in the centre of the town, next to the Cathedral, and only two or three minutes walk away from the Sheriff Court.
It would be a perfect location for the work they had to do.
The building was owned by Orkney Islands Council, but there seemed to be no difficulty in securing a temporary tenancy.
There was space enough for an office for the two solicitors, a room for the visiting advocates from Edinburgh to work in, and a meeting room for talking to parents, specialist advisers, and witnesses.
The two lawyers told the meeting in St Margaret's Hope that the offices were ideal for their purposes.
All that the rooms lacked were furniture and equipment.
They did not lack these for long.
The following day, Sunday 10 March, Action Committee members and friends started to forage for office furnishings and equipment from anywhere they could get them.
By Monday the office was equipped with desks, tables, chairs, two word processors, telephones, a fax machine, a photocopier, and everything else needed for the efficient running of an office.
That included a few old but comfortable easy chairs for the meeting area, plus a coffee table, a kettle and cups.
The room where the four senior and four junior counsel from Edinburgh would work was fitted out with several very basic trestle tables, not perhaps quite what members of the Faculty of Advocates are used to working on, but Alistair Bruce described them as very resilient people.
They were, he said, ready to muck in.
Senior  counsel Edward Targowski had already proved that when he made such an effort to travel to Orkney for the first Children's Hearing.
His return journey had been even more dramatic, on a fishing boat, and for the first week he charged the families nothing at all.
Alistair Bruce was sure the trestle tables would present the members of the Bar with no problems.
Many items were donated outright; many were lent for the duration, but everything was volunteered in one way or another.
British Telecom responded with great promptness and had two telephone lines and a fax line installed on Monday.
It was almost a miracle.
The Legal Centre was up and running and ready for business.
Work started there in earnest on Tuesday 12 March.
The solicitors moved in, volunteers answered phones, typed documents, and novices learnt to operate the computers and word-processors.
The support from the Parents' Action Committee continued to grow.
Rather tentatively at first, volunteers came forward to work the word-processors; another manned the phone continuously from that first day until the office finally moved out of its temporary accommodation in the middle of May.
Other committee members were in and out of the new Law Centre, holding meetings, planning strategy, contacting people with wide experience of the sort of situation they found themselves in, and collating information.
This coming and going caused its own problems, though.
The two solicitors needed peace and space to work on what was a very complex case.
It became obvious that the Parents' Action Committee needed to find somewhere else to carry out its own work.
That somewhere wasn't long in materialising, either.
An empty house just a mile or two outside St Margaret's Hope village was put at the disposal of the Committee.
It was on the market and it was a grand gesture by the owner — one that was much appreciated by the parents of the nine children, and by the Action Committee that had come together so promptly to support them.
The house, called ‘Quindry’ is an ugly, flat-roofed box-shaped building, which resembled a factory unit rather more than a home.
Its saving grace, however, was a windowed passage-way with spectacular views of the sea and the land beyond.
Here was office space and room enough for meetings.
Here the hard day-to-day work of the committee got under way; there was always someone on hand to answer queries, provide information, make a cup of coffee.
Many newspaper journalists and reporters from radio and television found their way to Quindry.
There they were received with unfailing courtesy and friendliness, and over endless cups of coffee checked out facts, co-ordinated information, and often interviewed Helen Martini or Derek Edwards.
The first big task the South Ronaldsay Parents' Action Committee set themselves was to circulate a petition round all the Orkney Islands.
This was launched at the meeting at St Margaret's Hope on Saturday 9 March.
To gather signatures for the petition was a formidable task indeed, because it had to be back in Helen Martini's hands by the following Thursday, so she could present it to No. 10 Downing Street on Friday 15 March.
Six days to circulate a petition around the scattered islands.
Nothing daunted, the committee members set to; they contacted friends and acquaintances on other islands, they studied ferry time-tables, and planned their campaign with a speed which matched that which had equipped the Law Centre.
The petition drew attention to the events in Orkney and the way in which the case had been managed; it asked the Prime Minister, John Major, to hold a public judicial inquiry into all the circumstances, It asked, too, for the working of Orkney's Social Work Department, and other involved Social Work Departments, to be investigated.
And it asked for the Scottish Office Guidelines, and those in Lord Justice Butler-Sloss's Cleveland Report, to be made law.
In the end there were certain logistical difficulties in getting all the petition forms back from the outlying islands in time for Helen Martini's departure for London on Thursday 14 March.
There were other problems, too.
Certain teachers and other employees of Orkney Islands Council were, it was alleged, ‘warned off’.
They were apparently advised by people not named, that they should not take the petition round in their area, and they were also apparently reminded who they were employed by.
Many people, dependent on the council for their livelihood, refused to sign it.
Others, on some of the more northerly islands, away from the emotion and strength of feeling in South Ronaldsay, were still murmuring that ‘there's no smoke without fire’ and speculating on what the parents of the nine children had been up to.
Helen Martini left Orkney on Thursday 14 March, and on the Friday presented the petition at the front door of No. 10 Downing Street.
She had hoped for an audience with the Prime Minister, but  had to be content with the publicity of being there.
At the same time as the petition was being circulated, the Action Committee wrote and widely circulated a letter that anyone, anywhere, could send to their own MPs.
It asked for their support in getting the law changed, and the guidelines strengthened by law.
This letter was freely available at the opportunely-timed Scottish Labour Party Conference, held that very week in Aberdeen.
With Shadow Cabinet Ministers, Labour MPs and Prospective Labour MPs (including the candidate for Orkney and Shetland, John Aberdeen from Stromness) at the conference, the Action Committee thought it was a good opportunity to make a lot of politicians aware of the situation very quickly.
Vice-Chairman Derek Edwards took the opportunity to stress publicly the urgent need to make their campaign a national one.
‘We want every person in every part of the country to contact their MP,’ he said.
‘They should write, phone and insist that Parliament addresses this issue now .
Not tomorrow, next week or next month, but now.’
The Action Committee launched an appeal for funds.
At the very first meeting in St Margaret's Hope village hall they had asked for monetary pledges, at the second meeting in the local school they said it was time to call in those promises and start counting the cash.
If each family was to have the services of a senior and a junior counsel, the costs would be enormous, and at that stage no one knew what the position would be regarding the question of Legal Aid.
Even the solicitors could not say whether Legal Aid would be granted to all or any of the four families.
There had never been a case quite like this in Scotland before.
The running costs of the Law Centre had to be met, too, and all the incidental expenses of the Committee — phone bills, fax.
machine, petrol, stationery.
Funds had to be found — and quickly.
Immediately the generosity of people within Orkney and much further afield became apparent.
Contributions came from all over the United Kingdom.
Large and small amounts were sent, pledges were honoured.
The work of the treasurers began in earnest.
Letters and phone-calls of support also came from every corner of Britain.
They came from young and old, from friends and strangers, from church groups, and from families in Cleveland and Rochdale who had been in the same position themselves.
They even sometimes came in person.
Sylvia Hayes, an artist who had spent some time  painting in Orkney, came from Oxford to show her support for the four families.
‘Once I'd learned about what had happened here, like so many other people I was absolutely staggered,’ she said.
‘Because I know perfectly well that there can be no sound evidence for such monstrous, silly accusations.’
She went on to say that although she'd done what she could from her Oxford home, and encouraged her friends to do the same, eventually she just had to pack and go to Orkney.
‘In the end I couldn't bear to be anywhere else,’ she said, and added that if such practices had been going on in the islands as were alleged, everyone would have known about them.
of doors, wandering along the cliffs, across fields.
I've got to know so many people in the community, and I turn up at their houses any time at all.
If such things had been happening, I would have come across them.’
Her sentiments echoed those of all the neighbours and residents of South Ronaldsay.
The island is small, no homes are out of sight of others, even in the farmland; people know each other well and, as in all rural communities, they also know each other 's business.
No one there could believe that the allegations could have any validity.
With that strength of support coming from far and near, the South Ronaldsay Parents Action Committee launched itself into the mammoth task it faced.
Each and every member of that committee felt changed by the events that had shaken their community.
Each and every one felt threatened, felt their own families and peace of mind were at risk.
They knew life in their island haven would never be the same again, but they knew, too, that their quality of life, free from fear of the authorities, was worth fighting for.
At the outset Helen Martini said the prospects of what they had taken on were daunting, but she had no doubts about what they could accomplish.
The stakes were too high for doubts.
‘In the beginning,’ she said, ‘when these children were uplifted, none of us had any idea what a national scandal we were dealing with.
We thought it was a little local issue.
It's not, it's a national scandal,’
Religious Mania?
In the midst of all the child-care and legal paraphernalia of hearings and appeals, another element in the whole affair caused distress.
Because the allegations against the parents were centred around ‘ritualistic’ behaviour, the word ‘satanic’began to be heard.
During the police questioning on the first day, some of the parents were asked about Satan and satanism.
It's a subject that has gained momentum across the country in recent years.
In Rochdale and in Nottingham it led to the removal of many children.
It was used too, in Ayrshire.
Some people believe that a sort of ‘satanic hysteria’ has invaded Social Services Departments across Britain.
They believe that certain extremist Christian movements encourage workers in the social services to look everywhere for evidence of satanism.
That ‘evidence’ can be bizarre and unlikely, such as the book with a picture of a goat on its cover taken from one of the Orkney homes, gas lamps and a Halloween mask taken from another, or a church minister's hooded funeral cloak.
The Evangelical Charismatic Movement has been described by religious correspondents as the fastest growing part of the Christian Church in Britain in the second half of the twentieth century.
It is a movement that seeks to put the supernatural back into Christianity, saying God is supernatural, and so essentially Christianity is a supernatural religion.
The movement began in America, and has been imported to Britain, bringing with it what many observers see as an obsession with satanism.
The Charismatics — part of this evangelical upsurge — feel they have been blessed with the direct gifts of the holy spirit, and one of the main ways in which this manifests itself is speaking in tongues.
They see around them evidence of supernatural happenings.
They say that God intervenes directly in a supernatural sense in what goes on in the world.
By the same token, they say that the devil is actively at work as a supernatural force.
They believe people can be possessed by demons, and that their role is to rid the world of such demons.
There is a great healing tradition within the evangelical Charismatic Movement, and those who adhere to it believe this healing is about seeking out the devil and ridding the possessed of this influence.
They look for signs of his presence in all areas of everyday life.
They talk about Satan being particularly active towards the ‘end times’— that's the time when they believe Christ will return.
Reading the scriptures, they translate this into the very near future.
The Gulf War, for instance, fitted in quite precisely with some of the things forecast in Isaiah Chapter 13 about the destruction of Babylon.
They also see the ‘end times’ approaching according to the Book of Revelation .
They see the signs of Satan everywhere, not just within dictators, and others widely acknowledged to be evil, but within individual people.
Of a family where child abuse may be taking place, they will say that Satan has got into that family, and that there's some sort of evil force at work.
These Christians look for signs of satanic influence within families and encourage friends and colleagues to do the same.
Since the mid-1980s when the satanic child abuse scare first came to Britain, it seems that many workers within Social Services in particular have been influenced by this thinking.
The Reverend Derek Edwards, Vice-Chairman of the South Ronaldsay Parents' Action Committee, and a Baptist Minister, voiced his concern that belief in large-scale ritual sexual abuse grows within agencies over the months and years.
Once in the system, he said, it tends to perpetuate itself.
‘People hear of it who know nothing of its origins.
They receive information on it from people they trust, and whose opinion they hold in high regard.
They see it as something that they, as the caring agencies, must be involved in if they are going to be doing a good professional job.
Then, by a slow, gradual process, they get to a point where they expect to find ritual sexual abuse in the community in which they are working.’
Derek Edwards spoke, too, of the presence of Charismatics in Orkney: ‘It's known that there is one social worker in this very small department who does belong to a Charismatic Christian Fellowship.
The history of this Fellowship in Orkney goes back to the early 1980s…
They've been living for the last ten years in an environment where they expect there to be a high level of occult activity in society.
Coming from a background like that, I think those  views would make a Charismatic social worker highly sympathetic to the views that he was receiving through the professional channels of the social services.’
Another fast-growing religion in Britain at the moment is a non-Christian movement.
It is neo-paganism, or a revival of the pre-Christian religion that was practised here hundreds of years ago.
In those times people worshipped according to the cycles of nature; they held rituals at key points of the year, and in the minds of the Charismatics they are very much associated with things like standing stones.
Orkney has a great many standing stones.
The Charismatics see direct satanic involvement in this revival, and say the neo-pagans are devil-worshipping.
The neo-pagans say this is nonsense, their religion has nothing at all to do with the devil, because the devil is an invention of the Christians.
They claim they are pre-Christian and good, not satanic and evil.
Nevertheless, the Charismatic Movement continues its relentless search for evidence of satanic influence and there is a history of an active Charismatic ministry in Orkney.
The Orkney Christian Fellowship was set up in the mid-1980s by a former Church of Scotland Minister, Alan Cowieson, who had caused division amongst a number of families while he was still Minister of the Evie, Rendall and Firth Parish.
A summer camp held on the island of Rousay in 1990, in which the Orkney Christian Fellowship was involved, is alleged to have created a climate of fear and suspicion.
Teenage girls returned from that camp with stories of speaking in tongues and exorcising evil spirits.
Some of them had gone into trances, and questions were asked by many worried parents.
Some of the children needed psychiatric treatment, and others received counselling by the orthodox Church of Scotland clergy.
Police enquiries were made into complaints from some parents about the camp and the way it was run.
Many people involved with the alleged child abuse case in South Ronaldsay think that the roots for believing that ‘ritual’ abuse was taking place in the island were established at that controversial summer camp.
It is known, too, that Charles Fraser, one of the social workers involved in the abuse inquiries in the family of fifteen, and in the cases in question, is a member of the Orkney Christian Fellowship.
It is not known if the original allegations of satanic ritual abuse came from this source.
It is certain that not one incident of satanic abuse has been  proved anywhere in the world, An American child abuse counsellor from Illinois, Pamala Klein, was instrumental in bringing the scare to Britain.
A self-styled psychologist specialising in child sex-abuse cases, she has now been discredited in both the USA and the UK.
Her influence, however, has been far-reaching.
She ‘diagnosed’ one of the first British cases of satanic abuse, in Kent, in 1988 — over the telephone.
Police found no evidence in that case and the child was returned to its parents.
She developed courses on child abuse for senior police officers, and distributed a list of ‘satanic indicators’, or signs and symptoms to look out for, which have since been circulated to police forces and social workers across the country.
In September 1989 she was instrumental in organising national conferences on child abuse — one at Dundee University — for social workers, police, and other child-care professionals.
Pamela Klein's crusade against satanism certainly helped to create the right climate for the prevailing tendency of Christian Evangelic Charismatics to step up their search for signs that Satan was at work.
In some areas the Movement has become excessively exclusive.
Members believe that anyone outside their particular way of looking at things is not a Christian at all— and this applies to groups such as Quakers.
One of the families in the child abuse case in Orkney is a Quaker family.
The Charismatics are suspicious of anything they are unfamiliar with.
If they suspect satanic influence amongst any group of people, they would also look with suspicion on anyone associated with that group, whether politically, socially, or on religious grounds.
They would believe that all these people were caught up in this satanic net.
A very dangerous piece of theology.
The Reporter, Gordon Sloan, inferred that the South Ronaldsay community were all involved in the abuse he believed to have taken place there.
Was he suggesting there was a paedophile ring operating?
Was he influenced by a growing tendency to look for ritual abuse.1
People like Ms Pamala Klein would seem to have a lot to answer for.
They have caused fear and suspicion and encouraged people to look for abuse where there is none, or to dress up actual sexual abuse of children with ‘satanic’ imputations.
This may have completely the opposite effect to that intended.
It may stretch credulity to the point that signs of real abuse are overlooked.
In Britain a Welsh woman, Maureen Davies, established the  Reachout Trust in 1983.
She was part of an evangelical crusade that claimed many people were trapped in the occult.
They said parents sexually abused their children as part of a satanic ritual, and that these practices were widespread.
The Reachout Trust prepared a paper on how to spot symptoms of satanic ritual abuse in children.
It contained clear guidelines.
Children who were preoccupied with the natural motions of their own bodies or who were difficult to toilet train were abused children; children who laughed when passing wind, or indulged in aggressive play were displaying the classic signs of abuse; destroying toys, harming animals, and being pre-occupied with death, were all stated to be symptoms of satanic ritual abuse.
The natural fears displayed by many children were turned into signs of abuse — such as fear of going to jail, fear of ghosts and monsters, fear of ‘bad people’ taking the child away, fear of being left with a babysitter.
A clingy child was also an abused child according to these guidelines.
There were other stated symptoms, too, including singing or chanting odd songs — and what child has not spent time happily singing something totally incomprehensible to a parent?
Another symptom is writing numbers or letters backwards — again a common enough thing to do when a child is learning to write, particularly if he or she is left-handed, or perhaps dyslexic; and probably most absurd of all, children who refer to television characters as real people are showing signs of abuse.
Perhaps Maureen Davies and members of the Reachout Trust had never read any of the daily tabloid newspapers where the doings of soap opera characters are regularly reported as ‘news,.
Maureen Davies advised social workers in Nottingham and Rochdale.
She had earlier written a report called ‘Facing the Unbelievable’, which told of the ritual abuse of children.
She has not been directly involved in the Orkney situation, but she did lecture on ritual or satanic abuse at a two-day seminar in Aberdeen in November 1990.
The seminar was organised by the local Evangelical Union of Churches.
It was directed at ministers and social workers, and it is believed that one Orkney social worker was invited to that seminar, as well as a Baptist minister who had helped to organise the summer camp on Rousay.
The Chairman of Orkney Island Council Social Work Committee, Councillor Mairhi Trickett denied that any members of her department had ever been to any courses or seminars on the subject of ritual or satanic abuse.
They had not been schooled in the symptoms of such abuse, but she told reporters that the abuse of children was such a terrible problem in society, that everyone should be on the look-out for it.
One minister of the Church of Scotland in Orkney had been growing increasingly concerned about the growth of extremism in religion.
The Reverend Peter Brown, Convener of the Social Matters Committee for the Orkney Presbytery, began to investigate the actions of the Evangelical Charismatic Movement in Orkney, and whether any members of the Orkney Christian Fellowship had been at that seminar.
At the same time, at the request of the minister of South Ronaldsay and Burray, the Reverend Morris Mackenzie, he had been conducting inquiries into the law concerning the uplifting of children.
This followed the previous removal of eight children into care in November 1990.
With other members of the presbytery, the Reverend Brown was worried about what had taken place at the summer camp on Rousay in 1990.
They were concerned about the implications of what influences were being exerted in their island society.
When the police raided the manse of fellow-minister, Morris Mackenzie, in South Ronaldsay on Wednesday 27 February, their concern took on a very personal edge,
Now one of their own was implicated in alleged rituals that seemed to have sprung directly from a determined searching for satanism and rituals adopted by extremist Christian groups.
peter Brown conducted investigations and presented a report to the Orkney Presbytery.
The presbytery met in private to discuss the report, and the alleged child abuse cases in South Ronaldsay.
They then issued a public statement, which was published in the March edition of The Presbytery Bulletin , the Orkney churches' informal news-sheet.
The statement came in the form of nine motions which had been passed by the members.
First they declared their grave concern at the happenings in South Ronaldsay, and condemned the method or lack of method, used to investigate the allegations.
They re-affirmed the sanctity of the family, and the rights of parents and children in the home.
They regretted that there appeared to be no suitable places of safety in  Orkney if it was found to be absolutely necessary to remove children from their homes.
A decision was taken unanimously by the presbytery to support and assist the Reverend Morris Mackenzie; to share some of the burden of his parish duties, and to make life easier for him.
The Bulletin reported that the presbytery welcomed the pastoral care already shown to the minister of South Ronaldsay and Burray and his wife, and encouraged such continuing concern.
They recognised that cases of alleged child abuse put great stress on all concerned, and they offered pastoral support to all children, parents, police, lawyers, the medical profession, social workers and anxious onlookers.
The presbytery also instructed their clerk to write to the Prime Minister, John Major, the Secretary of State for Scotland, Ian Lang, the local Member of Parliament, Jim Wallace, and the Member of the European Parliament, Winnie Ewing, asking for the law concerning child abuse to be reviewed as a matter of urgency.
The clerk was also instructed to write to Orkney's Director of Social Work, Paul Lee, the Chairman of the Social Work Committee, Councillor Mrs Mairhi Trickett, and Councillor Jackie Tait, Convener of Orkney Islands Council.
He was to express the presbytery's grave concern over certain aspects of the handling of these cases and press for an urgent review of procedure in suspected child abuse cases.
The presbytery asked members of the church to note that the South Ronaldsay Parents' Action Committee had set up a fund for legal aid to which they might like to contribute, and they asked their Social Matters Committee to look into the question of guidance to ministers in cases involving the Social Work Department.
They also expressed their concern that a manse and church buildings had been searched by the police, and items of an ecclesiastical nature removed.
These were described as artefacts and clothing used in Christian worship and devotions, such as the broken cross, and Mr Mackenzie's funeral cloak.
Professional papers had also been removed, and the Presbytery urged that a dialogue should be established between ministers of religion, police and the Social Work Department.
To set this in motion, the clerk was also asked to write to the Chief Constable of the Northern Constabulary, Hugh MacMillan, and the Chief Executive of Orkney Islands Council, Ron Gilbert.
The church in Orkney had put their support squarely behind the minister and the parents in South Ronaldsay.
They had also put themselves into the role of mediators, if anyone wanted to use them.
There was a sadness in Orkney that religion appeared to be an element in the story.
There was no proof that an initial spark from Christian extremists had set the whole affair in motion; there was suspicion, and it is one aspect of the Orkney affair that attracted the attention of the feature writers.
They focused on the fact that each of the four families followed a different form of worship.
One family is, as has already been said, a Quaker family; another family belongs to the Church of Scotland, and one family is Baptist.
The mother in the fourth family is Jewish, and this, said the Reverend Peter Brown, was even sadder.
‘Haven't the Jews so often been the victims down the years of people who were looking for demons to bait?’ he said.
Because there is no rabbi in Orkney, the Jewish family had got into the habit of worshipping with the Quakers; but the ecumenical element didn't end there.
All over Orkney during the time the children were away from their homes, prayers were said for them in churches of all denominations and at prayer meetings, and despite the torment they went through, none of the parents' faiths wavered.
The only message some of them had had time to give their children as the social workers took them to waiting cars was ‘have faith, be strong, we'll do what we can’.
The Quaker mother, who was so astonished by the ignorance of the police when they questioned her about the way she and her family worshipped, said her faith remained strong.
She had tried to describe the origins of the Quakers — or the Society of Friends — to the police, but she said they had simply found it strange.
They couldn't understand the practice of mainly worshipping in silence and without a minister, or without the trappings of church rituals.
This mother said that even in the midst of all the pain and trauma of her children being taken away, she had felt surrounded and safe in the love and support of the Quaker movement.
She had felt, too, the warmth and comfort coming from the general public.
In the first days she said her one hope was that her children, isolated though they were, could feel ‘held’ in the same safe way.
If they did, then she believed they would come through all this and be reasonably all right.
The Reverend Peter Brown was worried that the police had seemed so confused about what he called ‘orthodox auld kirk’ Christianity, as well as the less usual religious situations such as the Quaker Movement.
In an island which has an excellent record in ecumenicism, a seeming lack of understanding and intolerance was a great source of concern.
A former chaplain in the Royal Navy, Peter Brown has lived amongst and mixed with people of many creeds and cultures.
He practises what he has always preached — respect and tolerance for people of whatever religion, who try to live a good life by their own creed.
He continued his investigation and on 12 April 1991 presented a very full report to the Islands' Presbytery.
During the 1980s, when allegations of satanic ritual abuse multiplied, as has been stated, not one single case was backed by any forensic evidence, either in Britain or in the United States.
In some cases, the lack of forensic evidence had actually disproved the allegations and exposed the witnesses as perjurors.
Yet new waves of allegations continued.
They were rejected in Rochdale, and even in Nottingham, where cases of sexual abuse were upheld, and nine parents were found to have been involved in elaborate and organised abuse, there was no evidence that they did this as part of any satanic rituals or worship.
In Orkney, the idea of devil worship was seen as ridiculous.
The neighbours of the four involved families were vehement that there was nothing like this going on.
Anger began to grow, fuelled by the possibility that because certain extremists seemed to go out of their way to look for signs of Satan in every aspect of everyday life, people living quiet, caring family lives had been put into a state of terror and agony.
Experts in the held are questioning the basis on which the satanic abuse war is being fought.
They say that social workers who attend seminars and lectures on the subject do not realise that these ideas are being promoted by Christian Fundamentalist extremists who believe that all abuse is demonic in origin.
Social workers, who are justifiably worried about the growth of abuse, are eager to catch hold of new ideas, but they have failed repeatedly to realise that they are not being given proof.
They are being told to go out and search for it.
Applying the satanic indicators, they can find signs anywhere, but they have never been able to furnish proof.
The public remains sceptical, but those who support the notion of satanic abuse say that social workers must not fall into  the trap of believing it does not exist, just because it is difficult to prove.
That is all the more reason, they believe, for keeping their crusade going, so that a wider public will react positively and begin to recognise the indicators of abuse.
On 4 April 1991, the very day the children were finally flown home to Orkney, the government announced it had commissioned an Inquiry to establish the extent — if any — of ritual sexual abuse of children.
The announcement came from the Department of Health, besieged by a welter of conflicting evidence.
They said the inquiry would be headed by Professor Jean La Fontaine, Professor of Social Anthropology at the London School of Economics.
Her remit would be to talk to social services departments, the police and the Home Office; she would examine documents on all reported cases of ritual abuse, and draw up her report within two years.
A Home Office spokesman was quoted as saying: ‘The object is to investigate whether children are being abused in an organised way by networks or rings of adults.
Such organised abuse may be satanic or ritual, but we do not use those terms.
Everyone in the world seems to have a view on this subject, but no one knows whether it exists or not.’
Processes of Law
Events in Orkney seemed to gather their own momentum.
Hearings and appeals became part of the pattern of life for the families, their legal advisers, their friends and supporters, and indeed for the press and media corps that were reporting what was happening to the outside world.
A report on the case involving the removal of the nine South Ronaldsay children from their homes was sent by the police to the Procurator Fiscal in Wick.
At that time Orkney did not have its own full-time Procurator Fiscal.
The office was shared with Wick.
The situation has been altered since, and although Orkney still does not have its own procurator Fiscal, it now shares one with Shetland.
It is maintained that neither group of islands will lose out from this arrangement, even in emergencies, as there are deputies in both Kirkwall and Lerwick who can act on police reports.
The Northern Constabulary carried out independent enquiries into the case.
Quite separately from the Social Work Department in Orkney, they investigated the information that led to the uplifting of the children.
The police reached the same conclusions, agreeing that the nine children were severely at risk, and they cooperated in the early morning raids.
Part of the police investigations involved a young policewoman from the Northern Constabulary.
Linda Williamson worked with the RSSPCC social worker, Liz McLean in most of the interviews with the eight children from Orkney's large problem family, who had been taken into care in November 1990.
These interviews included the unrecorded but crucial ‘disclosures’ with three of them.
Police evidence was sent to the Procurator Fiscal, who had to decide whether there were grounds enough for criminal prosecutions to proceed.
He put the matter into the hands of the Crown Office for a decision from a higher authority than his own.
The Lord Advocate ordered further enquiries to be made.
This move was interpreted in two ways.
Firstly, it could be argued that there was not sufficient evidence to warrant a criminal  prosecution, and the Crown Office would need more if this was to proceed; and secondly, that there was enough evidence to make it impossible to drop the case, but more was needed to make it substantial.
Police enquiries in Orkney continued.
On Wednesday 20 March, three weeks after the dawn raids, Mr and Mrs H, the fourth family whose children had been removed, were suddenly taken to Kirkwall Police Station for questioning.
These were the parents who had not been questioned, nor had their house been searched on the morning of 27 February.
They had however, been subject to the same grounds for referral and allegations as the other three families at the first Children's Panel Hearing on 5 March.
This was the family where the father was a semi-invalid.
His health had already suffered considerably since the removal of his children, and his condition had deteriorated.
The hours undergoing questioning at the police headquarters were an added strain; but it had been an extra strain, too, waiting to be questioned, and not knowing when or if it would happen.
Police activity increased.
The suspects were kept under surveillance.
The beleaguered families reported that their homes were being watched.
Cars sat at the ends of roads for hours.
The occupants were observing whoever came and went.
Some parents even said they had been aware of being watched for some considerable time.
This was March — it was cold, windy, and altogether an unpleasant time of the year to have to sit in a car for long periods observing people's activities, and how they lived their lives.
One of the mothers said she felt quite sorry for the police officers involved and was tempted to offer them warm drinks to keep out the cold!
On the same day as the H parents were questioned, the Interim Reporter to Orkney's Children's Panel, Gordon Sloan, petitioned the Court of Session in Edinburgh.
He asked their Lordships for the forthcoming Proof before the Sheriff to be heard away from Orkney in mainland Scotland.
His request caused even more anger amongst the families and their supporters.
In his petition, the Reporter claimed the move to the mainland would be in the best interests of the children.
He said it would be traumatic for them to be flown home to Orkney for the Proof Hearing, only to be flown away again afterwards.
The Court of Session, the highest court in Scotland, convened on Tuesday 26 March.
It was led by the Lord President, Lord Hope, sitting with Lords Mayfield and Murray, three of Scotland's most senior judges.
Before the Bench, Mr Sloan's Counsel, Lynda Clarke, QC, made the request for the move away from Orkney.
She referred to previous Panel Hearings and Court Appeals in Kirkwall having been ‘mobbed’ by demonstrators.
A spokesman for the parents, when Lynda Clarke's submission was heard, was quick to contradict this statement, saying the supporters outside both the Panel offices and the Sheriff Court had been orderly and quiet.
The Reverend Derek Edwards, Vice-Chairman of the Action Committee, described all the demonstrations as ‘warm and supportive’.
He said the atmosphere at each gathering had been one of calm, loving concern, and this would continue for as long as it took to get the children home.
Mr Sloan's QC also maintained that the ‘fairly horrific publicity’ and local hostility in Orkney might not only affect the children.
If the Proof was heard in Kirkwall she said it would be prejudicial to certain adult witnesses that would be called.
These witnesses would include social workers, teachers, police officers and psychologists.
The other side of the picture was the very severe hardship that would be faced by the families, their witnesses and supporters if they all had to travel out of Orkney for the case.
Many were involved in farming, which at that time of the year meant that cows were calving, ewes beginning to have their lambs, and people were generally busy in the spring-time agricultural work.
Their farms could not be left unattended at this crucial time.
If the parents and their witnesses had to travel to the Scottish mainland, this would involve them not only in time away they couldn't spare, but also travelling and accommodation expenses.
There would also be the difficulty of finding people to look after the farms while they were away.
The Parents' Action Committee was outspoken in its condemnation of this possibility.
Such a move would, they said, impose severe hardship and very great practical problems at a time when the families had more than enough distress to cope with.
The parents' lawyers made the same points.
The parents' interests, they said, had to be considered as well as the children's.
Committee Chairman Helen Martini, however, said that if any such decision was really in the best interests of the children, they would happily go along with it.
They all wanted whatever was best for the nine children they all missed so much.
She promised the community's support and help if indeed the parents and their  witnesses had to leave the island.
No matter how long it took, she said, those who were left in South Ronaldsay would work out shifts on the various farms.
The calving and lambing would be taken care of somehow.
The Court of Session, with the wisdom of Solomon, decided that the Proof Hearing should be split.
The children's evidence would be heard in the Sheriff's Chambers in Inverness, and the rest of the case taken in Kirkwall Sheriff Court.
Giving their decision, Lord Hope said strong reasons had been given for hearing what the children had to say without taking them back to Orkney.
It might indeed be contrary to their best interests to travel back to their island home.
He said, however, that the court could see no reason for the Reporter's adult witnesses having to be heard away from Kirkwall.
The three senior judges agreed that a balance had to be struck between the interests of the children and their parents — and Lord Hope said the parents' interests were also of very great importance.
He stressed that attempts should be made to minimise any hardship they might experience to the greatest extent possible, as long as these did not prejudice the children's best interests.
Lord Hope also asked the Scottish Legal Aid Board to act urgently to lessen any hardship to the parents.
The decision of the three judges satisfied most of the parties concerned.
The parents and their support group were pleased.
Committee Chairman, Helen Martini, said it was a very sensible, if unusual decision.
No one wanted the children to be more traumatised than they already were, she said, and it would certainly be less travelling for them to go to Inverness than to return to Kirkwall.
The children's Curators — the lawyers appointed by the court to look solely after the children's interests — had also been in favour of the children being heard in Inverness.
Taking them back to Orkney, they felt, would have deprived them of the privacy they needed.
The Curators, with no other concerns in the matter, were truly speaking in the best interests of the children.
Parents' Committee Vice-Chairman, Derek Edwards, described the decision as a ‘working compromise’.
The parents had to be able to present a full defence, he said, and if the whole case had been heard in Inverness, it would have been almost impossible to fully safeguard their interests and get everybody in the right place at the right time.
Mr Edwards was delighted that for the very first time someone had  started to consider the interests of the parents.
He urged everyone concerned to take note of what the Lord President had said.
The Court of Session decision was taken on Tuesday 26 March — just one day after the twenty-one day Place of Safety Orders on the nine children had expired.
A further Hearing of Orkney Children's Panel had been held on 25 March to extend the orders and keep the children in care.
Again supporters and the press gathered outside the terraced house in Kirkwall that serves as Orkney's Children's Panel Offices.
Again the four families, accompanied by their representatives, went inside.
Again the nine children were absent, and the Place of Safety orders were extended for a further twenty-one days.
One difference this time was that each of the parents was accompanied by either a senior or a junior Counsel.
These people were to be their ‘lay’ representatives, as, of course, the Panel Hearings are not Courts of Law, and lawyers as such have no role there.
One of the great strengths of the Hearing system in Scotland is its informality.
The lay panel, the rights of parents and children to be accompanied by a friend or supporter, and the complete absence of any professional legal formality generally help to reduce the tension and create a situation for discussion.
The presence of the high-powered lawyers at this second Children's Hearing in Orkney immediately charged the atmosphere.
The Hearing began with a formal decision to dispense with the presence of the children.
The Reporter, Gordon Sloan, told the three Panel Members that the grounds for referral had not changed since the last Hearing three weeks previously.
He considered it was potentially damaging to the children to be at the Hearing, and, besides, the case of Proof before the Sheriff was still pending.
The Panel agreed it would have been too traumatic for the children to bring them back.
The Chairman, Mrs Jean Robertson, said the risk of the children meeting their parents and other local people was too great, given the serious nature of the allegations.
And so the presence of the nine children was quickly dispensed with.
They were not to have the grounds of referral explained to them, or a chance to have their say, for the second time.
The lawyers acting for the parents tried to present themselves as friends, representatives who would speak on behalf of the parents.
This was not easy, and they unavoidably sounded like lawyers arguing a case.
Gordon Sloan, the Interim Reporter, took great  exception to their presence.
He threatened repeatedly to have them removed from the Hearing for disrupting the proceedings.
At one stage he threatened to remove solicitor John Moir from the room, too.
He accused Mr Moir of ‘sniggering’.
In making these threats, Mr Sloan exceeded his authority.
The role of the Reporter is to advise the Panel, and keep the proceedings within the framework of the law.
It is not to dictate the course of the Hearing, and only the Chairman of the Panel can have a person removed.
Mr Sloan, however, appeared to adopt an attitude of being ‘in charge’.
One of the parents accused him of ‘smiling when it was completely inappropriate to do so’.
The Panel Chairman told the parents that their children were well, settling down in their foster homes, and that some were going to school.
One child was being tutored at home, and they were all fine.
One mother, Mrs B, was very distressed when she heard this.
‘It's just like hospital patter,’ she said.
‘It tells me nothing about my children, and I shouldn't have to keep contacting the Social Work Department to find out how they are.
They should contact me,’
She was told that two of her three children were together in one foster home, but was given no information as to where in Scotland they were.
She was told one of her daughters was receiving tuition in her foster home.
This was later found to be untrue, as neither of her daughters nor her son received any schooling or tuition of any sort for the five weeks they were away.
She complained that her children had apparently not been allowed access to a Baptist minister, but was told that they had not asked for religious support when it was offered.
The advocate acting as her representative said she believed matters had changed very substantially since the last hearing.
It was now known that the allegations had come from statements made from three children already in care in mainland Scotland.
These three, also from South Ronaldsay, had been abused, and were undergoing extensive questioning about it.
It was known, too, she said, that medical examinations on the nine children in the present case, had revealed no signs of abuse.
She told the Panel that the original allegations could not be taken at face value, and that children shouldn't be taken into care on the unchecked allegations of other children.
Mr Sloan constantly interrupted.
The line she was taking was not proper for a Hearing, he said.
This was not a Court of Law.
The only concern for the Panel was whether the children had to be in compulsory care.
Questions were also asked about what guidelines the Social Work Department had or had not used.
The Reporter said this was not a concern of the Children's Panel.
They were straying back into the realms of evidence, and that would be a matter for the court when the Proof was heard.
The proceedings for the four families followed much the same pattern.
In each case their representative raised the question of the lack of medical evidence, and said the authorities should not have rushed to take children into care on the basis of unchecked statements from other children.
Several times the Reporter interrupted and threatened to remove them.
All the parents were told that their children were in very nice foster homes, with very nice families.
In one case this turned out to be quite untrue.
A fifteen-year-old boy, the oldest of the nine, had been taken to a secure unit.
Geilsland School is a residential establishment in Beith, run by the Church of Scotland in Ayrshire.
It's the sort of establishment formerly called a List D school, a place for youngsters who have, for example, committed offences or were beyond parental control.
This boy had never been in trouble with the law in his life.
His parents, furthermore, had requested that he and his eleven-year-old brother should be placed in a Quaker boarding school.
One such school had immediately offered places and declared that it would abide by any access restrictions laid upon it.
But this school was not considered by the authorities to be a suitable place of safety.
They told these parents that it was preferable, anyway, for the boy to have the comfort and security of a good foster home.
The parents didn't know then that a List D school was considered suitable for their son.
More of that, however, later.
The Reporter's request to the Children's Panel for an extension of the Place of Safety orders for a further twenty-one days was upheld.
The children were to remain where they were — wherever that was the parents were to remain in ignorance, with the children still isolated.
The parents' impassioned pleas that the best places of safety for their children were with their families was disregarded.
Mrs B asked that her children be sent to their father, who was working in England, and had not been implicated in the allegations of abuse.
That, too, was disregarded.
The agony of not knowing where, or how their children were, continued.
The parents' pain on behalf of their children was almost too much to bear.
They  believed their children were being abused by the system set up to protect them.
Derek Edwards, speaking after the Place of Safety orders were extended, said that although they had all more or less expected this to happen, it was another blow for the parents.
They had come out of the Hearing without their children, and without knowing how long it might be before they were able to be together again.
He said that although the public faces of the parents were brave, and they were trying to bear up, there were times when they sank to the depths of despair.
They all knew that they had to go on fighting, and be strong for their children, and Mr Edwards commended them for that strength.
He repeated that the Action Committee should call for change.
It was a cry that was gathering support all over the country.
The laws concerning child care and child protection had to be reviewed and changed for the benefit of all children.
It was absolutely essential that everyone in every position of authority in child-care organisations, local authorities and government should take this on board, he said.
He also called for a full investigation into Orkney's Social Work Department, and the RSSPCC whose involvement was turning out to be very much more fundamental than had at first been supposed.
The lawyers, working away in their legal centre in Kirkwall, continued to prepare their case for the Proof Hearing, which was due to open in Kirkwall on 3 April.
This was now only a week away.
There was still a great deal of work to be done.
Other distractions kept cropping up to delay their work, however — like the publication in a Scottish Sunday newspaper of an alleged statement from Orkney Islands Council Temporary Press Officer, Nick Clayton.
The story quoted him as saying there was medical evidence which showed that there had been abuse.
It was the main lead story and was written by one of the paper's most respected journalists.
News of its intended publication filtered through to Orkney late on the Saturday night.
The parents, their lawyers and supporters, as well as the Islands Council and their own legal advisers, were aghast and very angry.
The parents' lawyers, acting through an Edinburgh firm, tried late that night to get an interim interdict to stop publication.
Orkney Islands Council, too, tried to prevent the story appearing in the following day's edition.
Lord Penrose, hearing the interdict late at night in his home, turned it down.
It was too late by this time to stop the presses rolling, and the first editions had already been despatched.
He said there had been sufficient time to bring an action, and awarded costs against the parents.
There was great anger in the parents' support group.
Helen Martini said if this was evidence that had been leaked, it would be very prejudicial to the Proof Hearing due to begin the following week.
If the Council's Temporary Press Officer, who had been appointed solely to deal with the alleged child abuse controversy, had been given such confidential information, she said, they wanted to know who had given it to him.
She found it hard to believe that a Press Officer would be party to evidence of this nature.
This was a police matter, and such information should only be divulged to the legal teams, and possibly to the families, she said.
It was certainly not for general release to the public.
The Chief Executive of Orkney Islands Council, Ron Gilbert, was furious too.
The council had heard about impending publication late on Saturday night, too, he said, and had tried to stop it by taking out an interdict against the newspaper concerned.
Mr Gilbert stated categorically that only very few council officials would be party to such information, and would certainly not release it.
Nor would they, he said, under any circumstances, give it to the Press Officer.
Mr Clayton had not had this evidence, and nor, claimed the Chief Executive, had he said so to the journalists.
He was appalled that such a story should appear in a newspaper, and the council, he said, would meet to determine what should be done about it.
It was expected that some sort of legal action would follow.
A press statement was issued by Ron Gilbert on behalf of the council, emphatically denying that medical evidence of alleged child abuse had been ‘leaked’ to a Sunday newspaper.
The statement continued:.
‘A journalist was given a briefing by the council's acting Press Officer, Nick Clayton, on the general Scottish Office guidelines for dealing with child sexual abuse….
During this briefing Mr Clayton said nothing about what medical evidence may exist relating to the nine children subject to Place of Safety warrants.
Since his recent appointment Mr Clayton has at no time had access to any medical evidence relating to the nine children.
He has not been informed as to terms of any such evidence by officials of Orkney Islands Council's Social Work Department…
It is specifically denied that during the briefing Mr Clayton stated that in relation  some form of abuse'’ which has been found during examinations carried out by a police surgeon.’
No action was taken against the newspaper, however, and one journalist, who had taken legal advice himself over the story, steadfastly maintained that he had quoted Nick Clayton's comments completely accurately.
With this unwelcome interruption behind them, Alistair Bruce and John Moir continued, with the QCs and advocates, to prepare their case for the Proof Hearing.
It was a preparation time fraught with difficulties and frustrations.
The Reporter, Gordon Sloan, was unhelpful.
They said he was unwilling to show them the evidence he had been given so they could adequately prepare their case for the parents.
It is normal procedure for this sort of evidence to be made available to defence lawyers, although in a civil case it is not a legal requirement.
Finally the lawyers for the families went to court again to try to obtain sight of at least some of the evidence against their clients.
They spent Thursday 28 March presenting ‘Minutes and Motions’ before Sheriff David Kelbie in Kirkwall Sheriff Court.
They wanted him to direct Mr Sloan to release the evidence against the parents, and at the end of the day they were only partially successful.
The two solicitors had been very busy dashing round Orkney gathering character witnesses.
They had taken the very unusual step of advertising in the local newspaper for anyone to come forward who knew of any ritual practices that might have been taking place in South Ronaldsay.
They were not at all surprised when they didn't receive a single reply.
They were overwhelmed with replies, however, when they asked if people were prepared to come forward as character-witnesses for the parents of the nine South Ronaldsay children whose plight had moved the nation.
They set up sessions where people could come and talk about the families, and make statements about the sort of people they were.
In just a few days over eighty people came forward, eager to support, and to add their voices and their knowledge of their neighbours to the case.
The two Kirkwall solicitors worked day and night to gather and collate these statements.
They were overwhelmed by the response, and by the willingness of so many to step forward and be counted in court when the time came.
These witnesses were the main thrust of the defence for the parents.
‘Innocent until proven guilty’ does not apply in cases  such as these.
All that has to be established is that ‘on the balance of probabilities’ the alleged offence took place.
The parents felt that the normal protection of the law had been reversed and they had to prove their innocence, rather than the law having to prove their guilt.
They were up against the absolute certainty of guilt expressed by all the parties weighed against them.
Orkney's Social Work Department, whose leading officials apparently had no doubt at all that the parents were all guilty of abusing their children.
This view was evidently shared by other bodies involved in the case, and one particular representative of the RSSPCC, Raymond Starr, when asked if they were really sure of their ground and that the children had had to be removed from their homes in the devastating dawn raid, had replied: ‘Oh yes.
If you knew what we know, you'd realise we had to take the action we did.’
But proof positive they did not have to supply.
A decision is made only on the balance of probabilities.
This means a case does not have to be proved beyond all reasonable doubt.
If there is enough to suggest that it is more probable that the offence took place, that is enough for the action that was taken by all the agencies involved in Orkney.
Social Workers: Friends or Enemies?
Orkney Islands Council's Social Work Department is a small one.
In recent years the Department has been starved of financial resources which has led to many of the serious problems faced by succeeding directors.
Within a ten year period the department has also been the subject of two investigations by the Social Work Services Group, the social work arm of the Scottish Office.
In 1981 concerns over the way the Social Work Department operated led to an inquiry, the results of which have never been made public.
At around the same time, Orkney Islands Council officials made their first attempt to remove the Reporter to Orkney's Children's Panel, Mrs Katherine Kemp, from office.
Then, as in 1991, they were unsuccessful.
She continued to work as Reporter for the Islands until she was locked out of her office and suspended by the Chief Executive in March 1990.
During the 1980s problems beset Orkney's Social Work Department.
Questions were asked about the way in which Camoran, the children's home in Kirkwall, was run.
There were allegations that things there were not right.
The small department, short of manpower and finance, was stretched to the limit, and worse was to come.
The then Director of Social Work, Hugh MacGillivray, was asked to drastically cut back his department's budget.
This was at a time when the work load was growing.
As in many areas, an increasingly ageing population was becoming an added drain on scant resources.
At the same time child abuse, following a national pattern, was becoming more widely acknowledged and symptoms recognised.
This was not a time to cut back the resources of the department which deals with the most acute form of social need, but a time to expand, provide more personnel, more finance, and more expertise.
In October/November 1989, Orkney's Social Work Department was the subject of another Social Work Services Group investigation.
Two social workers asked for this to be done, because they were so concerned about the policy they were supposed to be implementing.
The report was completed, and sent to the senior officials of the council.
It is believed to have been highly critical of the way the department was operating, but again the contents of that report have never been disclosed.
The elected members of Orkney Islands Council were each handed a copy of that report at a meeting of the council.
They were allowed to see it for one hour, before it was taken back, and none of them has been able to get hold of it since.
Several have tried.
Councillor Ian MacDonald and former Councillor Spencer Rosie made a number of requests to officials for copies of the document.
They were unsuccessful.
Even the Member of Parliament, Jim Wallace, has been unable to obtain a copy of what is thought to be a damning indictment of Orkney Islands Council Social Work Department.
Hugh MacGillivray, the beleaguered Director of Social Work, handed in his resignation.
Some of the social workers followed suit.
The way was set for much-needed change, but would things change for the better?
The man appointed by Orkney Islands Council to succeed Mr MacGillivray was a Yorkshireman, Paul Lee.
With his photograph in every newspaper in the country, and regular shots of him on television during much of 1991, Mr Lee has become well known, by sight at least.
He came into the department in Orkney at a time of crisis, his remit to operate on a shoestring budget, and to repair social work's damaged reputation.
Many people in Orkney believed he was succeeding — until the morning of 27 February 1991.
Although it later transpired that the RSSPCC were contracted by the Social Work Department to remove and question the South Ronaldsay children, at the time it was generally understood that Orkney's own social workers were mainly involved.
Paul Lee immediately became a man under siege.
A quiet, reserved, almost taciturn man, he was ill-equipped to cope with the bombardment of questions from the press and media reporters.
He retreated into monosyllabic replies, giving no clues as to the origins of the information that led to the removal of nine children.
He stuck rigidly to his statement that what had been done was absolutely essential in the best interests of the children.
The few brief interviews he gave to journalists were terse, and could be described as defensive.
He said people would have had cause to criticise if his department had failed to act following the information they had received.
He repeated, together with the  Chairman of the Social Work Committee, Mrs Mairhi Trickett, that seven o'clock in the morning was the right time to take the children, as it was a time when families would all be together.
That early hour also avoided having to go to the schools to take children, an action which had caused such controversy in November 1990.
Mr Lee stood firmly by the decisions that had been taken in collaboration with members of the RSSPCC, who had been involved from the beginning in the disclosure work with the eight W children who'd been taken away then.
Mr Lee, who came to Orkney after ten years working in Scotland, in both Highland and Grampian Regions, was reluctant to talk to the media.
One press conference was held in the week following the children's removal; during it Mr Lee denied emphatically that there was any sort of a vendetta taking place.
Feelings were being expressed freely in some quarters that the whole matter had been one of ‘revenge’ for support shown to the W family after eight children from the family of fifteen had been taken away three months before.
This was certainly not the case, Mr Lee said.
‘We were acting jointly with the police,’ he said, ‘having received information which pertained to potential offences against children’.
At that time Paul Lee did not rule out the possibility of other families in South Ronaldsay being involved in the ritual sexual abuse that was alleged.
He said that his department was concentrating its activities on the investigation in hand, for the time being.
There was an implication, however, that more was to come.
That ‘concentration’ on the current investigation involved a senior social worker, Sue Millar, working as Team Leader.
She liaised with the RSSPCC social workers on the mainland who were dealing with the children, and conducted meetings in Orkney about the case.
She did not, however, conduct any multi-disciplinary case conferences about the children until after they had been returned to their homes.
She did not consult with the children's family doctors, or their class teachers at school.
She was described by parents and Action Committee members as a hard woman, with no emotion, no compassion.
She did nothing to help the stricken families, to advise, or to offer information on either the Social Work Department's rights and responsibilities, or those of the parents.
Her responses to all questions by the parents were criticised by them as ‘text-book jargon’.
She used the same lines over and over again, wearing a fixed smile on her face.
A smile, the parents said, which was devoid of any emotion.
They all felt her attitude was hostile and aggressive, throughout the weeks that followed the removal of their children and after their return home.
In June 1991 Sue Millar left Orkney's Social Work Department saying this move, to further another strand in her career, had been planned at the beginning of the year.
Condemnation of the way in which the Social Work Department had handled the case came from all sides.
The South Ronaldsay Parents Action Committee wrote in protest to the Secretary of State, Ian Lang.
Orkney Presbytery followed suit, stating their very grave misgivings about the procedures followed by Orkney Islands Council.
The lawyers reiterated their concern about the legality of the actions taken.
Calls from every side for a full judicial inquiry into the whole affair grew louder.
MP Jim Wallace made his appeal for such an inquiry on the floor of the House of Commons; and when the topic was brought up at the Scottish Liberal Democrats Conference, he was supported by Judy Steel, wife of the former leader of the Liberal Party, and herself one of the first ever Reporters to a Children's Panel when the system began in 1971.
Several of Orkney's councillors, too, began to support the call for an inquiry.
All the political parties spoke of their concern in one way or another.
Each of the prospective parliamentary candidates for Orkney and Shetland added their voices to the growing storm of unrest.
Labour's John Aberdeen talked to colleagues at the Scottish Labour Party Conference; the Conservative candidate, Hampshire barrister Dr Paul McCormick, made an immediate and thorough study of the circumstances surrounding the removal of the children, and Frances McKie for the Scottish National Party was quick to express her horror of the Social Work Department's actions.
A teacher, employed by Orkney Islands Council, she said there was an atmosphere of great insecurity amongst council employees about there right to protest at that time.
She herself received what she termed ‘strong advice’ not to get involved.
The Scottish National Party Euro-MP for the Highlands and Islands, Winnie Ewing, wrote to the Secretary of State for Scotland, detailing some of the correspondence she had received from worried parents.
She said it was a clear infringement of human rights to deny parents access to their children.
Following her enquiries in South Ronaldsay, she said it was clear that the law was not complied with at all times, and that grave irregularities had occurred.
There could  well be, she continued, a case for the Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg.
It was no wonder that the Social Work Department in general, and Paul Lee in particular , felt under siege.
There was no doubt, however, that Mr Lee could have made the situation a little easier for himself, and his staff, if he had been a bit more open with the press.
His very short statements, and constant insistence that they had done the right thing, made it difficult, if not impossible, to reflect the point of the view of ‘the other side’— the side of the authorities, who then complained that the parents had too much publicity and had the full support of the press and media.
Comments like ‘if I was one of those parents, I'd be so ashamed I'd want to keep out of the limelight’ were heard from some of those connected with the local authority.
It is true that the families, because of their own determination and because the course of events dictated the coverage, got the lion's share of the publicity.
The press began to be accused of being one-sided, unfair, of not giving a balanced picture.
At that time, there was no sight of the other half of the picture, and until Orkney Islands Council appointed a temporary Press Officer, no regular statements were made.
The council's temporary Press Officer, Nick Clayton, did not appear to help their cause very much.
He would only read out short prepared statements, and would neither comment on them, nor give journalists any access to the people who could.
Ranks were closed.
Mr Clayton was simply a front man.
He fielded the phone calls and promised answers — answers which never came.
Frustration grew.
The Parents' Action Committee wrote to Orkney Islands Council asking who was supplying Nick Clayton with the information he was giving to the press.
They wanted to know urgently, they said, who decided to employ him, and who checked his credentials.
At times, especially following the leakage of so-called ‘medical evidence’ to a Sunday newspaper, it appeared he was acting independently.
The frustration turned to anger on more than one occasion.
News that the Islands' social workers had been given professional stress therapy astounded the families and their support organisation.
The Secretary of the British Association of Social Workers, Dennis Gower, confirmed that experienced case workers had visited Orkney to support five social workers involved in the South Ronaldsay case.
He said they were under ‘some considerable stress’.
Although social  workers were trained in dealing with stress, said Mr Gower, the whole subject of removing children from their parents was no less emotive for them than for other members of the community.
Dr Helen Martini, Chairman of the Action Committee, was almost speechless with anger.
How dare the council obtain stress counselling for the social workers, she asked, when the agonised parents of the nine children were under the sort of stress the social workers couldn't even begin to imagine?
She described their action as callous and insensitive.
The parents hadn't been offered any sort of advice or counselling; they had all received a letter from Paul Lee inviting them to come and talk to his department, but no one had offered them any information about their children; if they wanted that they had to ring up the department and ask for it.
No one had asked how they were coping, or attempted to offer at the very least a listening ear.
Dennis Gower said that the press coverage of the events in Orkney had been mainly anti-social work because they were unable to answer back.
The parents and their action group had been free to talk to the press.
The social workers were bound by rules of confidentiality and legal requirements which prevented them from revealing any relevant information.
Mary Hartnoll, Director of Social Work in Grampian Region, and Secretary of the Association of Social Work Directors, entered the debate.
She said that there was a great deal of strain on all concerned, the children, the families and the social workers, wherever there were child abuse allegations.
What made it more difficult for the social workers in Orkney, she said, was the very small size of the department; they had few colleagues with whom to share the stress.
Following as it did the enormous publicity that surrounded the child abuse allegations in Cleveland, Nottingham, and Rochdale, Orkney Islands Council were strangely unprepared for the wide interest their own case attracted.
This was the first time a Social Work Department in Scotland had come under such public fire for the same reasons.
The normal peace and tranquillity of South Ronaldsay.
Photograph © Robert Black
Where it all began.
The village of St Margaret's Hope in South Ronaldsay, where two of the families live, and all the younger children go to school.
Photograph © Sharyn Crossley
The last of four man-made causeways known as the Churchill Barriers linking Orkney's mainland to its scattered and remote south isles.
Photograph © Robert Black
The quarry on South Ronaldsay where the alleged abuse was supposed to have taken place.
Photograph © Robert Black
The Reverend Morris Mackenzie, Church of Scotland minister of South Ronaldsay and Burray.
Photograph © Orkney Photographic
Family solicitor John Moir talking to the media after a hearing of Orkney Children's Panel confirmed Place of Safety orders on the nine children.
Photograph © Orkney Photographic
Orcadians and incomers join together in a peaceful demonstration outside the Children's Panel office in Kirkwall as a hearing takes place.
Photograph © Sharyn Crossley
The solicitors and representatives of the South Ronaldsay Parents' Action Committee hold a press conference in a Kirkwall night club.
Pictured left to right: Alistair Bruce, John Moir, Dr Helen Martini, the Reverend Derek Edwards.
Photograph © Sharyn Crossley
Paul Lee, director of Orkney Social Work Department, and Social Work Committee chairman Mrs Mairhi Trickett, facing the press to explain their action in removing the children.
Photograph © Sharyn Crossley
Former reporter to Orkney Children's Panel, Mrs Katherine Kemp.
Photograph © Orkney Photographic
Gordon Sloan, acting interim reporter to Orkney Children's Panel.
Photograph © Orkney Photographic
Sheriff David Kelbie.
Photograph © Orkney Photographic
Lord Clyde, appointed by the Secretary of State to lead the Inquiry, outside Kirkwall Town Hall.
Photograph © Sharyn Crossley
Dr Helen Martini, chairman of South Ronaldsay Parents' Action Committee, after hearing the children are coming home.
Photograph © Orkney Photographic
Friends and well-wishers gather at Kirkwall Airport to await the return of the children to Orkney.
Photograph © Sharyn Crossley
It was not, however, the first time that questions had been asked about Social Work Departments in Scotland.
Departments in Fife, Aberdeen, Strathclyde, Shetland and Dumfries and Galloway have all been subject to criticism and controversy regarding their handling of child care and protection during and since the late 1980s.
The question that continues to haunt many people, both  inside and outside of the social work profession, is just how deep is the problem!
No one doubts the huge work-loads that these departments face.
The amount of child protection work has increased massively in recent years.
More cases of abuse are coming to light, and children have to be protected; some children have to be rescued from the living hell they have to endure.
There has to be a force which operates truly in the best interests of the child, and there has to be recognition and understanding of the very difficult and narrow lines many social workers have to tread in dealing with the most harrowing cases.
They have to have public support or their jobs would be untenable, but perhaps they also need to be less rigid and more approachable.
Social workers should never have to be in a situation where a small child slips through the net and dies.
That sort of episode makes them subject to public outrage.
The feelings of outrage are the same as when large numbers of children are taken from their homes simultaneously on unsubstantiated allegations of child abuse.
The outrage reaches epic proportions when people realise that no cross-checking has been done, no enquiries made from the people who have regular dealings with the children.
The question must then be asked: who protects the children from the protectors?
Who is there to put the brakes on these outbreaks of zeal, and the absolute belief that, no matter how bizarre, the allegations are water-tight?
In June 1991, following the trauma in Orkney, the government announced categorically that no more children were to be taken from their homes by social workers in dawn raids.
The only exception would be if a child's life was in danger.
This became law immediately in England and Wales, and is part of the new Children's Act.
It was believed that similar action would follow very quickly in Scotland, where the Child Care Law Review was nearing completion.
This review of child-care in Scotland began before the children in Orkney were taken from their homes early on a February morning.
Its completion was delayed because of the case.
In reviewing child-care law, the Scottish Office took submissions from every agency involved with the care, protection and management of children.
These included Social Work Departments, children's homes, Children's Hearing Panels, voluntary organisations, and others.
Many proposals have been made to tighten the  law and offer real care and protection to children, the most vulnerable members of society.
In the light of the inquiry into the Orkney affair, it is likely that these submissions will have to be looked at again, and new laws drafted.
Meanwhile, the relationship between the Social Work Department and the families and their representatives was not an easy one.
The families were pressing for information, for assurances; the department was, if not directly hostile, certainly defensive, according to the parents and the Action Committee which supported them.
Communication between them was at a minimum.
Communications sent to the children in care, however, blossomed.
The Social Work Department duly acknowledged the receipt of letters sent to the nine children care of the department.
The Parents' Action Committee was sent lists of letters the department claimed to have forwarded to the children, with each addressee mentioned by name.
In the early days, individuals who sent letters received a standard reply from Paul Lee.
This reply read: ‘I duly acknowledge receipt of correspondence sent in respect of children in care and confirm that the mail has now been forwarded accordingly.’
One Aberdeen correspondent, who received this, and who later realised that the children hadn't received the letters she had sent them, felt very aggrieved.
She wrote to the Director of Social Work and accused him of lying.
Paul Lee replied: ‘Thank you for your letter of 2 May 1991.
All mail received in respect of the children to whom you refer was sent by this office to workers involved directly with the children.
If mail did not reach them by the time of their discharge from care, it was not intentional.
All mail, which was subsequently returned to this office, has been passed to the families concerned.
I am sorry if you feel aggrieved.
There was no intention to misinform you about the situation.’
In fact this correspondent initially wrote to the children soon after they were taken to mainland Scotland.
One writer, who enclosed stamps for forwarding his letter to the children, had these returned to him, with a letter from Paul Lee to say the mail had been duly forwarded, and that the council had its own forwarding system, so he was returning the stamps.
It is known that none of the three thousand or so of letters were received by the children until their return home.
The first batch arrived the day they went home.
These had been written weeks  before.
Indeed, some that are known to have been sent have never been returned.
The deluge of letters that continued to arrive in the Social Work Department eventually made personal replies an impossible task for the Department.
Their right to withhold correspondence from the children in care must, however, be questioned.
These nine children were allowed no crumbs of comfort whatsoever.
Not even the knowledge that hundreds of people, friends and strangers, cared about their plight, and wanted simply to say so.
The hand of friendship, extended so warmly by so many, was rudely brushed aside by those who believed they knew best.
It was, they considered, all in the best interests of the children.
The South Ronaldsay Parents' Action Committee wrote to the Islands Council repeatedly.
They asked for a delegation to meet the Social Work Committee; they asked the Director of Social Work to meet with the Action Committee Chairman and Vice-Chairman to discuss the report issued by the organisation PAIN.
They also wanted to talk about Mr Lee's policy for dealing with the action group, and asked that a meeting should take place as quickly as possible; no replies were received to these letters, and the requests were made repeatedly.
Eventually a reply came from the Islands' Director of Administration and Legal Services, Rowan McCallum.
He stated that, because matters relating to the issue in question were sub judice, it would be very difficult to meet with the Parents' Committee.
Mr McCallum continued that the decisions made by the Social Work Department were made on the basis of confidential information, and should that department reply to the Action Committee, he said, they might divulge information which should nut be revealed at that time.
He did, however, acknowledge that it would be neither responsible nor sensible to ignore the existence of the Action Committee, and he offered them the opportunity of a meeting with representatives of the council.
This would, however, exclude anyone who was involved in the handling of the cases then before the Children's Hearings.
Mr McCallum said that the representatives the Committee could meet would, of course, have no detailed knowledge of the cases, and would only be able to speak in general terms.
He added that the Social Work Department could not be represented at such a meeting.
The Parents' Action Committee was continually frustrated in its attempts to seek a dialogue with the Council.
The offer by Mr  McCallum seemed pointless.
There were several other matters of concern, and they attempted to hold discussions, or to get answers to their questions.
On 29 March they wrote again to Paul Lee.
By this time, they were looking ahead to the long-term effects on the children of the arbitrary manner in which they had been removed, and the lengthy absence from their homes and families.
They wrote to the Director to ask for consideration to be given to the rehabilitation and counselling of the nine on their return home.
The committee felt strongly that preparations should be put in hand immediately to offer such counselling to the children whenever their return might be.
If the plans were laid, then they could be put into effect as soon as the children came home.
They asked for a multi-agency conference to be convened, involving the Social Work Department, teachers, doctors and health visitors.
They pointed out that local personnel in these fields had no experience in long term caring for such children, and they added that such a conference should be convened without delay, as leaving it until the children were returned home would be too late.
No action was taken.
Meantime, the Parents' Action Committee had been writing letters to Councillors as well.
On 14 March they wrote to every Orkney Island councillor, outlining the situation to date, and sending a full copy of the PAIN report and details of the formation of the support group.
They were asking the elected members to read the report, reconsider the issues surrounding the whole affair, and assist them in getting some answers from the council officials.
The responses were varied.
Some councillors expressed their deep concern, but declined to comment further; some promised help and support, and expressed their own outrage at the course of events; some didn't take the trouble to answer the letter at all, A few of them, however, proceeded to make their own enquiries.
The local member for South Ronaldsay and Burray, Councillor Cyril Annal, wrote to Orkney Health Board asking whether there had been any consultation with Health Board employees and general practitioners prior to the removal of the nine children from their homes.
The reply from the Board's General Manager, Dr James Cromarty, was unequivocal.
There had been no such consultation.
Mr Annal wrote, too, to the Education Department, to discover for himself whether the children's teachers had ever been consulted.
Again the  answer came as no surprise.
Neither the Education Department as a whole, nor the Child Psychology section, had been consulted in these matters.
This reply, however, turned out to be incorrect, as teachers had been asked for pen-portraits of the children for use at the Panel Hearings, and the Acting Director of Education Mike Drever had supported the request.
Councillor Fiona Matheson from Stromness, a member of the Social Work Committee, consistently pressed for information.
She asked the Chief Executive for clarification of the policy for taking children into care.
In the absence of the Orkney guidelines, she asked to be told which guidelines had been used, and whether these had ever been placed before the Island's Social Work Committee for their approval.
Councillor Matheson also asked if any social workers presently in the employ of Orkney Islands Council had at any time in their careers, attended conferences, seminars or other courses organised by the Reachout Trust?
She stressed that, as a councillor and member of the Social Work Committee, it was important that she should be in possession of these facts as soon as possible.
In his reply, the Chief Executive told Councillor Matheson that the Social Work Department had been in the process of compiling guidelines when ‘the present difficulties’ arose.
Therefore, he said, formal guidelines for Orkney had not been submitted to the committee.
Mr Gilbert said the department had received guidance from the Scottish Office, and had access to guidelines used by other local authorities.
He added, though, that there were no guidelines to cover the situation which had manifested itself in Orkney, and even if the council had formally adopted written guidelines, they would not have been appropriate in the circumstances.
He concluded by saying that, as far as he was aware, none of the council's social workers had attended any courses of instruction organised by the Reachout Trust.
Councillor Matheson was not satisfied.
She considered it very remiss of the Social Work Department not to inform the Social Work Committee of what guidelines or policy it intended to use as a stop gap measure.
There had been a committee meeting on 20 February, only seven days before the children were taken away.
She felt sure that plans must have been well advanced for the action they intended to take, and she thought that councillors should have been asked to approve the use of emergency guidelines at that time.
No  hint of what was to come was given at that meeting on 20 February.
Councillors serving on the Social Work Committee were as shocked by events a week later as everyone else.
In a further letter to the Chief Executive, Councillor Matheson said that, had emergency guidelines been approved by the committee, the department could have acted in the knowledge that its committee had backed their use.
She believed the department had left itself extremely vulnerable in acting without any form of approval by the committee.
This, she said, left her unable to support the actions of the Social Work Department, and extremely concerned that they had acted too hastily in a situation that was not of life-threatening proportions to the children involved.
Mrs Matheson also pursued the question of the Temporary Press Officer appointed by Orkney Islands Council.
She sought to discover where he had obtained the information he was supposed to have passed on to a Sunday newspaper.
She was informed, as was everyone else in the council statement, that Mr Clayton would have had no access to the sort of information quoted in the paper.
Nick Clayton himself denied he had ever said the things relating to medical evidence that had been quoted.
He accused the newspaper of making them up.
Councillor Spencer Rosie, who had so consistently championed the cause of the suspended Children's Panel Reporter, Katherine Kemp, also gave his whole-hearted backing to the parents' fight.
He welcomed the PAIN report, saying it raised issues to be tackled both locally and nationally.
He stated categorically that he had no doubts that the parents in this case were innocent.
Councillor Rosie also voiced his concerns over the treatment of the W family, eight members of which had been held in care since November 1990, at enormous cost to Orkney.
He was worried that the media might be making too much of the religious implications, and not the real issues at hand.
He offered Helen Martini, as Chairman of the Parents' Action Committee, whatever help he could in the campaign to get the children home, and to ensure that a full judicial inquiry was held.
He further stated his concerns by forwarding a paper to the Action Committee for their information.
This paper had been given to all councillors by an official of Orkney Islands Council.
It was by Roland Summit, a child psychiatrist based in California in the United States, who had been described in one newspaper  article as being discredited.
Roland Summit believed fervently in satanic ritual abuse, and followed the theory that, if a child denies abuse, that is sufficient evidence that they have been abused, and therefore they should be pushed until they break down and admit it.
This was the reading matter considered suitable for Orkney Islands councillors, to enable them to understand what was taking place in their community.
Councillor Rosie was appalled that the paper was American, outlining aspects of child abuse, what to look for, and how to confirm suspicions; it was also nearly ten years old, written by an ‘expert’ who had been discredited in his own country, and certainly didn't signify that the council was keeping itself up to date on matters of such importance.
These, then, were some of Orkney's councillors who weren't afraid to speak out, who were glad to be seen to be supporting the stricken families.
Others kept their heads down, and others were openly hostile.
They adopted what was becoming the catch-phrase of the moment —‘if you knew what we know’— but, as even the Convener of Orkney Islands Council, Jackie Tait, said he did not know the full details, how did some of the other councillors purport to know?