

POLITICAL WHOPPERS — WORLD CUP CRICKET Our Elton — a lovely guy, but a lousy dresser Is this the worst-dressed man in Britain?
Elton John and John Major slug it out as we ask, ‘Where did you get that tat?’
Plus Verbal and Tactile Rights for Men You've got to fight for the right to fondle And Star Trekking in Rotherham, the final frontier
Country life
The sender of the first cutting published will receive a bottle of Aberlour whisky and £5.
For all other cuttings published a miniature bottle of Aberlour and £5 will be awarded.
Cuttings should be sent to 
The gay love scenes were sensitively filmed, although the men had to wear boxer shorts for the US version as Americans are said to be touchy about testicles.
J MENDES (Today)
A judge admonished the Pennsylvania police for pretending that a Xerox copy machine was a lie detector.
Officers had placed a metal colander on the head of a suspect and attached the colander to the copier with metal wires.
In the copy machine was a typed message which read: ‘He's lying’.
According to UPI, each time investigators received answers they did not fancy, they pushed the copy button.
Out came the message ‘He's lying’.
Apparently convinced the machine was accurate, the suspect confessed.
M KIRCHNER (Reno Gazette Journal)
The eternal flame went out yesterday for the second time since it was lit on July 26 last year.
E GREENSMITH (Trinidad and Tobago Daily Express)
‘I say let him have it’
The World According To MR PUNCH
Adding up to a figure of fun
Mr Edward Pearce, the political pundit whose views have appeared in an impressive number of different newspapers over the past few years, has been pondering the curse of the accountant for the benefit of Guardian readers.
‘If you want to define the Thatcher-and-after era in a single phrase,’ he muses, ‘accountants with plenary powers’says it.’
Well now…
I would have gone for something a little snappier: ‘A mad cow with a handbag,’ comes to mind as a first attempt.
But I know what Pearce means.
For the last decade has been one in which short-term cost-cutting has been seen as the answer to any commercial or governmental problem.
The modern manager establishes his machismo, not by creating a business that can employ thousands, but by buying a business and then chucking all his supposedly supernumerary workers on the dole.
Now, Pearce takes a pretty dim view of this kind of behaviour.
And the particular incident that has aroused his fearsome wrath is the departure from Granada Television of Mr David Plowright, a man who knows about TV programmes, at the behest of Mr Gerry Robinson, a man who knows about balance sheets.
As far as Pearce is concerned, the accountant is simply: ‘the asphalterer-over of culture, the censor without passion, the taker-out of excess oxygen, the man who will make Michaelmas daisies flower in place of orchids and daffodils.
This sort of power accountant, a bookkeeper on horseback, is the future and not just in television.’
All this would be fine were it not for the fact that Pearce has chosen to support the main course of his assault with a little verbal side-dish, to wit: an attack on Punch .
This magazine, the readers of the Guardian will have been appalled to discover, is plagued by ‘young men from Coopers & Lybrand in striped shirts looking suspiciously at cartoons for excess intelligence.’
The result, he claims, is ‘comedy's answer to Ramadan’.
Quite how Punch resembles a religious festival involving millions of peckish Muslims I'm not quite sure, except that we don't like Salman Rushdie much either.
But, be that as it may, I cannot let our corporate accountants go undefended.
They are fine men and they play a crucial role in the creative life of this magazine.
For example, I might think of a rather jolly idea for a cover story.
Following a brief chat with my fellow editorial staffers concerning such unimportant matters as choosing a writer or an illustrator appropriate to the piece, I will go to see Brian, our in-house number-cruncher and say something like, ‘Hello Brian,’(I always like to get meetings off to an informal and uncontroversial start)‘I'd just like to discuss next week's cover story.’
Pausing only to straighten out the stripes on his drip-dry polyester-mix Marks & Spencer executive shirt, Brian will respond with a jaunty, ‘Proceed!’
So I'll explain how we want to do a three-page feature on, for the sake of argument, the literary genius of Melvyn Bragg.
Brian will then reply, ‘I hear you.’
Having established that his ears are, indeed, in working order, he'll kick in with the kind of first-rate, imaginative and, in a very real sense, creative idea for which accountants are renowned, such as: ‘Have you considered running it over four pages?
By amortising your editorial expenditure over the extra 33 per cent of product in-fill you could save approximately £82.68 on your per-page cost.
Also, a switch to a black-and-white rather than colour illustration will save on both artist's fees and reproduction, thereby making a significant contribution to the downside exposure of this week's editorial and production budgets.
‘The Liberals may get five years’
‘Then again, if we were to split the feature into 51  parts, the joke could be written-off on a week-by-week basis and any potential liability, laughter-wise, might be spread across two tax periods.
The bottom line is we've got to be flexible.
We don't want to find ourselves with any comic exposure unless all the parameters have been examined in-depth.’
The result is cost-effective, humour-style page coverage with maximum customer impact targeted at a chosen niche market and achieved at costs which represent a significant improvement on previous performance.
Anyone who considers such trivial questions as humour or literary merit is clearly living in a previous century and I can only refer them to the motto of the Punch accountancy department, which is: ‘If they can read, we don't want 'em.’
A few brief thoughts: if Mike Tyson appeals, is found guilty again, then takes his case to the US Supreme Court, it is entirely possible that he will have his case heard by Judge Clarence Thomas.
These two eminent gentlemen should be interesting to watch as Tyson rehearses his inimitable chat-up line, ‘Put on somethin' loose, babe, I wanna **** you in the limo,’ while Clarence discusses his collection of King Dong videos and picks the pubic hairs of his cans of Coca-Cola.
Meanwhile, no doubt, Messrs Kennedy, Clinton and Hart will be making their opinions of the case known to Congress and the press.
And as a Portuguese Euro-minister claims that Britain's oil may have to be controlled by the authorities in Brussels, Jacques Delors demands another £2bn and ERM-inspired interest rates force thousands on to the dole, how long will it be before one of our major political parties has the guts to campaign against the European Community in its present form, rather than sticking their collective heads in the merde and pretending that everything's coming up roses?
Apology
In last week's article on the US elections, ‘All Bull And Bush’, we referred to the Republican candidate, Pat Buchanan, as ‘a womanising rake’.
Mr Buchanan, of course, is no such thing.
Nor did he, as the article stated, run against David Duke in the Louisiana gubernatorial election.
The error did not appear in the original text of Anthony Lee's article, but resulted from changes made to the piece during the editing process.
Our profuse apologies go out to both gentlemen.
Whoppers!
Just how big an issue are the sexual peccadillos of today's politicians?
We looked through the files to see how the big men at the top are sizing up the hard decisions in a man's life
President Bush is the consummate politician.
His claims start out modestly enough, but then disaster!
They soon stretch beyond any form of credibility as he jokes with his advisers.
Bragging boyo Neil Kinnock can't resist outlining the charms of wife, Glenys.
John Major balances his economic package, but the right one's always lower, oh yes.
Saucy Cecil Parkinson lets his fingers do the talking about the one that got away.
Liberal Lothario Paddy Ashdown can only hope his poll share keeps growing.
Wild Bill Clinton shows he's a real front runner when tackling the big issues.
Democrat Gary Hart proves that the bigger your are, the more painful the withdrawal.
Review of the week
A bit of a GIT
IT'S NO CONTEST this week for the Punch column which salutes that famous person who's been very silly indeed.
Come on down,Steve Wyatt .
First off, the man they call the Houston Hunk left behind the photos of his holiday with Fergie.
This was simply inept.
But now his ex-girlfriend Denice Lewis has revealed that he believes in pyramid power.
She says the 38-year old bachelor hangs a three-foot brass and crystal ‘pod’ over his bed to ‘cleanse and heal the soul’.
And he gets up at 5.30am to ‘get in tune with the rhythms of the day’.
The man the News Of The World dubbed ‘Fergie's Mystic Master’ is, of course, also known as ‘Wyatt Twerp’.
Today he can look in his pharaoh-style mirror and say, ‘Oh dear, I've been a bit of a git.’
Not the least surprising aspect of the Mike Tyson case was the revelation that he has a bodyguard.
A bodyguard?
For the most terrifying fighting man in the world?
Mike Tyson needs a bodyguard like…
Madonna needs a press agent
Jeremy Beadle needs an assertiveness trainer
Norma Major needs a plain friend
Salman Rushdie needs a Bradford City FC season ticket
The Queen needs a tax accountant
Brigitte Nielsen needs a padded bra
Stephen Fry needs a condom
George Hamilton needs a solarium
Peter Clowes needs a chauffeur and
Warren Beatty needs a Dateline subscription
On the other hand, there are some posts which must tax even the most hard-working individual, such as…
Ollie Reed's sommelier
Lady Di's Relate counsellor
David Icke's psychiatrist
Burt Reynolds' wigmaker and
French rugby's charm coach
The Art of Laughter exhibition runs at the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, from 19 February–24 May.
It features the work of many Punch cartoonists including Anton, Bateman, Tenniel, John Jensen and Emett, as well as Giles, Steinberg and Osbert Lancaster.
Also four well-known contemporary cartoonists have chosen their own favourite cartoonists.
Mel Calman and Posy single out David Low, Nick Garland prefers Vicky and John Jensen admires Bateman.
The serious academic interest comes from the Ashmolean's own collection of illustrations which shows the origins of caricature and humorous art in the work of Breughel, Ghezzi, Michaelangelo and others.
Get your cartoon in Punch
Find out if you're the next Bateman.
Send us a cartoon or a caricature on the theme of 20th-century Oxford and we'll publish the best two entries and display them at the Ashmolean.
Entries should be on A4 or A3 paper and sent to:.
Closing date is 4 March.
‘I say, old boy, don't tell me you missed the Art of Laughter exhibition’
Who's a twitty boy, then?
So Terence Stamp is the best-dressed man in Britain.
But who's the worst?
Stylish STEVEN SMETHURST reports
The Period Pain
Chatmeister Terry Wogan exemplifies the Seventies penchant for shirts and ties made out of the same floral tablecloth.
His rival Jonathan Ross still sports the spivvy whistle of an Eighties estate agent.
Memo to Mr Ross: it's the Nineties now, pal.
The Fundamental Lifestyle Problem
Michael Winner, however, suffers from a perennial misfortune: no matter which bit of his body he squeezes in, another bit is bulging out.
This month's Esquire magazine is devoted to an account of the Ten Best-Dressed Men in Britain.
Chief amongst these is the indubitably elegant Terence Stamp, who gives a moving account of his first biker jacket and his love of fine fabric.
‘I was keen to get into texture,’ he comments, somewhat cryptically.
Few would argue that Mr Stamp is the modern Beau Brummel, although the choice of such unlikely figures as Boy George and Lenny Henry amongst the other nine dandies casts doubt upon the good taste of the magazine's judges.
If they felt compelled to pick a popular musician, then why was it not Eric Clapton, who is by far the most elegantly-tailored gentleman in rock?
The journalists of Esquire did not specify the names of this country's worst -dressed men.
The public, however, has a right to know, so a team of Punch researchers was set to work, quizzing fashion experts about the men whose very arrival at a wardrobe signals sartorial disaster.
The same names cropped up again and again.
But one point must be noted: Elton John and John Major ranked top of many respondents' lists.
Yet both are known for their all-round good chaphood.
Could it be — and this will shock the glossy posse at Esquire — that there are some things in life more important than fashion?
Mister Polyester
His trousers are held together with safety pins, his suits don't fit and he rolls his sleeves down in the summertime.
Norma does her best at C & A, but we must hope that John Major runs our country more expertly than his wardrobe.
The Futile Gesture
The arrival of his new spouse, Madeleine Gurdon has coincided with a snazzy re-vamp for Andrew Lloyd Webber's clothes.
Sadly, his face still looks like the inspiration for Phantom Of The Opera.
The Cabbie
Richard Littlejohn just can't help it.
This Is One of Britain's Best-Dressed Men
Are they quite sure?
ASK THE EXPERTS: Fashion pundits speak out about male wardrobe abuse
Geoffrey Aquilina-Ross
Editor,For Him 
Listed his sartorially-challenged men, to wit:
Jeremy Paxman:‘a nonentity with a paunch’
Edward Heath:‘gross clothes for a gross man’
Andrew Lloyd Webber:‘at least he's stopped wearing hipster flares’
John Major:‘no advertisement for a country that boasts Savile Row’
Richard Ingrams:‘corduroy suits!’
Prince Edward:‘His elder brother is no better’
Biggest mistake made:‘People have no idea of their own size, they dress for who they think they look like.’
Peter Howarth
Style Editor, GQ
‘John Major is just appalling, no excuses; man from Austin Reed.
There are so many casualties in England and shit colour coordination (sic) is no way to start.
Browns and beiges can be really nasty, they always look like soup has been spilled down them.
Shoes are the biggest give-away, grey soft leather ones with white socks…
I think your list is spot on.
All these people are the sort who will get really upset by this criticism.’
Nick Sullivan
Fashion Director, Esquire
‘I think the way people wear their clothes bothers me more than the actual  style of them.
Like pulling the sleeves of a jacket up to the elbow or having their hands in their jacket pockets.
I don't think I'd like to say who was the worst dressed, but if people don't feel comfortable in their clothes, they are not likely to look good.’
Tommy Nutter
Savile Row tailor who dresses Elton John
‘Oh, trainers are the worst thing to ever happen to fashion.
You can almost smell them just by looking at them.
And anyone with a ponytail — mind you, they're all out of a job now, aren't they?
Elton doesn't deserve to be called the worst, he's very stylish and I dress him for the country.
That Spender man is awful, stuck in the Seventies but Sinbad from Brookside is better now he's got Marcie and I suppose Jonathan Ross tries hard.
But John Major should get a moustache, he's got a very funny lip hasn't he?
Oh, and that weatherman!
The tall one who wears the yellow jacket ten sizes too big.
He's terrible.’
Marcelle D'Argy Smith
Editor Cosmopolitan
‘All men are like sparrows, they never do anything to attract the opposite sex.
John Major always looks so dowdy, Terry Stamp tries too hard and if I were him I'd slash my wrists.’
Elton John: sartorial mystic or lousy dresser?
We present a portfolio of Elton's ever-changing looks.
Is he making subtle statements about the mutable nature of fashion, or does he just have crap taste in togs?
YOU decide.
Gutter gossip
Guttersnipe
A thinking man's guide to tabloid tattle
by Mr Mitchell Symons
Fresh from its triumphant trawl through Liberal affairs, as it were, the Fourth Estate has been turning its prurient attention to the amours of Mr Phillip Schofield , the televisioniste turned stage performer.
We are confidently informed that the ‘amazing dreamgirl’ with whom he partook of a ‘romantic stroll through the mist’is his inamorata.
The said belle is one Miss Stephanie Lowe,a blonde beauty and person, who is said to be co-habiting with Mr Schofield in a ‘luxury  Thameside home’.
Recently, it is said that the pair enjoyed ‘an evening walk by the river’ in the course of which ‘they wandered deep in conversation, pausing only to kiss and cuddle tenderly on the deserted towpath.’
Guttersnipe, as a gentleman of the old school, chooses to believe that Miss Lowe's relationship with Mr Schofield is purely platonic.
Readers must decide for themselves but should bear in mind the words of the man who has followed in the footsteps of Mr Jason Donovan as the eponymous star of Joseph And His Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat : ‘It's not the easiest thing in the world to be Phillip Schofield's girlfriend.’
Mr Donjela ‘Donnie’ Wahlberg , the putative vocal stylist with the popular beat ensemble, Recent Children In The Vicinity (aka New Kids On The Block), is apparently mortified at claims that he and his fellow troubadours ‘don't sing on their albums or at concerts.’
They were so incensed that they flew to Los Angeles officially to deny charges that ‘they only sang about 20 per cent of the music on their 1988 album,Hanging' Tough .
‘It is Obvious that it's us,’ averred Mr Wahlberg.
On a similar tack, Guttersnipe would be intrigued to discover whether Mr Wahlberg was responsible for any more than 20 per cent of the many sexual peccadilloes attributed to him in this column.
If not, would the person (or persons) responsible please make themselves known to us so that their contribution can be duly catalogued.
Mention earlier of the out-and-out-all-round entertainer,Mr Donovan leads me to Miss Kylene Minogue , the law of diminishing returns, who has been turning her thoughts to matters matrimonial.
Although she has yet to meet her future spouse, she nevertheless has an idée fixe when it comes to her prospective spouse's physique.
‘If the guy I marry turns into a fat slob,’ avers Miss Minogue, ‘I'd warn him about his cholesterol level, tell him to cut down on booze and fatty foods, and take exercise.
If that didn't work I'd kick him out.’
As a gentleman of considerable physique, Guttersnipe is naturally alarmed at such prejudice against the nutritionally challenged.
As a married man, however, he wishes to point out that were his spouse to turn into Miss Minogue, he might feel equally impelled to ‘kick her out’.
According to authoritative sources,Miss Brooke Shields , the formerly be-hymened publicity stunt, is not immune from Hollywood's preoccupation with social diseases.
Following the much trumpeted loss of her maidenhood, she is said to have undergone a test to determine whether or not she has AIDS, an ailment prevalent in that part of the world.
Fortunately, the result of this test proved to be negative but, given the temperance of her lifestyle, her decision to take it in the first place would, at the very least, seem as bizarre as Mr Oliver Reed , the thirst, embarking upon an  assertiveness training course.
Having said that, it is entirely possible that one is being hopelessly naïve and that it is simply that the AIDS test has replaced the screen test as the sine qua non for any ambitious ingénue .
Mr Francis Rossi , the vocal stylist with the perennially popular beat ensemble, Status Quo(see left), has been articulating the enjoyment he derives from giving recitals.
Indeed, he is of the opinion that entertaining people with his ‘music’ is even more satisfying than experiencing carnal relations.
‘When you play live,’ opines the maestro, ‘there are thousands of people screaming for more, paying good money to watch you perform.
Unfortunately, it's not like that for sex.’
Having once inadvertently caught Mr Rossi making ‘music’ rather than love.
On the other hand, after seeing what he was doing with his electrified guitar, it is entirely possible that Mr Rossi's aficionados are of the opinion that they are getting the best of both worlds.
Finally, in the week that the IRA bombed Whitehall, it was reported that…
Miss Margarine ‘Margi’ Clarke,‘is not a natural blonde’;
Miss Julie Goodyear,the earring enriched tragedienne, was once taken to a ‘pub on the end of a dog lead’; and that
Miss Priscilla Black,the televisioniste, ‘may have plastic surgery to improve her looks.’
Guttersnipe does not wish to appear ungallant but might not a carrier-bag serve her avowed purpose at a mere fraction of the cost?
Who pray is…
Mr FRANCIS ROSSI?
Guttersnipe's Dictionary of National Biography
FRANCIS DOMINIC ROSSI WAS born on April 20th 1949 in the Forest Hill district of London.
He started his musical career whilst still a ‘teenager’ in The Spectres, a beat ensemble which eventually metamorphosed into Status Quo in 1967.
As such, they enjoyed success early on with the ballad, ‘Pictures Of Matchstick Men’, before opting for the chord-challenged sound — so beloved of their followers — which is typified by such seminal lieder as ‘Caroline’, ‘Down Down’, ‘Whatever You Want'’ and ‘Rockin' All Over The World’.
Indeed, one is reliably informed that, as far as these things are measured, Status Quo is ‘the most successful UK group ever’.
Despite the occasional brush with the law (‘obstructing the police’ in Vienna), Mr Rossi seems to have led a laudatory (for a man of his calling) existence — save for the fact that he bears no little responsibility in influencing the progeny of working people to attire themselves in tent material.
McLachlan's week
‘We're taking no chances — there could be trouble getting Mike Tyson back to court to be sentenced’
‘You've been found guilty of a breathtaking fraud that cheated thousands of people.
Is there any reason why I should not send you to prison for a very long time’
Politics
Julia Langdon
A sovereign remedy for indecision
Politicians can't decide on much — but they know a woman who can
What a shame that we didn't — or couldn't — see more of the role that the Queen actively plays in British politics in the television portrait filmed to mark her 40 years in what she memorably described as a ‘job for life’.
She moves discreetly but with considerable effect on occasion.
The best example of this was the way in which she stung the Government into action to do something about AIDS.
The evidence for this is overwhelming.
A few years back, when the scale of the problem that AIDS would represent was just becoming clear, a senior civil servant tried unsuccessfully to nudge the Government about the need for a policy to handle the impending crisis.
Then he found himself in conversation with the Queen and the subject cropped up.
She said something along the lines of: ‘It's all very worrying — I've got a lot of them on my staff, you know — and I wonder if the Government is doing enough.’
My informant said that in his view this was certainly not the case.
‘Oh,’ said the Queen, ‘would it help if I mentioned it to Mrs Thatcher?’
The civil servant thought it might.
Just days later the Government announced the establishment of a cabinet sub-committee on AIDS.
No coincidence that.
The Queen obviously has a sense of humour, as was evident from her hamming it up for the cameras.
I was also diverted, watching the film on video, by what she was writing on her official papers.
Her handwriting was distinctly visible so I rewound the film and stopped it to see what she had written.
‘Just for fun,’ it read.
I have also heard a story, however, about her being distinctly unamused by some of the things written about her in the newspapers.
She was incensed because one of the tabloids had suggested that she was the absentee hostess at a wet Buckingham Palace garden party.
‘I don't mind what they write about me,’ she said, ‘but did you see what Today said today?
That I was the absentee hostess and nobody like the chocolate cake we serve at the garden parties.
Well, I've just been round the tents and Lyons are hopping mad!
Everyone like the chocolate cake!
And as for me being absent!
Well!
I was out there in the rain all afternoon and I didn't see any members of the press!’
It rather looked like Her Maj quite liked Neil Kinnock.
She probably enjoys speaking to people who are not either obsequiously forelock-tugging or trying to upstage her.
I suspect, though, there can be no doubt about which side she would have been on in the public debate about fox-hunting prompted by last week's Private Member's Bill.
There were a few exceptions to prove the rule, but by and large the Commons looked as if it were fighting the class war rather than debating the need for the protection of wild mammals.
I was nearly run over in New Palace Yard after the vote by the surge of Jaguars roaring out of the carpark and off to the country for the weekend.
One of the Tories who broke party and class ranks was Dame Janet Fookes, who has long been associated with the RSPCA.
This reminded me of the story of how Dame Janet allegedly tried to relocate the ducks which meet and mate annually on the landscaped patch in front of the Commons and atop its underground carpark.
According to legend, Dame Janet decided that these ducks would be much happier in St James's Park and arranged for them to be escorted thence.
They were run over en route .
There are votes in animals, as all parties know.
One Labour MP, Joe Ashton, who has always had a sure touch for populist politics, used to maintain that the best party political broadcast anyone could produce would be a wildlife film about  seals.
His idea was that this would make no difference to those who knew how they were going to vote anyway, but could sway the others; the floating vote, I suppose.
The Party never listened to him, anyway, and it was about 15 years before they made the gushing film of the Kinnocks on the clifftop — otherwise know as Jonathan Livingstone Kinnock .
I played my own small part in formulating Labour Party policy in this area.
It was nearly 20 years ago and I was proof-reading an immense document called Labour's Programme .
It was very long and the print was very small and the exercise was very tiring.
The document said something like: ‘The next Labour government will ban fox-hunting, hare-coursing and otter hunting.’
I had never heard of otter hunting and it didn't occur to me that there might be such a sport.
I just though it was a simple misprint and with one stroke of the pen I changed ‘otter’ to ‘other’, thus effecting a rather broader sweep to Party policy than had been intended.
As far as I know, nobody noticed and it remained Labour Party policy for years afterwards.
The next Labour government nonetheless did no such thing, of course.
‘And here's one we reconstructed earlier…’
Robin Corbett, who was speaking up for animals from the opposition front bench in the fox-hunting debate, had a bitter experience of his own concerning the animal-lovers' vote.
He was out canvassing when he encountered an old lady who was ready to vote for him as long as he could convince her about Labour Party policy on cats.
She adored cats.
This was quite difficult as there just wasn't much Party policy.
‘Neil Kinnock likes cats,’ isn't really good enough.
As he stood at the door trying to persuade her of the importance of other more pressing political issues, one of her cats shot out of the door, into the road and under the wheels of a passing lorry.
Corbett related that he felt much like committing suicide himself at this point.
Dispatch Box
IT SEEMED VERY UNFAIR that poor Tristan Garel-Jones should be brought to book for referring to the French as ‘frogs’.
Admittedly, I suppose, it is not a very good idea for Foreign Office ministers to use pejorative nicknames in public, but no one could really complain that it was a filthy racist slur.
It is certainly the sort of thing that Garel-Jones says in private because he often describes himself and his family in similar terms.
He is married to a Spaniard, owns property in Spain, has worked there himself and made a fortune, too.
And he calls himself, rather disarmingly, a ‘spic’.
THIS WEEK'S GUEST COLUMNIST IS…
PLAIN JOHN SMITH
COMMON SENSE TALKING ON THE BIG ISSUES OF THE DAY
As I travel around to explain Labour's economic plans, I can feel the great passion for change that is gripping the country.
People are outraged by the performance of this Conservative government, so Labour's policies have really caught the public imagination.
‘Do you know,’ I asked a market trader as I met the fine working people of Motherwell over the weekend, ‘that this country's public sector borrowing requirement expressed as a percentage of Gross National Product is running at a completely unacceptable level?’
Lowest
He looked at me and nodded.
‘Och,’ he said.
‘Is that right now?’
‘It certainly is,’ I was able to confirm, ‘and that's not all.
Price differentials within the European Community have driven our visible earnings down to their lowest figure since 1987.
And what is the Government doing about that?’
Crippling
What is the Government doing about what?’
‘Well, there's nothing it can do is there, what with RPI up 4.5 per cent and the current swingeing Bundesbank-fixed interest rates…’
At this point, the trader began hurriedly packing up his stall.
Yet another victim, no doubt, of this Government's crippling monetary policies, policies which have been driving this country to economic ruin for the past 13 years, and which can be alleviated only by the immediate election of a Labour government.
Deadening
As my car moved through the area announcing ‘Meet shadow chancellor John Smith as he explains Labour's policy on fiscal and monetary reform,’ I noticed that the town was not as crowded as I remembered it from only that morning.
That's the deadening effect of 13 years of Tory rule for you!
I'm the Leader of the gang, I'm not
I would like to take this opportunity to say how fully I support the leader of the Labour Party, Neil Kinnock.
Reports that Labour would enjoy increased support under my leadership have no bearing on this support.
The fact that Labour would be assured of victory and five years of socialist government under a Smith leadership does not dent my unswerving loyalty.
That the country would be lifted from recession should Neil Kinnock step aside in my favour counts for nothing.
And I rarely consider the fact that Scottish MPs form the bulk of the Party's support in the House of Commons.
No I would like to take this opportunity to say how fully I support Neil Kinnock.
Unemployment has reached its highest figure for four years, a record number of people have been thrown out of their homes and well-known companies are announcing huge losses.
Yet Labour still can't seem to pull ahead of the Tories!
It's a funny old world, isn't it?
(But under a Labour government it would be 72 per cent funnier.)
HE'S FAT, HE'S ROUND, HE TALKS ABOUT THE POUND
SCHWADRON
‘It's your birthday?
Cook anything you want for supper’
‘Do you wish to order now, or do you need some more time to add up the calories?’
‘I understand the boss and his secretary are playing house’
‘Couldn't you at least wait until halftime so we could discuss our communication problem?’
‘We met on this show, got married, and now we're getting divorced because I earn more money than him.
Details at 11’
‘I just couldn't bring myself to shoot him’
Money
Oofy Prosser
Amstrad feels the byte of recession
But Sugar's not down-hearted down White Hart Lane
‘Wouldn't mind if the light at the end of the tunnel was an oncoming train…’
In the week that Alan Sugar was revealed to be Britain's top earner under the age of 45, his company, Amstrad, announced its first loss in 23 years.
Once the great white hope of our consumer electronics industry, Amstrad lost £15.2m in the six months to December, a far cry from the £160m profits made only four years ago.
The company is, to some extent, a victim of its own success.
It led the way in providing computers to the grubby masses, only to show the opposition what money could be made in this way.
It is a harsh reminder that there are no prizes for discovering a niche in the market.
Ask Clive Sinclair.
Life is not all bad for Sugar, though.
Tottenham Hotspur, where Sugar fought off Robert Maxwell to take the reins, has now returned to profit.
Despite a rather poor performance ‘on the field’(as we sportsmen say) the club's parent company last week reported a £810,000 profit in the last six months, an improvement over last year's £2m loss.
So perhaps one shouldn't weep too much for Sugar.
It was, after all, less than a year ago that he sold a substantial quantity of Amstrad shares.
At the end of 1989, the price was 36p.
Helped to some extent by a profits upgrading from James Capel (Amstrad's broker), shares rose to 87p in the spring.
Mr Sugar then decided to invest in commercial property, an investment funded by the sale of 43 million Amstrad shares, a transaction netting him £34m.
Not long afterwards, the company issued a warning about its likely profits and shares tumbled.
They have not recovered.
Why so many of the other directors chose to sell at the same time is not known to me.
Perhaps they all wanted to invest in commercial property.
One director was particularly lucky, selling his shares at 87p, their highest price over the past two years.
Let us hope that Mr Sugar's property investments bore fruit.
Without doubt, it is important for investors to monitor what directors are up to with their shares.
This has become more difficult in recent years.
The Financial Times gave up reporting such trifling information some time back, leaving investors to subscribe to one of the various services that now exist.
Directus , based in Edinburgh, is one such.
It costs £90 or so for investors to get the monthly newsletter, the Inside Track 
But information once a month is not enough.
If you're a serious investor and can shell out a little over £300 without grimacing then the weekly service makes much more sense, particularly as this also offers a telephone message updated daily.
True, this is on one of those detested and expensive 0898 numbers but I am assures that Directus keep the message as succinct as possible and that is rare for a call to last more than a minute.
I have made no secret of the fact that I don't like the Channel Tunnel.
I give three cheers every time there is news of another delay or cash crisis.
So far, it has made me reassuringly hoarse as TML, the builders, and Eurotunnel, the operator, blame each other for the problems that have arisen.
Something like £800m is currently owed to the contractors and Eurotunnel is very sorry and all that but it doesn't seem to have the cash just at this moment.
Eurotunnel has offered payment in shares but TML doesn't want shares.
It wants cash and very sensible too.
As they squabble, the estimated time of arrival for the first train has shifted from next summer to the autumn, just in time to miss the holiday rush and about £200m revenue.
The tunnel has proved incomparably more expensive than at first imagined.
Even by the normal ballooning standards of construction projects, this one's original budget has turned into an amazing work of fiction.
But with the interest bill now well over £600m a year, it is surely now getting to the stage where there is some doubt whether revenue will be sufficient to cover running costs and pay back some of the monumental debt.
None of this surprises me.
I warned against it at the time, telling investors not to touch it with a bargepole.
So why was I so utterly, utterly wrong?
Could somebody please explain to me why it is that a project that was always highly speculative and which now looks like a near disaster should have been so profitable for investors?
An original share (with attached warrant) cost £3.50.
It's still (if you can believe it) around £4.50.
I daren't mention the top price these things fetched.
Why?
Unless the mystery of the Eurotunnel share price is satisfactorily explained to me, I shall just have to assume that there is after all no rhyme or reason to the universe.
Which would, of course, explain a lot.
Six years ago, Guinness made its bid for Distillers.
Six years and the legal system is still working its way through the small print.
Trial number two has collapsed because of the mental and emotional state of Roger Seelig.
Trial number three has been suddenly dropped.
No news yet of trial number four.
Clowes got his comeuppance with ten years for what the judge described as the ‘worst ever case of fraud’.
But one can sympathise with Mr Justice Henry, the now redundant Guinness judge, when he called for a radical re-appraisal of the way big fraud cases are handled.
No need, Mr Justice Henry, no need.
We had the Roskill report back in 1986.
It recommended doing away with juries in complicated fraud cases and using a special tribunal of a judge and a couple of chaps who understand what's going on in court.
Someone should dig it out from the carpet under which it was brushed and blow the dust off it.
Too much public money is being wasted as lawyers explain to jurors the precise meaning of the term ‘a share’.
Money Box
THE GOVERNMENT last week announced the worst unemployment figures for four years.
It was the same that Gateway announced job cuts of 2,000, that Ford announced job cuts of 2,100 (plus a trading loss of more than £500m), and that British Aerospace announced the loss of 2,350 jobs.
If that were not enough, there has been a 72 per cent increase in the number of people thrown out of their homes because they could not afford their mortgage repayments.
It is also the same week that the Bank of England (whose governor was last year awarded a £22,000 pay increase) admitted that it had been over-optimistic when three months ago it predicted the recession was ending.
‘Recovery,’ it said, ‘is proving elusive’.
If nothing else, the bank's comical detachment from real life may prove a comfort in these hard times.
Hobart
‘Margaret's off sick.
I'm the temp’
‘How come we suddenly need a cox?’
‘Oh my God — it's Jacques Frost!’
Give and let die
Dillie Keane
Warning: performing at charity gigs could seriously damage your career
I swear it.
I have done my last charity ball.
In fact, I have done my last charity performance ever.
I don't care how weepy the cause is.
It could be for starving Romanian baby whales with AIDS for all I care.
You can pile on the guilt but my heart has turned to stone.
An ex-agent of mine told me I had the wrong attitude to charity shows; I did too many.
He told me to adopt the Perry Como technique.
‘What's that?’ said I.
‘Ah,’ said he, ‘Perry is very clever.
When someone comes up to him and says, ‘Hey, Per, could you do a concert in aid or our church roof, £20 expenses, staying overnight with the verger and his wife?’, he says, ‘Of course!
I'd love to!
Just check with my manager.’
The chap then goes to the manager, saying ‘Perry has agreed to appear at our benefit concert,’ whereupon the manager says, ‘Sod off, slime bucket.’
End result, everyone goes round saying, ‘Ohhh — Perry Como's a lovely man — but his agent…
What a schmuck!’’
This seemed like an excellent idea.
Except my agent had a will of sponge, so instead of telling the charity committee to go take a bath in some sulphuric acid, I'd find myself trekking off to Bodmin to give my all for the local branch of the Cats' Protection League.
I changed agents but that didn't help because some people never give up.
They get it into their heads that their fund-raising dinner for Hypothermic Pensioners In High Rise Blocks In Portsmouth will fall apart at the seams if Dillie Keane isn't there.
So my agent will say, ‘No, Dillie's not available on the date you mention, she's on a world tour of the Channel Islands,’ and they'll say ‘We'll change the date.’
One can picture the committee meeting.
They're getting desperate about the cabaret.
Fry and Laurie are otherwise engaged, the Comic Strip is on holiday and Simon Fanshawe is strangely silent.
Someone suggests Dillie Keane.
Someone else says ‘Who?’
The chairperson then trills ‘Jolly good!
Any other biz?’
Thus begins my nightmare.
Letters, late-night phone calls, ransom demands (‘If you wish to see your Ford transit again…’).
So you do the gig.
This either takes the form of a benefit concert or a private party.
A benefit concert is a two-hour show that begins at 7.30pm and goes on till dawn when members of the audience are either asleep or drunk.
Twenty-five acts are booked to do seven minutes each and no one does a spot shorter than 15.
Backstage is bedlam; 17 performers in a dressing room designed for Wayne Sleep.
The technical side is, at best, ropy .
Last year I did a big, all-star benefit; the sound check was fine.
When I came on stage, the piano had been turned round the other way.
The lid opened upstage so all the sound was thrown up the back wall.
I stood in the gloaming for the longest 30 seconds of my life while someone looked for a light switch.
Neither my microphone nor my sound monitors were turned on.
I left the stage in the middle of my song as I couldn't hear a thing.
Recently, I tried to cancel my appearance at a benefit as my pianist was ill.
The organiser had hysterics, telling me I couldn't cancel as I was the biggest name on the bill.
This surprised me.
Not only have I never been mobbed at Sainsbury's but I had been assured that the likes of Sheridan Morley and Julia Mackenzie would be giving their all.
When I arrived Jules and Sherry were nowhere in sight, and I was the only performer without a day job as a singing teacher in Coventry.
Then there are the private parties.
These are organised by a team of do-gooders called Annabel Cardigan-Fitzbaddely and Camilla Courtenay-Biggins.
The technical supremo is Caroline Fawcett-Inne whose previous experience was organising a cocktail party in a punt one May Week.
The party is being held in a ballroom the size of Carnegie Hall and they've forgotten to provide a podium so the people at the back have no idea you're there.
You arrive for your sound check at 6.00pm and the organisers ask you if you can practise elsewhere.
You spend so long explaining why a sound check has to be done in situ that you miss the sound check.
You're scheduled to go on at 10.30pm when coffee has been served.
You actually go on after midnight.
The lighting man used to work for Anthrax, so all the lights chase one another up and down your face in ghastly brilliancy.
The guests are legless anyway; they've paid at least £75 per head and shelled out for the tombola, raffle and auction.
They therefore feel they are entitled to sing, throw plates and trip the light fandango during your act if they so choose.
And in general, they do so choose.
Crawling offstage after a mauling, you ask for a glass of wine.
‘Sorry, madam, the wine's finished.’
So don't ask me if I'm available on November 7th to appear at the Platinum Ball in aid of Spavined Armenian Panda Orphans, because I most definitely am not.
I shall be doing something self-serving and enjoyable such as chucking stones in my back yard, or having my teeth pulled.
‘Our next guest is often seen as a maverick in the world of needlework’
The Cricket WORLD CUP!
English coverage:
thanks Mrs Grundy for the cakes we ate in the interval…
Australian coverage:
Owzeeeyaaaah!
Wonderful catch by Australia!
And another!
and just look at England!
What are they playing at?
Let's see that again from the camera in Merv Hughes's moustache
…this should be an interesting angle eh, Geoff?
What we call a Yorkshire angle, Tony!
Pardon, Geoff?
Sport
Marcus Berkmann
My Cup runneth maiden over
The only world tournament we may have a chance of winning
Ah, the magic, the excitement, the sheer indefinable whatnot of the World Cup.
The only question is, which World Cup is it this week?
The megatons of cash generated by the football World Cups have clearly caught the eye of most other sports, and now we have athletics World Cups to contend with.
It can only be a matter of time before World Cup, sheep-racing and World Cup bog-snorkelling are much loved fixtures in the sporting calendar.
This week's, though, is one of my favourites — the cricket World Cup.
For one thing, it's cricket World Cup.
For one thing, it's cricket, which immediately confers a prestige on the competition that other World Cups could but dream of.
And for another, it's about the only one that England do have a vague chance of winning.
After their escapades in New Zealand, morale is so high that Graham Gooch was actually seen last week to smile.
Most of the batsmen are making runs and the side has dodgy, medium-pace-all-rounders coming out of its ears.
Of course, such unprecedented confidence from this column no doubt presages a 150-run defeat by Zimbabwe but hopes remain high.
The greatest relief about this particular World Cup, though, is that it's unlikely to be overwhelmed by the media overkill that now inflicts virtually every major sporting event.
While certain contests I could mention (clue: begins with ‘W’ and ends with ‘inter Olympics’) have been thrust down our throats, only a few poor unfortunates hooked into Mr Murdoch's communications system will suffer 24-hour-a-day cricket coverage, and such people should not concern us here.
For rest of us, it's Radio 3 and the highlights, with a quick dose of Ceefax in the morning.
Triumph through adversity, that's the British way and don't let anyone persuade you otherwise.
As a result of this information shortage, however, the highlights will assume an unnatural significance, requiring much ingenious manipulation of the video timer and, in extreme cases, the hire of a small child to help you set it.
This is where the whole appalling influence of Sky TV — and its cultural progenitors in Australia — comes into its own.
Compare the highlights of the recent Test series in New Zealand.
Stolid, neat and terrifically inoffensive, these were the sort of highlights you'd be happy to take home to mother.
Peter Williams had the sort of nice neat blazer that everyone can remember being forced to wear at some traumatic stage in their lives, while the commentators and summarisers, who all sounded about 70, had a comfortingly narrow command of the English language.
Innings were always ‘fighting knocks’ and if someone hit the ball hard, they ‘took full toll’.
Anyone who took a clean catch ‘made no mistake’.
The contrast with the Australian coverage couldn't be more vivid.
Mild dullness is rejected fully, in favour of hysterical chauvinism and loads of graphics of ducks.
Watch out for the credits at the beginning of the programme: I'm willing to bet my next season's average that the batsman hitting the ball out of the ground will be Australian, while the batsman being clean-bowled by Merv Hughes's moustache will be English.
The fieldsman taking a brilliant one-handed diving catch will be Australian, while the fieldsman letting through an easy four will be P C R Tufnell.
And when it comes to camera angles, well, the Aussies gottem.
With 598 cameras around the ground, including one in each stump, three in the bat, and a couple embedded in the batsman's forehead, we will be able to see everything.
The trouble is, all we will see is one shot replayed 598 times.
When you add in all the filler (Tony Greig interviewing Ian Chappell, Ian Chappell interviewing Tony Greig, Merv Hughes interviewing his moustache) that won't leave time for an awful lot of cricket.
Two fours, a six and the odd wicket, and that'll be your lot.
So what to do?
Swallow your pride and get a satellite dish?
And then put up with Geoffrey Boycott saying ‘Dear oh dear oh dear that were a terrible shot’ twice an over?
Ah, the magic and the excitement of the World Cup.
I wonder which one it is next week…
‘It'll have to be retaken — the keeper moved!
Mixed blessings!
‘How was I to know he was precocious?
I've never even heard of Philip Glass’
‘It's going to be a theme pub — the theme is the death of the English local’
‘What a great day, Eve — the discovery of sex and board games!’
‘Bless you’
‘Excuse me, sir — do you have a quarter of an hour to waste on some fatuous questions?’
‘I enjoyed your wimminuscript, Madaleen’
WHO GIVES A MONKEYS?
A CRITICAL LOOK AT MODERN LIFE
by Richard Littlejohn
HUNTING
An awful lot of wind has been generated by Mr Kevin NcNamara's Private Member's Bill to ban fox-hunting.
As Labour's spokesman on Northern Ireland, one might enquire whether he would not be better employed trying to do something about the vermin planting bombs in the Six Counties rather than those worrying sheep in the Home Counties.
There is a common misconception that hunting is the exclusive preserve of inbred toffs and bloated captains of industry.
Not so, as last week's pro-blood sports advertisement in the Daily Telegraph (talk about preaching to the converted) amply proved.
Alongside predictable signatories, such as dukes, lords, farmers, land agents, three day eventers and jockeys, there was a railwayman, a carpenter and a digger driver.
Perhaps he is the Quorn's latest recruit for getting badgers out of the ground.
The list also included a couple of cabbies.
(Rip ‘em to pieces, that's what I'd do to them.
It's the only language these foxes understand.)
And a women who described herself as a social worker.
I bet they love her down at the outreach centre.
as if to demonstrate that this is not a party political issue, it was also signed by Sam McCluskie, former treasurer of the Labour Party.
I have it on good authority that Fat Sam's pleasure is coarsing.
Just as well.
I can't somehow see him in a red riding coat being winched aboard a dappled stallion.
In case you're wondering, I couldn't give a monkey's about hunting, a sport once described as the unspeakable in pursuit of the uneatable.
I just don't think it is any of my business what people do on private land, provided they don't interfere with anyone else.
The one thing that can be said in favour is that it sends vegans and animal rights activists incandescent with rage.
That at least means that during the season they are out in the countryside throwing themselves in front of Land Rovers every Saturday instead of standing outside Safeway's screaming abuse at shoppers.
There used to be a bloke who walked up and down Fleet Street in the old days with a fox on a lead, to prove how harmless they were.
Come to think about it, he looked a bit like Kevin McNamara.
Molest we forget
A very touchy subject
Sick of men being censured for their advances towards women JOHN HIND and STEVEN MOSCO told the papers they'd formed MVTR: Men For Verbal And Tactile Rights.
Just how much support did such a movement drum up?
COME, COME.
WE HAVE WORK TO DO!
HELLO MY DARLINGS!
HER!
HER!
HER!
BUT LOOK HOW THEY'RE DRESSED!
PROVOCATIVE LITTLE MINXES!
SORRY TO INTERRUPT BUT WE HAVE TO BROWSE OUR QUOTA OF MEN'S MAGAZINES…
These are difficult times for men.
In France, a government minister is working on plans to make sexual harassment a criminal offence, so how long can it be before Britain begins a similar move?
How long before ample-bottomed builders find themselves behind bars for a few ill-chosen words or a misplaced calendar?
Unusually, there is no counter-revolution to the women's movement.
There are no men's groups asserting their rights.
So we thought we would form one, just to see what happened.
The first thing our group, Men For Verbal & Tactile Rights.
(MVTR) needed was publicity, so we sent a letter to leading journalists.
‘We are writing to you to ask for your support in our battle for men,’‘For too long now, we have had to endure an overly-sensitive onslaught from the feminists.
They have tried to stop us having all-male bars where we can drink in peace.
They have introduced sex laws.
Now they are trying to end our verbal and tactile rights.
By this, we mean our rights to innocently flirt with and fondle women.
We have written to you as we believe you may well share our views.’
John Junor, from the promisingly-entitled Mail On Sunday , responded in award-winning time.
‘I was interested to read that you have started a campaign to battle for men's rights.
I will watch its progress with much interest.
Kindest Regards!’
Lord Wyatt of Weeford, the News Of The World's ‘Voice Of Reason’, was less forthcoming.
‘I wish you luck with your amusing campaign but I cannot help you,’ he replied.
Sensitive Sunday Telegraph columnist Sir Peregrine Worsthorne was so distressed by our views that he had to ask his secretary, Justine Oliver, to reply.
‘I hope common sense will prevail on the issue of flirting,’ she wrote.
‘We women enjoy it too, you know!’
The issue seemed too hot to handle for Andrew Neil,Sunday Sport boss David Sullivan, Anne Robinson, Oliver Reed and Jaci Stephens, but Paul Raymond, pornographer and Soho publican replied.
‘Thank you for your letter which is very interesting indeed, to say the least,’ he wrote.
‘I have informed the editors of each of my magazines accordingly to give you a mention.’
That's more like it!
Our campaign was underway.
Heartened by Mr Raymond, we sent a press release to the newsdesks headlined ‘New Group Formed For Men's Rights’.
It read: ‘Over thousands of years, almost all the animals on this planet have engaged in flirting and courtship rights; it is the stuff from which Life itself evolves.
If the piranha fish did not brush its fins gently against a member of the opposite sex each month it would not exist as a species.
Similarly — and we declare this honestly and proudly — we believe human males have a genetic thirst to flirt.
What we believe in is moderate verbal and tactile rights.
They should be protected by law from moral persecution as the majority of men mean no harm.
It is perfectly natural!’
The Independent 's Topaz Amoore was first to call.
‘We got this thing this morning about your Men For Thingie, said the dairy writer.
‘I just wanted to know if you're professional men.’
We said we were a design consultant and a travel agent.
‘You say harmless tactile appreciation.
What exactly is that in your book?’
‘Oh, enlarged pupils, tasteful  derrieère  -squeezing ,’ we said.
‘If someone came and pinched my bum on the escalator I'd k-i-c-k him as far as I could down the escalator,’ Topaz responded with gusto.
‘Does it happen often?’ we wondered.
‘Yeah.
For a long time.
And I've always reacted like that.
I don't mind men saying ‘Lovey’ and ‘Dear’.
I mean, every builder that I walk past whistles.
Others get more graphic.
I don't particularly enjoy it but men shouldn't be ostracised for it.’
Wouldn't both sexes miss it, if flirting were outlawed?
‘Sure.
Women sit there and say, ‘Coor, isn't he gorgeous!’ but women feel vulnerable when pinched.’
Would she think it fair for someone to lose their job for pinching her posterior on the Indie escalator?
‘It depends whether I knew them.
Actually, if it happened just once I wouldn't go to anyone.’
Well, Topaz, glad we got all that cleared up.
TO DISTRIBUTE AMONG THE NEEDY OF THE PARISH
FOSTERING THE VIRTUES OF SELF-HELP, HOLME
THAT REMINDS ME — DO WE KNOW ANY GOOD COPYWRITERS?
Next to respond was Jessica Davies of the Daily Mail's Femail.
‘I was intrigued as to what you're doing and was interested in meeting you.
Umm, err…to make it more fun for both of us, we could perhaps have dinner and you could show me how you'd behave in a date situation.
Presumably you're fighting for old-fashioned manners.
I'd like to see your philosophy in action.
I wouldn't expect you to pay for it.
Haaa!
The Mail will pay.
But if we were in a restaurant, I could get you in action, pulling back my chair.
If both of you came, I could get a woman photographer along, so we could actually have an err, a — you know, err, a nice evening…ha-ha-haa-ha!
We could go out and about.
In a night-club you could show me how you chat-up.
How about one night next week?’
We were tempted but declined.
Politely, of course.
We did have a boys' night out with Tim Cooper of the Evening Standard .
Clever chap, Tim Cooper.
‘Is this a joke?’ he asked.
Deadly serious, we assured him, relating tales of unfair dismissals from council jobs for breaking codes of conduct by saying ‘Dear’ or ‘Lovey’.
Telling him that our plans include both National and London Flirting Days, we described how the following Monday our group of sympathisers would be distributing badges bearing the slogan ‘I Flirt, Therefore I Am’ at 20 London tube stations.
‘Are you sure you're not just doing this ‘cos you're sexually inadequate?’
Cooper countered.
Good lord no, we insisted, the British are too reserved, we want to make wolf-whistling acceptable in public.
‘We know a travel agent who came within a whisker of losing his job, all for innocently caressing a colleague's bum while she was closing a sale on a two-week package to Alicante on the phone.’
Cooper mellowed.
‘You should ask Peter McKay — he'd be interested in joining.
He's a bit of a ladies' man,’ he said, adding ‘Nigella Lawson — she's very tasty, nicer than in her picture.
‘We are primarily interested in upper-class girls,’ we said.
‘Anybody with an ‘a’ at the end of their name.’
‘There's loads of them at the Standard ,’ said Cooper, persuasively, so persuasively in fact, that we ended up at 7.00 am outside Holborn Tube with a banner declaring Flirting for London, handing leaflets to men and flowers to women, so he could get a good photograph for his story.
Of our initial 20 rather withered carnations, 18 were carried off into the distance by bewildered or gracious lasses.
Before too long a photographer arrived.
‘Right,’ he said.
‘Let's find a good-looking girl for you to flirt with…
I can't see a decent one.
Oh look, over there, she'll do.’
So for ten minutes an innocent young lady was held up on her journey to work as a photographer issued instructions.
‘Right, you slip her a rose, and the other one blow her a kiss.
Now look as though you're surprised by them love!
OK, come on, look happy!
That's better!
Nice big kisses and smiiile everybody!’
’ The picture and story was not the only interest from the Standard because, encouraged by her admirer, Tim Cooper, we had sent a letter to Nigella Lawson.
She was not best pleased.
‘Most of the letters I receive are informed, enquiring — and welcome,’ she wrote in the Standard .
‘Just occasionally a barmy one gets through.
Last week I got a real corker…
The letter, addressing me chummily as Nigella, exhorted me to rescue men  from the cruel tyranny of women, or at least to lend my support to their cause of ‘Fighting Back For Fellas’ Per-lease!’
BACK AT THE OFFICE.
IT'S TRUE, WE NEED MORE INTELLECTUAL BOTTOM…
YOU MEAN, LIKE ANDREA DWORKIN SITTIN' ON YER FACE?
MMNUMNUMNUMM!
THE MEN'S MOVEMENT NEEDS MORE THRUST, MORE GRASP, IF WE'RE TO WHIP UP A STIFF FRONT TO MEET THE FEMINIST POSITION AND LAY THE GHOST OF LIMP WET LIBERALISM!
URK!
THE CRACK OF DOOM!
FEMINEMESIS!
WHOOARGH!
CRIKEY, LOOKIT THE JUGS ON THAT!
In a 650-word piece headed ‘Flirting With Foolishness’, Ms Lawson dismissed our ‘saloon-bar puffery’, ‘genuine hostility’ and ‘show-us-yer-knockers masculinism’.
‘But there is something even more disturbing about the letter,’ Nigella noted at the climax of her piece.
‘Do you agree with us,’ I am asked, ‘or has your manliness been squashed by the hard feminists?’
If these innocent flirts and fondlers really think I'm a man…now then, they have got problems.’
More sympathetic feminine interest came in the shape of Nikki Townley.
‘Helloooo!
I've just seen your pic in the Standard ’, she proclaimed excitedly, ‘I'd just like you to come on LBC radio tomorrow.
The presenter I work with on the Mike Dickin Show — that's Mike Dickin — is considered to be one of the biggest male chauvinists around.
He desperately makes out he's a male chauvinist but then tries to say he isn't — it's an act.’
So ‘Anthony Hulme’ rolled up at the LBC studio to explain the group's viewpoint.
‘We want to make sure that too many laws don't come about discouraging people from expressing admiration for the female form,’ he said.
‘So you're concerned that the legal eagles are getting in your way?’ asked Dickin.
Hulme agreed, ‘If you were to come from up north and work for certain London councils and come in one morning and say ‘Hello, chucky ducky lover’ it would be instant dismissal.’
Dickin was stern.
‘Do you think that ‘chucky ducky lover’ is an appropriate address to any member of the human race?’
Hulme was exasperated, ‘What should men be allowed to say?
‘Show us your legs darling?’
‘You're nice?’
Mike, has there been extra pressure on you during the past year not to flirt at your radio station?’
‘I have absolutely no concern in that regard at all,’ Dickin stormed.
‘I don't think I'd ever use such infantile expressions.’
And Hulme stormed back, ‘But using ‘sexual harassment’ to describe someone who says ‘Phwooar!’is to suggest that all men are animals.
And though, Mike, you have a lot of hair on your body, that doesn't necessarily mean you're a brute.’
‘No, but I am an animal,’ replied the bearded DJ, ‘And I think you'd have to agree that you are as well, in fact I'm beginning to wonder what species you are.’
Hulme explained, ‘I'm of the species that has lots of testosterone pumping around its body.
And I'd be interested to know what the masses of London think.’
Mark of Manor Park thought that Mr Hulme was offensive, repulsive and repugnant, but Bill in Wembley was more sympathetic.
‘This is 1991,’ he said (It wasn't).
‘A women who's spent half an hour in front of the mirror making herself attractive, 100 yards down the road hears a man on a building site say, ‘Hello, beautiful’, and she looks shocked!
I wonder why?
Was her effort wasted?
Or perhaps it proves that women tend to try to be attractive to upstage one another and they completely forget that men are going to find them attractive too.’
Nick in Westminster called to publicise his social skills course in ‘How To Flirt For Friendship, Business & Romance’, and Anthony from Kensington called to say he had friends who were confused in the workplace.
‘For example, can they compliment a female co-worker's hair, smile, dress…or indeed thighs?’
Dickin asked whether Anthony would ever call ‘Go on darlin  ',show us yer legs’ to a man?
‘To another man?
No!
But I might say, ‘My, your biceps are growing and you seem very fit.
Are you doing sit-ups?’
As luck would have it the phone rang.
It was Zak Jane Keir, assistant editor of Penthouse .
‘What I thought is, I'd like to meet you and we could have a chat and so on,’ she intoned nervously.
We had met Ms Keir at the offices of MVTR, where she seemed to be having trouble with her tape machines.
‘These friggin', friggin' batteries,’ she moaned.
Ms Keir, whose career in journalism began on an amateur stamp-collecting magazine, said that one of the highlights of life at Penthouse was being kidnapped by a pop-group.
‘I ended up spending all night watching porn videos with them in Hounslow,’ she trilled.
Keir enquired whether there'd been any other media interest in MVTR.
On mentioning the Standard we were regaled with a cry of ‘There's one bitch on that paper who I'm going to top when I see her!’
Asking why, were told the Standard had written a story on ‘a dominatrix club I'm a member of’, in which they'd described the Penthouse Pet as ‘plump’.
So greatly did Keir take us into her confidence that, by the end of the evening, we felt like old muckers.
‘I'm a member of FAC!’ she confided, ‘That's Fems Against Censorship.
Maybe MVTR and FAC could get together?’
Now here was a lady we could do business with.
Mixed blessings II
‘The limousine in the pool really dates you, Simon’
‘Well, I hope that sentence will deter you from  any more writing on walls’
‘I've been headhunted by Hayward's End — their village idiot's moved to East Twittering’
‘Why couldn't you get a rowing machine like anyone else?’
‘I was a bit lucky, really — the gun backfired’
‘Now that the company has been liquidated, JR, I wonder if we still need Gerald?’
‘Hello, operator?
What the hell happened to my alarm call?’
How to be a has-been…
BIMBO
The Hey day
Politicians, bankers, Fleet Street editors — all are grist to your kiss-and-tell mill.
They get the sack.
You get the loot when the beans are spilled in the Sabbath press.
But it's all downhill from here…
The slippery slope
1.
You offer escort services to a famous journalist.
But Sir Peregrine Worsthorne politely declines.
Sir John Junor attacks, ‘She is nothing but a cheap tart.’
2.
‘Hardly cheap, darling,’ you reply.
You become ‘sexy siren’ to a clothing king.
‘She's my femme fatale ,’ he swells.
You certainly are…
3.
When he dies of a heart attack during la petite morte .
A Cabinet minister steps into your life.
But steps out again…
4.
After fathering your love child.
You move to America but hastily return after Ted Kennedy invites you for a drive.
The futile gesture
5.
You take to photography as your new career.
‘Snapper or slapper?’ asks Mistress Monitor magazine.
No good.
You have another steamy affair…
6.
When the clothes iron blows up in your face.
After plastic surgery, interest wanes in your services.
You take up a new career in advertising…
7.
Installing kinky stickers in phone booths.
Your affair with the Cabinet minister is revealed in the Daily Mirror .
‘I hate publicity,’ you squeal at the hastily-arranged photocall.
8.
You sue Intelligent Woman magazine for branding you a gold-digger.
But to win your case you have to promise to donate your winnings to charity.
9.
You become an MP's secretary…just before he comes out.
The killer blow
10.
Richard Ingrams starts to take you seriously.
You appear on intellectual talk shows.
You write books that are critically praised.
You lose your looks.
The cruel twist
After your death from contortionist's back, your roman fleuve ,Of Vice And Men , is published.
Michael Ignatieff loves it.
‘Truly a penetrating study,’ gushes Bernard Levin.
They inaugurate the Hooker Prize in your honour.
Rotherham
The final frontier
Lawrence Skilling boldly goes to a New Generation Star Trek mini-convention
Admiral Paul Rowe, of Rotherham Starfleet Command, was waiting to meet me from the train.
‘We don't want the Romulans picking you up, do we?’ he said.
Indeed we didn't.
The very last thing you want when stepping off a train at Rotherham station is to be confronted by a Romulan death squad.
Still, no chance of that with a Starfleet commander in full regalia waiting to meet you.
Admiral Rowe — Paul to his friends — was my host at a conference of New Generation Trek fans, a conference held in Paul's council house.
Star Trek VI — The Undiscovered Country opened in London on Friday with Kirk and Spock resuming hostilities against the Klingons.
Kirk, Spock, Scottie and the rest are, of course, of interest to Paul.
His burning enthusiasm is reserved for their successors — Captain Jean-Luc Picard, Deanna Troi and young Wesley.
In the conference centre — Paul's living room — members of his Trekkie club, Ten Forward, were wall to wall watching Trek videos.
Upstairs, a child's bedroom had been turned into the equivalent of a multiplex cinema complete with flickering 12-inch video monitor.
I squeezed into a minute dining-room, where there were no TV sets and nervously tried to join a group of people.
‘Hi,’ I said.
‘I'm Lawrence.’
‘Hello, I'm Sue.
Who's your favourite Star Trek character?.’
‘Er, new or old?’
I replied cautiously, acutely aware that I hadn't seen Spock and Kirk do their thing for years and that I'd only seen one episode of the new series.
‘Both!’ demanded Sue mischievously.
‘Well, Kirk of course, for the old series,’ I said.‘Spock is the only other credible choice and as he has no discernible personality, it has to be Kirk.
The man is an unreconstructed fascist chauvinist…but he has great charm.
I love it when he raises his eyebrow in that sardonic fashion…
‘As for the new series, it has to be Captain Picard.
Because he's European, he's bald and the opposite of everything Kirk was and he's always so messed up about making the right decision…’
In a couple of minutes I had lost any chance of kinship with Sue by making one of the most basic mistakes.
The last thing a Trekkie wants to hear is analysis: enthusiasm is all.
The weekend was a bargain at four pounds but as the food arrived I began to see why.
There were piles of Happy Shopper economy burgers, and Iqbal Cola (33p for two litres).
Still, when you are boldly going where no man has gone before, you don't expect cordon bleu.
Over the coke and burgers, the Trek conversation continued relentlessly.
What exactly are the specifications of a Ferengi battleship?
Which was the most perfect episode of the New Generation ?
Paul's 12-week-old baby sat impassive throughout, permanently shrouded in cigarette smoke, fending off attacks from blobs of ketchup, crisps and bits of hot dog.
Paul calls his children the Tribbles, after the small furry creatures that make strange cooing noises and seem to reproduce at an alarming rate.
Come evening time, after half-a-dozen more flickering Trek videos and prior to the conference party, I suggested that we get some wine/beer from the off licence.
The silence was deafening.
I might as well have suggested that Spock was a paedophile.
‘If you're going to be sick,’ said a flat, passive voice, don't do it downstairs.
They've just decorated.’
The Enterprise is a dry country.
But not devoid of mischief, obviously, because in the evening Paul produced a board game called ‘Fore Play’, a throw-a-dice-and-take-off-some-clothes  sort of board game.
Ten Trekkies got down on the floor to play this, some still wearing Federation anoraks, which seemed to be cheating somewhat.
Captain Picard would have approved of the game, though, which was all very innocent.
If a Trekkie lost an item of clothing, they just marked the fact off on a sheet of paper.
Anything embarrassing, like instructions to hold hands, was ignored.
Later most of us spent the night on the floor in our sleeping bags.
The next day, fresh chip butties and burgers in hand, we readied for the weekend's big attraction: a copy of a New Generation episode, not due to be shown here for months.
It was called ‘Unification’.
The holy significance of this two-parter is that Spock meets the new Enterprise crew.
Old Gen meets New.
It was as if Moses came down from the mountain with the Ten Commandments to find Christ and the disciples standing in the crowd.
According to the excited murmurs of my fellow conferencees, Leonard Nimoy was supposedly paid $3m for this short appearance.
Despite the hype, ‘Unification’ still wasn't as good as the average old Star Trek show.
Spock's father dies, Spock seems to have turned traitor but in fact he's on a personal peace mission to unite Romulans and Vulcans (basically the same race).
It's a thin allegory of Eastern Europe, with the hard-core Romulans being old regime communists (with smaller eyebrows).
The best part for the fans was when Spock turns to Captain Picard and says, ‘You remind me of a captain I used to serve under.’
The oohs and aahs could probably be heard as far away as Ecclesfield.
A few more straight episodes on top of this treat had everybody fired up for ‘Interstellar Combat’.
This is played with multi-armed Klingon and Federation battleships and a ten-sided dice.
Things were going well until the arrival of the Borg, a multi-armed, part-organic battleship that was virtually indestructible.
Not surprisingly, this was piloted by Admiral Sean Hellewell, second-in-command of the club.
His favourite expression was ‘Clear this room now!’
After this, all that remained to wrap up the conference was the Grand Raffle.
This brought two 12-year-old girls down from the video screening upstairs.
‘I've watched nearly 30 hours of Star Trek since we got here, one announced, nearly falling over.
Both girls had a terrible faraway look in their eyes; the result of too many alien monsters, meteor showers and allegories in the now terribly politically correct New Generation series.
They were placed in a corner clutching over five pounds worth of raffle tickets each.
The prizes were books, mags, posters and postcards of the intrepid crew (both old and new).
By some freak of natural injustice my five tickets won me no fewer than three prizes; not bad for a stake of 50p.
This was obviously the Great Controller In The Sky having a laugh.
One unlucky chap, an ex-paratrooper, took it very badly and was nearly in tears.
To make amends, I swapped all my unreadable but expensive book prizes for one life-size poster of Captain Kirk in a typical phasering pose.
Oh, for the old Federation values!
None of this ‘It's a lifeform we must respect it.’
man
I thanked Paul's wife for doing all the cooking, whereupon she remarked that she didn't mind because it meant that she didn't have to watch the Trek videos or play the games.
An older club member gave me a lift back to the station and I asked her what she thought of Ten Forward.
‘Oh, pretty good.
Only about a third of the members are so awful as to be frightening.
That's a better ratio than most Star Trek clubs.’
20 fascinating facts about Star Trek — and all completely logical, Captain
1.
It takes longer to make William Shatner look young in the make-up department than it does to create the Klingon look: five hours as compared to four.
2.
An episode of the new series was banned in England because it referred to the ‘victory of the IRA over the English in the 21st century’
3.
A pair of Mr Spock's ears cost £880 at Christie's in December last year, and a phaser from the Sixties was valued at £6,000.
4.
NASA named its first shuttle Enterprise , and played the theme to Star Trek at its unveiling.
5.
Kirk and Spock featured on an album last year called 20 Golden Throats on which they sang, ‘Lucy In The Sky With Diamonds’(Shatner), and ‘Put A little Love In Your Heart’(Nimoy).
6.
The only thing William Shatner dislikes about the new series is that, ‘It stars a guy with a bald head (Captain Picard).
Why couldn't he wear a toupee like me?’
7.
Patrick Stewart (Captain Picard) has consistently vetoed scenes he felt were ‘blatantly and outrageously sexist’.
8.
Millionaire drummer Mick Fleetwood starred in an episode as a fish.
EastEnder Ian Woodyatt is also a confirmed Trekkie and wants to play Worf the Klingon's side-kick.
9.
Anti-matter has been known to exist since the Twenties but making enough for a propulsion unit (one milligram) would cost $100bn.
10.
A project to turn Star Trek into an opera has been scrapped.
Shatner called the plans ‘asinine’ and said the idea ‘stank’.
11.
Paramount supremo Frank Mancuso received death threats as he voiced plans to do a Police Academy -style Star Trek .
12.
Marina Sirtis who plays Deanna Troi gets letters asking if her ‘amazing cleavage is for real’.
She adds, ‘They always were that size, it's just the clingy clothing.’
13.
A publication that came out in 1989 was described by Paramount as ‘A sordid and shocking book, which all true Trekkies should shun.’
It showed Kirk and Spock having a gay affair.
14.
Star Trek V was the first film of the series to make a loss, estimated at about $30m.
15.
Three episodes of the original series were banned for showing ‘sadism’, ‘torture’ and ‘insanity’.
16.
In the new series Nurse Chappel has appeared as Deanna Troi's mother and Dr McCoy as a 137-year-old.
Mr Spock is set to appear in two episodes.
17.
The new series is BBC2's top ranked show with an average of over five million viewers each week.
Of these some 6,000 are members of a fan club.
18.
This year there are going to be at least seven conferences, organised by the fan clubs around the country.
(British Rail organises special rates and trains for them.)
19.
Leonard Nimoy always wears his lucky woolly hat on set.
20.
The character of Lieutenant Uhura in the original series was praised by Martin Luther King as having ‘the only non-stereotyped black role on television’.
‘This looks like a nice spot’
Charivari
Punch's weekly guide to the arts, entertainment, media and more…
Fast-acting campaign relief
The election — A Voters' Guide David McKie 
The anxiety that I will be caught out on the hustings by a clever swine in a corduroy jacket asking ‘What is the current rate of child benefit?’ is one which is shared by all those rash enough to offer themselves for election.
MPs live sheltered lives in which they are encouraged to take a gentle interest in the passing political scene.
Tory grandees (there are not many of those left) specialise in agriculture and foreign affairs, the latter being estate management on a larger scale, while the simpler Tory backbencher shouts ‘hear, hear’ at Prime Minister's Questions and is rude about M Delors.
It is no joke, I assure you, to be subjected to the impertinent questioning of those who have come to your public meeting neither for enlightenment nor even good fellowship but to make the candidate appear a proper Charlie.
This fat book is a worthy attempt not only to educate the electorate but to inform candidates of all parties and of none; they is even some entertainment offered in the shape of ‘essays’ by Guardian scribblers such as Hugo Young, Andrew Rawnsley and David McKie.
Mr Young, who knows more about Margaret Thatcher than is good for anyone, recounts the story of the fall of the Titan.
Rawnsley is cheeky about Kinnock, Major and poor Ashdown, while David McKie writes, in a magisterial preface, ‘This is still in a sense a watershed election.’
Give me an election that wasn't.
It is a psephologist's handbook, a guide to swings and roundabouts and a heckler's compendium.
Like the Pickwick, the Owl and the Waverley pen, this volume comes as a boon and a blessing to men.
Especially to eager young parliamentary candidates and local trouble-makers.
The book includes a wealth of information.
Did you know that 30 Tory knights of shire and suburb are not standing at the election?
One only has to read out their names — Sir Julian, Sir Geoffrey, Sir Michael and Sir Robin et al , to be transported back if not to Camelot then to an Excalibur lager commercial.
But we shall retain our synchronised swimmers: not a single Tory woman is retiring; indeed, the ‘regiment’ is to be heavily reinforced.
Those of us who hope to return to Westminster after the election will find a change of tone and a shift of emphasis.
Many of those who have been chosen in place of the knights are Essex Men, but Essex Men with degrees: clever chaps like John Wittingdale and Oliver Letwin, whose cloaks were laid at the feet of Mrs Thatcher.
But they are balanced by people like the speedy Sebastian Coe and the beautiful Lady Olga Maitland.
I do not wish to carp but what this book lacks is a list of MPs' secretaries together with their personal details, buttressed where necessary with photographs.
We are told who sits for what, where, what our majorities are and the swing needed to return us to the real word and gainful occupation.
We are told the way in which MPs have voted on certain controversial cross-party issues such as abortion and hanging; we are given the names of those to whom we must say farewell and those we should welcome, but no details whatsoever as to the make up the corps of MPs' secretaries, that body of sirens from whom the more susceptible among us should be protected.
When I was at Shrewsbury School, the housemaster made it his duty to chose the cooks, maids and bottle-washers; his criteria being age combined with an aggressive plainness.
Could not a similar method be adopted within the Palace of Westminster?
This is a worthy guide which I will take care to read before alighting from the train at Aldershot station to begin what will be my tenth election campaign.
I will be so armed with facts there will be no room whatsoever for fiction.
Nor, having read it, will I be afraid of interruptions.
On the contrary, I shall positively invite them.
Julian Critchley
Julian Critchley is Conservative MP for Aldershot.
‘But I'm your dentist!
It's almost impossible to catch it from your dentist!’
Charivari wireless
Radio 4 play is an anticlimax
STANDING BY THE SINK, my dear wife was plunged into gloom.
‘I really miss Woman's Hour ,’ she said.
Mounting the pulpit, I explained that she was merely a listener.
Although this old 2pm slot was massively popular with the nation's women, their wishes sadly do not count.
The BBC is no longer, as I have pointed out before, involved in public service broadcasting.
‘No, my dear, they are concerned with ratings and as you stand by the sink drowned in misery you may console yourself that your loss has been radio's gain.
Think of how it has bolstered Radio 4 against rival stations.
‘You have been sacrificed, martyred and cut off in mid-satisfaction, but see it as a noble act for the good of a world-renowned radio station that is admired as far away as Irkutsk, Tristan da Cunha and (after the recent never-ending Arctic festival) Greenland.
‘And, anyway, there must be something good on at two o'clock to divert you.
I am sure that all these thrusting executives are not going to kick away this trusty old crutch and fob millions of women off with something unsuitable like, oh, say,(what can we think of?) a string of old Irishmen singing maudlin songs for hours on end.’
Mrs Big Ears was unmoved by my monologue.
‘There's an awful play on,’ she snapped, having already turned it off.
I turned the switch and I regret to inform you that out of the loudspeaker came a lot of old Irishmen singing maudlin songs.
I am convinced that Scattering Day by Patrick Carroll was drama of the very highest quality.
I am sure that the maudlin singing was top notch, but this is not my point.
How many women want to sit down at two o'clock and give an hour and a half of their attention to a play of any sort whatsoever, let alone one about the life of somebody who collects Irish folk ballads?
And answer me this: if it was so easy to chop Woman's Hour why is it so difficult to abolish the House of Lords?
There seem to be double standards at work here.
In The Radio 4 Debate the motion was that the Lords are an anachronism and we  should unplug the oxygen tent as soon as possible.
Naturally, this sensible idea was defeated.
I predict with complete confidence that the House of Lords will never be abolished for two reasons.
First, the arguments for and against are so soporifically dull that no one will ever stay interested long enough to sort the question out.
Second, you cannot storm barricades that are manned by people so polite they even congratulate Brian Redhead on his ‘magnificent handling of this debate’(particularly as Brian hardly said anything).
People kept arguing that the House of Lords ‘works’.
Competence, however makes no difference to the British.
The Radio 2 Arts Programme devoted two whole hours to the singing of people who could not sing.
What was so shocking about Famous But Not For Singing was the sheer amount of material.
Audrey Hepburn was inaudible, Joan Collins was flat.
Bob Hope was off the scale altogether and Peter O'Toole was worse than the whole lot put together.
And yet it did not hold any of them back.
O'Toole was even invited to appear in a musical.
If people sing really badly the British merely take them to their hearts.
Lee Marvin's song ‘Wand'rin' Star’ would be unacceptable to most bullfrogs but it still got to number one.
Big Ears 
3 VIEWS INSIDE THE BIG EARS HOME:
i.
Gloom over by the sink:
ii.
The pulpit: So, er um…
iii.
A ‘Double Standard’ detector: They're everywhere!
The SAFEWAYS by Paul Thomas
THE GENEROUS-MOUTHED LAURA SAFEWAY HAD LEARNED OF HER HUSBAND'S BRIEF AFFAIR WITH THE SEVENTEEN-YEAR-OLD SELINA MURTAGH.
THE ACHINGLY CONTRITE GEOFFREY HAD TAKEN HIS WIFE BREAKFAST IN ONE OF THE NUMEROUS SPARE BEDROOMS AT STATELY PYM HALL…
AND I SUPPOSE THE STOICISM AND FORGIVENESS EXHIBITED BY MRS ASHDOWN HAVE, IN A WAY, HELPED ME TO COPE WITH YOUR INFIDELITY…
THANK GOD FOR THAT, LOLLIPOP…
LOOK, I CAN NEVER EXCUSE MY BEHAVIOUR WITH MISS MURTAGH, LAURA — BUT I JUST WANT YOU TO KNOW THAT, AT NO POINT , DID I STOP LOVING YOU …
BALLS YOU DIDN'T …
PLEASE, DARLING,HEAR ME OUT…
I'VE BEEN A BLOODY FOOL — ALL I ASK NOW IS FOR A SECOND CHANCE…
GO ON…
WELL, BASICALLY, WHILE I CAN UNDERSTAND AND INDEED RESPECT YOUR WISH TO SLEEP ALONE IT'S TEARING ME APART …
WELL I'M AFRAID YOU'LL HAVE TO GET USED TO IT!
WHAT?
WHILE YOU WERE OFF ACCOMMODATING YOUR TART , MY AD AGENCY WERE PRESENTING A RADICAL PITCH TO BENETTON INVOLVING BOTH ANNEKA RICE AND NANETTE NEWMAN …
YOU'RE KIDDING!
NOT AT ALL— WE FLY TO THE ROMANIAN ORPHANAGE ON MONDAY…
CHRIST ON A BIKE !
television
Well, look at the puck in here
Only ice hockey can redeem Albertville
THE BIG, BIG PROBLEM on the Olympic downhill at Val d'Isère was how many times David Vine, the big man from the BBC, could fit the  word ‘big’ into his commentary without the towering presence of Michael Mair, ‘The Big Italian’.
But Vine is nothing if not professional.
‘That's a big problem for Girardelli,’ said Vine as Marc, the big Austrian who skis for little Luxembourg, lost his line and slid off the course.
Not that you could tell who was who.
Racers flashed past spectators at speeds of up to 80mph, and nobody knew who was winning the medals until the computer had flashed the result on the scoreboard.
At least BBC viewers had David to explain who had got the gold, who had got the silver, and who had got the big, big problem.
The big problem for anybody watching the opening ceremony must have been suppressing whoops of hysterical laughter.
It was the clearest sign since Charles Aznavour that the French have no sense of embarrassment.
The ceremony was hosted by a couple dressed in matching velvet Babygros, his tipped off by a woolly bobble, hers with what appeared to be a cat's tail.
Silhouetted against the setting sun and peering anxiously upward, they looked as if they were awaiting their fate on Watership Down.
Frankly, it would have been a mercy killing.
Then there was the poetry.
The arrival of each team was heralded by a verse, on which France's top Christmas cracker poets had been working day and night since at least last week: ‘For many games past, our hearts have been smitten by the courage of the athletes who come from Great Britain.’
Or something like that.
Anyway, in each ditty the name of the country was used to finish a rhyme.
No wonder Swaziland had such difficult registering its team.
David Vine: it takes a big man to point out the big men with the big problems
Only ice hockey provided real spectator interest.
It is fast-moving, there is skill to be admired, and plenty of off-the-puck incident to sustain our interest.
It is Holiday On Ice , starring Vinny Jones.
Switzerland made up for 500 years of neutrality by setting about the Canadian team, who were unsportingly thrashing them.
As one Canadian was scraped off the floor by his team-mates, commentator Barry Davies observed ‘Good body check’.
This year's games, however, did not have the human interest of Calgary — Eddie Edwards, the Jamaican bob-sleigh team's reggae single, or the four waiters (coached by their dad) who made up the Mexican bob team.
What did Sportsnight choose to bring us last Tuesday, the third day of Albertville '92?
Bristol Rovers against Liverpool, followed by Celtic Against Dundee United, followed by ice skating.
Hands up all those who turned off when the final whistle went at Parkhead.
Roland White 
Charivari Music
More to Madness than just loony tunes
HEY KIDS!
REMEMBER THIS? baggy trousers
IT'S THE NATURE OF POP music that groups come and go.
A short life and a merry one.
If you can scrape together a few hits and make enough to retire to a little place in the suburbs, you've made the most of the opportunity.
If you can translate the act to the big time of global rock ‘n' roll there's the chance of a lifelong career but it's a deceptively hard trick to pull off.
Ask Madness.
There was a time when Madness seemed like the most durable of British pop bands.
Their heyday lasted for the first five years of the Eighties, when they scored the incredible total of 20 consecutive Top 20 hits.
It was a time when Madness seemed the most immortal of pop bands.
Today, they are a half-forgotten group, long since disbanded, whose name only qualifies for a where-are-they-now status.
The new Divine Madness (Virgin), a definitive collection of Madness hits, tells the story, and somehow it's a melancholy tale.
All the more so because Madness were such a good, unaffected laugh.
Humour in pop is usually a deadly thing, the preserve of the novelty hit, yet Madness seemed able to tickle funny bones from the beginning without causing embarrassment.
They arrived on the coat-tails of the brief interest in ska music at the end of the Seventies with their lively but inconsequential ‘The Prince’ and ‘One Step Beyond’, but they quickly built on their early success with ‘My Girl’and ‘Baggy Trousers’.
These were songs that laced their natural exuberance with a strain of English satire that was remarkable because it seemed so unaffected.
Ray Davies of the Kinks had tried this sort of songwriting before but his laboured and intensely mannered approach smacked only of bourgeois facetiousness.
Madness walked it like they talked it.
‘House Of Fun’ became the first number one hit about the problems of going into a chemist for a packet of condoms and they had plenty of other insights left in them: ‘Blue Skinned Beast’, unfortunately missing from this compilation, is one of the most scathing political tunes which British pop has ever produced, the kind of thing which  has completely disappeared from the contented scene of today.
‘Grey Day’ is a perfect evocation of England going through a very bad patch.
‘Michael Caine’, although disguised, is an oblique look at the troubles in Northern Ireland, and ‘Yesterday's Men’ and ‘Brand New Beat’chronicle a country slipping into darkness with nobody there to turn the lights back on.
That was the trouble with Madness: they got serious.
Having made their name as the most mischievous men in pop, their audience watched uneasily as Madness turned down the corners of their mouths.
Their fourth album,Keep Moving , is one of the masterpieces of British rock in the Eighties but its downbeat tone and ominous tread destroyed their following.
Mike Barson, the man who'd given them most of their best tunes, quit the group, spent.
The group carried on for another album and a few more singles but the charts were changing, and their time was up.
Four of them had another go as The Madness but it didn't work, and suddenly they were gone.
The most enduring band of their time now seem like a memory bound up in a few classic singles and a reputation for ‘nuttiness’.
They seem as ancient now as Monty Python or Bobby Moore.
Their calibre, though, is impossible to deny: listen to the last half of Divine Madness and you'll hear the most consistently pugnacious and provocative music British pop has turned up in the last 15 years.
Richard Cook 
film
Barton is such sweet sorrow
How the Coen Brothers have made a dream out of a nightmare
SOMEHOW, FILMS BY the Coen Brothers aren't quite like the cinema I see every week.
Barton Fink is about a playwright whose success is rewarded by an offer from Hollywood.
His play is about that mythical creature, the common man.
The playwright is acted brilliantly by John Turturro, who has the kind of aloof self-felicitation of a man conscious of his own rare perceptions.
Joel Coen directs, Ethan Coen produces; they co-wrote the script.
When the playwright gets to the rundown Los Angeles hotel in which his social conscience insists he stays, he finds he can't write.
He sits by the hour with three or four words on his typing paper and listens to the noise from the room of a neighbour.
But he doesn't complain.
He is quite glad of the disturbances, especially as the intruder, a salesman, is played with admirable common man-ness by John Goodman.
But is he really a common man?
Suddenly the playwright becomes trapped in a living nightmare, with the man next door, really not so ordinary, providing the action.
It is all spell-binding Gothic stuff: an empty hotel corridor, a fire, a return to realism with the dismissive studio boss, then back to fantasy with the product of Fink's imagination.
You are glued to the screen.
In The Favour, The Watch And The Very Big Fish Bob Hoskins plays a Paris photographer of religious themes who has to find a model for Christ on the cross and comes up with Jeff Goldblum, an ex-convict and former lover of an actress (Natasha Richardson), who he meets at a pornographic dubbing studio.
Unluckily, the model begins to identify himself with his divine original and violence threatens.
I feel Mr Hoskins, whom we all value, is safer in London.
The director is Ben Lewin.
Star Trek VI (PG Empire) has, if nothing else, the comfort of the familiar.
It pursues the hostilities begun in the series 25 years ago and much of the old formula: attempted allegory to political developments on this planet; loud space effects.
Dilys Powell 
Sing Your Hearts Out For The Lads…
Tunes from the terraces
Sailing, Rod Stewart:Adapted by Millwall to ‘No-one likes us, no-one likes us, no-one likes us.
We don't care’ Who could disagree?
Perfect, Fairground Attraction:‘It has to be-ee-ee-ee Celtic’ they sang in a shameless lift of the Asda song
Give Peace A Chance, John Lennon & Yoko Ono:The hirsute duo's anthem became the plaintive ‘All we are saying is give us a goal’
Wandering Star, Lee Marvin:A pugnacious refrain in Manchester Utd's Stretford End: ‘Boots were made for bovver, trains were made to wreck/If you see a City fan, then you break his f***ing neck’
Compiled by John ‘Blue Moon’ Naughton of Q magazine
Agent Orange by Haldane
THE VERY BRITISH AFFAIR I
BRITAIN 1992.
THE WHOLE COUNTRY WAS IN THE GRIP OF ELECTION FEVER
FIFTY QUID AND I'LL CLAIM TO BE THE EX MISTRESS OF THE M.P.
OF YOUR CHOICE, GUV
AH, AGENT ORANGE, GOOD OF YOU TO COME TO M.I.5.
HEADQUARTERS — EXPECT YOU'D LIKE TO KNOW WHY YOU'RE HERE, EH?
WELL IT'S QUITE SIMPLE.
THIS IS ELECTION YEAR AND IT LOOKS LIKE BEING A DAMN CLOSE RUN THING
AND WE KNOW WHAT THAT MEANS — SMEAR CAMPAIGNS, DIRTY FIGHTING, USUAL SORT OF THING
SO WE CONTACTED YOUR DIRTY TRICKS DEPARTMENT AND THEY AGREED TO SEND YOU !!!
SIR I…
DON'T BE MODEST, DEAR CHAP.
YOU COME WITH A FIRST CLASS PEDIGREE
PULLED A FEW STROKES IN CUBA, RUSSIA, KUWAIT, I UNDERSTAND —SO!
HOW DO WE UNDERMINE OUR LABOUR PARTY?
ALL IDEAS GRATEFULLY RECEIVED
BUT WHY ME?
SIMPLE — IF WE GET CAUGHT WE CAN BLAME IT ON THE C.I.A.
SIR, I THINK YOU'VE GOT THE WRONG MAN — I'M NOT OFFICIALLY ASSIGNED TO DIRTY TRICKS.
I DON'T EVEN BELIEVE IN DIRTY TRICKS.
ESPECIALLY DURING ELECTIONS
OH, I'M WITH YOU ALL THE WAY, OLD SON.
CUT AND THRUST OF DEBATE AND ALL THAT…
BUT IF THE DEBATE DOESN'T GO OUR WAY…
…
WE CAN ALWAYS LEAK NEIL KINNOCK'S LONG LOST NEO NAZI LOVE CHILD TO THE NEWSPAPERS 
Charivari theatre
THE NIGHT OF THE IGUANA
EILEEN ATKINS as Hannah Jelkes
ALFRED MOLINA as The Reverend Shannon
We're off to see the lizard
SWEAT, RUM, PASSION — everything at the Costa Verde Hotel contributes to the steamy atmosphere drenching the characters of The Night of the Iguana .
The glistening palm leaves of Bob Crowley's immense, jungly set enclose a tin-roofed veranda where Tennessee William's outcasts are melting from more than the Mexican weather.
Perspiration streams over the nearly-exposed breasts of Maxine Faulk, the hotel proprietress who has just buried her husband and wants to entice Shannon, a former minister, into her bed.
Shannon, constantly mopping her feverish forehead, is, like the giant lizard tied up and thrashing under the floorboards, at the end of his rope, and the party of Texan school teachers he is leading on a ‘tour of God's world’ are incensed about his having put them up in flea-bag hotels and fallen into bed with the teenage student they have brought along.
Not everyone, however, is hot and bothered.
Sweatless, and seemingly bloodless, Hannah Jelkes glides up the steep path through the rain forest, pushing her 97-year-old grandfather in a wheelchair.
He is an itinerant poet, she an executor of quick charcoal character sketches, and their financial situation is as extreme as Hannah's eerie serenity.
Loneliness and death await them, ruin faces Shannon, and the reverend's pronouncement that ‘hysteria is a natural phenomenon’ does not seem unreasonable in the circumstances.
Like the glycerine running in rivers down Maxine's cleavage, though, most of the desperation seems applied for the sake of surface effect rather than expressing emotional or philosophical truth.
This rather static play spreads a minimum of action very thinly over more than three hours, as the characters engage in confession, renunciation, and acceptance of their past lives.
The delicate poetry of the atmosphere William seeks to establish is disrupted not only by that noisily symbolic iguana but by such clumping speeches as Shannon's explanation that his problems began when his mother punished him for masturbating.
And yet, in this last (1961) coherent play Williams managed to write, there is much sharp imagery (‘Miss thin female standing-up Buddha,’ a raving Shannon calls the cool, kimono-clad Hannah) and tenderness for the weak and woebegone.
‘I've never been so tired in all my life,’ sighs the whey-faced spinster, and Williams is wryly sympathetic to her plight: unlike Greta Garbo, who uttered that same line in Grand Hotel , she has no possibility of romantic regeneration.
Not only the indignant schoolmarms but all of  William's sad cases have to learn that you can't be a tourist in God's world, and that you get what you pay for.
Alfred Molina's Shannon comes over as an assemblage of mannerisms rather than a man whose behaviour arises from dissipation and anguish; Frances Barber is too young, too wiry and too busy for the over-ripe Maxine; Robin Bailey, though he believably slips in and out of awareness, is too sturdy for the ancient poet, and he sounds and gestures just like colonel Hall on Sergeant Bilko .
But Eileen Atkins is magical as Hannah, subtly conveying all the character's brisk New England pragmatism, spiritual grace and terror of the physical.
She seems to have a moth-like fragility until, spellbound by the weightless command she exercises in a long, intimate soliloquy, you realise that you are the moth and she the candle.
A MUCH-PRAISED AMERICAN playwright, John Guare has never received his due in this country — not, I think, because his comedies don't appeal to the English sense of humour but because it's difficult for actors here to get across their vision of insane optimism and everyday insanity.
(Seeing Joe Orton's plays in New York, I couldn't understand why English friends thought so much of a self-indulgent, kooky lightweight).
Fifth Floor and Theatre Technis's production of Bosoms And Neglect is a bit too tepid and self-consciously poetic, but, in staging the British première of this play, the companies have shown enterprise and imagination far above their limited resources.
After passing each other silently in their analyst's waiting room for years, Deirdre and Scooper — weird and immature, respectively — get together, though the man-hungry Deirdre is disappointed to learn that Scooper plans, that evening, to run off with his long-time, married mistress: ‘She is so healthy !
She has been going to therapy since she was about two.’
(The woman's husband, he assures Deirdre, will not be alone: ‘We left a letter for him at his group night.
We thought that was the kindest thing to do.’)
This bad timing is typical for Deirdre, who once tried to kill a faithless lover with an ashtray, but succeeded only in setting the hotel room on fire.
Meanwhile, Scooper's blind 83-year-old mother, Henny, whose cancerous breast parallels Scooper's atrophied heart, is in a hospital bed, facing an appalling future (she has cheated death by her refusal to stop talking) but still struggling to get across her philosophy: don't worry about being healthy — just live!
Daniel Bank's production — especially in the acting of Campbell Graham as Scooper — lacks a sense of the aggressive competitiveness that in New York is taken for granted.
(The questions of who is nearer death or in more rigorous therapy become the subjects of virulent debate).
But Eve Pearce is magnificently anguished and smothering as Henny (this is the kind of mother whose ‘I don't want to burden you with my problems’ sounds as convincing as ‘I am not a crook’did when it come from the lips of Richard Nixon), and Debora Weston flutters and fences vivaciously as the girlish killer and literary know-all.
If you've ever wondered what Joan Didion shouts while having an orgasm, she can tell — the names of Herman Melville novels.
Typee !
Omoo !
Rhoda Koenig
MEYRICK JONES
‘Tonight we'll be looking at ways of casually slipping the word ‘proactive’ into everyday conversation’
‘We're all manic depressives.
At the moment I'm Happy, he's Grumpy, he's Happy, so's he, those two are Grumpy, and he's Happy’
‘So you're the one who's been making nuisance calls to Brown Owl’
Charivari Food
Mild and pitta
If only more pubs had a commitment to ale and hearty eating
IF I WAS GOING TO take money from the public for the privilege of sampling my cooking, I would do it in a pub.
There are psychological and financial reasons for this.
Psychological first.
I can't speak for everyone, but whenever I find myself eating in a pub it's usually because raging hunger has overcome the judgement of discriminating palate.
The safest option is often a single, enormous sausage and a side order of disintegrating baked beans.
On the rare occasions when you stumble on a pub whose ‘chef’ has qualifications beyond O-level microwaving, the surprise is so pleasant that you are guaranteed a feel-good eating experience that few established restaurants can match.
The option of drinking properly-pulled pints with your meal is an added bonus.
Financially speaking, the pub offers a chef-proprietor an extremely good deal.
If your pub is owned by a brewery, your lease is going to be a laughable fraction of what you would pay for a prime restaurant site in the same area.
You can serve drinks, even wines and spirits, to people who aren't eating.
And you can live on the premises — with luck, in a bit of style.
These factors explain the smiles on the faces of Mike Belbin And David Eyre, who jointly lease, run, live in and cook at the Eagle pub in Farringdon Road.
‘We're on such a good deal it's a joke,’ David told me.
‘Anyone who is shelling out £200,000 a year for a prime City restaurant site must be crazy.’
I don't know if they're laughing all the way to the bank, but they can certainly afford to get there in a cab.
The value-for-money deal on their premises is happily reflected in the prices they charge for their hearty, rustic, Italian-orientated menu.
The charcoal grill is applied to spicy sausages, T-bone steaks, fresh sardines and the right sort of vegetables.
There's always a hearty soup, such as garlic and cannelli bean or roast pepper and tomato, and plenty of fashionable rabbit food for those who don't want to fall asleep straight after eating.
Two courses will rarely cost you more, and often a fair bit less, than a tenner.
Why aren't there more pubs in London doing this?
But a country pub is where I'd really like to cook.
And if I did half as good a job as Brendan Ansbro and Ruth Watson do at the Fox and Goose in Fressingfield, Suffolk, then I'd be a proud and happy man.
The pub has one of those eccentrically eclectic menus that you might associate with lesser pub food.
Don't be alarmed.
The Chinese-style duck with hoi-sin sauce and pancakes, and the fish and vegetable tempura, are as accurately executed here as by native practitioners in Chinatown or at a Soho sushi bar.
I didn't try the grilled Greek halloumi cheese with pitta bread, but as it passed by on the way to another table I rather wished I had.
Brendan's steak and kidney pudding is definitive.
The suet crust is rich, but has enough air in it to absorb a generous amount of the dark, meaty gravy.
The steak falls apart in your mouth, not on your plate, and the kidneys' tenderness belies the long steaming this champion pudding must have had.
The whole pudding was meant for two, but we couldn't finish it and I took the remainder home.
It ended up serving four generously — the fact that I was three of them was particularly gratifying.
My attempt to follow that with a lemon curd tart was a bit half-hearted.
I was, to use the technical term, completely stuffed.
I enjoyed what little of it I could manage, though.
Perhaps I'll start with it next time.
Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall 
Punchbag
Letter of the week
Could you please expose the scandalous and tasteless way in which the Queen has announced the celebration of her accession 40 years ago?
Quite clearly this was timed to capitalise on the public sympathy caused by the death of Freddie Mercury, singer with the pop group, Queen.
Whoops!
There goes your CBE.
You'll just have to be content with the JB instead.
Booze and babes
May I offer a piece of advice to Carrie Schlegel and other precocious kids writing to your letters page?
As a simple product of British schools I am amazed that the following rather obvious point has not been grasped in America or Botswana:if you put a school address or your age, they don't send you the booze .
The main incentive to write to Punch is lost on these people.
May we offer a piece of advice to people who use W C Fields's nom de plume when writing to our letters page?
If you don't put any address on your letter you stand NO chance of getting the booze
Shaved at last I'm somewhat bewildered by Ken Pyne's cartoon (29 January — 4 February) which shows two bearded castaways — one trying to guess the other's identity.
Even to someone as straight as myself, the bearded gentleman is preferable to Anneka Rice or Judith Chalmers.
There are quite a few love-struck chaps here who don't agree.
Jest a minute
What is Bargepole up to?
Last week (22–28 January) there were jokes, actual jokes, at least three according to my powers of reckoning.
When will he return to the illegible diatribe that the nation has come to expect?
Pretty soon, if you consider that the only gags he feels at home with are the ones that get stuffed in his mouth in the interest of his, er, research.
The Dane and simple truth
In the interests of accuracy, I question your calling Auberon Waugh a ‘once funny memoirist’.
I'm fairly certain that it was twice.
BARGEPOLE
I am now a man of straw.
Everything I own is now to be delivered up to Her Majesty's Inland Revenue.
Unfortunately, I own nothing, as I tried to point out long ago, but there you go.
Nor is it some fiscal dodge.
I simply cannot see the point in having things I don't need.
I am now mobile.
Upwardly so, I suppose, since I have now hit rock bottom.
‘Rock bottom’ sounds nasty, but in fact the whole experience is rather disappointingly painless.
The bad yellow-eyed woman made me take my toothbrush in case I got carted off to pokey.
She said that the secret of a happy prison life was to submit cheerfully to buggery from morning till night, but phooey to that.
I once spent six months as a PR person, and I'm not getting caught twice the same way.
Five quid to anyone who gets the extra joke in there.
Answers on a postcard to the Official Receiver who now has possession of my estate.
Official Receivers tend to be called things like Dolman, Sibley, Chillery, Norris and Pugh.
I wonder if there's someone in Whitehall making up their names.
I have not met the one in possession of my estate, and maybe never will, but I like to think of him as a kindly, white-haired old gentleman with a twinkle in his eye and a bag of humbugs for passing children, a man who has seen the troubles of the world but who remains untainted.
On the other hand, he might be a she, a six-foot redhead, carnal as Messalina, who Officially Receives dressed in severe fitted bombazine beneath which satin, silk and latex play their susurrant music to torment the newly-indigent.
I do not know.
Perhaps I do not even care; I don't know that, either.
What I do know is that The Da completely missed the point, as usual.
The old darling is the intellectual equivalent of a Cruise missile.
Every sentence begins ‘The whole point is this,’ proceeds doggedly towards the target, then veers off at the last moment and explodes harmlessly in the undergrowth.
It's got worse since he took up golf again.
Perhaps the swing sends the blood rushing to his brain and it gets over-enriched and out of kilter.
Anyway, he rang up the following day and said ‘Hear you've gone bust.
Seems a good idea on the whole,but whatever you do , don't go writing to that ruddy man at the tax office any more or you'll get his back up.’
Oh dear.
The whole point is in fact that ruddy man at the tax office's claws have been drawn, and the condition of his back is now between him and members of the chiropractic profession.
My only regret is that he didn't turn up at court to watch his Pyrrhic victory.
I wish he had.
I could have told him that he has been elected an honorary member of the Academy Club drinking school run by Oofy Prosser and Stephen Hargrave, in recognition of his services to literature.
If anyone still has his number, they can ring him up and tell him so.
Second Wednesday of the month.
The champagne is on me.
But I don't want any other civil servants turning up.
They seem to be a strangely ugly, ill-nourished lot, rather like the subhuman race in The Rime Machine who lived underground and fed upon the Beautiful People up above.
The one who turned up to preside over my fiscal destruction was particularly dismal, a desolately unattractive woman in a pink cardie who looked like a sitting duck for household cleanser advertisements.
I bet her kitchen floor is surgically sterile.
At the first hearing, she had a gloomy, slit-mouthed sidekick with the worst case of acne I've seen since I gave up computer programming, but this time he wasn't there.
Perhaps his face came off.
Or perhaps he cheered up and they had to get rid of him.
The incipient bankrupts were almost as bad.
They sat along one wall by unspoken consent, like a school dance: a grey-haired man in a grey anorak with a once-brutal face now cowed by misery into a sort of gentleness; an Asian couple, he in a leather jacket, resigned, she pretty and solicitous; another grey-haired man who looked as though defeat was what he was born for; a bearded man with a red scarf, lips twitching as he rehearsed things to say, things which would not help.
It was too late for any of them apart from the Asian couple.
They would be all right; the men would not.
The registrar was waiting down the corridor with the tools of his trade, an exercise book and a fountain pen, and that would be that.
And the Guinness trial of Roger Seelig was abandoned because he was ‘depressed and anxious’.
And the new boss of Burton, Laurence Cooklin, has been sacked after 15 months with a £773,00 pay-off, with more to come.
And Mr Stephen Dorrell is still Minister of Health.
And the sandwich man is now boss of Granada.
Thinking of them, I remembered the sad grey men and the sleek lawyers.
All I can say is that if Mr Kinnock fancies a bankrupt's vote, he can have mine, and be welcome to it.
Pick of Punch
Laughter from the archives
February 20th 1980 :Blazing a trail for the sex guides now commonplace in every newspaper in the country, Punch devised the prophetic At It  magazine …
INSIDE WEEK ONE OF AT IT MAGAZINE;:
The Looks That Say ‘What About It?’
They say that actions speak louder than words.
What does it mean when man gazes into a woman's eyes, then lets his gaze drop to her cleavage?
If a woman holds a man's hand as he lights her cigarette and strokes him behind the knees with her foot, is it a secret sign?
Can women by hypnotised on the Tube?
Does touching your ear-lobe mean ‘I'm yours?’
Each week At It will unlock the secrets of the gestures we all make and explain why some women are powerless after a well-timed shrug.
Having An Affair
Why do some men find it easier to get along with big-busted, mindless blondes?
Does a children's party or a loved-one's funeral inhibit the urge to chat up new acquaintances?
At It reveals all — in full colour!
Forming A Relationship
We usually expect a marriage to last — yet things can change!
Sometimes, when one or the other partner grows obscenely fat, goes mad, is obsessed by TV or joins a monastery, the temptation to find ‘a bit on the side’ can be very compelling.
Why does this happen?
Are people who work with strippers especially at risk?
Every week At It will present a feature on extra-marital affairs — coming soon: coping with a bisexual window cleaner on roller skates.
February 20th, 1920:It was on this date that Adolf Hitler gave up painting and became spokesman for the newly-formed Nazi Party.
Keen to dissuade other aspiring painters from such a course, Punch celebrated the heroic struggle of the artist…
Caption Competition
WINNERS
Number 1148
ACTUALLY, I'VE PUT BOTH FEET IN ONE KNICKER LEG
1881 Caption — Mamma (to Mabel, who has expressed a desire to see the boundary of Sussex and Surrey).
‘Now Mabel, you are in Sussex.’
Mabel (disappointed).
‘It is not pink!’
I'M A BIT NERVOUS, I'VE NEVER HAD TO MAKE A WITHDRAWAL FROM THE SPERM BANK BEFORE
1938 Caption —‘And do I put in one for the urn?’