

Historical Background
Biographical summaries
The Prelude as autobiography
My life is in my writings.
WORDSWORTH
A chronological table can only give us the bare outlines of a life: one asks three questions.
How much do the facts listed really tell us?
And, even if they are an adequate summary of the externals of time and chance to which all are subject, what about the inner life?
Finally, what, in retrospect, did the person who lived that life consider had happened during its course?
In the case of William Wordsworth we are fortunate in possessing his own very full account of the first part of his life, roughly down to the mid-1790s, in the ‘Poem’ addressed to Coleridge which we now know as The Prelude .
We shall be considering The Prelude as a poem at the appropriate point in the Critical Survey; for the moment I propose to refer to it simply as evidence of Wordsworth's internal struggles and preoccupations, as if it were a diary or a letter to a friend which just happens to be in verse.
Wordsworth tells us that he wrote The Prelude in order to give an account of the growth of his mind, which may help to account for the inclusion of some of the stranger incidents.
The poem may be read through quickly by a newcomer to the study of Wordsworth, but it would be foolish to pretend that there are no difficulties.
It is not always easy to follow what the poet is trying to tell us, even when we understand the words on the page: he was conscious of the problem himself, as in the famous (and, dare I say, quite charming lines)—
There are two parts of his life to which he devotes a great deal of space, and to which he returns again and again.
The first is his education: we find in the first two books of The Prelude those experiences which Wordsworth regarded as formative.
The second was his residence in France during the French Revolution: this direct encounter with the main movement of the age led Wordsworth into constant political agony and debate, and it is significant that one of the main characters in The Excursion , his other long poem, is the Solitary, a despondent figure disillusioned by the failure of the Revolution.
In this chapter we shall begin by examining these concerns in some detail.
Wordsworth concludes The Prelude with tributes to his sister Dorothy, and to S. T. Coleridge, both of whom, in their different ways, helped him to resolve the personal crisis into which the events of the 1790s had led him, and I have given a short biography of each.
There follow some accounts of Wordsworth by people who knew him, mainly in later life, as a way of pointing up, and perhaps correcting, the poet's own version of himself.
Education
Wordsworth was an intelligent and highly educated man: he was a learned, clever, even a witty poet.
This catalogue of adjectives needs to be frequently declaimed and asserted, even in the teeth of what most people will call ‘the evidence’.
The trouble is that the evidence is misleading: in the poetry of his maturity the pose of simplicity is assumed, and Wordsworth refers to book-learning as a poor substitute for Nature's revelations; Science and Art are ‘barren leaves’—
In the early books of The Prelude Wordsworth repeatedly tells us that natural objects are most important in forming the mind of the child, and hardly any polite references are made to the curriculum at Hawkshead Grammar School and Cambridge University.
As a result the impression has grown up that Wordsworth was rather a simple soul — an impression aided and abetted by the maid at Rydal Mount, who told visitors that her master's study was ‘in the fields’.
In the late 1790s and early 1800s, when the poems mentioned above were written, Wordsworth was trying to justify and illustrate educational theories ultimately derived from books like Rousseau's Émile (see page 75).
Children were to be brought up in accordance with Nature; when describing the progress of little Basil Montagu in 1796 Dorothy says:
Moral impressions were to be associated with enduring things such as lakes and mountains, for so Wordsworth and Coleridge interpreted the philosopher Hartley's system of the association of ideas (see p. 80).
In the poem Frost at Midnight Coleridge announced that his child Hartley was to be educated according to this theory, and Wordsworth, in writing about his own childhood, makes out a case that he was an example of the same process:The Prelude describes Wordsworth's  formative years from this point of view, and though the facts may be correct, the selection and emphasis of the facts is open to question.
We might say that Wordsworth has slanted his autobiography to fit a theory; in doing so he denied his own high academic attainment.
In fact he was one of the intellectual élite; none of his contemporaries ever thought that Wordsworth was ill-educated.
The fury of the critics was directed at the intellectual poet who wrote deliberately like a simpleton in the Lyrical Ballads and the Poems of 1807.
If Wordsworth had been a simple country boy, they could have patronized him; the Johnsonian style of the Preface to Lyrical Ballads showed that he could write like the gentlemanly reviewers if he wanted to, and nothing is more infuriating than one of our own sort who ‘lets the side down’.
Wordsworth's earliest reading is remarkably similar to that of Charles Dickens; it consisted of folk-stories and eighteenth-century novelists, works of imagination rather than of fact.
He refers to Robin Hood, Jack the Giant Killer, St George, and the Arabian Nights.
His father's library was open to him and we are told that his ‘father set him very early to learn portions of the works of the best English poets by heart, so that at a very early age he could repeat large portions of Shakespeare, Milton, and Spenser’.
In his Autobiographical Memoranda Wordsworth remembers first of all his freedom to read at Hawkshead:
Hawkshead Grammar School was at the highest point of its reputation when Wordsworth arrived; boys were sent to it from all over the north-west of England and even from Scotland.
From 1782 to 1786 the headmaster was William Taylor, who seems to have been responsible for directing Wordsworth's attention to poetry.
In its curriculum the school concentrated on mathematics and science; there were courses in algebra, geometry and Newtonian physics.
This was unusual in schools at this time, for the classical languages were pre-eminent.
Wordsworth received a ‘good grounding’ in the classics, but the object of the intensive mathematical training was to prepare him for success at Cambridge University.
When Wordsworth arrived at St John's College, with which his school had strong connections, he found that he was already in advance of his fellow-students in the basic requirements for the first year's work.
In mathematics he was clearly one year ahead , and was immediately awarded a Founder's scholarship and two small exhibitions — and this at St John's College which was noted at this time for its academic distinction.
Obviously Wordsworth's performance in his studies at school must have been outstanding for him to have started off at Cambridge with such a lead, and it is hardly  surprising that in the college examination in 1787 he was placed in the first class.
The road to academic distinction now lay open.
His guardian uncles intended him for an academic career, and his brother Christopher, presumably of similar intelligence and attainment, later became Master of Trinity.
The way was also clear to holy orders and advancement in the Church; this was never of much appeal to Wordsworth, who regarded compulsory chapel as an abomination.
In fact he took neither course; in his own account — in The Prelude — he gives the impression of a drifter, ‘detached from academic cares’, and he tells us that he ‘did not love…our scholastic studies’.
He dropped to second class in the examinations of June 1788, and after that was unplaced.
He chose not to read for a fellowship and once it became clear that he was no longer in the race for academic honours he was not required to take all the examinations.
Some critics, arguing from the cases of Blake and Keats, have assumed that a ‘Romantic’ poet would obviously be hostile to the demands of a university dominated by the influence of Newton.
In fact Wordsworth liked geometry; he describes the ‘pleasure gathered from the elements /Of geometric science’(Prelude 1805 vi, 135–87), and in the famous dream in Book V of The Prelude the two things to be saved from the impending Deluge are ‘Poetry and Geometric Truth’.
Furthermore, the window of his college bedroom was cherished in his memory because it enabled him to see the Antechapel of Trinity College,
The simplest explanation lies in his greater ability, his superiority over his contemporaries, and his wider interests.
Because he was so far ahead in his first year, he spent his time on other things.
He says modestly that he ‘got into rather an idle way’, but Wordsworth's way of ‘idling’ offers little comfort to those who might consider him as a precedent for their own incapacity.
He seems, on his own initiative, to have put himself through an extensive course of classics, modern languages and English literature, a combination of subjects that it was not then possible to offer at any university.
Dorothy reported to a friend that ‘he reads Italian, Spanish, French, Greek, Latin, and English, but never opens a mathematical book’.
If anything, he was more bookish and intellectual than many of his fellow-students who were pursuing with success the required courses of study.
He was already determined to be a poet — between 1787 and 1789 he had composed An Evening Walk — and part of the aim of his 1790 long vacation walking-tour was to gather the material which was to form the basis of Descriptive Sketches .
These, his two earliest publications, are aimed at an educated public, and are, if anything, too clever, and give too much evidence of extensive reading, being full of reminiscences of earlier poetry.
Wordsworth had to learn to be simple.
The pass degree which Wordsworth received in 1791 was hardly fair evidence of his abilities.
He had, in his own way, educated himself beyond the requirements of the university system.
He continued to read voraciously throughout the 1790s, and there seems no reason to doubt Coleridge's belief that Wordsworth was eminently equipped to write philosophical poetry.
Political experience and change of attitude
In the late eighteenth century the British parliamentary system was still unreformed, and could in no sense be described as democratic.
Even though two parties had emerged, those who called themselves Tories or Whigs were more often guided by the interests of their family or their pocket than by loyalty to political principles.
The real power lay outside the House of Commons, in the hands of a few rich magnates and aristocratic landowners.
Wordsworth's native region provides a good example.
The western half of Cumberland was part of the preserve of the Lowthers, or Earls of Lonsdale.
In the 1760s Sir James Lowther (1736–1802) owned large estates in the area and treated the industrial port of Whitehaven as a family investment.
He had married the daughter of Lord Bute, who was First Lord of the Treasury, and therefore Prime Minister (1762–3).
Soon nine seats in the House of Commons were in his gift: his M.P.s were referred to in Parliament as ‘Sir James's ninepins’.
One of these seats, or ‘pocket-boroughs’, was the small country town of Cockermouth, where William Wordsworth was born.
Sir James needed a man to run his political affairs, to manage the undercover campaigns of entertainment and bribery.
He chose Wordsworth's father, John, probably because Richard Wordsworth had held a similar position a generation before.
John is described as a ‘law-agent’, but at election time, as the Lowthers were usually   against the Whigs, ‘Tory agent’ would be a more accurate title.
Sir James set John Wordsworth up in the largest house in the High Street of Cockermouth, and later gave him the office of Coroner of Millom.
John moved in with his eighteen-year-old bride in 1766, and kept up an appearance of middle-class solvency.
How he was able to do this is a mystery, for he never seems to have been paid by Lowther, not even for the necessary expenses of entertainment called for by an election campaign.
In addition to financial worries the job was not a pleasant one: in spite of many years of apparent conviviality, Dorothy realized after her father's death that ‘he had not one real friend’.
Thirty-five years later, in 1818, William Wordsworth was helping the new Lord Lonsdale, Sir William Lowther, in the Westmorland elections.
It would be a good idea, he pointed out to the noble lord, to buy a large freehold estate and divide it into twelve, creating twelve new freeholders who would be entitled to a vote each because of the property qualification; he hastened to add that he would personally make sure that only suitable Tory adherents were thus enfranchised.
A superficial observer of this piece of jobbery might well be forgiven for commenting: ‘like father, like son’.
But Wordsworth had not simply inherited his father's position.
In the interval he had travelled to the extreme Left wing of English politics at that time, and swung back again to the Right with vigour and determination.
Cynics have observed that Wordsworth's detestation of aristocracy and love of democracy coincide with the elder Lord Lonsdale's refusal to pay John Wordsworth's accumulated salary to the Wordsworth children:
Wordsworth's birthplace, Cockermouth
But after 1802, when the new Lord Lonsdale agreed to pay the money over, Wordsworth discovered the admirable nature of a feudal and paternalistic society!
‘I now perceive many advantages in our present complex system of representation, which formerly eluded my observation’Letter to James Losh , 1821.
Wordsworth's changing of sides has always laid him open to this sort of comment; later generations of poets regarded him as a moral coward or a fallen idol, attitudes best summed up in the first stanza of Robert Browning's poem The Lost Leader :
But a close examination of the facts makes such a simple reaction difficult to justify.
Wordsworth's ‘swing to the Left’ may be regarded as part of a general sympathy on the part of English intellectuals towards the French Revolution, and it is extremely unlikely that he was ever regarded as a leader of opinion.
In the next chapters we shall see that  Wordsworth's political ideas run parallel to and are often interwoven with his philosophical and religious beliefs; from whichever aspect we view it, the same pattern of development emerges, though which element is providing the motivation remains obscure.
It is interesting that in his later years Wordsworth regarded himself as a statesman as much as a poet; he certainly annoyed his womenfolk by talking politics incessantly with Robert Southey, though one might have expected two writers to bore the company with literary theory.
The plain fact is, surely, that Wordsworth was intensely politically conscious all his life; he may have changed sides, but he never lost interest in the battle.
He is indeed ‘the most political of all our poets’ and this is hardly surprising when we remember that he grew up in an age of Revolution.
We can only speculate on Wordsworth's political beliefs before 1792 — in The Prelude he attributes his awakening to a French soldier, Beaupuy —(see below).
But there is some evidence of his association with liberals at Cambridge which must be mentioned briefly at this point, since it seems rather unlikely that he would have visited France in 1790 and again in 1791–2 if he had no sympathy with what was going on there.
It is significant that he studied Italian at Cambridge under Agostino Isola.
Isola was a Milanese liberal who had been found in possession of an English book, and therefore banished, since England had been regarded on the Continent as a ‘revolutionary’ country ever since 1688.
Coming to England as a political refugee, he had originally worked for Thomas Gray, the poet, who, as Professor of History, was responsible for modern languages in the University.
Cambridge also contained a strong ‘republican’ group at this time, and while there is no proof that Wordsworth joined them at the University we find that he freely associated with ex-Cambridge liberals after his  return from France in 1793.
It seems reasonable to suppose that even before 1790 he would have learned to appreciate their attitudes towards recent history.
We have already noticed that England was considered a very advanced and progressive country by European standards.
The English had removed the head of a king as early as 1649, and the Glorious Revolution of 1688 could be interpreted as an example of Rousseau's ‘general will’ of the people triumphing over the Divine Right of Kings.
This was one of the reasons why Wordsworth and Jones were welcomed by the French in 1790 —
Political reality in England, as we have seen, did not exactly square with this European idealization.
The English liberals studied their seventeenth-century predecessors with great attention — Wordsworth frequently refers with enthusiasm to Milton and Algernon Sidney — but for them the land of the free was on the other side of the Atlantic.
The American Rebellion and War of Independence (1775–82) were seen by the British Left as the first stages of the liberation of England.
It was Tom Paine, an English radical, who encouraged the Americans to break the link with the crown and declare a republic.
But support for the Americans came from a wider section of the English people than the intellectuals: the presence of discharged and wounded soldiers created a loathing of war itself on humanitarian grounds.
This is seen in two characters in Wordsworth's early poems.
The Female Beggar in An Evening Walk — the first of Wordsworth's deserted women — laments for her soldier ‘Asleep on Bunker's charnel hill afar’, and the Female Vagrant, having followed her husband across the Atlantic, loses him and her children and is reduced to destitution.
The Gordon Riots (1780, described by Dickens in Barnaby Rudge ), in which the London mob sacked the houses of Catholics and released the inhabitants of Bedlam, frightened all sections of English society.
(This helps to explain why so many English liberals ceased to support France when they heard that Paris had been taken over by the ‘mob’ in 1793.)
The first stages of the French Revolution seemed to be more obviously under reasonable management and it was assumed that the French would set up some sort of parliamentary government under the control of gentlemen.
When the Bastille fell in 1789 a wave of euphoria swept over Europe; William Blake, blending together millennial hopes and biblical imagery, demonstrates the emotional release provided by the success of two revolutions accomplished overseas and the hope of a third to follow in England itself:
Wordsworth recognized this mood of elation when he landed at Calais with Robert Jones on 13 July 1790:
Everywhere on their journey through France they found the people mad with celebration, for the king had agreed to observe the new constitution:
This long vacation tour provided the material for the poem Descriptive Sketches , which concludes with a rousing cry for the spread of Liberty, presumably by means of war and revolution.
But it is also important to remember that the object of the 1790 visit was really Switzerland, traditionally the land of liberty; Wordsworth never retracted his belief in the ideals of Switzerland, which helps to explain why, when France threatened Swiss independence in the late 1790s, it was necessary for him to make a decisive choice.
Wordsworth returned to France in November 1791 to find himself in ‘a theatre, of which the stage/Was busy with an action far advanced’(Prelude 1805, ix, 93–4).
The king had tried to flee the country in June 1791, and had been ignominiously brought back under guard.
He was regarded as a traitor.
The Revolutionary leaders in the capital were divided into two main groups — the Girondins, under Brissot, who  were supported by merchants and the middle classes, and the Jacobins, under Danton, Marat and Robespierre, who were supported by the sansculottes (the clerks and artisans of Paris).
In the newly elected Legislative Assembly, which Wordsworth visited, the Girondins led by Brissot were in control.
Robespierre had to make his speeches in the Jacobin Club, as he was not eligible for election to the Assembly.
Wordsworth had some idea of what was going on, as he had prepared himself for this second visit by reading pamphlets, and probably had a letter of introduction to Brissot; but at first he was only sentimentally affected by the ideals of the Revolution.
He stayed in Paris for a week, and spent the time looking at paintings and collecting souvenirs — a stone from the Bastille, for example; yet on his arrival in Orleans he met officers and members of Royalist clubs.
This contradiction did not seem to matter, for he was as 
There was a lull in the progress of the Revolution, and for a little time Wordsworth associated with those sections of society where ‘politics’ were not discussed.
Yet Wordsworth tells us that he was by upbringing and inclination a natural Democrat (Prelude 1805, ix, 217 ff).
His conversion to the wholehearted support of the Revolution was the result of his admiration for Captain Michel Beaupuy, who took upon himself Wordsworth's political education.
So that, Wordsworth tells us,
Wordsworth was so moved that he became ‘a Patriot’, that is, a Republican, and from that time, he says,
With some people this might be mere bravado, but when Wordsworth was on his way back to England he seems to have lingered in Paris far longer than was necessary, and possibly considered active participation in practical politics (Prelude 1805, x, 129 ff).
Wordsworth sided with the Girondins, who were still in control of the Assembly, and had declared war on Austria and Prussia in April 1792 to spread the Revolution abroad.
But the sansculottes were capable of independent action; in August they had seized the king, and in September, fearing the advancing armies might use the prisoners in the Paris prisons, they began to murder them (September Massacres).
By the end of the year the country had become a republic and the king was on trial for his life; the Girondins were losing their command of the situation, and some critics have seen Wordsworth's departure from the scene at this point as evidence that he foresaw their fall from power (which took place in the summer of 1793).
Certainly he hated Robespierre and the Jacobins, and his subsequent disillusionment with the course of the Revolution makes sense if he is seen as an exiled Girondin.
One should always bear in mind that he never went back on his sympathy for the early stages of the Revolution, and his statement in 1821, at the height of his Toryism, when he was accused of deserting France, has its own indestructible logic: ‘You have been deluded by places and persons, while I have stuck to principles.
I abandoned France and her rulers when they abandoned Liberty, gave themselves up to tyranny, and endeavoured to enslave the world.’
Shortly after his arrival in England, Wordsworth found himself in an impossible moral position.
England and France were now at war.
For a while Wordsworth retained his loyalty to the Girondin leaders of France, though this meant that he was in English eyes a ‘Jacobin', that is, a revolutionary extremist who had actually visited the infected country twice.
Wordsworth, for his part, longed to hear of British defeats:
Provoked by a sermon issued in January 1793 entitled The Wisdom and Goodness of God in having made both Rich and Poor , which was an attack on the French Revolution by Richard Watson, Bishop of Llandaff, Wordsworth countered with A Letter to the Bishop of Llandaff on the Extraordinary Avowal of his Political Principles…by A Republican .
But his publisher persuaded him that it was not wise to print such an open attack on the Government.
It is ironical that Watson had at first supported the Revolution and then changed his mind.
For as the Girondins fell from power and the Reign of Terror began Wordsworth felt that the ideals of the Revolution  had been betrayed (Prelude 1805, x, 308–61).
He was glad that the French had driven back the invading foreign armies, but this was no real comfort to the conflict in his mind.
He still hoped that the Revolution would bring forth some good result, but could not suppress his fears:
In fact he was identifying himself with his Girondin friends who were guillotined by the Jacobins in October and November 1793; although the story that Wordsworth visited France at this time to take help to the Girondins may be untrue, this is clearly what he would have wished to do if an opportunity had arisen.
In July 1794 the death of Robespierre brought a feeling of relief (Prelude 1805, x, 536 ff).
Wordsworth returned to his former trust in France, and thought of the British Tory government as ‘vermin' (Prelude 1805, x, 655); but when the French began to take away the liberty of other countries, Wordsworth saw that there was little to choose between the French and any other conquering nation (Prelude 1805, x, 792 ff).
De Selincourt, the editor of The Prelude , dates this phase as early as the end of 1794; after this time Wordsworth sought refuge in philosophy (see Godwin, p. 77) and had to be virtually nursed back to mental and moral stability by Dorothy amid rural surroundings.
Wordsworth and Coleridge were further alienated from France by Napoleon's campaigns of conquest; the subjugation of Switzerland in 1798 — Liberty suppressing Liberty — was the crowning irony which confirmed Wordsworth's group in their suspicions of Napoleon.
We must of course remember that many English liberals continued to support Napoleon — see Gillray's cartoon of English liberals incensed by the naval victories of Nelson; one of these, William Hazlitt, was so amazed at the change in Wordsworth and Coleridge that he accused them, later, of swinging over ‘as on a pivot, to the unclean side’.
But the movement to the Right took far longer than this implies; Wordsworth continued to admire Charles James Fox, the Whig leader, although Fox was in favour of making peace with   Napoleon, but after visiting France in 1802 Wordsworth could not stomach the Whigs as a party.
He watched them rushing through Calais on their way to pay court to Napoleon (Sonnet: ‘Is it a reed that's shaken by the wind ’), and decided, since he regarded the French leader as a despot and a menace to free institutions, that the only course open was to support that party in England which wanted to continue the war, namely the Tories.
His patriotism became inflamed (Poems Dedicated to National Independence and Liberty ) and when Napoleon crowned himself Emperor, he shared the disgust of Beethoven, who tore out the dedication of the Eroica symphony.
Wordsworth felt that the wheel had indeed come full circle or rather, to use his own expression, that France was like a ‘dog/Returning to his vomit’(Prelude 1805, x, 935).
He continued to support the Tories through the very difficult war years, and after 1815 seems to have felt that any popular demonstration or movement towards parliamentary reform would be the prelude to an English Revolution which would, in turn, throw up a ‘Napoleon’ to tyrannize over the British people.
After receiving a government post (in 1813) he seems to have felt bound to repay the debt of obligation by political services, especially at election times.
There seems no point in pretending that he was reluctant to serve the Tory Party in this way, though it added to his unpopularity with the younger Liberals.
To the new generation of Romantics he appeared to have become a fossilized appendage of a backward-looking Establishment, which was already, in 1815, in the process of restoring the eighteenth-century dynasties to the thrones of Europe, so that the French Revolution might never have taken place.
Wordsworth's later views on home affairs will be more appropriately discussed at the end of Chapter 2.
In foreign affairs he was always a consistent supporter of the principle of national sell-determination —‘The nations shall be great and free’(Sonnet: Sept. 1802; Near Dover ).
This goes back to his championing of Switzerland; in 1809 he tried to challenge the Government with a tract On the Convention of Cintra .
He considered that the Spanish nationalists had been betrayed, and the tract soon develops into an argument about nationalist aspiration —
At a much later stage he produced three sonnets about Italian freedom (At Bologna, In Remembrance of the Late Insurrections, 1837 ).
One of the difficulties about snap judgments of the later Wordsworth is that the revolutionary in him would not lie down and die.
Macaulay, the Whig historian, reviewing The Prelude in 1850, was shocked at what he found: we must remember that the book was not published until after Wordsworth's death, and had the effect of a carefully nurtured time-bomb.
Macaulay found The Prelude ‘to the last degree Jacobinical, indeed Socialist’: the linking of words that look far   back into the past and equally far forward into the future shows that from the point of view of the Whig benches at any rate, Wordsworth's politics were lamentably consistent.
Dorothy Wordsworth and her Journals
Dorothy was born in 1771, and was about a year and a half younger than William Wordsworth.
When their mother died in 1778 she was sent away to Halifax, to stay with her mother's cousin, Miss Elizabeth Threlkeld, for nine years; she then lived at Penrith with her grand-parents, seeing William for only a short time, and from 1789 to 1794 was away from the Lake District again, in the care of her uncle and aunt at Forncett in Norfolk.
Brother and sister were not therefore reunited until later in that year when they lived at Windy Brow, Keswick —‘We find our own food.
Our breakfast and supper are of milk, and our dinner chiefly of potatoes and we drink no tea.’
Dorothy's liking for long country walks upset the neighbours and her aunt tried to intervene; Dorothy replied that her brother's virtues were ‘sufficient protection’.
In October 1795 they settled together at Racedown Lodge, Dorset, a house which had been offered them rent-free by a Bristol family, the Pinneys.
‘We plant cabbages,’ said Wordsworth in a letter, ‘and if retirement in its full perfection be as powerful in working transformations as one of Ovid's gods, you may perhaps suspect that into cabbages we shall be transformed.’
Retirement and Dorothy's influence did in fact restore Wordsworth after the period of revolutionary storm and stress.
After this time they were never really separated for any long period, and the course of Dorothy's life can be regarded as the same as Wordsworth's.
They went to Germany together in 1798 and to Calais in 1802.
After Wordsworth's marriage she continued to live in the same house; in 1829 she became seriously ill, suffering from arteriosclerosis.
Soon her mental health began to deteriorate, and after 1835 there were few lucid intervals; nevertheless she outlived her brother and died in 1855.
Napoleon I on the Imperial Throne, by Ingres, 1806
Her monument consists of her Journals, which record the ordinary   details of day-to-day life with her brother and help us to understand how the poems were created, for frequently the first idea for a poem is to be found in them.
The most important records are the Alfoxden Journal (1798) and the Grasmere Journals (1800–3), but there are also accounts of the tours and visits which the Wordsworths made — not all these are complete, though, and the Hamburg Journal (1798) breaks off shortly after their arrival in Germany.
Dorothy began the Alfoxden Journal with an entry which one editor, H. Eigerman, has printed in free verse as if it were an Imagist poem:
We know that Wordsworth thought highly of this entry, for he began to copy it into a notebook, and used its phrases in a fragment of poetry:
Dorothy went on with her Journal at his request.
The observations of the moon are particularly remarkable, for example: ‘January 25th…
She sailed along, followed by multitudes of stars, small, and bright, and sharp’.
And when we read ‘March 23rd.
Coleridge dined with us.
He brought his ballad finished’, we hardly need to be reminded that The Rime of the Ancient Mariner ,Christabel , and other poems were being written at this time.
Coleridge also kept notebooks which parallel Dorothy's Journals in their observation of nature.
The impression of the Grasmere Journals is less literary; William is seen as a person enjoying retirement, occupied in his garden or in ‘rural pursuits’.
Although the Wordsworths are not well off they are charitable to the really poor, the beggars and the wanderers.
The following entry is taken at random, but illustrates this well.
We also see the Wordsworths as part of a community of neighbours, and Dorothy is good at recording details of people and of local speech:
Sometimes these meetings with strangers become the material for a poem by Wordsworth, for example, 10 June 1800 (Beggars ); 3 October 1800 (Resolution and Independence ); 15 April 1802 (I wandered lonely as a cloud ), and so do the narratives of other people's experiences which Dorothy records:
In the poem,Alice Fell (see Critical Survey, p. 118), this is transformed into an experience in which Wordsworth takes the place of Mr Graham.
A similar change of person takes place in The Solitary Reaper , whose song was originally heard by Mr Wilkinson (of the Spade sonnet).
Some people have felt that this borrowing from Dorothy and others shows a certain egotism on Wordsworth's part, but it was his method as an artist to absorb things into himself, and think of them for a long period before writing them down; nor is it necessary to maintain, in any case, that the ‘I’ of a Wordsworth poem is necessarily the poet himself — it may stand as a universal shorthand symbol with which the reader can equally identify.
The Journals also contain accounts of literary composition:
Again we notice that the initial stimulus comes from a memory of Dorothy's.
The poems may almost be considered as examples of literary collaboration, and, though her own attempts at verse were not successful, the originality and freshness of perception in the Journals and her letters make a clear case for assessing her as a ‘poet’ in her own right.
Collaboration with Coleridge
Samuel Taylor Coleridge, more simply S.T.C., was born in 1772, the tenth child of a Devonshire clergyman; he was educated at Christ's Hospital in London and then at Jesus College, Cambridge.
After a curious military episode — he ran away from Cambridge to join the 15th Dragoons — he arrived in Bristol in 1795 full of plans to establish a new system of society, called Pantisocracy; this word is explained on p. 80, but what it meant in practice was the rather grandiose idea of founding a new American colony.
One of the partners in the scheme was Robert Southey, at that time a poet and rebel against established ideas like Coleridge himself; married couples were needed for the venture, which of course fell through, leaving Coleridge rather unsuitably married to Southey's sister-in-law.
He first met Wordsworth in 1795 and corresponded with him thereafter; meanwhile he dedicated himself to Left-wing political and religious propaganda, writing and lecturing in provincial towns.
He had written The Fall of Robespierre , a verse drama, with Southey in 1794, and published Poems on Various Subjects in 1796, the year in which his first son, Hartley Coleridge, was born.
At that time, like Wordsworth, he had no career, and depended on the generosity of friends; he had planned to live quietly in the country, but by the middle of 1797 was already beginning to get bored with rural solitude.
On June 5th of that year he suddenly appeared at Racedown —‘he did not keep to the high road, but leaped over a gate and bounded down the pathless field’.
The description might be an allegory of Coleridge's journey through life.
After staying for three weeks at Racedown, Coleridge invited the Wordsworths to his cottage at Nether Stowey, Somerset; their visit coincided with that of Charles Lamb (see Coleridge's poem This Lime-Tree Bower My Prison ).
Living in close proximity in such a small cottage may have caused difficulties; one gathers that Coleridge's domestic arrangements included benevolent toleration of mice, whom he had not the heart to kill.
But the Wordsworths' desire to continue the acquaintance was so strong that on July 14th they rented Alfoxden House, in a village three miles off.
Racedown seems to have been given up without regret; what was important was ‘Coleridge's society’.
Alfoxden was not a cottage, but a country house with considerable room for visitors.
When John Thelwall, a well-known democrat and agitator, who had recently been on trial for treason, happened to call and then decided to stay for some time, the strange community fell under suspicion.
The Home Office sent a detective to report on the movements of ‘the French people’— they were assumed to be foreign as they did not have a Somerset accent.
(It is all very much the same story as D. H. Lawrence's persecution in Cornwall during the First World War.)
At first the spy thought he had stumbled on something worth investigating: Wordsworth carried a telescope, and Coleridge was surveying the river (he was in fact making notes for a projected long poem,The Brook ); furthermore, Coleridge's oft-repeated references to ‘Spy Nosy’ were assumed by the Home Office spy to be aimed at him personally — he had presumably never heard of Spinoza, the philosopher of the moment.
In the year July 1797 to June 1798 Coleridge produced most of the verse for which he is now remembered, including Kubla Khan ,Christabel , and The Ancient Mariner — for which Wordsworth suggested the albatross and the theme of the guilty wanderer which had so often appeared in his own recent work.
Meanwhile Wordsworth wrote all the poems, with the exception of Tintern Abbey , which subsequently appeared in the first volume of Lyrical Ballads .
In Dorothy's Alfoxden Journal (20 January — 22 May 1798) there is plenty of evidence of the interaction of the three minds in the creation of poetry.
At the same time a revolution in mental attitudes was taking place: like Wordsworth, Coleridge was disillusioned by Napoleon's  conquests.
Frightened by the threat of invasion (Fears in Solitude ), he was beginning that slide or jump to the Right which angered and puzzled his liberal associates, though it is fair to say that his revolutionary sympathies, unlike Wordsworth's, had never been more than superficial.
‘I have snapped my squeaking baby-trumpet of sedition,’ he wrote in April 1798, ‘and the fragments lie scattered in the lumber-room of penitence.
I wish to be a good man and a Christian, but I am no Whig, no Reformist, no Republican.’
In fact, as we shall see in Chapter 3, he was beginning to evolve a new kind of conservative philosophy, and this was in no sense a time-serving decision, so that when Coleridge returned to ‘orthodox’ religion, his interpretation of Christian doctrine was strikingly original.
Coleridge had developed an apparently relaxed, but in fact extremely clever style of blank verse.
The tradition of writing ‘effusions’ in blank verse had a long history in the eighteenth century, culminating in The Task by William Cowper.
Cowper's poem was still under the shadow of Milton's Paradise Lost , and it is to Coleridge's credit that he was able to avoid Miltonic diction and write true ‘conversational’ poems.
Wordsworth had also been experimenting with blank verse, and with the example of Coleridge's Frost at Midnight before him, was able to reproduce ‘the movement of the mind’ in Tintern Abbey .
The same ‘conversational’ blank verse is used in much of The Prelude and it is noticeable that after Coleridge's influence lessened (during the next decade) Wordsworth's blank verse begins to revert to eighteenth-century and Miltonic mannerisms.
Although Wordsworth had produced more poems than Coleridge for their joint volume,Lyrical Ballads , honour was satisfied by giving the long Ancient Mariner — or Ancyent Marinere as it was originally spelt — pride of place.
(Its position at the front of the volume was later regretted by Wordsworth as some readers were put off.)
Tintern Abbey was given the other important position — it was printed at the end of the volume.
The book appeared anonymously in September 1798, just as the authors and Dorothy departed for Germany.
The best description of this journey is to be found in Satyrane's Letters , written by Coleridge and reprinted at the end of Biographia Literaria .
The war continued but the German states were still neutral, and it seems that the travellers had illusions that Liberty, suppressed in England by Tories and in France by Jacobins, still lingered farther north.
In Hamburg they visited the aged poet Klopstock, who had welcomed the Revolution but subsequently renounced the French.
Originally Wordsworth and Coleridge had invited more English people to accompany them, perhaps envisaging a new Pantisocratic colony; but Mrs Coleridge and the children had remained behind, Coleridge being accompanied by only one disciple, Chester of Stowey.
At the end of September the group split up; determined to get away from things English, they now decided to explore different areas, thinking they would learn more German if they gave up each others' company.
The German poets and philosophers were becoming  fashionable; perhaps Wordsworth and Dorothy could make a living by translating.
Coleridge wished to study at a university; he went to Ratzeburg and Göttingen, enjoying himself immensely, and stayed till July 1799.
But Wordsworth and his sister, after arriving at Brunswick, went on to Goslar because the local coach happened to go there.
They were then immured in Goslar for five months by the coldest weather of the century.
Left to themselves by the German bourgeoisie — because in German usage ‘sister’ was the accepted genteelism for ‘mistress’— the Wordsworths declined into misery and homesickness.
Books were few, but there was ample time to write; as Coleridge, proficient in German after two months, put it: ‘He seems to have employed more time in writing English than in studying German.’
In fact, Wordsworth produced some of his greatest poetry; the descriptive passages in the early books of The Prelude , and the ‘Lucy’ poems, which are significantly about the North of England.
Wordsworth felt that he wanted to return to England, settle down, and never go abroad again; as he stated in the last of the ‘Lucy’ poems, written two years later:
It was also remarkable that Germans — thought to be so liberal — now looked to England as the last refuge of Liberty; they applauded Nelson's recent victories — the political wheel had turned full circle.
The Wordsworths returned to England in May; their money had in any case run out.
They rushed back to the North, staying with the Hutchinson family at  Sockburn -on-Tees, Yorkshire; it is significant that the poem quoted above continues with an image of domestic love — Wordsworth would soon be married to Mary Hutchinson.
It was Coleridge who returned from Germany in triumph, clutching the works of Immanuel Kant.
Coleridge was under contract to the Morning Post , and had to spend some time in London; but in October 1799 he walked in the Lake District with William and John Wordsworth, and after a certain period of indecision arrived at Greta Hall, Keswick, with his wife and family in August 1800.
A second time of close companionship now began, though of course the group had kept in close touch by correspondence and short visits in the interval.
In the spring of 1802 there was another phase of mutually influenced poetic production; Wordsworth wrote over thirty important poems at this time, and though Coleridge had already announced — in March 1801 — that ‘The poet is dead in me’, he was  able to contribute the main theme of the dialogue, which is, put simply, what happens to ‘young Romantic poets’ after the age of thirty when the visionary period of youth comes to an end.
The following poems should be read in sequence:
Oct. 1800 — Coleridge:The Mad Monk 27 March 1802 — Wordsworth begins Immortality Ode 4 April 1802 — Coleridge writes first version of Dejection , called A Letter to…
(Sara Hutchinson) 3 May 1802 — Wordsworth begins The Leechgatherer i.e. Resolution and Independence 17 June 1802 — Wordsworth continues Immortality Ode 4 Oct. 1802 — Final version of Dejection published by Coleridge.
A final comment is provided by Wordsworth in the Prelude 1805, xi 329 ff. (see Critical Survey, p. 135).
The theme of the poems was hardly a happy one; Coleridge was now frequently ill with complaints which, though genuine enough, must surely have been complicated by psychosomatic factors.
He was sufficiently recovered to begin a Scottish tour with William and Dorothy on 15 August 1803, but separated from the Wordsworths on the 29th.
Dorothy's Journals provide a record of the tour, which involved the use of a vehicle described as ‘an Irish jaunting car’; they made a pilgrimage to the grave of Burns and visited Sir Walter Scott, whose Lay of the Last Minstrel was to introduce the new metre of Christabel to a public who had never heard of the source.
This is a typical example of Coleridge's influence, which extended to many other writers of the age; but in the case of Wordsworth the period of any real exchange of ideas was rapidly coming to an end.
Coleridge, after many delays, left for Malta on 9 April 1804.
He had a semi-official position as assistant to the Governor, with many chances to travel in the Mediterranean area.
There were delays in correspondence owing to the war, and Wordsworth decided to finish, as a tribute to his friend, the ‘poem to Coleridge’ which we now know as the 1805 Prelude .
The news of the death of Wordsworth's brother John, who was drowned in Weymouth Bay on 5 February 1805, had a profound effect on the group.
Coleridge fainted when told at a reception in Malta, and tried to get leave to return.
But he was not able to do so until the following year, and when he met the Wordsworths again, at Kendal on 26 October 1806, they were shocked by his changed appearance.
His fatness seems to have been largely the result of good living rather than ill-health; he had decided to separate from his wife, yet he was obviously in need of looking after.
In 1808 he moved into the Wordsworths' new house, Allan Bank, together with his two sons, and after the usual long preliminaries embarked on his new periodical venture,The Friend .
But this depended on keeping Coleridge away from‘stimulants’(i.e. brandy), and when Wordsworth happened to mention his difficulties to a friend, the final quarrel was inevitable.
This took place in 1810, and though a reconciliation was arranged in 1812 things were never the same again.
Coleridge lived in London, and never returned to the North of England, so that meetings only took place on rare occasions.
After Coleridge died in 1834, his son Hartley, who lived at Ambleside, would frequently walk with Wordsworth in the Grasmere area.
They were sometimes accompanied by Wordsworth's daughter Dora, who to some extent replaced Dorothy after her illness; at times this must have seemed like a re-enactment of the earlier years, when Dorothy, William and Coleridge were inseparable.
Appearance and character
Many portraits of Wordsworth and Coleridge exist, though unfortunately Dorothy was only painted in her dotage.
In Wordsworth's case, as we might expect, most of the paintings show him in middle or old age after he had become famous.
In addition several verbal sketches have come down to us: William Hazlitt first met Wordsworth in 1798 and recorded this description:
The next day Wordsworth arrived from Bristol at Coleridge's cottage.
I think I see him now.
He answered in some degree to his friend's description of him, but was more gaunt and Don Quixote-like.
He was quaintly dressed (according to the costume of that unconstrained period) in a brown fustian jacket and striped pantaloons.
There was something of a roll, a lounge in his gait, not unlike his own ‘Peter Bell’.
There was a severe, worn pressure of thought about his temples, a fire in his eye (as if he saw something in objects more than outward appearance), an intense, high, narrow forehead, a Roman nose, cheeks furrowed by a strong purpose, and a convulsive inclination to laughter about the mouth, a good deal at variance with the solemn, stately expression of
the rest of his face….
He sat down and talked very naturally and freely, with a mixture of the clear gushing accents in his voice, a deep guttural intonation, and a strong tincture of the northern burr like the crust on wine.
This last point is worth amplifying as it does affect the poetry.
Wordsworth's accent frequently struck Southern ears as harsh: even though suburban gentility had not yet forced all regional speakers to conform to the colourless vowel-sounds of the Home Counties if they wished to be socially acceptable, and even though Coleridge, like Sir Walter Raleigh before him, spoke broad Devon all his life without being taken for a peasant, it is clear that Wordsworth's accent did contribute to a general impression of roughness.
In reading Wordsworth's poems aloud, a Northern speaker will have no difficulty in rhyming ‘notes’ with ‘thoughts’, or ‘chatters’with ‘waters’, though these are obviously not true rhymes to a Southern ear.
But Wordsworth does not use any dialect expression, so that this difficulty need not be exaggerated.
In 1802 Wordsworth produced eight stanzas in the manner of Thomson's Castle of Indolence , which give first a self-portrait and then a description of Coleridge:
Further verbal pictures of Wordsworth at this period may be found in Thomas De Quincey's Recollections ; but 1805 may be considered as the end of his youth.
The death of his brother John at the beginning of that year affected him physically.
In 1809 ‘a whole coachload of passengers’, according to De Quincey, ‘took Wordsworth [then aged thirty-nine]for a man of sixty’.
In his later years there was a tendency to treat Wordsworth as a venerable sage: there is too much sentimental piety about some descriptions, while others give the impression of a strange, and slightly dotty, old man of the mountains.
In Passages in a Wandering Life , Thomas Arnold the Younger tells us that between 1835 and 1850:
The poet's ordinary dress was a loose brown frock-coat, trousers of shepherd's plaid, a loose black handkerchief for a neck-tie, a green and black plaid shawl round the shoulders, and a wide-awake or straw hat, often with a blue veil attached to it.
The best account of his facial appearance, some time between 1830 and 1834, is by Sir Henry Taylor:
Wordsworth's was a face which did not assign itself to any class.
It was a hard weather-beaten old face which might have belonged to a nobleman, a yeoman, a mariner, or a philosopher; for there was so much of a man that you lost sight of superadded distinctions.
For my own part, I should not, judging by his face, have guessed him to be a poet.
To my eyes there was more of strength than refinement in the face….
Perhaps what was wanting was only physical refinement.
It was a rough grey face, full of rifts and clefts and fissures, out of which, someone said, you might expect lichens to grow.
Haydon, who painted Wordsworth on Helvellyn in 1842, noted that ‘His head is like as if it was carved out of a mossy rock, created before the flood’, and those who tried to penetrate to the character beneath the face of the old man used the same ‘stony’ vocabulary.
Carlyle, for example, saw in 1840:
A fine wholesome rusticity….
His face bore the marks of much, not always peaceful meditation; the look of it not bland or benevolent so much as close impregnable and hard.
There is plenty of evidence for this impression of ‘hardness’ throughout Wordsworth's life, frequently related to us by London ‘witlings’whose smooth sophistication he was not likely to suffer gladly.
He was a North-countryman, and the bluntness of his approach to many issues should be considered, I think, as a traditional North-country attitude, exaggerated at times to the point of obtuseness; it may have been merely a defence mechanism.
His prose style bears   this out: half the trouble about the Preface to Lyrical Ballads was caused by the dogmatic style of some of its assertions — Wordsworth probably thought he was simply stating a point of view.
Most observers, therefore, saw him as a tough and humourless man whose intransigent attitude had led to the quarrels with his friends; Keats dubbed him ‘the Egotistical Sublime’.
But Coleridge, who knew him well, saw him as a happy man, because he had one aim in life:
Coleridge was no doubt contrasting his own divided aims.
Wordsworth's unity of purpose contributes to the directness of his poetry and so strengthens the appearance of sincerity that some critics have stated that Wordsworth, like the young George Washington, ‘always tells the truth’.
But this would be to postulate inhuman perfections.
It would be even more uncomfortable to associate with a character like that than to feel at home with our previous assessment, the hard man whose admirers compared him to a stone.
Behind the external appearance of harshness and reserve lay sensitivity, suffering, even humour; Wordsworth took some time to get to know, but those who dared to make the attempt were often agreeably surprised.
Greville, the society diarist, noted in 1831:
No notice should be taken of the frequently reiterated statement that Wordsworth lacked humour: of course he had a sense of humour —‘sly humour’, Hazlitt called it in 1825, and added, ‘he has a peculiar sweetness in his smile’.
Those who have met with Cumberland jokes will realize that they are nearly always directly personal and intended to deflate pretension: the victims may well feel that this is not what passes for humour in ‘polite society’.
An example will serve to illustrate this point: Leigh Hunt was a vegetarian, and praised ‘in glowing words the cauliflower swimming in melted butter’; Wordsworth wryly asked whether ‘if by chance of good luck they ever met with a caterpillar, they thanked their stars for a delicious morsel of animal food’.
This down-to-earth good sense has not been sufficiently stressed in the past; there is a normality, a sanity, a state of psychological health which is so often missing in the more obviously ‘Romantic’ of Wordsworth's contemporaries.
Wordsworth, Coleridge and Dorothy have been too much revered by their admirers, and their common humanity played down.
When discussing a passage in Dorothy's German journal, where she states that she ‘carried Kubla to a fountain in the neighbouring market-place, where I drank some excellent water’, one editor allowed himself to speculate upon the existence of a missing manuscript copy of Kubla Khan .
In fact ‘Kubla’ was the name of their drinking- can , and the pun may strike some people as near-sacrilege; others may consider the whole thing quite trivial.
But, speaking personally, I regard this passage as an illumination; the Wordsworths suddenly become people instead of rather vague and sublime presences; furthermore, they become people one would like to have met.
Economic history
The Industrial Revolution
It is no longer fashionable to discuss the Industrial Revolution as if it were an event which happened between 1760 and 1840.
In certain areas of the country industrialization had been a slow but continuous process since the seventeenth century or even earlier; and it is a process which has not finished yet.
The first half of the eighteenth century had seen an increase in trade, which was paralleled by an increase in the population.
The 5½ million inhabitants of England and Wales in 1700 had swelled to nearly 7 million in 1760; in 1801 the first census revealed that there were over 9 million people; by 1811 there were 10½ million.
The increase was not uniformly distributed over the whole country; the population grew most rapidly in the North and West, especially where coal and iron were to be found, and supplied a convenient labour force for the manufacturing industries.
In the textile industry a number of technical inventions produced an increase in output; a way had been found of using coal, in the form of coke, to smelt iron; and the steam engine was so improved that it provided a new source of power.
But we must not imagine that factory towns grew up overnight.
The early factories depended on water power; in 1716 John Lombe built a silk mill in Derbyshire, recognizably an industrial building but situated in the country.
In the later years of the eighteenth century it was still usual to build factories near water; the iron industry was similarly dispersed in a series of villages.
The new industrial centres were, in fact, quite small at first, and as they were mainly out of the way in unfashionable parts of the country, many people ignored them completely; one or two distinguished men even had the impression that the population was declining.
But by the 17805 and 17905 — the years of Wordsworth's youth — the new advances in techniques of production began to provoke widespread comment.
The transport system improved rapidly, and this was a source of pride to the whole country, besides enabling the different regions to exchange materials and goods.
The roads were becoming a pleasure to travel on after centuries of neglect.
The first canals were constructed between 1757 and 1761 in order to transport coal from the mines to the towns and factories; in the years 1791–7 the canal system expanded rapidly, and by 1815 covered most of England's transport requirements in the industrial field.
The age of steam was not established until 1800, when Wordsworth was thirty.
The location of factories was changed so that they were situated near coal; more intensive exploitation of coal deposits and iron ore meant that either, as in the Black Country, the little villages began to merge and quite large areas of land were enveloped and  spoilt, or that, as in the case of Manchester, a factory town emerged.
The whole phenomenon of the Industrial Revolution must be seen as a cumulative process, resulting in an economic take-off at the end of the eighteenth century under the stimulus of the Napoleonic Wars.
Negative reactions were somewhat delayed, especially when the economists of the day preached the inevitability of ‘progress’.
At first the whole of society, including the poets, had welcomed the new industrial processes and the feeling of power which they encouraged.
There was a phase of hope and widespread optimism, at least until the agricultural distress of 1795, when it became clear that there would sometimes be a problem in feeding such a vast population.
Society had to consider its attitude to the ‘new men’— the manufacturers — and also to the pressures of organized labour.
It was also necessary to recondition the human mind to accept Change instead of Stability as the time-continuum against which one lived.
The English people were the first to experience an industrial revolution, and nobody was conscious that this was what was happening to them.
We may feel today that things might have been better planned, and that it is a great pity that what now looks like the decisive contribution of England to world history should have been carried through with so much muddle and mess.
These were comparatively abstract and long-term problems; what was immediately obvious was the effect of the new methods of production upon the people who were closely involved in them.
The condition of the new ‘working classes’ gave more and more cause for anxiety after the turn of the century.
Because of the division of labour, work soon became the perpetual repetition of a simple task, or the minding of a machine; such work often had to be done for fourteen hours a day, six days a week, and there were no special provisions for the women and very young children who were considered especially suitable for work in the textile industries.
The question of leisure activities did not arise, and the cheap housing, poor diet, and squalid surroundings produced a total environment that had a depressing effect upon human endeavour: this was especially noticeable in Lancashire.
To some observers, the new generations who were born into this environment appeared stunted and uncouth; their cheap clothing and strange variations on the English language made them seem like another species, almost subhuman.
Disraeli was later to talk of the Two Nations, the Rich and the Poor, who could exist side by side in the same country with no knowledge of each other 's way of life.
With these human problems Wordsworth was deeply concerned, though it must be admitted that a superficial reading of his poetry gives the impression that he ran as hard as he could to get away from them.
Unless Wordsworth's poetry is studied in the context of the economic history of the time many important points will be missed, and the intention of whole poems may be misconstrued.
Most of Wordsworth's readers who have left us their opinions were middle-class, but we must remember that he addressed his poetry to readers of all classes and we do not know how much the choice of natural subject matter may have meant to urban dwellers who lived out of sight of flowers and trees.
A poem about a daisy or a butterfly, however quiet in tone and however naive it may appear in isolation, may be read in this context as a hymn to battle against economic thinkers, who could find no place for such useless natural objects in their systems of ideas.
Even Wordsworth's residence in the Lake District, a non-profit-making area compared to, say, Manchester, and his initial attempt to live off the profession of poetry, represent a challenge to the age.
Those who still feel that Wordsworth ‘escaped’ from social reality will hardly be impressed by the argument so far, and will ask to be shown Wordsworth's poems about factories, steam-engines and so on.
It is not generally realized that he did write on such topics, though it must be admitted that a frontal attack on the factory system was not likely to be poetically successful.
Nevertheless,The Excursion (1814) is partly about society during the Industrial Revolution.
In his own time the Wanderer has seen the face of England changed:
The echo of Milton's Hell in the final image is significant.
Gas-light, the factory bell and shift work seem to call up similar echoes, for at night-time:
Wordsworth's comparison of mill and religious building is extremely apt as those who have seen some of these early industrial ‘temples’ will agree.
They are often indistinguishable in external appearance from the larger nonconformist chapels in the next street.
William Blake made good poetic use of this confusion of ‘mill’ and ‘church’, too.
In Wordsworth's note to this section of his poem — which also deals with improved roads and canals, and proffers hope that the new processes will bring ultimate good — he compares his work with that of a poet of the first half of the eighteenth century, John Dyer:
The implication of this note is that most readers did not want to hear that anything was wrong, and that Wordsworth's doubts about the growth of industry show original thinking on his part.
Certainly Wordsworth is interested and concerned; but he has little to offer as a remedy, and is no machine-breaker or Luddite.
He does see, though, that  anticipating the social criticism of John Ruskin and William Morris by more than thirty years.
The growth of the industrial proletariat convinced him that state education for all was essential, though in 1809 he asked: ‘What can you expect of national education conducted by a government which for twenty years resisted the abolition of the Slave Trade?’
He was impressed by the Madras or monitor system of Dr Bell, in which pupil teachers passed on one teacher's instruction to hundreds of junior pupils.
Bell visited Wordsworth in 1811 and in the same year William, Dorothy and Mary taught ‘Madras’ in the village school at  Grasmere.
It was shortly after this that the passage appealing for universal education was written:
It took another sixty years to achieve this; Forster's Education Act was not passed till 1870.
Some of Wordsworth's other ideals — that children should be treated equally, and that education should be devoid of competition — have been rather slower in materializing.
Nevertheless, the attitudes which Wordsworth adopted towards industrialization were successfully transmitted to the later nineteenth century, and ultimately down to our own day, where they have sometimes been incorporated into the law of the land.
Wordsworth contributed to the growth of ‘Humanity’, the climate of opinion in which Shaftesbury was able to proceed with factory legislation; and surely his attitude of reverence towards landscape formed public opinion, so that one now needs planning permission to site a factory and the line of a motorway has to be negotiated; certain areas have become National Parks, and one cannot help noticing how many of these were districts where Wordsworth lived or with which he was in some way associated (see Gazetteer).
Because we think we have tamed industrialism we no longer fear it; but in the age of laissez faire , when the power of the manufacturers seemed unbounded, it took a certain courage to think for oneself and run the risk of appearing ridiculous.
Wordsworth's ‘retirement’ to the Lakes begins to look less like a retreat than a strategic withdrawal to ensure survival.
Although he chose a contemplative life, he defined his occupation as ‘activity in solitude for society’.
The ‘fair works’ of Nature provided Wordsworth with a contrasting background which showed up more clearly ‘what man has done to man’.
Remembering that it was Wordsworth whom the Utilitarian John Stuart Mill turned to when he found that his philosophy produced nothing but visions of a grey and empty world, and that Matthew Arnold, after Wordsworth's death, believed that he alone could heal human nature in the ‘iron time’, the little poem that follows, written in 1833, seems a convenient summing-up of Wordsworth's mature attitudes.
Agrarian distress
In the 1790s Britain was still primarily an agricultural country; it still appears to be so in the novels of Jane Austen twenty years later, and, after all, even today one could choose a route from East Anglia to Cornwall which would give a foreigner this impression.
Large areas of the South and West remained untouched by the growth of the manufacturing industries, and in spite of the stimulating effect of the Napoleonic Wars upon certain sections of the economy, most of those who worked on the land steadily became poorer.
There is abundant evidence of this in the writings of William Cobbett, who observes well the results of a process without clearly understanding the causes.
He says, for example, that the people are ‘poor creatures about Great Bedwin and Cricklade’ because 
In order to find out why things had not been going so well on the  land as in the urban areas we must once again go back to the beginning of the eighteenth century.
In the year 1700 between 80 and 90 per cent of the population lived in the country, including the small market-towns (compared with about lo per cent in the year 1900).
Although 80 per cent of the land was already privately owned, 20 per cent, mainly in the Midland counties, was still divided up according to the open-field system: the inhabitants of a village held land in common , and this common land, if suitable for cultivation, was divided into strips.
(One could compare the present system of allotment-holding, which certain pressure groups regard as uneconomic.)
Even if he only held his cottage on a tenancy, a cottager could usually keep animals on the common pasture land, and collect fuel from the land unsuited to agriculture, known as the waste.
Although the system had been modified in many villages so that the strips fell together instead of being widely separated, everybody, including squatters, had access to the common land and was able to earn some sort of a living from it, and this could be supplemented seasonally by labouring or harvesting for a bigger landowner.
As the eighteenth century wore on, an agricultural revolution took place, complementing the industrial take-off.
Methods of cultivation were so improved that even relatively poor land could be intensively exploited; new crops were introduced, which involved new systems of rotation and made large units of farmland more economic than small-holdings.
Farming became a fashionable occupation among the aristocracy, who had enough influence in Parliament to pass through Bills of Enclosure.
The effect of these was to transfer the common land to private ownership; the dispossessed commoners were given small pockets of land or other compensation, but these were not necessarily equivalent to the rights they had lost.
Squatters, who had no legal rights, were forced off the land.
Even cottagers were frequently obliged to sell up, and those who did not remain as labourers went off to swell the population of the new towns.
After 1760 there were many Acts of Enclosure, and during Wordsworth's lifetime the new system of landownership became completely effective.
Of course this contributed to Britain's ability to feed herself during the Napoleonic Wars, but in bad years, because of the lack of imported corn, most people could not afford bread.
The result of the enclosures was that many countrymen lost what little security they had formerly possessed, including the sense of belonging to a particular village or cottage.
John Clare testifies to the wholesale obliteration of landmarks, and the subsequent consciousness of alienation;The Female Vagrant is not so much a poem by Wordsworth as a case-history.
The cottagers also lost their economic independence in areas unaffected by enclosure, such as the Lake District.
The new factories frequently centralized the processes of manufacture which had  formerly been dispersed among the cottages, especially in the textile industries.
Many had previously enjoyed a steady income from carding or spinning, which provided an occupation for women and children.
Again, the choice was between following the work to the factory towns or eking out an existence by labouring.
Mere labourers, however, had no security at all.
Although the farmers frequently made considerable profits, wages did not rise to correspond with the price increases brought about by the wars.
When bad times came and wages were below the level on which they could support their families, the labourers found that they had to ask the authorities of the parish in which they lived for relief; in other words they became paupers, who could be sent to the workhouse.
In 1795, after a severe winter and the failure of many crops, the price of provisions soared to an unprecedented height; the price of wheat in London was 108 shillings a quarter: and this meant that it was impossible to buy bread, even if it were obtainable.
There were not enough workhouses to cope with the problem.
The magistrates at Speenhamland in Berkshire decided to supplement wages out of the poor rates, and this system of outdoor relief soon became general; years of demoralization and artificially low wages ensued, but there was no mass starvation and a revolutionary situation was avoided.
Wordsworth, like Dickens fifty years later, considered that all human beings had a claim upon each other, even though political economists thought that war and poverty were ‘natural checks upon the species’ and ‘kept down the surplus population’.
It is interesting to note that Oliver Twist and A Christmas Carol , which were attempts to make the middle classes see their fellow human beings and notice their problems, have been reduced by the English mind to children's books.
Similarly, Wordsworth is commonly bowdlerized into a ‘Nature poet’, and his frequent accounts of human beings in economic difficulties are dismissed as his ‘revolutionary growing-pains’— to be omitted from the safe anthologies in which he is. commonly presented to the adolescent mind.
In the middle years of the 1790s Wordsworth observed what was happening to some of the cottagers and cared about it; like a good journalist, he called attention to outstanding cases in The Female Vagrant and The Ruined Cottage .
The titles of both poems suffered change, and The Ruined Cottage is to be found incorporated in the first Book of The Excursion , where Wordsworth looks back from 1814 to the year 1795:
It is these economic stresses which bring about the tragedy of Margaret and her family and lead eventually to the Ruined Cottage, which remains as a symbol of these afflictions.
The Last of the Flock (see pp. 101–3) records a similar process of degradation and suffering, as a farmer's sheep are sold off one by one.
These poems are probably set in Somerset, but as most of Wordsworth's social observation is directed towards the inhabitants of the Lake District, it would be as well to consider the economic history of that area in some detail before proceeding with Wordsworth's reactions to the poverty and despair around him.
The Lake District
The Lake District in Wordsworth's youth was not a tourist centre, but an economic going concern.
Penrith, Keswick, Kendal and Cockermouth were small country towns with a mixture of small-scale industrial activities.
The farmers and shepherds in the valleys may seem to have lived an isolated existence, if one thinks of Michael, but the wool from the sheep would be carded and spun in the cottages, and ultimately sent to the towns.
Along the Cumberland coast an industrial fringe was already well established, based on deposits of coal and iron ore: Whitehaven was in those days an important port.
Inside the ring of mountains Wordsworth was not as isolated from industrial activities as some people like to think: a valley forge, driven by water power, ‘thumps’ in the closing lines of An Evening Walk , among other ‘natural’noises of Lakeland midnight — but this may be considered unusual, and the image may in fact be borrowed from Gray.
For as the Industrial Revolution progressed and changed much of Northern England, the Lake District became more and more   of an economic backwater, a comparatively poor district where, for example, people scraped the yellow lichen Ochrolechia tartarea from the rocks and sold it to dyers for a penny a pound.
It seems wrong, therefore, to suggest, as some critics do, that the Lake District avoided the worst distresses.
While enclosure came later to the Lake District than the southern parts of England, there is plenty of evidence of rural depopulation in the later years of the eighteenth century.
This was because the system of land tenure was remarkably different from other areas, and there were a large number of ‘statesmen’ or ‘estatesmen’who were small freeholders.
In 1766 a Cumberland man pointed out the difficulties of agriculture in the region — it was too wet to grow wheat — and estimated that a quarter of Cumberland was owned by thirty lords and gentlemen, and the remainder divided between 10,000 small landowners.
He said:
These were the natural democrats whom Wordsworth idealized in memory; in his Guide to the Lakes he says that 
We notice the past tense: Wordsworth has omitted here to mention that these small proprietors depended on the cottage industries, which were taken away when the factory system had become established, so that in Wordsworth's lifetime the statesmen declined.
In other parts of the Guide he is more realistic about them:
There was a need for a new source of wealth, and as the nineteenth century advanced this was provided by the tourist industry.
It is often assumed that Wordsworth himself was responsible for the fame of the area as a holiday centre, but this is only partly true.
In the early eighteenth century all uncultivated districts were labelled ‘wild’ and ‘horrid’, and were therefore to be shunned.
But by 1750 fashion had changed — look at the new style of English landscape garden — and artists and poets set out to explore their own island in search of the picturesque; in due course they arrived in Cumberland.
At first they climbed to the heights to look down on Nature or to survey the scene — encouraging the building of ‘stations’ such as the Windermere Octagon; but after Thomas Gray's Journal of a Tour in the Lakes (written in 1769) artists began to take their views from the valleys.
The rich began to build along the sides of Windermere, and fitted out boats with cannon; salvoes were fired in order to ‘enjoy the echoes’.
De Quincey tells us of:
It seems the price of echoes varied, reasonably enough, with the amount of gunpowder consumed.
But at Lowwood, on Windermere, half-crown echoes might be had by those base snobs who would put up with a vile Brummagem substitute for ‘the genuine article’.
The Wordsworthian attitude of reverence for mountains had not yet appeared, and Wordsworth's two early poems,Descriptive Sketches and An Evening Walk , mainly purvey established eighteenth-century taste.
I say ‘established’ because in 1788 Wilberforce observed that a Lakeland holiday was already popular: ‘The banks of Thames are scarcely more public than those of Windermere.’
While Wordsworth later adopted an attitude of hostility to tourists — he fought the coming of the railways in the 1840s tooth and nail — there is no doubt that he aided and abetted their holiday plans.
Why else publish his own guide in 1822 and 1835 —Description of the Scenery of the Lakes in the North of England with Views , as it was first entitled?
By the 1830s the next stage — the identification  by the public of the Lakes with Wordsworth — had been reached.
Thomas Arnold and Ruskin's father bought houses there, feeling that the scenery would be a good influence on their children; and the reading parties from Oxford and Cambridge soon followed.
The mountains and lakes were now revered as a source of ‘uplift’.
With the invention of photography this attitude to Nature could be disseminated in book form.
Wordsworth's name soon doubled with the Lakes in the titles —The English Lake District as interpreted by Wordsworth appeared in 1874, and in 1911 Eric Robertson produced a book simply called Wordsworthshire — the final apotheosis!
But it took many years for the ordinary people of the area to benefit from tourism in any worthwhile economic sense.
Meanwhile the factory towns and the mines were not far off as they were in the South, and the northern peasant was used to a hard life; he was not forced to stay on the land as a pauper, since employers and employed were in the same economic difficulties and regarded each other as of nearly the same status.
As Dickinson, the Cumberland poet, put it:
It is in this inherited conception of the equality of all human beings that the people of the Lake District provided a contrast to the rest of England; Wordsworth therefore believed that ‘humble and rustic’ men were not yet corrupted.
We can see why Michael was to be admired; but Michael's son, who left for the town,was forced to do so because his father had to find money in a hurry and would not sell his land .
Though the industrial and agrarian revolutions may not have changed the appearance of the Lake District, they claimed the peasants' children.
And the break-up of the family was a change which Wordsworth felt must be resisted.
Wordsworth's concern for the poor, the displaced and the beggars
So much was Wordsworth concerned for the apparent breakdown of the family as a unit that he embarked upon a course of action which seems incredibly naive and yet illustrates his downright belief in the social value of poetry.
In January 1801 he wrote to  Charles James Fox, the Leader of the Whig Opposition, enclosing the two volumes of Lyrical Ballads , and asking him to read Michael and The Brothers , not for their poetic merit but because they illustrate ‘the weakening of the bonds of domestic feeling among the poor’.
The letter is worth quoting from at length:
Obviously Wordsworth thought that his poems would have some positive effect in this direction; it becomes clearer why so many of the poems written at this time deal with ‘domestic affections’, and in particular with the separation of mother and child.
The Cottager To Her Infant ,Maternal Grief ,The Childless Father ,The Emigrant Mother — so run the consecutive titles from a group of ‘Poems Founded on the Affections’.
Wordsworth hoped that the people who read these poems would cease to put forward such hardheaded schemes as the separation of husband and wife in workhouses, or the sale of children to be ‘apprenticed’ in the mills.
Wordsworth followed the rural child into the towns.
The Reverie of Poor Susan , cast in the form of a popular song and working on the association of ideas, is not a sentimental ballad but a study of the uprooted personality, forced to live in an unnatural environment.
Early reviewers were more upset by the social conscience which poems like this displayed than by the outlandish verses, and did not understand why a poet should be concerned with the study of ‘low and rustic life’.
Gentle readers did not want their poetry linked with what amounts to sociology; with his taste for ‘interviewing’ the practitioners of strange trades like the Leechgatherer and asking ‘How is it that you live and what is it you do?’
Wordsworth seems almost a hundred years ahead of his time.
We are therefore not surprised to   find that it was this part of his work which most nineteenth-century readers chose to ignore, as any Victorian anthology will prove with its selection of passages relating to Nature.
He also made a special study of the outcasts, the waifs and strays of industrial society the vagrants and the idiots.
People dismiss this aspect of Wordsworth's poetry as ‘odd’, forgetting that George Orwell became a tramp for six weeks and lived for a year as a down-and-out; and Shakespeare wrote a play about a mad old man who was also a vagrant!
Perhaps it is because in isolation human beings achieve their true status; they are no longer tied to an economic process which dominates their existence.
Wordsworth thought he could learn from them; he regarded no man as his inferior.
Indeed he approached the vagrants with feelings of reverence and holy fear; their very names seem more awe-inspiring than feudal titles: The Old Cumberland Beggar, The Pedlar, The Discharged Soldier, the Female Vagrant and The Beggarwoman.
Their mere existence fascinated him —‘an old man was ’— and the question addressed to the Leechgatherer: ‘How is it that you live?’ is not really a question about sources of income.
He had been interested in tramps since childhood —' I love a public road'; he had read Crabbe's description of a workhouse at school and had been shocked by the confinement of the mentally ill ‘inasmuch as idiots and lunatics among the humbler classes of society were not to be found in Workhouses — in the parts of the North where I was brought up,— but were mostly at large’.
(The Idiot Boy is intended to justify the retention of such a child in its mother's care, in the same way that Coleridge's The Dungeon pleads for humane treatment of criminals.)
In his early twenties Wordsworth wandered the roads himself in search of case histories — see Guilt and Sorrow or Old Man Travelling — and when he settled at Grasmere he lived alongside a road which was used by travellers to Whitehaven and to Scotland in bad weather; Dorothy's Journals are full of encounters with wanderers.
It is not at first clear what these people had to offer Wordsworth, though he tried to help them.
The Soldier in Book iv of The Prelude is an example of Wordsworth performing a Good Samaritan act; but what impressed Wordsworth and remains with us is the description of the Soldier's appearance:
Wordsworth continues to watch, but for a long time the figure refuses to move.
The strangeness of the whole situation comes across very strongly, together with a certain emblematic quality.
This is made clearer in the description of the London Beggar, whom Wordsworth did not help and yet who manifestly affected him considerably.
Lost in the confusion of ‘the moving pageant’ of the streets, he tells 
The religious implications of this are clear; but to our present purpose we notice that the vagrants and the beggars lead us away from‘economic man’ towards other kinds of existence.
The Old Cumberland Beggar is more obviously a sermon addressed to the political economist, who believes that only ‘people who show a profit’ are important, and that people who are poor or old or ill should be shut away because they are ‘useless to society’.
Wordsworth defends the Beggar:
The middle class may shut themselves off from life in a mental suburb of self-righteousness,
Therefore the Beggar has a ‘use’ in his society:
He is not to be shut away in the workhouse.
Whether this sermon to the reader is successful has often been debated, and it is worth contrasting at this point the more subtle approach of the painter, John Constable, addressing a London audience.
He is describing the fate of a tall and elegant ash-tree —
This ironical amused stance, this little parable indicative of a society's real values, was something Wordsworth was not able to do.
The older Wordsworth
The later Wordsworth is usually presented as a very unattractive figure; the case against his poetry will be examined separately, but  what annoys people even more than his apparent repudiation of the principles underlying Lyrical Ballads is his political attitude.
In this section we continue the story from the point reached in the ‘Politics’ section in Chapter 1 — the year 1815 and the illusion of the eighteenth century restored to Europe.
The years immediately after the Napoleonic wars were years of extreme repression in England; there was also a slump in trade and manufacture after the wartime boom.
The conditions seemed right for a repetition of the French Revolution on English soil.
Since our history books are still largely written from the liberal side we are amazed to find Wordsworth on the side of the aristocracy and against the rising hopes of the people; as he himself put it: ‘I cannot but be of opinion that the feudal power yet surviving in England is eminently serviceable in counteracting the popular tendency to reform.’
Yet, in spite of his now professed Toryism, he continued to mix his poetry with social criticism and to the very end of his life insisted on making statements which show an intense involvement in the sufferings of the people.
Wordsworth dreamed of an alliance between the aristocracy and the common people — at any rate in the rural areas.
He realized that he was supporting the weaker side, and was against the transfer of power to ‘mere financiers and political economists’.
He disliked industrialists and successful merchants, preferring the company of ‘gentry’, who could be convinced of their duty to those they controlled on their landed estates.
He felt that people without property were irresponsible, and that the manufacturers who would acquire power under the Reform Bill would only act out of self-interest.
He stuck to these attitudes through the 1820s and after, and could see no reason to take up the new liberal and radical ideas, which aimed at further break-up of the existing order of things.
He regarded the new ideas as a trick to give even more power to the manufacturers — and perhaps his political analysis was not at fault, since the exponents of these ideas were largely middle-class.
Nevertheless, in 1831, after a visit to Wordsworth, John Stuart Mill was impressed by the amount that he — a liberal Utilitarian by upbringing — agreed with the ‘hardened Tory’.
Wordsworth, he reported,
There is other evidence of a thawing-out during the 1830s.
Of course he opposed the Reform Bill itself, yet said in a letter to Crabb  Robinson (5 February 1833): ‘You mistake in supposing me an Anti-Reformer —that I never was, but an Anti-Bill man, heart and soul.’
In 1836, the Bill now having been passed, he suggested to Gladstone that there ought to be more enfranchisement to cure the effects of it; if the pyramid were extended at the base and the lower classes given some power, this would counter the preponderance of the manufacturers.
In fact, Wordsworth's position begins to look surprisingly consistent, if one considers what he is against ; he is prepared to use any weapon to attack liberal commercial values and the new affluent middle class.
In the years 1815–27, when he was hated by the young Romantic poets for his apostasy, it is only fair to point out that many quite reasonable people were at panic stations because of incipient popular unrest.
When the danger of revolution seemed to have passed he emerged with points of view that look forward to the emancipation of the working classes.
For evidence of this, as well as of his continuing interest in the outcast and distressed, it is worth looking at the Postscript to Yarrow Revisited and Other Poems (1835).
This shows how far Wordsworth has moved since the Preface to Lyrical Ballads , and on what subjects he feels compelled to address his readers; this time there is no discussion of the theory or poetry, but we begin with a review of the Poor Law Amendment Act (1834).
Wordsworth looks forward to an ideal Welfare State where all are entitled to ‘maintenance by law’ feeling of degradation.
The State must act in relieving distress, for private charity and a change of heart among the rich are not enough.
The law must be made more humane, for ‘sights of abject misery, perpetually recurring, harden the heart of the community’.
He then turns to ‘the state of the workmen congregated in manufactories’.
In order to prevent ‘combinations of masters to keep down, unjustly, the price of labour’ he suggests what we would call ‘co-ownership schemes’in industry, and ends by recommending the study of certain of his verses to trade union members.
In the 1840s most working men supported the Chartists, who aimed at a secret ballot and adult male suffrage.
Officially Wordsworth continued to dwell on the virtues of landed proprietors, but he made occasional remarks which surprised his companions.
On one occasion he kicked at a fence which was enclosing a footpath, saying ' I have no respect for the Whigs, but I have a good deal of the Chartist in me'.
He very much admired the poetry of Ebenezer Elliott, the Corn Law Rhymer, that is, a poet who helped to lead the opposition to the laws which kept the price of bread artificially high, and said ‘None of us have done better than he has at his best’.
When Thomas Cooper, a Chartist who had advocated extreme violence in 1842, visited him, he told him: ‘You were right…
I have always said the people were right in what they asked; but you went the wrong way to get it.’
However, the Chartists did not receive any public support from him and were not conscious of his attitude; so that George Julian Harney wrote on Wordsworth's death: ‘We are not impressed with any heavy sense of  sorrow….
We had no tears for the salaried slaves of Aristocracy and pensioned parasites of Monarchy.’
His last campaign, in 1845, fought with pamphlet and sonnet, was against the projected Kendal and Windermere Railway, which would have brought tourists into the Lake District at the price of wrecking the scenery.
This was not just an old man's hatred of change; the sonnet Steamboats, Viaducts, and Railways (1833) is surprisingly in favour of these evidences of man's ability, and concludes:
But Wordsworth had already proposed in his Guide that the Lake District should be made ‘a sort of national property in which every man has a right and interest who has an eye to perceive and a heart to enjoy’; we can now see that, over a hundred years before his time, he had come up with the idea of a National Park.
However much, therefore, we may feel with the later Romantics that Wordsworth was ‘a political apostate’, his social interests will always remain as evidence of his humanity.
If he ended up with a taste for feudalism and aristocracy it was because he believed that the old paternalism was better than the inhuman gulf between ‘classes’—‘One would wish to see the rich mingle with the poor as much as may be upon a footing of fraternal equality.’
Actions speak louder than words: at the age of seventy he climbed to a house
high up Loughrigg side where dwells the good woman who lost her two children in the flood last winter.
The wind was high when I knocked at her door, and I heard a voice from within that I knew not what to make of, though it sounded like the lullaby of a Mother to her Baby.
After entering I found it came from a little sister of those drowned Children, that was singing to a bundle of clouts, rudely put together to look like a Doll, which she held in her arms.
Letter to Dora Wordsworth, 7 April 1840
Perhaps he still identified himself with the man who bought a  duffel cloak for Alice Fell (see Critical Survey, p. 118); he instructed his daughter to buy the child a doll —‘only let it be a good big one’.
Philosophy and religion
Locke and the sense of sight
Locke's philistinism was in no sense an aberration.
He wanted to get away from the imagination, away from the vague glamour of medieval things, from reverence for tradition, from mysticism, enthusiasm and gloire ; away from all private visionary insights and down to the plain, measurable, publicly verifiable facts; and this desire was central to his whole mission as a philosopher and reformer.
MAURICE CRANSTON, John Locke
As we have seen in the section on Education, Wordsworth grew up in a mathematical and scientific age, which still adhered to principles discovered in the seventeenth century.
Isaac Newton (1642–1727) had demonstrated that natural phenomena were governed by universal laws; these were capable of experimental proof, whereas the ‘truths’ derived from books, mystical visions or revelations were not only incapable of mathematical proof but were often contradictory.
The late seventeenth century had seen a new departure in philosophic enquiry; philosophers abandoned metaphysical speculations and tried to pursue their studies in a scientific spirit.
The change of attitude may not have appeared so dramatic since the word ‘philosophy’ was more general in its meaning than today, and scientists were called ‘philosophers’or ‘natural philosophers’down to the end of the eighteenth century.
Between them the scientists and philosophers set out to explain a universe, which, after the muddle of the Dark or Middle Ages, seemed to be flooded with clear light.
In approaching philosophical problems John Locke (1632–1704) kept the temperature of discussion as low as possible; there was no point in reviving the interminable religious disputes which had produced the Wars of Religion in the earlier seventeenth century.
Addressing an audience of sensible and clear-headed gentlemen — the sort of people who had produced the Bloodless Revolution of 1688 — Locke pictured himself as ‘an under-labourer in clearing the ground a little, and removing much of the rubbish that lies in the way of knowledge’.
He proposed that we should test things by the evidence of our senses.
‘Revelation must be judged by reason’; in this way one could avoid being misled by Fancy (a rather disorganized mental activity) into the dangers of ‘Enthusiasm’(uncritical belief in a religious or political doctrine).
Finally — a very neat blow at any remaining opposition — he pointed out that only people who were mentally ill allowed themselves to be guided by ‘persuasions of immediate intercourse with the deity’, so that prophetic or bardic inspiration was simply a delusion.
Between them Locke and Newton built up the mental picture of the universe which the educated classes in the eighteenth century absorbed as incontrovertible truth.
The Great Architect, or the Watchmaker, had put together a mathematically perfect world.
(God, or the Deity, existed because somebody had had to work out the mathematics in the first place.)
In the created universe there was no room for divine operation; the biblical miracles presented a difficulty here, but perhaps rational explanations would soon be found.
There was no need for God to intervene in his superbly designed universe, which was equipped to deal with all contingencies.
The Watchmaker, having wound up the watch he had made, had retired elsewhere, presumably for contemplation.
The Great Machine could be left to operate without interference.
The many mechanical analogies (in this admittedly crude summary) were all used to explain the world to simple people; but machines, though they may be perfect, are nevertheless quite dead.
There was no real room for God in Newton's universe, and even living creatures were an untidy addition to the perfect geometry of stars, planets and rays of light.
Similarly, in Locke's descriptions of mental activity, comparisons are made with inanimate objects, and the mind becomes, as at the beginning of the following extract, a sort of vast furniture warehouse.
This long extract gives one the general flavour of Locke's discourse, besides illustrating some of his main propositions.
Earlier philosophers had thought that there were innate ideas, but Locke will have none of this.
The operations of the mind which he describes are reduced to two fairly simple activities.
We passively receive sense-impressions —‘in bare, naked perception the mind is, for the most part, merely passive’; and all human thought and knowledge is reduced to rational generalizations derived from experience.
There is little room for poetry — a product of the despised Fancy — in all this; yet Wordsworth was in the Locke tradition when he rejected the ‘gaudy and inane phraseology’ of the Fancy and devoted a long poem to the description of how Nature (in Locke's sense of the whole external world rather than simply mountains and lakes) formed his mental character.
Wordsworth also inherits from Locke an intense concern with the visible universe; although Locke tries to explain all kinds of sensory experience he is most at home with the sense of sight, which could most easily be related to Newton's optical discoveries.
Therefore, as Ernest Tuveson points out in Imagination as a Means of Grace : ‘From the nature of mind as described by Locke we could expect a new poetry to be highly visual in nature, for the faculty of sight came to monopolize the analysis of intellectual activity.’
So that even in a passage like the following, which is moving away from Locke's philosophic teaching, Locke's influence is apparent.
Many explanations have been given for the careful measurements and statistical information so frequent in Wordsworth's early poetry, for example: but surely even this may ultimately go back to a desire to placate the scientific and Lockean tradition.
The terminology of Locke is still considered valid to support the argument advanced in the Preface to Lyrical Ballads : we are referred to ‘sensations’ and ‘ideas’, and told that ‘falsehood  of description’has been avoided, for the object of poetry is ‘truth’.
In this way, Wordsworth insists, ‘Poetry is the most philosophic of all writing’.
Rousseau and the education of the sensibility
The world has not seen more than once or twice in all the course of history a literature which has exercised such prodigious influence over the minds of men, over every cast and shade of intellect, as that which emanated from Rousseau between 1749 and 1762.
MAINE, Ancient Law
Rousseau, sir, is a very bad man.
DR JOHNSON
The eighteenth century is often referred to as the Age of Reason; most people believed that the world that Newton and Locke had made was the real world.
Later ages have tended to magnify the importance of those thinkers and poets who disagreed; there is no reason to think that the young Wordsworth would have taken any notice of them; he believed with his University that whatever Newton said, was right.
Nevertheless, he could not fail to have heard of the protest movement which originated with Jean Jacques Rousseau (1712–78).
There is no evidence that Wordsworth ever studied Rousseau in a systematic way, but he would have met with his influence in France, if not well before.
Rousseau's tactics in doing battle with ‘Reason’ were very simple; he rejected its validity altogether, and appealed to the emotions — he did not feel that the dictates of Reason and science were true.
As Tennyson put it a century later: ‘The heart stood up and answered ‘I have felt’.’
While the objections to this point of view are obvious — we can be led into all manner of belief by wishful thinking — it coincided with the beginnings of a general desire to re-open the discussion which Locke had apparently concluded for good and all.
Rousseau challenged the Christian doctrine of Original Sin; he believed that man was by nature good, and that he had been corrupted by civilization; savages were uncorrupted.
In European countries virtue would be found to linger in remote and rural communities.
This doctrine appears in an altered form in the Preface to Lyrical Ballads where Wordsworth tells us that he had written about ‘low and rustic life…because in that situation the essential passions of the heart find a better soil in which they can attain their maturity’.
Civilized man could perhaps be saved by education.
In Émile Rousseau suggested that it might be possible to recreate a system of ‘natural education’.
The child is to be brought up in the country, and  should learn by experience; this is far better than sitting indoors, studying books.
He would not be made to read, in fact, or to perform any formal educational exercises; nor would he be crammed with useless theorizing.
On the other hand, his tutor would always tell him the truth, and he would never be allowed to hear stories or fairy-tales.
He would learn morality by observing people's reactions when he performed unsocial actions; but he would never be punished.
These teachings clearly influenced the early books of The Prelude , and it is worth digressing at this point to see how Wordsworth amended and yet clung to the spirit of Rousseau's ideals.
Wordsworth's views on education were remarkably ahead of his time.
They were also consistent throughout his life.
Whereas many otherwise ‘progressive’ disciples of Rousseau believed in controlling the entire environment of the child and programming its mind with carefully selected sense impressions, Wordsworth and Dorothy believed in complete freedom: ‘Till a child is four years old he needs no other companions than the flowers, the grass, the cattle, the sheep that scamper away from him, when he makes a vain unexpecting chase after them, the pebbles upon the road etc.
’ Wordsworth hated ‘model children’and ‘infant prodigies’(Prelude 1805, v 291–349); he preferred ‘real children, not too wise, too learned, or too good’.
His writings were later able to save a model child, the philosopher John Stuart Mill, who had been brought up on a system of intensive reading and deprived of the ‘culture of the feelings’.
Although Wordsworth's own children, together with Basil Montagu and Hartley Coleridge, can hardly be called unqualified successes in their later life, this does not undermine Wordsworth's ideas, which anticipate the freedom of modern infant teaching.
Allied to Wordsworth's campaign for the free child was his campaign against ‘edifying children's literature’; instead of, for example , Harriet Martineau's stories designed to illustrate economic principles, he asserted the child's right to works of imagination and fairy-tales.
He continually stressed the value of out-of-school freedom, writing in 1845 to Seymour Tremenheere, an Inspector of Schools:
It followed from Rousseau's theories that children, being nearer to nature, might ‘know’ more than adults, who had been miseducated.
In Wordsworth's poetry we find adults ‘learning’ from children, and in the Immortality Ode the child is addressed as  
These beliefs of Rousseau would have filtered down to Wordsworth in any case; like the cult of Feeling (see Jane Austen:Sense and Sensibility ) they were part of the climate of opinion by the 1790s.
But it is to be noted that the only doctrine of Rousseau's which Wordsworth uses directly after his return from France is that of ‘the general will’— the ‘will of the people’ had produced the French Revolution, as Wordsworth explained in his Letter to the Bishop of Llandaff .
By 1794 he seems to have had enough of undisciplined emotion and of the actions of Robespierre, Rousseau's fervent disciple; and therefore rushed to embrace a new philosophy of reason and nonviolence.
‘Throw away your books of chemistry,’ he tells a friend, ‘and read Godwin on Necessity.’
Godwin, the philosophical anarchist
The ideas of the author became more and more perspicuous and digested as his enquiries advanced.
GODWIN, Political Justice
William Godwin (1756–1836) is now remembered chiefly as Shelley's second father-in-law and father of the author of Frankenstein.
In 1793 these attainments were far in the future, and his reputation was riding high: everyone was reading his recently published Enquiry Concerning Political Justice .
The book had been written in haste, he charmingly tells us in the Preface, so that the first part was already at the printers before the second part was written.
We are further disarmed by the lucid and persuasive style: surely the book has been much underestimated?
Human beings have made so much progress since the beginnings of civilization, says Godwin, that nothing can now hinder the ultimate goal — the perfectibility of man.
‘There is no science that is not capable of additions; there is no art that may not be carried to a still higher perfection.
‘Therefore the time would surely come when mind would control matter — he forecast a field being ploughed by remote control — and eventually Man would conquer sickness and become immortal.
Politically the book calls for the abolition of government, institutions, and also of private property.
In the absolute reign of reason  which is shortly to appear on earth anarchy will be a pleasant and co-operative state of affairs, since all men will be inspired to a joyful devotion to social duty and justice.
Perhaps Godwin should be allowed to describe what would happen:
Progress towards this happy state would be hindered by revolution; some of those who read his book might have been inspired to take some practical action, so in order to make clear his position Godwin produced a pamphlet in 1795 entitled Considerations on Lord Grenville ‘s and Mr. Pitt's Bills in which he supported the government's repression of ‘agitators and democrats’.
This is not so hypocritical as it sounds for Godwin hated violence and war.
H is book was just the message that the English liberals were waiting for, now that they were disillusioned by Robespierre, frightened by Pitt's attempts to repress ‘sedition’, yet still unwilling to support the war with France.
In June 1794 Wordsworth told his friend Matthews that 
Godwin also offered guidance on moral problems; we must always look to the general good, calculate the consequences of the courses of action open to us, and arrive at an unbiased decision.
We should never allow ourselves to be swayed by our feelings.
This, again, sounds  at first very attractive and in Wordsworth's mind ‘found ready welcome’(Prelude 1805, x, 806 ff).
Unfortunately, Godwin's illustrative examples give the game away.
A house is burning down; it contains an intellectual and a chambermaid; which one should we save first?
In this case an enlightened friend of mankind would save the intellectual because of his potential influence on thousands of human minds; the chambermaid is advised to devote herself willingly to the flames!
Some are evidently more equal than others in this system of justice; let us consider another example.
Let us imagine that I have the misfortune to be born or to have settled in Portugal; being an enlightened philosopher I dislike the institutions there; should I try to change them by political subversion?
Godwin is not pleased with that idea: I might compromise my sincerity by acting in an underhand manner.
Should I then speak out and invite martyrdom?
Oh dear no! says Godwin: ‘an enlightened person ought by no consideration to be prevailed upon to settle in Portugal; and, if he were there already, ought to quit the country with all convenient speed’.
This is not just avoiding violence — it is simply avoiding the issue.
But Godwin's teaching on crime and punishment is years ahead of its time.
If our actions are necessary, that is, the result of all the preceding circumstances, then the criminal is not ‘guilty’; he is the inevitable product of an unenlightened social system.
Wordsworth rewrote Guilt and Sorrow to conform to this teaching, and in Lyrical Ballads we are invited to contemplate The Dungeon and The Convict from a Godwinian viewpoint; criminals are to be re-educated and placed in surroundings conducive to this end.
Wordsworth soon became disillusioned with most of Godwin's ideas.
They did not seem to square with his experience of real people; there was something inhuman about Godwin's conclusion that ‘the virtuous man, in proportion to his improvement, will be under the constant influence of fixed and invariable principles’.
Wordsworth's tragedy,The Borderers , shows what happens when one trusts to reason rather than the feelings.
For Godwin taught that one should ignore even the most obvious emotions, such as filial piety and gratitude: ‘Gratitude — a principle which has so often been the theme of the moralist and the poet, is no part of either justice or virtue.’
Wordsworth later countered by writing Simon Lee, the Old Huntsman , of which the theme is gratitude:
But in 1795 and 1796, after seeking the answers to his problems from Godwin's book and finding none, Wordsworth had come to a full stop: he had become ‘Sick, wearied out with contrarieties’(Prelude 1805, x, 900–1) and finally ‘yielded up moral questions in despair’.
It was about this time that Wordsworth met Coleridge (1772–1834), whom we are considering in this chapter as an important English philosopher rather than as a poet.
Coleridge had not yet evolved his  own system, and in many respects his development had run parallel to Wordsworth's.
He had been so moved by reading Political Justice that in 1794 he had decided to found a Godwinian state in a remote part of America.
Twelve males and twelve females — Godwin had objected to the ties of conventional marriage — would hold their property in common, as in the ideal republic described by Plato (whence Pantisocracy, which literally means ‘all equal government’).
But Coleridge's ideas were constantly changing; by 1797 he had finished with Godwinism, and during the time that he was constantly with Wordsworth at Alfoxden, his conversation (or ‘monoversation’) was full of references to Hartley, Berkeley and Spinoza.
Of these the most important was Hartley, after whom he had named his first son.
Hartley and the association of ideas
David Hartley (1705–57) was a disciple of Locke, and it is reasonable to assume that Wordsworth, like Coleridge, had read his work while studying at Cambridge, or just afterwards.
Hartley's Observations on Man, His Frame, His Duty and His Expectations , first published in 1749, had recently been reprinted.
His ‘system’ was founded on the principle of the Association of Ideas, a principle which had been recognized by the Greeks and by Locke, but which Hartley used to explain everything.
Sense impressions produced vibrations within the brain; two impressions received simultaneously would be linked and a later stimulus which recalled one would also recall the other.
(See Wordsworth's poem There was a Boy for an illustration of this.)
The mind was a machine which worked by association —‘all reasoning, as well as affection, is the mere result of association.
Hartley's philosophy was in fact an early form of the twentieth-century scheme of mental association known as Behaviourism (Pavlov's dogs were taught to salivate at the sound of an electric bell), and if writing today he would presumably have compared the brain to a computer.
The point to notice in this mechanistic philosophy is that the mind is thought of as passive:
Of course, when we test Hartley's philosophy against experience an immediate problem comes to mind: why is it that we are so often unable to link a face with a name or remember the title of a book we were reading only last week?
If the brain is a machine, why do the most obvious associations sometimes escape us?
Hartley tries to explain:
This curiously lame explanation seems not to have bothered Wordsworth, who adapted the system to his own purposes.
The association of sense impressions with moral ideas forms the principle on which The Prelude is constructed.
Wordsworth explains how the associations of early childhood help us in later life:
The long extract, which is printed in the Critical Survey, p. 134, should be studied before embarking on the vivid descriptions of the first two books of The Prelude ; it explains why the childhood memories are to be treasured.
Locke had thought that there were meaningless and trivial associations, but after Hartley's philosophy had been reinterpreted by Wordsworth, this objection was refuted.
Nature, we shall see, chooses good associations for her children; even those which appear bad will ultimately be good.
Association also influenced Wordsworth's poetic theory.
He classified his poems on Hartleian principles, e.g. Imagination, Affection, Sentiment and Reflection, and in the Preface to Lyrical Ballads he explained that one of the functions of poetry is to show how ‘we associate ideas in a state of excitement’; Wordsworth did not expect his poems to ‘gratify certain known habits of association’— he will provide new associations and ‘create the taste by which he is to be enjoyed’.
At the same time that Coleridge was discussing Hartley with Wordsworth he was also constantly urging him to write ‘a philosophic poem’—‘No man was ever yet a great poet without being at the same  time a profound philosopher’.
But it was never suggested that Wordsworth should simply versify Coleridge's ideas.
The two poets were intellectual equals; if anything, Coleridge deferred to Wordsworth.
Their views were only approximately the same, and they differed over Christianity.
Coleridge was absorbed in discussing minute points of religion, and found Wordsworth's lack of interest in the subject difficult to understand — he called him a ‘semi-Atheist’.
Wordsworth, on the other hand, placed more value on Nature as a religious and moral agent; he began those speculations about the meaning and direction of his own life which eventually built up into The Prelude .
A brief excursion in July 1798 provided Wordsworth with an opportunity to summarize these new ideas in Lines Written a Few Miles Above Tintern Abbey, on Revisiting the Banks of the Wye During a Tour, July 13th 1798 .
This poem was written immediately after the experience it describes — most unusual for Wordsworth — and owes its style and structure to Coleridge's Frost at Midnight .
The ideas behind it are partly derived from Hartley's chapter on The Pleasures and Pains of the Imagination , which explained that —‘the grandeur of some [natural]scenes, and the novelty of others, by exciting surprise and wonder [makes]a great difference in the preceding and subsequent states of mind’; he also contrasted ‘the offensiveness, dangers, and corruption of populous cities, and the health, tranquillity and innocence which the actual view, or mental contemplation , of rural scenes introduces’.
Hartley concluded his observations on natural beauty by stressing that although such scenes ‘strike the young mind with pleasure’, it is only ‘after a considerable time’ that the responses rise to their maximum; the poem in fact deals with an interval of five years.
In the end, said Hartley, ‘the pleasures of imagination must decline’— but Wordsworth, although recognizing the possibility in Tintern Abbey — was not to face up to this fact until the time of the Immortality Ode .
Wordsworth's ‘Creed’ 1798–1805
(Therefore the lively power of his mind prevailed and he journeyed far out beyond the flaming walls of the world, and traversed infinity in his intellect and imagination.)
LUCRETIUS, De Rerum Natura, i, 72–4.
There is, of course, far more in Tintern Abbey than Hartley.
Wordsworth was already constructing his own philosophy in a series of blank verse effusions which were incorporated in The Prelude .
Quite simply,
Wordsworth took the materialist philosophy of Locke and Hartley which had sufficed the eighteenth century, and changed round the terms, writing in positive instead of negative signs Instead of a dead universe described in terms of machines from which the Creator had departed, he proposed a living universe called ‘Nature’ described in terms of growth and organic life, which was being continuously created by a God who was inextricably involved in all its parts Whereas in Locke the mind at birth was ‘a white paper’, with no innate ideas, in Wordsworth the mind retains in early childhood some consciousness of a pre-existent state; in Locke the mind passively receives impressions from the senses, but in but in Wordsworth the mind actively perceives and a creative power within the mind organizes the multitude of chaotic sense impressions into a partial picture of the world.
But it is necessary for the individual mind to cooperate with the external Mind in Nature; the two minds are related and together they create the world — in Tintern Abbey the beholder loves 
Finally, in moments of vision the internal mind ‘goes out into the external Mind; they communicate through new kinds of sense experience — this is what the ‘sublime’ passages in Tintern Abbey and The Prelude are about.
It is of course true that there are parallels to certain of these ideas in Greek and Roman philosophies, in Eastern religions, in the writings of mystics and in eighteenth-century sublime poetry, and well-read and inquiring students like Wordsworth and Coleridge could not have avoided hearing about them.
In Berkeley's Siris , for example— we know Coleridge was passing through a Berkeley phase as he named his second son, born in 1798, alter him — we read that ‘there is according to those philosophies (Platonic and Stoic) a life infused throughout all things’.
The jump to ‘interfused’ is not difficult.
But if we exaggerate the earlier parallels to the announcement made in Tintern Abbey and The Prelude we lose sight of Wordsworth's purpose and of his originality in terms of the philosophic situation in 1798.
Nor is there much to be gained from explanations of Wordsworth's ideas which imply that he was in some way different from ourselves.
If we begin by saying ‘Wordsworth was a mystic, therefore…’, or ‘Wordsworth was a poetic genius, therefore…’ or, as in recent years, ‘Wordsworth was psychologically abnormal, possibly mad, and certainly strange…’we deceive ourselves; it is flattering to think that we have explained Wordsworth, and need therefore pay no attention to what he says.
We are hiding from the attack presented by the plain statements of a normal and intelligent human being.
Furthermore, I do not see that fastening a label from ancient  philosophy upon Wordsworth — in this case to call him a ‘Pantheist’— is particularly helpful; we are simply consigning him to a museum of dead ideas.
To label anything, whether an idea or a person, is frequently a method of blocking inquiry, of avoiding the difficulty of actually looking for ourselves; it is a way of shunning mental adventure.
And this is exactly the quality which Wordsworth excels in.
In 1798 it took amazing moral courage to publish a poem which said ‘the world is alive’.
Wordsworth's achievement has also been devalued by attributing all his ideas to Coleridge.
But the first written reference to the new philosophy occurs in 1794, before the two poets had met.
In preparing An Evening Walk for a possible new edition, Wordsworth writes of 
In The Prelude (though one could argue that Wordsworth is writing after meeting Coleridge), he tells us that he felt these emotions as early 
At Cambridge he developed these ideas until 
The Prelude , which is, in fact, the nearest thing to the great philosophical poem which Coleridge hoped Wordsworth would produce, was mostly written while Coleridge was in Malta, and it is as an exposition of Wordsworth's ideas that we must read it; for Coleridge, as we shall see, had already begun to return to orthodox Christianity and  in 1803 was shocked at Wordsworth's irreverence: ‘O dearest William!
Would Ray or Durham have spoken of God as you spoke of Nature?’
The theme of The Prelude is the growth of the individual mind under the guidance of the Mind of external Nature.
The Babe is 
Wordsworth explains how his own mind slowly arrived at maturity, how he dedicated himself to poetry, and how after being diverted by Cambridge, France and Godwinism, his imagination was restored, a vision of the eternal Mind granted to him on Snowdon (Prelude 1805, xiii, 1–119) and his poetic vocation assured.
It is a ‘heroic poem’, even though, as Wordsworth admitted, ‘it was a thing unprecedented in literary history that a man should talk so much about himself’.
The hero of modern times is the individual , and Wordsworth only knew one individual well enough to write about — himself!
The whole poem radiates a feeling of new life, of active exploration of a new-found universe.
Wordsworth writes as if he is a new kind of human being, like Adam naming the creatures for the first time.
This sense of exultation, of ‘man's unconquerable mind’, was not to last.
Wordsworth lived by his beliefs for eight years, but in 1805 he was so shaken by the death of his brother John that his self-sufficiency collapsed.
For a time he adopted a Stoical attitude to outface suffering, but this only brought on middle age prematurely.
We shall follow his change of course towards religious belief in the next section.
But Wordsworth's achievement in these eight years cannot be written off, even though the poet himself tried, as the years went by, to minimize it.
He had made an attempt to overthrow the eighteenth-century system of materialism and this attempt, with Coleridge's help, succeeded.
In the effort of battering down the wall of the old order Wordsworth suffered some damage; very frequently the pioneers of new ideas hurt themselves in making the breach through which others will rush gaily (and take the credit!).
Wordsworth had been exhausted by his efforts as early as 1804 (see Ode to Duty ), and he would probably have returned to conventional pieties and religion even if his brother's death had not accelerated to process.
After 1805 the flood of ideas poured on past Wordsworth, without him; for The Prelude was not published until 1850.
It was left to Coleridge to schematize and to elucidate, to pilot through the new philosophy into the minds of the next generation.
Coleridge's development after 1798 was roughly parallel to that of Wordsworth, though he was always more concerned to make his opinions square with Christianity.
Coleridge tells us that after he ‘had successively studied in the schools of Locke, Berkeley, Leibnitz, and Hartley and could find in none of them an abiding place for [his]reason’(Biographia Literaria , ix) he discovered in Germany the writings of ‘the illustrious sage of Koenigsberg’: Immanuel Kant.
In March 1801 he announced that Hartley was ‘overthrown’ and that ‘Newton was a mere materialist.
Mind , in his system, is always passive — a lazy Looker-on on an external world.’
Having cleared away the relics of the eighteenth century, Coleridge substituted the doctrine of the Imagination, the creative power within the mind, with which we actively perceive and make our world.
In this way he saw that Man was truly made in the Image of God: ‘The primary Imagination I hold to be the living power and prime agent of all human perception, and as a repetition in the finite mind of the eternal act of creation in the infinite I AM’(Biographia Literaria , xiii).
The way was now open to an orthodox Christian philosophy which would contain psychology, history and poetry within it, and which would emphasize the Middle Ages; it would embrace the Gothic Revival and the Oxford or Anglo-Catholic Movement within the Church of England.
Although Coleridge never produced the great metaphysical work which he had always intended, he passed on his ideas by lectures, journalism and conversation.
John Stuart Mill's essay on Coleridge clearly indicates the wide extent of this influence, calling him one of the ‘great seminal minds of England’.
But Wordsworth, ‘having never read a word of German metaphysics, thank Heaven’, travelled towards religious belief on a lonelier road, like Christian in the Valley of the Shadow of Death.
It seems appropriate to bridge the transition into the next section with a long appreciation of Wordsworth written by John Keats in a letter of May 1818, in which he puts Wordsworth above Milton as a ‘philosopher’; Keats's judgments are usually right!
Looking down on the clouds, Snowdonia
I will return to Wordsworth — whether or no he has an extended vision or a circumscribed grandeur — whether he is an eagle in his nest, or on the wing.
And to be more explicit and to show you how tall I stand by the giant, I will put down a simile of human life as far as I now perceive it; that is, to the point to which I say we both have arrived at.
Well — I compare human life to a large Mansion of Many Apartments, two of which I can only describe, the doors of the rest being as yet shut upon me.
The first we step into we call the infant or thoughtless Chamber, in which we remain as long as we do not think…we no sooner get into the second Chamber, which I shall call the Chamber of Maiden-Thought, than we become intoxicated with the light and the atmosphere, we see nothing but pleasant wonders, and think of delaying there for ever in delight.
However, among the effects this breathing is father  of is that tremendous one of sharpening one's vision into the heal.
and nature of Man — of convincing one's nerves that the world is full of Misery and Heartbreak, Pain, Sickness and oppression — whereby this Chamber of Maiden-Thought becomes gradually darkened and at the same time on all sides of it many doors are set open — but all dark — all leading to dark passages.
We see not the balance of good and evil.
We are in a Mist.
We are now in that state — We feel the ‘burden of the Mystery’.
To this point was Wordsworth come, as far as I can conceive when he wrote ‘Tintern Abbey’ and it seems to me that his Genius is explorative of those dark Passages....
Here I must think Wordsworth is deeper than Milton, though I think it has depended more upon the general and gregarious advance of intellect, than individual greatness of Mind From the Paradise Lost and the other Works of Milton, I hope it is not too presuming, even between ourselves to say, that his Philosophy, human and divine, may be tolerably understood by one not much advanced in years…
He did not think into the human heart, as Wordsworth has done.
Return to the Anglican Church
It is most unlikely that Wordsworth ever thought of his philosophical ideas as a ‘Creed’; later he said that we are not supposed to take literally his reference to himself in Tintern Abbey as ‘a worshipper of Nature’.
This, he points out in a letter of December 1814, was ‘a passionate expression uttered incautiously’.
He goes on to explain that he was never a follower of Spinoza (the seventeenth-century philosopher, who identified God with Nature).
It would be easy to put this 1814 statement down to the cowardice of a middle-aged civil servant ashamed of his youthful indiscretion, were it not for the amazing passage which follows.
One would expect the older Wordsworth to trot out the arguments of the Established Church at this point: instead he says he does   
Perhaps what Wordsworth is trying to say is not as unorthodox as it may sound.
We are used to the traditional emphasis placed in Christian teaching on the transcendence of God, on His detachment from the world which He has created.
Wordsworth emphasizes the immanence of God, that is, His presence in Nature; to say that Nature is permeated by God is perfectly orthodox — the Roman Catholic poet and Jesuit priest, Gerard Manley Hopkins, wrote a sonnet beginning ‘The world is charged with the grandeur of God’.
In the letter quoted above Wordsworth reiterated that he never said that God is Nature, or that Nature and God are the same; what he (and Hopkins) stressed was ‘the indwelling spirit’.
Theologically-minded critics have pointed out the Christian precedents to Wordsworth's view of Nature.
They say he was looking for evidence of natura naturans ‘all-creating nature’, rather than natura naturata , ‘the made world’; in certain seventeenth- and eighteenth-century writing of unimpeachable orthodoxy reference is made to anima mundi , a spirit pervading the world and supplying the continuing presence of God.
What is this other than the ‘Spirit far more deeply interfused’ of Tintern Abbey , or The Prelude's ‘Wisdom and Spirit of the Universe’?
In this way one could go on to save — or salvage — a number of Wordsworth's apparently unorthodox poems in the interests of Christianity.
But difficulties arise which are inherent in the nature of poetry itself.
Most Romantic poetry depends not on statement but on suggestion and metaphor, whether concise, concrete and verbal, as in Keats and Hopkins, or diffuse, abstracted and structural, as in Shelley and Wordsworth.
And if Wordsworth is simply describing one thing in terms of another , then the case for a ‘Christian’Tintern Abbey or 1805 Prelude breaks down.
Surely the language of religion is being used to direct us towards a new kind of philosophy, for which no language of its own exists.
Wordsworth's use of religious vocabulary may be ambiguous, to say the least.
This ambiguity of language helps to explain why so many interpretations of Wordsworth's philosophy and religion were able to arise.
If one read the linguistic signs as pointing to something vaguely beyond the poem, to ‘Something evermore about to be’(Prelude 1805, vi, 542), then the poetry could be used to support innumerable creeds.
But if we study the use of religious language in Wordsworth's poems between 1798 and 1820 we see a gradual change from what might be  meant metaphorically or ‘poetically’(Wordsworth said that he employed the pre-existence theme in the Immortality Ode ‘as a Poet’) towards language that is used literally and in an orthodox Christian sense.
(The many later alterations to The Prelude move in this direction too.)
In his poetry, Wordsworth uses the language of faith years before his ‘prose mind’ can accept Christian doctrine; this is why his ‘conversion’is impossible to date, and why there is so much divergence between the poetic and prose statements he may make at any stage in his progress.
In 1798, then, at the conclusion of Tintern Abbey , we find phrases indicative of the future —‘blessings’, ‘zeal of holier love’, ‘Shall e'er prevail against us’; in Resolution and Independence (1802) we hear of ‘peculiar grace.
/A leading from above, a something given’, and ‘a Man from some far region sent’.
These point out of this world, but where to is not made clear.
Later in 1802 on the way to France, ‘Dear God!’, in the penultimate line of the Sonnet:Composed upon Westminster Bridge , may be an exclamation, but in August 1802 his blessing on his daughter Caroline is undoubtedly surrounded by Christian references.
How far is this to be taken simply as metaphorical language?
By 1804 Wordsworth had embraced an attitude usually described as Stoical — his poems refer more and more to the virtue of endurance in the face of suffering, age and death (Michael, The Small Celandine, Resolution and Independence, Ode to Duty ).
In the Immortality Ode (1804) he declares   
In these lines ‘the primal sympathy’ seems to represent all that is left of the relation between Man and Nature; ‘the philosophic mind’, on the other hand, is a direct reference to Roman Stoicism.
Nevertheless, the language of the Immortality Ode offended many liberal critics who had up to then been sympathetic to Wordsworth's poetry.
They were not clear how to take lines like 
Even though learned readers took this as a reference to Platonic, rather than Christian belief, there appeared to be something Biblical about the ‘young lambs’ and ‘the tabor's sound’.
And the Ode to Duty , with its opening lines  sounds as if it might have been written by an Old Testament Prophet.
The death of Wordsworth's brother John in the spring of 1805 destroyed any remaining illusions.
In the Elegiac Stanzas (see Critical Survey, p. 140) the picture of Peele Castle fronting the storm seems an apt image of Stoical defiance in a hostile universe:
Having stated that his earlier life was misdirected, and his poetry the product of ‘fond illusion’, Wordsworth concludes with a decision to 
The first three lines of this are exaggerated Stoicism; but what is the ‘hope’ of the casually thrown-in last line?
‘Batter my heart, three-person'd God’, wrote John Donne; it seems that Wordsworth has decided, his spirit broken, to try the Christian ‘hope’ of personal immortality.
The difficulty is that the letters written at the time by Wordsworth, while full of references to ‘God’ and ‘fortitude’, can hardly be described as pious.
He contrasts the moral ideas of humanity with those of the deity, who is described in terms reminiscent of Voltaire: ‘Why have we sympathies that make the best of us so afraid of inflicting  pain and sorrow, which yet we see dealt about so lavishly by the supreme governor?’
Nevertheless, in 1806, staying at the house of his friend Sir George Beaumont, Wordsworth began to go to church again, even though he was not a regular attender.
The next stage of his personal beliefs is obscure.
The White Doe of Rylstone (written 1807–8) is a very difficult poem, containing a sympathetic account of the Catholic Rising in the North in 1569.
The rebel banner is made by the one Protestant daughter of the Catholic Norton family, who endures a lonely life after the failure of the rising and the death of her brothers and father.
She is visited by a Doe, which radiates sanctity; the point of the poem, says Wordsworth, is ‘nothing less than the Apotheosis of the Animal’.
I must confess that I have not the least idea what this phrase could mean in an orthodox Christian context.
But the poem appears to commend long-suffering endurance and to suggest that mourners may be silently visited by Divine Grace.
The relevance of this to Wordsworth's personal bereavement is clear.
While The Excursion (1814) contains a Pastor and a Churchyard, the Christianity it offers is still minimal; Wordsworth himself says that it illustrates ‘the Bible of the Universe, as it speaks to the ear of the intelligent’.
Yet it was the poem that brought Wordsworth to the notice of clerics in need of sermon material (his poems were used for this purpose throughout the last century, and I have heard them used in this).
In 1820 Wordsworth saw that ‘the Church was in danger’ owing to the debates on Catholic emancipation, that is the restoration to Roman Catholics of full civil rights; he therefore produced the Ecclesiastical Sonnets (or Sketches ) as a contribution to the controversy, a hymn in defence of the Established Church.
He continued to give public support to the Church of England for the rest of his life.
While there were clearly political motives involved, there seems no reason to doubt his sincerity.
One cannot leave Wordsworth's religion without a glance at his final years.
The visitor to Rydal Mount, after bumping into a boulder with the following inscription: would find himself in a conventional household, where the master read morning and evening prayers to the assembled family and servants.
One might be excused for wondering what the aged poet really believed.
It is significant that what appears to be his last autograph, written in a shaky hand in a young girl's album, is the final passage of the Immortality Ode , which teaches us to live by ‘the human heart’.
These words recur so often in Wordsworth's work that they seem to represent an unwavering core of faith.
‘All  religions’, he wrote in 1824, ‘owe their origin or acceptation to the wish of the human heart to supply in another existence the deficiencies of this.’
'If my writings are to last,’ he said in 1835,'…they will please tor the single cause, ‘That we have all of us one human heart’.’
Keats, as we saw in the preceding section, concluded with the same emphasis.
It seems only fair to allow Wordsworth the last word.
Critical Survey
Early poems, 1784–93
For many years little notice was taken of Wordsworth's writings before 1798, but even the School Exercise written at the age of fourteen (Poetical Works , i, 259–61) is useful as an illustration of the faults of eighteenth-century style; it is written in heroic couplets, in imitation of the work of Alexander Pope, and contains an excessive use of personification:
Wordsworth produced a long poem in 1787 entitled The Vale of Esthwaite (Poetical Works , i, 270–83).
The poem is remarkable for its Gothic horrors and its energy, for example: This is not a ‘Wordsworthian’ view of Nature, but it helps to explain what the poet meant when he told us in The Prelude that he was haunted by mysterious ‘presences’during childhood and youth;The Vale of Esthwaite anticipates The Prelude in other ways — the interest is in the mind of the poet, and the effect of the imagination on landscape.
Wordsworth's first publications,An Evening Walk and Descriptive Sketches , appeared in 1793; the aim was to bring his name before the public as he felt he had done nothing at university — and, of course, the faint hope of making money.
We might therefore expect these works to conform in some way to established taste, but it does not follow, as many of Wordsworth's later disciples were prone to assume that anything in heroic couplets is necessarily bad; in fact, many passages from these poems compare quite favourably with Wordsworth's eighteenth-century predecessors.
The common idea that Wordsworth disowned all his eighteenth-century ‘beginnings’ may perhaps need correcting.
He went on ‘improving’ this poem over a long period of years so that the text usually printed shows many alterations from the original.
An Evening Walk is a topographical poem, that is, it describes the scenery of a limited locality.
The area delimited can be very restricted indeed.
The precedents for this kind of poem go back to the seventeenth century, and one could usefully look at Pope's Windsor Forest or Dyer's Grongar Hill .
Wordsworth describes the Lake District in a series of pictures; in the last paragraph of the poem the evening walk is almost over, and culminates in a night-piece.
From An Evening walk 
TEXT.
The extract consists of lines 433–46 of the 1793 edition.
It is the last paragraph of the poem.
CONTENT.
The sounds of night, picked out one by one, are imitated in the carefully constructed lines; yet the pauses between the sounds are also conveyed in the slowness and tranquillity of the whole passage, so that the general effect is one of intense stillness, with the ear strained to catch the least noise.
Wordsworth describes silence by pointing away from it.
Compare Milton's Il Penseroso , lines 73–6.
VERSE.
Heroic couplets, the typical verse form of the Augustan age, were brought to perfection by Alexander Pope.
Notice that Wordsworth can play off speech-rhythm against the iambic pattern; if one reads the extract aloud ‘List'ning’ and ‘Broke’, for example, are heard to run counter to the expected rhythm and help the verse to mime what is being described.
There are many similar examples of skilful writing, so that it is hardly possible to think of Wordsworth as abandoning traditional forms in 1798 because he was unable to write in the accepted manner.
If anything this piece of writing is too competent, too clever.
POSTSCRIPT.
Coleridge admired the early poems, with reservations, and one of his many projected schemes was: ‘to analyse the pleasures received from Gates, in corners of fields, at twilight’(Notebooks 1794–1804 : 1707 with a reference to this extract from An Evening Walk ).
Revolutionary Wordsworth, 1793–98
This is a period of storm and stress, at any rate to begin with; Wordsworth's obscure and apparently purposeless wanderings are reflected in Guilt and Sorrow (also called Salisbury Plain , and, in truncated form,The Female Vagrant ).
In this extract the hero approaches Stonehenge: Some readers have found the human sacrifice image ‘juvenile’, and it is reminiscent of the general level of The Vale of Esthwaite ; but in Wordsworth's defence one must point out that everybody believed that Stonehenge had been the scene of human sacrifice, and continued to do so until this century (see, for instance, Hardy's Tess of the  D'Urbervilles  ).
The rest of the poem is concerned with the social causes of human misery: the Female Vagrant tells us that  This is dismissed by many critics as ‘tainted with Godwinism’, but I cannot myself see that lines like these are ever likely to become out of date.
They affront the ‘enlightened reader’ because they are about reality and because they demand sympathy, compassion and remedial action, qualities which are always in short supply.
Wordsworth's next work,The Borderers , appears at first to be a pseudo-Shakespearean tragedy, one of many that the Romantic poets produced.
It is in fact an argument about Godwin's ideas, and it is difficult to decide whether to assign the  victory to Godwin or to the more conservative philosophy which Wordsworth was now beginning  to embrace.
The story of the play is simple; the hero ‘goes into the world and is betrayed into a great crime’.
The betrayer, Oswald, believes that it is possible to cut oneself off from the past (compare the argument between Tom Paine and Burke about the British constitution; is it desirable to imitate the French and abolish the past by Revolution?).
If one reads nothing else, the account of Oswald's voyage (in Act iv, lines 1682–1882) should be compared to The Ancient Mariner .
During these years Wordsworth also began The Ruined Cottage ; this was later incorporated into Book i of The Excursion and suffered considerable modification.
In 1797 he was also producing shorter poems like The Old Cumberland Beggar (see p. 64).
The point to notice is that while all these poems deal with problems of society and justice, the emphasis is changing from explaining the causes of criminal behaviour to understanding and defending the outcasts.
Lyrical Ballads
The first volume of Lyrical Ballads was published in 1798.
It conveniently marks the beginning of nineteenth-century poetry, though not of course the end of eighteenth-century readers, who lingered on till after 1832, so that in the first three decades of the new century a great battle of taste was fought out, largely over Wordsworth's ‘simple’ poetry.
Because of this certain ideas have passed into critical legend; Wordsworth's own Preface has encouraged modern readers to believe that the reading public of the 1790s were completely unprepared for the new poetry, and that Lyrical Ballads was a complete failure from the point of view of communication and also of financial success.
An article by Mayo brought new facts into consideration.
The first point which everybody had overlooked was that Wordsworth hoped ‘to make money’ with Lyrical Ballads , and presumably thought that he had gone some way in making concessions to popular taste.
The magazine poetry of the 1790s frequently deals with similar subject-matter, and poets were already using a wide variety of metrical forms, including ballads.
There were many reviews of Wordsworth and Coleridge's joint volume, and Goody Blake and Harry Gill was the most popular poem.
If Lyrical Ballads was as unpopular as legend would have it, why would Wordsworth have added a second volume in 1800, and why would both volumes be reprinted in 1802 and again in 1805?
Lyrical Ballads nevertheless remains a very strange publication, the full effect of which can only be appreciated by studying a facsimile edition, or one of the reprints of the first edition.
One can see why The Ancyent Marinere prejudiced the success of the volume, and the ‘simplicity’ of many poems can be seen to emerge from a background of rather precious cleverness.
Tintern Abbey , which, on the surface, appears more eighteenth-century than the other poems, is not typical of the volume.
The Idiot Boy and Simon Lee, the Old Huntsman are true Lyrical Ballads, and are poems which remain alive because they continue to provoke such intense disagreement.
Since most readers' first reaction to such poetry is unfavourable, one has to look hard tor critics who have something positive to say.
J.
F. Danby's The Simple Wordsworth is particularly to be recommended here — he is very good on Simon Lee , for example.
One of the easier Lyrical Ballads will serve to bring out the main points of critical debate.
TEXT.
The version given here is taken from the 1798 edition of Lyrical Ballads .
Wordsworth later made changes in the text — as in most of his early poems — mainly to please Coleridge.
For example, he altered the number of children (line 41) from ten to six, to avoid describing an extreme case of misery; but by making this alteration he weakened the point of the poem.
GENERAL IMPRESSIONS.
The first impression of the true Lyrical Ballads (i.e. Simon Lee or Goody Blake and Harry Gill ) is one of amusement.
We laugh at what is incongruous, and also I suspect, as a defence mechanism against something strange and unusual.
Yet ‘Wordsworth was of opinion that posterity will value most those Lyrical Ballads which were most laughed at’—(Crabb Robinson).
The second impression is probably one of childishness and simplicity; we seem to have strayed into a non-adult world — is it comparable, as some have suggested, to the world of Blake's Songs of Innocence and Songs of Experience ?
Surely not, because we feel that we are listening to a true  story of a real person, and if we grant this, then feelings connected with relieving distress are more likely to arise in us than purely poetic emotions.
SUBJECT.
The social problem is the apparent occasion for the poem, and some people feel that it is an intrusion.
But even the theme of agricultural distress is subordinate to the attack on Godwin's belief that property is evil.
The peasant has identified himself with his flock.
The poem was classified in 1815 as a Poem founded on the Affections.
This is supported by Wordsworth's defence of his choice of the common people as subject matter —‘Low and rustic life was generally chosen, because in that condition the essential passions of the heart find a better soil in which they can attain their maturity…’
(Preface to Lyrical Ballads ).
Wordsworth worked from observation —‘The incident occurred in the village of Holford, close by Alfoxden’,— but in a letter of 1836 he makes it clear that it was a friend who actually saw the man.
(Compare Alice Fell ,The Solitary Reaper , and many other poems where Wordsworth assimilates other people's experiences and tells them as if they were his own.)
DICTION.
Sometimes, for many lines together, we can say with Wordsworth —‘the words, and the order of the words, in no respect differ from the most unimpassioned conversation’(Preface to Lyrical Ballads ).
Some early critics of Wordsworth's ‘simple’ style thought that he was stupid and incompetent; but we have already seen that he could write with due regard to eighteenth-century decorum.
One can only conclude that we are presented here with a deliberately unpoetical poem , an assault upon the cultivated reader's exquisite sensibility.
The cultivated reader sensed that he was being teased, and reacted accordingly —‘Whatever is too original will be hated at first’(De Quincey).
BALLAD FORM.
There was a literary vogue for pseudomedieval ballads following the publication of Bishop Percy's Reliques of Ancient Poetry , 1765, and Coleridge in The Ancient Mariner is trying to imitate the diction and manner of an earlier age.
But Wordsworth's intentions here are more difficult to follow.
Presumably ‘he is trying to write a popular street ballad; if so, it looks as if the stylistic crudities are an imitation of ‘the idiom of the people’.
Perhaps the ‘I’ of the poem is not William Wordsworth but a rustic narrator — compare the old sea-captain who tells the story of The Thorn .
This is not a very convincing solution, since most readers don't feel that this a dramatic monologue, and take the ‘I’ of the poem to be Wordsworth himself.
CONCLUSION.
Hazlitt said of the Lyrical Ballads —‘Fools have laughed at, wise men scarcely understand them’.
Coleridge said that Wordsworth's object was ‘to give the charm of novelty to things of everyday, and to excite a feeling analogous to the.
supernatural’.
Certainly the feeling excited here is strange and unusual, and this may be due to the confusion in the man's mind between his sheep  and his children (lines 21–30, 81–90).
Even the numerical counting-down is uncanny: there are ten children in line 41 and the flock dwindles ‘from ten to five, from five to three (’(line 92).
We are reminded of a well-known nursery rhyme —‘Then there were none’.
Which is more important — children or property, especially when the property is identified with one's hold on life?
We think of Michael who sent away his son, Luke, rather than give up his land; and surely the picture of the man weeping with a lamb in his arms, which he has fetched ‘from the rock’, calls up a wealth of Old and New Testament imagery?
In this way the man and his sheep may linger in our minds, even if we do not remember the economic difficulties so clearly —‘The Last of the Flock’ would make a good title for a Victorian narrative painting.
But already we are moving away from the source of the poem — the real man on an actual road in Somerset — who obstinately refuses to turn into a symbol.
However hard we try to make him into a literary archetype he remains firmly rooted in life, in nonliterary experience.
Perhaps Wordsworth intended to break down the cultivated reader's protective distinction between literature and life: he certainly succeeded in confusing people, in 1798 and ever since.
‘If the author be a wealthy man’, said a reviewer in 1799, ‘he ought not to have suffered the poor peasant to part with the last of the flock’.
Germany, 1798–9
The meteorological aspects of the German winter have already been discussed, and could perhaps be reread at this point (p. 36).
Wordsworth was forced into using his own past as material for poetry, and the first attempts of a writer in a new vein are frequently the best.
The autobiographical narratives of this period are saved from personal triviality by the force of visionary insight.
Wordsworth discovered and established those kinds of poetry which would best suit him; it is in the German period that we travel to the furthest limits of the ‘Wordsworthian’ vision, in poems such as the ‘Lucy’and ‘Matthew’sequences, which are at one level blindingly clear, but in terms of prose exposition almost impossible to ‘explain'.
The 1798–9 version of The Prelude (or the first two books) may be read at this point, and if the reader finds more to enjoy in the narrative sections this is entirely appropriate since they appear to have been written as separate entities and only later blended into a single poem.
The ‘Lucy’ poems have received a great deal of critical attention (see, for example, F. R. Leavis in Revaluation ); it is because the ‘Matthew’poems are so frequently ignored that I have chosen one of them for special comment.
NOTE.
This poem is part of a cycle and will become clearer if The Fountain is studied in conjunction with it.
TEXT.
The earliest printed text — from Lyrical Ballads (1800)— is given here.
Later versions are ‘improved’ in several places, and I would agree that the later reading of the penultimate line —‘With a bough’— is a real improvement.
FIRST IMPRESSION.
This is another attempt to imitate true ballad style, but this time it is more like a medieval ballad —‘bright and red /Uprose the morning sun’ sounds like The Ancient Mariner.
Although graves and a dead girl are at the centre of the poem, no melancholy feelings can completely overlay the initial impression of life and good health, conveyed by ‘bright’, ‘glittering’, ‘blithe’, ‘spring’, ‘steaming’, ‘merrily’, and the jerky jog-trot of the first verses.
STORY.
The ballad tells an apparently simple story; in fact it is a tale within a tale within a memory — as in many of Wordsworth's poems, for example The Rainbow and Tintern Abbey , there is a backward and forward movement in time.
At first the narrator (whom we take to be the Boy of the parallel poem,The Fountain ), joins the old Schoolmaster on a joyful excursion to the hills.
Suddenly, the old man stops short; the peculiar shape and colour of a cloud brings back into his mind a similar day thirty years before — a true Hartleian touch, this!
On  the earlier occasion, the old man had also ‘stopp'd short’ while on a holiday fishing expedition; at that time his daughter Emma was already dead, but we flash back even further for a moment to recall her voice.
He then goes on to say that after her death he loved her more than when she was alive — this leads us into a trap, for we begin to feel that the old man was a ghoulish sentimentalist.
As he turns away from the grave (symbolically as well as literally) he meets, beside the yew-tree (traditional symbol of death) a Girl whose appearance is strikingly unusual.
Some critics feel that she is either Emma returned from the grave, or a supernatural vision; though both these interpretations make some sense, I feel that the most obvious possibility is the true one.
She is another child, an ordinary human being over whose appearance Wordsworth has thrown a ‘supernatural charm’(see previous poem for the purpose of the Lyrical Ballads ).
Her life is over-emphasized —‘blooming’, her freshness —‘dew’, and her exceeding fairness; the ‘fountain', clearly made a symbol of life in the poem of that title, ‘trips’ 'from its rocky cave' — possibly in association with‘basket’a reference to the return of Proserpine from the underworld, combining the idea of spring and the return of a daughter.
These multitudinous associations — and more could easily come to mind — prepare us for a sentimental reunion scene (if it is Emma) or an adoption scene ('Let me be your father', etc.).
Instead, with an unexpected unsentimental twist, the Girl is rejected —‘I did not wish her mine’ and allowed to remain free and unpossessed — we must not use others as emotional fodder.
‘Mine’ is an example of the heavy loading of a simple word —‘With Wordsworth, words mean all of their possible meaning’, says Coleridge.
In The Fountain the Boy's offer of sonship had been similarly rejected; perhaps Matthew is peculiarly honest and telling us that there are no substitutes , but we still have the ‘sigh of pain' and the persistence of the memory to account for.
At any rate, his strange story, told thirty years later, forges another link in the chain of associations, so that Wordsworth, years afterwards, in the last stanza, can still see Matthew ‘at that moment’ of finishing his story, though he too, at the time of writing the poem, is also ‘in his grave’.
The ‘bough of wilding’ remains, perhaps an accidental association, but with some symbolic force of mystery, like the mythical Golden Bough, in communicating with the dead.
And Wordsworth was always concerned, as we shall see in the extract from The Prelude (p. 134), in keeping open communications with the important moments of his past, which are used to fortify the present.
It is this sense of fortification which the final lines of this poem give us.
(See Danby,The Simple Wordsworth , 79–88, for further discussion of the poem.)
INFORMATION, PROBABLY IRRELEVANT.
Since the Matthew poems are mysterious, a good deal of speculation has arisen, mainly biographical.
For example, Matthew is usually thought to be William Taylor (see p. 13), but Taylor died at thirty-two.
He was traditionally  responsible for Wordsworth's early verse, encouraging his pupils to imitate the ‘Graveyard school’ of eighteenth-century poetry.
We might therefore expect a commemorative poem in his honour to contain melancholy, death, and a churchyard, but the whole mood of Wordsworth's poem is different from, say, Gray's Elegy , a stanza of which was inscribed on Taylor's tomb.
The dead girl links The Two April Mornings to the ‘Lucy’ poems, and since Emma is used as another name for Dorothy Wordsworth in yet another group of poems, it has been suggested that the Lucy/Matthew cycle is connected with a sublimated brother-sister relationship.
I cannot see that any of this speculation helps us to understand the poem; but if we must guess, it seems more to the point to look for an eight-year-old girl.
In 1799 Wordsworth's own daughter, Caroline, would be almost the same age as Emma; he had, of course, never seen her.
CONCLUSION, POINTING FORWARD.
Notice the hints of Stoicism; of facing experiences, not shirking them; of enduring and continuing to the end, six years before the Elegiac Stanzas (p. 140).
At the beginning of the poem Wordsworth is a boy, at the end a mature man, capable of recognizing adult experience, even the experience of middle and old age.
The decision to go home, 1799
The importance of this decision has already been discussed (p. 36); the experience is given its full poetic record in Home at Grasmere , that is the First Book of the uncompleted Recluse , to be found in Poetical Works , v, p. 313–39.
In the earlier draft of this poem the following passage occurs, describing an incident on the journey from Yorkshire to Grasmere:
The passage goes on to say that the Hart-Leap Well experience made William and Dorothy feel that their decision to settle at Grasmere was justified.
If nothing else, the Hart provided a forceful illustration of the homing instinct.
Hart-Leap Well
Hart-Leap Well is a small spring of water, about five miles from Richmond in Yorkshire, and near the side of the road which leads from Richmond to Askrigg.
Its name is derived from a remarkable Chase, the memory of which is preserved by the monuments spoken of in the second Part of the following Poem, which monuments do now exist as I have there described them.
TEXT.
This is the second published version, from the second volume of Lyrical Ballads (1802).
There were several later alterations, which look like attempts to make certain lines more elegant, surely the occasional clumsiness of expression suits the ballad style.
TYPE OF POEM.
This raises an important question: with what type of poem, what genre, are we faced here?
We could argue, from the  title of the volume, that this is a Lyrical Ballad: if so, it is a further development of this kind of poem, in the same way that The Two April Mornings was an intensification of the basic method of The Last of the Flock .
Here, too, a certain ‘colouring of the imagination’ is thrown over an incident on Wordsworth's journey home; but is this enough to explain the strange story and the even more mysterious ‘Part Second’?
Another approach would start from the medieval subject matter: is this a Gothic tale?
The Gothic side of Wordsworth is usually played down, and he is thought of as reacting against the overstimulation of the imagination which medieval fantasy so frequently provided.
But Wordsworth shares the interest in the Middle Ages common to his Romantic contemporaries, and such poems as the Song at the Feast of Brougham Castle and The White Doe of Rylstone are by no means negligible.
Personally, while admitting its close relation to the ‘true’ Lyrical Ballads, I prefer to describe this as a commemorative poem , related to the large number of poems ‘On the Naming of Places’and the poems ‘written on tour’(see p. 122).
The story tells us, at a literal level, how Hartleap Well received its name; the curious prose preface emphasizes this and also conveys the idea of commemorating and preserving a tradition for posterity.
But note that Wordsworth classified it as ‘A poem of the Imagination’ in collected editions.
METRE AND VERSE-FORM.
The slow-moving five-foot lines are unexpected; the dignified quatrains make for a cumbrous narrative style, which is alien in spirit to that of a medieval ballad.
This stanza form has an eighteenth-century history, and was used in Gray's Elegy written in a Country Churchyard :
In Gray's Elegy there is also a ‘hoary-headed Swain', who addresses a ‘kindred spirit’(to the dead poet)‘led by lonely contemplation’; there may be other parallels, but it must be conceded at this point that it is only at the close of Hartleap Well that Wordsworth approaches closely to Gray's verse movement:
These lines illustrate the sententious moralizing that the eighteenth-century reader would associate with the stanza, and look forward to its even more emphatic use in Elegiac Stanzas (p. 140).
THE STORY.
The first part of the poem deals with Sir Walter's attempts to impose his mastery on the natural environment.
Although he controls other animals — horses and dogs — he is never able to catch the hart alive, and it escapes him in the moment of death.
Sir Walter is  man enough to recognize the nobility of his victim, but does not see that he has challenged his real adversary — the forces of Nature.
To be fair to Sir Walter, it is he who begins the commemoration of the event by building the ‘Pleasure-House’; he also imposes ‘a cup of Stone’ upon ‘the living Well’.
(At this point notice the parallels to the first part of Coleridge's Kubla Khan , with its Dome of Pleasure and Sacred River, and its order imposed by an all-mighty ruler.)
He degrades the nobility of the place by turning it into a weekend retreat; the human beings firmly under his sway — the Damsels, and the Artist — do not question his purpose, and he announces that his achievement will last for ever:
But already, before Sir Walter's death, the gentler powers of Nature have begun to assert themselves:
The second part of Hartleap Well is set in the present.
(As in Michael, The Ruined Cottage , and other poems, Wordsworth is moved to visionary experience by the landscape surrounding a ruin.)
The poet begins by disclaiming any intention to indulge in Gothic suspense and relate a tale ‘packed with thrills’:
We are readily persuaded to postpone any criticisms we may have of his mode of telling the story, and the next two lines make it clear that the tale is only there to bring out a moral.
Many readers take the moral to be the last two lines of the poem, which seem to mean ‘Be kind to animals’.
On a very literal level this is true, and at this point one might compare the ‘obvious moral’ of The Ancient Mariner :
But The Ancient Mariner is really concerned with what happens when a man upsets the powers of Nature —
Sir Walter, who hunted down the hart, is therefore a lesser Ancient Mariner.
Because of the Hart's death, ‘the spot is curst’.
Nearly all Sir Walter's monuments of pride have disappeared, but enough remains to commemorate the great event.
Nature is alienated, and animals, including dogs and horses, refuse to drink at the well.
The shepherd, ‘sitting in the sun’, hardly distinguishable from the poet, ‘alone in summer shade’, guesses that the place was of particular importance to the Hart: he was born there, and returned instinctively to his true home.
The poet follows with more abstract interpretation of the event, but it is clear that his ideas are not opposed to the shepherd's: ‘Small difference lies between thy creed and mine.’
Nature observed the death of the Hart, and ‘the Being’, variously interpreted as Nature, God, or God-in-Nature, because of his ‘reverential care’, has allowed the place to decay as an example of ‘What we are, and have been’.
But at a later date, slowly and quietly, the beneficent powers of Nature will reassert themselves; there is no dramatic reversal of fortune, no catastrophe —‘at the coming of the milder day the monuments will disappear, engulfed in new growth of beauty and of bloom’.
RELIGIOUS AND OTHER INTERPRETATIONS.
The deeper meaning of the poem has always been a puzzle.
Clearly there are a number of images which reveal a hinterland of religious suggestion.
The hart, to begin with, recalls 
This is from Psalm 42:1: ‘Like as the hart desireth the water-brooks, so longeth my soul after thee, O God.’
Is it possible to follow this symbolism in our poem?
The poet tells us that ‘This race it looks not like an earthly race’, but it is not made clear what kind of chase we are witnessing.
Sir Walter thinks he has captured something (the soul, the imagination?) which he associates with joy and his kind of pleasure.
His life of action is surely contrasted with the contemplative life of the shepherd and poet, who realize that Man's past and present state ('what we are, and have been') is doomed, because it is based upon cruelty and the confining of imagination — surely this is the Cup of Stone, almost a Cap of Stone, laid upon ‘the living well’.
At this point we might call in evidence William Blake's teaching:
The ‘milder day’ remains a puzzle which cannot be solved from within the poem.
We have the additional reference in The Recluse (see p. 109) and a further reading of that poem shows that the Wordsworths approached Grasmere in a mood of mystical elation verging on trance.
At this time the poet's ‘Creed’ included belief in a new state of being, a redemptive process brought about in slow tranquillity without sudden conversions or a Last Judgment.
The small community at Grasmere would be the first to experience ‘the milder day’ which would eventually include the whole of mankind.
A poet in retirement, 1800–7
During these years we are still on the high plateau of Wordsworth's poetic achievement.
Certain aspects of his retirement have already been discussed see ‘Dorothy Wordsworth and her Journals’(p. 27) and ‘Collaboration with Coleridge’(p. 32).
These were years of simple pursuits and steady writing; personal and domestic themes predominate Wordsworth was married in 1802.
It was a firm belief of the poet that his way of life was right for him, and that his poems should arise naturally from it; as he himself said: ‘I speak of what I know.’
Nevertheless, it is obvious that by limiting himself to his own observations in a remote valley, he would soon exhaust his material: he therefore drew on Dorothy's Journals and upon other people's experiences, for example in Alice Fell, The Solitary Reaper (observed by Wilkinson who ‘Passed a female who was reaping alone’), and The Kitten and Falling Leaves (rough draft by Coleridge printed in Notebooks, vol. i, 1813).
He received additional stimulation from holiday excursions and tours, so that his visit to France (combined with a reading of Milton) encouraged him to explore the possibilities of a new form — for him — the sonnet.
Seeing that a French invasion was a possibility in 1803, he joined the Volunteers, and used the sonnet as ‘a trumpet’ to encourage national resistance, for the principle of national self-determination led logically to the defence of one's own country.
Most of his work for this period was published in Poems In Two Volumes (1807); many important poems, such as Resolution and Independence and the Immortality Ode , which were included in these volumes, have received a good deal of critical attention elsewhere.
But three of the poems which follow were published in 1807 —Alice Fell, Stepping Westward and Elegiac Stanzas — and when we consider that the major part of The Prelude dates from this time there seems no reason to challenge the usual critical dictum that this was Wordsworth's major creative period.
Yet it is a pity that, as a corollary, his earlier and later poetry is left unread.
TEXT.
The poem is given here in its 1807 version, since this provoked the controversy over it.
An earlier text of the poem occurs in a notebook kept by Sara Hutchinson (see Poetical Works ii, p. 542).
Later versions contain more ‘dignified’ phraseology.
A close study of the textual variants of this poem makes one wonder how much value Wordsworth really put on the words of a poem as opposed to its message (see THE CONTROVERSY OVER POETIC DICTION below).
TITLE.
In 1815 Wordsworth added a subtitle —or Poverty .
In the same way the ballad Lucy Gray became Lucy Gray, or Solitude and The Leechgatherer was renamed Resolution and Independence .
One may speculate whether these new titles were designed to help the reading public, or whether the older poet himself felt the lack of dignity.
The new titles limit the poems to the field of moral tracts, and make one wonder exactly what Wordsworth thought his poems were about.
TYPE OF POEM.
Clearly a Lyrical Ballad; but is it, as some say, an improvement on the earlier ballads, or a last attempt at an exhausted manner, a tired self-parody?
There are very few poems of this type in the 1807 volume, for Wordsworth was now more interested in literary verse forms, such as elegy, ode and sonnet.
STORY.
According to a note dictated by Wordsworth to Isabella Fenwick, the incident happened to a ‘Mr Graham of Glasgow…a man of ardent humanity’; it is recorded in Dorothy Wordsworth's Journals , 16 February 1802.
(The relevant passage is quoted in the section ‘Dorothy Wordsworth and her Journals’ p. 31.)
At first reading the tale seems simple enough; it is a modern version of the parable of the Good Samaritan, and a slightly unpleasant air of self-congratulation surrounds the ‘I’ of the poem, however worthy his actions may be.
(This may be unfair, but how much did this charitable act really cost the narrator?
I expect Alice Fell — the real one — thought him a pompous busybody, but she was probably used to being ordered about by ‘men of ardent humanity’.)
Further readings are more favourable; the strange cry and the endless sobbing remain in our minds, and it seems that Alice is weeping for far more than she or her unimaginative protector can understand.
To misquote Gerard Manley Hopkins: ‘It is Alice Fell you mourn for.’
This poem and The Last of the Flock exhibit a pathetic clinging to a single idea or possession which must not be destroyed: I mean something far removed from a simple love of property.
The cloak, in this case, represents a last hold upon life, and however disproportionate the child's grief may appear, it is still explicable in terms of human psychology.
One might even guess that the orphan thought of ‘the wretched rag’ as a mother substitute — such things are not unknown among young children.
The phrase ‘as if she'd lost her only friend’ bears this out.
There are no replacements in these deeply held relationships (compare Matthew and his daughter in The Two April Mornings ).
One gathers that the ‘I’ of the poem, seeing that the old cloak was a complete write-off, assumed that the new cloak, which he bought with cash, had completely solved the problem.
Compare: ‘I'm sorry I've run over your dog.
Here's the money to buy a new one’, and incidentally, notice the textile-trade insistence on the best cloth that money can buy!
The last two lines are not based on Mr Graham's observation since he travelled on to another destination; they were put in ‘to gratify Mr Graham’, as the Fenwick note has it.
CHILD AS VICTIM.
For the use of the child as a vehicle for social commentary in the nineteenth century, see Peter Coveney,The Image of Childhood .
Wordsworth's other poetic children may be compared — see for example The Idiot Boy, Lucy Gray , and We Are Seven .
The last-named poem has caused a great deal of controversy and amusement.
THE CONTROVERSY OVER POETIC DICTION.
At the time of writing this poem (11-14 March 1802) Wordsworth was preparing a new edition of Lyrical Ballads and revising his famous Preface .
He said that ‘there is no essential difference between the language of prose and that of metrical composition’, and declared that poetry should be concerned ‘with incidents of common life’.
Alice Fell provides a fair illustration of these dicta .
The reviewers of the 1807 Poems in Two Volumes disagreed with these principles.
In common with most readers they expected poetry to deal with elegant, or at any rate, elevated topics; they also believed that there was a special language for poetry which was quite different from the language of prose — and certainly far removed from that of daily conversation.
The Edinburgh Review (Oct. 1807) was openly abusive: ‘If the printing of such trash as this be not felt as an insult on the public taste, we are afraid it cannot be insulted.’
At this time the reviews controlled ‘the public taste’, and the 1807 Poems were widely ridiculed.
Alice Fell was such a stumbling-block that Wordsworth withdrew it from the 1820 edition of his poems.
It was restored at the request of some of his friends in 1836.
The whole controversy was surely settled by Coleridge in Biographia Literaria (1817), but it has remained a hardy perennial in critical studies of Wordsworth.
Modern readers are likely to be pragmatic; if a poem like Alice Fell is still convincing as poetry, it matters little what theories it was designed to illustrate; if it does not succeed, no amount of special pleading can save it.
I have therefore devoted little space to the problem in this study, but those who feel that it is important might well look at Dr Johnson's comments on Macbeth — he disliked ‘the Butcher's knife’— and also at the correspondence between Gerard Manley Hopkins and Robert Bridges.
The twentieth-century preference for ‘the colloquial’ in poetry may well be a temporary phenomenon; Donald Davie's Purity of Diction in English Verse (1952), together with his admiration for the late Augustans, represent one attempt to revive an interest in the use of a ‘civilized’diction; it is interesting that he has to go back to the age before Wordsworth.
Meanwhile, here are two remarks by Wordsworth which can be applied to Alice Fell as well as to the whole problem:
1
‘Language is not thought's dress, but its incarnation’— implying, surely, that one should not, at a later date, alter the text.
2
‘The voice which is the voice of my poetry, without imagination, cannot be heard’— which is a nice snub to the critics, but could, I suppose, be used to justify any amount of bad writing.
On tour
In 1803 William and Dorothy visited Scotland together with Coleridge (see p. 37); many poems were written to commemorate the experiences of this holiday.
A quick glance through the contents of Wordsworth's Poetical Works might well give the impression that he was more frequently ‘on tour’ than at home and several of his later sonnet sequences and other groups of poems are entitled Memorials of a Tour …to this place and that.
He preferred walking to other forms of locomotion, and De Quincey calculated that Wordsworth must have walked between 175,000 and 180,000 miles in his lifetime.
He remained physically active far into old age, riding from Westmorland to Cambridge at the age of sixty, and walking in the hills in his seventies.
No wonder, then, that the poet described himself as ‘a wanderer’, supporting the literal sense of the next poem's conclusion.
TEXT.
Though there is little difference between the text of 1807 and Wordsworth's final version, I have printed the final version of this poem, since the tidying up in matters of punctuation is in all cases justifiable.
LITERAL BASIS.
Dorothy Wordsworth describes the incident which the poem records (Journals i, pp. 367–8).
Those who despise fictions will presumably admire Wordsworth's fidelity to fact in line 1.
SUBJECT.
A glorious sunset is a standard Romantic thrill: the greetings which human beings exchange are usually meaningless, and the woman's strange expression was presumably the usual one in that part of the country.
Wordsworth's power as a poet is seen in what he can do with such material, so that after reading Stepping Westward these commonplaces, while retaining universality, are made new for us.
In fact Dorothy tells us more about the sunset and the landscape than William — and yet he is traditionally thought of in association with such moments of natural grandeur.
Wordsworth is often considered to be cold, egotistical and self-sufficient, but what he writes about here is the warmth of a stranger's greeting and how it increased his pleasure in the sunset.
The salutation seemed to open infinite  possibilities, and expressed a recognition of his right to travel; he felt welcomed, and also saw that he had been given something of inestimable value.
Exactly what is arguable.
Obviously a good deal more could be read into the poem if one really tried.
The ‘endless way of the last lines extends the travelling into a metaphor for the journey we make through life (compare The Pilgrim's Progress ).
—‘Heavenly ’ and ‘spiritual’may simply be suggestive exaggerations, but if ‘stepping westward’is a ‘heavenly destiny’surely the pilgrimage towards death is meant.
But Wordsworth only says ‘seemed to be a kind of’(lines 11, 12)— not, incidentally, an example of that precise use of language which one is taught to admire.
Yet perhaps he is being precise, because to say more than he does would be inaccurate.
Notice how the sunset and the greeting are welded together in the last stanzas and are transformed into the endless journey and ‘human sweetness’ of the last three lines.
Many of Wordsworth's poems are attempts to show how we associate ideas (see ‘Hartley’, p. 80), and he often points out how the second idea —‘the echo of the voice’ in this case — is blended with the first idea on which our conscious attention is fixed —‘my eye /Was fixed upon the glowing Sky’.
Dorothy tells us that Wordsworth wrote the poem ‘long after’, as was his usual custom.
The phrase reminds us of the conclusion to The Solitary Reaper :
In the extract from The Prelude we shall see how ‘spots of time’, especially those connected with ‘power’ of feeling (line 21), are the source of ‘future restoration’.
USE OF LANGUAGE.
Notice how much of the poem is written in simple vocabulary, even strings of monosyllables (stanza 1).
Pomposity has been avoided, and yet a monument has been erected.
The total impression is a nice balance between the colloquial, which might have led to bathos, and an over-polished style which would not have been appropriate to the subject.
Wordsworth chooses a neutral style, yet the total effect is somehow magnificent.
CRITICISM.
The learned reviewers — and their successors in all ages — might regard this poem as too trivial to bear much discussion, but the fact remains that Stepping Westward is much liked — if one may be allowed to use such a term in criticism.
The judgment of the common reader should never be ignored, though I realize that this poem is easier to follow than most.
The best critical account of the poem is to be found in Donald Davie's Articulate Energy , p. 154 ff; where it is compared with The Gypsy by Ezra Pound.
Professor Davie's further remarks (on pp. 164 and 165 of the same book) must not be missed; they seem to me one of the high points of modern appreciation of Wordsworth's greatness.
How to read The Prelude
Wordsworth's greatest poem was not published till after his death, and even then was slow in achieving recognition.
Its position as the Epic of the Romantic Age is still not beyond question, firstly because it is treated simply as a verse autobiography, and secondly because it combines poetry and philosophy.
Wordsworth never wrote more than one book of The Recluse , which was to have been ‘the great philosophical poem’.
The Prelude was meant to illustrate the growth of his own mind, so as to show his fitness for such a project.
On this level it may be read simply as an account of his own life, and though its evidence is selected there seems no reason to doubt its general accuracy.
It is, however, a very special kind of autobiography, and may be compared to the accounts of their own lives which the early Methodists were expected to write at the time of their reception into the church: in such spiritual autobiographies divine visitations were singled out for special mention as evidences of God's grace and power; they were contrasted with laments over sinful behaviour and backsliding, and led to the culminating moment of conversion.
In The Prelude we can easily detect a similar pattern imposed upon experience, though Wordsworth is describing a poetic rather than a Christian vocation; and though he may appear to use religious vocabulary (see again the discussion on pages 89–91), he is expounding a secular philosophy.
Wordsworth deliberately rejects a traditional Christian way of describing the progress of the soul; he starts from a kind of zero, as the French Revolutionaries had restarted the calendar with the Year One.
He begins with the mind as ‘white paper’(following Locke), describes ‘external sensible objects’, then records — as, for example, in the ‘sense of unknown modes of being’ after the boat-stealing incident — what he felt at the time, and then adds a later ‘reflection’or meditation upon the event from the point of view of the author writing in 1798–1805.
This method of narration allows the reader to take part in the initial experience, to share in the inquiry into its meaning from the start, and then to join in the subsequent dialogue with which Wordsworth engages ‘the Mind out there’(or the ‘Wisdom and Spirit of the Universe’) in his attempt to find a fuller explanation.
Wordsworth returns again and again to his main problem, whether we are in some sense ‘led’ by spiritual agencies — notice that he is not sure, and carefully qualifies any dogmatic statements — or whether we are alone responsible for what we become.
He circles round this difficult area, trying to explain it to himself; such a circular method of approach enabled him to rewrite again and again in a syncretic way, adding and extending without damaging the basic structure of the poem.
THE COMPOSITION OF THE 1798–9 Prelude .
(Note: See the diagram on page 127 for a synoptic view of the relation between the texts.
If you do  not have the text of the early version discussed here, then you can work out which parts of Books i and ii are referred to.)
The first drafts of The Prelude were written in Germany during the winter of 1798–9.
There were many rewritings of the verse, and the letter to Coleridge from Dorothy, partly reproduced on page 128, contains descriptive passages — the skating and boat-stealing episodes.
As Stephen Parrish points out in discussing the very earliest ‘complete’ draft (Ms JJ), the embryonic Prelude is best understood as an extension of the structure of Tintern Abbey : ‘The last poem Wordsworth wrote before leaving England was Tintern Abbey , completed in mid July, and the affinities between Tintern Abbey and the autobiographical verse he began to write in Germany three months later help to point up The Prelude's earliest design’(Introduction to the Cornell edition).
The second part of the poem was written at Stockburn-on-Tees in 1799, and by the end of that year the two-part poem was transcribed into fair copy as if considered a completed work.
The subject of this first version of the poem is the mainly benevolent influence of Nature in forming the imagination of the poet in childhood and early youth.
It lacks the ‘glad preamble’ of the later texts, and by beginning at ‘Was it for this…’(1805 Book i, line 271) appears to trace the growth of the mind from earliest consciousness.
As this consciousness is immediately intertwined with the murmuring of the River Derwent, we are reminded of the poem about The Brook (p. 34) and the ‘poem upon the Wye’, as Tintern Abbey was sometimes called.
This is in turn related to the ancient symbol of the River of Life, in which the course of human development is compared to the wanderings of a river from its source to its final merging with the sea.
This early text already exemplifies the pattern of narrative passages and meditations upon them which became the regular mode of presentation in the fuller texts of 1805 and 1850; and the sophisticated author is only too aware of the division within himself which the method leads to:
The mode is aptly described as ‘thinking aloud in verse’: another way of putting it, reversing the first account given in this paragraph, would be to say that an argument of the mature poet (consciousness I) is illustrated and exemplified by a passage of recollected memory which is relived (in consciousness II).
This reversal of priorities establishes the author as a thinker rather than a narrator, a philosopher rather than a Peter Pan obsessed with his own childhood memories.
In fact, in order really to explain to the reader what he is getting at, Wordsworth, like Locke, has in the end to return to the period before memory can help us.
Hence the long, much altered and much discussed passage beginning  already mentioned on p. 85; and the ‘spots of time’ meditation to be discussed on pp. 134–9 — which is at the heart of Wordsworth's concern with the use of the past, this too is already present in the first Part of the 1798–9 version, before being moved to its present position in the longer texts.
These two passages should be read again and again before returning to the rest of the text, which is illuminated by them; and it then becomes clear that the poem is a work of theory, and not a simple narrative of fact.
THE EPIC STRUCTURE OF THE 1805 VERSION.
After an intermediate five-book stage,The Prelude was completed in 1805 in thirteen books, including the addition of the first 271 lines at the beginning of Book i.
In many ways this text exhibits all the evidence of rapid composition, hut against this must be set its readability , making it the version now generally preferred.
Some of the additional subject-matter, such as Cambridge and the French Revolution, has already been discussed.
The poem as a whole now tells a quite different story from the two-Part version of 1799; after the period of childhood, something is lost (this sounds vague, but if it were known what was lost it would not be so !).
To the grown man visionary experiences come infrequently, but when they do appear the effect is profound, as in ‘the Blind Beggar’ episode; caught in the maelstrom of London, the poet is admonished as if from another world' (see page 64).
As in religious autobiographies of ‘confessions’(St Augustine is relevant here) the poet is steadily driven to despair as one by one the hopes and promises of his early ‘vocation’ are withdrawn; the restoration of his imaginative powers is the subject of the final books of the poem, and the new placing of the ‘spots of time’passage now offers an explanation of this recovery, besides connecting the end of the poem with the ‘childhood’scenes of the now almost forgotten first two books.
So the work remains, in some sense, circular: but what is more important to our understanding of the poem, as opposed to the misadventures of the poet, is that there has also been a change of genre .
What began as a two-part idyll or pastoral has now grown into a full-length epic.
All new poems, however novel and revolutionary they may appear, are nevertheless indebted to past literature, whether by imitation, parody or even burlesque of a preceding form.
To pretend otherwise is to fall too easily into the trap of regarding the act of writing as ‘self-expression’.
And so to take examples among longer poems a new kind of satire, Dryden's Absalom and Achitophel , is in fact a mock-epic, attacking and yet leaning for support upon Milton's Paradise Lost ; even the extremely violent novelty of T. S. Eliot's The Waste Land reminds us  of a Renaissance or Arthurian version of its text, which is rarely present on the surface but against which the poem reverberates and resounds most deeply.
Similarly,The Prelude constantly alludes to classical epic and in particular to Paradise Lost , though how conscious an intention of the poet this was is debatable.
The most obvious resemblances are the choice of blank verse as the medium for the poem, and the rather archaic division into ‘Books’.
As T.S.
Eliot pointed out a hundred years later, it is impossible to write blank verse without falling into ‘Miltonisms’ of verse-movement and echoes of the earlier poet's lines.
These are present in The Prelude though it is arguable that the best parts of the poem avoid them.
On the other hand, the division into thirteen Books (really twelve plus) can only give us cause to examine Wordsworth's deliberate structuring of the poem to fit older models.
In both Milton and Virgil the first two books are clearly separated off from what follows; Wordsworth begins a new theme with Book iii, and also observes the traditional break at the end of Book vi, the halfway point of the poem.
In traditional epic there is a visit to the Underworld, a descent into Hell, which may or may not be the point of Book vii, with its description of the swamping of the personality of the poet by the multiform ephemera of the metropolitan city.
In Virgil's Aeneid , the first six hooks having shown the preparation of the hero, a large part of the second half of the poem is devoted to battles, in which the hero is tested.
Similarly, the hero of The Prelude is taken from the ‘educational processes’ of the Lake District, Cambridge and so on, which take up the first half of the poem, and engages with society and history in the conflicts of the French Revolution; the Revolution is not to be taken as a purely fortuitous occurrence, but the main event of the time, that which separates off the Modern Age from all that had gone before.
Wordsworth sees with some prescience that political beliefs will be the calls to battle in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries — you might say!
The action of a traditional epic poem is further complicated in that it deals with the relation of human beings to gods.
Put in those terms it may seem a strange statement, but it is one of the essential differences between true epics and novels, which deal, on the whole, with the world of ‘reality’.
Whereas in classical times, and in the periods of Dante and Milton, there was an accepted ideological structure of religious belief to be accepted, explored or questioned, one might be forgiven for enquiring whether any gods are present in The Prelude .
Certainly Wordsworth is not consistent in the terminology which he uses to name the non-human ‘Presences’: the 1798–9 version seems animistic, with its references to ‘Beings of the hills’, ‘Powers of earth’, ‘Genii of the springs’ and so on.
The apparently central forces such as‘God’ and ‘Nature’are also named, and in the 1805 text the ‘Wisdom and Spirit of the Universe’makes its appearance.
The whole poem, at this stage as was pointed out in the section on Wordsworth's creed uses language ambiguously, though it must be obvious that he does believe in ‘something out there’.
Therefore the poem leads us towards  transcendental moments of revelation, scattered throughout, but climaxing at the Simplon Pass (end of Book vi) and the vision on Mount Snowdon in the last book of the poem; in the same way Aeneas was granted a vision of the destiny of Rome in Book VI of the Aeneid, and Adam in Paradise Lost receives revelations on top of a high mountain.
However much, therefore, we might wish to point to Wordsworth's poem as a pure organic growth, it does owe a great deal to previous epics, both in its form and in its religious content.
THE 1850 Prelude .
When the final text of the poem was published after its author's death, readers were given a revised version.
There had been several copyings out and rewritings over a number of years, and although the changes made are sometimes evidence of ideological revisionism (the poet had become more conformist in his later years), what is remarkable is how much of the young man's vision has been allowed to remain intact.
To the readers of 1850 it represented on the one hand a great Romantic apologia, though the stress on the French Revolution would not have pleased; on the other hand it could be seen as specifically a mid-Victorian poem, contemporary with the work of Tennyson, George Eliot and Matthew Arnold.
In its apparent exemplification of the replacement of religion by poetry it would fit the demands of many liberal intellectuals after the religious crisis of the 1830s.
THE PRELUDE AND THE MODERN READER.
Nevertheless,The Prelude did not really command a wide readership until the end of the nineteenth century, when the image of the poet as an old man ('Daddy Wordsworth') was finally replaced for younger readers with the more appealing picture of the revolutionary poet of the 1790s.
For twentieth-century readers the lack of dogmatism of the poet in dealing with moral and religious matters, his genuine hesitations before categorizing strange experiences, and the fact that, as Hazlitt pointed out, ‘His Muse is a levelling one,’ all these factors have contributed to the steady popularity of The Prelude .
It also foreshadows the interests and preoccupations of certain twentieth-century writers.
One could, for example, look no further than T. S. Eliot's Four Quartets for another long poem which sifts through past experience in order to make sense of it, trying to re-create ‘the moment in the rose-garden’ and other ‘gleams and glimpses’— to use Wordsworth's vocabulary — of eternity.
But it is in the field of the novel, now that epics are no longer fashionable, that comparable studies of the relation of temporal experience to other kinds of time are explored.
In Virginia Woolf's To the Lighthouse there is a long passage in which Mrs Ramsay meditates after her child has been put to bed and she is on her own:
No, she thought, putting together some of the pictures he had cut out — a refrigerator, a mowing machine, a gentleman in evening dress — children never forget.
For this reason, it was so important what one said, and what one did, and it was a relief when they went
to bed.
For now she need not think about anybody.
She could be herself, by herself.
And that was what now she often felt the need of to think; well not even to think.
To be silent; to be alone.
All the being and the doing, expansive, glittering, vocal, evaporated; and one shrunk, with a sense of solemnity, to being oneself, a wedge-shaped core of darkness, something invisible to others.
Although she continued to knit, and sat upright, it was thus that she felt herself; and this self having shed its attachments was free for the strangest adventures.
When life sank down for a moment, the range of experience seemed limitless….
It was odd, she thought, how if one was alone, one leant to things, inanimate things; trees, streams, flowers; felt they expressed one; felt they became one; felt they knew one, in a sense were one; felt an irrational tenderness thus (she looked at that long steady light) as for oneself'.
There rose, and she looked and looked with her needles suspended, there curled up off the floor of the mind, rose from the lake of one's being, a mist, a bride to meet her lover.
Hogarth Press edition, pp. 99–102
In this passage the Wordsworthian echoes of subject-matter and vocabulary are remarkable, though I suppose it is worth pointing out that Virginia Woolf was the daughter of Sir Leslie Stephen, an ‘agnostic mountaineer’ whose interests owed a great deal to the reading of Wordsworth.
Though small in size,To the Lighthouse is a novel which, like The Prelude , does attempt to give an account of the totality of experience.
It is, however, Proust's much longer novel,In Search of Lost Time (Remembrance of Things Past ), in which a similar enterprise to Wordsworth's is undertaken for the benefit of our century.
At the end of the novel, when the narrator understands that he has to recover unconscious memories to become their chronicler and therefore a true artist, a re-integration of the personality similar to that achieved by Wordsworth's poet-hero is made possible.
The famous passage about the madeleine, the little cake whose associations call back the forgotten scenes of the narrator's childhood, would have caused the Hartleian in Wordsworth to applaud.
The more subtle and telling imagery in The Prelude , in which the relation of the narrator to his material is dwelt upon, would likewise have appealed to Proust:
This passage, which should be read in its entirety, illuminates Wordsworth's self-consciousness as his work progresses.
The extract chosen next is just as remarkable for its acknowledgement of the mysterious nature of mental processes.
TEXT.
The extract given here is Book xi, lines 258–389 of the 1805 text, corresponding to Book xii, lines 208–332 in 1850.
Those wishing to study the development of the text should consult Wordsworth's Prelude , edited by E. de Selincourt and H. Darbishire, which has the two versions printed on facing pages, and lists all variants in the notes.
Although this passage is unaffected, the Penguin Parallel Text and the revised Oxford Standard Authors 1805 Prelude contain some interesting new readings based on more recent study of the manuscripts.
In the Penguin edition J. C. Maxwell does not follow the capitalization conventions of the text printed here.
In general, Wordsworth's changes were often simple adjustments aimed at tidying up the poem — he removed lines 343–4 in our extract; but he also altered the language in the direction of the exaggerated poetic diction which he had campaigned against in earlier days — there are no examples in our extract, except perhaps ‘the female’ for ‘the Woman’in line 315.
More seriously, Wordsworth changed the ideas of the poem to conform with his later religious and political opinions, though this did not affect our extract.
LENGTH OF EXTRACT.
The reader may justly ask why this extract is so long.
Selections from Wordsworth usually contain short narrative passages from the early books of The Prelude ; the ‘philosophy’ is omitted.
This practice can be justified on the grounds that many narrative pieces, including those related in our extract, were written separately in Germany in 1798–9; and so the philosophy can be regarded as a later intrusion.
I am against the custom of pillaging a long work for its ‘beauties’ and letting the rest sink or swim.
In a long poem we expect to find breathing-spaces interspersed between the more important sections of the poem; in The Prelude the real matter is the philosophy, and the narrative passages, as can be clearly seen here, are illustrations of it.
Our extract shows the interweaving of philosophy and narrative characteristic of the poem.
SUMMARY
258–268
This passage has been chosen because it is central to our understanding of The Prelude .
Wordsworth tells us that our memories are selective: certain ‘spots of time’ are able to restore us when we are ‘depress'd’— compare the recollections of the Wye Valley in Tintern Abbey .
269–273
This restoration comes from moments when our minds, presumably also our imaginative powers, are in control of ‘outward sense’, presumably our normal perceptions.
274–279
These moments are particularly to be found in early childhood.
280–308
Wordsworth illustrates this with an example.
When he was five years old he lost his guide when out riding; frightened by the ‘horrid imaginations’ conjured up by the inscription in the turf, he saw a pool, a beacon, and a woman.
309–316
These impressions may seem ‘common’, but were invested with ‘visionary dreariness’.
317–324
Many years later, in the ‘time of early love’, he wandered in the same area, which was now invested with ‘youth's golden gleam’(see Elegiac Stanzas , p. 140).
325-328
This gleam was strengthened by the early associations.
So one ‘feeling’ reinforces another.
At this point the poet ‘takes off’ and in a moment of vision tells us that Man's ‘greatness’is derived from early childhood experiences — provided that we have contributed something from ourselves to the bare impressions.
334-337
His own experiences crowd upon him, even from earliest infancy; he recognizes them as the sources of his own creative powers; it is as if doors were ‘open’.
337-339
But when he tries to ‘approach’, he is frustrated.
Now, in 1805, he can only see ‘glimpses’, and fears that in old age nothing will be left.
(Compare the Immortality Ode .)
340-343
It is therefore imperative to record these experiences in words now, to recreate them ‘in substance and in life’, so that they can restore him in the future.
343-364
He therefore tells us how he waited impatiently for transport home, the day before his Christmas holidays.
He sheltered by a wall, and observed a hawthorn and a sheep.
365-375
Shortly afterwards his father died: he felt that he had been punished for expecting too much.
376-385
Yet (because of the association of ideas), the experience of that day and all its elements, sheep, tree, wall and mist, has remained with him; he has benefited from it.
386-389
Even today, he is sure that subconsciously the experience continues to affect him, especially when storm, rain or trees trigger off the train of associations.
COMMENT ON SUBJECT-MATTER.
Although it is commonplace today to stress the importance of the experiences of early childhood in forming the personality, Wordsworth did not have the benefit of recent theories of psychology.
The idea was not of course original to Wordsworth, but his expression of it is unusually convincing; and he is ahead of his time in his recognition of the ‘subconscious mind’— this phrase had not yet come into the language, and Wordsworth's ‘workings of the spirit’— he has many other phrases — are not always seen to refer to this.
In the light of this passage we can interpret one of Wordsworth's gnomic sayings —‘The Child is Father of the Man’— and can understand what the attractive childhood episodes are doing in Books i and ii; they are now seen to be similar ‘spots of time…enshrined…for future restoration’.
Philosophically, we might comment on the extraordinary qualities of Wordsworth's perceptions.
He seems at times to be reassuring himself of his grip upon a world of his own devising.
In a note dictated to Isabella Fenwick about the Immortality Ode , Wordsworth said that in childhood 
I was often unable to think of external things as having external existence, and I communed with all that I saw as something not apart from, but inherent in, my own immaterial nature.
Many times while going to school have I grasped at a wall or tree to recall myself from this abyss of idealism to the reality.
At that time I was afraid of such processes.
In later periods of life I have deplored, as we have all reason to do, a subjugation of an opposite character, and have rejoiced over the remembrances.
The disappearance of the visionary gleam…the glory and the dream' is regretted in the Immortality Ode , and its truth is questioned in Elegiac Stanzas , our next poem.
BLANK VERSE.
Wordsworth composed aloud while walking, ‘his jaws working the whoal time’, to quote a peasant's recollections.
The womenfolk noted down completed sections of the poem, and probably supplied the punctuation — we often feel that there is no reason why one sentence stops and another begins.
The method of composition helps to explain the feel of the blank verse; it should be read aloud, in a quiet meditative manner, as if we were listening to a man trying hard to clarify his own thoughts about a difficult topic and at the same lime explaining it to somebody else.
CONCLUSION.
Great works are usually difficult; they are often rather long.
We are not used to long poems these days, and we no longer expect poetry to do the work of history, psychology and the novel, or to find ‘the spirit of the age’ expressed in poetic medium.
Nor do we ask the poet to combine the roles of priest and sage, or to enlighten us with revelations, or teach us the morality on which we should base our lives.
In The Image of Childhood Peter Coveney points out that after Wordsworth's day poetry ‘suffered continuous enfeeblement.
The sphere of poetry became more and more peripheral, and it has remained so ever since….
It is sobering to reflect that a case could be made out for the judgment that the last extensive exercise of the English poetic sensibility was Wordsworth's Prelude .’
‘The set is now broken’, 1805
The normal routine of settled peace and domestic happiness which now made up Wordsworth's life could never have lasted for ever; it was like a challenge to the gods.
On 5 February 1805 The Earl of Abergavenny , a merchant ship bound for India, was wrecked in Weymouth Bay.
A contemporary newspaper account stated that ‘as the Abergavenny was laden with an immense quantity of porcelain ware and 27,000 ounces of silver she sank with unusual speed’.
Wordsworth's brother John, who had put his capital into this trading venture and was in personal command, went down with his ship.
The impact of this news upon the whole Wordsworth set was shattering; many of his biographers feel that the experience was the pivot on which Wordsworth swung from youthful to middle-aged attitudes, from liberal to Tory opinions, from atheism to orthodox Christianity.
But of course these tendencies can be traced back to earlier stages in his development; and the Ode to Duty —‘Me this unchartered freedom tires’— was written the year before.
But the death of John not only confirmed Wordsworth's adherence to these opinions; it undermined his former self-sufficiency and cast doubts upon the validity of poetry.
‘I feel that there is something cut out of my life which cannot be restored’, he wrote in a letter of March 1805; and in the Elegiac Stanzas , our next poem, written in 1806, he declared:
The question is whether the ‘power’ referred to was the power to write poetry; for though the Poems In Two Volumes (1807) are of high quality they mark for most people the end of Wordsworth's poetic life.
TEXT.
Taken from Poems in Two Volumes (1807).
At one stage the text was altered in an attempt to make lines 15 and 16 clear; these   lines are ambiguous as they stand, and can be taken as approving of ‘the light that never was, etc.’
This would wreck the sense of the entire poem: Wordsworth tried to make it clear that ‘the gleam’ refers to an illusion which the poet has now seen to be wrong.
The original text of the poem was later restored.
We may take the ambiguity to imply that Wordsworth was unwilling to admit that the visionary gleam was entirely self-deception, and was trying to have it both ways.
If this were so, we could argue that the poem only represents a temporary loss of faith, instead of the turning-point in Wordsworth's career.
SUBJECT-MATTER.
Sir George Beaumont's painting depicts Peele Castle in a storm (see illustration).
In the foreground a ship is battling with heavy seas.
Wordsworth had stayed near the castle in 1794.
In the first half of the poem (lines 1–32) Wordsworth tells us that he once visited the castle in a season of calm weather.
The castle seemed asleep, and the sea was tranquil (line 12).
If he had been a painter at that time, he would not have produced a picture like Beaumont's storm scene ('different from this' — this picture, line 18); he would have reproduced the tranquillity and the smiling sea, and added ‘the light that never was’— the Poet's illusions.
Wordsworth's painting would have been ‘a mine of peaceful years, etc.’(lines 21–32); that is, it would have represented his youthful ideas about life, which he really thought were true, though he now sees that they were deluded (line 29).
Now come the turn of the poem.
The second half represents the emotions of 1806.
‘Tis so no more’, that is, he can no longer consider himself the same person — he has become, at last , a human being (line 36), not a dreaming poet, and he cannot go back to the earlier state.
He is stoical (line 40), and sees that Beaumont's conception of the castle in the storm is the true image of human life; further, he welcomes what it tells him (lines 43, 45 and 50).
So he rejects his former selfish hiving-off from the rest of the human race (lines 53–6); from now on even worse sights than Beaumont's painting will be welcome, for they will reinforce his resolve to endure in patience to the end (lines 57–9).
Note that ‘born’(line 58) = ‘borne’.
He is encouraged to go on with the process of living (line 60) and perhaps hints at compensation for suffering in an after-life.
COMMENT.
This is a complete reversal of Wordsworth's former teaching — that the Child is Father of the Man, and that in this world ‘we find our happiness’(Prelude 1805, x, 728).
I cannot see that this represents a temporary disillusionment: see the discussion of the religious aspects of the poem in Chapter 3 (p. 91).
The expression ‘cased in the unfeeling armour of old time’ exactly represents the impression Wordsworth made on certain observers at a later date (see Chapter I, p. 42).
CRITICISM.
How eighteenth-century this poem is!
The slow, deliberate verse movement; the invocation of such abstractions as ‘fortitude and patient chear’; the careful avoidance of metaphorical expressions; the weight of moral earnestness; the balancing of word against word, of phrase against phrase, of the first half against the second half of the poem — in listing these characteristics we move back fifty years.
For this is the poetry of statement, of clear prose exposition of what is known to be true —‘This, which I know, I speak with mind serene’(line 40).
Besides eighteenth-century excellencies, there are just those faults which the author of the Preface to Lyrical Ballads attacked.
Some of the diction —‘thou rugged Pile!’(line 1) is certainly not ‘the language of men’, and there is a cumbrous elegance about the ‘wit’ of  which is far removed from the simplicity which Wordsworth is thought to exemplify.
Nevertheless, this seems to me the greatest short poem ever written by Wordsworth, comparable to Dr Johnson's magnificent exposure of The Vanity of Human Wishes .
One cannot prove a personal judgment of this kind, and I do not expect immediate assent to it.
But listen to Wordsworth on the definition of poetry, again from the Preface to Lyrical Ballads :
It is poems like this which prove that Wordsworth knew what he was talking about.
The Excursion
Wordsworth produced quantities of verse in the next forty-three years: I stress the exact number of years because it amounts to over half his lifetime, and certainly to two-thirds of his poetic existence.
It has often been pointed out that even if he had written nothing before this stage he would still be regarded as an important poet.
In recent years The White Doe of Rylstone (published 1815, but written 1807–8) has provoked critical discussion by John Jones and J.F. Danby among others.
But the work which really made Wordsworth's reputation,The Excursion (1814), is usually dismissed as almost unreadable; it offers Wordsworth's mature opinions ‘on Man, on Nature, and Society’, and one must grant that, as The Prelude was not published in 1814, it appeared to be his most considerable poem.
Nevertheless, the following sentence from a letter of 1814 defending The Excursion reveals how far we have travelled since 1798.
One would never have expected that the author of Tintern Abbey would be reduced to this sort of stage-management!
In the same letter he refers to ‘a passionate expression uttered incautiously in the Poem upon the Wye’(see p. 88) and adds significantly: ‘Unless I am greatly mistaken, there is nothing of this kind in The Excursion.’
Apart from Book i, which incorporates The Ruined Cottage , a poem originally written in the 1790s, the best part of The Excursion is probably Book iv —‘Despondency Corrected’.
The Author of the poem and the Wanderer have gone to visit The Solitary, who has retired to a remote region usually identified with Blea Tarn, at the head of Langdale.
He has rejected the world since the death of his wife and children, and broods over the failure of his hopes in the French Revolution.
The Wanderer argues that religion can be a support, and gives examples of ‘natural religion’, in this case from Ancient Greece:
The whole of this passage is spoken by the Wanderer, except for the  last lines where the The Solitary (called the Sceptic because he reads Voltaire) answers back.
You may feel that you have read some of these lines before; line 760 anticipates Keats's ‘Ode to a Nightingale’: as does the sense of the next two lines.
It is not a large step to 
But such announcements as ‘We live by Admiration, Hope and Love’, although memorable, and remarkable for the exclusion of ‘Faith’ from the Pauline triad, seem to have alienated readers by their dogmatic assertiveness.
Even Wordsworth's friends and admirers sensed that something had gone wrong.
Charles Lamb could not believe in the Pedlar who narrates most of Book i, and Keats was suspicious of ‘poetry that has a palpable design on us’.
By 1819, if Shelley is to be taken as a reliable guide, Wordsworth's stock had gone down and down: ‘He was at first sublime, pathetic, impressive, profound; then dull; then prosy and dull; and now dull — oh so very dull! it is an ultra-legitimate dulness’(Dedication to Peter Bell the Third ).
It is necessary, therefore, to turn to a sonnet written on a personal theme for evidence of poetic survival.
TEXT.
From Poetical Works , iii, p. 16.
The sonnet was written between 1812 and 1815.
SUBJECT.
Wordsworth tells us that the poem refers to his daughter Catherine, who died in 1812.
Another child, Thomas, died in the same year.
He was so deeply moved by this double loss that he was still able to describe his children's last illnesses over thirty-five years later (Aubrey De Vere,Essays , vol. ii).
De Quincey's morbid account of ‘the death of little Kate Wordsworth’ is to be found in the second volume of his Works edited by Masson (Reminiscences vol. ii, pp. 440–5).
EXPLANATORY NOTES.
‘Transport’(line 2) means ‘rapturous emotion’; ‘vicissitude’(line 4) has a long poetic history going back to Milton — it means ‘alternation’, or ‘change of circumstances’.
The question mark at the end of line 4 refers back to ‘with whom?’ 'No vicissitude can find' is therefore a statement of fact, implying a pagan, not a Christian attitude.
CRITICISM.
It is the movement of the verse which makes this sonnet come alive, as was brilliantly demonstrated by F. R. Leavis at some length (Scrutiny vol. xiii, pp. 119–34, especially pp. 125 ff).
We may need to read the poem several times to appreciate the way in which an effect of spontaneity is achieved within an extremely rigid verse form.
The poet appears at first to be unable to utter his thoughts clearly; he circles wildly, stumbling from one half-finished sentence into another, and breaking up the lines awkwardly (1, 2, 6, 9).
Yet this is exactly the way in which people do speak, especially ‘in a state of excitement’, as any tape-recorder can prove.
The ‘poetic’, almost sentimental, ‘Love, faithful love, recalled thee to my mind’ is abruptly cut off by ‘the true voice of feeling’—‘But how could I forget thee?’
But after the first 8½ lines these crosswinds of emotion are harmonized, and the poem concludes with a dignified and controlled recognition of the fact of death.
Victorian precursor
In the 1820s and 1830s a strong moralizing voice takes firm control of the poetry.
In spite of the increasing stiffness in the handling of the verse, Wordsworth continued to experiment with varied stanza forms, and also, I feel, with language: but the aureate diction frequently conceals the tritest sentiments.
If we do pay attention to his thought we feel we are listening to a public orator of unimpeachably orthodox Christian principles, a Poet Laureate in training — he did not in fact attain this honour until the reign of Queen Victoria in 1843.
Many of his verses, for example Ecclesiastical Sketches, Sonnets upon the Punishment of Death (in favour of capital punishment), several sonnets on Railways (both for — in general; and against — in the Lake District), and one on Illustrated Books and Newspapers (against!) might well find their present day equivalent in irate letters to national or local newspapers, or in an ‘Any Questions’ discussion.
But more typical poems point forward to the quiet effusions of Victorian clergymen and hymn writers.
Since the Victorians in general thought of Wordsworth as a Nature poet and in particular as a writer of flower pieces, I have chosen The Primrose of the Rock as a representative example.
The confidence of this poem in Christian doctrine is unchallengeable.
I do not think it is complacent or smug; one feels it has been worked for.
The style of the poem is in many ways seventeenth-century, though there are plenty of resemblances to later hymns; but it could be  described as an emblem-poem in the seventeenth-century tradition.
One could perhaps compare The Oak , by the Rev. John Keble: to see how Wordsworth can still avoid lapsing into utter platitude and sentimentality.
TEXT.
From Poetical Works ii, p. 303.
The poem was probably written in 1831, but may be earlier.
SUBJECT.
Wordsworth has observed a primrose perched on top of a rock; in the second stanza he remembers that he first saw it many years ago (actually 1802.
See Dorothy Wordsworth's Journals 24 April 1802).
He also used the flower as the starting point for The Tuft of Primroses — Poetical Works , v, p. 348 ff, written in 1807–8.
He thinks of it as a link in ‘the great chain of Being’, a medieval idea which survived into the eighteenth century (see A. O. Lovejoy's book of the same title).
Therefore the flower is ultimately linked to the earth itself, which is thought of as part of a ‘sphere’— this refers to the Ptolemaic system, already out of date in the seventeenth century.
The earth is upheld by the providence of God; so the plant revives each year.
In the second part of the poem the springtime revival of the plant need not cause envy of an old man.
It is a symbol of God's love which — stanza 7 — can triumph over disease, sorrow and age and reverse Original Sin (lines 41–2).
This leads to the thought of the Resurrection of the Dead — stanza 8 — and shows that God visits the ‘humble in heart’ with individual consolation and reassurance.
STYLE.
Lines like 41–2, ‘turned the thistles of a curse/To types beneficent’, are quite remarkable and are an example of what I mean by ‘experimental’.
One might compare the language of Thomas Hardy.
The usual gibes about ‘Romantic imprecision’ have no weight  here, but then this is hardly a Romantic poem.
I do not see that a poet who can write like this in old age, again like Thomas Hardy, deserves to be sneered at and abused with phrases like ‘fossilized’ and ‘quite dead’.
Is the later poetry so bad?
It would be unfair to leave the discussion of the later Wordsworth without a rejoinder to what is usually said.
During his final years he extensively revised, rewrote and rearranged his poems, especially The Prelude , and although the changes he made are not always improvements, they add up to the formation of the definitive text of the poems, so that many lines and phrases which we think of as unmistakably Wordsworth date from these latter years.
He went on going through the motions of being a poet until the very end, and inevitably, because he kept in practice, hit upon some successes —‘gleams like the flashing of a shield’ occur in unexpected places.
One should certainly look at the following poems:
Composed Upon an Evening of Extraordinary Splendour and Beauty — where Wordsworth faces his own decline —
Extempore Effusion upon the Death of James Hogg — a great dirge for his own generation of Romantic poets.
The River Duddon — a series of sonnets.
The ‘After-Thought’(xxxiv) is famous, but try to read more than this.
Processions — a very strange poem about religious ceremonies, the last stanza of which seems to describe the Imagination as a 
In reading this last poem we may glimpse a solution to the problem of Wordsworth's decline — the Imagination had become a power so terrible that he could not risk indulging it, and yet it would not release him from its grip.
As he said in the Preface to the 1815 edition of his poems:
Whatever this may mean, it is a brave utterance; the man who believed this would never admit defeat.