

£1.95
Edited by NIGEL STARMER-SMITH
TIME TO GO PRO?
NICK FARR-JONES ON THE SPOT
World Cup 7's QUALIFIERS Supplement sponsored by THE FAMOUS GROUSE FINEST SCOTCH WHISKY
SCOTLAND & ENGLAND ‘B’ Down Under
NEW LAWS DEATH OF THE GAME
WIN a Camcorder
As the Wallabies, fresh from beating Scotland, strike a deal with sports marketing agency IMG, skipper Nick Farr-Jones speaks of his desire to speed up what he sees as the game's inevitable move to semi-pro status.
Why not introduce retainers of say, £8,000 for three months of the year, asks Farr-Jones.
On the air…
WITH NIGEL STARMER-SMITH
Put in our place!
As a race the Brits may sometimes be too self-effacing for our own good.
Whether it's the launch of Concorde or a dramatic scientific advance — such as the invention of the hovercraft — we are slow to thump our own tub and even slower to exploit our own innovations.
However, we are equally guilty at times of thinking ourselves to be better at certain pursuits than we have cause to feel.
The recent European Soccer Championships were a case in point — we (in this case, England) looked, and were, second-rate.
Remember the hype over the last Winter Olympic hopefuls, or the Seoul Games when we didn't land a single gold in track and field.
I hope Barcelona proves more bountiful.
Which brings me to the point that we must not lose sight of the fact that in rugby terms we are not world champions.
As Geoff Cooke opined only recently, England can currently rate no better than third best, whilst the exploits of Scotland, Ireland and England ‘B’ Down Under will, I hope, have helped us to keep domestic triumphs in perspective.
Moving on to the subject of domestic competition, may I draw your attention to a missing tournament.
At the moment we enjoy in England two wonderfully successful knock-out competitions — at the top level the Pilkington Cup has gone from strength to strength with full-houses at Twickenham the setting for repeated grand finales in recent years.
And what a great innovation the Provincial Insurance Cup for junior clubs has been.
But you may not have realised that in between these two splendid, well-run national tournaments lie a large number of middle-strength clubs who do not qualify for participation in either.
To illustrate the point let me cite the example of Yorkshire, where the majority of the county's clubs competing in the Courage Leagues have no opportunity of taking part in a national knock-out competition.
All 43 of the lower division clubs in Yorkshire accepted the challenge to compete last season in the Provincial Insurance Cup; in fact, once again, producing the eventual winners in Bradford Salem.
This coming season 43 clubs, comprising the lowest echelons of the league, qualify and have accepted participation in the Provincial Insurance Cup.
Equally, seven Yorkshire clubs will line up in the 1992–93 Pilkington Cup competition, two as Yorkshire qualifiers, three as National Division Three qualifiers and two as National Division Two qualifiers not competing in the Yorkshire Cup.
Thus at the top and bottom of the scale all is well, be it at Sheffield, Wakefield or newly amalgamated Roundhay and Headingley, now in the shape of the new Leeds club — or, at the other end, such as Yorkshire Copper Works, Wath upon Dearne or Wetherby.
But in between these two groups (and ironically double Provincial Insurance Cup champions of the last two years, Bradford Salem, are amongst them) there rest 47 Yorkshire clubs who have no opportunity, although competing in the Courage Leagues, of entering a national knock-out competition, because the qualifying regulations for the two existing competitions do not encompass them.
Clearly it would not be practical, I would suggest, to extend the already extensive catchment area for the Pilkington and Provincial competitions.
But surely there is scope for a new middle-tier tournament — and no doubt a willing sponsor who would be prepared to present such a cup in the light of the successful association of Pilkington and Provincial with the existing events.
Alongside Barnsley and Beverley, Doncaster and Driffield, there are literally hundreds of clubs throughout the English counties who would relish the challenge of a knock-out competition to give the added zest and new contacts that such competitions bring.
Time for action!
SEND YOUR LETTERS TO: RUGBY WORLD & POST, CHILTERN HOUSE
A step in the right direction
IT was common knowledge the come the new law changes they would almost certainly include the experimental decision to award the put-in following a maul going nowhere to the defending side, so why are we getting so many whingers making their thoughts known whenever they can get their name in print.
Any watcher of quality U19s rugby would notice that following the introduction of this same decision last season the ball became more readily available in a maul situation by means of better support play.
What could be simpler than the ball carrier going in, turning and setting with the support player going in low and hard and stripping the ball as he turns?
Straight away there are two players between the ball and the opposition, both are trying to drive backwards once the weight of their opponents is felt and the ball is available for distribution.
As a coach to both a colts XV and a senior team I have seen the game my charges play become more free flowing by doing away with the juggernaut mentality.
If these so-called rugby experts want to relive the monotonous and tedious forward battles that culminated in England's Grand Slam then they can keep their memories.
That was then and this is now and changes have to be made.
Preserve full contact
AFTER having played for one season under the new laws governing the U19 games, I would like to say how disappointing the season was.
The new laws, which were supposed to enhance by educating the younger players thus enabling them to improve their game and so become better players when they progress to senior level, has turned out to make the game no better than the farcical ‘tic’ game played at mini level.
It is comparable with the now discredited phonetic method of teaching children to read where they no sooner learned to read by this method than they had to scrap all they had learned and then start all over again and learn to read properly.
Rugby has survived all these years as a good robust contact sport, and as we are always being told by the medical profession that modern youth is bigger, stronger and fitter than children of previous generations, why can't we play rugby as it is supposed to be played rather than a genteel non-contact pass ball?
If we wanted to play a game that is not rough we could stick to bridge or three-card brag.
South Africa — dodgy choice
WITH respect to the 1995 World Cup, there must already be sad voices at Rugby World & Post muttering ‘I told you so’.
For, whilst we all wish to see democratic government in South Africa and recognise the role played by the restoration of sporing links in achieving those aims, events of the last few weeks confirm that the country is still very unstable.
Whilst the nation is still at war with itself, whilst the security forces stand accused of supporting Inkatha members in attacks on the ANC at Boipatong, now, as Mick Cleary asked in RW&P in January, ‘can anyone say (now) that there will be no violent backdrop to the 1995 World Cup?’
If the IB is serious in its wish to help restore democracy it must act now.
It must be made clear to South Africa's political and rugby authorities that the nation's hosting of the tournament is dependent upon political reforms continuing at pace.
In the meantime a replacement (Canada?
Why not?) must be prepared to take over should the process break down.
To do otherwise will merely support conservative South Africans in their belief that the country has already changed enough to gain international respectability.
It could place players and spectators in 1995 at great risk of violence.
Moreover, it will be guilty of giving succour, however tacit, to a regime where people continue to be deprived of their democratic rights, to suffer and to be killed, purely on the grounds of the colour of their skin.
Japanese shamateurism
KOMEI Sugawara's letter and Norm Hadley's words — like Ian Williams' in his book ‘In Touch’— must have given worldwide rugby fans another view of Japanese rugby.
It is quite questionable why the heads of JRFU don't establish ‘real’ clubs in Japan based on long-range plans.
Company-based amateurism is not real amateurism because owners try to invite excellent domestic or foreign players for their company clubs with the assurance of company works, as Sugawara said in his letter.
And, ironically, professional sports, like baseball or soccer in Japan, are also company based except for some soccer clubs.
But even these clubs are influenced by major companies; for example, Grumpas Eight, the club that invited English striker Gary Lineker, was once the soccer club of Toyota , whose rugby club has Japanese centre, Eiji Kutsuki.
It may be curious for non-Japanese.
Are France really bad boys?
I'm not English, Irish nor French, but I have the same opinion as both Mr. Schwabb and Dr. O'Donohue.
Needless to say, I have a knowledge of the Hundred Years War and feuds between England and France.
Any dirty play must be criticised, but bashing France alone doesn't solve the problem.
If Lascubé's play was against the laws, how about the fact that English no.8 Dean Richards punched a French player in the match against England in the Championship last year?
That was also rough play and he should have been punished sternly.
And if Rob Andrew got sympathy for his injury, how about the case of Philippe Sella, who led his side until 56 minutes in spite of his poor condition caused by the class with Andrew?
I hope Italy will join the Championship as its sixth nation.
Squadra Azzura may fight powerfully against others, but I hope hey don't join it instead of France.
Whether it is true or not, I think the law changes are revolutionary and apt for the current rugby style, producing more speed and entertainment.
The game is not only for players but also for the audience, especially team supporters.
Was anyone consulted?
HAVING read the June edition from cover to cover, I can find no notice or article, either from the Secretary of the RFU or the Editor, on the proposed alterations to the Courage League and Pilkington Cup regulations which will affect all clubs in the country.
These changes strike at the very base of rugby union football as played for the last 100 years in that a player could play when ,where and for whom providing that he paid his subscription before departing from his old club.
The changes, if reported correctly, will cause problems right across the board.
A player joining a new club during the close season or after the season starts will have to wait 30 days if joining a club two leagues higher or lower before he plays for that club in a Courage league game or 120 days if joining a club on the same level or one league higher or lower before he plays for that in a league game; he waits 180 days if he is not a British passport holder.
Yet he can still play for his former club while he waits for the clearing period to expire.
Will he be paying his subscription to both clubs?
What discussions took place before this was made law?
Who discussed it, when and where?
Why were the majority of clubs not asked for their thoughts on the changes?
Or are the Senior Clubs Association and the competition sub committee the only ones that matter?
There are 1161 other clubs in England.
As for the Pilkington Cup, to ensure the senior clubs are protected, including the relegated ones, the counties are to lose 10 places in the competition from season 1993–94.
These 10 places will in the main come from the middle 549 clubs who by their status do not qualify for the Cup.
Thus out of the middle only 27 will have any chance of getting into the top flight and then only into the second round of the Pilkington Cup.
Is there not to be any competition for the middle and majority of clubs?
Mr Editor, you have a duty on behalf of the 1161 to investigate this matter.
England's open-door policy
HAVING read Mr. G. Palmer's letter in the June 1992 Postbag , I felt the ERFSU should put forward the facts
Inevitably the national selectors are able only to select from those players who have achieved at least county level.
With the lack of time county selectors may normally only select from those players nominated from either schools and clubs.
Sadly, for whatever reason, many such establishments do not nominate players.
With regard to the formation of selection committees, last season's 18 Group Committee was made up as follows:
Retired schoolmasters 3
Independent schoolmasters 2
State schoolmasters 5
Whilst the final selection of 21 players showed 18 from independent and three from state schools, the number in the final trial showed several more state school players.
At 16 Group level the selection committee was made up as follows:
Retired schoolmasters 2
Independent schoolmasters 4
State schoolmasters 4
On the playing front out of 88 selected for the divisional team 57 were from state schools and 37 from independent schools, with 16 out of the 23 finally selected from the state system.
The selectors are charged with selecting the best available side from the talent made available.
It is up to us all to make sure that good players are brought to the notice of the selectors.
Forget Sports Illustrated
AS someone who has played rugby (at a humble level) in England, Canada and the USA, I feel compelled to comment on Randall Lieberman's discussion of rugby's low profile in the States (RW&P, May ).
Mr Lieberman makes many valid points, but his remarks about ‘cleaning up rugby's image’ are surely misguided.
High-profile, big money American football is a game in which at all levels — schoolboy included — deliberately maiming and crippling opposition players is regarded as a legitimate tactic.
Many coaches encourage this, most people here are aware of it, and as a doctor I know that many of my orthopaedic colleagues owe a good proportion of their incomes to repairing football-related catastrophic knee injuries.
In contrast to this condoned and systematic brutality, rugby's ‘image problem’, in Mr Lieberman's analysis, stems from its association with ‘beer parties’, which are frowned upon by the editor of Sports Illustrated , who is dismissive of rugby in a way which I find offensive (I wonder if he's aware, for instance, that the US Womens' team recently won a world title?), and attempting to placate people like him would be buying into a value system which is completely alien to the game.
There's actually plenty of potential space on US cable sports TV networks for minority sports (for example Aussie Rules is televised and has a following here) and there are other sports magazines besides Sports Illustrated .
Hopefully, the company marketing the next World Cup will do more groundwork on this side of the pond, and begin to unleash this huge potential.
Beyond the bamboo curtain
CONGRATULATIONS on your recognition that rugby has crossed beyond the bamboo curtain (Rugby World & Post, July 1992 ).
May I, however, challenge Alvin Sallay's assertion that the birth of rugby in China dates from Shi Zheng Scheng's return to Beijing Nong Ye Da Xüe from Japan.
Rugby union (the Chinese translates as ‘olive-shaped ball’) was being played at Tonghua in Dongbei (Manchuria) in 1987.
I know because I was one of the VSO teachers who introduced it there.
We bought our ball in Dongbei too — from the no.1 department store in Dandong on the North Korean border (could Korea have been the original influence?).
It may interest you to know that until last highlights from the previous day's Five Nations Championship games were shown on the nationwide seven o'clock news every Sunday evening in China.
Furthermore, at 7.30 on Christmas Eve 1988 CCTV, the central television channel broadcast from Beijing, showed 40 minutes of highlights from the 1986 Wales v Scotland game at Cardiff Arms Park.
Don't ask me why they chose that game.
All I can say is that my students were gobsmacked by Paul Thorburn's 70m penalty.
The last game I played in China was in November 1990.
My team, Guizhou Agricultural College, were beaten 24–16 by the Guizhou University in a game which attracted about a hundred spectators and in which ten tries were scored.
English also-rans
I ENJOY reading your magazine every month.
However, I can no longer read some of the rubbish that is being written about the current English team and still stay silent.
England have recently won a second-rate success called the Grand Slam.
England are a good team but when they play against the ‘Big Boys’ they are also-rans.
Defeat against New Zealand and Australia within one month during the World Cup on their home ground confirms this.
The fly-by-night supporters might believe the hype about the current English team but the genuine rugby supporters know that the real rugby is played in the Southern Hemisphere.
Nick Cain's ROUNDABOUT
The Naas and ‘Noddy’ Show
FLY-HALVES Michael Lynagh and Naas Botha got an early chance to size each other up before world champions Australia take on would-be kings South Africa later on this month when they meet, plying their trade for Treviso and Rovigo respectively, in the Italian Championship final.
Both men are part of a coterie of so-called ‘rugby mercenaries’ whose pay-offs are said to start at the $120,000 mark and the best-rewarded of whom — the ‘rugby millionaires’— are reckoned to be paid $250,000 per season.
What to do — of anything — about the Italian Connection is a problem that has long perplexed the top administrators: some see it as a cancer at the heart of rugby; others as a storm in a teacup of no consequence to what they see as larger and more insidious threat to amateurism in England and the rest of the ‘Big Eight’.
Next month RW&P talks to the main men and gives an in-depth look at the Italian scene and asks whether rugby can afford to turn a blind eye.
In an in-depth feature on the Italian scene next month both Botha and Campese — rumoured to be amongst the best paid of the legion of ‘stranieri’ in Italy — talk about what Italy holds for them and tackle head-on the issue of pay-for-play.
Battle of the fly-halves: Springbok Naas Botha (far right) and Wallaby Michael Lynagh (far right) in action against each other in the Italian Championship final for Rovigo and Treviso respectively.
Lynagh scored two tries in Treviso's 27–18 win to eclipse Botha…
Strapped for cash
WHILST the accounts from last year's World Cup are still not available, I.B. Secretary Keith Rowlands asserted in Catania recently that RWC profits would be more than the paltry £3 million mooted earlier this year by fellow director Marcel Martin.
It would be a welcome change, however, if the revenue were large enough for RWC to fund its own tournaments and to allow the ‘minnows’ of world rugby to stay at a decent hotel within 45 minutes drive of civilisation during the high-point of their rugby lives (see pages 38 & 39 ).
‘Edge’ the centrefold!
AT LAST, the story can be told.
Two years ago Bath no.8 Dave Egerton toured Argentina with England.
After one of early games he was approached by a strange looking character who proposed a meeting ‘which would be to your advantage, senor’.
Egerton went, taking the very sensible precaution of asking Mickey Skinner along as a bodyguard.
The meeting, in a downmarket Argentinian hotel, went like this:
— Take your clothes off, Mr. Egerton.
— Why?
— It could be worth £25,000.
— Right, no problem.
— Good, Senor Egerton.
They obviously liked what they saw.
Egerton was offered $30,000 to pose in a pornographic magazine.
The deal might have gone through but for two things.
One, Egerton, taking advice from his learned friend, Brian Moore, asked the man in the seedy overcoat and dark glasses for a contract.
The man took flight.
There was another reason as well, Egerton explains.
‘You see, I was a bit worried about my amateur status’.
Cold comfort…
IN OUR June edition we wrongly stated that Sutton Coldfield RFC were  bringing a £500,000 civil action against a referee who presided over a game in which the club's colts captain, Ben Smolden, broke his neck.
No action has been initiated or is being contemplated by the club, although Ben's father, Roger, who is also chairman of SCRFC, has engaged solicitors independently of the rugby club to determine if there was any negligence responsible for his son's injuries.
Mick blazes a trail
MICKEY Skinner blazed a trail of glory on the London-Brighton bike race last month.
Skinner led a group of 28 players from Kent clubs on the 56 mile ride.
They raised almost £10,000 in aid of the Royal Marsden Cancer Hospital.
Skinner teamed up with former Blackheath back-rowers of the '80s, Danny Vaughan and Kevin Acott, after learning that another Blackheath colleague from that era had lost his wife to cancer.
Skinner, renowned for his fitness, was only one of six who managed to climb the ferociously steep Ditching Beacon just before the finish.
‘I'm now Kent's King of the Mountains’, he said.
He will soon enter hospital for a knee operation.
Any further donations to M. Skinner, c/o Blackheath RFC.
Now listen in boys!
HERE are a couple of anecdotes that might tickle your fancy from the World Sevens Qualifying Tournament in Catania, Sicily.
1) Zimbabwe skipper Andy Ferreira had got it all worked out.
He got his men into a tight huddle before they took on arch-rivals Spain.
Said Ferreira: ‘Now listen!
I've been studying these boys and I can till you they're bloodee slow — so lit's git out there and run the ligs off them!’
Two minutes later and 12–0 down Ferreira looked a little sheepish.
Zimbabwe eventually snatched that game 18–16, but the Spanish had their revenge later (see pages 36 & 37 ).
2) Heard about the enraged Moroccan team which turned up to find their flag emblazoned with the six-pointed Star of David?
A hasty cut and stitch job by the Italian organisers restores Arab pride when a five-pointer was unfurled the next day.
Zimbabwe's Andy Ferreira gives his boys the low down…
Fashion victims
THE recent controversy over the All Blacks' over-abrasive rucking methods against both New South Wales and England ‘B’— and the injuries which sidelined four Australian and one English player (see page 30)— bring to mind a disturbing complaint which surfaced last season in Britain.
Allegations of stamping apart, the recent trend towards the use of longer studs has made nasty gashes through ‘sprigging’ far more commonplace.
If Scotland and Harlequins lock Neil Edwards is to be believed, players, he says, have taken to wearing 22mm studs — 4mm longer than the standard wet weather studs.
Players hide the studs from referees by showing him their reserve pair — complete with regulation studs — and them quickly switch before the game.
Referees are so trusting that at one recent international a player who had forgotten his reserve boots showed the ref the physio's pair — three sizes too small and with moulded studs!
The fashion is a dangerous one.
Not only do the longer studs serve no purpose other than to inflict greater pain upon both teammates and opposition (standard studs give just as much grip in the scrums), but the players rightly risk sanction if caught endangering others.
One for the ‘Names’
OUR January issue cover story was the first comprehensive airing of the pros and cons regarding South Africa's suitability as the next venue.
The view we took was, in a nutshell, that the venue.
The view we took was, in a nutshell, that the volatile nature of the South African political arena outweighed not only its magnificent facilities, but also the anti-apartheid emotional legacy of welcoming back the Springboks.
Rugby is identified so strongly as an Afrikaner sport by the black majority that there appears little doubt that it will become a political football.
Steve Tshwete, himself a former flanker and now the ANC's chief of sport, told RW&P in an exclusive interview to be published next month, that sportsmen would be expected to ‘take the field wearing armbands and stickers on their kits showing their commitment to peace and democracy in South Africa’ and to ‘show their support for out struggle by visiting the scene of the Boipatong massacre’.
In its infinite wisdom the IB had decided that the threat of political disruption of the event is a gamble worth taking in view of the factors already mentioned, plus the prospect of rich commercial pickings.
They will hedge against that bet no doubt by insuring the tournament against unforeseen disaster and having plans in place for a swift change of venue — possibly England and Wales.
Anyone like to guess the premium, and are there any Lloyds ‘Names’ out there prepared to take the risk?
Quick fix…
THE muted SARFU response to the discovery of steroid abuse among Currie Cup players is a disgrace.
Drugs in rugby will become a much more widespread problem if the sort of ducking and diving that took place when Messrs. Swart, Du Preez and van den Bergh tested positive is the only form of official discouragement on offer.
The Ice Pack!
THE Australian pack looked a mighty outfit as it blew Scotland to the four corners at both scrummage and line-out during their recent two-test series (see pages 22 & 23).
There don't appear to be any weak links, and in John Eales they have a phenomenal line-out talent.
The New Zealand and South African eights will do well to live with his  mighty Wallaby pack in the weeks to come…
‘SEEN & HEARD…
‘Would I rather be on the field?
Sure, then I would not have to stand in the rain talking to you ’—PHIL DANAHER (Ireland's injured skipper) talking to a radio commentator on the Athletic Park (Wellington) sidelines before Ireland lost the Second Test against New Zealand (59–6).
‘To me it smacks of a cover up.
The IRB rules are that if you have a positive drug test you should be banned from the game for two years ’—JOHN MAYHEW (NZRFU doctor for the tour to Australia and South Africa) on the quashing of drugs sentences on South Africans Balie Swart and Elandre van den Bergh.
‘They have the steroids in their body tissues.
That's the one and only test.
The way the drugs get into their bodies might be a mitigating factor, but it's not an excuse ’—HENNIE ERASMUS (South African rugby union tribunal member and a lawyer) on the acquittal of Balie Swart and Elandre van den Bergh of steroid charges.
‘There will be no problems with steroids.
We want rugby players, not body builders ’—LUIS LUYT (SARFU executive) on alleged extensive steroid abuse in South Africa.
‘It is common for club players to take anabolic steroids.
So if it is happening at club level you can guarantee it is happening at the top.
The steroids are very easy to get.
Almost any gym has them ’—DAVE EDWARDS (former Transvaal hooker now living in New Zealand).
‘You would be playing rugby with people who are supportive of change and who are non-racial.
There's nothing wrong with that ’—STEVE TSHWETE (ANC executive) on suggestions that the New Zealand tour to South Africa should be called off owing to the Boipatong massacre.
‘It is an absolute red herring and they are just trying to make a mountain out of a molehill ’—NEIL GRAY (All Black manager in Australia) after his team had been accused of excessively tough tactics in beating New South Wales (41–9).
‘We have established a reasonable group of players capable of playing test rugby ’—LAURIE MAINS (New Zealand coach) after the 2nd Test victory over Ireland (59–6).
‘We are learning that, as a result of how they operate, the game moves with greater continuity.
It's not go.
It's go-go.
We are fit enough and bright enough to play that type of game.
If Southland's game is representative of New Zealand rugby, then it's quick and the forwards move at a great pace ’—JACK ROWELL (England ‘B’ coach in New Zealand) after the 31–16 win against Southland.
Heavyweight Wallaby hooker Phil Kearns cools off after blitzing Scotland.
THE NEW LAWS — They all fall down…
DEATH OF THE GAME!
Never have the game's laws undergone so radical an overhaul as they did last year — and never have they provoked such an outcry.
MICK CLEARY heard why tempers are rising.
The new laws were presented as taking the game into a new arena.
Well, if you fancy playing your rugby in the graveyard then good luck to you.
The laws could be the death of the game we know.
They have been in operation in the Southern Hemisphere since the beginning of June.
Already the noises of complaint coming from Down Under have begun to register on the Richter Scale.
‘I don't figure there would be one coach of a major nation in international rugby who would agree with the ruck/maul law change’, said Australian coach Bob Dwyer.
Spectators at club matches in New Zealand have vented their feelings in no uncertain fashion, jeering every time the action stops and their side loses the ball.
So, are all forty or so law amendments to be booted swiftly into touch?
No.
In fact there is only one real rogue amongst the package.
Final judgement on the others will have to be reserved until they are seen in action: initial soundings from Down  Under are not unfavourable, however.
The same cannot be said of the ruck/maul proposal.
In simple terms the law now states that if the side taking the ball into a ruck or maul does not succeed in producing the ball then the opposition are awarded the put-in at the scrummage.
The aim, it was said, was to encourage teams to get the ball on the move quickly and so create a more fluid handling game.
The result?
The exact opposite.
Games have been dominated by the boot.
There is now little purchase in trying to run the ball for the simple reason that the penalty if you fail to sustain the movement is too great.
If you don't score you lose possession.
One big kick downfield from the opposition and you're set right back on your heels in defence.
Recipe for trouble.
The new ruck-maul law, rather than resulting in quicker and cleaner ball, could end up with the sort of pile-up seen here when New South Wales took on Fiji in the recent Super Six Series as defending players desperately try to stop the ball coming out of the rucks or mauls.
Some may argue, as Wayne Shelford does, that these are still early days.
He suggests that teams may eventually evolve new rucking and mauling habits and learn to play the game in a different way and at a different pace.
Even though his first impressions have not been positive he is prepared to give the new laws a run for their money.
Andy Cushing, a coach at London Scottish, is not.
To his mind the central tenet of the game — that you will be rewarded for driving forward and making ground — has been abandoned.
Cushing is also in charge of rugby at Hurstpierpoint College in Sussex.
Schoolboys have played the laws for two seasons now.
To use their level of rugby as a role model is ridiculous argues Cushing.
‘There are different forces and different principles at work with schoolboys’, says Cushing.
‘The skills are not as high as in first-class rugby and winning is not your prime objective.
You want the boys to use their hands more, so losing possession is not as critical a factor as in senior rugby.
Also, boys, in their innocence, are not inclined to cheat.
Senior players will do everything they can to gain an advantage’.
as if they hadn't already got enough to do, the referees will have one hell of a job with the new law.
If the opposition can get their hands round the ball in a maul or ruck, they it will be a huge gain to them.
How do they do that?
Any way they can.
Already the refs have had long meetings working out just how strict or just how lenient they are going to be.
Fred Howard gives  us his view.
The administrators themselves were unsure as to whether this radical change would work.
Along with alterations to the lineout, the amendment is to be for an experimental twelve months only.
Former All Black coach Grizz Wyllie, now with Eastern Province in South Africa, pours scorn on that decision.
In fact Brian Moore reckoned it would take only twelve days for the administrators to see the error of their ways.
He may well be proven right.
Will we see a complete about-turn in mid-season?
It may be the only way out.
THE COACH'S VIEW — AN UNHOLY MESS SAYS GRIZZ WYLLIE
The new laws have not worked at all!
They simply confirm my view that the people who make the laws are people who have little direct contact with the playing of the game.
Why on earth they should subject the whole world to an experimental period for some of the laws is beyond me.
If they weren't sure, they why not select certain games only or certain areas of one country and then see what happened?
Instead, what we have is a mess.
The idea was to promote more open rugby and see more points being scored.
They've failed on both counts.
So many of the games I've seen here have been dominated more that ever by the boot.
I saw two top-grade U20s sides last weekend.
The score was 24–6; all penalties.
I've said for years that you stop teams infringing by upgrading the penalty to, say, five points, and not be upgrading the try.
Teams will do anything to stop a try being scored now that it's worth more.
Look at what happened when the try was upgraded to four points in 1971.
Who has dominated the record books ever since — the goal-kickers.
The real bugbear has, of course, been the ruck/maul law.
What a shambles.
It cuts right across everything we believe rugby football should be about — driving forward, gaining ground and exerting pressure.
We all want to encourage the winger to have a go for the corner.
It's the classic movement of the game.
Not any more.
So the winger has a go, gets tackled, the ball is trapped and the attacking side loses possession.
The defence then kick 50 yards downfield.
Defence has beaten attack even though the spectators have shown all the skill and all the enterprise.
What happens is that possession is changing hands more often.
That's not continuity: that's movement, and movement for movement's sake.
Continuity comes from sustained movements.
You can no longer get that.
It's stop-start and it's boring.
As for the poor referees.
I don't know how they're going to cope.
Let's simplify the laws, not add to them.
Let's help them enjoy the game.
The ruck-maul change could spark a lot of trouble.
The touch judges' flags were on the pitch more often than off it in a game I saw recently here (in Eastern Province, South Africa).
Any coach is doing to do the best for his side; if it suits him to be negative, he will be.
He'll get his men in there to stop each and every maul.
There are several other areas of concern.
The one-metre gap in the line-out is a joke.
If you can throw down the shoulder line, then you might as well put the ball in the jumper's hands, never mind throw it to him.
Who now is going to kick sweetly to touch fifty or sixty metres when there's a danger of a quick throw against you?
Belt it out of the ground thirty-five metres will be the ideal kick.
What about not running back into the '22 to kick?
Most probably that player will be on his own.
Fair enough, perhaps.
Make him run.
Why then can you pass the ball into the '22, a situation which will only arise if you have support there to pass to.
That is when you ought perhaps to be encouraging some running.
Where is the logic in it?
I'm afraid that it looks as if the game will be completely ruined.
Grizz Wyllie — not impressed.
THE SCHOOL VIEW — ANDY CUSHING'S BEEN THERE, SEEN 'EM, & HATES 'EM
The new laws will be a disaster.
They cut right across the basic philosophy of rugby football — that is, to go forward and make ground.
Now after the changes if you do that and don't produce the ball then you lose possession.
Why?
It doesn't make any sense.
You have still created a pressure situation.
You're still working your strategy carefully to move down the field, using your back row, using your tight scrummage skills, using your three-quarters to gain some ground, and eventually you might outmanoeuvre the opposition defence and score.
It's all good rugby.
And that is what the lawmakers want to do away with.
Now, if you don't score, you lose possession.
It's as stark as that and it's a nonsense.
You may have driven the ball 50 yards downfield, you may have won six rucks in succession, but, on the seventh attempt, if you could not get the ball away, you lose it.
The opposition get it and kick the ball back 50 yards.
Who has played the better rugby?
Obvious, isn't it?
But who has been rewarded?
At schools level I constantly see good sides lose to mediocre teams who know how to play the laws.
The game will degenerate into a battle of the big kickers.
It's a Fool's Paradise to think that a ruck will be won, the ball moved down one channel, another ruck won, over to another channel and then finally over the try-line.
Defences are too organised for that to happen.
You just don't score off first phase possession.
And even if you did, then who really wants to see tries scored so easily and so readily?
Quantity does not mean quality.
It will become like basketball.
How many of the scores in that game are really satisfying?
Only those scored in the last 60 seconds probably.
However, the try-glut scenario will not happen.
Teams will simply kick.
Why risk anything else?
You would have to be a fool to kick to touch from defence unless there is a gale blowing.
Far better to kick very deep and let the opposition make a decision about running at you.
If they do and the first tackle brings a pile-up, then you've got the scrummage put-in deep in their half.
Much better than a line-out with them throwing-in on half-way.
The fascination of the game used to lie in seeing how sides could be broken down.
The lawmakers prattle on about wanting greater continuity.
Well, just because play is static does not mean that there is no continuity.
There is continuity of attack.
You are creating pressure.
You are moving the point of attack downfield; you are changing the thrust of attack from back row to wing back to fly-half.
The permutations are endless.
It used to be like a game of chess.
Now it's, at best, just wham-bam draughts.
There is only one way to attack: to try and run the living daylights out of the opposition.
It just won't work.
Even if it did, how can players keep those fitness levels up?
So what do we get?
Tries scored simply because the defence is slightly more knackered than the attack.
Where's the skill in that?
What else will happen?
You will never have the put-in at two scrums in succession unless the other side knock-on trying to intercept.
After one scrum you will either score, give them a line-out or lose the ball in the ruck or maul.
Line-outs must now go with the throw as there is too big a gap between sides.
The opposition have no chance of getting across.
Why not keep the old laws and the half-metre gap, then allow the touch judges to look for off-sides and crooked throws and let the ref look just for illegal play?
As for the incentive of the five-point try; well, that's a nonsense.
It's far too risky to run the ball.
If you get stopped you lose possession and one big kick from the opposition and you've lost position.
So what do you do?
You simply go for the drop-goal.
All in all, the new laws are a madness.
They spell the end of the game as we know it.
Andy Cushing — seen it all before.
THE PLAYER'S VIEW — BUCK SHELFORD PREDICTS THAT THIS WILL BE A BRAND NEW GAME
I've seen the laws in action and I haven't been too impressed.
There have been two main problems.
One is that there has been far more kicking with sides belting the ball downfield and then hoping to block the attacking position.
The other trend has been that the midfield is more cluttered than it ever was.
Opposition forwards are not committing themselves to the ruck or maul.
They know that the ball has to be released quickly as the danger for the opposition of losing the put-in at the scrum, if the hold and drive does not work, is too great.
So they fan off the loose and close down the spaces for the fly-half or blind-side winger.
There is only one option left for the attacking team — to kick the ball.
So, far from encouraging sides to run the ball more often, we have the opposite.
However, it seems to me that the chief problem is that the guys are playing the new laws with the old mentality.
The old habits of mauling and rucking are still ingrained.
What needs to happen is for players to learn how to ruck and maul more efficiently.
The onus will shift.
The ball carrier will no longer hit and drive.
He must now look to unload the ball as soon as he can.
He may even have to set up the maul before he hits the tackler.
He must not get isolated.
The support man must strip the ball clear, the blocks must go in and then the drive can take place.
Of course the ball could be moved immediately which is what the lawmakers want.
You just can't keep the pace going, however, so you protect and then drive.
Communication skills will have to be much better and every player will have to be acutely aware of what the ball carrier is going to do.
It will be no good just trying to aimlessly follow the action and then flop into a maul.
If these skills improve then we may yet have the desired effect of improving the flow of the ball.
We've got twelve months to get things right.
I think we'll need all twelve months as well.
Certainly the referees seem to be blowing up very quickly and not giving the players the slightest chance to get the ball back.
If there's no momentum, the whistle goes.
That must be wrong.
Give the players a bit more time.
At the moment there's too much whistle and so too many stoppages.
Also they are very severe on the second man going to ground.
If he does then, yet again, the whistle goes.
The first player can hit the deck but the support, as it drives over, must all stay on its feet.
I say let's give it a go and see what happens.
Let's find a way to force the opposition to join the maul or ruck.
My fear is that the maul will go completely.
We can't let that happen.
The result will just be massive congestion in the middle of the field.
The other laws have been generally well received.
The referees are very strict at the line-out with only the jumpers allowed to get across.
The five-point try has not stopped teams looking to put points on the board through taking kicks, though a bird in the hand is still worth two in the bush.
Wayne Shelford — there will be more kicking
THE REF'S VIEW — WE'LL HAVE TO SUCK IT AND SEE, ACCORDING TO FRANK HOWARD
The referees have decided to adopt a policy of ‘suck it and see’ as regards the new laws.
After a lengthy meeting at the end of June there was clear agreement as to how the more controversial, and radical, of the laws should be applied.
These are the line-out and the ruck/maul laws.
If anything the line-out will call for more rigorous refereeing than the ruck/maul.
WE have decided not to allow anyone into the one metre gap except the jumpers.
Only after the jumper has touched the ball will any one of the support players be allowed to make contact in the one metre gap.
The aim is clear — to provide for a good, clean unimpeded jump with the inside arm.
That contest between the jumpers will now be clean; that is, there will be no blocking or barging.
Of course this will take some getting used to and the referees will have to work hard to be consistent.
As for the ruck/maul law, which seems to have excited some heated debate, we are quite clear as to how this should be refereed.
As long as the ball is quite clearly seen to be on the move through the maul, then the ref will not blow, even if the maul itself is stationary.
However, if players then attempt to hold the ball within the maul, the whistle will be blown.
The potential for a flare-up under the new law is obvious.
It's to the defending side's hugh advantage if they can get their hands on the ball.
Of course, they could do this quite legally.
However, there is no doubt that we will have to be very vigilant.
Several schools coaches I spoke to pointed out that, by the end of the season of the new law, most of the boys had worked out ways and means of blocking the ball.
I'm sure it won't take senior players as long as that.
It seems to be that there will be two consequences of the new law.
One is that players will tend to chip the ball more as the tackler moves in.
They can tackle the recipient and hope to win the scrummage put-in themselves.
Secondly, fewer players will actually get involved in the rucks and mauls.
There will no longer be the same opportunity for driving a maul, so why bother to get in there?
So, the back row or whoever will hang off.
That obviously means that the fringes will become more crowded.
The ref's job will be to ensure that these guys stay on-side.
It should be pointed out that a deliberate knock-on can still be penalised by a penalty kick.
Laws 26.2a states that any law which is wilfully broken can lead to a penalty kick.
I realise that there is something of a contradiction here, but so be it.
If we take the Campese knock-on in the World Cup final, I personally would awarded a penalty try.
That is not to say that Derek Bevan was wrong; just to say that we saw it differently, that's all.
Under the new law I would still be able to award a penalty try.
In practice what will happen is that in the middle of the field where the deliberate knock-on is no more than inconvenient a free-kick will be awarded.
When it is a two-on-one situation near the line, then the penalty try will result.
Other points discussed were fairly minor.
A player cannot retreat into the '22 to kick for touch but he can pass back to another player.
This means that a player can't pass back to himself, as it were, run into the '22 to take the pass and then clear his lines.
He can, though, take a quick throw-in to himself in the '22.
All in all, I'm optimistic.
I realise that the work-load may well increase but I'm happy about that.
Already I've been lined up to do 12 presentations to clubs and coaching conventions.
There is no doubt that there will be teething problems and that some things will be thrown back at the International Board.
Let's hope that we can all be positive about the changes.
Frank Howard — major challenge for the arbiters.
S.A.'s STEROID TIME BOMB Never have rumours of steroid abuse in rugby been anything more than that — rumours.
But the recent positive tests of four top South African players have changed all that.
JOHN ROBBIE looks at a scandal that is threatening the Boks’ rehabilitation.
South African rugby folk were appalled when Canadian sprinter Ben Johnson was caught and banned for using steroids.
His excuse that he did not realise what he was being given was laughed at.
The general feeling was that Johnson was a cheat, athletics is a rotten game, at least at top level, and thank God for the rugby spirit that keeps us pure.
This mood has changed drastically in the last few weeks.
Prompted by a return to international competition, drug tests on two players from each Currie Cup side were introduced this season, just as they were during the World Cup.
Two players tested positive in the first two months and since then speculation, rumours, rows and ructions have been the order of the day.
Eastern Province flanker ELANDRE VAN DEN BERG and Transvaal prop BALIE SWART were the two who tested positive, the former after the Test Union day on April 25th and the latter after the Transvaal v Western Province game on May 16th.
They denied taking steroids knowingly, citing a supposed vitamin injection and a French doctor's treatment as the probable causes.
As with Ben Johnson most South Africans smirked openly at these revelations.
However, it became clear that unless intent to use the drugs could be proved, the players could not be banned.
This in line with IB recommendations.
Court actions were threatened and the players were acquitted.
Many felt that the SARFU should have fought the case, even with no hope of success, just to prove its determination to stamp out illegal drugs from the game.
In fact, one of the SARFU's disciplinary officials, Hennie Erasmus, resigned after the decision to acquit was made.
Clearly all did not agree with the way the matter was handled.
Swart was selected for Transvaal but withdrew voluntarily until he tests clean.
Dr. Luis Luyt undertook to close loopholes in the SARFU code and both Transvaal and Eastern Province initiated testing of their whole squad.
This revealed two more players with positive tests, EP's Junior Bok lock Armand Du Preez and Swart's replacement Johan Le Roux.
They are suspended pending appeal.
Quite rightly other countries, including Australia and New Zealand, have indicated concern and it's even been suggested that the South African tours by those countries might be called off.
The SARFU has assured both unions that is act will be squeaky clean before the All Blacks and Wallabies arrive.
The mood of the players is one of anger.
‘Test everyone and let those who are positive be kicked out’ is the general consensus.
The feeling is that cheats have had an advantage and are also risking the tours.
Many spectators feel the same way and are calling for blanket tests and bans for those who are positive.
From now on ignorance will be no excuse and if a doctor gives a pill or an injection it is up to each player to make sure it's not on the list of banned medicines.
An interesting development is that while Northern Transvaal followed suit, and instituted squad tests, Free State, Natal and Western Province have not followed suit.
The feeling seems to be that none of their players are on steroids and until requested to do so they will assume innocence.
One admires unions backing their players, but surely a responsibility to the country and to rugby in general should come first.
Surely all provincial players should now be tested as a matter urgency.
At the time of writing, we were all awaiting the SARFU meeting on June 26th with great interest.
N.Z. VIEW
SARFU's failure to pan steroid abusers has jeopardised the Black's tour, says DON CAMERON.
A three-pronged attack prodded the New Zealand Rugby Football Union into action against the apparently growing scandal of drug-taking among South African rugby players.
A few months ago one of the fruitier New Zealand Sunday tabloid comments from Don Clarke, the sensational All Black fullback of the 1950s and 1960s who has now settled in South Africa.
However, the drugs dust was really stirred with the apparently unrehearsed efforts of two rugby-medicos, Laurie Knight, the former All Black flanker now practising medicine in South Africa, and John Mayhew, in recent years the doctor tending and travelling with the All Blacks.
When the Balie Swart-Elandre van den Bergh hearing were completed Knight launched a series of attacks from South Africa and, at about the same time, Mayhew complemented those from Auckland.
Knight's were the more damaging, for he had obviously gained first-hand information on the drug-hearing and drug-testing procedures in South Africa, and when he was not satisfied fired off a series of messages, including newspaper clippings, hearings findings and his own personal letters to the NZRFU.
With chairman Eddie Tonks overseas these landed in the legal lap of John Dowling, the deputy chairman, in what was virtually his first major test as acting leader of the union.
Dowling did not dally.
In the past the NZRFU might not have dealt with submissions from individuals (such as Knight or even Mayhew) but would have waited for the details to come, union-to-union, through the usual official channels.
Dowling, though, reacted very quickly, expressed grave concern about the ease with which Swart and van den Bergh were cleared and started the NZRFU mill-wheels in overdrive.
It may not be a coincidence that the Otago Rugby Union, of which Dowling is a committee member and former chairman, actually requested that the NZRFU cancel the July-August tour of South Africa because of the drug scandals that had occurred — and which were followed by a variety of other allegations and proof of steroid use in the Republic.
The NZRFU did not follow Otago's cancellation line, but a special meeting of available councillors met in Wellington and virtually demanded that South Africa clean up its drug act otherwise the All Black tour was in jeopardy.
This drew the immediate and sincere response (and it should be noted that the South African Rugby Football union comments published in New Zealand have not attempted to side-step the issue) from Dr Danie Craven that every player who opposed the All Blacks in their five matches in the republic would be cleared of drugs use.
The good doctor may not be everyone's favourite rugby official, but his word still carries weight in New Zealand.
But now the NZRFU, having taken the high moral ground against South Africa over drug-testing and drug-use, must also show that they are as clean as driven snow.
Mayhew, who has a lot of contact with players at first class and international level, maintains he knows of no first-class players in New Zealand using steroids or performance-enhancing drugs.
And, if they are, they are not readily apparent to newspapermen's eyes.
Back in the early 1970s there were suggestions that some Auckland players were taking rather unusual medical treatment, although steroids did not seem to be involved then.
There have been occasional remarks that some players may have dallied for a time with what are known as recreational drugs.
But the NZRFU will now, having made such strong demands of South Africa, have to undertake a similarly intense drug-screening process in New Zealand.
Otherwise it cannot hope to command the moral high ground.
And the NZRFU councillors who so quickly criticised South Africa must hope that none of the leading New Zealand players show positive on drug-testing — if and when that is introduced as thoroughly as New Zealand require from South Africa.
Fullback Theo Van Rensburg keeps Currie Cup leaders Transvaal on the right track, but the positive dope test on prop Bailie Swart (second from right) and replacement prop Johan Le Roux has put their beefy pack under the microscope.
FARR-JONES — TIME TO GO PRO?
How much longer can the money men be kept at bay?
With IMG having just signed up the Wallabies, JIM TUCKER listens to Nick Farr-Jones' advocacy of greater rewards for the players.
The mind of Nick Farr-Jones is regularly filled with the puzzle of rugby's new dance with professional interests as the code marches towards the year 2000.
The Wallaby leader's visions are far-reaching, yet for every marriage of the game with the mighty pound, a warning flare is fired across his bows by the code's amateur guardians.
The dramatic changes he forecasts would, for one, place every Wallaby who lands in South Africa to defend the World Cup in 1995 on a cash retainer for his rugby services.
Farr-Jones, now 30, is unlikely to be there himself, but insists that his energies will be instrumental in forging a new destiny for the defenders of the William Webb Ellis Trophy.
He is also a staunch advocate of sports marketing giants like IMG (International Management Group) being given the means to maximise revenue by packaging rugby — the tickets, the sponsors, the signs at rugby venues, the television rights, the advertising and the players.
In short, the lot.
IMG was recently announced as the group to represent the Wallabies as a team world-wide.
Farr-Jones feels it would take an organisation with the resources of an IMG to put on the calendar his pet projects — a two-yearly challenge between the Five Nations winner and the champions of the Southern Hemisphere equivalent.
It would be the game's answer to the Super Bowl and would be staged in venues like Tokyo.
Such a tremendous vehicle for the corporate pound, the players and the promotion of the game excites the Australian captain.
‘I wonder a lot about the year 2000 — what we'll be doing (as rugby players), what we'll be driving, what we'll be living in’, he muses.
‘In the years to the World Cup in 1995 we'll see an amazing turnaround in world rugby in terms of the amateur and professional nature of it.
‘I like to think the main reason we have stayed together since the World Cup is the great spirit within this Australian team.
Our major motivation is still playing well’.
True as that may be, he doesn't break stride in saying the new deal on rugby's doorstep has ‘created the potential for people like Tim Horan to make a lot of money’.
It is certain Farr-Jones is already talking  too fast for many in the game.
The men in gold who invigorated the rugby world through Wales, Ireland and on to Twickenham in 1991 are still willing to run with the ball off the field.
‘Placing 30 Australian players on retainer is not such a bad thing’, Farr-Jones says candidly.
The substantial corporate support needed has not yet been tapped.
In two or three years it could be, believes Farr-Jones.
What sort of figures are we talking?
‘You could put each player on £4,000, £6,000, £8,000 or whatever’, he suggests as more realistic compensation for the elite player's onerous commitment of time and energy.
‘I'm only in the office for nine months in the year.
What about the other three months of the year?’
World Cup fullback Marty Roebuck, says Farr-Jones, is the perfect example.
He has a pregnant wife yet has given up his job as a physio because it started to interfere with his rugby preparation.
‘I want to see an end to those days’, Farr-Jones adds.
The rough calculation of £200,000 to support a Wallaby squad on such retainers is not yet to be found in the coffers of the Australian Rugby Football Union.
I'm not encouraging pay-for-play, but I think the players should be put on a retainer by the ARFU to provide their services to the union’, their skipper says.
The retainer would be consideration for the ever-growing demands on top players and their time spent away from work.
Such fancy notions make Australia's International Rugby Board representative, Norbert Byrne, bristle.
‘Fairyland’, he says.
He has been part of the decision-making process to broaden the game's amateur ideals: ‘The players now have a very square deal worked out’.
Farr-Jones presses further into uncharted territory: ‘I want to see the day when rugby union is run by a professional sporting and marketing body.
I mean I've been at meetings where they (IMG) have said ‘We'll hand you (rugby) a cheque for $2 million (£800,000) for the year.
You don't have to do anything.
We'll do the ticketing, the merchandising, the sponsorships, the TV rights, everything’.
‘It's got to happen before the next World Cup.
Look at what they sell the TV rights for in golf and tennis?
I'd hate to think what you could get for selling the rights to tests in, say, a Southern Hemisphere Five Nations with South Africa and Argentina coming in.
‘When that happens unions are going to have to put players on retainers.
You're just not going to be able to maintain your rugby at the highest standard otherwise.
They are going to have to say: ‘Look fellas, we don't want you to work for three months.
Go out and train, build yourselves up and become super rugby players’.
If you do that, we are going to fill the stadiums every time, the receipts are going to be there to channel back into developing the game and the profiles of the players are going to be lifted for commercial opportunities.
‘In that environment do we mind playing 12 tests a year?
No, because we don't have to go to the legal office or to school to teach for 50 hours a week in between’.
World Cup assistant coach Bob Templeton, an indomitable figure in most things rugby for more than 20 years, is outspoken about the game guiding its future.
‘I'm violently opposed to selling ownership of rugby events to management groups’, he says.
‘I'm all in favour of giving sponsors fair value for their mega-bucks but, by God, we want to retain control of our game.
The when, how and where has still to be part of rugby administration’.
Farr-Jones himself admits there are fuzzy edges.
His suggestions topple easily into the territory of pay-for-play.
He is no advocate of finishing a test match and being handed a £2,000 cheque for his efforts, et he has no qualms about wishing all the best to the rugby gypsies playing in Italy, France and South Africa.
‘Last I heard, the Eiffel Tower hadn't collapsed and neither had Rome been sacked by pagans because of money perhaps changing hands in return for playing rugby’, he says.
‘The way I look at it, they're over there and are lucky enough to make a dollar for something they enjoy.
Good luck to them.
It might be the IB's problem but it's not mine or my team's problem’.
Over the top? the radical plans of Nick Farr-Jones, leading from the grant against Scotland (left), have not met with universal approval.
But the Australian captain (above) looks happy enough to have got it off his chest.
That Farr-Jones is playing at all this season is a surprise to those who listened to his post-World Cup speeches about taking a break from the game.
‘Winning only one Bledisloe Cup in my eight years and, of course, South Africa were factors’, Farr-Jones says of his decision to add the 53rd cap he won at Twickenham.
‘I think it's really important we continue winning and 1991 doesn't become a one-off year.
I think I can add qualities as a captain to assist that’.
The size of the pie generated by Wallaby Promotions for Marketing Pty Ltd. will be substantial.
Whether the benefit is between £8,000 and £20,000 annually per player, as ARFU executive director Bob Fordham speculates, is yet to be proven.
How to cut the cake is yet to be resolved.
Farr-Jones' suggestion is that the players acquire units or shares for their involvement in the team.
He tots up the maths in his head — five units for last year's domestic season and the World Cup, a unit each for 1992's five domestic tests, two more for the venture to South Africa and four for the major tour of Ireland and Wales.
Farr-Jones dismisses the idea that his championing of IMG's cause has compromised him, given that his brother, Peter, has joined the sporting company after working in the banking sector for many years.
He does admit, though, that ‘with Peter there, it probably weighs on my mind a bit.
I mean, I don't want any players thinking IMG had done nothing for them.
‘That's why I'm always encouraging and looking for opportunities for the team.
If anything Peter is more conscious of looking after the  other guys.
He knows I'm flat out so he won't approach me.
I'm tied to another organisation for guest speaking anyway, so IMG get nothing of that’.
Farr-Jones said the whole notion of a players' company was for all the players to be involved, not to feather the nests of a select upper echelon.
‘Everyone is contributing to the team fund.
That's why we've got things like a glossy magazine, a team video (of the Wallabies in South Africa), lunches, golf days and merchandising on the go.
We're trying to lift the profile of every player and get everyone involved.
It's a team effort’.
The ventures are still small fry —‘chook raffle stuff’ in Farr-Jones' words.
No big Japanese corporation — he has spoken to Tokyo-based lawyers and former Wallaby Ian Williams at length— or Australian company giant has stepped forward to sponsor the team.
The gulf between the humble club player and the international has never looked so great.
‘It's just like it is in cricket’, he says.
‘I don't see the problem.
I don't think the club player is putting the same commitment and time.
‘The club game has always been left a bit behind.
Rugby hangs its hat on the international game but that's also where the funds come from for the grass-roots development.
That there are now 40-odd rugby development officers in Australia when there were two or three to capitalise on the 1984 Grand Slam tour is tremendous’.
Farr-Jones isn't saying it in as many words, but he clearly feels that some of the doors opened by the World Cup triumph were not marched through quickly or expertly enough.
‘I'm not being critical of our unions, but there should have been marketing people approaching the corporates even during the World Cup’, he says.
‘The game now is too big to run your own administration in an amateur way, sit back and think big companies are going to come to us’.
There are individual deals the players' company has no control over.
Pre-season David Campese signed a contract with commercial broadcaster Channel Ten .
He appears for commentary work and promotions.
Of equal significance in his contract was a clause believed to specify the maestro play on in 1992.
Test centre Jason Little is the latest of the team to have a personal manager.
‘We won't by 15 mini-corporations running onto the field.
We'll still be a team which tackles every situation together’, Farr-Jones says.
‘If, at the end of the day, we work out some sort of deal, that's great.
If we don't, what you've never had, you won't miss.
Winning will always be the number one focus’.
Hand it over — skipper Farr-Jones and try-ace Campese to the forefront of the Wallaby commercial drive.
SCOTLAND TOUR TO AUSTRALIA
SCOTS BLITZED BY WALLABY BIG GUNS
Scotland were not short of pluck, says IAN ROBERTSON, but it was still business as usual Down Under as yet another British side came, saw and bit the dust…
Two victories in eight matches cannot be construed as a success, even by the wildest stretch of the imagination, but there was some good news as well.
Part of the mission was to unearth some new talent for next season and the season after that, and on that score this tour provided plenty of encouragement.
Kenny Logan won his first cap and demonstrated he is a player for the future.
So too Graham Shiel and Gregor Townsend, And scrum-half Andy Nicol played some tremendous rugby behind a beaten pack to confirm his abundant potential.
Even more important, a good pack can be constructed around first class players like Wainwright, Smith, Hogg and Macdonald.
The Scots have four decent locks, although they failed to cope with John Eales; but remember he is the best lock in the world.
Kenny Milne is far and away the Scots' best hooker and his injury robbed them of a great deal in both tests.
Needless to say, David Sole will be hugely missed but the show must go on.
The tour was disappointing but looking to the longer term future of Scottish rugby it was certainly not a disaster.
The itinerary was ridiculously demanding.
Just four days after completing a 30-hour journey from Edinburgh to Darwin they were expected to overcome a nine-hour time difference and temperatures in the 90's to beat a Northern Territories Invitation XV .
Not only did they have to combat debilitating  jet-lag and intense heat and humidity, but the Northern Territories included five top class guest players from Queensland and New South Wales .
Scotland did their best in very difficult circumstances but a late penalty goal meant they started the eight-match tour with a one-point defeat.
Tearaway: Tim Horan, who scored twice in the Second Test, proves too hot to hold — even for a tackler of Scott Hastings' calibre
Another five-hour journey from Darwin to Brisbane left them only one training session before facing Queensland , which was hardly an ideal preparation.
In the event the Scots performed remarkably well against a team which had swept the board all season in Australasia, including a big win over Auckland .
Considering they had also beaten New South Wales convincingly they could justifiably claim to be the top provincial side around.
The golden touch: Australian lock John Eales — whose domination of the line-outs earned him the Man of the Series award — steals a march on Doddie Weir as Willie Ofahengaue lends him a helping hand…
Scotland had the satisfaction of outscoring Queensland by two tries (Stark and Lineen) to one and they produced their best rugby of the tour to earn a well-deserved draw.
The only worrying aspect of the match was the overwhelming superiority which Queensland enjoyed at the line-out, something that was to be a recurring problem in the later stages of the tour in the big matches.
Another five-hour journey from Brisbane to Hobart gave the players a sense of the extremes of Australian weather.
From temperatures during the day in Darwin of over 100 degrees, it was minus three when they arrived in Tasmania.
They adapted well to the conditions in the end but at half-time the found the Emerging Wallabies leading by 21–4 and they looked to be heading for a big win.
However, the Scots launched a spirited recovery in the second half against a very powerful side made up of former and future Wallaby internationals and, especially after David Sole came on as a replacement prop, they took complete control of the match, running in four excellent tries in an exciting 24–24 draw.
Hogg, Cronin, Shiel, Stark and Milne scored the tries and again it is worth pointing out that the Scots outscored the opposition by five tries to two.
The glut of tries came to an abrupt halt when the party flew in to Sydney for the New South Wales game.
Craig Chalmers got all Scotland's points with three penalties and two drop-goals.
New South Wales, on the other hand, ran in six tries to win quite convincingly in the end, although it has to be said in Scotland's defence that they came close on several occasions to scoring a try and only slipped out of range in the last five minutes when they conceded two tries, both of which were converted.
Fortunately there were several good individual performances to offset the 20-point defeat.
Nicol and Chalmers were excellent at half-back and the centres, Lineen and Scott Hastings, played really well in midfield.
At fullback Logan showed immense promise for the future.
Weir and Wainwright did well at the line-out and the loose forwards were just as quick and creative as their much more   illustrious opponents.
Unfortunately, the forwards were comprehensively outscrummaged and that left the whole team at a severe disadvantage.
They were catapulted back on their own ball, which not only put the pressure on Nicol but meant there could be no back-row moves to take the heat off the threequarters.
What was worse for Scotland was the knowledge that in the test they would also be facing Eales and McCall at the line-out plus Lynagh, Horan and Campese in the backs.
Key man.
With Kenny Milne (centre) in harness the Scots scrummage held up.
Without him they struggled.
The mid-week match in Tamworth was memorable mainly for providing Scotland with their first win in five matches.
Once again, there were several guest players in a New South Wales Country team which performed with great energy and enthusiasm, although the country boys were eventually subdued by a rampant Scottish pack.
Cronin and Macdonald were outstanding at the lineout, winning the ball almost at will, and the tourists also had a decided edge in the scrums.
Furthermore, Gregor Townsend, the 19-year-old fly-half, had an excellent match to confirm he is a player of rich potential.
He scored a try, dropped a goal and controlled the game with some prodigious kicking mixed with some beautifully balanced running.
Watt, Millard and Gray scored the other tries with Dods adding two conversions and one penalty.
It was a comfortable victory and encouraging to see Macdonald, who had only just arrived in Australia to replace Stuart Reid, doing so well so soon.
Despite the evidence of the Queensland and New South Wales games, the selectors stayed loyal to the established team from the Five Nations Championship for the First Test.
Not surprisingly, there were major problems at the line-out throughout the match with Eales and McCall winning the lion's share at the front and in the middle and at all the short lineouts.
The scrums started well enough but when hooker Kenny Milne was injured and replaced by Corcoran the problems started.
Struggling in the set-pieces, Scotland maintained their challenge through the superb play of the loose forwards, especially Rob Wainwright.
They outplayed Wilson, Gavin and Ofahengaue and helped Scotland to a half-time lead of 9–7.
After Hastings and Lynagh had each kicked a penalty, Australia took the lead when David Campese chased a cross-kick from Lynagh to score.
Moments later Wainwright was up in support to score by the posts and Hastings converted.
At half-time David Sole really believed Scotland would win.
‘We had played really well for 40 minutes.
We put the Wallabies under a lot of pressure and harried them into making a lot of mistakes.
We knocked them out of their rhythm and never allowed them to settle or sustain any momentum and I felt their frustrations were beginning to surface.
Unfortunately we had a few lapses of concentration at the start of the second half and you just can't afford that against a team as good as Australia.
Carozza and Lynagh scored and Lynagh kicked penalties and that left us too much ground to make up.’
Gavin Hastings managed his second penalty, but a second try by Campese, his 48th in international rugby, clinched victory for the world champions by 27–12.
The following Wednesday Scotland won a scrappy match in Toowoomba against Queensland Country by 29–12.
The Scottish forwards were in tremendous form, cleaning up at the line-out and generally demolishing a big, strong Country pack.
Cronin, Logan and Scott, who only arrived in Australia two days earlier as the replacement hooker, won promotion to the test team.
The tries were scored by Stark, Millard, who had his best game of the tour, Townsend, who also had an outstanding match, and Stanger.
Peter Dods, in his last appearance for Scotland before retiring, adding two conversions and three penalties.
The Second Test proved bitterly disappointing for the Scots.
The troubles began on the morning of the match when Gavin Hastings, probably the best fullback in the world, pulled out of the team with a back injury.
Kenny Logan switched from wing to fullback and Tony Stanger came in on the wing.
But the problems were not in the backs.
The Scottish forwards faced the full brunt of the Wallaby pack.
They were badly out-scrummaged throughout the game, providing no sort of platform to launch attacks.
The Australians won not only twice as much line-out ball but also much better quality possession.
Furthermore the referee, Colin Hawke, from New Zealand, ruined the game as a spectacle by blasting away in the whistle almost non-stop, awarding a penalty or a free-kick every two minutes or so, mostly against Scotland.
In the First Test, the Scottish first-time tackling had been excellent, but in Brisbane they allowed the Wallabies to run a couple of yards too far and they paid a high price.
The Australians scored five tries, Tim Horan and Paul Carozza each got two and John Eales one.
Lynagh missed half-a-dozen kicks at goal but he succeeded with one conversion and five penalties.
From extremely limited possession the Scots bravely threw everything into attack in the last 20 minutes and were rewarded with two tries from Lineen and Sole.
Chalmers converted one and kicked a penalty.
Taking the two tests together, the difference between the Scots and the world champions was about 20 points.
For Scotland it's now a case of rebuilding for the Five Nations Championship.
For the Wallabies it is case of ‘two down and four to go’— three tests against New Zealand and one against South Africa .
In the second-half of the Second Test they recaptured their World Cup form and it will take a very good side to beat them this summer.
At least the Scots had the last word.
The last try was scored by David Sole in his last international for Scotland.
That was a fitting end to a great career.
SCOTLAND TOUR TO AUSTRALIA
SOLE GOES IT ALONE
A two-test defeat is a difficult way to bow out after six years at the top.
But, as DAVID SOLE, the Scottish captain, tells BILL McMURTRIE, it wasn't all bad…
Sentiment was deliberately left out of the equation when David Sole played his last game of rugby.
The principal was Scotland's Second Test against Australia at Ballymore in June, and Sole even scored a try in his finale.
It was not, however, a storybook finish to an illustrious career.
Scotland, led by Sole, lost by 37–13 and Australia won the series 2–0.
Plaudits still flow his way after the match, but Sole accepted them with typical modesty.
He preferred to count what rugby had given him, as he remarked to his squad when the tourists handed out their thank-you presents at a private party the morning after the Second Test.
Sole has retired from rugby at the age of 30, when prop forwards such as he should just be coming to their prime.
He had seven seasons at the top from his debut, along with six other new caps, in Scotland's 18–17 victory over France at Murrayfield in January 1986.
He played in 44 internationals for Scotland as well as three tests for the 1989 Lions in Australia.
He led his country 25 times, surpassing Ian McLauchlan's previous record of 19.
Under Sole's command Scotland won 14 times, and when he took over from Finlay Calder as captain in 1989 he continued a sequence that was to lead to another record: 13 successive victories at Murrayfield.
A singular man.
Sole's single-mindedness and drive will be sorely missed by Scotland.
He is adamant that he will not be tempted back to play rugby.
His intention is to take a complete break from the game for three years to concentrate on his business as a grain buyer.
After that he will assess how rugby might figure again in his life.
Sole is not interested in administration.
Scotland's record-breaking captain does not see himself as a future Scottish Rugby Union president.
Only coaching would attract him.
Even now, however, he is prepared to accept that he may not be able to come back in a new guise after three years.
‘My business might be in a position where I could not be involved’, he warned.
Sole would not be tempted to suggest who might be his successor as his country's captain.
Scotland's selectors, however, have time enough to think on that.
The next international will not be until the new year, when Ireland visit Murrayfield in January.
Gavin Hastings was the nominated vice-captain on the tour, but he did not have the chance to lead.
Because of injury he played in only two games, and he did not finish one of them.
Ian Smith led from the open-side flank when the Scots lost to New South Wales by 35–15 in the absence of both Sole and Hastings.
Peter Dods was captain in the midweek games but, like Sole, the Gala fullback has also hung up his boots.
Sole suggested that Smith's Gloucester colleague, Peter Jones, had done well enough on the tour to be marked down as heir apparent at loose-head.
Jones has the bonus of being able to play on both sides of the front row, although Peter Wright, Scotland's new cap at tight-head, showed the same facility against the Queensland Country Origin XV.
Despite the tour results, with only two wins and two draws to set against four defeats, Sole cited the tour as a success in bringing on newcomers.
‘Look at the players who have come through and learned to compete at the highest level’, the captain said before citing Wright, Carl Hogg and the 20-year-old Kenny Logan, all new caps.
Wright, filling the gap created by Paul Burnell's injury, played in both tests.
So did Hogg, nephew of the famous Jim Telfer.
Hogg, the 23-year-old Melrose forward, settled in at blind-side beside Rob Wainwright and Smith as well as playing other matches at open-side and no.8.
Sole, however, was critical of the extensive travelling which the itinerary imposed on the Scots, with a four-hour flight between the first and second venues, Darwin and Brisbane, and then the same time on to Hobart…from one extreme to the other in less than a week.
‘I'm not thanking anyone at Murrayfield for accepting the itinerary’, Sole said.
‘It's been a difficult tour’, he went on.
‘It says a lot that the players have knuckled down in adversity.
Lesser players would have cracked’.
It said a lot for the captain himself that his team remained confident in themselves even when results were not going for the Scots.
Nothing, even in the tests, was a better example of the man and his leadership than when he went on as replacement open-side flanker against the so-called Emerging Wallabies in Hobart.
The home team, well filled with credited Wallabies, led 24–4 before Sole roused the Scots to fight back to a 24-all draw.
Sole was also critical of the way the tourists' programmed was structured so that, outside the tests, home players could turn out two or three times against the Scots.
‘I'm amazed it's Chivas Regal who've sponsored the tour’, he said.
‘It should have been Bells with the number of ringers who've been playing’.
The Aussie post-tour perspective
WHILE Australia's 27–12 and 37–13 victories over Scotland in the test series saw the Wallabies again rewrite the record books, the two victories were not achieved with the slickness and perfection which coach Bob Dwyer and his team are striving.
The near perfect 40–15 win over England in Sydney last year has set a benchmark the Wallabies wish to repeat.
The convincing wins over the Scots saw Australia take its winning sequence to a record eight tests in succession and the Wallabies have now lost only one of the last 13 internationals.
And, had the normally reliable Michael Lynagh been on target with the boot, Australia's record score against Scotland would have been eclipsed in the Second Test at Ballymore.
The First Test in Sydney was a rusty performance with the backline's cohesion missing during the first half before the dominance of the Wallaby forwards at the scrum and line-out took control in the second half to enable them to pile on 20 points and quickly reverse the 9–7 half-time deficit.
Similarly, the Wallabies were unable to play with continuity in the first half of the Second Test at Ballymore because of a string of penalties but were finally able to chain together some magical passages of play.
There were several exceptional individual performances with Eales voted Man Of The Series while Campese, Lynagh, Farr-Jones, Horan, Daly and newcomer David Wilson all played skilful rugby.
it was a dismal ending to David Sole's and Iwan Tukalo's distinguished careers but the Scots' inability to withstand the Wallabies' dominance in the set pieces and their slick attack saw them suffer two comprehensive losses.
ENGLAND ‘B’ TOUR TO NEW ZEALAND
Kiwi stamp of approval
Was the build-up to the first ‘test’ too gentle?
New Zealand's aggression certainly seemed to catch England ‘B’ unawares.
But as DON CAMERON reports, the lessons learnt may yet provide for a bright England future.
Several times during their tour, which ended with the second ‘test’ against a New Zealand XV a few days after these notes were written, the England ‘B’management announced that one aim of their New Zealand expedition was to broaden their rugby experience.
Sadly, one of the grimmer interpretations of the word ‘experience’ loomed in ugly manner over the last few days of the tour and may overshadow some of the good that the trip has produced.
Only four minutes into the first match against the New Zealand XV at Rugby Park in Hamilton the England ‘B’ side put together a scoring movement which had the New Zealand purists purring and suggested that England ‘B’had gained much from their tour.
It was, the classic New Zealand manoeuvre, the line-out won from the top by Martin Bayfield, the ball moved quickly to midfield by Aadel Kardooni, carried vigorously into the heart of the opposing forwards by Victor Ubogu, and then returned to the backs going left.
There the typical New Zealand blind-side second-phase move unfolded, the ball moved quickly to Stuart Barnes; then to Ian Hunter, the fullback, slipping up inside Tony Underwood, flicking past the last defender and scoring in the corner.
But at about that time that Barnes was beginning an afternoon of goal-kicking misery by bouncing the conversion attempt off an upright, Ubogu was laying in midfield, clutching his head.
He was removed quickly and taken to hospital to have ten stitches in an ear so badly lacerated that the cartilage was exposed.
Considering that Ubogu had started the game with a wide bandage protecting his ears the injury was surprising and could only have been caused by heavy treatment from something metallic.
Hunting in pairs: Nottingham flanker Matt Greenwood supports Northampton fullback Ian Hunter, scorer of two tries in the first ‘test’…
Afterwards, Jack Rowell, the England ‘B’ coach, railed against this incident.
He also claimed that Ben Clarke had been ‘stamped’ by a New Zealand XV forward without reaction from the referee or touch judge.
Clarke in fact gave the touch judge, some 15 metres distant, a fierce look after he staggered to his feet, the back of his jersey ripped in two places by the flying sprigs.
Rowel suggested that during the tour opposition players had breached the fine line between rucking and stamping.
His team, said Rowell, had come to accept that rucking and raking were part of New Zealand rugby.
He said that stamping on the head of players on the ground was not acceptable to his team.
It did not help matters that about the time Rowell's rather reluctant jab at some New Zealand rugby habits was being published it occupied space beside reports that the All Blacks had been over-vigorous — and sometimes over-the-top — in their match against New South Wales at Sydney.
However, while Rowell will take his men home next week with mixed emotions about their experiences of New Zealand rugby, the sweet memories should outnumber the bitter.
The England aim to develop and educate their players, to measure them against the stiff and stark texture of New Zealand rugby, was a complete success.
By the end, or at least the last week, of the tour England ‘B’ were looking a much better all-round side than when they started.
They could still construct their own frustrations.
They really should have outpointed the New Zealand XV in the first match at Hamilton for they outplayed the New Zealanders for rather more than half the game.
In fact the England ‘B’ side played the first 45 minutes of that match with the command and control that seemed sure to produce a notable victory.
In the first half they had dominated the line-out through Bayfield and David Baldwin, they had handled the New Zealand scrum capably and they had put together two backline tries with training ground precision, whereas the  struggling New Zealanders could find only two penalty goals from Greg Cooper and never looked like mounting a try-scoring attack.
Immediately after half-time England poured attack after attack into the left corner, loose-head scrum after loose-head scrum.
The wise heads realised that when a side is given such consistent attacking time points must be scored.
Unfortunately, as Rowell mentioned later, the Englishmen lacked a little in patience.
In fact this might be one of the abiding lessons on the tour; the need for patience and cool-headed skill.
After butting away through scrum and old-fashioned maul for some five minutes England spread the ball wide to their backs, the defence pounced, England conceded a pile-up penalty in midfield, the New Zealanders cleared and England still only had their modest half-time lead of 10–8 as insurance.
Had they picked up three or perhaps six points immediately after half-time the effect on their morale, and on the New Zealanders, would have been profound, perhaps decisive.
Mind you, England should have been home and clear before that, but poor Barnes, the man who had won the Cup final at Twickenham with a last-minute magical goal kick, could not get a goal from eight attempts in the first half.
Those misses obviously eroded Barnes' confidence, and he tended to play the last half hour of the game with the weight of the world on his shoulders.
Patience, that was the need.
But in the last minutes of the game, after Phillip de Glanville had ripped open the defence for Hunter's second try — leaving England 18–12 behind — England again lacked the cold, clinical brain the would open the way through the New Zealand defence.
Facing up to reality — the England ‘B’ forwards (l-r: Back, Hynes, Dunn, Ubogu and (rear) Clarke) dealt comfortably enough with their counterparts from New Zealand Universities but stiffer tests lay ahead.
Instead Barnes gambled with a huge, floating cut-out pass across the New Zealand '22, which fell neatly into the pickpocket '22, which fell neatly into the pick-pocket hands of Timo Tagaloa who raced 80 metres for the try.
It mattered not that Underwood repaid in kind a few minutes later — the   damage had been done.
Looking into the crystal ball, there now seems the prospect that the New Zealand XV (after a mid-week warm-up) will improve considerably by the time of the second ‘test’.
The New Zealand backline looked erratic compared with England's, but the New Zealanders are better players than Hamilton would suggest.
The question is whether England reached their peak for the first 45 minutes of Hamilton or whether they have the resources of skill and spirit to play even better seven days later at Pukekohe.
But even before the last two matches the England management would have been reasonably content with the tour and the evidence it offered for the future development of England rugby.
Several players were either quite outstanding or showed genuine promise that they are the stars of the future.
Perhaps the two really outstanding men were Underwood, the wing, and Neil Back, the diminutive loose forward, but only marginally ahead of a largish group.
Underwood has speed and balance and, on the New Zealand evidence, that extra sense that carries him closer to attacking chances than Andrew Harriman, despite the latter's Rolls-Royce speed.
With Rory moving on, England seem sure to have another Underwood in their first side.
The thing about Back is that you don't refer to his stature when within ear-shot.
He is quick and, like Underwood, he has that special sense of where the action will be.
And his work-rate is remarkable.
To get the best of a player like Back you have to develop the back row around him, to make the most of his speed and to cover his natural deficiency at the line-out.
Others with very honourable pass marks for the tour include Barnes, the captain; the two second-choice players Steve Hackney, the wing, and Dave Baldwin, the lock; Phillip de Glanville as a centre; Graham Dawe at hooker and Gavin Baldwin at prop.
Déjà vu— Underwood scores in the corner.
Yesterday it was Rory: now, and for the foreseeable future, it's brother Tony, just evading the clutches here of Southland's Grant Beardsley.
Barnes is a very intense young man, in spite of his cheeky-chappy outward look.
He appealed to most New Zealand judges simply because he made good use of the blindside, mixed up his passes and kicks and generally gave the impression that he could play the percentages very much in the New Zealand fashion.
If there was another thought about Barnes it was that he needed a strong-willed centre at his shoulder to offer the occasional reminder that the three-quarters could use some more work.
Hackney developed with surprising speed, even if his defence under the high ball did tend to have the watcher on the edge of his seat.
But Hackney made up for those heart-stopping moments with 100 per cent willingness to try anything and his 200 per cent determination for the team cause.
Dawe did many things well.
As a thrower-in to the line-out he was absolutely superb.
The locking Baldwin got better and better and, as he threw away the worries of his old shoulder injuries, he developed in confidence to the point where he outranked David Sims as Bayfield's up-front ally.
Gavin Baldwin started slowly but grew in stature as the tour progressed and rather moved past Martin Hynes as the top loose-head by the end of the tour.
Baldwin, like Hunter, has played in New Zealand before at club level, but to seen them play at international standard was a revelation.
Bayfield was the senior ‘pro’ of the pack, and lived up to that responsibility nobly.
One player who New Zealanders would like to gain is Phillip de Glanville.
A tallish centre cast very much in the old and ideal New Zealand mould, de Glanville tackled well, covered expertly and had genuine zip into and through the gap.
On a longer tour, and with more chances, de Glanville could have been quite outstanding.
On less tangible aspects the tour must have added a plus or two to the English rugby character, for there were problems with the itinerary, occasionally with the accommodation.
And yet the players and the management maintained a courtesy and comradeship that spoke much for their character.
There was often fun about, through Andy Mullins' ‘judgemanship’, Damian Hopley's flanker's fingers flicking elegantly over the piano keys, the efforts of keeping ‘Moon Child’ Harvey Thorneycroft's feet on the ground.
On a more serious note, Rowell was a very impressive coach, demanding on the training field, decisively analytical off it — yet not afraid to speak out over indignities such as the Ubogu affair.
Mike Slemen offered the pleasant counter-balance, rather lighter in touch than Rowell, but similarly devoted and gaining equal respect.
They could make an interesting international team together one of these days.
WORLD CUP SEVENS Qualifying Tournament — Catania, Sicily 29–31 May, 1992
Keeping a grip.
Hong Kong's Stuart Brew does his best to avoid the attentions of a Taiwanese tackler as they drew 12–12 in a Far Eastern showdown.
CATANIA'S CULTURE CLASH A complicated system which meant 42 games were played in one day cast a shadow — albeit a small one — over three days of full blooded sevens.
CHRIS THAU was there.
Although by and large novices to the art of sevens, the Namibians — the worthy winners of the World Cup Sevens qualifying tournament in Catania, Sicily — provided a sample of the Southern African perception of the shortened version of the game: hard running, support and tackling rather than silky skill and stealth.
They looked vulnerable, though, against Zimbabwe , their neighbours, who for half of the match played the same brand of power rugby, only better.
In fact their game in the quarter-finals of the Sicily 7s, operating as both qualifier and dress rehearsal for next year's World Cup Sevens at Murrayfield, revealed some of the shortcomings of the competition.
With the Edinburgh tournament likely to mirror the Catania format the flaws revealed by the Italian tournament must be addressed and hopefully solved.
The main problem was not necessarily the number of matches played, though winners Namibia and runners-up Hong Kong had to play eleven games each, mostly under the hot glare of the Sicilian sun.
However, with the weather in Scotland in April less of a concern, World Cup directors Marcel Martin, Russ Thomas and Keith Rowlands argue that a World Cup requires the highest standards not only in skill and ability but also in stamina and fitness.
Leaving the ever-increasing fitness demands on players aside, the chief weakness of the Sicily schedule was that it mixed a pool-based round-robin format, which creates a precise and fair hierarchy, with a league system, which reshuffles the pack and can end up rewarding skilful planning rather than success on the field, before finally moving to a knock-out format.
In the first round of the three-day event the 17 participants were divided into three pools: pools A and B with six countries each, and pool C with five.
After forty matches on Day One the top four in each pool, 12 teams in all, qualified for state two, played in pools of three; in Pool D the winners of Pool A, B and C (Namibia, Hong Kong and Taiwan ), in Pool E the runners-up (Sweden, Zimbabwe and Spain ), in Pool F the thirds (Tunisia, Portugal and Belgium ) and in Pool G the fourths (Germany, Czechoslovakia and Poland ).
So far so good.
The new draw was designed, said the organisers, to establish a ranking from one to 12.
On the third day, the pack was reshuffled with the top 12 teams distributed as follows:
The winners and the runners-up in pools H, I, L and M qualified for the knock-out stages.
This was where the weakness of the system became apparent.
By relaunching into the qualifying  cauldron nations who had hardly made an impact in the earlier stages the organisers ran the risk of altering the natural hierarchy of the event and, therefore, the result.
This happened to Tunisia , one of the best sides in the tournament, who were knocked out of contention as a consequence of a draw against a resilient, but hardly inspiring Czechoslovakia .
Czechoslovakia reached the quarter-finals on the dubious claim of one win and three draws.
Had they then found the resources to pull off an improbable win against Hong Kong it would have drastically altered the fairness of the tournament.
The third qualifying round altered the seeding in such a way that arguably the best sides in the tournament, Namibia and Zimbabwe, found themselves playing each other in the quarter-finals.
As it happened Namibia won the game and the tournament, but for a long time it looked as if the Zimbabweans would win, leaving the hitherto unbeaten Namibians out in the cold.
The format has to be reviewed in order to restore the balance between the desire to give the playing countries enough games in the early stage to sharpen them up for the knock-out competition, and the need for a structure that is both fair and seen to be fair.
Bouncing Czechs
Naturally CZECHOSLOVAKIA have been more than pleased with the unexpected bonus of reaching the quarter-finals at the expense of Tunisia , who have several players featuring in French club rugby and were without a doubt one of the more stylish sides in the tournament.
Bruno Kurdna, who played fly-half for the great Czechoslovak team of the '70s, which beat Italy, Spain and drew with Romania , was thrilled.
‘This is a great result for us.
We don't play much sevens back home.
Traditionally we go to Germany for sevens tournaments.
This tournament has put us on the map and we are keen to develop it further.
We will have the first sevens tournament in Prague in August and we hope to be able to organise sevens competitions before top soccer matches.
We are not allowed to play the 15-aside game on soccer pitches because of the scrummaging, but sevens is permitted’.
Zimbabwe's hard-luck story
Without any doubt ZIMBABWE captain Andy Ferreira's men must count themselves unlucky to have missed the semi-finals, and with it the chance of appearing in the World Cup tournament in Scotland .
The 10–10 draw against Hong Kong on the first day of the tournament upset their plans and despite their brave performance against eventual winners Namibia — at one point Zimbabwe were leading 10–0 — they went back home empty-handed.
Zimbabwe's game against Hong Kong was their first ever sevens international.
Sevens, through very popular in both the Northern and Southern Hemispheres, does not set the world alight in Southern Africa.
The team, coached by national coach Ian ‘Bucky’ Buchanan, has displayed the same hard running, no-nonsense tackling as the Namibians.
H.K.'s Strange Brew
HONG KONG's top try-scorer and inspiration, Stewart Brew,(a top cricketer), got injured in the final against Namibia and boarded the flight back home on crutches.
In the qualifying pool his seven-try spree — Brew and his policeman colleague Ian Strange scored in each of the five matches — helped Hong Kong's comparatively modest outfit beat Zimbabwe on the try count and, accordingly, clinch a place in the World Cup Sevens final tournament.
Much of the credit for that must go to New Zealander George Simpkin, the man who made a name for himself as coach of Waikato and subsequently as coach of Fiji in the 1987 World Cup.
Simpkin is now coaching Hong Kong, after a stint as the Colony's director of coaching.
The Kiwi coach has done very well to help the game reach communist China (see July issue of RW&P , pages 56 and 57) where there are hopes that rugby might be introduced to the Chinese armed forces.
Hong Kong's achievement in Catania has been Simpkin's first success since he took over the Hong Kong representative side.
Simpkin, the inventor of a new set of kicking tees used by his players in Catania, has been waiting to hear from the International Board on his amateur status, allegedly jeopardised by his involvement in a professional capacity with the Hong Kong Union.
Kenyans go back to school
For Dennis Awori, the chairman of the KENYA Rugby Union and one of the talented group of players to have put Kenyan rugby on the seven-a-side map, the inability of his side to concentrate and play consistently well must have been nerve-wrecking.
It's bizarre, but the standards have dropped since the mid-'70s when we won the Dubai Sevens three years in a row.
We have realised, though, that we are not going to improve unless we get rugby into the schools.
We have started mini-rugby in Nairobi and it has proved very successful.
We have to rebuild  our strength and we have asked the South African RFU to help us.
I met Dr. Craven and he was very positive about helping us’, said Awori.
Referees — the judges judged
It was painfully obvious that the refereeing standards varied considerably: from the travesty of the Tunisia v Sicily game in the final of the Etna Cup (extended by an Italian referee until the locals scored and won) to impeccable handling by some of the Home Unions refs.
French referee Daniel Salles complained in an interview after the tournament that the top refereeing assignments in Catania had been handed over to the Home Unions referees, implying some kind of conspiracy — all of which is an absolute nonsense.
Welsh director of refereeing, Ken Rowlands, who was in charge of the refereeing appointments, held a series of theoretical and practical lectures for the referees from Italy and overseas before the tournament…
Portuguese short of pace
London Scottish sevens coach and former scrum-half Andy Cushing has been helping PORTUGAL in training and, without any doubt, in spite of a temperamental outburst from Pedro Neiva that earned him an early shower and a one-match suspension, it showed.
The Portuguese have been among the most knowledgeable sevens exponents in the tournament.
Unfortunately, all the clever work in the midfield which allowed them to create overlaps and scoring opportunities was wasted due to their lack of pace out wide.
Namibia's God Squad
From the outside it looked as if the NAMIBIA players surrounding their coach-cum-manager-cum-union President, Henning Snyman, had gathered for the ritual pre-match huddle.
It was nothing of the sort.
Hardly a murmur could be heard from the Namibians.
Snyman's boys were praying.
Virtually all of the Namibians are members of the Christian movement ‘Sportsmen for Christ’ which started at Stellenbosch University in the '80s.
Said Henning Snyman: ‘As it happens, most of the players in the squad are exceptionally religious people.
The movement was launched in Namibia at the beginning of last year and has offered a new dimension to the lads’ Christianity.
We don't pray to win; we pray before and after each game to thank God for giving us the gift of talent and the capacity to express it.
We approach it from a humble Christian perspective’.
The prayers, or perhaps a combination of skill and simple luck — against Zimbabwe in particular— helped the Namibians win the tournament undefeated.
Captain Gerhard Mans and his men are not great purveyors of the subtle art of seven-a-side rugby.
They play an abbreviated edition of the 15-a-side game: do the basics well, run straight and fast, support and maintain possession in most circumstances.
They are among the first to acknowledge their relative inexperience in the shortened version of the game, pointing out that sevens has not captured the imagination of Southern Africa and that Hong Kong was Namibia's first international sevens appearance.
Kari comes a cropper
SWEDEN, although strengthened by a strong Scottish -Swedish contingent, seemed unable to reproduce the deft touches of the originators of the abbreviated game.
The two Mabon brothers, 27-year-old Hamish and 23-year-old Hunter, the sons of the Scottishborn former President of the Swedish Union, scored ten tries between them by playing the traditional Swedish game — full of energy and aggression.
Alas, defensive naiveties prevented the Vikings from reaching the last four.
No-one was more cheerfully downhearted than their Barbarian captain Kari Tapper, sporting a tightly wrapped knee following an injury in a soccer game the week before Catania.
Who said that rugby is a dangerous pastime?
Under pressure.
No.9 Johansson scrags his opposite number while his opposite number while Ahlgren, Sweden's wild and woolly warrior, looks to cut down the Taiwanese options in his side's 20–12 Sicily Trophy quarter-final defeat.
Caught in the act.
Zimbabwe's Chimbima gets an unwelcome leg-up from a Namibian tackler as Andy Ferreira's men gave their Southern African rivals a fright in a hard-fought quarter-final encounter, leading 10–0 at half-time before eventually succumbing 16–10.
NAMIBIA Emerge from Catania's Trial by Fire
Galvanised by the success of the World Cup and the Hong Kong Sevens tournaments, the International Board has initiated a World Sevens tournament.
NICK CAIN went to Catania, in Sicily, to see the qualifying tournament for the finals in Scotland next year…
Having come from a country afflicted by the worst drought in recent memory it should have come as no surprise that the Namibians were able to handle the Sicilian heat.
After an exhausting schedule of two days of pool matches — the most tortuous ‘trial by fire’ ever devised for a sevens tournament — Namibia had established themselves as firm favourites to claim top spot among the four qualifying berths up for grabs in Catania for Murrayfield, 1993.
They swatted aside every challenge that came their way with a direct, forceful brand of sevens based on impressive strength and fitness.
This was underpinned by a dedication to the cause that couldn't have been bettered by a pack of African Hunting Dogs.
They also possessed in skipper Gerrie Mans a nuggety customer blessed withe a wicked turn of pace.
But after amassing a remarkable 222 points for, 26 against, record in an unbeaten eight-match run in the pool rounds, lo and behold, on the third day they faced their Nemesis.
It came courtesy of fellow African hopefuls, Zimbabwe, in the quarter-finals of the Sicily Trophy as the tournament did a rapid shift from Pool to Knock-out format.
Fortunately for Marcel Martin and his Rugby World Cup (RWC) organising committee the Namibians went into over-drive and, inspired by Mans, managed to turn around a 10–4 half-time deficit to beat the fired-up Zimbabweans 16–10.
Had they failed, Martin and his men — i.e. those who dreamt up the match schedules — would have had enough egg on their faces for a thousand  omelettes .
The message that rang out and clear to the RWC Sevens organisers was this: Do not carry this system on to Murrayfield.
The pool format has considerable merits if it's employed as a round-robin league table qualifier for the knock-out stages as per the '91 World Cup, but in Sicily it was so exhaustive it was almost self-defeating.
RWC defended their format on the dangerous premise that aspiring World Cup Sevens sides should be paragons of fitness.
If rugby ever had an own-goal masquerading as a laudable aim this is it.
Sevens, by the very nature of 14 men playing on an area normally reserved for 30, demands a high level of fitness.
The game's administrators have to realise that to burden players further with apparently ever-increasing expectations of fitness levels is incompatible with the amateur ethos they are dedicated to preserving.
They cannot have it both ways and, at the moment, by making such demands they are unwittingly pushing the game towards professionalism.
The RWC men were soon under fire when, on the first day, the sides in Pool A discovered that their schedule allowed only three 20 minute rest-periods between matches.
‘This is ridiculous and unfair.
With the fatigue level involved here someone could get severely injured’ stormed Manuel Cabral, the manager of Portugal.
Away from the pitch there were other voices of dissent, not least that of Gulf manager Bob Driver describing the hotel which accommodated all the teams: ‘There are no TVs or radios functioning in the rooms, the swimming pools are out of order, and the tennis courts can't be used.
‘We're 45 minutes from town, so, after training there's not a great deal on the agenda.
The boys are not best pleased — which is a pity because for most of them this is the highlight of their rugby-playing lives.
In many ways Catania provided Keith Rowlands, RWC director and secretary of the International Board, with a microcosm of the problems confronting the game as it negotiates the commercial minefield surrounding its venture into the world of World Cups.
With insufficient funds to pay for the whole tournament RWC readily accepted the Italian Federation's offer to host the Qualifying Tournament.
While RWC undertook to fly in all the participating nations, the Italian Federation, with the aid of Sicilian government incentives for promoting tourism, took care of the board and lodging.
It would be churlish to suggest that either RWC or the Italian Federation fell down in some areas because of a lack of will to make the event succeed.
Some things were outside their control.
Other things were not.
‘The whole organisation is under pressure to deliver’, acknowledged Rowlands ‘We want to maximise profits, but not at the expense of the game’.
The problem is that while some commercial interests made a healthy profit from the '91 World Cup it failed to produce enough RWC cash to underwrite the Catania tournament, let alone the qualifying tournaments for the 1995 World Cup in South Africa.
Using the simple principle that the bigger the crowd the better the revenue, either Hong Kong or Japan would have been better suited to host the event.
‘We were criticised in '91 for our lack of marketing expertise…that was both a disappointment and a learning experience’, reflected Rowlands in Catania.
In the shadow of Mount Etna it seemed that nothing much had changed.
While Namibia, Hong Kong, Taiwan and Spain won a trip to Scotland for the finals, by contrast RWC appeared to have failed to maximise on the potential of the Qualifying Tournament.
The ordeal is over: the Namibians show off the Sicily Trophy after beating Hong Kong 26–12 in the catania final.
The squad (pictured here) that took them to Murrayfield in pole position among the four qualifiers was: J. Barnard, B. Buitendag, J. Deysel, P. Du Plooy, G. Mans (captain) E. Meyer, H. Snyman, A. Van Rooyen, P. Von Wielligh and W. Wentzel.
A Sponsor's View
MATTHEW GLOAG talks to CHRIS THAU
So far,The Famous Grouse Finest Scotch Whisky is the first and, at least until the end of June, the only sponsor of the 1991 Rugby World Cup to have announced its commitment to the 1993 World Sevens tournament.
The sponsorship involvement was evident during the World Sevens qualifying tournament in Catania, Sicily, where advertising boards with ‘The Famous Grouse ’, which is the flagship brand of Matthew Gloag and Son Limited , were conspicuous in their solitude.
CPMA Managing Director, Nigel Rushman, claims that several other sponsors have already signed for the Sevens spectacular in April at Murrayfield, but for a variety of reasons none has come out of the woods yet.
According to The Famous Grouse Director, Matthew Gloag, the company's interest in the next year's tournament in Edinburgh had been almost a foregone conclusion due to the enormous benefits of having been involved in the 1991 World Cup.
‘When we entered into a sponsorship agreement with the Rugby World Cup Limited, no one believed that the event would be such an outstanding success.
I have to admit that when we started we were convinced that, like everybody else, we took a risk by investing in the tournament.
As it turned out, it was a risk well worth taking.
We felt that the tournament suited the premium image of The Famous Grouse very well and it consolidated the link with rugby that had already been established.
As a direct consequence of that success, we believe that the inaugural World Sevens, taking place only a few miles from the company headquarters in Perth and with its strong Scottish flavour through its base at Murrayfield, ideally suited for The Famous Grouse .
‘The Famous Grouse sponsored Scotland's tour to New Zealand in 1990 and through that Matthew Gloag and Son Limited learned a lot about rugby and rugby sponsorship, although at that time no suitable rugby sponsorship of world standing was available.
In this respect the emergence of the Rugby World Cup has been extremely beneficial for out brand.
‘Rugby is the game that is suited to The Famous Grouse .
It has got the right profile.
It has a glowing global appeal.
It is like a religion in Scotland and, besides, it has a very strong social aspect attached to it’.
Mr. Gloag revealed that The Famous Grouse has expressed an interest in sponsoring the 1995 World Cup in South Africa.
The Famous Grouse , like all the 1991 World Cup sponsors, had a first refusal option included in their contract; in other words they are asked to make a bid for 1995 before the marketing agent goes to the open market.
A similar clause in the 1991 Rugby World Cup TV deal provided ITV with an option to renew their contract for 1995, which they have done forthwith.
As a consequence the BBC have not been invited to make a bid.
‘The level of investment is quite substantial and one does not go into this sort of operation for short-term objectives.
We are in for the long-term benefits which imply a long-term strategy and involvement’.
Unlike the 1991 Rugby World Cup, which took place over a whole month, not to mention the three months build-up, thereby allowing the sponsors to develop their marketing strategy over a long period of time, the World Sevens tournament is a three-day event, with the commercial potential of a ‘Market blink’, as he puts it.
One of the tasks of a sponsor of such an event is to maximise on its appeal over a long period of time.
This is why in Perth Matthew Gloag and Son Limited have been already planning the activities that will be run before, during and after the event for The Famous Grouse .
‘The inaugural World Sevens will be successful.
Murrayfield will provide a feast of entertaining rugby if the quality of the tournament at Catania was anything to go by.
Scotland is renowned for its hospitality and the SRU for its organisational ability.
‘So all in all we are delighted to be associated with this prestigious world event’, concluded Matthew Gloag.
Matthew Gloag: investing in the World Cup proved to be a risk well worth taking…
Germans hit by brain drain
GERMANY, another side to have ‘employed’ the technical know-how of a foreigner (Emil Signes, the former coach and current manager of the US Eagles sevens side) were equally unsuccessful in their bid to reach the last four.
However, unlike Portugal , who showed glimpses of class, the German side tried to bludgeon their way through with an ill-tempered Claus Hammer as their star.
Taiwan conquers the world
From Catania, where they played a vital role in their country's successful bid for a place in next year's World Sevens finals, the two Taiwanese stars, flanker Jon Teng Sing and winger Chyan Shuonn Mae, headed for Paris to join the multi-national FIRA selection which made a four-match, two-test tour to Namibia.
There are 10 French men in the 26-strong squad, led by former international fly-half Didier Camberabero.
Italy is represented by the Cuttitta twins Marcello and Massimo and hooker Pivetta, while Yves Kummer is the token Dutch player.
The squad also includes a  Belgian  (Lally), a Uruguayan (Dabo), a Pole (Wiecorek), two Romanians (Dinescu and Veres), a Tunisian (Nocami), two Portuguese (Ferreira and Macierra) and Racing CF speedy wing Willie Jefferson as the honorary American .
Fira President Albert Ferrasse turned down an invitation from SARFU to extend his tour to South Africa for two games, one against a South African selection.
If at first you fail…
Malaysia leave the field after narrowly losing to an accomplished Tunisian seven (14–10) in the semi-finals after losing their pool match 22–0 to the same side.
Malaysian fliers
MALAYSIA, who host one of the top club sevens tournaments in Asia at their centenary Royal Selengor Club in Kuala Lumpur, showed glimpses of their true potential in the final stages of the tournament.
The side, annihilated 22–0 by TUNISIA in the first round of the tournament, recovered well enough to give the same Tunisia a fright in the semi-finals of the Plate competition, the Etna Cup .
Refereed by Zimbabwe 's World cup referee, Kingsley Went, Malaysia went down 14–10 after an entertaining game.
Three of their players, Kabul Zaini (who won his first cap in Catania at the tender age of 31), Mohd Kuisany and Afandy Nordin, come from the Royal Malaysian Air Force Club, Blackhawk, a regular presence at the popular Singapore Sevens.
Mans — the main man
Gerhard Mans (above) has been the driving force behind Namibia's emergence as a force in the fifteen-a-side game, captaining Namibia in its first Currie Cup dame and to its first win over a ‘Big Eight’ nation (Ireland).
The wing's 16 tries in Catania — making him the top try-scorer — mean Namibia get their first chance to meet the ‘Big Four’ at Murrayfield.
Line-up for Murrayfield 1993
Although technically complete the full line-up for Murrayfield 1993 has yet to be confirmed, simply because no-one knows whether the slot allocated to the former Soviet Union is going to be taken by a CIS selection or by one of the break-away republics.
The CIS students have entered a genuine selection from their member states — including players from Georgia, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Ukraine and Russia — for the Students World Cup in Italy in July.
But rumour has it that a sevens tournament is going to be organised in Moscow in September to decide who takes over the Soviet place: Russia, Ukraine, Georgia,Latvia or Kazakhstan.
However, this is what the full Murrayfield tables could look like.
SOUTH AFRICA
BEDFORD'S BLAST
Former Springbok skipper TOMMY BEDFORD's exclusive column — only in Rugby World & Post 
This column argues that maximising revenue and making the next World Cup accessible to all are incompatible.
Just on a year ago, as I was to be in London at the time of the World Cup, I made enquiries about obtaining tickets to attend some of the Cup matches in the United Kingdom.
My old club, Richmond, had already sent me details of how to get tickets through the club.
The snag was, though, that for the major matches the entire club membership would be lucky to be allocated even two tickets.
It was clearly going to be easier to obtain tickets in South Africa.
Indeed it was, except that there was a rider.
To get the tickets you had to sign up for a complete tour and hospitality package, available through Travelforce , a travel agency in Durban — of which the then President of the Natal Rugby Union, and member of the Executive of the (former) SARB, just happened to be a director.
And as this 18-day tour package cost R12,500 it meant that one was stuck with a situation where the cost of entry to five matches in France, Scotland, the Cardiff third-place match and the Final at Twickers, around which the tour package was structured, amount to R2,500, or £500 a game.
Now Richmond have sent me applications for the coming year at Twickenham.
What a thrill it is to see England against South Africa on 14th November, as the first match and, at the same time, not to have ticket availability restricted to two per club.
And the cost of admission for the better seats in the house — £30 and £23.
I have no idea whether in British terms these prices are considered reasonable.
Compared to other forms of entertainment in London, shows in the West End, Covent Garden, and even ordinary club football fixtures, the prices would probably be on a par.
But in South African terms, and in terms of the diminished value of the Rand, the equivalent of £30 and £23 tickets would only have cost us R55 and R40, then the allocation of the 1995 Rugby World Cup to South Africa would have made more economic, as opposed to rugby sense.
With two World Cups now under the IB's belt though, it seems pretty clear from the post mortems which followed the first event in Australia and New Zealand, and the one held nine months ago in France, the U.K. and Ireland, that making money in this new era of professionalism is almost as important, if not equal in importance, to the game itself.
Why else would there already be the reported droves of tour operators and speculators visiting South Africa, if not to set up the same kind of hospitality package deals that South Africans were forced to buy in 1991?
Why else would there be the persistent stories that the IB might not even make £3 million out of the 1991 competition?
They have said that they are disappointed not to be making at the very least £12 million, and possibly even £17 million — and are determined to do better in 1995.
These ticket prices are levied, on top of profits from television rights, sponsorship, advertising and kickbacks, on everything from hotdogs to jockstraps.
Whether the profits were £3 million, or £12 million, or £17 million from the 1991 World Cup, the figure was still substantial, in spite of the fact that France, Ireland and Britain, have been in recession.
Certainly in Britain's case, the economic conditions remain the worst since the last war, with over three million people out of work.
What, then, are the realistic prospects for the World Cup in South Africa?
The new SARFU certainly has the wealth.
It has the stadia.
It has the management skills and manipulative expertise acquired through having to survive, by hook or be crook, in the apartheid years.
But it also has a duty to contribute towards shaping a struggling new South Africa.
Rugby, as will all other sports, should now truly belong to all its peoples, rich and poor, white and black, on an equal basis.
To do this, accepting that many visitors from across the world will probably attend the next World Cup, tempted also by the extraordinarily favourable rates of exchange and despite the problems which may still exist in the country, SARFU has to ensure that the majority of South Africans will have a chance to attend the games if rugby is to lose its elitist ‘white’ connotations.
As things are, President de  Klerk's hasty initiatives might have solved some of our problems, but they have certainly created others — problems which may not have abated but could well have intensified come 1995.
In our poorer ‘black’ communities the killing continues and as many people are killed every week as were killed in the recent Los Angeles riots.
The country is in the depths of a recession, made worse by the worst drought in living memory.
There are five million people out of work and in 1995 this figure is expected to have risen to six and a half million.
Other sections of the population appear strike bound and bent on civil unrest.
The Government's own Department of Development Aid has apparently been so devious that the judge investigating the billions of Rand evidently missing or misappropriated, which should have gone towards assisting the poorer (black) communities, has thrown in the towel when faced by the department's shambolic accounting.
Inflation is another problem.
In three years' time it is likely that everything in the country, including rugby ticket prices, will have escalated by 45 per cent.
So one can go on and on…
In terms of the game of rugby it was a wonderful gesture on the part of the IB to award the World Cup to South Africa, and a wonderful opportunity — but not financially.
South Africa is, today, effectively a ‘third-world’ country with third-world problems.
To expect SARFU to squeeze first-world profits from the new third-world South Africans, when the 1991 World Cup didn't achieve the expected profits — even from first-world venues — would, in my long held view, not only be unrealistic but immoral.
SOUTH AFRICA Namibians cut to shreds If anybody wondered about the strength in depth of South Africa, the crushing 79–3 defeat of Namibia — conquerors of Ireland — by the Junior Springboks in Windhoek should remove any room for doubt.
JOHN ROBBIE reports.
With so much emphasis on the steroids row it's been a pleasant distraction to take in a number of excellent Currie Cup matches.
Also, the return to the international fold was marked with an emphatic victory by the Junior Springboks over Namibia .
Before the game the former South Westers had threatened to make biltong (dried meat) of the Junior Boks.
In fact, the home side received their biggest thrashing since independence.
The score was an incredible 79–3.
Remember that Ireland lost two tests in Windhoek just the year before and both Wales and France ‘B’have escaped with marrow wins.
Most felt a win for the juniors would be tough enough.
Nobody predicted a landslide.
The game was characterised by solid if not spectacular forward play and breathtaking running by the South African backs.
Let it be recorded that Namibia, with Gerhard Mans prominent, also played their part in opening the game.
They just could not finish.
For the Juniors, fullback Theo Van Rensburg scored four tries and Pieter Muller three.
Wings Pieter Hendriks and James Small were devastating and there was an air of control throughout.
Robert Du Preez and Hennie Le Roux at half-back varied play well and both attacked the advantage line with profit.
Surprisingly, there was little euphoria after the game.
How good are Namibia?
Have the slipped?
How would we have done against the Antipodean giants?
Perhaps the display asked more questions than it answered but it's clear that the young stars are staking claims early.
The response of the established, mature players remains to be seen.
One of the stars of the game, lock Adri Geldenhuys, revealed his infuriating weakness two weeks later.
In Eastern Province 's defeat against Natal he was first sent to the cooler for head-butting, then dismissed for immediately raking a player in a ruck.
Perhaps, in the light of aggressive All Black rucking methods, the second decision was harsh.
But to return from the cooler and immediately start ‘mountain climbing’(an old Pontypool expression) was really stupid.
If this fine player misses out on selection he will only have himself to blame.
He received a two-week suspension after the game which Natal won 31–16.
Wing Tony Watson was Man of the Match, scoring two spectacular tries.
On the same day Free State beat Western Province in Bloemfontein 37–19, the home side scoring 28 points in the second half.
Amazingly Western Province are bottom of the table after the first round of the Currie Cup .
Two tries by young fly-half Jannie De Beer and a 60-metre dropped goal by fullback Hendrik Truter were highlights for Free State.
The week before Western Province had won against Northerns in Cape Town with the last kick of the game.
It was gripping stuff, but the drop-goal from Lance Sherrell put the new laws right into the spotlight.
Losing 14–12 Province had been awarded a free-kick inside Northern's '22.
They set up a ruck, the ball was passed back to Sherrell who dropped a goal.
The referee gave it and the debate started.
Initially the laws had indicated ho drop-goals may be scored after a free-kick until the ball had gone dead.
An amendment then added unless the ball has been played or touched by the other side.
Well, what is the definition of ‘touch’?
If a defending player has a loose lace and this touches the ball, may the attacking side drop for goal?
If the attacking side run the ball and simply contrive to touch it against the body of an opponent may they then drop for a goal?
What is they elect to take a scrum instead of the free-kick — may they then win the heel and drop for goal?
Even if the referee was technically correct in allowing Sherrell's match winner (the referee claims Northerns touched the ball in the ruck), surely the spirit of the law would have disallowed it?
The laws speed up the game greatly but clearly much thought has still to be given to implementation.
The arguments about national selection continue.
Drug revelations aside, the claims of exuberant youth versus wily experience will be a central issue.
Perhaps the rumours of a final trial along these lines might give extra bite to the occasion.
Perhaps a Bok side against a Junior side would be most informative.
Here are names the selectors might conjure with.
All players are assumed to be steroid-free, suspension free and eligible.
Unfortunately in South Africa today that's quite an assumption!
Can-Am U.S.A.
CANUCKS CRUSH EAGLES
United States players paid to play and still lost.
PETER McMULLAN reports on a series that has become less and less of a contest between equals.
In an era when the commercial opportunities now open to leading players often become a bigger issue that the game itself, the recent actions of the USA Eagles make news for an entirely different reason.
Representing a country with a reputation for hard-nosed materialism, the Eagles earned the heartfelt admiration of their Canadian counterparts on the occasion of the 16th annual Can-Am international staged in Denver, Colorado, on June 13.
Had not the American players been prepared to meet their own expenses, which included travel from often distant points of the continent, the game would never have taken place.
As their distinguished captain and lock Kevin Swords (30 caps) said afterwards: ‘This is a very important game and the fact that we all paid our own way is a statement of how much the fixture means to us’.
In the circumstances victory for the hosts would have been a fitting reward for their extraordinary dedication to the game and its very traditional amateur roots.
That was not to be and the financial problems facing USA rugby at this time were in a way mirrored on the field where the Eagles' shortcomings, rather than any great brilliance on Canada's part, determined the result with the 23 point margin between the teams the biggest in the 16-year history of the event.
The count now is 11–4 to Canada with one game drawn.
The tries, three in the first half, when the USA had the wind advantage, were well taken, leaving the USA to ponder how a game where they had parity in the scrums and very much the upper hand out of touch, winning the lines-out 16–5, could have been lost by such a comprehensive margin.
Playing at an altitude of over 5,000 feet and in humid conditions, Canada introduced only two new caps, B.C. no.8 Colin McKenzie and Scott MacKinnon, the Ontario wing who joined flanker Gord to give Canada its first instance of brothers appearing together in the same international side.
The Eagles, with lock Tony Ridnell injured and backs Chris O'Brien and Gary Hein unable to travel, started with five new caps; centre Mike Waterman; half-backs Mark Gala and Greg Goodman; along with Dave Steinbauer and Brannon Smoot in the back row.
Then they lost lock Jim Keller (shoulder) and wing Barry Tofaeono (leg) late in the first half and just before the finish, and brought on two more newcomers, flanker Mark Vander Molen and wing Via Anatoni.
Canada dominated the scoring, leading 22–6 at the interval and by 19 points in as many minutes with outside-half Gareth Rees, back after a winter in France, scoring the first nine and going on to a 20-point afternoon.
With 12 players on call from the World Cup compared to the USA's six, Canada could rely on experience and it made all the difference, especially among the backs where the Eagles paid a heavy price for dropped passes, missed tackles and errant kicks.
The first and fourth tries came as a direct result of poor USA passes.
Rees opened with a penalty and then picked up a try and its conversion when the Eagle half-backs fumbled.
A pushover try by scrum-half Chris Tynan and another by Gray put the result  beyond doubt with Rees kicking a conversion and a second penalty for a 22–0 lead before Gale hit back with a drop-goal and a penalty providing the USA with reward for pressure.
It was all Gale with a second penalty just after the interval, but this was matched by two more from Rees while, in between, right wing Pat Palmer confirmed his standing as Canada's most productive wing.
Swooping in on a spilled pass he gathered one-handed on the run for the winners' fourth try, one that Rees just failed to convert.
The final quarter was an untidy affair on both sides with the conditions taking a heavy toll on concentration and stamina.
Canadian hooker Karl Svoboda has flankers Gord Mackinnon and Al Charron in support as he cuts a swathe through the Eagles defence.
NEW ZEALAND ALL BLACKS
NIGHT OF THE LONG KNIVES
No mercy was shown by the New Zealand selectors to the old guard when they picked the squad to tour Australia.
DON CAMERON considers the wisdom of their policy.
Even Laurie Mains, the All Black selector whose face rather appears like a grave image when he is interviewed on television, managed a quiet smile after he had superintended the selection of the 30 All Blacks who are touring Australia at the moment and will later play one cataclysmic test against South Africa.
Eight days before the choice Mains' face seemed set in a state of shock, for the All Blacks had just escaped 24–21 from defeat by Ireland in the First Test.
But after the All Blacks had won the Second Test 59–6 Mains was rather more relaxed and in fact exuded some confidence about the prospects of his new-look team.
The danger about it all is that Mains and his lieutenants, Peter Thorburn and Earle Kirton, have based their selection plans and playing philosophies on what might later be regarded as insecure grounds.
After two trials which saw some established crowns toppled, Mains' men played three tests against a World XV put together rather haphazardly to celebrate the New Zealand centennial, and the two against Ireland.
The All Blacks lost the first game against the World XV and then won the second easily — a non-contest, rather, as Olivier Roumat was sent off and the World XV backs had a no-tackling policy.
The All Blacks won a sterner Third Test against the World side, almost went base-over-apex in the First Test against Ireland, then came back so powerfully the Second Test was a 59–6 mis-match.
No fewer than ten new All Blacks emerged from these games!
Of the rest Matthew Cooper played as a fledgling in the All Blacks' scamper through Japan in 1987; Jon Preston had one game in the World Cup last year; Kevin Schuler appeared briefly as a replacement in France in 1990; and Graham Dowd had been the reserve hooker for the World Cup and the home series against the World XV and managed a short time on the field when Richard Loe was injured in the second half of the First Test against Ireland.
So 15 of the chosen 30 have a very modest international background — and this going into tests against Australia, the World Cup holders, and South Africa, who rather fancy that they would have won it had they been invited.
By the time Mains and company had twirled their long knives, the only long-service survivors were Terry Wright, John Kirwan and Grant Fox in the backs, and Michael Jones, Mike Brewer, Zinzan Brooke, Ian Jones, Steve McDowell, Loe and Fitzpatrick in the forwards.
The remainder — Va'aiga Tuigamala and Walter Little in the  backs, Paul Henderson and Graham Purvis in the pack — have largely been back-up strength in recent times, although Little was busily occupied at first five-eighths in four of the tests this season.
It should also be added that Bachop and Bunce gained some international exposure playing for Western Samoa in the World Cup last year.
As mentioned before, Mains seemed pleased with the final choice and there have been only muted complaints from about the country — although it would be hard to be too critical 24 hours after a test was won 59–6.
But there are, in the recent jargon, many grey areas in the All Black team.
Matthew Cooper, for example, got there on only one game, a 23-points feast against Ireland at Athletic Park, and at the expense of his older brother Greg who played the four earlier tests and who had long prospered in Mains' Otago side.
The two brothers are rather similar in method — and neither is cast-iron solid in the tackle or as a goal-kicker.
The selectors opted for a 13 back-17 forward team split, forcing Wright into the utility role of wing-cum-fullback.
Kirwan and Timu look good on the wings, while Tuigamala is only fair for he is very large and by no means consistent.
Bunce has done well in five games, with two braces of tries against Ireland, and may yet play something like the Joe Stanley role.
Little seemed set solid in the fly-half role — a combination of Thorburn's past experience as North Harbour selector-coach and an apparent desire to dismiss Fox altogether — and he was a lively mover in the inside position.
However, at the last minute the selectors have restored Little to inside centre and picked Fox and Steve Bachop as the fly-halves, very likely on the basis they are much more accurate punters than Little.
The oddity about the scrum-halves is that Strachan cannot get a game for Auckland ahead of Jason Hewett, of last season's World Cup squad, and Preston does not rank ahead of Graeme Bachop, the no.1 All Black halfback since 1990, for Canterbury.
The selectors remark studiously that Strachan — only an occasional player for Otago and Auckland in the past — offers some art that the other scrum-halves cannot provide, although this special asset is not readily apparent for Strachan is only an average passer and is very dodgy as a left-foot punter.
Clarke played four of the five tests this season at inside centre without quite looking the part.
Not surprisingly, really, for in his limited first-class exposure he has looked a much better wing or perhaps outside centre.
Clarke is a burly man who tends to grab the ball and go — more suited to the wing than midfield.
The one fascinating prospect who has yet to show his international ability is Ellis, a very lively mover for Otago and New Zealand Universities when played at outside centre or on the wing.
He can also play at fullback and handles the place-kicking duties well, and looks a player of genuine class, although this may not really blossom on this tour.
Bunce is now the established outside centre and on an Australian tour the top players tend to get the big weekend games, and the new chums like Ellis play the easier mid-week affairs.
Fox's future is intriguing.
He was virtually out the back door and the rumours had him ready for retirement.
However, the fabulous goal-kicker is now much more mobile than he was last year when a niggling groin injury affected him.
Fox remains the best tactician in the game here.
The forward strength is more reassuring.
Jones and Brewer have had a long series of injuries, but both are near enough to fitness and form.
Henderson, Joseph and Pene owe much to their Otago and Mains' background, but Pene particularly offers much in the back row.
The front row looks solid enough, but there must be some worries about the locking of the scrum with only Jones having any real international background and Cooksley the only one to compare in size with the big locks of other countries.
Mains and his men have chased after the mobile forwards and only time will tell whether this philosophy of fast-footed men will work in the rough and tumble of test rugby.
As insurance the selectors have picked seven loose forwards and this may emphasise one of the great worries about the touring side.
An Australian tour only requires a 25 or 26-man squad from New Zealand, with replacements only three hours away.
The uneven nature of the tour, with hard games on the weekend and soft ones mid-week, does not make too many physical demands on players.
Yet Mains and his men want a squad of 30.
This will make it extremely hard for some players to get more than two or three of the 11 games in Australia — and that would not be long enough to evaluate the newcomers' test qualifications.
This could be one of those tours when the test or top XV are quickly established, and the other players simply have mid-week wanders to keep them busy.
So the fringe players such as Preston, Ellis, Bachop, Cooksley and Dowd might have a very quiet tour of Australia, and thus not be march-hardened by the time they move into the five-match tour of South Africa.
Thus the tour will be as much a test of Mains' ability as a coach as it will be a search for a new generation of All Blacks.
The mind rather boggles at what might happen should this expedition not be a success — and the odds are not all that good that it will bring back the Bledisloe Cup from Australia or a one-test rubber win from South Africa.
Mains and his men have already used 25 players in five matches this season — and now they are taking away 15 players who are novices in terms of international rugby.
Old wine in new bottles.
Scrum-half Ant Strachan (centre) and flanker Paul Henderson (left) take on the Ireland defence, while John Kirwan — one of the few World Cup players to prosper under Mains' regime — looks to support.
IRELAND TOUR TO NEW ZEALAND
The Irish may have scored socially but they came a poor second on the field because, says DON CAMERON, they were not prepared for the speed and the impact of the N.Z. game.
Apart from the 24–21 loss of the First Test, all the members tended to stack up against Ireland during their eight-match tour of New Zealand.
They ended with a 5–3 losing record, going down to New Zealand in the two tests (finishing with a 59–6 humiliation in the second) and ending with a lop-sided scoring record of 287 points (50 tries) against and only 153 (21 tries) for.
This did not make happy reading in Noel Murphy's end of tour managerial report.
Yet there was another statistic which may have illustrated just as vividly the gulf between the physical stature of the two sides.
In the eight matches the Irish required 15 replacements for injured players.
Of the opposition sides, Bay of Plenty replaced one player while Richard Loe, who left the field during the First Test, was the only other casualty.
The contrast is even more marked when the comparisons are limited to the four Saturday matches against Canterbury (admittedly one, Richard Wallace, suffering a broken jaw from an Andy Earl swipe), four against Auckland, two in the First Test, three in the second.
Halfway through the tour Ollie Campbell, who was holidaying in New Zealand at the time, made the comment that the Irish were under-prepared for the speed and physical impact of the game as practised by the stronger New Zealand sides.
Other experts suggested that Ireland's home experience offered a more comfortable playing side.
The top players might be exposed to the ruthless rigours of international rugby four times a season, with perhaps a fortnight between games.
The physical impact of such top-level experience is considerably less then undertaking a really rugged match on every Saturday of a tour, and with some heavy physical activity likely during some of the mid-week games.
Campbell made the point — and this was before the Auckland game — that Ireland needed better coaching and, on the face of it, more awareness of the growing physical demands of top-line rugby.
And it may have been pertinent that in the major games (and Bay of Plenty and Manawatu might rank only slightly below the status) the home sides tended to dominate the last quarter of each game.
Only against East Coast-Poverty Bay did the Irish finish the game in comfort.
Mind you, the odds were loaded against the Irish before they left home without so many experienced players.
They had accepted an itinerary which offered the fierce opposition of Canterbury and Auckland as the second and fourth games, followed by the two tests.
This reflects, and not always with credit, the New Zealand and Rugby Football Union's attitude towards their sponsors and the NZRFU cash-register demand that major international sides play high-profile games on each Saturday of a tour.
These are now telecast live, or slightly delayed, and have developed into a major part of the state-run television schedule on a Saturday afternoon — with the consequent spin-offs to the various sponsors.
Also Television New Zealand can mount a major rugby telecast more efficiently and easily from a major centre where all the facilities are already in place.
It did not help the Irish, either, that they may well have been winding down after the Five Nations Championship whereas New Zealand's players were hitting top gear with early-season All Black trials.
A new selection panel was trying very hard to make a good, early impression with players stiffened by the knowledge that strong and winning performances against Ireland would lead to places on the tour to Australia and South Africa later in the season.
New Zealand rugby and the All Blacks were not quite protected by the armour-plating they wore in the two years after the 1987 World Cup triumph, but the Irish would pay testimony to the fact that the All Blacks had become a very hard bunch of men by the end of their tour.
BATTERED AND BRUISED IRISH Mick Galwey holds firm as the All Black pack — with no.8 Arran Pene to the fore here — fails to click in Dunedin during the First Test.
The cute remark about the Irish tour is that it lasted a week too long.
Had it finished the day after the Irish rattled the All Blacks in the First Test at Carisbrook then Murphy would have taken his men home in high humour.
The Irish, predictably, could not maintain that test-type approach to the following mid-week match against a very tidy second division side, Manawatu.
In fact Manawatu shattered the Irish with their 58–24 win, and the tourists were in no mood to outwit a rampant All Black side stung by their faults in the First Test.
And this time they playing on a miserably wet and windy day at Athletic Park which, even at the best of times, can be a most unfriendly spot for touring teams.
So in that last week the Irish lost two games, conceding 117 points, offering up 21 tries and rather wrecking the statistical  side of the tour.
Afterwards there was gloomy talk that short tours by Home Unions might not have much appeal for either country in the future.
That may be too sudden a verdict, but if such tours are to continue and flourish then the background planning must be much more evenly balanced.
The NZRFU cannot really expect the Home Unions to agree to short tours when they place matches on the last two Saturdays of a tour, and put the tourists against top-strength sides at major venues on the two preceding Saturdays.
The NZRFU should accept the fact that such expeditions should be one-test tours, with the three previous Saturday matches against opposition which should become stronger as the test approaches.
The NZRFU must also accept the fact that these days touring teams such as Ireland will not fill major grounds, and that 30,000 — which was the top crowd for the entire tour — should be regarded as the benchmark.
The Irish must have taken some droll amusement out of the sights and sounds of New Zealand rugby being in a hyped-up state during their tour — and with not all the impact coming from the tour matches.
The activities of the new  selection panel, which Laurie Mains now leads with a quite astonishing amount of newspaper and television exposure, are constantly in the news.
Then there was the Auckland Rugby Union combining with TVNZ to produce a delayed-telecast of a Friday night match featuring two Auckland club championship sides.
This, incidentally, causes some warm regard in Auckland, but less in other parts of the country where rugby buffs asked why they should be presented with telecasts of club matches from those willy-woofers in the north each week while their own club games did not gain equal exposure.
And it should be said that, at least outwardly, Murphy and his men retained their charm and their good humour throughout what must have become a harrowing experience.
With his old-fashioned grace Murphy even mentioned in at least two speeches that he wondered whether the World Cup, and the impassioned pursuit of it by some countries, was really a good thing after all.
There were other touches of Irish humour and charm from the tour.
Sadly, the Irish went home bearing bruises and a rather unfortunate playing record.
The statistics might indicate that there is a physical gap developing between the two countries.
The greater danger is that there may be an even wider cultural gap growing between the two philosophies of rugby.
The New Zealand attitude is becoming increasingly confrontational and commercial.
The Irish attitude, in contrast, tends to be traditional and to regard rugby as a pastime and an international tour mainly adding to the flavour.
There may be the tendency to scorn the Irish for their olde worlde attitude.
But, in terms of sport, might they not be on a healthier track than is New Zealand at the moment?
Murphy's new day dawning?
SEAN DIFFLEY's Tour Reflections
On his last day in New Zealand, in his valedictory address to the press corps, Irish manager Noel Murphy announced that ‘when I get back to Dublin I will be speaking to the members of the IRFU involved in coaching, like former Irish coaches Syd Millar, Ronnie Dawson and Tom Kiernan, with our director of rugby, George Spotswood, with the various provincial coaches and with the coaches involved here in New Zealand, Ciaran Fitzgerald and Gerry Murphy.
‘We will discuss what we have learned on this tour and the various aspects that have influenced us.
I will involve some of the senior players in those discussions…and we will take it from there’.
Murphy, whose great enthusiasm, drive and charm managed, to some degree, to insulate the young playing squad from the full effects of the traumatic tour, is determined that Irish rugby will benefit from the experience.
He doesn't actually use the words but his philosophy is clearly that the New Zealand sojourn may have been the darkest hour but that the darkest hours comes before the dawning of a new day.
Team manager Noel Murphy faces the press flanked by captain Phil Danaher (left), who was ruled out for much of the tour by a knee injury, and coach Ciaran Fitzgerald.
Murphy's ebullience helped to keep Irish heads from going down…
Unlike so many of the home-based flat earth society type of observers who saw so clearly — from 13,000 miles away — what happened in New Zealand, Murphy does not indict the IRFU.
On the contrary: ‘The IRFU put the structures in place.
They agreed to concentrate on the under-age international sides and to the inauguration of a development squad.
And we are now a quarter way through a four-year development plan’.
Quite correctly Murphy calls for changes in the antediluvian playing customs and policies of the Irish clubs.
It was the clubs which had to be dragged screaming into the national club competition, the All Ireland League, two seasons ago after dithering and delaying a decision for years.
The great eye-opener for the Irish in New Zealand wasn't just the style of the All Blacks, but the style and consistent play of the ordinary sides — schools, clubs and even minor provincial teams observed in the usual plethora of curtainraisers before the Irish matches.
Not for them the purposeless Irish custom of the kick upfield which might, with a bit of luck, blunder into touch and ‘everything can stop for tea’.
The Great Lesson for the Irish tourists was that everything loose was run back by the New Zealand teams.
Support was always available even to a temporarily marooned fullback.
And physical strength and basic skills meant that the quota of ball-retention was way above 90 per cent.
The speed of the matches was so much faster that is usual in our own green and misty isle.
The game generally, was on a much higher plane of skill and fitness and thought.
It is those standards that the Irish manager, Murphy, and his coach, Ciaran Fitzgerald, are determined to impose on the   Irish game.
The assistant coach to Fitzgerald, Gerry Murphy, who impressed the players on the New Zealand tour, immediately travelled to Australia after the tour, crossing the Tasman Sea at the request of the IRFU to have a look at the coaching structures in Australia.
And a further indication of the influence Down Under is exerting on the Irish is the news that the IRFU's professional director of rugby at Lansdowne Road, George Spotswood — to be accompanied by one of his technical officer, former international Willie Anderson — will be in New Zealand in July.
As I write, details of that visit to have a look-see at the coaching structures and club and provincial administration are being worked out.
This summer will now come as a boon to the pressurised Irish representative players.
They have  been going hammer-and-tongs since last July and the tour of Namibia.
Many times on the recent trip to New Zealand Noel Murphy publicly referred to the vastly increased calendar of events which have been imposed on the leading players in all the rugby countries.
Murphy publicly wondered if too much was being demanded of the top players.
And he even questioned the wisdom of having such a thing as a World Cup.
And, no doubt, with the new laws speeding up the game, with the necessity of adding further to the burdens of training if the Irish are to catch up, there must be a question-mark hovering over the commitment of the more talented to the increased strains they will be asked to bear.
In Ireland, where the rugby population is, even at the most optimistic estimate, around a mere 20,000, the base of the pyramid is obviously narrow and talent doesn't just grow on trees.
What it means, eventually, is that a smaller base of committed players will have to shoulder the burdens and, in a country that remains strictly amateur, a coterie of liberal employers will be required to grace the scene.
In the meanwhile, as the sun shines warmly on an idle Irish summer, the prospect of world champions Australia arriving here int he autumn for five matches — four provincial and the test at Lansdowne Road on October 31 — manages to keep the blood cool enough, thank you.
No foundation for ‘smilin' eyes’…
THE whole back page of the Dominions newspaper in Wellington on the morning of the Second Test between Ireland and the All Blacks was taken over by Steinlager , the ‘official sponsors of the All Blacks’.
It contained the smiling faces of the respective captains, Ireland's Phil Danaher and New Zealand's Sean Fitzpatrick, with the question ‘Whose Irish eyes will be smiling after today's test?’ posed in the largest of poster type.
As it happened, neither.
Fitzpatrick, an All Black hooker of Irish stock, has a small problem with a few misshapen teeth which had inadvertently got enwrapped around an Irishman's knuckles in the course of the first encounter.
That effectively ruled smiling by one set of ‘Irish’ eyes.
The other set, belonging to Danaher, had little to smile about, even though he at least was able to, because a few hours before the kick-off he was finally ruled out of contention because of the knee ligament strain which had reduced his contribution over the eight-match tour to a couple of half-matches.
The bravest of the brave: Fullback Jim Staples prepared to clear his lines as All Black skipper Sean Fitzpatrick — who lost the best part of two of his front teeth to an Irish fist — hems him in during the record 59–6 loss to New Zealand in Wellington.
On a cold and very windy afternoon at Athletic Park it was far removed from a smiling task for Danaher to sit on the benches and watch his men concede an avalanche of tries, 11 in all, the greatest concession to any Irish opposition in 118 years of international participation.
Privately, it wasn't too difficult to discover in the Irish camp during the build-up to the match an acceptance that the backlash after the remarkable First Test would be fearsome.
The criticism in New Zealand of their own side after the 24–21 First Test win, that could so easily have been a defeat, was deafening.
That, plus the fact that less than 24 hours later the squad for Australia and South Africa was to named, concentrated the minds of the All Blacks most effectively.
True, the Irish began well, as they had in Dunedin.
The truth of the adage that the All Blacks might be vulnerable ‘going back’ seemed to be borne out when Vinnie Cunningham's neat chip over the line and the New Zealand defence looking anything but efficient.
Neville Furlong won the race for the touch before the ball went over the deadball line and Peter Russell made it 6–0 with a fine conversion from far out.
But it was very clear that the Irish were not playing with the conviction they had demonstrated in Dunedin.
The big deficiency was in the front five where the Irish scrum gradually disintegrated.
That, more than anything else, was the real shock.
For two seasons, against Five Nations and World Cup opposition, the Irish scrum has been as solid as a rock.
Not in Wellington, though.
True, Brian Robinson did get over from a maul on the All Black's line before the worst happened — although the Australian referee, Sandy McNeill, was unfortunately the only individual within a hundred metres who failed to note the touchdown.
But with no foundation up front, the fullback Jim Staples (the bravest of the brave), flanker Mick Fitzgibbon and fly-half Peter Russell all departing injured, the Irish were gradually taken apart.
Down 15–6 at half-time after 40 minutes with a strong breeze at their backs, the writing was on the wall for the Irish.
Over the years a favourite quiz question was to name the scrum-halves who played with Jack Kyle.
The new one is to name the scorers of the 11 tries by the All Blacks at Wellington on June 6, 1992; Arran Pene, Frank Bunce and Matt Cooper scored two each and the others were Eroni Clarke, Ian Jones, John Timu, John Kirwan and Ant Strachan.
Those 11 tries, by the way, surpassed the 10 scored by South Africa when they won 38–0 in Dublin in 1912.
And, purely in the interests of disinterested scientific knowledge.
I must point out that the 11 tries against Ireland is not the record number of tries conceded by an IB country.
That distinction is held by Wales, who had 13 tries scored against them by England at Blackheath in 1881.
Students World Cup Preview
Can New Zealand retain their last remaining world crown?
CHRIS THAU takes a look at the main men in next month's Students World Cup in Italy.
At one stage, as the game evolved from a purely Corinthian pastime to an internationally recognised entity, it looked as if student rugby, once a valuable missionary force, was destined to oblivion.
Confronted with the new philosophy that winning is the name of the game, student rugby, with its romantic vision of fun and entertainment, seemed increasingly out of touch with the pragmatic reality prevailing in the unions' corridors of power.
In some countries the drive for rugby excellence pushed student rugby into a precarious position.
In New Zealand , for example, student representative rugby threads ‘a delicate path between obscurity and insolvency’, as the President of the NZ Students Union put it.
In Scotland the SRU has yet to include the student in their long-term development plans, while in Australia student representative rugby simply does not exist.
It was Michel Bonfils, the general secretary of the French Students Union who realised that in order to arrest the declining fortunes of the student game, it needed an inspiring international competition.
‘I was in New Zealand, watching the rugby league students’ world tournament, when I realised that the 15-a-side game did not have an equivalent competition.
So, on my return home, I approached the French Federation and persuaded them to support the idea of a Student World Cup in France’, Bonfils recalled.
Driven by a passion akin messianic fervour, the Frenchman managed, almost singlehandedly and against considerable odds, to launch the first Student World Cup in August 1988.
The Romanian students were prevented from attending by their communist rulers, while the Irish could not solve their differences in order to send a team.
The organisers had to pay the travel bill of the poverty-stricken Fijians and, until literally the first day of the tournament, no-one knew whether the Russians would turn up or not.
The Soviets materialised out of nowhere and their sensational win against New Zealand, as well as the electric final, where Argentina took on New Zealand, gave student rugby credibility and kudos.
It also led to the setting up of the 1992 tournament in Italy .
Soviet lock Sergei Sergeyev, one of the finds of the inaugural tournament, gets a helping hand as his side suffer their only reversal in the pool matches, losing 10–8 to Italy.
In Ireland the prospect of playing in the second World Cup brought the arm-wrestling contest between the powerful Irish Universities and the students union to an end.
South African students found the fast-approaching World Cup a strong enough incentive to sort out their differences and achieve unity in a short span of time.
The South Africa v Argentina game will be South Africa's first official international encounter at any level since the mid-80s.
In England , where the increasing public appeal of the Varsity game battles administrators, the wise heads of the RFU made the Students Union the RFU's fifth division, thus allowing the students to find their place in England's playing hierarchy.
The organiser of the World Cup in Italy, CUSI (the state-sponsored students union), made every effort to ensure the success of the tournament.
Learning from France, where the games had been concentrated on the Mediterranean and the Atlantic coasts, in Italy the organisers instead decided to spread the games across the country from Sardinia and Sicily to Abruzzi and Venice.
Accordingly, the amounts spent are staggering.
Sadly, Fiji, unable to pay the travel bill, had to pull out of the tournament, while the organisers had to chip in a hefty contribution to secure the presence of the New Zealanders.
It seems incomprehensible that the NZRFU could spend thousands of dollars, for example, to bring Russia over for a ‘vodka and caviar’ tour and yet could not find the pennies needed to foot the bill of their world champion students.
In this respect the attitude of both England and Wales, who wholeheartedly support their student representatives, is both wide and commendable.
The Scottish Union, despite their early misgivings, eventually agreed to chip in, with Midland Bank, the sponsor of the Scottish students, picking up the rest of the tab.
The semi-finalists of the previous World Cup — New Zealand, Russia, France and Argentina — have all been seeded, but South Africa's emergence onto the world scene has upset the draw.
The South Africans have been entered in Pool 3 alongside Argentina and England, by far the toughest group in the tournament.
With South Africa likely to clash with New Zealand in one of the semi-finals, England, if they manage to upstage the Argentines, together with France, Italy and Wales , are the front runners for semi-final places.
Although one of the main claims to fame of student rugby is its  unpredictability , A south African win against France in the final seems to be eminently possible.
The marketing agents,Telemundi , have found themselves with the unenviable task of selling an event that has yet to capture the imagination of public and sponsors in a soccer-mad-country at a time when all media resources are concentrated on the approaching Olympic Games.
However they have done well to sign a number of top-grade sponsors, such as Fosters ,Mars ,Hewlett-Packard and Mitre , while selling the TV rights to Japan , South Africa, Argentina, New Zealand, France and Italy, with several hours of highlights on Eurosport and possibly ITV .
Blacks in the pink.
Captain Kendrick (centre), displays the World Students Shield after New Zealand beat Argentina 30–21 in the 1988 final.
POOL A
ITALY , under the supervision of the French coach, Bertrand Foucarde, made impressive progress at all levels and must be rated as favourites to win the pool.
In addition to a host of talented players from the Italian First Division, which in effect makes the student representative side the understudy to the full Italian XV, the selectors have drafted in a number of seasoned internationals (nine in all), among them classy Milano centre-cum-fly-half Massimo Bonomi and World Cup forwards Massimo Giovancili, Roberto Saetti and Carlo Cecchinato.
The CIS are probably the oldest team ever to play student rugby, but this composite side — made up of two Ukranians, nine Georgians, five Muscovites, six Kazakhs and Uzbeks — are unlikely to repeat their 1988 heroics and could well struggle against both Italy and Ireland.
IRELAND have the expertise — they are coached by Munster senior coach Garrett Fitzgerald — and the talent to reach the last eight.
They are impressive up front, as they showed against England at Waterloo, and have some fleet-footed customers behind who are able to run riot against virtually any opposition.
Student rugby, with its adventure, enthusiasm and romance, is just what the Irish love.
POOL B
FRANCE , winners of the Student Five Nations competition, are the favourites in this pool.
They have a solid platform up front, organised around their captain and member of the infamous Bègles-Bordeaux front-row, Serge Simon, with an incredibly talented and efficient back division behind them.
‘We missed three first-time tackles against them and they scored three scintillating tries.
They are simply superb’, observed England Students coach Les Cusworth.
SCOTLAND , deprived of the services of two of their international colleagues, Andy Nicol and Doddie Weir, are likely to struggle against the French, who beat them 22–9 in the winter.
However, as coach John Rutherford pointed out, there are some experienced players among the 26-strong squad, including budding star Gregor Townsend and Scotland ‘B’ centre Craig Redpath, not to mention about a dozen Scotland U21 players from scrum-half Roderick Dickson to prop Graham McKee, the captain.
‘We must win the game against Japan if we want to reach the quarter-finals.
The Japanese made tremendous progress and, in true student fashion they are a great unknown factor.
If we win against both Spain and Japan that could give us a shot against South Africa in the quarter-finals, which would be tremendous news for Scottish rugby back home’, said Rutherford.
SPAIN , who qualified at the expense of their fellow Iberians, Portugal (withdrawn), are captained by winger Jaime Gutierrez and include several players from the senior squad; while JAPAN feature, among a host of World Cup players, the electric winger Yoshihito Yoshida, of Meiji University, who played for the World XV in the Centenary series against New Zealand.
POOL C
ENGLAND , captained by the fiery Nottingham flanker Martin Pepper, face an uphill struggle in the toughest pool of the tournament.
Without their England ‘B’ players, Tony Underwood, Harvey Thorneycroft and Damian Hopley, England take on a formidable South Africa and an equally strong Argentina.
Although ARGENTINA have announced an impressive line-up that includes four Pumas — Sebastian Salvat, Matias Allen, Enrique Camerlinckx and Fernando Buabse — they have not played together much, unlike England who have a useful winter of buildup games under their belts.
TAIWAN are likely to be the cannon-fodder of the pool, although their national side's rapid development programme, modelled on the New Zealand forward technique, should have trickled down to the students, ensuring that the defeats aren't too heavy.
The highlight of the whole tournament — almost irrespective of their performance on the field — will be SOUTH AFRICA 's emergence from the woods, a coming in from the cold which is generating a great excitement.
According to South African manager and former international referee Steve Strydom, the South African students selection, though without any current Springboks in its ranks, is as strong as many of the top provincial sides taking part in the Currie Cup .
SA Students and Orange Free State fly-half Jannie De Beer played in the Junior Springboks' 79–3 win against a full-strength Namibia national side in Windhoek last month, while scrum-half Hentie Martons represented SA schools two years ago.
The tight five feature some remarkable samples of SA ‘beef’: locks Nico Wegner of Western Province (6ft 7ins and 17 stones), Philip Schutte of Northern Transvaal (6ft 8ins and 17 stones), and tight-head prop Pieter Boshoff (6ft 3ins and 17 stones).
Behind them is a combination of speed in Northern Transvaal flier Johan Visagie and Roland Beck of second division Currie Cup side Boland, and power — centre Johan Van Deventer at 6ft 3ins and 16st 4 lb is a human battering ram.
POOL D
Reigning champions NEW ZEALAND have selected a powerful squad for the tournament, probably stronger that the one that won the title four years ago.
As with the 1988 squad, the backbone of the side is provided by Manawatu's Massey University regulars from Palmerston North.
Manawatu tight-head prop Mana Otai is one of the survivors of the 1988 side, but this time the Kiwi students have drafted in several highly-rated provincial players: Auckland's first choice scrum-half Jason Hewett, Canterbury open-side wing forward Dallas Seymour and Manawatu and New Zealand XV fly-half Loe Stensness.
Had the other students currently in Australia with the All Blacks — John Timu, Arran Pene and Marc Ellis — been available, the squad would have been even stronger.
WALES , captained by 1988 veteran Ian Buckett, of Swansea, have been sorely hit by the ankle injury which has sidelined the highly-rated Llanelli, England Students, England ‘B’ and Wales reserve scrum-half, Rupert Moon.
Without his help the Welsh could struggle to secure two wins in the pool to make sure of a place among the last eight.
Whereas THE NETHERLANDS should not pose too much of a problem,ROMANIA , given the chequered history of the relations between the two countries, could upset the Welsh plans.
There will be at least six full internationals in the side, which is captained by World Cup fly-half Neculai Nichitean.
FRANCE
FRENCH CHAMPIONSHIP FINAL
NO PARTING GIFT FOR SUPER SERGE
Although Biarritz were destroyed by Toulon's hungry, young tight five, the Centenary will always be remembered for what it was — Serge's send-off.
Earlier in the season the prospect of a French Championship final between Toulon and Biarritz would have been dismissed with the words: C'est fou!
(It's crazy!)
What work of fiction could possibly bring together Toulon, who had a dreadful year, and Biarritz, a side whose parts — including the incomparable Blanco — were always greater than the whole?
Not surprisingly, 96 per cent of the coaches in the French first division predicted a Toulouse v Agen final.
But faith has always played a big part in the game, and in France they have often made things happen simply by believing.
The object of this act of collective will was the magician himself, Serge Blanco.
Everyone in France fervently hoped that, having been denied a grand finale on the Paris stage by a bunch of mean Englishmen in the World Cup, Blanco would get a second chance.
The Toulon v Biarritz final gave him that second chance.
It was also the climax of the most bizarre French Championship to date.
And not only because of Blanco.
Loud and proud.
Michel Perie, the boisterous young Toulon prop whose domination of Pascal Ondarts helped provide a platform for his side's victory, holds aloft the Championship trophy.
The event at Parc des Princes celebrated 100 since the day when the then president of the French All-Sports Society, Baron Pierre de Cubertin, the founder of the modern Olympics, presented the victorious Racing Club de France with a  trophy designed and engraved by Charles Brennus, a referee and rugby fanatic.
Racing CP beat Stade Francais by 4 points to 3 in the first French Championship final on March 20, 1892.
A century later, the President of France, Francois Mitterand, was present to be roundly booed by the two war-painted rugby tribes — the black and red Pirates of Toulon and the red and white Warriors of Biarritz.
He made the journey along with the 26-odd winning captains from the recent past, including ‘Monsieur Rugby’ Jean Prat (Lourdes), and to the most successful captain in the history of French club rugby, Béziers scrum-half Richard Astre.
General bewilderment had set in by this year's quarter-final stage, by which point most of the big names — Toulouse, Racing, Agen, Narbonne and Béziers — had fallen by the wayside.
Meanwhile the holders, Bègles-Bordeaux, became the victims of lacklustre Chalon in the first round of the knock-out stage, while much-fancied outfits like Grenoble, Tarbes, Dax and Bayonne followed suit in the subsequent rounds.
It was as if the entire French rugby community had conspired to give its favourite son, Serge Blanco, the opportunity to restage his exit in the white  heat of Parc des Princes in the centennial final.
Serge's final fling.
Biarritz fullback Serge Blanco scythes a path through the Toulon defence during a faultless display in his first and last Championship final.
The ‘Blanco script’— with its romance, riddles and emotion — captured the imagination of the public who turned up in their thousands to bid him farewell in his first and last Championship final.
And when Biarritz scored a quick try and Blanco landed a sensational penalty from about 60 metres it looked as if a miracle seemed possible simply because so many people passionately wanted it to happen.
But fact, as we all know, is often stronger than fiction and Blanco was deprived of his fairytale ending by Toulon's hungry young wolves.
The collective fury of Toulon and their perceptive planning eventually doomed Biarritz's efforts.
It was a contest of generations: Blanco's exhausted veterans against Toulon's freshmen.
In the end, although the margin of the score might suggest a different story, the slaughter resembled an act of euthanasia.
Toulon coach Jean-Claude Balatore made the right assessment; while Biarritz had the men to hold their own in the line-out, neither Ondarts nor his mate Condom — despite their impressive international records — had the stomach for a ferocious challenge up front.
Balatore, an astute observer, rightly felt that by achieving supremacy in the front five, their effective, yet inexperienced back row of Goulomet, Pool-Jones and Irigaray would be tied in, sapping morale.
It worked a treat.
Though deprived of the services of their suspended captain and inspiration, Eric Champ, a grey and sad figure on the fringes (with another important forward, lock Yvan Roux, missing,(also banned) the Toulon pack inflicted  ‘grevious bodily harm’ on their opponents.
The symbol of Biarritz's predicament was Ondarts' thorough demolition by his tormentors — first 23-year-old Michel Perie and, after his replacement in the 65th minute of the game, by a ferocious 20-year-old by the name Marc de Rougemont.
The contribution of the undersized but immensely powerful locks Gerard Orsoni and Bruno Motteroz to the devastating eight-man shoves that demolished  Biarritz's scrummage could not be underestimated.
Red and black army.
Victorious Toulon, joined by suspended flanker Eric Champ (left), show off the shield.
With their scrum in tatters the effectiveness of the Biarritz back row, of the feared Englishman Pool-Jones in particular, had been considerably reduced.
The quality of the ball suffered accordingly and although Biarritz scored two tries to Toulon's one they never looked as if they could win the game.
Behind such a solid platform Toulon's back row of Melville, Louvet and Loppy thrived, roaming the field with impunity.
Behind they the little general, Aubin Hueber — increasingly influential and confident — marshalled his troops with an assurance and tactical awareness reminiscent of his great predecessor, Jerome Gallion.
Before the final Pascal Ondarts ascribed Biarritz's assertiveness to a regained pleasure.
‘Once we (myself, Jean Condom and Serge) decided to quit international rugby everything became easier.
We started to enjoy ourselves’.
Unable to resist their piratical instincts the Toulon brigands spoilt the leisure and fun of their Atlantic coast rivals.
But the defeat did not dampen the enthusiasm of the Biarritz folk.
The Basques, romantics to a man, believed that Fate would give Biarritz a helping hand.
They observed that their right winger, Franck Corrihons, had never dropped a goal until the 73rd minute of the cliff-hanger against Bayonne when, with Biarritz trailing 15–13, he landed a monstrous 60-metre drop-goal to steal the game and with it a place in the semi-finals.
In a similar vein, the Biarritz men described the heroic feats of resident English flanker Richard Pool-Jones, of Cambridge University and Barbarians, in helping Blanco and co. reach the Parc des Princes as ‘Divine Justice’— as atonement for his countrymen's unceremonious treatment of Serge in the World Cup.
Said Pool-Jones: ‘It is wonderful to have played in a final, especially for Serge.
When he announced he would retire from the game at the end of Biarritz's run in the Championship it was the signal for scores of journalists to gather at each match to report on his ‘funeral’…but we kept postponing it’.
This was Blanco's first appearance at Parc des Princes in the red and white jersey of Biarritz Olympique and his club's first Championship final since 1939.
Acts of chivalry and goodwill abounded.
As a sign of respect for the Prince of the Parc, Toulon refused to draw the dressing rooms and invited Biarritz to use the facilities of the French team.
Blanco responded by asking the Federation to lift the suspension of the Toulon captain, Eric Champ, in case of a replay.
The magic spell touched Toulon too.
Three months earlier, after one of the poorest seasons in their post-war history, Toulon were on their way to pool ‘B’ of the first division and rugby oblivion.
A lucky win against Aurillac in the play-offs secured them a place among the last 32.
In the same quarter-finals that witnessed Biarritz's act of drop-goal escapism against Bayonne, Toulon managed — with the scores tied at 30-all after 110 minutes of play — to knock out Tarbes on the try-count.
They were far from impressive in their semi-final against Castres, while their performance in the final, though short of polish and inventiveness, was full of dynamism and — above all — will to win.
But centenary of the French Championship will always be remembered as the Blanco final; the year in which the Championship lost its head and rugby one of its prime entertainers.
LISBOA SEVENS
The standard was high, and the competition very fierce.
NICK CAIN reports from the Lisbon Sevens.
This may not come as a surprise to most of you, but relations between Britain — particularly England — and France are not at their best.
But strained through they may be, the last place you expect to see a dust-up between the two protagonists is in Portugal — unless of course you happen to be a historian with a penchant for the Peninsular Wars.
The culprits in this instance were the amalgam of sevens gypsies that gathered under the Warblers banner — including New Zealand sevens internationals Eric Rush and Glen Osborne (North Harbour) and the star of the Melrose Sevens, Peter Woods (Bay of Plenty)— and the Froggies, a polyglot of French first division players from the Toulouse area.
With bad blood carried over from last year's clash between the two sides which saw Eric Rush retire from the fray with a broken wrist, the portents were not good.
As Fred Howard, taking a breather in the stands observed, ‘The body language began to get ugly’.
Midway through the second half the tie erupted into warfare after Rush and Froggies forward Cecilliot got in a tangle.
Peter Tayler, Rosslyn Park's stocky England ‘B’ flanker, then exacerbated matters by upending Cecilliot with a kick.
A flurry of fists and boots followed as local referee Ignacio Silva struggled to keep the lid on.
With a form of order finally restored, the Woods-inspired Warblers — the better footballing side of the two — scored two late tries to put the result well beyond the Frenchmen (20–4).
That, however, was not the end of the affair as Kevin Bean, the English-born manager of the Froggies, marched towards the organisers to display a player with a sprig-marked rib-cage.
Bean, who lodged an official complaint, raged: ‘We'll not be coming here again.
That was awful refereeing.
Two of my players were kicked and one stamped on in front of the referee — and he did nothing.’
Bean had a point, even though he couldn't be accused of understatement.
But the Warblers, not noted as a team of bruisers, while less vociferous than Mr Bean, were adamant that the French had provoked the trouble.
‘They're always at it — gouging, kicking, sly-punching, late-tackling it was the same last year.
It's the way they play’, said Tayler, Rosslyn Park's captain next season.
Thus closed another chapter in the history of the ‘Entente Discordiale’, with both camps crying foul and the French departing in high dudgeon.
Back on the pitch, the Warblers, who had suffered a surprise 22–16 defeat in their quarter-final pool at the hands of a spirited Irish Wolfhounds outfit fired by scrum-half Alain Rolland, hauled their way into the semi-finals with wins over the Portuguese Barbarians and the Froggies.
The victorious Warblers:(Standing l-r) Eric Rush, Glen Osborne, Peter Tayler, Chris Sheasby, Simon Hunter.
(Kneeling) Simon Davis (Manager), Peter Woods, Chris Wright, Everton Davis and Clive Barber.
The problem was that rather than landing Portuguese champion  club Cascais in the semis they were drawn against the Saltires in a re-run of last year's final.
In another cliffhanger the Saltires, for whom Paul Hull was outstanding, came off second-best again when Mark ‘Turbo’ Thomas powered over for two tries to clinch it for the holders (12–10).
In the other semi, Cascais, who had already thumped a disappointing London Scottish seven 24–4, ripped through the Wolfhounds (18–6).
Ironically, this provided London Scots' Andy Cushing with some consolation.
He had just finished coaching Portugal, a side based heavily on Cascais players, at the World Cup Sevens qualifiers in Catania.
Clearly some of his words of wisdom had stuck.
There were not enough, however, to stop them being blitzed in the final by a Warblers side whose quaint victory song underlined a cutting edge.
Kiwi one-two: Peter Woods (Bay of Plenty) slips the ball to Glen Osborne (North Harbour) as the  Warblers feel the heat in the semi-finals in the shape of Saltires' André Dent.
ENGLAND ROUND-UP
Wasps summer school
WITH the game enjoying a boom amongst the young,WASPS have organised a summer school in weekly sessions for boys and girls aged 10–15.
There will be New Image Rugby , top quality coaches, visiting international players (including Nigel Melville , ex- England captain and British Lion , and Wasps Chris Oti and Paul Rendall and the opportunity to gain awards, all starting on 20th July with the final session beginning on 10th August.
Cricket and tennis tuition will also take place during the course.
The course costs £60 plus VAT per week (including all instruction, lunch, insurance, certificates, fun pack and T-shirt).
Applications for a day rate will considered.
Minis invade Beauvais
MAIDSTONE U12's visited twin town, in France, fro the 16th International Marcel Communeau Youth Rugby Tournament along with more than 60 clubs from France, Belgium, Holland and Germany.
Maidstone came through their qualifying group, beating French sides Montchemin, Houilles, Domant and Lormaison , and beat Belgian side Anderlecht after extra-time before losing in the semi-final to PUC Paris .
Fingers in the till
FOR the second year running MOSELEY club accounts have been found to contain discrepancies and the police have bee called in to investigate.
Their auditors came across alleged irregularities at a time when the Division Two outfit is already expected to make a loss of £120,000 for the season.
Last season £18,000 in bar takings were found to be missing but no culprit was ever found.
Blackpool Tower
THE new captain of Preston Grasshoppers is none other than England lock WADE DOOLEY , which wold suggest that — at least at club level — the ‘Blackpool Tower’ has every intention of playing on for a little while.
Batting for England
BRADFORD GRAMMAR SCHOOL represented England in the inaugural World Schools 1st XV Rugby Championship There were 16 schools from nine countries involved.
Bradford GS had an outstanding recent season, winning three major tournaments, 25 out of 26 matches and the Daily Mail U18 National Schools Cup at Twickenham.
They were seeded second, one behind the leading New Zealand school,Gisborne High School .
The championships were held in Whakatane, New Zealand, from 4th to 18th July.
Calling coaches and refs
SUSSEX SOCIETY OF REFEREES are organising a residential conference at Sussex University from Friday 18th to Sunday 20th September 1992 to mark their 60th year.
Ed Morrison and Roger Quittenton (England),Jim Fleming (Scotland)and Steve Hilditch (Ireland)will lecture and the weekend will include either a Pilkington Cup match or a Courage League match on the Saturday and a county side versus Brighton on Sunday.
Rafter joins Bedford
SECOND division BEDFORD have appointed former Bristol and England flanker Mike Rafter as their new coach after parting company with New Zealander Ian Snook , coach for the past three years, Snook is now expected to join Old Wesley in Dublin.
Leicester Crusaders, a touring side based on Leicester and including current players Simon Povoas and Jez Harris, took on Oyonnax at the end of the French club's most successful ever season.
As well as raising several thousand pounds for charity, the Crusaders also won 24–14.
IRISH REPORT
The New Zealand-Australia coaching influence will pervade the Irish club scene this winter.
Murray Kidd (from Auckland ) remains for another season with Garryowen , the All Ireland champions whom he steered to victory last season.
Jake Howard , who was on the Australian coaching staff for the World Cup, has joined Wanderers for next year and at the other end of Lansdowne Road the Landsdowne club have enrolled Graeme Taylor, formerly a Counties back and more lately involved with the All Blacks ‘seconds’ squad.
And, as the late Tommy Cooper would say, that's not all.
Ian Snook , who was the coaching administrator of Taranaki , will be the Old Wesley coach in 1992–3.
And Terenure College , another side in the All Ireland League, have yet another Kiwi,Duncan Rossiter , to look after their coaching affairs.
BRENDAN MULLIN ,Ireland 's highest try-scorer, who announced his retirement from representative rugby last March, will persist with his decision to give the bigtime a miss.
But he has accepted the captaincy of his club,Blackrock College , who won their way to the second division of the All Ireland League in 1990–91 and Mullin will devote all his playing activities to Rock's welfare.
DAN LARKIN is the new captain of Garryowen , the All Ireland champions, from Limerick.
Larkin, a former Irish Schools international, normally plays fullback for his club but has taken over at fly-half on occasions.
He succeeds as club the Irish captain Phil Danaher .
MICK GALWEY , one of the success on the Irish tour of New Zealand, whether at no.8, blindside flanker or lock, will captain Shannon next season.
He takes over from fullback Pat Murray .
WINDOW ON WALES
The International Sales
ALAN DAVIES is reportedly keen to repeat the experiment of last September when a ‘warm-up’ match was played against the French on a balmy September evening at a floodlit Arms park.
No details yet (although a possible game against Italy has been mooted) however, and it seems the national side may not have an engagement before they square up to the World Champions in November — gross score from the last two encounters being Wales 9 Australia 101 .
Attention was therefore focused upon the announcement of a national training squad of 45 players for a six-day training camp at the end of June and on the performance of Nick Farr-Jones ’ team in six test matches this summer.
The advent of satellite T.V. and the commitment of ITV to rugby coverage provides the opportunity to assess how the Australians cope with the challenges of Scotland ,New Zealand and South Africa during a very short space of time.
Some interesting names were called up by the Welsh selectors.
Amongst those who did not do duty in this year's championship are Phil Davies (standing down as Llanelli skipper after a highly successful five year run; reverting to the second row and declaring his intention to challenge for a place in the Lions party in that position — remember the trouble he gave Paul Ackford when Wales last beat England in 1989);David Bryant (controversially appointed a youthful pack leader in his first season in international rugby under the John Ryan regime, now recovered from a debilitating period of illness);Andy Allen (the front jumper was capped out of Newbridge in 1990, subsequently becoming yet another moving down the valley to Newport );Aled Williams (one cap as a replacement wing in Namibia in 1990, when a Bridgend player, but increasingly favoured by many to join Robert Jones in forming a club halfback partnership).
Amongst the newcomers are Llanelli 's Wayne Proctor and Swansea 's Simon Davies , both wings (a position short of challengers recently), hooker Nigel Meek from Pontypool (who has made the most of Garin Jenkins ’ move to Swansea), second row Paul Kawulok (another who took the Hall and Griffiths trail from Bridgend to Cardiff ) and two sons of famous fathers,Richard Shaw (Bridgend) and Scott Quinnell (Llanelli); scions of Glyn and Derek respectively.
Gareth Jenkins , Llanelli coach, is anxious that the younger Quinnell should not be rushed despite the impressive strides he made last year.
On the other hand, a glance at the likes of Federico Mendez suggests if he is good enough, he is old enough — unless you subscribe to the theory that the dates of birth of Argentinian props are as suspect as those of Pakistani fast bowlers!(*For the cricketers this refers to Mike and Mike, not Wes and Charlie).
Tony Copsey requires an ear operation (Get Well card from Neil Francis?.
He missed the squad session and may miss the start of the season as well.
However, the inclusion of Davies, Allen and Kawulok hints at the selection of a specialist front jumper and a move away from the ‘twin lighthouse’ policy successfully adopted by England and Australia.
Tours
IT IS rare now for the top clubs not to have some sort of close season tour, but some of this year's destinations are interesting.
It is typical that the tough men at Pontypool should choose the toughest of destinations.
Courtesy of their arrangements with Air New Zealand , ‘Pooler’ set off on 10th July for the land of the ruck and the long white cloud.
Former hooker Steve Jones has taken over from John Perkins as coach, included in their personnel are former Lions Staff Jones and Graham Price , and club captain Chris Huish , who announced his retirement at the end of last season.
All three made themselves available for the club committee.
At the other end of the scale,Newbridge went to Cyprus shortly after the season's end.
Presumably they played against some army sides?
‘Well no, we intended to, but actually it was more of a holiday — a training camp’ confessed a club official.
Fair enough.
No doubt the team spirit was enhanced.
Given the option, would you prefer to spend 80 minutes hard labour twice a week at placed like Lancaster Park, Christchurch or lying on the beach at Famagusta?
Neath also had a ‘summer training camp’ in Florida for two weeks under the supervision of their new coach Leighton Davies .
The former Maesteg coach is best known for his work at what was once known as Cardiff College of Education whose former student include Lyn ‘the Leap’ Davies, Gareth Edwards and John Bevan and more recently,John Devereux and Tony Copsey .
His captain next season will be Welsh second row Gareth Llewellyn.
Swansea and South Wales Police chose a middle road.
The Police went to Hong Kong where they won all three games against a Hong Kong Select XV , 27–12,The Royal Regiment of Wales , 43–12, and Hong Kong Police , 43–3.
Included in the itinerary was a stop-over on the way back in Bangkok, but unfortunately this coincided with the civil disturbances featured on our T.V. screens.
There is no truth in the rumour that some of their number fancied joining in for a bit of a busman's/policeman's holiday.
They re-routed through Singapore instead.
Swansea head for Western Canada in mid-August for a three match tour which concludes with a game against British Columbia on 22nd August.
It will be noted they provided the bulk of the players for the Canadian side which so impressed against France and New Zealand in the World Cup .