

INTRODUCTION
The organization of this book is relatively straightforward.
The introduction discusses theoretical and methodological perspectives on the history of crime, and explains some of the ways they are applied in this study.
It is followed by a chapter which surveys major social, economic and political developments in colonial Sri Lanka, the purpose of which is to provide information necessary for an understanding of the arguments presented later in the book.
The goal of the second chapter, which examines judicial and police arrangements, is twofold: to describe the administrative setting in which crime was committed and repressed, and to put forward an interpretation of the legal system.
For most of the nineteenth century officials paid more attention to the judiciary than to the police, but in the twentieth century policy shifted and the police became central to colonial efforts at crime control.
Although judicial business was conducted in English and followed procedure alien to pre-British Sri Lanka, people were able to adapt themselves to the new institutions and the courts soon handled a very heavy criminal and civil load.
Colonial tribunals were popular largely because they provided Sri Lankans with opportunities to use the power of the state, not because they efficiently enforced a widely-recognized concept of justice.
During the late nineteenth century some of the more manipulable aspects of the judicial system were abandoned, but even in the twentieth century the courts generated little moral authority.
The importance of the police gradually increased, but as in many societies they were often regarded with suspicion, fear or contempt.
The three middle chapters each consider individual crimes: cattle stealing, homicide and riot.
These offences were selected both because of their importance and because there is sufficient evidence for detailed analysis.
They also serve as case studies of crimes against property, the person and the state.
The incidence, geography and social setting of each offence are analysed.
It is argued that although cattle stealing was affected by administrative arrangements, particularly in the twentieth century, it was more sensitive to economic influences, especially changes in land use brought on by the expansion of plantations.
Cattle theft flourished in circumstances where it was profitable, and the risk  of punishment was only one factor which thieves took into account when assessing this profitability.
Homicide, on the other hand, is interpreted as a consequence of distinctive aspects of Sinhalese culture which changed little during the colonial period.
Most homicides were unplanned, and few brought any benefit to the offender even if he avoided punishment.
Neither government policy nor social change had much influence on this crime.
Riot exhibited yet another pattern.
Changes in types of disturbances are traced to the formation of new social groups, and to changes in the fortunes of older social groups, both consequences of structural economic change.
These changes in social identity set the parameters of potential riots, but the actual incidence and seriousness of rioting often depended on the actions of individual officials and the presence of random catalysts which could prompt disturbances.
The three studies, taken together, are illustrative of the variable and uneven impact of social change in colonial Sri Lanka.
The penultimate chapter examines selected features of crime in general, especially the social characteristics of persons thought to be responsible for various offences.
Unlike most societies, the social profile of persons treated as criminal was not weighted towards the poor and otherwise disadvantaged.
Crime was committed largely by Sinhalese adult men of respectable caste.
There were however differences in the types of crime persons with certain social backgrounds were likely to commit.
Emigrant workers, regardless of ethnicity, were more often accused of property crime, while some localities near the south-western coast produced a large proportion of violent offenders.
The conclusion draws together themes treated in earlier chapters, including two general issues which are discussed extensively throughout the book: the relationship between crime and broad forces of social and economic change, and the effectiveness of the administration of law and order.
Both topics have attracted the attention of scholars seeking to interpret crime in other parts of the world.
Crime and Social Change
It has been long and widely believed that urbanization and industrialization cause large increases in crime.
The rise in recorded offences in many parts of the Western world in the first half of the nineteenth century played an important role in the  original formulation of this belief, which is still accepted by many scholars.
The similarly large increase in recorded crime in many countries in the second half of the twentieth century has also been cited as support for this theory, which has strongly influenced interpretations of crime in the contemporary Third World.
The standard book on crime in non-Western countries, published in 1973, asserts that social changes in developing countries in the mid-twentieth century are similar to those which ‘suddenly produced extensive crime a century or more ago in Europe.’
The authors explicitly link crime with progress: ‘In fact, one measure of the effective development of a country probably is its rising crime rate.’
Recent historical research has qualified and in many cases disputed the view that increases in crime are necessarily related to urbanization, economic growth or ‘progress’.
An alternative theory is that all crime rises in the initial stages of industrialization and urbanization, but that thereafter violence falls while property offences continue to increase.
The idea that modernization brings about a shift in criminal activity from violence to theft has also been put forward by scholars who do not necessarily accept that violence increases at the beginning of the modernization process.
In Western Europe this change has been located anywhere between the sixteenth and nineteenth centuries.
This trend has been plausibly related to the transition from a feudal, aristocratic society which places premium on honour to a bourgeois, capitalist order which puts a higher value on property.
The most clear-cut counter-example of the link between rising crime and modernization is that of late nineteenth-century England.
Between 1850 and 1914 population doubled, urban population tripled and national income more than tripled.
Yet recorded crime fell by one-third despite increased willingness among the police and public to institute prosecutions.
Doubt has also been cast on the scale of supposed increases in crime in early nineteenth-century England, since these increases coincided with the rapid expansion of the police and changing attitudes towards lawbreaking.
Evidence from other European countries and the United States also points to declines in crime, including offences against property, over much of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
Although there has probably been a long-term decline in serious violence in Europe over the past several centuries, the relationship of this trend to patterns of theft and other property crime, or to broad forces of social change, remains obscure.
Historical research has thus proved more successful in demolishing old myths and theories about the relationship between crime and social change than it has in replacing them with sustainable generalizations.
So long as criminological theory drew from ahistorical empirical data from the United States and Europe it was possible to construct theories relatively consistent with the available evidence.
Historical and non-Western material has been more difficult to encompass.
It is becoming increasingly evident that theories which seek to explain patterns of crime in socio-economic terms must do so in conjunction with cultural and political variables.
The past practice of explaining discrepancies between theory and the empirical data as the product of ‘cultural differences’ is inadequate now that comparative data often show more variations than similarities.
Long-term social change, frequently defined as modernization but in studies of crime often measured by urbanization, is in this book defined by the expansion of the market economy.
Although there was both urbanization and industrialization in Sri Lanka during the British period, neither of these processes were carried very far.
By contrast, there was a general shift from subsistence agriculture to the production of cash crops and the provision of services.
In 1796, at the beginning of British rule, the market economy was dominant only along the south-western coastal strip.
In the 1840s, when coffee plantations were established on a large scale, it expanded into the central highlands.
From this time on the position of subsistence agriculture declined in other regions, though the pace of this change was uneven.
The process provides a good opportunity for correlating economic change with patterns of crime.
The relevance of more specific indices of social change, including urbanization and rates of literacy, are discussed as sub-themes where appropriate.
My findings emphasize the importance of distinguishing among different types of offences, and point to the futility of seeking to interpret all crime within a single framework.
The three crimes examined in detail, cattle stealing, homicide and riot, all exhibit different relationships with the expansion of the market economy, and even these three crimes are not representative of crime in general.
Moreover, it is not clear that the changes which took place were related so much to any general process of social change as to the specific economic and social changes which occurred in Sri Lanka.
In other words it is possible that local social and ecological facts may be of more importance when interpreting crime than broad processes such as modernization.
For instance, it may be that the rise and fall of certain forms of property crime is more closely related to their profitability than to changes in economic and social structures.
Little of scholarly value has been written on crime in colonial South Asia, but the work which is available has shown a strong positive relationship between property crime, including robbery, and depressed economic conditions.
It is probable that the importance of what has been sometimes termed in India as ‘famine crime’ preceded British rule.
Research on crime in Europe before around 1850 has also shown a direct relationship between economic conditions, especially the price of grain, and crime, especially theft.
Sri Lanka, like India, was subject to periodic increases in the price of grain, but the link between crime and economic hardship was not as strong as one would expect from the Indian evidence.
It is argued that this difference may be partially accounted for by the higher standard of living in Sri Lanka, but also that the motives and social composition of offenders in normal times were such that depressed economic conditions did not necessarily lead to substantial increases in criminal activities.
Criminological theory, supported by evidence from North America and Europe, assumes that the poor commit a disproportionate amount of crime.
As a corollary, it is generally accepted that many marginal social groups, especially economically-depressed ethnic minorities, also have high rates of crime.
Historians of North America and Europe have generally confirmed the propensity of the poor to appear in criminal records.
Scholars accept that prison statistics and other official data often discriminate against the poor and marginal, but the frequently overwhelming preponderance of these groups among those treated as criminal is thought partially to reflect social reality.
On this point the Sri Lankan case proves to be striking.
When considering a whole range of variables it is found that those social characteristics indicative of a low position of wealth or status do not appear among persons treated as criminal more often than one would expect from their proportion among the general population.
In some instances better-off persons are disproportionately numerous.
Three possible explanations come to mind.
It may be that the Sri Lankan system of crime control was more fair than most others, that it did not discriminate against those least able to defend themselves, and that the ‘real’ profile of Sri Lankan lawbreakers was not much different from those of other societies.
It  could even be argued that in the special circumstances of colonialism the judicial system was biased against mainstream groups in order to increase the state's control over them, and that in fact the poor and marginal, as in all societies, committed most crime.
These suppositions are rejected because there is little evidence to support them.
Instead it is argued that the unusual social profile of lawbreakers did reflect social reality.
Crime and the State
A second major theme is the effectiveness of the state in preventing and punishing crime.
The importance of studying government activity is on one hand methodological.
Since much of the information available about crime comes from officially-generated sources, it is essential to understand the workings of the administration even when interpreting crime within a social and economic framework.
Attempts to analyse the increase in reported crime in early nineteenth-century England illustrate the point.
Reported crime increased several times between 1800 and 1840, but so did the efficiency of government in recording offences.
Those who seek to interpret this increase as a reflection of rapid social change which led to increased lawlessness must still consider the changes in administrative arrangements and popular attitudes which may have distorted the relationship between the reported and ‘real’ rates of crime.
Similar problems arise in this study.
The failure to find broad patterns relating crime with social and economic change has led some scholars to examine in detail the possibility that government policy may have exercised an independent influence on patterns of crime.
Research has shown clearly that a ‘modern’ pattern of crime control developed in Western Europe and North America in the nineteenth century.
The eighteenth-century practice of harsh but selective punishment was condemned as barbaric, and was replaced with an attempt to impose lighter but more certain penalties.
To this end police forces on the contemporary model were created, and imprisonment became a standard punishment.
Retribution was replaced with discipline.
Traditionally this change has been seen as an aspect of progress, fuelled by humanitarian ideals.
Some historians now view it as an attempt by the state to exercise more effective though subtle control over the lower classes.
In many ways changes in government policy in nineteenth-century Sri Lanka were similar to those in Britain.
In some  instances reforms in Sri Lanka even preceded those of the colonial power.
Treason and murder were the only capital crimes after the assumption of British control in 1796, but the death sentence continued to be imposed in Britain for less serious offences until around 1830.
Moreover, the simplification of the structure of the courts along utilitarian lines proceeded more thoroughly in Sri Lanka than in Britain itself.
But in other ways the colony lagged behind, especially when government expenditure was at stake.
Consequently policing had a low priority, and regular police were established in rural areas only in the twentieth century.
The gradual extension of the state's role in crime control certainly affected some sorts of crime, particularly property crime, but government institutions rarely worked in the ways intended by higher officials.
Besides these changes in government policy familiar to students of European history, the fact that Sri Lanka was a colonial polity had important consequences.
This can be seen most clearly in the operation of the judicial system.
The failure of the courts to operate according to the legal norms under which they were established is a familiar theme in South Asian studies.
Charges of litigiousness and widespread perjury have gained widespread acceptance in both India and Sri Lanka.
The British established legal institutions in both countries around the same time and in similar political and cultural contexts.
Although the rate of litigation in India was not as high as in Sri Lanka, interpretations by modern scholars of the Indian legal system provide some starting points for an analysis of Sri Lankan justice, and are worth pursuing here in some detail.
Interpretations fall into two broad categories: those which emphasize conflict between Indian and British cultural values, and those which attribute the difficulties of the courts to the nature of disputes in South Asian society.
The most well-known exponent of the ‘culture conflict’ view is Bernard Cohn.
He has argued that differences between British and Indian legal norms inevitably led to a divorce in Indian minds between justice and the colonial courts.
He identifies four specific value conflicts.
First the courts treated persons as equals, but Indians viewed people as having widely different inherent worths.
Second, legal decisions based on ideas of contract did not fit the value system of Indian villagers.
Third, the courts desired a clearcut outcome.
According to Cohn, Indians preferred a compromise solution, or at least the fiction of a compromise.
Finally, the colonial courts settled only disputes brought before them.
According to Indian values the courts should have looked further  and settled the real dispute which lay behind the ostensible complaint.
As a result of these value conflicts litigants had no respect for the courts and manipulated them.
There have been two important responses to Cohn's argument, both of which emphasize the nature of social conflict in Indian society.
Robert Kidder has argued that there was no clash of values, but that on the contrary the attraction of the courts was that they were in theory able to pass down clear-cut and decisive decisions.
Litigants went to court because they had adopted ‘Western’ legal values.
The difficulty was that the courts were unable to function effectively.
Kidder's fieldwork, carried out after independence, shows that litigants who approached the courts honestly were unlikely to gain any benefit.
Emphasizing the failure of the courts to resolve civil disputes within a reasonable period of time, Kidder argues that the fault lay with the structure of typical disputes in India.
The personalized nature of disputes caused litigants to pursue all possible legal strategies even when it would have been more rational to compromise.
Litigants were likely to be neighbours who had long been on hostile terms.
Oliver Mendelsohn has carried Kidder's argument one step further.
He attributes the failure of the courts to the intractable nature of land disputes, rather than the structure of conflicts in general or faults in the system of justice.
He believes that any judicial system would be overwhelmed by what he sees as contradictions in Indian rural society.
Although Cohn, Kidder and Mendelsohn all used some historical sources, their explanations of the deficiencies of South Asian courts were mainly inspired by fieldwork.
This perspective is inadequate for an understanding of the colonial legal system because the post-independence practices evolved over a long period of time.
Cohn does not show why Indians responded to alien courts with enthusiasm rather than indifference.
It is after all unlikely that any culture conflict present when British courts were first established would continue unresolved and unchanged for over a century.
The distinctions which he makes between South Asian and British values also seem exaggerated.
Law in British India was not strictly locked into enforcing equality and contract.
Kidder and Mendelsohn, on the other hand, attribute litigiousness and perjury to an exceptional amount of hostility and conflict in South Asian society, but they fail to explain why this aggression was channelled into formal litigation.
In addition, the stress which they place on the feasibility of indefinite delay as a cause, rather than a consequence, of the misuse of the courts  seems misplaced.
Although there were delays in the criminal courts, they seldom lasted more than a few months.
Yet the same problems which plagued the civil courts prevailed.
The interpretation of the courts advanced in the second chapter of this book accepts many of the arguments put forth by these scholars, but provides a fuller model of judicial behaviour which is historical as well as functional.
It is argued that specific policies implemented at the outset of British rule led to the development of a judicial system which did not coincide with either British or indigenous notions of justice but which was none the less compatible with local culture.
Aided by court officials, lawyers and unofficial legal advisers, Sri Lankans used the courts as they used the spirits and demons of popular Buddhism.
Both were perceived as amoral sources of power which responded more or less predictably to specific modes of address.
That the new system generated little moral authority was less important than the fact that it gave many Sri Lankans access to the power of the state.
Crime and History
My contention that the functioning of the courts was a consequence of the implementation of specific judicial policies in a unique cultural and social setting points to the historical approach of the book.
Both the expansion of the market economy and the imposition of colonial institutions took place in the context of long-established and complex cultures which shaped the form of the new social arrangements that appeared during the colonial period.
This study is not constructed to test general theories about the relationship between crime and social change or the state.
These themes are dealt with time and time again, but the possibility that they may be irrelevant, or that unique cultural, social or ecological facts are more important, is left open.
Some of the other issues discussed in this book have been central to historical writing on South Asia which treats more traditional subjects.
One of these is the importance of colonialism.
Did British rule transform South Asian society, or was state penetration weak in most rural areas?
The study of crime and justice is one of the few fields where there is evidence about relations between the state and the people at the lowest level.
It is argued in this study that although the courts did matter, they often failed to operate in the ways intended by British policy-makers.
A resilient indigenous legal culture grew up around the courts, and attempts  by government to change this culture were unsuccessful.
The state was of course sometimes perceived as an alien entity by peasants living in remote rural areas, but this was not because it was Western.
Such alienation from official institutions is common to many societies with isolated peasant populations; it was not necessarily an outgrowth of colonialism.
The colonial courts, despite their formal structure which was modelled on British lines, were far less alien to the average Sri Lankan than they would have been to the ordinary Englishman.
Another important theme in the modern history of South Asia is the rise of nationalism.
If, as is argued here, the representatives of the state at the local level were widely viewed as indigenous, what prompted nationalist agitation?
The cynical answer is the spoils of patronage.
Some historians have argued that nationalism was the outgrowth of the desire by élites to gain economic and political power, and that they manipulated indigenous symbols to this end.
Few would deny that there are elements of truth in this explanation, but it has been criticized as incomplete because of its bias towards élites and its failure to explain why nationalist symbols had such wide appeal.
In Sri Lanka Sinhalese-Buddhist cultural nationalism was linked with other grievances and was sometimes expressed through rioting, but in the absence of élite leadership it was not channelled into demands for constitutional concessions from the British.
Events in India made this distasteful task unnecessary.
There were few explicit and illegal anti-British protests during the last century of colonial rule.
There remains the possibility that much social protest was expressed indirectly through crime.
In historical studies generally the interest in ‘social crime’ has declined because detailed research has found common thieves and bullies, not social bandits and grain rioters.
Sri Lanka was not an exception in this regard.
Some crimes were acts of protest, but within the overall context of illegal activity they were marginal.
What is striking about crime in Sri Lanka is the relatively high economic and social status of criminals.
Though certain crimes served to even out the distribution of power and income, other crimes had the opposite effect.
Illegal activities often helped high-status groups maintain their positions.
Another current trend in historical writing in South Asia is to move away from analysis at the local, regional or national levels and instead attempt to trace the linkages between various localities and the wider society, economy and culture.
The study of crime offers some opportunities for this type of analysis.
Geographical comparison of patterns of lawbreaking sometimes throws light on more general differences in social and economic conditions.
Criminal behaviour is important evidence for the reconstruction of all social relations.
Methodology and Sources
Crime has been studied from a great variety of perspectives.
In part this diversity is the result of wide variations among legal systems, popular definitions of crime and patterns of illegal activity.
It is also a reflection of differing disciplinary and ideological inclinations among scholars.
As a starting point, crime is defined as actions which are contrary to criminal law.
Its content changes according to time and place.
The main advantage of this definition is its precision.
In societies such as colonial Sri Lanka, in which criminal law was made up of a set of rules, under this definition it is not normally difficult to determine whether or not an action was criminal.
No claim is made for the universal usefulness of this definition; others would have to be found for societies in which law is not defined by a relatively clear, usually written, set of rules, or in which no distinction is made between civil and criminal law.
Under the legal definition of crime, it is in theory possible to determine the number of crimes committed in any one place over a period of time.
In practice neither scholars nor officials ever have sufficient evidence to put forth an accurate, exact figure.
The ‘dark figure’ of crime, that is the difference between ‘real’and reported rates of crime, may be substantial even for serious offences in twentieth-century developed nations.
Perhaps more importantly, the total number of crimes committed would be of little interest because there is great variation in the meaning and significance of individual criminal acts.
To be useful, crime rates must be broken down into specific categories of offences.
A second advantage of the legal definition is that it reflects a political reality.
Though not all laws are enforced with equal vigour, criminal law defines crime as it is officially recognized.
Even when this definition differs from widely-accepted popular definitions, those who transgress the legal definition may well be punished.
The administration of law and order may enforce another definition of crime which is different from the legal definition.
This practical definition is equally a political reality, but it is constantly changing, lacks precision and may be arbitrary: therefore it is not a useful definition to adopt.
This is not to say that differences between the legal and practical definitions should not be an important theme for analysis.
Another view is that crime is those actions which are punished by the state.
This definition is partially motivated by the recognition that factors such as the race or social class of the offender and victim, rather than the nature or actual commission of an offence, may determine whether or not there is a conviction.
It has the advantages of being very precise and of reflecting the social reality of the operation of the administration of law and order.
Its weakness lies in its very narrow scope.
Crime is equated with punishment, but most offences are unpunished.
Some scholars define crime as deviance from a social consensus of permitted behaviour.
This view takes into account the general view that crime is or ought to be those actions which are considered so immoral or damaging that they should be subject to punishment.
Proponents of this definition often assume that criminal law is closely related to the consensus, although they accept that law may be tardy in reacting to changing attitudes.
The main disadvantage of this definition is its vagueness.
Since it is accepted that the consensus varies according to time and place, it is not clear how one distinguishes between a legitimate consensus and a deviant subculture.
The scholar may assume that the consensus is the same as his or her own idea of crime.
Alternatively, the moral values of a particular group within the society under study may be adopted.
Another option, accepting criminal law as an accurate reflection of the social consensus, is less helpful than the legal definition because it precludes the study of differences between criminal law and popular conceptions of morality.
The legal definition of crime adopted here should be seen only as a starting point.
The two alternative definitions discussed above point to its limitations.
Whether one believes that ideas of morality determine the content of criminal law or that they instead serve as justification for the state or a social class to exert economic and political control, the relationship between law and morals is important.
In either case, the actual functioning of official institutions may differ greatly from their declared purposes.
The study of crime includes how and why the boundaries of crime change, the extent to which the legal definition is accepted, and the reasons why the authorities are more likely to punish certain legally-defined crimes than others.
This approach is consistent with much historical writing on crime, the quantity of which has increased greatly in recent years, especially in relation to Europe and North America.
Previously many historians perceived crime as abnormal and peripheral, fit only for study by specialists in deviance.
Current research assumes that crime and justice do not exist in a social vacuum, that they are at least partially political creations, and that they are inextricably involved in society.
This view is not new; in fact it was put forward by Durkheim and other nineteenth-century writers, but it was often disregarded after the study of crime was taken over by the new discipline of criminology in the early twentieth century.
The decision to organize the book around the analysis of specific crimes rather than district studies or thematic issues reflects my conviction that crime is best understood as an ‘umbrella concept’ which encompasses many different modes of human behaviour.
The diversity of crime accounts for the unconvincing nature of attempts to explain it by all-encompassing theories.
Murder, petty theft and tax evasion, for instance, all have different motives and consequences.
The fact that in many societies all three are illegal does not mean that they have a similar social or historical significance.
The use of quantification in studies of crime tends to obscure this diversity.
Crime rates often distort more than they clarify.
This point may be illustrated by the different ways of measuring the following set of crimes:(a) a gang robbery with six offenders and two victims,(b) five cattle thefts, involving sixteen offenders and eight head of cattle, and (c) a murder with a single assailant.
According to one crime rate, for which the number of offences is counted, seven crimes were committed.
Each case of cattle theft has the same value as the murder and the gang robbery.
Under another widely-used method, for which the number of persons accused is used, there were twenty-three offenders.
Here the value of the robbery is not equal to that of the murder, but is instead six times greater.
The cattle thefts are five times more significant than the murder when offences are counted, but sixteen times as important when the number of offenders make up the crime rate.
Some scholars and officials have sought to avoid distortions by counting only crimes defined as ‘serious’; this adjustment would not affect the example given above, for all of the crimes mentioned would normally fall into this category.
Another alternative is to create an index whereby a number of factors, including the ‘seriousness’ of the offence, and perhaps the value of any property involved, are taken into account.
Such efforts may eliminate some common inaccuracies, but no set of  criteria can avoid distortion caused by the quantification of unlike incidents.
The approach of this book, with its emphasis on the study of specific crimes, reduces but does not eliminate the problem.
As the case studies make clear, there was much variation in the circumstances of even the relatively narrowly-defined categories of cattle theft and homicide.
Some distortion through the quantification of similar but not identical events is inevitable.
None the less, crime rates for cattle theft and homicide prove very useful when analysed in conjunction with detailed information from other sources about the social settings of these crimes.
In some instances it is possible to break down these rates further by motive or other circumstances.
The other methodological problem in determining crime rates is that of accuracy.
It is well known that the authorities are aware of only a small proportion of crimes, and that administrative processing of those crimes further distorts official statistics.
These difficulties are discussed in detail at those places in the book where crime rates are presented and analysed.
At this point it is sufficient to mention that it is accepted that there were differences between the real and reported rates, but that for some crimes over certain periods of time the difference was fairly constant.
A thorough understanding of the way official statistics were collected and of the workings of the administration is shown to be essential for the proper interpretation of these data.
Quantitative material is also used as evidence for the criminal proclivities of persons with certain social characteristics.
Some data on convicted prisoners are available.
More useful is my enumeration of persons who were listed in the Hue and Cry , a biweekly bulletin published by the police.
This publication contained detailed descriptions of persons who failed to appear at court to answer a criminal charge.
Their social characteristics, the type of crime of which they were accused and the district in which the crime took place were recorded for the period 1896 — 1905 (Appendix A).
These 4,505 persons are treated as representative of persons considered responsible for crime during the mature colonial period.
Finally, the study of homicide is largely based on a quantitative analysis of details of 1,482 cases committed during the years 1883 — 9 and 1900 — 4 (Appendix B).
Each case was examined and classified according to sixteen variables which describe some of the circumstances of the incident and the social characteristics of the persons involved.
Again, this data base is not used to determine  the overall frequency of homicide, but to provide information about the types of people who were involved and the proximate causes of the crimes.
The above discussion may give the impression that this is a predominantly quantitative study.
This is true only in the sense that the significance of crime is directly related to its frequency; the bulk of the evidence is found in narrative form.
There are a few works by scholars which deal directly with aspects of my subject.
Official documents account for a large proportion of the primary sources.
Several categories are used, including semi-official diaries, annual reports, the proceedings of special commissions and correspondence both within Sri Lanka and between Sri Lanka and London.
Non-official sources are also important.
The press, polemics and literature all provide perspectives and information not otherwise available.
POLITICS, ECONOMY AND SOCIETY
The aim of this chapter is to provide the background information necessary to understand the arguments of this book.
The first section treats the colonial administrative and political structures.
It is followed by accounts covering the main economic and social developments of the British period.
Administration and Politics
European penetration of Sri Lanka began in the sixteenth century, when the Portuguese established control over some coastal areas.
Their rule was rarely peaceful, for they competed for power with Sinhalese and Tamil states.
The Dutch replaced the Portuguese in the seventeenth century and established a relatively stable colony in the coastal regions of the island.
The main concern of their administration was to profit from the monopoly over cinnamon, the principal export commodity.
Only the Kandyan Kingdom maintained its independence in the interior.
After 1739 it was ruled by members of the southern Indian Nayakkar dynasty, who adopted the roles of Sinhalese kings.
The British ousted the Dutch in 1796, and two decades later, in 1815, assumed control over the entire island.
The Kandyan Kingdom fell quietly to the British as a result of its internal weaknesses and divisions, but part of the aristocracy led a major rebellion in 1817 — 18.
After it was crushed, the British took direct administrative control over the Kandyan districts.
In the early years of British rule the avowed principle of government policy was the continuation of policies of the previous regimes, the Dutch in the coastal areas or Low Country, and the Kandyans in the interior.
In practice there were innovations, partially because of the perceived need to reduce the influence of headmen, and partially because British officials naturally governed on the basis of their own training and inclinations.
In 1829 a Royal Commission of Enquiry, appointed because of recurrent annual deficits, began an investigation of the colony's affairs.
Four years later a wide-ranging set of reforms, named after the two commissioners, William Colebrooke and Charles Hay Cameron, was implemented.
Many of the institutions and practices established at this time remained intact until the twentieth century.
The island's administration was unified under a government structure shaped like a pyramid.
At its apex was the Governor.
He made policy with the aid of an Executive Council which was composed entirely of senior officials.
He also presided over a Legislative Council which included a non-official minority.
Governors generally appointed one representative for each of three Sri Lankan ethnic groups, the Sinhalese, Tamils and Burghers (Eurasians).
The other three non-official positions were filled by local British residents.
After the Legislative Council was expanded in 1889 a Ceylon Moor and an extra Sinhalese representative were also included.
All legislation had to be approved by the Legislative Council, but the Governor could control this body by ordering the official majority to vote in a certain way.
Normally such action was unnecessary.
In the 1860s there was open conflict between the Governor and the non-official members over the size of the colony's military contribution to the imperial budget and other financial matters, but this fracas was the exception rather than the rule.
The proceedings of the Legislative Council were sent to London for the perusal of the Colonial Office and were reported in detail by the local press.
Legislation had to be confirmed by the Colonial Office, which took note of any opposition.
Governors generally tried to get as much support as possible from the Legislative Council, and they usually succeeded.
Although the legislative branch was clearly subservient to the executive, the Supreme Court exercised power independently.
Initially vacancies were filled from Britain, but by the late nineteenth century at least one of the three judges was Sri Lankan.
Judicial officials at lower levels were normally members of the civil service.
They were subject to transfer, but the executive branch was unable to interfere with specific decisions.
Appeals were heard by the Supreme Court.
The Governor administered the colony through the highest ranking civil servant, the Colonial Secretary.
All heads of department carried on a voluminous correspondence with this official.
Outside of Colombo, the capital, the main representatives of colonial power were the government agents and assistant government agents.
These officials were responsible for the  collection of revenue and the general administration of the districts where they were stationed.
Each worked from a permanent district headquarters called the kachcheri (Map 1.
1.).
In the years immediately following the Colebrooke-Cameron Reforms civil servants were ill-paid and allowed to participate actively in outside economic ventures.
Many owned coffee plantations, and not unnaturally were more concerned with the success of their investments than with carrying out government policy.
In 1845 salaries were raised, provision was made for pensions, and restrictions were placed on economic activities.
As a result, civil servants gradually developed a stronger bureaucratic ethos.
This trend was strengthened in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries by the establishment of more stringent educational requirements and by the expansion of technical and specialist administrative departments.
Revenue officials ruled their districts through several levels of headmen.
The lowest officials on the administrative tier were the village headmen, who were normally men of substance.
The chief headmen, who were called mudaliyars in the Low Country and ratemahatmayas in Kandyan districts were persons of high status and much wealth.
They exercised territorial jurisdiction over areas often inhabited by tens of thousands of people.
The extent to which British administrators depended on them for information varied greatly according to the social composition of the district and the competence of the civil servant in charge.
Another important Sri Lankan official was the kachcheri mudaliyar , who was in charge of the kachcheri staff and who often acted as an interpreter.
These officials should not be confused with the many honorary and titular mudaliyars created by the British.
Unless otherwise specified the term mudaliyar refers to officials with territorial jurisdiction.
In most districts only a few high-ranking headmen were paid a salary.
Many lower-level headmen received a legitimate income by retaining a proportion of the fees paid to them for issuing various licences and for other duties.
The reliance of the government on untrained and largely unsupervised headmen undermined government policies which were formulated as if headmen would act as local bureaucrats.
The provincial boundaries established by the Colebrooke-Cameron Reforms were deliberately designed to cut across traditional political and ethnic lines.
This policy was motivated by a utilitarian-inspired belief that the island should be administered in a unified way.
In the second half of the nineteenth century  government policy shifted, partially as a result of agrarian unrest in parts of the interior in 1848.
Many officials believed that these disturbances were prompted by needless interference with traditional society.
It was felt that the more conservative backward-looking elements no longer represented a serious threat to British authority, but could on the contrary be placated and transformed into loyal allies.
The ‘native aristocracy’ of Kandyan districts were all members of the Goyigama caste, and most were members of the Radala subcaste which had been influential in the Kandyan Kingdom.
The authority of these headmen was increasingly supported by officials, and three new Kandyan provinces were created (Map 1.2).
In the Low Country the link between social status and government appointments was less rigid, but nevertheless important.
A group of predominantly Protestant families known as ‘first-class Goyigamas’ dominated the ranks of the mudaliyars .
Some governors saw the ‘native aristocracy’ as a counterweight to upwardly-mobile Low Country families, many of them non-Goyigama, who had taken advantage of the commercial and educational opportunities of British rule.
In the second half of the nineteenth century urban local government provided the small but growing English-educated élite with a limited opportunity to exercise political power.
Municipal councils were first established in Colombo and two other towns, Galle and Kandy.
Local boards, with less power than municipalities, held sway over smaller towns.
Officials acted as chairmen of both these bodies, but some councillors were elected by Sri Lankans who met certain property requirements.
In many rural areas village committees were established.
The name was misleading, for the jurisdiction of each committee included many settlements.
Though the president of each committee was appointed, councillors were elected by universal manhood suffrage.
The proceedings of the village committees, unlike those of all other official bodies, were in Sinhala, not English.
Government revenue was much less dependent on the surplus from subsistence agriculture than in neighbouring India.
The grain tax usually amounted to about one-tenth the value of the rice crop, considerably less than the burden imposed on the Indian peasantry.
In the nineteenth century it provided little more than ten per cent of government revenue.
It was abolished in 1892, amidst justified concern that its harsh enforcement had contributed to rural destitution in some districts.
Customs duties and related levies were more important, accounting for about one-third of government proceeds.
The revenue from arrack and toddy  provided a significant portion of official income, as did the salt monopoly, railway receipts and income from the commutation of an annual labour levy on adult men.
The administrative structures set up by the Colebrooke-Cameron Reforms, though subject to some change in the nineteenth century, remained largely intact until the early twentieth century.
In 1912 official control over the Legislative Council was reduced when an election was held for an ‘Educated Ceylonese’ seat.
More significant concessions were made in the 1920s, when a majority of the Legislative Council was elected by a franchise limited by ethnicity, education and wealth.
This arrangement proved unsatisfactory because there was no corresponding transfer of executive power.
The non-official majority was able to reduce the power of civil servants but powerless to fill the ensuing void.
Under the Donoughmore Constitution of 1931 the Legislative Council was transformed into the State Council, the members of which were elected by universal suffrage.
Executive power in many fields was turned over to seven committees of the State Council.
The chairmen of these committees made up a Board of Ministers.
Although the Governor retained direct control over defence, finance and justice, Sri Lankan politicians wielded an increasing degree of executive power.
The influence of government agents and chief headmen, on the wane since 1920, declined still further.
In 1936 the post of District Revenue Officer was created to supersede the mudaliyars and ratemahatmayas .
Full independence was granted in 1948.
The Economy
Sri Lanka bore many traits of a classical colonial economy.
The island exported raw materials and imported food, textiles and other goods.
Although this pattern was well established as early as the sixteenth century, the expansion of the market economy during British rule was unprecedented.
More and more land was needed to grow crops for export and in some cases for the domestic market.
The extent, timing and nature of this trend varied geographically, but by the early twentieth century virtually all districts were affected.
Coffee was introduced into the central highlands in the 1840s, and quickly became the most important cash crop.
It was produced not only on large British-owned estates, but also in small  gardens owned by the indigenous inhabitants, the Kandyan Sinhalese.
The Sinhalese were however generally unwilling to work as labourers on large estates.
Impoverished Tamil peasants from southern India were used instead.
Since much of the work on coffee plantations was seasonal, most of these workers returned to India once the harvest was over.
The ‘Indian Tamils’, as they came to be called, were of low status and had a reputation among British planters for being docile.
The Sinhalese were thought lazy because of their reluctance to work for planters, but the poor living conditions of estate labourers are ample explanation of the failure to recruit Sinhalese workers.
Disaster, in the shape of a leaf disease, struck the coffee industry in the 1870s.
By 1878 productivity had fallen and Sri Lanka's economy faltered.
The depression was not limited to the coffee-growing area; there was also a decline in employment in the packing industry in Colombo, and many temporary emigrants from maritime areas who had earned their livelihood providing services in the previously-expanding economy of the central highlands were forced to return home.
Around 1883 the economic outlook began to improve.
With great rapidity tea replaced coffee as the major plantation crop, and soon its acreage surpassed that of coffee at its height, for tea could be grown at more varied elevations than coffee.
The change of crop was not without important social consequences.
Unlike coffee, tea could not easily be grown profitably on smallholdings.
Thus the Kandyan Sinhalese were denied a full share of the renewed prosperity.
Moreover, because tea required a more stable labour supply than coffee the plantation Tamils became more settled, though many continued to retain some ties with India.
Tea and coffee were not the only important export crops.
A coconut belt had grown up along the south-western coastal fringe during the late eighteenth century.
Elsewhere, the tree had grown randomly at lower elevations, and the nut was used for local consumption.
In the nineteenth century the amount of land devoted to coconut cultivation expanded sharply, especially in Chilaw and Kurunagala districts.
The value of coconut products consumed within the island was larger than the value of exports, but substantial amounts of coconut oil and copra were sent overseas.
Unlike tea estates, coconut plantations were generally owned by Sri Lankans, especially by the urban élite which had become wealthy by taking advantage of entrepreneurial opportunities.
Many had made their fortunes by buying the arrack and grain tax rents from the government, through providing services  and transportation for plantations, and by the production and sale of coconut products.
Graphite mining was another industry which became important in the second half of the nineteenth century.
Most mines were owned by Sri Lankans.
Mining activity was very sensitive to the price of graphite on the international market.
A sharp rise in 1898 — 9 resulted in increases in the wages offered miners, and led to a general, if temporary, wave of prosperity for Sinhalese labourers, for other employers were obliged to follow suit.
The sensitivity of the graphite industry to international demand may be illustrated by the sharp fluctuations in the value of graphite exports as a proportion of the value of rice imports: in 1890 this proportion was eighteen per cent, by 1895 it had fallen to seven per cent , but in the boom year of 1899 it soared to sixty per cent .
The importance of graphite mining declined late in the colonial period.
Rubber was first grown commercially in the 1890s.
Its acreage expanded quickly as a response to demand fuelled by the emergence of the automobile industry.
Rubber passed coconuts in importance as an export crop in the first decade of the twentieth century.
Although more than half of rubber production was controlled by British interests, there was also significant investment in the industry by Sri Lankans.
Most rubber was grown in Kalutara, Kagalla and Ratnapura districts.
Although many Sinhalese were employed on rubber estates, there were local influxes of Indian Tamils into districts where rubber was established.
The rubber industry was badly affected by the depression of the 1930s, but its position as the second most important export was not threatened.
Other cash crops, such as tobacco, cinnamon, arecanuts and citronella, were grown in gardens and on small plantations.
In some instances these products were grown by peasants who sold their produce to local traders who in turn supplied urban merchants and exporters.
Like coconut and rubber, many of these crops were also grown on estates owned by the urban élite.
The steady expansion of land given over to the production of cash crops and the growth in population inevitably resulted in a decline in the proportion of villagers able to make a living from subsistence agriculture.
The market economy provided other employment opportunities for poorer villagers.
Fluctuations in the world economy had a strong effect on the economic health of the island in the first half of the twentieth century.
Conditions were depressed in 1918 — 21 because the high price of rice, a major import, was coupled with low prices for  many of the colony's exports.
The increased demand for rubber in the early 1920s resulted in general prosperity, but in 1926 the terms of trade again turned against Sri Lanka.
In the years after 1930 the world depression caused severe hardship.
Unemployment soared, and many small producers of cash crops went bankrupt.
There was some recovery in the late 1930s, but the Second World War led to further disruption.
Some Sri Lankans were able to take advantage of employment opportunities brought about by increased government expenditure, but the high inflation rate of the war years cut the standard of living of many Sri Lankans.
Food production, though largely neglected by the government in the early nineteenth century, remained very important.
Rice was the staple crop which was grown in most villages where its cultivation was ecologically possible.
Most rice fields were owned in unequal shares, and the produce was distributed accordingly when the crop was harvested.
Alternatively, the tract could be subdivided, or the responsibility for cultivation could be rotated from year to year.
In principle all children, regardless of sex or parentage, were entitled to equal shares of property when a landholder died intestate.
In practice a married daughter did not claim her share unless she continued to live in her natal village after marriage.
Under Roman-Dutch law, which gradually came to be enforced in the Low Country, all children were allowed a share in the inheritance.
The ensuing tension between popular and legal norms concerning a married daughter's rights was an important cause of land disputes, and also contributed towards the increased fragmentation of shares.
Population growth and restrictions on settling forest land were other causes of this fragmentation.
Shares were often bought and sold, but the cultivators were not necessarily displaced as a result.
The share system of land ownership did not meet the approval of the British, and legislation was passed which made it possible for any shareholder to force the division of a tract.
When this happened owners of small shares were left with tiny, uneconomical holdings, which they were forced to sell.
Sri Lanka did not grow enough rice to feed its people.
This shortfall was not a new development, but the scale of rice imports rose sharply, increasing ninefold between 1840 and 1900.
Most people who lived on the south-western littoral consumed imported rice, while the plantation workers and those who provided services for the plantations were almost entirely dependent on it.
In the villages of the interior little imported rice was used because  local production was adequate.
When crops failed, people could not afford to buy imported rice anyway, though in some districts a number of villagers received income from seasonal work on plantations.
Rice grown in Sri Lanka did not in general enter the market economy, although there were local transfers by barter and gift.
Rice was supplemented by other foods grown in the villages.
Gardens normally surrounded village dwellings.
Like rice fields this land was often owned in shares.
Fruits and vegetables grown in these gardens formed an important supplement to the rural diet.
Most produce was consumed locally, but the cash market gradually expanded, especially in the Low Country and around towns.
Grains were also grown on chenas , forest land which was cleared, burnt and cultivated once every five or ten years.
In pre-British times chena cultivation formed an integral part of the economy of many villages.
The government saw chena cultivation as a threat to the state's right to forest land, a matter of some importance because the sale of Crown land provided a significant proportion of official revenue in the nineteenth century.
Moreover, many officials believed that chenas caused soil erosion and that the grains produced on them were unhealthy.
Under Ordinance 12 of 1840 forest land was declared the property of the Crown, and in some districts a large proportion of it was sold for plantation development.
In the 1840s most of those who acquired this land were British, including some civil servants.
Later in the century many Sri Lankans purchased forest land from the Crown, and villagers also sold much chena land to speculators and capitalists.
As a result,chena cultivation disappeared in many districts.
Even when there was suitable Crown land available,chena licences were often refused.
This policy caused great hardship in villages where it was not possible to grow enough rice for the needs of the residents.
The expansion of commerce required a revolution in transportation.
At the beginning of the nineteenth century there were only tracks and canals in the Low Country, and paths in Kandyan districts.
The British soon constructed roads, mainly for military reasons.
By the mid-century economic considerations were more important, and although roads continued to be built, more attention was paid to the construction of railway lines.
The initial impetus for the development of the railway came from British planters who wanted a cheaper and quicker way to transport goods to and from their plantations.
The Colombo-to-Kandy line  was completed in 1868, and fifty years later there was an extensive network which included a coastal line from Puttalam to Matara and which linked Colombo with Anuradhapura, Kurunagala, Matale, Badulla and Ratnapura.
The advent of motorized transportation further improved communications.
By 1930 over two thousand buses and a similar number of lorries plied the island's roads.
Although Sri Lanka was a small island, there were marked differences in local economic structures even within the Sinhala-speaking areas.
Ecological patterns accounted for some of these variations.
Specific cash crops were profitable only in certain districts.
Most early plantation development was at the higher elevations, especially in the central highlands, which covered parts of Kandy, Nuvara Eliya and Badulla districts.
Subsistence agriculture was also influenced by patterns of rainfall and other geographical conditions.
The northern part of Sinhala Sri Lanka, including large parts of Puttalam, Anuradhapura, Kurunagala and Matale districts, was in the dry zone which received less rainfall than the wet zone of the south-western and central portions of the island.
Rice cultivation was more difficult in the dry zone, which also included parts of Hambantota and Badulla districts.
No general geographical division of Sinhala Sri Lanka into regions can serve all purposes of analysis, but identifying districts which shared some attributes is a useful tool if not used indiscriminately.
Three regions have been identified: Low Country, Intermediate, and Interior.
The Intermediate and Interior areas together made up the Kandyan districts, the geographical area under the sway of the former Kandyan Kingdom.
The boundaries of these regions are shown on Map 1.1.
The Low Country, which contained about half of Sinhala Sri Lanka's population, corresponded roughly to the area which was subject to direct Dutch and Portuguese political influence.
There were perhaps 500,000 inhabitants in the early years of British rule.
Its population grew steadily, reaching about one million in 1870, two million in 1915 and three million in 1946.
The population of Colombo, by far the largest city, grew from around 20,000 early in the century to 160,000 in 1901 and 360,000 in 1946.
The term ‘Rural Low Country’ is used to mean the Low Country with the exception of Colombo.
The next largest town, Galle, had a population of 37,000 in 1901 and 49,000 in 1946.
The entire coastal fringe from Chilaw south to a few kilometres into Hambantota district was the most densely populated part of the island.
The littoral was well integrated into the market economy even  before the beginning of British rule, and it was families from this area who were able to gain wealth through trade and other capitalist ventures when the cash economy expanded inland in the nineteenth century.
Many Low Countrymen of more modest means emigrated for much of the year to work in expanding sectors of the economy.
Coconuts and other garden produce were grown everywhere and fishing was an important industry in seaside villages.
Arrack and toddy production generated a great deal of wealth in Kalutara district.
Further inland within the Low Country, the economy was based largely on rice cultivation, although tea and rubber were introduced into Kalutara in the 1890s, and there were coffee plantations in Matara before the spread of the leaf disease.
The interior of the Low Country was not divorced from the market economy even during the nineteenth century.
Cash was raised to pay taxes, to buy salt and cloth, and to purchase Indian bone-dust fertilizer.
In the twentieth century population growth and increased use of land for cash crops led to a relative decline in the importance of subsistence agriculture.
The Intermediate region was transformed in the late nineteenth century by the establishment of plantations.
The area had been on the periphery of the Kandyan Kingdom, and in the early years of British rule it remained an impoverished backwater.
Even at the end of the nineteenth century it was overwhelmingly rural; the largest town, Kurunagala, had a population of less than 6,500.
The first plantation crop to be introduced on a large scale was coconut, and the pace of its expansion increased rapidly in the late 1880s and 1890s, mainly in Kurunagala district.
Much of this land was purchased from the Crown; other tracts were bought after a shareholder of a garden forced its division and sale.
The plantation owners were mainly Low Country Sinhalese from the littoral who were seeking to invest capital which they had made as entrepreneurs, and they usually hired Low Countrymen to manage their estates.
After around 1890, tea and rubber made similarly quick and extensive inroads into Kagalla and Ratnapura districts.
Graphite mining also expanded in Kurunagala and Kagalla.
One social consequence was a large influx of Indian Tamil and Low Country Sinhalese immigrants into all three districts.
The population of the region increased from around 425,000 in 1870 to over 1,200,000 in 1945.
The Interior area included the heart of the former Kandyan Kingdom, the central highlands where coffee was first established in the 1840s.
The fortunes of the coffee and tea industries have  already been discussed above, and it uncertain whether Kandyans in coffee districts had by 1900 recovered the standard of living which they had attained in the early 1870s.
Although Indian Tamils lived mostly on estates, their sheer numbers had a significant social effect.
More Tamils than Sinhalese lived in Nuvara Eliya district, which during the Kandyan Kingdom was inhabited almost entirely by Sinhalese.
The Interior region also included large parts of the dry zone which were sparsely populated, where famine was not uncommon.
Late in the nineteenth century some efforts were made to improve irrigation facilities in these areas, where.
People often had to depend on chenas for their livelihood.
Like other areas of Sri Lanka, the region's population grew under British rule.
The number of inhabitants increased from around 600,000 in 1870 to 1,600,000 in 1945.
Social Divisions
The inhabitants of Sinhala Sri Lanka were divided by ethnicity, religion, language, caste, wealth and other characteristics.
Many of these categories were related to each other.
For instance, if one knew a person's ethnic identity one could predict his or her religion with some confidence.
Yet none of these social features overlapped entirely, and none were ‘fundamental’.
Their relative importance varied according to context.
The most obvious social division, at least to the British, was that of ethnicity.
The three major groups were the Sinhalese, Tamils and Moors.
Although nineteenth-century immigration decreased the Sinhalese proportion of the population, their dominance was never in doubt.
In the early twentieth century two-thirds of Sri Lankan residents were Sinhalese, as were between three-quarters and four-fifths of residents of Sinhala Sri Lanka.
Their language, of Indo-Aryan origin, was probably brought to Sri Lanka by immigrants from northern India over two thousand years earlier.
A large proportion of the ancestors of the Sinhalese were more recent immigrants from southern India who adopted Sinhalese language and culture.
In the late nineteenth century Sinhalese élites invented a racial consciousness which was based on the assumption that all who spoke Sinhala were of Aryan origin.
This belief gained wide currency among Sinhalese of all social strata in the twentieth century.
Tamils were divided into two discrete groups, Ceylon Tamils and Indian Tamils.
Ceylon Tamils, many of whose ancestors had  lived in Sri Lanka for perhaps one thousand years, lived mostly in the Northern and Eastern Provinces, outside the purview of this book.
A small number, some of them wealthy, settled in Colombo, and others were employed throughout the island as government functionaries.
Indian Tamils, recent emigrants from southern India, had a very low social and economic position.
As well as providing the bulk of labour for large plantations, they carried out menial tasks in Colombo and other urban centres.
By the end of the nineteenth century Tamils accounted for about one-third of the population in the Interior area.
In the Intermediate and Low Country regions less than one-tenth of residents were Tamil.
Moors accounted for about five per cent of the population of Sinhala Sri Lanka.
Most knew no home other than Sri Lanka, though there was a small community of Coast Moors which retained strong ties with Muslims in southern India.
Moors were geographically scattered but had concentrations in the Eastern Province and Puttalam district.
Although there were many Moor villages where rice cultivation was the principal economic activity, Moors were often pictured as traders and shopkeepers, and they had a strong presence in towns.
Other ethnic groups were very small but important.
The Malays were an urban community many of whom lived in Colombo and Hambantota.
Indian Chettiars controlled most rice imports and served as bankers for the emerging class of Sri Lankan capitalists.
Burghers were persons of mixed European and Asian ancestry.
Those who claimed descent from Dutchmen had a high social status, and English was the language of the home in many Burgher families.
A large number were employed in government service.
The British, who were considered part of a European racial group, were the ruling race.
They dominated the upper levels of government, controlled much commerce, and owned the great coffee and tea plantations.
Ethnic minorities were concentrated in urban areas.
Although the Sinhalese were the largest ethnic group in the city of Colombo, in 1911 they accounted for only forty-four per cent of the municipality's population.
Tamils made up twenty-two per cent of Colombo residents, Moors nineteen per cent, and Burghers eight per cent .
Other towns also had fewer Sinhalese residents than their rural hinterlands.
Language broadly followed ethnic lines.
The most widely spoken was Sinhala, the language of the majority community.
Tamils and Moors spoke Tamil, though many Moors were  bilingual.
Some élite families, both Tamil and Sinhalese, spoke English better than any other tongue.
English was the official language, and was used in courts and government departments.
In 1901 about four per cent of males and one per cent of females were literate in English.
Literacy in Sinhala and Tamil was more widespread; about forty-five per cent of men but only ten per cent of women living in Sinhala Sri Lanka were literate in any one language.
The extent of literacy gradually increased in the first half of the twentieth century.
Religion was also associated with ethnicity.
This link was strongest among Moors and Malays, who were without exception Muslim.
The dominant religious beliefs among Sinhalese and Tamils were respectively Buddhism and Hinduism, but Christianity had made inroads into both ethnic groups.
About nine per cent of the Sinhalese were Christians.
Most were Roman Catholics and lived near the coast in Chilaw, Colombo and Kalutara districts.
They were  descendents of persons who had adopted Christianity during Portuguese rule.
A somewhat smaller proportion of Tamils living in Sinhala Sri Lanka were also Christians.
Most Burghers were Protestants, as were some wealthy Low Country Sinhalese families who had a tradition of government service.
The second half of the nineteenth century was a time of religious revival and controversy, especially in the Low Country.
Three traditions took part: Buddhism, Roman Catholicism, and Protestantism.
Priests and laymen of all three religions organized educational institutions and missionary propaganda.
Beginning in the 1860s, Catholics and Buddhists established newspapers to rival long-standing Protestant organs.
These newspapers devoted much space to religious dogma and disputes.
The Catholic and especially Buddhist revivals were partially reactions to earlier activities of Protestant missionaries, who as part of their strategy to gain converts had produced polemical literature and established schools, including those which provided the best available English-language instruction.
The Buddhist revival gained momentum in the 1870s after a series of public debates between Buddhist and Protestant preachers increased Buddhist self-confidence.
Among its financial supporters were wealthy traders and entrepreneurs, including many non-Goyigamas.
After 1880 Buddhists received aid from European Theosophists, a development which partially offset the presence of Christian missionaries from Europe.
The Buddhist revival provided opportunities for upwardly-mobile social groups  to gain status denied them by the largely Protestant mudaliyar families of the Low Country, but it was also a way for Sinhalese to challenge indirectly apparent British scientific, economic and political superiority.
The discovery of impressive ruins which illustrated the past existence of a great Sinhalese-Buddhist civilization in the dry zone provided Buddhists with proof that their religion was not the cause of their colonial status.
As in India, caste was an important social institution.
In Sinhala areas most Ceylon Tamils were of high caste while a majority of Indian Tamils were of low caste.
The Sinhalese were also divided into castes, although unlike Hinduism, neither Buddhism nor Christianity provided caste with religious sanction.
Caste among the Sinhalese differed in that concepts of purity and pollution were not widespread.
There was no Brahman or priestly caste, though admission to the Buddhist monkhood was generally limited to members of four ‘respectable’ castes.
Although there was an unclean caste, the Rodi, whose members were regarded not unlike Indian ‘untouchables’, it was very small, accounting for well under one per cent of the population.
There was no unified Sinhalese caste ‘system’.
In Kandyan districts, where multi-caste villages were common, there were ritual and service ties between castes.
These links were weak or nonexistent in the Low Country, where most villages were identified with only one caste.
The structure of Sinhalese caste was unusual in that a majority of Sinhalese belonged to a single caste, the Goyigama, which was also traditionally the highest caste.
A further twenty per cent of Sinhalese were members of one of three ‘respectable’ castes which were not openly subservient to any other caste.
Although hierarchy was not expressed by ritual along the coastal strip, inequality remained fundamental to perceptions of caste.
A family's status, of which caste was part, was defined by the search for marriage partners.
The refusal to accept a marriage proposal was often interpreted as a statement of superiority.
Goyigamas probably accounted for somewhere between fifty and sixty per cent of Sinhalese.
The traditional occupation of this caste was cultivation.
In communities which were economically and socially based on growing rice, Goyigama dominance was clear throughout the nineteenth century and beyond.
Although along the coast and in towns their numbers and wealth were less secure, substantial numbers of Goyigamas entered the new urban élite.
Elsewhere the chief headmen and large rice-field landowners were invariably Goyigama.
Nevertheless, a majority of Goyigamas, in common with the rest of the population, lived in relative poverty.
Three other castes of high status, the Karava, Salagama and Durava, were concentrated near the south-western coast.
None had ritual or service ties with Goyigamas.
The Karavas, whose traditional occupation was fishing, numbered around ten per cent of the Sinhalese population.
Many were also engaged in carpentry and other artisan trades.
Although a large proportion of Karavas were poor, some members of this caste successfully took advantage of entrepreneurial opportunities within the expanding market economy.
Karavas were as a result disproportionately represented in the wealthy and English-educated élite.
In particular, many families from the village of Moratuva, about fifteen kilometres south of Colombo, were among the wealthiest of the island.
The Karava élite resented the tendency of élite Goyigamas to regard them as inferior, and claimed equal or greater status.
In the late nineteenth century Karava and Goyigama spokesmen carried out periodic verbal battles through pamphlets and in the press.
This controversy was known as the Kara-Goyi contest.
The traditional occupation of Salagamas, who made up about seven per cent of the Sinhalese population, was cinnamon peeling.
Under Dutch and early British rule their fortunes had varied according to colonial policy towards the cinnamon industry, which at that time provided most of the country's export earnings.
The Colebrooke-Cameron Reforms freed Salagamas from their traditional obligations.
Some of them, like some Karavas, seized available economic opportunities and joined the new élite.
Less fortunate caste members provided much of the labour for graphite mines.
Most Salagamas were casual labourers, cinnamon peelers and agriculturalists.
The Durava was a considerably smaller caste than the Salagama, and its social status was probably slightly lower.
The traditional occupation of Duravas was toddy tapping, or climbing trees in order to extract sap with which to make toddy, a mild alcoholic drink.
A few Durava families entered the new élite, but many continued in their traditional occupation.
Twenty or so low castes accounted for between one-fifth and one-quarter of the Sinhalese population (Appendix C).
Many were very small or were found only in certain districts.
The largest of the lower castes was the Vahumpura, which numbered perhaps six per cent of the Sinhalese population.
Traditionally Vahumpuras were associated with the making of jaggery, a sweet substance derived from the jaggery palm tree.
Most lived in rural areas, where they eked out meagre livings as cultivators.
The  economic position of those who lived near the coast was higher, and there were wealthy Vahumpura traders in Colombo.
They were, however, unable to evade their low social status.
Work was highly differentiated according to sex.
Women had many tasks to perform in the fields and in the home.
When they participated in the market economy, they were usually confined to menial positions, many of which did not bring them into much contact with men.
In some coastal areas basket making was a major female occupation.
Even in towns women did not normally act as traders.
Indian Tamil women lived and worked on the plantations with their families.
Members of certain ethnic and caste groups clustered into specific occupations.
Many traditional caste occupations, such as cinnamon peeler, washerman, toddy tapper, fisherman and blacksmith, were still largely performed by their respective castes.
Nevertheless, cultivators and labourers were drawn from all castes, and there were few caste monopolies.
In any case, correlations between birth-determined groups and occupation did not need to have any historical or ritual justification, as the number of Karava carpenters, Moor masons, and Indian Tamil plantation labourers demonstrated.
The relationship between wealth, occupation and birth-determined social characteristics such as caste is a problem common to much research on South Asia.
There is no widely-accepted model for the task of identifying for analysis categories which reflect divisions of occupation and wealth.
There was little class consciousness in the European sense among the peasantry or urban workers in the nineteenth century, though occupational groups such as washermen, carters or fishermen could unite at the local level to protect their economic interests.
Only in the twentieth century did skilled workers in Colombo begin to organize along working-class lines.
There is little evidence that social class was a conscious force among other groups during British rule, with the possible exception of the new élite, or ‘middle class’.
One approach is to oppose the peasantry to the rest of the population, most of whom can be loosely described as labourers, and then to identify élites which stood above the mass of the people.
In Sri Lanka there was a national élite which was prominent in Colombo and Moratuva.
Its economic base lay not in manufacturing but in commerce, contracting and land.
Many élite families made fortunes in the first half of the nineteenth century and then invested their wealth in agriculture, usually in plantations.
They rarely lived in the countryside, but their investments  brought them prestige as well as profits.
A good English-language education was considered a necessity for their male children, some of whom entered government service or one of the professions.
In the twentieth century it was the growth in the power and influence of this élite, along with the example of the Indian movement for independence, which led directly to the end of colonial rule.
Only English-educated politicians participated in the legislative institutions through which the British devolved political power in the 1920s and 1930s.
The granting of universal suffrage in 1931 did not immediately undermine their position.
Below this top crust was a growing group which included teachers, notaries, minor government functionaries and moderately successful traders.
These persons were not necessarily well off, but they were literate in Sinhala if not in English and had a relatively high standard of living; they may be termed local élites.
They gained direct political influence only after the 1956 election, eight years after independence.
In rural areas the economic base of some wealthy families, including those which dominated the office of ratemahatmaya in Kandyan districts, remained their ownership of large tracts of rice fields.
These families may be described as a traditional élite; in the twentieth century they either found new sources of wealth and influence or became local notables.
None of these élites had sharply defined boundaries, and there was much overlap among them.
A complementary approach to social classification is to group persons by a series of social characteristics.
In this study the biweekly bulletin Hue and Cry , which listed descriptions of persons for whom magistrates had issued warrants, provides the necessary data.
It includes information about age, sex, caste, religion, occupation and birthplace.
Quantification of most of this material presents few methodological difficulties; the exception is the variable ‘occupation’.
The first task is to separate out cultivators, who are defined as landowners or tenants whose livelihood was in agriculture, usually the production of rice.
Excluded from this group are persons who worked in fields, gardens and plantations for a cash wage, but who had no stake in land.
These latter are classified in a residual category called labourers, which included coolies, carters and service workers, such as blacksmiths and washermen, who usually worked for a fee or wage.
Some of these ‘labourers’ were thus in fact small businessmen, albeit usually on a petty or part-time basis.
Domestic servants and white-collar workers, though they worked for a wage, are classified separately because they are easily distinguishable in the colonial sources.
Other categories are traders, fishermen, ‘loafers’ and ‘others’.
There are two main limitations to the use of these categories.
First, it was common for persons to follow more than one occupation.
Many Kandyan peasants worked on plantations for three or four months each year.
Low Countrymen emigrated to the interior, often temporarily, to take advantage of employment opportunities.
Moreover, a large proportion of traders and persons who followed service professions also owned land and sometimes cultivated it themselves.
The official descriptions presumably reflected the most recent activity of the person concerned; when interpreting data drawn from the Hue and Cry the flexibility of occupational boundaries should be kept in mind.
Secondly, membership in these occupational categories tells us little about the wealth of the person concerned.
Cultivators included both well-off landlords and their much poorer tenants.
Some merchants were very rich, and even village storekeepers were often among the wealthier inhabitants of a locality.
But there were also many petty traders who barely eked out a living.
The disparities were perhaps less great among labourers, but skilled workers, such as carpenters, railway employees and miners, often commanded wages three times those of a common labourer.
Even the pay of domestic servants varied widely depending on the status of the employer and the sex and duties of the employee.
These categories are thus unsatisfactory for use in ways similar to class analysis in European history.
Fortunately there is no need to rely on occupation alone to assess social and economic status.
Although the other social characteristics available are not directly related to wealth, they are amenable to ranking in a general social and economic sense.
When a social profile of a certain group is constructed using these variables, its place in the social hierarchy is usually evident.
THE ADMINISTRATION OF LAW AND ORDER
The most prominent feature of the administration of law and order in colonial Sri Lanka was the popularity of the courts.
In the nineteenth century the number of persons who were each year involved in civil and criminal cases often exceeded the adult male population of the island.
One official noted that ‘most English people die without having been inside a court, and regard it as a misfortune to be entangled in a lawsuit.…
[but]To the Ceylonese the judicial aspect of government is more prominent than the administrative.’
This assessment appears valid, but the authorities did not take satisfaction from it.
They did not believe that the high rate of litigation was primarily the result of an excessive amount of crime or an unusually large number of valid civil disputes.
Nor did they think that Sri Lankans prosecuted a larger than normal proportion of true criminal cases because of their faith in the effectiveness of British justice.
Instead, from the very beginning of British rule it was the nearly unanimous opinion of officials and literate Sri Lankans that there was an inordinate number of false accusations.
It was widely believed that the courts were used to further disputes which were not necessarily related to the ostensible complaint.
An explanation of the contradiction between these two themes, the seeming failure of the courts as shown by the consistent and convincing allegations of widespread perjury, and their seeming success as demonstrated by their immense popularity, lies at the heart of this chapter.
My contention is that although the colonial legal system was influenced by culture conflict at the beginning of British rule, it was soon adapted and accepted as an integral social institution by the mass of the people.
The major point of conflict was the means of determining whether or not a defendant was guilty, not the definition of criminal offences or the failure of the British to take into account status differentials.
Also important was the decision to hold all proceedings in the English language.
Although the assumptions behind British judicial procedure were not popularly accepted, the courts soon ceased to be alien because they were used by Sri Lankans in ways which fit indigenous norms.
Unfortunately, from the British viewpoint at any rate, the dispute-solving model adopted by the Sinhalese had little to do with British conceptions of justice.
Instead the courts were treated as an amoral source of power which could be used by those skilful enough to manipulate them.
The first three sections of this chapter survey the development of government policy towards crime.
The first section examines the institutions established during the first half-century of British rule.
Little attention was paid to policing during this period.
Official energies were instead directed to the establishment of a judicial system similar in many ways to that of Britain.
Policy towards policing is examined in the second section.
A modern police force was established in the 1860s, but until 1906 it remained largely confined to urban areas.
Headmen were relied upon to perform police duties in the countryside.
In the 1890s a serious effort was made to transform them into a rural police force.
It was the failure of this attempt which led to the gradual expansion of the regular police into rural areas in the first half of the twentieth century.
Judicial policy in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries is examined in the third section.
Government during this period sought to clarify the law and simplify judicial procedure.
Although delays were mitigated and judicial efficiency improved, the courts continued to exercise little moral authority.
The fourth section looks beyond government policy to the actual workings of the police and judicial institutions, as far as possible from the perspective of the inhabitants.
It is shown that there was very often little to be gained from approaching government institutions with attitudes which would have been considered proper by British administrators.
The final section shows how Sri Lankans were none the less able to use the courts as a legitimate and acceptable, if sometimes disreputable, way to solve disputes.
The Establishment of the Colonial Judicial System
During the first few years after the British first gained control over the Low Country there was much administrative confusion.
Under the Dutch there were formal courts which tried serious criminal cases, but both European officials and headmen were empowered to judge summarily petty cases and to punish offenders with a fine or whipping.
The British were suspicious of the  loyalty of headmen, and soon stripped them of their judicial powers.
They established a three-tier court system which had exclusive authority to punish crime.
All proceedings were held in English, a language with which very few inhabitants had familiarity.
The courts were dependent on interpreters from the very beginning of British rule.
The Supreme Court was composed of two judges who were the only officials other than the Governor appointed directly by the Crown.
It had original jurisdiction over serious offences.
Provincial courts, staffed by civil servants who had other duties, tried some criminal cases.
At the bottom of the judicial system, magistrate's courts handled petty crime and committed more serious offenders for trial in one of the higher tribunals.
They were mostly staffed by Burghers, many of whom had served the Dutch colonial government.
Policing was left largely in the hands of headmen, who were in theory supervised by magistrates.
Under the Dutch, revenue headmen were responsible for apprehending lawbreakers, but in 1806 the British created a new class of local headman, called vidanes , to carry out police duties.
In the early years of British rule vidanes were allowed ten per cent of the value of any recovered stolen property when they were instrumental in gaining a conviction.
When the Kandyan Kingdom was annexed in 1815 the administrative structures of the Low Country were not applied there.
The Kandyan judicial system, which included tests by oath and ordeal as well as trials conducted by various grades of headmen, was initially left largely intact.
After the rebellion of 1817 — 18 the judicial powers of headmen were limited to trying petty cases.
British agents of government, whose primary responsibility was the collection of revenue, were given judicial duties, and the Board of Kandyan Commissioners functioned much as the Supreme Court in the Low Country, with the power to hear appeals and with original jurisdiction over serious criminal offences.
The court system was unified under the judicial charter of 1833.
The result was a set of institutions based on English principles, especially the ideas of the utilitarian Jeremy Bentham.
The lower-level courts were abolished and the remaining judicial powers of Kandyan headmen were eliminated.
A reconstituted Supreme Court was given authority over the entire island, with original criminal jurisdiction for serious crime.
District courts, with exclusive geographical jurisdictions, were established to try all lesser offences.
The Queen's Advocate, a civil servant, had overall  responsibility for the legal branch of administration, but the Supreme Court was entirely independent.
The district judges of Colombo and Kandy later came to have a similar independent status.
Other judicial officials were transferred at will by the Governor, from station to station and department to department, but the Colombo secretariat could not interfere with specific judgments.
The Dutch courts applied Roman-Dutch criminal law in the Low Country, though it is unlikely that it was adhered to by headmen or officials trying minor offences.
It was British policy to enforce Roman-Dutch law, as amended by British proclamations.
In practice, Roman-Dutch criminal law was gradually replaced by English law because British judges were influenced by English precedents and modes of reasoning.
A similar process took place in Kandyan districts.
There the indigenous law was unwritten, and although the Board of Kandyan Commissioners, relying on assessors, at first attempted to enforce Kandyan criminal law, within fifteen years of annexation the same mixture of Roman-Dutch and English law which prevailed in the Low Country was generally applied.
The reforms of 1833 affected only the structure of the courts, not the law which they administered.
Utilitarian ideas such as codification and the setting of fixed punishments for specific offences were not implemented.
In 1852 the demise of Kandyan law was made formal by legislation which extended all Low Country criminal law to Kandyan districts.
In the decade after 1833 it became apparent that the district courts, which had original jurisdiction in all civil cases and most criminal ones, were unable to handle the litigation brought before them without long delays.
They were clogged with cases because there was no procedure for summarily trying minor offences.
As a result a third, lower tier to the court system, the police courts, was added in 1843.
In an effort to avoid delays brought about by the technical procedures of the district courts, police court decisions were not subject to appeal and lawyers were barred from appearing in trials.
Verdicts were, however, subject to‘review’ by the Supreme Court on six rather ill-defined grounds, a procedure which led to much confusion.
In 1854, appeals were introduced on matters of law and lawyers were allowed to practise in these courts.
These reforms were partially aimed at reducing the influence of court officials and other persons who served as unofficial lawyers.
The legal profession served as a means of upward social mobility for Burghers, Sinhalese and Tamils.
Before 1833 only British  and Burgher lawyers were allowed to practise in Colombo courts, but this restriction was lifted by the reforms of that year, and by the mid-century few British lawyers practised in Sri Lanka.
Although much litigation was carried out without professional legal advice, the bar grew quickly, and the more competent lawyers were able to command high fees.
There were two official categories of legal advisers: advocates and proctors.
Both were certified by the Supreme Court.
Higher standards were set for advocates, who dominated Supreme Court business.
They had to satisfy the judges that they had had the education of an English gentleman.
In the nineteenth century the judicial system did not depend on either the headmen or the police for the initiation of criminal prosecutions, but on private individuals.
A man who felt he had been victimized by a crime and who wished to have the perpetrators punished could accuse the person or persons whom he suspected before either a justice of the peace or a police magistrate.
If he did not suspect any particular person, he had no redress.
In most districts the same person held the posts of justice of the peace and police magistrate, but it was necessary for the complainant to determine in which capacity he wanted this official to act.
The distinction was based on the seriousness of the offence.
The magistrate summarily tried cases in the police court, where the maximum punishment was three months imprisonment, twenty lashes, a fine of five pounds, or any two of the above.
The justice of the peace, on the other hand, did not himself try cases.
If, after examining witnesses, he was satisfied that there was sufficient evidence for a trial in one of the superior courts, he sent details of the case to the Queen's Advocate, who made the decision on whether or not it would go forward.
District courts had the power to inflict punishment of up to one year in prison, fifty lashes, a fine of one hundred pounds, or any two of the above.
There was no formal limit to the punishment which the Supreme Court could impose, though in practice the death sentence was passed only in cases of murder.
The law did not specify which court should try most specific offences.
The criterion for the complainant, and then the judicial officials, was the amount of punishment which the crime warranted.
The initial decision of the complainant was not without importance, for if, after hearing the evidence of witnesses, the justice of the peace decided that the case was not serious enough to be sent to a superior court, he could not then and there try it as a police court case.
Instead the complainant, defendant, and  witnesses had to come back and testify all over again, usually on a different day, when the official was acting in his capacity as a magistrate.
Similarly, a serious case brought before the magistrate had to be presented a second time before the justice of the peace.
The distinction between these two offices, usually held by the same person, was an important cause of delay.
To add to the confusion, in many smaller localities one official held not only the two posts just discussed, but was the district judge as well.
Some officials objected to this arrangement in principle, but the government felt that the cost of additional personnel was too great to warrant changing it.
The justice of the peace did, however, have to justify any decision to commit a case to a superior court.
He sent a transcript of the testimony to Colombo, where it was perused by a secretariat official who might ask for more evidence before accepting or changing the local recommendation.
All Supreme Court cases and selected district court cases were prosecuted by a government official.
Most reported crimes were brought before police courts, many of which were located in the plantation areas of the Central Province (Map 2.1).
In 1868 there were thirteen police court sites in the Central Province, or one for every 40,000 inhabitants.
In contrast, there was only one police court in Kurunagala district, which had a population of over 200,000 but very few Europeans.
Although regular use of itinerating magistrates was made in some areas later in the century, many villages remained thirty or forty kilometres from the nearest police court, and some were much
Although all testimony was recorded on paper in English, the procedure of police court trials was relatively simple.
Both the complainant and defendant could summon witnesses who were subject to both cross-examination and re-examination.
The magistrate could then decide the case on the spot, though postponements were often granted on the grounds that witnesses were missing.
After 1854 appeals to the Supreme Court on matters of law were allowed.
The right of appeal on questions of fact was introduced in 1874, but restricted after 1885.
Although the formal rules of police courts were almost entirely of British origin, in practice the atmosphere was influenced by climatic and other considerations.
John Capper, a journalist, contrasted the ambience of Colombo Police Court with the minor courts he had known in Britain: ‘How different from the vicinity of the law courts at home!
There, everything is cool, solemn, silent, orderly,; here, it is all glaring sunshine, dirt, noise, dust and effluvia.’
There were thirteen district courts in Sinhala Sri Lanka (Map 2. 1).
District judges, unlike many magistrates, were experienced officials.
Cases could be tried with the aid of assessors, or local men of respectable income or property, but this option was rarely exercised in criminal cases.
The judge determined the guilt of the accused, and passed sentence, but the opinions of any assessors were recorded for the benefit of the Supreme Court in case an appeal was made.
Witnesses were examined according to the same procedure as at police court trials.
Also like police court trials, witnesses had to pay their own expenses, even though they sometimes had to travel long distances, especially when a trial was postponed several times.
Although some officials recommended that the expenses of the district court witnesses be paid by government, nothing was done, apparently for financial reasons.
Supreme Court cases were decided differently.
The British introduced trial by jury to the Low Country in 1811, and this institution was retained after 1833.
Though cases were presided over by one of the three judges of the court, questions of fact were decided by a jury of thirteen men.
The judge instructed the jury about legal points.
Four criminal sessions, each of which usually lasted from one to three weeks, were held annually at Colombo, and at least two sessions were held each year at Kandy and Galle.
Cases were tried at other localities according to the geographical distribution of serious crime.
At first potential jurors were classified by ethnic group and caste, but after the 1840s they were assigned to one of three lists which were drawn up on the basis of language capability.
Jurors had only to be ‘of sufficient intelligence and respectability’, but in 1 868 a financial test was instituted in order to exclude low-status white-collar workers.
When a Sinhala or Tamil jury heard a case, all proceedings not in the language of the jury were translated for its benefit.
Since the official language of the court was English, all testimony in other languages was translated regardless of the composition of the jury.
In practice most cases were tried with an English jury.
Except in the Central Province, Europeans were almost always in a minority.
The judicial changes implemented in the first half of the nineteenth century represented a break with many eighteenth-century practices.
New distinctions were established between executive and judicial power, and between civil and criminal law.
More importantly, the British courts were founded on the acceptance of abstract and impersonal principles which had no firm base in Sri Lanka.
In pre-British times judges had made decisions on  the basis of all known information.
Some officials recognized that the new system was alien, but expected that the judicial system would act as a progressive force which would promote the adoption of British norms about justice.
Despite some improvements in judicial efficiency, this hope was little realized.
Government Policy towards Policing
Though the judicial system itself was symmetric in structure, the administration of law and order was unwieldy and uncoordinated.
The police, headmen and courts did not work together.
In the early years of British rule the government paid far more attention to the judicial system than to either the police duties of headmen or the establishment of a regular police force.
This bias was no doubt at least partially a reflection of the haphazard organization of policing in Britain itself at the beginning of the nineteenth century.
The high level of criminal litigation which ensued was taken as a sign that this policy had failed.
In the late nineteenth century efforts were made to build an organized system of policing, but rural districts remained largely unpoliced until the twentieth century.
Headmen were relied on in rural areas.
They had wide powers to arrest persons suspected of committing such crimes as theft, burglary, and serious assault.
In theory all arrested persons were supposed to be brought before a judicial official within twenty-four hours, but in practice more time often elapsed.
At the village level the same person generally handled police and revenue matters in Kandyan districts, while different officials performed these duties in the Low Country.
Police headmen in Sri Lanka were not equivalent to the village watchmen of India, who were of low social status.
In Sri Lanka the police role of the headman was not a profession, but an additional source of authority for a village notable.
Since the headmen were neither recruited, trained nor even supervised in a consistent manner, it is not surprising that they were generally inactive when it came to dealing with crime.
Their main duty was to arrest wanted persons; they rarely reported or investigated crime during the early years of colonial rule.
There was little incentive for them to be active in this regard, for only a few high-level headmen received a salary.
Headmen were inclined to use police powers in their own interests rather than act as bureaucratic tools.
There was also a regular police force, but during the first half of the nineteenth century it was small, poorly paid, and limited largely to Colombo, Galle, and areas where there were coffee plantations.
Its main task was not to detect or prevent crime, but to maintain order on public occasions, perform guard duties and apprehend well-known criminals.
In 1852 an official report stated that the ‘uselessness of the force, as at present constituted, is too notorious to need much remark.’
It was not until the 1860s that a determined effort was made to expand the police and to use it as an instrument to suppress crime.
This move stemmed largely from the perceived success of the police in Britain and India.
George W. R. Campbell was recruited from India to reorganize the force.
He remained in Sri Lanka as Inspector-General for twenty-five years.
Under Campbell's leadership the sanctioned strength of the force rose from around 700 in 1866 to over 1,600 in 1879.
Its duties were largely urban; over half the force was stationed in Colombo and there were also large contingents in Kandy and Galle.
The police normally went to villages only to investigate specific serious crimes, usually homicides, but even then they were not always involved.
They could also be temporarily stationed in villages at the expense of the inhabitants as punishment for unsolved crimes.
The police had no organizational link with the courts, despite the designation of the lowest tier of the judicial system as ‘police courts’.
The duties of the ordinary policeman, who was known as a constable, were arduous, at least in Colombo.
He was supposed to be on his beat twelve hours out of every twenty-four, one week by day, the next by night.
Men were sometimes on the beat twenty-one out of twenty-four hours during the transition between day and night duty.
Campbell pointed out that London policemen worked only eight hours each day and were given one day off each week.
He wanted to hire more men and reduce the number of hours each constable spent on duty.
But the necessary funds were not forthcoming and the beat system established by Campbell soon after he took charge remained unchanged for over twenty-five years.
Men were often punished or dismissed for failing to remain alert while on duty.
About one-fifth of the force had to be replaced each year, partially because many recruits were found unsuitable.
The career of Ibrahim Nanno represents a not untypical career pattern among constables in the second half of the nineteenth century.
He joined the force as a third-class constable in 1870 at  the age of nineteen.
At first promotion came regularly.
He reached the second class in 1873 and became a first-class constable in 1876, when twenty-four years old.
As a result of these promotions, his salary rose from 15 to 22.50 rupees a month.
But in April 1878 he was cautioned for being intoxicated while on duty, and when discovered drunk in 1882 was reduced to the second class.
Six years later, having ‘consorted with a person of bad character’ while stationed in a low-caste Sinhalese village, he was transferred to Colombo at his own expense.
There, in 1892, he was found asleep and drunk on his beat, and was reduced to third-class constable and the fifteen rupees salary upon which he had started over twenty years earlier.
In 1895 he was promoted back to the second class, but two years later, at the age of forty-five, a medical board found him unfit for duty ‘due to chronic rheumatism and cracked feet’.
All in all, he had been departmentally punished on twenty-seven occasions, an average of once for each year he had spent in the force.
Nanno received a pension, as did all policemen who joined when under thirty years of age and who served for twenty or more years.
The prospect of a pension must have attracted many men into a profession in which prestige was low, the pay not particularly good, and discipline strict.
Another inducement was income from tips and bribes, the importance of which will be discussed later in this chapter.
Campbell's force was not ethnically representative of the island's population.
Though the Sinhalese accounted for over two-thirds of Sri Lanka's inhabitants, they made up less than one-third of the force.
This disparity was not as striking as it first appears, for the Sinhalese were proportionately less prominent in urban areas, where most policemen were stationed.
Nevertheless, the paucity of Sinhalese undermined the force's authority among the majority ethnic group.
Not only were the Sinhalese underrepresented, but only about half the Sinhalese in the police professed Buddhism.
Equally important in setting the force apart was the strong representation of Malays, who accounted for only 0.3 per cent of the population, but for nearly one-third of policemen.
Many Malays were descendants of men first brought to Sri Lanka as soldiers in the earlier days of colonial rule.
After the disbandment of their regiment, the police became a customary occupation for Malays.
The ethnic and religious composition of the force varied greatly according to rank.
A majority of the small number of officers, those whose rank was superintendent, assistant superintendent or  inspector, were British or Burgher.
Malays made up between forty and fifty per cent of sergeants.
The group least represented in proportion to its population, Sinhalese Buddhists, accounted for an even smaller proportion of sergeants than they did of the force as a whole.
Campbell was aware of the disadvantages of having so few Sinhalese in the police, especially in higher posts.
Soon after arriving in Sri Lanka he pointed out that ‘one of the great wants in the Ceylon Police is the want of officers in the rank of Inspectors who have family or personal influence among the native community.’
In order to fill this lacuna he hired three Sinhalese ‘of good family’.
They were not required to wear normal police uniform, or to cut their hair short, both of which were considered demeaning.
The experiment was not a great success, though all three stayed in the force for some time.
Despite Campbell's efforts, there remained a general dissatisfaction with the ‘criminal state’ of the island.
Judicial statistics, which were compiled more systematically as time went by, continued to show a high number of offences.
In the late 1880s there was a spate of burglaries in Colombo.
A. H. Giles, an officer in the Bengal police, was called to Sri Lanka in 1888 to investigate policing in the island.
Though his subsequent report did not directly criticize Campbell, it did attack the overall structure of the police and judiciary.
Giles wanted to see the judicial and revenue branches of government drawn more closely together on the Indian model.
Above all, he sought to bring the headmen, or ‘village police’, fully into a police structure which would cover the entire island.
Although Giles's suggestions concerning the judiciary were not adopted, his report served as the basis for police reform.
Campbell and his higher-ranking colleagues were forced to retire.
All were over fifty-five years old.
Giles was critical of the stagnation in the upper ranks of the force; of four provincial superintendents, two had held their position since 1871 and the other two since 1873.
He wanted talented members of the civil service to take temporary appointments in the police, but though agreeing in principle, the government could not spare officers from revenue and judicial work.
In any case, the police did not offer a high enough salary for any but the most inexperienced official.
Instead, young gentlemen were hired from England.
Unfortunately their quality did not prove to be high.
The organization of policing was fundamentally changed.
The new system, which was implemented in 1892, took away from the  Inspector-General direct control over the force.
Henceforth, he commanded only the police in the city of Colombo.
Elsewhere government agents took charge, with the Inspector-General retaining responsibility for promotions and discipline.
As headmen were also under the authority of government agents, it was hoped that the two groups would begin to work together.
Magistrates were given a more active role.
Giles's proposal to make them subservient to government agents was rejected, but they were given some responsibility for supervising the work of both the regular police and the headmen, who were now designated the ‘rural police’.
For the first time headmen were supposed to report all crime directly to the magistrate, who was in turn required to record the case even if there was no specific person accused.
Magistrates also had to state their reasons for dismissing a case.
Previously no distinction had been made between acquittals, cases which were dismissed because there was no evidence that the accused had committed the crime, and cases dismissed because no crime had been committed.
The precise organization of the rural police varied from province to province.
In some districts revenue officials made energetic efforts to turn headmen into active policemen.
In the Western Province forty-four village sergeants were hired and each was paid fifteen rupees a month.
Though this salary was the same as that of a third-class constable, the lowest police rank, village sergeants were much better off because they served in their own localities, were not subject to discipline, and had other income.
It was their duty to report all crime in their areas, and to investigate serious cases.
After a few years this scheme was pronounced a failure.
A. R. Dawson, the Government Agent, noted in his diary that ‘the work of the village sergeants is simply ludicrous.
They do nothing but draw their monthly salaries.
So the position was abolished, and official efforts were concentrated on unpaid police vidanes , whose jurisdictions covered several hamlets or a village.
Each vidane was given forms in triplicate on which to record information about crimes.
A fund was established to reward headmen for good police work, but it proved difficult to manage properly.
If rewards were given for keeping a village free of crime, then cases were suppressed by headmen.
If it was known that a bad record led to the dismissal of a headman, then his enemies reported false cases.
In many districts headmen could not or would not undertake their new duties.
In Kandyan districts there had not previously been a specific class of headman assigned police duties.
The  headmen now made responsible thought police work beneath their dignity.
Another obstacle to the smooth functioning of the system was the geographical restrictions on each headman's authority; investigations often stopped on the border of an administrative division.
Perhaps more serious was the failure to understand, or accept, bureaucratic mores which were at the centre of the system.
The government tried to implement a ‘scientific’ approach to crime, but despite the exhortations of officials, headmen did not report crimes promptly.
A decade after the reforms were implemented, officials, especially in Kandyan districts, still complained that the new system was confusing and not understood by those who were supposed to work it.
There were few changes in the duties and conduct of the regular police in the years after Campbell's departure.
Outside Colombo the force was theoretically under the control of government agents who had many other duties and usually spared little time for the police.
Any esprit de corps the police had possessed disappeared.
One consequence was a significant increase in violence within the force.
Attempts were made to improve the public image of the police.
More Sinhalese Buddhists were hired; by 1900 they made up more than one-quarter of the force.
Recruitment was also restricted to certain castes.
Campbell had allowed low-caste Sinhalese to join, but L. F. Knollys, the new Inspector-General, accepted only Goyigamas, Karavas, Duravas and Salagamas.
After 1898 the latter two of these castes were also excluded, a fact which led to protests from élite Salagamas when it became generally known.
These changes did not lead to any change in popular perceptions of the police, partially because there were still few Sinhalese officers.
In 1905 E. B. Alexander, the Superintendent for the Southern Province, admitted that the police were not good at detection.
He noted that ‘officers of other nationalities, no matter how capable, have little chance at getting at secrets of a Sinhalese village.’
The problem was identical to that identified by Campbell forty years earlier.
There is little evidence that the new system led to increased cooperation between the regular police and headmen.
No effective mechanism was established to link the two groups.
Putting both the police and headmen under the control of government agents did not ensure that they worked together.
Headmen continued to feel socially superior to the regular police.
In 1904 Henry Blake, the Governor, decided that the system was inadequate.
He wrote to the Secretary of State for the Colonies that ‘the police system is  unsatisfactory and the regular police inefficient, if not corrupt, while for police purposes the unpaid headmen are equally untrustworthy.’
In 1906 the system of policing was again reorganized.
Overall control was returned to the Inspector-General, and for the first time the jurisdiction of the regular police was extended to cover entire districts.
Many new rural police stations were opened in the Western, Southern and North-Western Provinces.
In these ‘policed provinces’ crime was to be reported in the first instance to headmen who would in turn notify the police of serious offences.
The system was not intended to supersede the police role of headmen, but to complement and support it.
Minor crimes, including petty assault and the simple theft of articles worth less than twenty rupees, remained the responsibility of complainants.
Many headmen regarded the establishment of police stations with jurisdiction over their localities as a challenge to their own authority.
For at least a decade after 1906 relations between the police and headmen were often poor.
Many of those first placed in charge of rural posts proved unsuitable, and were dismissed for abuse of power.
Despite these difficulties, by around 1920 most headmen co-operated to some extent with the police.
Official attempts in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries to reform and strengthen the police duties of headmen were carried out at a time when the overall influence of headmen was on the wane.
New social groups, clerks, carters, traders, teachers and notaries, challenged their authority.
In Kandyan districts headmen had difficulty dealing with immigrants from the Low Country.
In coastal areas social mobility led some lower castes and classes to assert themselves against headmen.
In most districts there were factions opposed to local headmen.
The introduction of the police into rural areas further hastened the decline of headmen as a class.
Police constables and sergeants tended to address headmen in disrespectful terms, and the possibility of such humiliations dissuaded many of the more wealthy villagers from accepting the post of headman.
Under the energetic leadership of H. L. Dowbiggin, Inspector-General from 1913 to 1937, the police gained sophistication which may have given them a relative advantage over some lawbreakers.
The force expanded, working conditions improved, and for the first time a limited capacity for detection was developed.
Use was made of modern inventions, including fingerprinting, photography, automobiles and telephones.
By systematically analysing crime reports, the police were able to  ‘map’ outbreaks of crime and gain clues to the identity of the perpetrators.
Fowl thieves, burglars, and gang robbers were detected by this method.
Night patrols were started in some rural areas, and they sometimes caught burglars or cattle thieves red-handed.
The force also became more ethnically representative of the population.
The proportion of Sinhalese policemen passed the fifty per cent mark in the 1920s, and continued to rise thereafter.
The numbers of Malays and Burghers in the force remained greater than their strength in the population as a whole, but to a much lesser extent than earlier.
For political reasons British officers continued to hold about one-half of the senior posts.
Government Policy towards the Courts
There was a widespread feeling as early as the 1840s that the judicial system suffered from too much technicality and formality.
This view dominated government policy towards the courts in the later nineteenth century.
Officials sought to simplify the judicial process and clarify the criminal law.
The ensuing reforms were implemented piecemeal and did not fundamentally change the system, but procedure was considerably more summary by 1900 than it had been fifty years earlier.
An important innovation in judicial policy was set in motion in 1871 by the passing of legislation which authorized the Governor to establish village tribunals in designated districts.
The name of the new institution was misleading, for each tribunal covered many settlements.
The new courts were designed to relieve police courts of petty offences.
They normally tried cases to which only ‘natives’ were parties.
Sinhalese, of status equivalent to that of a mudaliyar or ratemahatmaya , were appointed as presidents of the tribunals.
The jurisdiction of the new courts was limited to petty theft and assault, malicious damage to property, cattle trespass and the violation of rules made by local government in matters such as irrigation.
The president and councillors were supposed to encourage an amicable settlement, but if they failed the president could convict wrongdoers and fine them up to twenty rupees.
Convictions could be appealed, not to any judicial authority, but to the government agent and then the Governor.
The tribunals were intended to provide a way for rural residents to settle disputes without legal formalities.
Unlike all other courts, proceedings were in Sinhala, not English.
The idea of village tribunals was attractive to many British officials who thought that they were resurrecting ancient village institutions.
Other officials, especially those who observed the operation of the tribunals in the Low Country, were more sceptical.
The Assistant Government Agent at Matara agreed that the establishment of village tribunals had led to a decrease in the number of police court cases, but asked ‘what good end is obtained by merely removing the scene of litigation from one set of courts to another, and doubling the amount of litigation in the process, and how it is supposed that by increasing litigation twofold the peace and harmony of the district is secured, and litigation robbed of all the rancour and bad feelings it engenders in the ordinary courts?’
In 1904 another official described the tribunals as ‘mere schools for litigators’.
Despite such criticisms, the British found these courts useful and by the end of the century they had jurisdiction over most rural areas.
It was certainly cheaper for government to try cases in village tribunals than in police courts.
When village tribunals were first established it was felt by some officials that they would reduce the power of headmen.
It was argued that many disputes which were previously resolved by headmen would be taken to the new courts.
In fact village tribunal presidents were often relatives or allies of chief headmen, who usually controlled appointments of other headmen.
Over twenty years after the introduction of village tribunals the Government Agent at Kurunagala discovered that presidents refused to accept any criminal plaints not endorsed by the village headman.
Thus the headman had a veto over criminal prosecutions for the petty offences over which village tribunals had exclusive jurisdiction.
Foreseeing this enhancement of the authority of the traditional élite, parts of the upwardly-mobile Low Country population, including many Karavas from Moratuva, opposed the establishment of tribunals.
The 1880s saw a major effort to clarify the law and simplify court procedure, both of which were seen as essential prerequisites for improving the efficiency of the judicial system.
The law of criminal procedure was reformulated and brought together in one ordinance, and a penal code partly based on Indian law was adopted.
The intention of this legislation, which was implemented in 1885, was to reduce technicality and speed up justice.
The office of justice of the peace was abolished.
Its functions and those of the police magistrate were consolidated in the office of police magistrate.
The complainant no longer needed to make a  distinction between petty and serious crime; all criminal charges were now brought before the same official.
The magistrate decided whether to try a case summarily or to set in motion the process of committing it to a superior court.
He was also given the power to convict on any charge within his jurisdiction, even if another offence was originally specified on the charge sheet.
The penal code listed all criminal offences, thereby eliminating the position of Roman-Dutch criminal law as the residuary criminal law of the island.
Judicial officials were given more guidance as to punishment than had been available previously, but a great deal of discretion remained.
The maximum penalty for an offence was set higher than the maximum punishment that the court which usually tried the crime was empowered to inflict.
For instance, the maximum period of imprisonment for simple theft was three years, much longer than the six months term which a police court could now impose.
If the magistrate before whom an accusation of theft was initially brought felt that three years imprisonment was appropriate, he had to commit the case to the Supreme Court.
Humanitarianism also influenced the reforms.
Hangings were henceforth carried out behind prison walls; the public spectacle which executions had provided came to an end.
The frequency and severity of corporal punishment was also reduced.
James Longden, who was Governor from 1878 to 1883, thought that ‘the number of lashes allowed is positively inhuman’, and that ‘the physical condition of most natives makes this a more serious punishment than in England.’
The power to inflict this punishment was taken away from police courts, and district courts were limited to ordering a total of twenty-five lashes.
These reforms were the culmination of a gradual movement throughout the nineteenth century towards a decrease in the use and severity of corporal punishment.
This trend was partially reversed in the years after 1885 because many officials felt that the prison regime was too lenient and that flogging was the only effective deterrent to crime.
In the 1890s magistrates were given the power to order corporal punishment as punishment for specific offences.
Though flogging was restricted, the length of sentences which lower courts were empowered to impose was doubled.
Police courts could impose sentences of up to six months, and district courts of up to two years.
These changes were aimed at speeding up trials and saving government expenditure by allowing some cases which would have previously been tried in the Supreme Court moved to district courts, and by having other cases tried by  police courts instead of district courts.
The increased use of lower courts met with the general approval of officials.
It was felt that prompt punishment ‘has a better deterrent effect than a sentence of longer imprisonment.’
In the 1890s there was periodic tinkering with judicial policy.
Officials felt that the procedure for trying criminal cases was still too complicated.
In 1892 magistrates were given the power not to record testimony when the sentence was not to exceed imprisonment for one month or a fine of twenty-five rupees.
Another ordinance allowed a magistrate to try summarily cases which he would normally commit to the district court, if he himself was also the district judge.
A more ambitious change sought to require complainants to present their cases orally to the magistrate, instead of through a written statement composed by an intermediary.
Since the establishment of British rule certain persons, called outdoor proctors and petition-drawers, had made a living by helping people in their dealings with the administration, including the courts.
The outdoor proctor or tout sought business and acted as an agent for petition-drawers and proctors.
The petition-drawer acted as an unofficial lawyer.
A potential litigant sometimes went through three persons: the tout, petition-drawer and proctor.
Proctors had to give up to twenty to fifty per cent of their fees for custom received through petition-drawers.
Not that an official proctor was necessarily called upon to take up the case; often clients received only the less expensive advice of petition-drawers, who drew up as many as ninety per cent of all criminal plaints.
Petition-drawers and outdoor proctors were often regarded with distaste by officials, some of whom blamed them for fostering perjury and false cases.
One official described outdoor proctors as men who ‘hover about the streets leading to the courts, like so many ill-omened birds of prey, from early morning till late at night, and who have no trade or legitimate calling but who subsist by swindling.’
Many officials believed that ‘as a rule, men of inferior or no education and of low morals resort to petition-drawing as a means of livelihood.’
Part of this negative image may be attributed to the general British dislike of South Asians who had acquired some knowledge of English and who followed some Western customs, but who had not fully assimilated the values of an English gentleman.
Nevertheless, petition-drawers did not have a particularly good reputation among Sinhalese.
The Buddhist-managed Lakrivikirana divided them into two categories.
The smaller group was literate in English, Sinhala  and Tamil, and performed its duties well.
The members of the larger group charged lower fees but had a poor knowledge of English.
The relationship between these men and their clients was likened to that between a cobra and its prey.
When the government, with the intention of circumventing petition-drawers, proposed legislation to require all criminal plaints to be presented personally, some judicial officials argued that not all petition-drawers were dishonest, and that they served a function in the judicial system because there were too many complaints for magistrates to settle without help.
The fees charged by lawyers were said to be too high for ordinary people to afford.
One senior official believed that the legislation would in any case fail in its object of circumventing intermediaries: ‘Witnesses will still be tutored.
The Magistrate will record the complaint in the words of the party — as he has been instructed by the outdoor proctor — and the case will then go on, subject to the same conditions as at present.’
As an alternative a licensing system was proposed.
Despite this opposition, the government went ahead and enacted legislation which required magistrates to hear all complaints orally.
A Sinhalese member of the Legislative Council thought that magistrates would have difficulties carrying out the spirit of the legislation: ‘A crowd appears in the Police Court in the morning and unless plaints are presented and the names called out it will be somewhat difficult for the Magistrate to ascertain who are the people who have come to offer plaints and it will depend on some minor Court official or the peons as to who are admitted to the precincts of the Court.’
The Attorney-General replied that the magistrate could stand before the crowd and shout for the complainants to come forward and then interview the men who had done so.
Other changes in judicial policy at the end of the nineteenth century were the result of a shift in European legal thought which placed more emphasis on the identity of the convicted person, as opposed to the actual offence, when determining punishment.
Legislation was passed in 1891 which sought to differentiate between first-time and repeating offenders.
Magistrates and judges were given the power to release upon probation for good conduct first offenders who had committed an offence not punishable by more than three years imprisonment.
The legislation was felt to be a success, for in 1898 the types of crimes covered by it were expanded.
Around the turn of the century about twelve per cent of persons sentenced to imprisonment were released under this law.
While provision was made to treat first offenders leniently, other legislation was passed to ensure that ‘habitual criminals’ received harsher punishment.
This category was first defined officially in 1894.
Legislation was passed which required that persons who had been sentenced to an aggregate of more than three months imprisonment during the past seven years be committed to a superior court when charged with another offence.
The definition of an habitual criminal was altered in 1897 and again in 1899, when the time limit was dropped and two or more convictions with an aggregate of imprisonment of over six months became the standard.
Habitual criminals were also required to report once a month to a police station after they were released.
In addition, district courts were given the power to imprison these men for up to four years.
Thus the maximum term of imprisonment which could be inflicted without a jury quadrupled between 1884 and 1899.
In the twentieth century the focus of government policy shifted from the judiciary to the police, and few changes were made in the structure or procedure of the courts.
The main innovation was the gradual increase in the number of Sri Lankan magistrates and judges.
After around 1910 the proportion of Sri Lankans in the civil service, which had long hovered around ten per cent, began to increase.
Most were routed into judicial rather than revenue appointments.
The proportion of Sri Lankan judges received a further boost in 1923 when it was decided to fill most posts from the local bar, and by 1930 eighteen of forty-two appointments were held by lawyers.
These men were thoroughly anglicized, and did not necessarily run their courts differently from their British counterparts.
The Colonial Administration in Practice
Despite the widespread impression that many court cases were either false or trivial, the judicial system was not regarded as illegitimate.
Far from shunning the courts, Sri Lankans made what very often seemed to the British excessive use of them.
During the early years of British rule many officials observed that there was a high level of both civil and criminal litigation.
The earliest comprehensive statistics, which were compiled in the 1860s, indicated that about seven or eight per cent of the population were accused of some criminal offence each year.
Not all of these charges may be taken as evidence of ‘litigiousness’, for one-quarter  to one-third of prosecutions were for regulatory offences, such as gambling and tax evasion, which were normally prosecuted by the police or other government agencies.
The overall level of criminal litigation dropped in the late nineteenth century.
This trend was largely the result of changes in government policy.
In 1872, when a fifteen cent stamp fee for criminal plaints was instituted, the number of police court cases immediately fell by one-third.
The simplification of criminal procedure also may have discouraged false cases because defendants were put to less inconvenience when the charge had little or no evidence to substantiate it.
In the 1880s and 1890s around five to six per cent of the population were accused annually, about one-third of them in village tribunals.
There was a large increase in the total number of criminal charges in the early twentieth century, but, most of these offences were minor regulatory infractions, such as traffic and safety violations.
A large proportion of this increase was also accounted for by the new offence of failing to send children to school, which in 1920 accounted for nearly one-quarter of all criminal cases.
When one considers that relatively few women were accused, and that a large proportion of the population were children, it is clear that a remarkably high number of adult males, around one in five, were brought before the courts each year.
If one assumes that there was an average of one complainant and four witnesses for each two persons accused, over one-half of all men appeared in a criminal court as a defendant, complainant or witness every year.
Many others were involved in civil suits or attended court as spectators.
Officials compared the judicial statistics with those of India and found that there were proportionately several times more cases in Sri Lanka.
This difference cannot be explained by a higher level of prosecutions for regulatory offences.
Sri Lankans instituted charges of crimes against the person and property many times more frequently than did Indians.
There was no consensus about whether or not this high rate reflected a higher amount of crime, or if the difference could be attributed to false cases in Sri Lanka or the failure to report crime in India.
Some of the difference may be accounted for by the greater number of court sites and judicial officials in proportion to population and area in Sri Lanka than in India.
Both the official and non-official élites believed that many charges were not true, but there was no agreement about the proportion of false cases, or about the number of crimes which  were never reported.
There were also differences of opinion about the degree of malice involved.
A minority believed that a large number of cases were based on minor grievances, and that complainants rushed to court in the passion of the moment.
According to this view, these cases were dropped when tempers died down.
The courts served as a safety-valve, acting as an alternative to violence when emotions ran high.
The more general view was less charitable, placing more emphasis on the belief that Sri Lankans habitually lied in court.
Many officials believed that a large number of false cases were prosecuted, and that many were successful.
H. W. Gillman, a district judge, believed that ‘natives find both profit and amusement in bringing false cases, and that they have a natural talent for lying.’
J. H. Eaton, a magistrate, declared: ‘It almost goes without saying that there is hardly a case that comes before our courts, to which the natives are parties, in which this crime [perjury]is not more or less freely indulged.’
Henry Blake, who was Governor from 1903 to 1907, believed that ‘in the majority of cases tried in Ceylon the evidence is unsatisfactory, as there is not alone an utter disregard for truth, but an extraordinary ingenuity of invention.’
Another official thought that less than ten per cent of the criminal plaints filed at Negombo were true.
The available statistics offer some support for the allegations that there was much perjury.
Not only was the number of court cases higher in Sri Lanka than in India, but the proportion of convictions to cases was much lower.
In the 1860s, less than ten per cent of accused persons were convicted.
Thereafter the conviction rate steadily increased, reaching twenty-five per cent or more early in the twentieth century.
This trend was partially because of increased efficiency on the part of police and judicial officials, but also because an increasing proportion of accused persons were charged with regulatory offences, for which the conviction rate was higher than for offences against the person or property, which were usually prosecuted privately.
The conviction rate for these latter offences rose from around five per cent in the 1860s to fifteen per cent in the twentieth century.
One reason for the low conviction rate was that a large number of cases were dismissed without trial, sometimes because the complainant did not follow through with the prosecution.
In the first half of the nineteenth century only one-fifth to one-quarter of all criminal cases were decided on the merits of the evidence.
Around the turn of the century, when the rate of litigation was lower and officials were less willing to allow complainants to drop  charges, about one-half of all cases came to trial.
Those which were dropped were not necessarily false.
Many were settled out of court.
It is also possible that magistrates gave defendants the benefit of the doubt when in the preliminary inquiry both sides produced witnesses who appeared unreliable.
Colonial officials put forth two related explanations for the prevalence of perjury.
One blamed the inherent ‘litigious’ nature of Sri Lankans, and in particular the Sinhalese.
The other pointed to ‘inappropriate’ institutions of government, arguing that the judicial system was too advanced for a backward people.
The first view was expressed in its extreme form by a frustrated magistrate: ‘Love of litigation is hereditary with the people, and is the very breath of their nostrils.
Wealth is only desirable in so far as it enables them to indulge in litigation, and the height of their ambition is to succeed in a case, especially if thereby their enemy is punished.’
In its more moderate form ‘litigiousness’ was linked with government policy.
British officials admitted that their institutions were not working, and attributed this failure to social conditions.
Some hoped that education would in time solve the problem.
Others proposed bringing the executive and judicial branches of government closer together, as in India, in the hope that a more authoritarian system would generate more respect.
This course was rejected partially out of inertia, and partially because it would have been strongly opposed by the English-educated Sri Lankan élite, who held judicial posts and dominated the legal profession, but who were excluded from the executive branch of government.
They rightly feared that they would not be appointed to judicial posts which carried executive responsibilities.
That Sri Lankans were involved in much litigation and that the judicial system was based on alien principles cannot be denied, but contemporaries did not successfully explain the link between these two facts.
If Sri Lankans were inherently ‘litigious’, the system of administration would not matter.
If the institutions were inappropriate, why were they not ignored?
To assert that both litigiousness and inappropriate institutions were the causes of perjury was tautological, for the tendency towards litigation was explained by the inappropriate institutions, and the inappropriateness of the institutions by the fact of too much litigation.
Late nineteenth-century judicial reforms did streamline court procedure, but they had little effect on the way in which the administration of law and order was popularly perceived.
The widespread perjury, especially on the part of accusers, demonstrated that government institutions enjoyed little moral authority.
Some British officials hoped that the judicial system would gradually gain acceptance and function as intended, but there was little opportunity for Sri Lankans to observe the principles which lay behind the rule of law.
Officials did not articulate these values in a way understandable to the people.
It was widely believed that middle and low-level government employees accepted gifts in return for favours.
There is much evidence that.
constables and sergeants of the regular police unofficially augmented their incomes.
In Colombo policemen often took advantage of municipal health, safety and traffic regulations in order to ‘tax’ carters, rickshaw drivers and others who made their living on the streets of the capital, and in the twentieth century bus drivers regularly bribed the police.
Many officials and others believed that police evidence before the courts was unreliable.
Accusations were also made against the police for active complicity in crime, but proof was difficult to come by.
In 1879 Campbell, the Inspector-General, became convinced that the Navalapitiya police were regularly involved in burglaries.
Neither were the higher ranks immune.
Inspectors, some of them Englishmen, were dismissed from time to time for accepting bribes or for other dubious practices.
Headmen did not consistently function as exponents of the rule of law when carrying out their duties.
Their positions were often used for their own benefit.
Few headmen willingly enforced the law against kinfolk or other allies.
Although many officials and newspapers proposed that they be paid a modest salary, only the chief headmen received official remuneration.
When headmen's posts became vacant, many were sold by the chief headmen to the highest bidder.
Village headmen used their control over minor administrative matters, especially the threat of reporting the illicit cultivation of chenas or the cutting of timber on Crown land, to receive a steady unofficial income.
Despite the exhortations of the British, they were very often reluctant to carry out police duties which brought them no profit.
Another obstacle to headmen serving as representatives of the principles behind the legal administration was their own participation in crime.
Occasionally a chief headman was discovered to be involved in organized extortion, requiring services and gifts from the headmen and people under his jurisdiction beyond those which were customarily expected.
Lower-level headmen were frequently involved in various offences, especially cattle stealing.
A particularly serious problem was the protection of  criminal relations by headmen.
When headmen were put in the position of choosing between protecting relations and carrying out their duties they chose the former.
Neither were judicial and court officials free from the taint of corruption.
Although there is no direct evidence that officials at the judicial secretariat in Colombo accepted bribes for dismissing or weakening criminal cases prosecuted in the superior courts, there were persons who claimed to act as agents for such transactions.
The taking of bribes by petty officials was more prevalent.
The Queen's Advocate, Richard Morgan, noted in his diary upon the death of the interpreter at the Kalutara courts that ‘he was a very worthy man, and, though an interpreter of a court, perfectly honest.’
In some courts a payment was needed to see the magistrate, or to ensure that one's case was heard promptly.
S. M. Burrows, when Government Agent at Kurunagala, described the Police Court clerks there as ‘utterly corrupt’.
Even physical access to a court hearing was not guaranteed.
One magistrate asserted that weak complainants sometimes had their cases dismissed because they were unable to push through the crowd which blocked the doorway into the court.
Corruption was not normally a problem among judges and magistrates, but in the early and mid-nineteenth century many of these officials were incompetent or excessively eccentric.
Even in the late nineteenth century few were talented and hardworking men.
Sir John Phear, who was Chief Justice for a short time in the late 1870s, felt that many magistrates ‘manifest as a rule want of knowledge of the practice of the Courts, of the business of their office, and of the law which they have to conform and carry out.’
In 1884 the Governor, Arthur Gordon, wrote that ‘District Judges are those who are too stupid or incapable to hold Revenue Offices.’
Ten years later the Attorney-General noted that judicial officers were chosen ‘because considered unfit for the revenue branch of the service’.
It was clearly the desire of young, ambitious civil servants to receive revenue as opposed to judicial appointments, for career prospects were much better in the revenue department.
The higher administrative posts in the colony were usually held by members of the civil service, but the top judicial positions were normally filled from the professional bar.
Leaving aside the question of the relative competence of revenue and judicial officials, many magistrates, especially those in small towns, were young, inexperienced, and had very little knowledge of the island and its peoples.
It was widely believed  that inexperienced magistrates were taken in by false evidence and relied too heavily on interpreters and clerks.
In theory civil service recruits were supposed to pass an examination in law and a first language test and then be attached to a senior police magistrate for six months.
In practice the demands of the administration made the latter appointment impractical.
Sometimes a young civil servant would be appointed to a subordinate revenue position immediately after passing the first law examination.
Two or three years later he might suddenly be appointed a full-time magistrate, even though by that time he had probably forgotten all of the law which he had learnt.
More subtle than corruption, but just as damaging to the judicial process, were variations in court procedure which must have seemed arbitrary to many Sri Lankans.
Magistrates were frequently transferred, and since they had little common training and virtually no supervision, they ran their courts differently.
Some spoke the local languages; others relied exclusively on court interpreters.
There were magistrates who appear to have relished ordering corporal punishment, but a minority thought it inappropriate and seldom included flogging as part of a sentence.
Some officials relied on the evidence of headmen; others believed that the intrigues of headmen were a major cause of crime.
The reputation of the individual magistrate was an important part of the popular image of a court, and this personal factor obscured the theoretical, legal consistency.
One indication of the differences of approach was provided in 1899 by F. R. Ellis, the Government Agent of the Western Province.
He compared the judicial returns of two magistrates who had jurisdiction over adjacent districts which were similar in their police arrangements and social composition.
One magistrate had declared fifty-one per cent of all cases false.
The other had classified only sixteen per cent of charges in this manner.
The proportions of convictions varied by nearly the same degree.
In the Supreme Court the guilt or innocence of the accused was decided not by the judge but the jury.
Again, there was much variation in attitudes.
L. B. Clarence, a Supreme Court judge, felt that juries often reached the wrong verdict and that they were inappropriate for Sri Lanka.
He argued that issues of fact were more difficult than in Britain because there was much false testimony and also because ‘precision of observation with regard to time and distance is quite unknown to a large proportion of witnesses.’
In addition to, it was difficult to find impartial jurors.
Among the Sinhalese and Tamils, Clarence argued, convictions  were difficult when the accused had a position of influence.
Burghers presented another problem: ‘With regard to the Eurasians, it is notoriously difficult, even upon the strongest evidence to induce a jury, in which the Eurasians are in a majority, to convict a Eurasian.’
Clarence also asserted that cultural and language differences could produce misunderstandings.
European jurors know little about Sri Lankans, while Sinhalese and Tamil jurors did not always know English well enough to understand the judge.
Some of these reservations about juries were shared by other officials, but the local bar would have objected strenuously to attempts to abolish or restrict the jury system.
Supreme Court judges often had little experience in Sri Lanka, and were unfamiliar with local customs and culture.
Juries served as a safeguard against this ignorance.
Though jury service was regarded as an important right by many members of the Sri Lankan élite, it was considered an irksome duty by the British planting community, and in order to reduce the burden of service the size of juries was twice reduced during the late nineteenth century.
The occasional release of prisoners due to technical errors or on points of law was another practice which reinforced a sense of unpredictability about judicial decisions.
Sri Lankans did not view some of the reasons behind the overturning of convictions as just.
An 1853 Supreme Court decision which set aside a conviction on the charge of ‘taking forcible and unlawful possession of the product of the Complainant's garden’ may serve as an example.
The proclamation under which the conviction had been obtained specified that in order to constitute an offence such an action had to be carried out ‘without the authority of a competent Magistrate’.
The conviction was reversed because the magistrate had failed to mention on the charge sheet that the alleged offence had taken place without such lawful authority.
On another occasion, Gordon was outraged when a Supreme Court judge released some prisoners because the magistrate had incorrectly described ‘theft of cattle’ as ‘cattle stealing’on the charge sheet.
These decisions may well have encouraged people to view criminal litigation as a game of skill.
Senior British officials did not always fully accept the rule of law.
A riot case in 1902 provides an example.
Several men were convicted by a jury even though the evidence which was laid before the court to support the charge was inconsistent.
The judge publicly rebuked the jury, and wrote to the Governor, J. West Ridgeway, asking him to pardon the convicted men.
Supported by  the Government Agent, Ridgeway refused to do so on the ground that it was commonly believed in the district that the men were guilty.
Over a year after the trial the mother of one of the convicted men sent a petition to Edward VII, quoting the remarks of the judge.
The Colonial Office asked Ridgeway for more details, including a transcript of the trial testimony.
Ridgeway strongly resisted freeing the men, though he admitted that the evidence placed before the court had not demonstrated their guilt.
His successor, Blake, was also convinced that the men were guilty, but agreed to release them.
Popular Ideas of Justice
Vijaya Samaraweera has pointed out that the ideal viewpoint for understanding the colonial legal system is that of the ‘typical litigant’.
He argues that the judicial system was established on principles alien to Sri Lanka, and that the use of English prevented people from speaking directly to magistrates.
He further asserts that during the nineteenth century litigants did not understand the way courts worked and were in awe of their proceedings, and that the intermediaries between litigants and justice, lawyers, court officials and petition-drawers, had little sympathy with or understanding for the average Sri Lankan.
This interpretation, which broadly parallels Bernard Cohn's argument that the Indian judicial system was manipulated because of culture conflict between British and Indian legal norms, does not explain why Sri Lankans used the courts so often.
It also fails to take into account the fact that a large number of men were familiar with court proceedings.
Although some of the more sophisticated lawyers may well have been culturally alienated from the mass of the people, these practitioners charged high fees and served only the élite.
Less successful proctors, petition-drawers and to a lesser extent court officials were dependent for their livelihoods on establishing a reputation for effectiveness.
Those who did not fulfil their clients' wishes lost income.
Samaraweera cites Leonard Woolf's novel The Village in the Jungle to support his characterization of the average litigant as ignorant of court procedure, but Woolf's novel was set in an impoverished, dying and atypical village in the dry zone.
In fact, the complainant in the case Samaraweera cites was knowledgeable about court procedure.
It was the defendant, an unusually ignorant peasant, who was in awe of the courtroom.
J. Vijayatunga's novel Grass For My Feet , set in a Low Country village fifteen kilometres from Galle, portrays more typical villagers who were familiar with the proceedings and personalities of the Galle courts.
It is not my intention to dispute Samaraweera's assertion that the newly-imposed colonial judicial system was alien to Sri Lankan values, but to explain how, in spite of this, the system proved popular.
It is necessary to show more precisely the link between ‘culture conflict’ and the operation of the legal system; otherwise the scholar in effect falls back on more subtle restatements of the litigiousness-inappropriate institutions tautology put forth by colonial officials.
It has already been noted that Kandyan and Roman-Dutch criminal law were only briefly valid in British courts.
No drastic changes resulted from their fall into disuse, for there was broad agreement between British and Sri Lankan norms as to what constituted crime.
Theft, robbery, assault, homicide and cheating were condemned by all.
In the words of an official who examined British records dating from soon after the conquest of the Kandyan Kingdom: ‘The most noticeable fact which strikes a reader of the minutes of the Board of Kandyan Commissioners, is the remarkable similarity between English ideas respecting various offences…and those of the Kandyans.’
As in all societies, there were some disparities between the official definition of crime and the views held by a large number of people.
Not all of these differences were primarily due to cultural confrontations between British and Sri Lankan values.
Coffee stealing from large plantations provides an example.
A police officer reported that ‘in some villages the young men are brought up from their childhood with the idea that according to ancient Kandyan custom the highland on which the [coffee]estate has been opened belongs by right of inheritance to the village below and in helping themselves they are only taking the rent of the ground.’
In contrast, the British regarded coffee stealing as a serious crime which threatened the prosperity of the colony.
This difference of opinion was not caused by cultural misunderstanding but by social conflict.
At issue was the right of the state to sell forest land to British planters.
The villagers and the British agreed in principle that ‘theft’ was wrong, but differing conceptions of property rights resulted in differing opinions about whether or not the taking of plantation produce was really theft.
Disputes between the state and the peasantry over the use of common land are not confined to colonial societies.
Other crimes which were not accepted as wrong by large numbers of people included tax evasion, gambling, the illicit sale and consumption of alcohol, and the use of Crown land for felling timber,chena cultivation and graphite mining.
None of these offences reflected any general clash between East and West.
Examples of clashes between the state and large social groups over similar economic and social issues may be found in many periods of European history.
Culture conflict over alcohol and gambling was probably.
stronger between those influenced by Buddhist revivalist ideas and the common people than between Sri Lankans and the British.
There were however some differences between British and Sri Lankan definitions of crime.
Some of these had to do with the importance of status distinctions.
Verbal abuse was traditionally a crime among the Sinhalese, but the courts stopped trying this offence in the 1820s in the Low Country and a decade later in Kandyan districts.
It is possible that many cases of petty assault were instituted as retaliation for verbal abuse.
More generally, colonial criminal law made little allowance for variations in caste status.
Under Kandyan law it was not an offence to kill a high-caste woman who had had sexual relations with a low-caste man.
In 1873, after a case of murder in which the victim was a Rodi, the Assistant Government Agent at Nuvara Eliya commented that ‘the victim was of the lowest caste, to which they [the Sinhalese]clearly believe that the principles of natural justice and law are not applicable.’
In the Kandyan Kingdom status was also a consideration when determining punishment.
Many Sinhalese viewed flogging as suitable for low-caste persons; it was considered much more demeaning if administered to a man of high caste.
Although the failure of the courts to take into account Sri Lankan ideas about status may have led some people to experience injustice, it scarcely explains the extensive perjury and high level of litigation.
Punishments administered by the colonial courts were more inflexible than those available through indigenous judicial procedures, but the change was neither sudden nor drastic.
Not only were the standard nineteenth-century British sanctions of fine, imprisonment and whipping commonly used during the eighteenth century, but the early British courts also punished offenders with branding, the pillory, banishment and the confiscation of property, all familiar punishments in Dutch and Kandyan times.
The main difference was that restitution, often viewed as appropriate by the Sinhalese, was not possible through the  colonial court system.
Conciliation and compromise were other important indigenous principles that carried official sanction in pre-British times but which were not accommodated by the formal institutions set up by the British.
In many parts of the Kandyan Kingdom both civil and criminal disputes could be taken to a gamsabhava , or village council which attempted to bring about an amicable settlement.
In the Low Country headmen often played a similar role.
Restitution could be required as a part of a punishment.
Alternatively it could be the result of negotiation between the complainant and defendant.
In the Kandyan Kingdom a man convicted for assault could be handed over to the complainant to be beaten, and thefts were often resolved by the return of the stolen property, plus further compensation.
In 1829 a convicted prisoner petitioned that he should have been allowed to free himself from a charge of robbery by rendering compensation.
Instead, he complained, he had been brought to court, fined, whipped and sentenced to two months imprisonment.
The structure of the British court system, combined with the lack of effective policing, ensured that compromise and restitution remained possible during the nineteenth century for all but the most serious crimes.
The institution and prosecution of criminal cases was the responsibility of the complainant.
The large number of court cases in which the complainant dropped the prosecution is an indication that many cases were settled informally.
Although gamsabhavas died out after the imposition of British rule, headmen and other intermediaries often negotiated compromises.
This state of affairs was not radically different from that preceding British rule, when adherence to the decisions of gamsabhavas and petty headmen was voluntary, dependent on social pressures.
In the Kandyan Kingdom dissatisfied persons could take cases to more formal courts.
Although it may be argued that the effectiveness of local social pressures not to take the crime to court declined as a consequence of colonial rule, this change was gradual, and therefore does not explain why the rate of criminal litigation was highest in the first half of the nineteenth century.
Trials by ordeal and by oath also continued to be available.
In 1899, when on tour in the interior of the Low Country, a British official discovered that trial by ordeal had been frequently practised in a village.
Supervised by a headman, people thrust their hands into boiling oil.
The official believed that it ‘was quite clear that there was a very general belief in the efficacy of the trial.’
The use of oaths in informal judicial procedures was  probably much more prevalent.
The president of a village tribunal in another Low Country district reported that peasants often made use of ritual to solve minor disputes.
In one such ritual the defendant touched his head three times in the presence of his child or mother.
This was taken as proof of his innocence, especially when the case had been brought on suspicion.
The gods could be publicly called upon to mete out justice.
On the night of 30 May 1871 burglars broke into a Buddhist temple in Kagalla district.
Not only were various articles stolen, but a clay statue was smashed, presumably as part of a search for valuables.
The next day the monk organized a procession with drummers and with the aid of a temple priest (kapurala ) appealed to the god of a nearby shrine to take revenge on the robbers by killing them.
Culture conflict between the British and Sri Lankans over the boundaries of crime, concepts of status and appropriate punishments was real, but it did not account for the general approach to the courts discussed earlier in this chapter.
These changes were no more disruptive than those which occur from time to time in non-colonial societies.
A more important difference between British and indigenous judicial norms lay in the means of determining guilt or innocence.
In colonial courts evidence had to be presented according to set procedures; otherwise it was declared invalid.
In contrast, the Sinhalese did not separate crime from either the social setting within which the action had taken place or from the social setting of the court itself.
Decisions by judges in the Kandyan Kingdom took into account all the available evidence, including the personal knowledge of the judge and others in attendance, which was likely to be extensive.
Sinhalese law was unwritten, and there was great flexibility both in its application and in judicial procedure.
When the evidence was inconclusive trials by oath or ordeal were legitimate options.
Though the refusal of one of the parties to a dispute to make an oath was admissible as evidence in British courts, these other ways of trying cases were generally ignored or disapproved of by the colonial authorities.
The technical way in which judicial decisions were made in the colonial courts was alien to indigenous tribunals but not to Sinhalese culture in general.
The most convincing way to interpret Sinhalese perceptions of the colonial courts lies not in the judicial proceedings of Dutch or Kandyan times, but in the cultural precedent set by perceptions of the gods and spirits of popular Buddhism.
There, power was exercised without any clear moral authority, sometimes in a quasi-judicial manner, as when cases  were decided by oath.
The supernatural beings of the Sinhalese could be manipulated by humans so as to influence events, but their ethical position was ambiguous.
Gods on the upper end of the divine hierarchy mostly granted favours, and punished humans only with good cause.
Demons and spirits had no such moral qualities.
Many of these beings could be manipulated through ritual, and illness or other bad fortune was often attributed to sorcery.
Although in theory sorcery could result in the target's immediate death, this variety was believed to be difficult and dangerous to carry out.
On the other hand, there was a general belief that less serious forms of sorcery resulting in illness, injury or other bad fortune, were commonly practised.
The different purposes of payments to influence the outcome of court decisions in Kandyan and British times illustrates the divergent approaches to these tribunals.
Bribes in the Kandyan Kingdom were paid to the judge, and it was accepted that both sides would contribute.
The gifts to the judge were one aspect of his knowledge of the case which would influence his decision.
In the colonial courts payments were not made to the judge, but to witnesses, court officials and lawyers whose task it was to manipulate the evidence placed before the judge in order to produce an outcome favourable to the client.
These payments were equivalent to those made to specialists who were skilled in influencing demons and spirits.
Important for an understanding of the way in which the colonial judicial system was used is an analysis of the ritualistic approach to demons and spirits.
What one said was neither true nor false.
Instead, it was either effective or ineffective.
A specific combination of sounds was ‘sacred to a certain demon, for whom it has an unaccountable, mysterious, and irresistible fascination, from which he cannot free himself.’
These sounds were incomprehensible to those without a specialist knowledge.
Similarly, court proceedings were in a strange tongue: English.
Seen in this light, the rampant perjury is explicable.
Witnesses often delivered their testimony according to a set speech.
For example, many cases of burglary followed the same pattern.
The thieves were said to enter the house at night, tie up the persons inside, threaten to murder them if they made any noise, dig up the floor to search for money, and so on.
Litigants, lawyers and petition-drawers told witnesses what to say in court.
In cases where there was no true evidence testimony tended to follow a set pattern.
When there was evidence, the prosecution had no compunction about strengthening it with lies.
Thomas Skinner, an  able government employee, wrote in 1849 that witnesses could ‘be obtained for evidence of any character.
Perjury is made so complete a business that cases are as regularly rehearsed in all their various scenes by the professional perjurer as a dramatic piece is at a theatre.’
Fifteen years later another official described the way an experienced litigant tutored witnesses: ‘He examines, cross-examines, corrects, and directs those in their parts who are to appear in the real court and give their testimony regarding what they know, or are to pretend to know, on the day of the trial’.
Cattle stealing, a crime which was often carried out at night and for which in many cases there was no true evidence, was particularly noted for testimony delivered in a set manner.
Sri Lankans did not believe that it was morally wrong to convict a known cattle thief on false evidence, and officials often complained that true cases were spoilt by complainants who added additional false evidence.
One experienced judicial official commented that evidence in cattle stealing cases might be recorded on a stereotyped printed form to be used by judges and magistrates.
Frederick Campbell, when District Judge at Tangalla, also noted that cattle stealing prosecutions were identical: ‘For example, no two parties ever happen to be together, and witness the removal of a stolen animal, one sees the removal at one, and another at another place, whilst a third sees the removal of the flesh.’
T. B. Panabokke, when Police Magistrate at Matale, was also suspicious: ‘The usual evidence was that so-and-so lost his animal and that two or three people at different places, when they went to turn water to their fields, met the accused driving the animals away.
The witness speaks to the accused, whereby the witness has an opportunity of recognizing the thieves and the animal with its brandmarks.’
E. M. Byrde, the Police Magistrate at Anuradhapura in 1896, noted that ‘cattle stealers do not go about, as witnesses would wish one to believe, removing stolen cattle in broad daylight or along frequented high roads by moonlight.’
The testimony of a witness in a case tried at Matara early in the nineteenth century illustrates the lack of plausibility of much court testimony: ‘I saw the two prisoners drive a head of cattle — It was in the high road — It was about two hours before dark — We asked them where are you going with the animal — Is this not the animal of the schoolmaster.
The prosecution case quickly broke down under cross-examination.
Such testimony was not necessarily regarded as morally wrong.
Richard Gombrich has pointed out that the idea of truth as an  autonomous secular value has no firm base in Sinhalese village society.
Telling the truth was recognized as desirable, but when truth came into conflict with a more important value, such as justice, it could easily be discarded.
Court testimony was seen as a formula to manipulate power and was evaluated on the strength of its effectiveness.
The morality of court testimony depended not on its truthfulness, but on the intention of the testimony.
False testimony in support of a just cause was moral; for an unjust cause it was immoral.
It many cases, especially those which were related to long-standing feuds, both sides no doubt viewed themselves as in the right.
In such instances court cases were like contests.
Persons who wished to manipulate the spirits and demons operated with the advice and help of specialists such as temple priests, exorcists, and mediums.
At the courts the same function was performed by touts, petition-drawers and proctors.
Both groups were somewhat disreputable.
There were also judicial parallels to the pitfalls to which a sorcerer was vulnerable.
A mistake in ritual rendered it ineffective and could be dangerous.
Similarly, a mistake in the testimony of the complainant or one of his witnesses caused the prosecution to fail, and a serious mistake could result in imprisonment for perjury.
The parallel also held on the side of the defence.
The intended victim of sorcery could take counter-measures by appealing to a supernatural being, and these counter-measures could in some cases transfer the intended harm to the person who had initiated it.
Similarly, the defendant could render the case ineffective by giving or arranging for skilful testimony in his defence, or he could file a counter-case which, if successful, would result in the punishment of the original complainant.
Just as the requirements of different spirits varied, so different results were obtained depending on the magistrate, judge or jury.
Villagers were well aware of the reputations of different officials.
In 1830 a monk living in Bentota, a village on the south-western coast, singled out George Turnour, an Englishman whose career had been in Kandyan districts, as an unusual arbitrator in that he understood Sinhala.
J. Vijayatunga, writing of the second decade of the twentieth century, noted that men in a Southern Province village gossiped about the various Supreme Court judges.
There were, of course, differences between taking a grievance to a supernatural being and instituting a case before a magistrate.
It is not my intention to argue that villagers confused the two  institutions, or that they thought magistrates and demons to be similar types of beings.
But sorcery provided the precedent which showed the Sinhalese the most effective way to approach the courts.
The most important difference between the two approaches ensued from the public setting of the court case.
The bringing of a criminal accusation was an open act, and its results were much more clear-cut because the punishment, if any, was publicly proclaimed.
In contrast, any misfortune which might happen to a person accused before a spirit might be attributed to sorcery.
It is likely that the courts, being more of a known quantity, were held in less awe than the spirits and demons.
The operation of the judicial system was subject to social change, and the various judicial and police reforms of the later nineteenth century did improve the efficiency of the courts and lessen technical aspects of court procedure.
Among the results of the changes were an increase in the conviction rate and a decrease in the rate of litigation.
Nevertheless, the fundamental perceptions by the people of the headmen, police and courts seem to have altered little.
The number of English-educated Sri Lankans who fully understood and even accepted the principles behind English justice was quickly growing, but this class did not propagate Western ideas to the masses.
Though many English-educated Sri Lankans were lawyers, in this role they fit in neatly with the role of the temple priest.
The lawyer was a technician, a man who manipulated the judicial system, and he took any case as long as the client could pay the appropriate fee.
Besides, a shift in the values of the people towards a desire for British-style justice would not automatically have brought about change, for the vested interests in and out of the administration would have continued to operate as before.
This is perhaps the situation found by observers of the legal process in post-independence South Asia.
The operation of the village tribunals, established in order to circumvent the formal proceedings of the other courts, shows the tenacity of the legal system once established.
The proceedings of these courts were in Sinhala, the judges were Sri Lankan, and lawyers were barred from appearing before them.
Yet it appears that litigators and judges behaved little differently than in police courts.
The wealthy, upwardly mobile, aggressive and sophisticated certainly benefited from the colonial administration of law and order, but they did not always have everything their own way.
In 1897 a petition from the North-Central Province noted that the local ratemahatmaya could influence the Government Agent  through his control of the information supplied to that official, but that he could not determine the outcome of court cases.
Judicial judgments were often dependent on the personality of the magistrate, or the composition of the jury.
The demons and spirits too could be arbitrary and unpredictable.
CATTLE STEALING
Cattle stealing was one of the more prominent crimes carried out in colonial Sri Lanka.
It was described as ‘the national crime’, the ‘great curse of the country’, and ‘the bête noire of the island’.
In rural areas it was often labelled the most important crime.
With varying degrees of vigour, officials tried to stamp it out.
The history of cattle stealing illustrates many aspects of rural life, including the effectiveness of the colonial state in asserting its authority, the impact of changes in land use on village society, and the importance of geographical variations when tracing economic and social trends.
The remarks of officials and newspaper correspondents provide detailed information about the crime.
A single comment by an official or letter to the newspaper may have reflected the perspective of the writer more accurately than reality, but when hundreds of such comments from different districts and time periods are examined, chronological and geographical patterns may be discerned.
The mobility of officials ensured that a variety of view-points are available for all districts.
Systematic crime statistics were not compiled during the first half of the nineteenth century, but there is some scattered evidence about the extent and frequency of cattle stealing during the early years of British rule.
Judicial statistics were first published in 1867, and appeared regularly after 1877.
They measured the number of cases brought to court by persons who alleged that their cattle had been stolen.
Early in the twentieth century these figures were replaced by police statistics which, unlike the earlier series, included cases for which there was no specific accused person, but excluded cases which the authorities believed were false.
This chapter traces the social and geographical patterns of cattle theft, and relates them to changes in government policy and the rural economy.
Administrative attempts to counter cattle stealing were generally ineffective in the nineteenth century, but the crime was not common everywhere.
Organized stealing thrived only in certain economic and social conditions.
In the 1890s it declined in one of its strongholds, Kurunagala district.
Some ten to fifteen years later a similar decline took place in the other area where it was prevalent, the interior of the Low Country.
Although improvements in policing contributed marginally to the decline of the stealing networks, structural change in the rural economy was a more decisive cause.
By the late 1920s cattle stealing was of little concern to the authorities, but it underwent a revival with the onset of the depression, and received further impetus in 1936 when various regulations designed to control the movement and sale of cattle were lifted.
The Economic and Social Position of Cattle
According to official statistics there were about 700,000 cattle in Sinhala Sri Lanka in 1870.
This figure rose gradually to over 1,000,000 by the turn of the century.
Since the human population increased by a similar rate, according to the statistics there was a constant proportion of about three persons for each head of cattle.
On the other hand, late nineteenth-century observers believed that the number of cattle was declining, not rising.
It is likely that the early figures in particular were underestimates, and that at the mid-century there were only two persons for each head of cattle.
In the twentieth century official statistics showed the number of cattle rising at a slower rate than the number of people.
There were two types of cattle, buffaloes and black cattle.
Buffaloes were generally stronger, but there was no necessary difference in their value, which depended on the size, strength, age and health of the individual animal.
The standard price of village cattle ranged from ten to twenty rupees a head, but those in poor condition could be worth as little as five rupees and bulls from India as much as eighty rupees.
By and large there were almost as many buffaloes as black cattle throughout Kandyan districts, but in the Low Country black cattle outnumbered buffaloes by at least two to one and in some districts by as much as ten to one.
There is no evidence of major long-term geographical shifts in the cattle population, but disease or drought could cause sudden local declines.
There were recurring epidemics of murrain and hoof and mouth disease, a particularly bad series of which decimated herds in the central highlands in the 1860s.
Murrain was usually fatal, while hoof and mouth disease permanently weakened animals without causing death.
Though a particular district might remain untouched for years at a time, there was  always disease somewhere on the island.
The epidemics of the mid-century began around 1840, and were probably transmitted by animals imported from India to transport goods to and from the early coffee plantations.
In the more normal years after 1870 annual mortality from disease was about one per cent.
Most village cattle were undernourished and unhealthy, and many contemporaries believed that their condition was getting worse.
In the words of one official, they were ‘miserable specimens of their class’.
Inadequate food and shelter and indiscriminate breeding, as well as disease, were blamed.
Because there was a shortage of pasture in many districts, cattle were allowed to wander freely to search for food, especially during the seasons when they were not wanted for agriculture.
Often they were not seen by their owners for weeks.
Some officials, especially in the lightly-populated dry zone, thought there were far too many useless cattle.
Since males were preferred for agricultural and draught purposes, cows rather than bulls were slaughtered for meat.
As a result there were more males than females, unlike Europe where milk was a relatively more important reason for keeping cattle.
No attempt was made at systematic breeding, whereby the weaker bulls were castrated when young.
Instead, bulls were not castrated until they were between four and seven years old.
An official report stated that ‘it too frequently happens that one cow will cause a furious stampede of bulls of all ages, the pursued animal suffering severe injuries in the protracted chase.’
There were many complaints that cattle infested roadsides, and their search for food often took them to rice fields and gardens.
One official labelled cattle trespass ‘the curse of the district’, and a mudaliyar complained that ‘at present there is not a single cow, or a buffalo which has not done more damage to the community at large, than double her worth to the owner.’
Throughout the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries land previously used for pasture was gradually given over to cultivation.
As more and more land was planted with cash crops, the lack of pasture became a serious problem in many districts.
Cattle, especially buffaloes, were used for cultivating and threshing rice.
Often buffaloes were driven back and forth, and their stamping was sufficient to soften and muddy the soil.
Otherwise a simple plough was used.
Black cattle, when they were used at all, ploughed light sandy soil.
In many districts cattle were thought essential for rice cultivation, and when there was a shortage fields lay fallow.
In parts of the Southern Province and  central highlands they were little used, and human power was employed instead.
When cattle were not used, groups of men beat the soil with hook-shaped implements called mamoties.
The poor physical condition of cattle hampered agriculture.
When the only cattle available were sickly, or when the cost of using cattle was high, human power became more attractive.
Though officials sometimes mentioned that poor peasants owned cattle, ownership was often concentrated and cattle usually had to be hired.
An example provided by a kachcheri mudaliyar shows that out of a crop which yielded sixty bushels of paddy, a little over eight bushels was paid for cattle hire.
Another observer thought hiring cattle cost smallholders one-third of their crop.
The island's transportation system depended heavily on cattle.
They were used for both pulling carts and carrying loads.
The introduction of railways did not lead to an immediate decline in the number of draught animals.
Cart transport survived both in direct competition on shorter routes and by taking goods to and from railway stations.
The steady improvement of roads and the general increase in commerce helped boost cart traffic.
Pack animals, called tavalams , continued to serve villages not on a road, and cattle were also used to pull carriages.
It is unlikely that there was any drop in the number of draught animals during the late nineteenth century, but the advent of motor vehicles in the twentieth century did reduce their importance.
Cattle were also a source of food.
Milk was not greatly used by villagers, partially because of the poor condition of the animals, but buffalo curd was considered a treat by those who could afford it.
Beef was more important.
Although among Buddhists there was a negative connotation attached to eating beef, contemporaries thought that more and more Sinhalese included it in their diets.
Muslims, Christians and low-caste Tamils had no compunctions about eating beef.
Demand was strongest in urban areas, especially Colombo, and the local supply was inadequate.
Of the nearly 18,000 head of cattle imported through Colombo in 1901, over sixty per cent were immediately sent to the slaughterhouse.
In 1912 an official estimated that as many cattle were sold for meat as for transportation and agriculture combined.
In rural areas ownership of cattle was also a barometer of status.
A government report stated that cattle were ‘property which Natives of all classes are ever anxious to possess’.
The owner of a large herd could use it as leverage over poorer neighbours who depended on his goodwill to hire out cattle during the agricultural seasons.
Some important headmen in Kandyan  districts owned hundreds of animals which were spread over several villages.
Ownership was somewhat less concentrated in the Low Country.
The Social Context and Incidence of Cattle Stealing
Patterns of cattle theft were largely governed by rational calculations on the part of the thieves.
The proximity of a market, the feasibility of holding the animal for ransom, the likely amount of profit to be earned, the value of the animal to thieves if kept for personal use or consumption, and the likelihood of discovery and punishment were among the considerations which were taken into account.
The great majority of thefts were carried out in the villages.
Cattle owned by the peasantry were easy to steal because they were rarely folded at night.
The difficulty for the thieves was not to gain possession of the animal, but to arrange for its profitable disposal.
Draught animals, though frequently more valuable, were stolen less often partly because they were more closely looked after, and partly because carters had a reputation as a violent class of men.
Draught cattle owned by households were more often subject to theft.
In Colombo they were sometimes openly attached to carriages and driven off.
Stolen cattle were often sold.
Usually the animals were spirited away some distance to prevent detection; many ended up at the Colombo slaughterhouse.
Others were purchased cheaply for agricultural use by villagers who were willing to do without the sale vouchers which were sometimes required by the government.
In some places such thefts were relatively casual.
One official wrote that the missing cattle ‘have probably been driven off some distance by some of the bolder spirits of the village, and hired out for the season to some not over-scrupulous cultivator, with instructions to let them go loose when done with.
The man whose own animals are missing when wanted has, in his turn, to ‘hire'’, and so there is a continuous round of misappropriation, to which the whole community is more or less privy.’
A variation was to try to extract a ransom from the owner for the return of the animal.
A Government Agent at Kurunagala thought that ‘the philosophy…is somewhat akin to that of dog-stealing in England.’
Cattle stealing for ransom was the most common form in many districts.
Officials often complained that the victim of cattle theft preferred paying the ransom to instituting  a court case.
Thieves who stole for ransom usually had some other use for the animal in case the owner was unwilling to pay for the recovery of his property.
Cattle could be stolen for the personal use of the thieves, often as beef.
One young magistrate commented: ‘An animal is stolen, killed, and consumed by half a dozen people in a single night — by morning not a vestige of the animal is to be found.’
Though in theory taking life was contrary to the tenets of Buddhism, it was considered more shocking to kill animals for other persons, or for their hides, than to kill for a meal.
Though most cattle thefts were committed by Sinhalese, Tamil plantation workers occasionally stole an animal in order to obtain beef.
Thieves could also take cattle for their own agricultural purposes.
Aelian King, when District Judge at Badulla, wrote that it was common ‘for the people, at the season for ploughing and preparing the soil for sowing, to help themselves without their neighbour's leave to the labour of their neighbour's buffaloes, which they find roaming at large.’
More serious were instances when a group of villagers raided a nearby district for cattle.
These expeditions were usually carried out in remote, sparsely populated areas.
Finally, cattle could be stolen for adventure, often tinged with a desire for revenge.
Some administrators drew parallels from British society.
G. S. Saxton thought that cattle stealing was ‘indulged in as pure mischief, as naughty boys used to wrench off knockers…. the idea being ‘Here is our enemy's bull, let us eat it'’.'
King believed that Kandyans regarded it as ‘an act of daring, largely partaking the character of a dangerous field sport’.
The excitement of cattle stealing was thought by Charles Liesching to be ‘as fascinating to the Sinhalese as to the Borderers of old’.
It is important in any analysis of a crime such as cattle stealing, in which individual cases are not of great significance, to assess the frequency of the offence.
If there had been very few cases, the crime would not have had much importance.
It has already been noted that contemporaries complained of the prevalence of this crime.
It is necessary to find out as precisely as possible how often it was committed, whether or not there were regional variations in its frequency, and if there were changes over time.
For the first half of the nineteenth century the evidence is sparse, but some generalizations may be made.
More detailed material is available for the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
Cattle theft was recognized as a problem in the early years of British rule.
In 1814 an official proclamation noted that ‘the  practice of Stealing and Privately killing Cattle has become very prevalent throughout the British settlements in Ceylon.’
In 1829 the Supreme Court judges wrote that cattle stealing was ‘very common’.
That same year judicial officials were asked which crimes were most prevalent in their districts.
Their replies indicated that cattle stealing was more common in the Low Country and Intermediate areas than in the Interior region.
Accounts from the 1840s and 1850s show that cattle stealing was thought by the authorities to be a serious problem in many areas.
Kurunagala and parts of the districts bordering it were singled out as suffering from an inordinate amount of cattle theft.
The judicial statistics of the late nineteenth century provide more precise information, but they must be carefully assessed in light of the social, economic and administrative settings which produced them.
Because the circumstances of many cattle thefts did not encourage people to initiate prosecutions, the statistics greatly underestimated the extent of the crime.
When the owner had no idea who had stolen his animal, there was no advantage in reporting the loss.
When he suspected a specific person, it was his responsibility to find witnesses to support his case.
The nearest court was often twenty or thirty kilometres distant; sometimes the journey was much further.
It was inconvenient for a villager to walk that far to report a theft, especially since he often had to make the trip several times if he wanted to complete a prosecution.
Since government did not pay for the expenses of witnesses, this cost also fell on the cattle owner.
In one instance the complainant and his witnesses each had to walk over three hundred kilometres back and forth from the court because the case was postponed several times.
It was often more rational for the cattle owner to accept the loss, or to take a different course of action.
Very often cattle owners negotiated with the thieves, usually through intermediaries, who were sometimes village headmen.
When there was little evidence, a ‘reward’ or ransom of about five rupees was paid for information about the location of the lost animal.
Criminal plaints were sometimes filed against the thieves in order to reduce the amount of ransom, or to get a couple of rupees compensation for an eaten animal.
Out of court settlements were consistent with Sinhalese norms.
In the pre-colonial Kandyan courts persons found guilty of cattle stealing were not imprisoned, but were instead required to render compensation to the injured party.
Another factor which affected the likelihood of a case being reported was intimidation by the cattle stealers.
Especially when  the complainant's village was relatively remote and the headmen themselves in league with the thieves, the long trip to court with little prospect of success was made even more unattractive by the possibility of violence.
Officials complained that cattle stealers often harassed the complainant and members of his family, sometimes by the institution of false criminal charges.
False cases offset under-reporting to some extent.
Officials varied widely in their estimates as to their extent.
Some seem to have thought that if a case could be traced to a feud, it was false.
This assumption was not necessarily justified, for the feud may have been a motive for the theft, or it may have determined whom the complainant decided to accuse in a case of real theft when the thieves were unknown.
Other accusations were the result of disputes over the ownership of animals.
The authorities considered these cases suitable for civil, not criminal, legal proceedings.
There were also cases which had nothing to do with cattle.
P. W. Conolly, when District Judge at Negombo, wrote that ‘when parties quarrel and assault each other, it is no uncommon thing for the person who has got the best of the struggle to have an animal brought to the spot, and a charge of cattle stealing is preferred against the unfortunate man who has been assaulted.’
To bring false charges against one's enemy, backed up by witnesses, was to cause him great inconvenience and expense.
Still other cases resulted from trespass.
It was legal to seize cattle which were trespassing on fenced land, but such action could lead to an accusation of theft.
In addition, when cattle got lost, or were eaten by wild animals, their owners sometimes assumed that they had been stolen and instituted a prosecution against known cattle thieves.
Despite all these shortcomings, the number of reported cases of cattle theft is valuable evidence.
The first period for which there is a consistent series is from 1872 to 1905.
There were variations in the accuracy of these figures according to time and place, but these evened out over fairly large geographical areas and periods of time.
For instance, if a magistrate dismissed most cases because he thought they were false, the proportion of thefts which were reported in his district might decrease because people would decide that it was useless to report them.
But over time all regions would have such magistrates.
Similarly, although a smaller percentage of cases were reported from places some distance from a court, all regions included such localities.
The reported number of cases underestimated the actual frequency of the crime, but it bore a reasonably constant relationship to the real frequency.
Over the period between 1872 and 1905 it is probable that increased facilities for reporting and prosecuting cattle theft resulted in a gradual increase in the proportion of crimes which were reported.
For the purpose of statistical analysis I shall use the three geographical divisions discussed in the first chapter.
The annual average number of cases reported between 1873 and 1905 was 1, 121 in the Low Country, 454 in the Intermediate region, and 253 in the Interior area.
Depending on the region and year, there were between one and sixteen cattle thefts reported annually for every 10,000 inhabitants (Table 3.1).
Because the concern here is with general trends and not annual variations, the rates are calculated for five year blocks.
An alternative method is to measure thefts against the cattle population (Table 3.2).
This approach is less accurate because the cattle returns are not as reliable as the census figures, but it is valuable because the presence of a large urban population can mask a high rate of cattle theft in the rural parts of a region.
When interpreting these tables it should be remembered that no matter how many animals were stolen at a time the case was recorded as one theft.
Both sets of figures give a similar indication of the trend in any one region.
The main difference is that the rates for the Low Country were proportionately higher in relation to the cattle population than to the human population, because there were more humans per cattle in the Low Country.
The tables show that  an animal was at greatest risk of being stolen in the Low Country, but until around 1895 a person was more likely to steal an animal in the Intermediate area.
How great a chance was there that an animal would be stolen?
The statistics are not reliable enough to answer this question with any confidence, but an estimate may be made given certain assumptions.
These are threefold:(1) that the number of cases reported represented one-fifth the true rate,(2) that an average of two head were stolen in each theft, and (3) that the hypothetical animal had a life span of ten years.
If these assumptions are correct, and the cattle returns accurate, an animal's chance of being stolen during its lifetime ranged from forty per cent in the Low Country around 1880 to three per cent in the Interior region at the end of the century.
The first assumption listed above is inevitably arbitrary and is conservative.
In areas where cattle stealing was highly organized and ransoming common it is likely that the proportion of cases reported was very much smaller.
The odds cited above would have given little comfort to the man in Kurunagala who, during a rash of cattle thefts, had to pay a ransom for the same animal seven times before finally selling it for the paltry sum of two rupees.
Administrative changes during the late nineteenth century should have resulted in a higher proportion of cases being reported.
After 1885 the cost of prosecuting was less because cases were tried in police courts instead of district courts.
The use of itinerant magistrates gradually increased, making prosecutions  more convenient.
Moreover, in the 1890s the British for the first time consistently encouraged headmen to report all cases.
This increased activity led to additional prosecutions.
In the face of these changes, the decline in the rate of cattle theft is convincing evidence of a real decrease in the incidence of cattle stealing.
The theft rate began to drop first in the Interior region and then in the Intermediate area.
The decline in the Low Country started later and was less sharp than in the other two regions.
The absolute number of cases reported in the Interior area remained fairly constant until 1885, and then fell gradually, levelling off again after 1900 (Figure 3.1).
In the Intermediate region the numbers were constant-until 1893, with the exceptions of dips in 1875 — 9 and 1888 — 9, both of which were caused by special government measures.
After 1893 the number of cases dropped sharply, though there was some recovery after 1901.
In the Low Country the number of reported thefts increased very gradually, though not as quickly as the human population.
The comments of officials and newspaper correspondents are consistent with the conclusions drawn from the statistics, and show more precisely the areas where cattle stealing prevailed.
There was some casual cattle theft virtually everywhere.
The variations in the overall rate were mainly accounted for by organized networks for cattle stealing which extended for scores of kilometres.
There were two main areas where organized stealing was carried out.
1 have chosen to call them the Northern and Southern Bands (Map 3.1).
The Southern Band stretched across the interior of the Low Country, from the Matara-Hambantota border in the south to Siyane Korale, in Colombo district, to the north.
Its leaders were local magnates who co-operated with each other by exchanging and transporting stolen cattle.
F. R. Saunders, when Government Agent of the Western Province, described the system in some detail in his annual report for 1889.
He wrote that there were well-to-do and respectable men in each district who either planned or were informed of all cattle stealing in their localities.
When an animal went missing, the owner visited such a man to arrange a price for the restoration of the animal.
If they agreed on a sum, an appointment was made to pay the money to an intermediary.
If no deal was made, the animal was spirited away to another district.
The local managers of cattle stealing operations exchanged purloined cattle to prevent them from being identified.
These men also bailed out the thieves if they were arrested, and arranged for lawyers, false evidence, and the intimidation of  witnesses.
The thieves were kept under control because the organizers had evidence which could get them convicted.
Saunders concluded his account by observing that evidence could never be found against the organizers themselves.
It was not uncommon for stolen animals to be transported along paths and roads for as far as fifty kilometres.
Local networks often took advantage of kinship ties.
Members of the Kotalawala family, living along the roads of Rayigam Korale, were thought to control the movement of cattle.
E. B. Alexander, the Police Magistrate at Panadura, drew a map showing places where the members of this family lived; Map 3.2 is a revised version of his sketch.
It was alleged that the animals were passed from one family member to another.
Those animals not ransomed were usually sold cheaply to cultivators or butchers who knew full well the origins of the animal.
It appears that a relatively small proportion of cattle stolen in the Southern Band ended up as beef, for there were ready markets for agricultural and draught purposes, especially in the Western Province.
Most profit was probably made from ransom payments.
The Northern Band was centred in Kurunagala district, which was long considered the hotbed of the crime.
Its organization was similar in that it was controlled by persons of relatively high social status, that ransoming was a major source of profit, and that the transporting of animals over long distances was usual when a payment was not forthcoming.
Charles Liesching, when District Judge at Negombo, wrote that ‘the distance to which cattle are transported in a single night by relays of men, is almost incredible.’
Less traditional modes of transportation were sometimes used.
In one case, ten head of cattle were stolen, taken to Polgahavela railway station and that same night put on a cattle truck bound for Colombo.
Although some of the animals stolen in the Northern Band were sold for agricultural use, especially in Chilaw and the Western Province, a high proportion of those not ransomed were sold for beef in the Roman Catholic villages on the littoral, and more importantly, in Colombo.
The slaughterhouse of the capital city tried to establish the origins of the animals it accepted, but with little success.
Kurunagala district was poorer than the Low Country; the one-way illicit trade in cattle not only enriched the thieves but brought money into the district.
By contrast, in the Southern Band cattle were generally exchanged between districts, though there was probably a net movement from the Southern to the Western Province.
Goyigama Buddhists normally organized  thefts in both areas, but Muslim or Sinhalese Roman Catholic traders usually took control of the animals for the last stages before the slaughterhouse.
One cattle trader suspected of dealing in stolen animals was Liyange Sardial Perera, a Karava from Dandugama near Negombo.
He was accused, along with two local men, of stealing cattle from the village of Vadigamangama in Puttalam district near the border with Kurunagala.
When a warrant was issued for his arrest, the Hue and Cry listed among his friends four headmen and an ex-headman.
One of his alleged accomplices lived in the house of the headman of the village where the theft took place.
The only available detailed information about the social characteristics of persons involved in cattle stealing was published in the Hue and Cry .
Ninety-six per cent of those accused were Sinhalese, and ninety-one per cent were Buddhists.
Of the Sinhalese, seventy-five per cent were Goyigamas, nine per cent Vahumpuras, nine per cent Karavas, Salagamas and Duravas, and seven per cent members of other castes.
Fifty-eight per cent of the alleged cattle thieves were identified as cultivators; this proportion was higher than that for any other crime.
Just over half the wanted men were in their twenties.
Over thirty per cent were in their thirties.
This social profile indicates that cattle stealing was not primarily a crime of the depressed classes.
Goyigamas were substantially over-represented, a fact which cannot be accounted for entirely by their agricultural pursuits.
Some non-Goyigama villages near the coast, such as Magalkande, Indisgastuduva, and Pohoddaramulla, had reputations as centres of cattle stealing, but in the interior relatively wealthy persons and their poorer kin and clients were the main beneficiaries.
The Kotalawalas and the in Rayigam Korale, were both upwardly mobile Goyigama families with much local influence.
The head of a local network in the Northern Band, Rajaruwo, literally, ‘King’, was related to a middle-level headman in a region where such appointments were always limited to the respectable and wealthy.
The frequent links between organized cattle stealing and headmen is strong evidence of the high social position of those responsible for this crime.
The illicit trade in cattle may have played an important role in providing an economic base for certain upwardly-mobile Goyigama families.
Judging from the value of each ransom payment, usually about five rupees, some stealing networks must have earned thousands of rupees profit annually.
Around the turn of the century officials noted that the scale of cattle stealing in Kurunagala had declined.
Their observations were only partially based on the fall in the number of cases brought before the courts.
In 1899, when there was a sharp increase in the number of reported cattle thefts, H. W. Brodhurst, the Government Agent, attributed it to false cases which were instituted because the magistrate was inexperienced: ‘I therefore attach little importance to this apparent recrudescence of a crime which was once the curse of the Province, but has been little heard of in late years.’
Three years later one of Brodhurst's successors, commenting on another increase over the previous year, noted that ‘there has been no return to the systematic trade in stolen cattle.’
Although some of the official assessments of cattle stealing in Kurunagala at the turn of the century may have been over-optimistic, it is clear that the level of the crime in the district, and more generally the Northern Band, was much less than it had been in the 1880s and earlier.
In the Southern Band the number of cattle-stealing cases reported to the courts failed to keep pace with the increase in population, but there was no general decline at this time.
This situation lasted only a decade; after 1908 the rate dropped sharply, in away reminiscent of its earlier decline in the Northern Band.
The number of ‘true cases of cattle theft’, that is the number of cases known to the authorities less those in which it was determined that no crime had been committed, declined in the Southern and Western Provinces from 1,160 in 1908 to 394 in 1914.
Throughout the nineteenth century there was some casual cattle stealing in most districts.
Villagers stole cattle for beef, for a ransom payment, or in some cases for ploughing or local sale.
But most cattle thefts were carried out in the interior of the Low Country, Kurunagala, and in the districts bordering these two areas, where they were organized by wealthy and powerful men.
After 1893 the crime declined in Kurunagala, but not in the Low Country, where organized networks of thieves continued to operate for another fifteen years.
Before entering into a discussion of the reasons for the decline of the organized networks, and of the patterns of cattle theft in the first half of the twentieth century, 1 shall first discuss in some detail the administrative policies which affected cattle stealing in its heyday.
Government towards Cattle Stealing
The authorities sought to suppress cattle stealing by punishing thieves and regulating the ownership of cattle.
In trying to bring  cattle thieves to justice they faced not only the usual difficulties but a certain amount of popular tolerance of the crime.
In the Kandyan Kingdom cattle theft was a legitimate way for a person to retaliate against an injustice, such as an unpaid debt or insult.
In 1819 the Board of Kandyan Commissioners stated that this ‘practice is sanctioned by such long usage that, until by some proclamation it is declared illegal, it might be deemed harsh to visit the act by punishment.’
It is not clear to what extent this view was held in the Low Country, but in Kandyan districts at that the ‘crime is not, it is to be feared, regarded with sufficient gravity among Kandyans, except by the person victimised.’
This last qualification was not unimportant, and violence sometimes ensued when cattle thieves were caught in the act.
On the other hand cattle stealing did not rouse general moral indignation.
In 1850 A. O. Brodie, who had been specifically appointed a justice of the peace to investigate the extent of cattle stealing, observed that witnesses, without intending irony, often made statements such as‘so and so is a man of good character — he deals in stolen cattle.’
Some twenty years later the District Judge at Kagalla found similar attitudes: ‘It is a common occurrence for persons to see an animal being driven away under very suspicious circumstances, and yet, although perhaps living within a stone's throw of the owner, they take no trouble to go and tell him what they have seen, and probably say nothing about it until they meet him looking for his stolen animal, three or four days afterward; of course then the recovery is hopeless!’
The attitude of more highly-educated persons towards cattle stealing was often less tolerant.
The Buddhist intelligentsia associated it with beef eating, gambling and the consumption of arrack, activities which were frowned upon by those influenced by Buddhist revivalist ideas but which were perceived as regrettably common among the masses.
The Buddhist press paid more attention to gambling and drunkenness than it did to cattle stealing, presumably because most newspaper correspondents lived in towns, where cattle stealing was a relatively infrequent occurrence.
In the previous chapter it was pointed out that testimony in cattle-stealing cases was  particularly prone to stereotyped ritual delivery.
The main reason for this tendency was the lack of true evidence.
Thefts were often carried out at night when there were no witnesses.
The prosecution case, even if it was brought against those believed responsible, was very often fictional.
In prosecutions  for many other crimes, for instance assault, testimony varied more because it built on actual incidents.
The conviction rate of persons accused of cattle stealing rose during the late nineteenth century (Table 3.3.).
The increase may be largely attributed to the penal code of 1885, which stipulated that most cattle thefts be tried in police courts rather than district courts.
Although the maximum length of imprisonment was thereby reduced from one year to six months, and flogging was no longer a possible part of the punishment, trials took place much sooner, and sometimes at a locality closer to the complainant's home.
The expense of prosecuting was reduced.
This change made compromise less attractive for the complainant when he had strong evidence.
Convictions were less likely in areas where cattle stealing was rampant.
For instance, 441 cases with 1,374 accused persons were instituted at Kurunagala Police Court in 1886.
Only twenty-three persons were convicted, less than two per cent of those charged.
Casual cattle stealers ran more risk than those involved in organized thievery.
The local magnates who did not personally carry out thefts were very rarely tried, although some middle-level headmen were convicted for forging sale vouchers.
Some officials thought that increased flogging was the only way to reduce the crime.
Whippings in Sri Lanka were carried out with a cat-o-nine-tails and flayed the back of the prisoner, scarring him for life.
One official later described the punishment as ‘the most disgusting and barbarous thing I have ever seen’, thus it is not surprising that another official wrote that ‘the native has a wholesome dread of the lash.’
Before 1885 lashes could be inflicted in ordinary cattle-stealing cases.
After this date, only repeated offenders or those convicted when the value of the cattle was more than fifty rupees were subject to this punishment.
Particularly efficient or harsh repression could temporarily suppress cattle stealing.
In 1828, after a period when cattle stealing had been rarely and lightly punished, the Supreme Court in session at Matara convicted a number of men, including some headmen, and sentenced each to five years imprisonment and two hundred lashes.
For three months cattle stealing in Matara declined sharply, and stolen cattle were returned to their owners or set free.
Similarly, in 1888 a Southern Province mudaliyar attributed a fall in the crime to a magistrate ‘who was really a terror to evil-doers’.
The efforts of F. R. Ellis, who was given special powers to itinerate through Kurunagala from 1874 to 1879, illustrate a more sustained approach.
At each locality which he visited, people brought cattle to him for a decision on ownership.
Ellis compared the brands of the animal to the claimant's name, and if he was satisfied, as he was in about two-thirds of the cases, he issued the claimant a certificate of ownership.
If the claim was rejected, the animal was sold, with the proceeds going to the government.
While in Kurunagala Ellis also established a cattle voucher system whereby headmen had to certify all sales of cattle.
He checked the books of headmen, searching for irregularities.
During Ellis's tenure at Kurunagala cattle stealing went into a sharp decline, but as soon as he left the district it revived.
There was a similar drop in cattle stealing in 1888, when an additional magistrate, L. F. Lee, was given the power to order public floggings.
Again, as soon as he left Kurunagala, the crime recovered to its former level.
Cattle stealing could be stopped, but some administrators had reservations.
J. O'K.
Murty, the Assistant Government Agent at Matara, wrote in his annual report for 1902 that ‘it is true that cattle stealing can be and has been suppressed by drastic measures, such as wholesale convictions, involving both innocent and guilty, and by the application of the lash, but I cannot conscientiously recommend this procedure.’
A more long-term official approach was the regulation of cattle through registration, branding, sale certificates, removal permits, and butchers' licences.
Various regulations were proclaimed from the early years of British rule, but they remained dead letters for most of the century.
Ellis was the first person to enforce them with determination, but in the end he failed because there were no corresponding regulations in the districts bordering Kurunagala, and because the rules could not be enforced without the very energetic supervision which was lacking after his departure.
A catalogue of regulations mentioned in a handbook published for headmen in 1873 illustrates the difficulty of enforcing such  rules without a reliable rural bureaucracy.
In January of each year cattle owners were supposed to make out and give to the village headman a certificate describing the appearance, sex and brand marks of their animals.
Each time a head of cattle was sold, the headman was supposed to certify a receipt which included the signature of the previous owner, the brand marks of the animals, and the signature of a witness.
The headman was then supposed to send a copy of the receipt to the police magistrate.
Anyone who wished to slaughter an animal was required to request permission in writing from a headman at least forty-eight hours in advance, noting a full description of the animal.
The headman was supposed to check the accuracy of this information before giving his permission for the butchering, and he was also expected to send copies of the permits which he had approved to the magistrate at the end of each month.
The handbook also included detailed regulations concerning cattle trespass and disease.
Throughout the late nineteenth century spasmodic efforts were made in individual districts to enforce some of these regulations.
Similar rules were made by some village committees and municipalities.
After about 1870 printed vouchers were used as sale certificates in order to make forgeries more difficult.
Only specified headmen were empowered to certify vouchers.
The numbered counterfoil of each certificate was returned to the kachcheri by the headman.
The system was meant to provide for the quick identification of stolen animals.
The lack of a widely-used system of branding hampered official efforts to hinder the disposal of stolen animals.
Sinhalese cattle medicine called for branding the animal with particular designs in order to give it strength or to cure it of various illnesses.
Ornamental brands were also common.
These brands obscured those placed on the animal for the purpose of identification, which sometimes included caste brands as well as the name of the owner and his village.
The British wanted to limit branding to the owner's initials and locality, and to require variations between the brands of an animal and the name of the owner to be explained by sale vouchers.
There were many difficulties in enforcing such a system.
It was not easy to store the counterfoils of sale vouchers out of the range of white ants.
The brands on buffaloes were difficult to read after a couple of years, and thieves were ingenious at altering them.
Above all, there was no popular consensus that systematic branding was necessary.
When the Chilaw kachcheri queried a sale voucher counterfoil submitted by a headman, it was explained that the seller had branded the  animal with his grandfather's name, Nicholas, because he believed it a lucky name in cattle breeding.
Another weakness of these regulations was their dependence on efficient and honest enforcement.
Headmen were frequently suspected of involvement in cattle stealing, and a number were regularly dismissed as a result.
Former headmen were known to be important organizers of the illicit trade in stolen cattle.
Even headmen not in league with cattle thieves had little interest in strictly enforcing the regulations.
One mudaliyar reported that ‘the minor headmen though repeatedly and strictly warned rest satisfied if the number of permits or vouchers and the number of cattle agree, without examining brandmarks.’
The authority to issue cattle vouchers enhanced the power and status of a headman, but many of those assigned to this task could not see why they should take the trouble to inquire into the origins of the cattle concerned.
Vouchers were issued on the payment of a fifty cent fee, which was kept by the headman, but blank vouchers were sometimes sold to thieves for three rupees or so.
The large number of forms in circulation made it difficult for the authorities to keep track of them.
In 1903, for instance, the Galle kachcheri issued over 5,000 voucher forms and 1,500 removal permit forms.
There were difficulties enforcing regulations at the Colombo slaughterhouse.
Forged vouchers were sometimes detected, but usually there was no way for the slaughterhouse manager to know whether or not an animal was stolen.
When cattle with brand marks not corresponding with the name of the seller were rejected, the owner went with a friend to a headman, and stated that he wanted to sell the animals to his friend.
The headman issued vouchers, and the animals were brought back to the slaughterhouse with their papers in order.
Headmen also issued vouchers upon the statement that an animal had been born in the fold.
Butchers in small towns were even less likely to reject cattle on the grounds that they might be stolen.
The authorities sometimes turned down applications for butcher's licences because they feared that the presence of such establishments would lead to increases in cattle stealing.
Other government regulations could be manipulated by thieves for their own advantage.
It was legal for landowners to seize and take to specified headmen or the village committee headquarters cattle which were found straying on cultivated or fenced land.
The cattle owner was held responsible for any damage done by his animal.
As the possession of documentation for stolen cattle  became important, thieves began to turn stolen animals in as strays.
If the animal had been stolen from another district, and its owner did not as a result claim it, thieves could buy the fully-documented animal for a nominal sum.
A variation was to drive cattle on to cultivated land, and then have damages assessed at the full value of the animals.
The owner of the cattle had to pay the inflated damages or lose his animals.
Another flaw was rooted in the structure of the administrative system.
At every level the lines of communication were with the central authority, not with the official who was doing the same job in the adjacent district.
Thieves could evade an efficient system by taking stolen cattle to another district for sale.
Even if the other district had its own system, it was unlikely that there was much communication between the two sets of officials over such matters.
Headmen communicated with each other through their superiors, and often sought to blame crime on persons outside their own jurisdiction.
In 1895, when the ratemahatmaya of Katugampola Hatpattu in Kurunagala complained that Low Countrymen from Chilaw district were stealing cattle and removing them to their own district, the Low Country mudaliyar concerned replied that the charge was false, and that Kandyans were involved in the few cases of cattle stealing.
Legislation was passed in 1898 which attempted to provide for the co-ordination of the various regulations.
The Governor was given wide powers to make rules concerning the branding, sale, and transfer of cattle.
The ordinance envisioned a common and compulsory branding system which would make possible the easy identification of cattle from anywhere in the island.
On one side of the animal there were to be letters and a number which would identify the revenue district, sub-division and village of the animal.
The owner's initials were to be branded in Sinhala script on the other side.
Persons tending cattle were to be required to have certificates for animals found outside of their branded subdivisions.
In practice this ordinance brought about little immediate change because it was introduced piecemeal into various districts.
As late as 1905 there were no branding or registration rules in Sabaragamuva.
Two trends in cattle stealing during the late nineteenth century showed that government regulations had some success.
As sale voucher schemes were extended, the crime was more and more concentrated near district borders.
If thieves had to transfer cattle out of the district to avoid detection, it was easier to steal animals from these areas.
Cattle stealers fully understood the efforts of  the administration to thwart them.
In the early 1890s thieves stole cattle in an area of Anuradhapura which bordered on Kurunagala, drove them across the district border, carried out false sales there with the help of some headmen, and sent the animals to the Colombo slaughterhouse.
The counterfoils, which contained descriptions of the animals, were returned to the Kurunagala kachcheri by the slaughterhouse.
Since the animals had been stolen from Anuradhapura, the descriptions were not recognized as those of stolen animals, and the system continued undetected
The other trend was towards immediately killing the animal.
It was no longer possible for casual thieves to take an animal for their own use, or to sell it for agricultural purposes in a village five or ten kilometres distant.
Cattle killing became the most common form of the crime in areas where there were no organized networks for stealing.
The increase in cattle killing was due to the sale-voucher systems making it more difficult for casual thieves to keep or dispose of stolen animals.
Government policy in the nineteenth century was important, but it did not determine the extent and geography of cattle stealing.
It reacted to the crime, and its attempts to suppress it succeeded only in forcing cattle stealers to adjust to administrative policies.
Headmen were enlisted to issue false sale vouchers, casual thieves feasted so that the animal could not be identified, and the stealing networks paid special attention to areas near district boundaries.
Government policy does not explain why the organized networks only covered certain areas, or why the illicit trade declined in Kurunagala at the end of the nineteenth century, but continued to thrive for another fifteen years in the Low Country before suffering a similar decline.
Cattle Stealing in the Twentieth Century
The picture of cattle stealing which has been built up thus far has emphasized its institutional nature.
In many districts the normal response when one's animal was missing was to visit a person well known to have connections with local thieves, and give him a chew of betel, a wad of tobacco, and five rupees.
The intermediary would then send a boy or servant with the cattle owner to ‘search’ for the missing animal, which would be found tied to a tree in a nearby forest.
In other areas at other times, the missing animal might have been quickly spirited away to another district  for sale to a cultivator or butcher.
When this was the case, the owner had no option but to accept his loss or institute a court case.
Although his prosecution, normally based on false evidence, had little chance or success, it was a weapon which could cause expense and bother to those he thought responsible.
The organizers were rarely charged in court, probably because such a prosecution would have met with an unpleasant response.
Casual thefts, which were increasingly carried out for beef, accounted for a minority of stolen cattle except in districts where there was no organized stealing.
The decline of organized networks around the turn of the century was the single most striking change in patterns of cattle theft during the British period.
Any interpretation should be able to explain why the decline came fifteen years later in the Southern Band than in the Northern Band.
It also should help determine why there was little organized stealing in the central highlands in the second half of the nineteenth century.
What administrative, economic or social conditions already present in the central highlands appeared in the Northern Band in the 1890s and in the Southern Band around 1910?
The answer may be found through an examination of trends in land use.
Though the areas with organized cattle stealing ranged from some of the least to most prosperous in Sri Lanka, they had in common an economy based largely on the production of rice and other grains for local consumption.
They also had relatively easy access to markets for stolen cattle and a reasonable amount of forest land in which to hide and transport animals.
The declines of both networks coincided with extensive changes in land use in their areas of operation.
Kurunagala, the centre of the Northern Band, remained an economic backwater in the 1860s, but in the late 1880s and 1890s coconut plantations were established there on a large scale.
There were several ways in which the widespread introduction of coconuts into the district interfered with cattle theft.
Forests disappeared, reducing grazing areas and possibly the number of cattle.
There was no longer as large an area in which to transport cattle secretly away from the scene of the crime and in which to hide animals being held for ransom.
The presence of coconut estates also forced cultivators to look after their cattle more closely because plantation managers were inclined to shoot cattle or bring charges of trespass against the owners of animals found on their land.
Incidentally, the decreased mobility of cattle thwarted thieves.
Equally important were social changes which accompanied the introduction of coconut plantations.
The world which had been dominated by subsistence agriculture crumbled.
Peasants put more energy into growing coconuts and garden produce for the market.
Land grabbing, often supported by forged documents, and coconut stealing provided alternative disreputable activities for those so inclined.
The large-scale immigration of Low Country Sinhalese disrupted the local social structure.
Cattle lost some of their importance.
Rubber, tea and other cash crops made similarly rapid and extensive inroads in much of the Southern Band in the first decade of the twentieth century.
The social impact of this structural change had been foreshadowed by the temporary effects of the graphite boom of 1898 — 9, when relatively high wages became available to many previously underemployed people.
Many of the graphite pits were in the Western and Southern Provinces, and a large proportion of miners who worked in other districts came from these areas.
The Government Agent of the Southern Province wrote in his report for 1899 that the ‘great feature of the year has been the rush to plumbago [graphite].
Paddy lands have been largely neglected, and the poorer classes have sought employment in the plumbago mines, preferring the certainty of regular and ample wages to the prospective reward of a crop in the fields often liable to damage from floods and other causes beyond their control.’
In the provinces most affected by the wave of prosperity the number of cattle thefts reported in 1898 — 9 was twenty-seven per cent less than in 1897 and 1900 (Table 3.4).
The men who lived at the graphite pits in 1898 — 9 were the same persons who would be likely to get up in the middle of the night to help take stolen cattle five kilometres to the next relay team, thereby earning a little money and easing the tedium of village   life.
When the price of graphite fell in 1900 and the mines closed they returned to their villages; one result was an increase in the number of cases of cattle stealing in the Western and Southern Provinces of fifty-six per cent over 1899.
The graphite boom temporarily reduced the social and economic importance of subsistence agriculture in the Low Country.
By around 1910 the cultivation of rubber and tea had brought about a more permanent change.
Many plantations were established in Pasdun Korale and the eastern part of Rayigam Korale, those parts of Kalutara district which were furthest inland.
Pasdun Korale, a relatively lightly populated division which bordered Sabaragamuva, had served as a transit area for the illicit cattle trade between the Southern and Western Provinces, and from Sabaragamuva to the Western Province.
Increasingly, tea and rubber plantations reduced the number of places where cattle could freely wander, thus making it more difficult for animals to be stolen, hidden and transported.
One result was the virtual end of the traffic in stolen cattle between the Southern and Western Provinces.
The change from a rural economy largely dominated by subsistence agriculture to one with a greater emphasis on cash crops also led to social changes in the interior of the Low Country similar to those which accompanied the spread of coconut plantations in Kurunagala district.
Immigrants, some of them Indian Tamils, arrived to work on the new estates.
Peasants also sought and obtained employment in the cash economy, often on a seasonal basis.
Some villagers, those with capital, established rubber smallholdings, or grew other crops for the market.
The relationship between land use and cattle stealing helps explain why the crime was carried out relatively less often in the central highlands in the nineteenth century.
The steep hillsides made it more difficult to hide and transport cattle, and after the establishment of coffee plantations and gardens in the 1840s the crime must have become more difficult to carry out profitably.
Some stolen cattle were transported from the Northern Band to supply the beef market at Kandy; the Moors of Akurana, a few kilometres north of Kandy, were said to be involved in this trade.
But most cattle theft in this region was casual, and increased vigilance on the part of the authorities succeeded in reducing its level in the late nineteenth century.
The decline of the networks roughly coincided with reforms of policing in rural areas, but the economic and social consequences of changes in land use were more significant than the hazards of the new policing systems.
The attempt in the 1890s to turn headmen  into policemen in Kurunagala was widely considered a failure, and even officials responsible for the province at the time emphasized the importance of coconut plantations in the decline of cattle theft.
In the Western Province, where the police reforms of the 1890s were implemented with more vigour than in Kurunagala, organized stealing did not decline.
The evidence is slightly stronger for a link between the establishment of rural police stations in 1906 and the decline of organized cattle stealing in the Southern Band around 1910.
Cattle transport routes were taken into account when the authorities decided where to open police stations, and efforts were made to enforce branding and voucher regulations.
For the first time details of serious crimes, including all cases of cattle stealing which village headmen chose to report, were investigated by a police force which could in theory take quick and decisive action.
Nevertheless, administrative change was not the main reason for the decline of the networks in the Southern Band.
In its early years the new police force had poor relations with headmen, and there is no indication of any general decline in crime at this time.
Thieves deliberately transported cattle across the boundaries of the police jurisdictions, and senior police officers did not exercise enough supervision to ensure that adjacent stations co-operated with each other.
The stealing networks did not disappear entirely in the early years of the twentieth century, but their geographical range and the extent of their operations was sharply curtailed.
Even in their heyday they had been fluid entities which could be dormant in specific areas for years at a time, but the decline at the turn of the century was much more widespread than earlier fluctuations.
Areas which had previously been central to the stealing networks were affected.
In Rayigam Korale, between Pasdun Korale and the coast, a local network survived, but it did not import cattle from the Southern Province because the Kalu Ganga made transportation from that direction impractical.
Instead cattle which were not ransomed were sent to Salpiti Korale in Colombo district, and cattle were also received from that area.
Organized stealing also appears to have continued in parts of Siyane Korale in Colombo district, along the borders between Kurunagala and the North-Central Province, and between Kurunagala and Kagalla.
The authorities continued to feel frustration with cattle owners who refused to report their losses.
H. L. Dowbiggin, the Inspector-General of Police, cited one case in Rayigam Korale where twenty-seven buffaloes were stolen from an owner who  preferred to pay ransom rather than place the case in the hands of the police.
Nevertheless, in the 1920s the police made some progress towards directly deterring cattle stealing.
Branding and voucher regulations were enforced much more consistently than in earlier years.
Night patrols were introduced in many districts, and some cattle thieves were caught transporting stolen animals.
In 1921, for instance night patrols made thirteen arrests for cattle stealing in the Southern and Western Provinces.
In the nineteenth century such arrests were almost unknown.
After the declines in organized stealing around the turn of the century, the number of cattle thefts known to the authorities remained at a low level, with some fluctuations, until the onset of the world depression in 1930 (Table 3.5).
The official statistics for this period are not directly comparable with those of the nineteenth century because they represent all cases known to the authorities less those cases which the police believed false.
The earlier figures measured the number of cases which were instituted before a magistrate or a justice of the peace.
Cattle stealing was more sensitive to economic fluctuations in the twentieth century than it had been earlier.
The severe depression of 1878 — 83, which was longer and deeper in the coffee-growing Central Province than elsewhere, had little effect on cattle stealing (Table 3.6 and Figure 3.1).
Officials in the worst hit areas reported an increase in cattle killing, but the number of  court cases did not increase sharply in any district.
There were only thirteen per cent more cattle theft cases in the Central Province during the height of the downturn than during the years immediately preceding and following it.
The equivalent figure for the rest of Sinhala Sri Lanka was five per cent.
The coffee crash was felt strongest in areas where there was less cattle stealing, and where most of the stealing was casual.
Although all parts of Sri Lanka were affected by the depression, the areas covered by the organized networks were less integrated into the market economy, and were affected less by the coffee crash, than either the central highlands or the coastal strip.
The commercial depression in Colombo and other towns may well have decreased the demand for beef, making the shipment of stolen cattle to butchers less profitable.
During the years 1918 — 21, a period of severe food shortages, there was a large increase in cattle theft.
The number of reported cases was thirty-eight per cent higher than during the years 1916 — 17 and 1922 — 3 (Table 3.7).
The increased sensitivity of  cattle stealing to hardship may be largely accounted for by the fact that at this time more cattle stealing was carried out casually, mostly for immediate consumption as beef.
As soon as the price of food fell, cattle theft declined.
During the prosperous 1920s, a time when the acreage devoted to cash crops expanded, cattle stealing nearly disappeared.
In the period 1925 — 9 an average of only 400 cases annually were reported in Sinhala Sri Lanka.
Under the more inefficient system of the late nineteenth century, it was not unusual for over 2,000 cases to be reported in a single year.
The beginning of the depression coincided with a sharp increase in cattle stealing.
The number of reported cases rose from 434 in 1929 to 650 in 1930 and 813 in 1931.
It held steady thereafter until 1935, the year of a devastating malaria epidemic, when the number of cases increased to 1,020.
Officials attributed these increases to persons who killed cattle for beef.
The next year, 1936, all government regulations concerning the branding, movement and sale of cattle were lifted.
In the new political climate of the Donoughmore Constitution these restrictions were seen as a restraint on the economic freedom of the peasantry.
The number of cattle-stealing cases doubled, reaching 2,020 in 1938, five times the level reported ten years earlier.
Unlike the increases of the early 1930s, this jump was caused by the revival of stealing networks, mainly in those areas where they had prevailed in the nineteenth century.
The high rate of the North-Central Province, for instance, is an indication that the old trade on the border between this province and Kurunagala had been revived.
Urban  consumers of beef benefited; within eighteen months of the lifting of the regulations the price of beef fell by half.
The number of reported cattle thefts increased still further during the Second World War, when food prices increased dramatically.
The number of reported cases peaked at 3,547 in 1944, then fell to below 1,500 in the late 1940s.
A combination of administrative and economic factors favoured the revival of organized stealing during the final decade of British rule, but given the growth of population and the more efficient reporting system the extent of the crime was not as great as it had been before 1890.
Conclusions
One temptation is to characterize cattle stealing as a traditional activity, and to argue that it was the victim of modernization.
This assertion would be misleading, for not only was cattle stealing not primitive, but when organized it was a rational economic business.
The expansion of the market economy in the nineteenth century at first stimulated the crime by providing markets for stolen cattle.
Although there may have been a trade in illicit cattle across the border between the Dutch and Kandyan territories in the eighteenth century, the large-scale networks were probably a product of the early and middle nineteenth century, made possible by the increased demand for cattle for transportation and meat.
It was only when cash crops reduced the importance of subsistence agriculture and the amount of forest land declined in districts adjacent to the areas where the new markets had been created that the market economy began to work against the crime.
Cattle stealing was an institution which provided benefits to different groups.
To village youths, whether they were acting as minor cogs of a cattle relay team or stealing a disliked neighbour's bullock, it provided both adventure and a small additional income.
There were few other sources of economic mobility or excitement in rural areas.
For a smaller group, it provided a living.
Certain villages were strongholds of cattle thieves and their residents derived a significant portion of their incomes from the cattle trade.
More significantly, in many districts there were in most villages several households which depended on cattle stealing for their livelihood.
Butchers who regularly received stolen cattle benefited, as did consumers who were able to buy cattle cheaply and peasants who killed cattle for food at times of hardship.
Cattle theft must also have brought about a measure of loss equal to the gain of those who profited.
It is likely that among the rural population this loss was more widely distributed than was the gain.
Thieves probably benefited from a certain popular tolerance which dated back to the time when individual thefts of cattle were a legitimate means of pursuing a dispute.
The cultural stereotype of cattle stealing as an exciting, adventurous activity may also have contributed to its acceptance.
In addition, the organized networks could to a certain extent rely on intimidation and social pressure.
The high social and economic position of the organizers made people reluctant to confront them.
Each local network of cattle stealing provided an alternative system of power and wealth in that locality.
The local magnates exercised a limited but real authority entirely independent of the colonial administration.
Cattle stealers had to outwit a government with a modern, bureaucratic structure.
That they were usually successful indicates that the thieves understood the workings of the colonial bureaucracy, and that government did not function in the way intended by higher officials.
Indeed, the colonial system of the nineteenth century was a sort of polity which was particularly vulnerable to an illegal activity like cattle stealing which could not be carried out without the connivance or at least tolerance of a large segment of the population.
A more authoritarian regime could have simply imprisoned the organizers.
Officials usually knew who they were, though they could not obtain the evidence needed to convict them in the courts.
In the twentieth century a combination of economic change and government regulations reduced the profitability of cattle stealing, and when the crime revived in the 1930s there was little the authorities could do in face of nationalist feeling and the economic pressures of the depression.
Over the long term cattle theft was dependent on the position of cattle, the major form of mobile wealth in a rice-based economy.
The non-subsistence sector of the economy needed cattle for transportation and food.
At the same time the quality of cattle was declining and any increase in their numbers did not keep pace with demand.
Cattle stealing provided certain groups in rural areas with an opportunity to benefit from the economic changes along the coast and in the central highlands, but it did not long survive as an organized business once a district was penetrated deeply by plantations.
The revival of the 1930s and early 1940s was temporary, brought on by extreme hardship, the temporary decline of the market economy in some rural areas, and the  inability of an administration in the last stage of colonial rule to adjust.
When the importance of cattle declined in the local economy, so did cattle stealing.