

Our duty to refugees
BRITAIN is a small, overcrowded island yet it has a tradition of being a safe haven for refugees.
As it has become more crowded, that reputation has been stretched to its limit.
Especially so when housing and jobs are in such short supply for those who already live here.
Yet it is right for the Home Secretary, Kenneth Clarke, to offer a refuge to another 4,000 survivors from the Bosnian detention camps.
Each one who comes to Britain would almost certainly die if left in his own country.
What is going on there is not just war, it is genocide.
Mr Clarke has to weigh up the strains which would be caused in our nation by admitting more refugees.
He cannot listen to those who, however well-intentioned, say we should operate an open-door policy.
But neither should he allow in only a handful of those who are being persecuted in what used to be Yugoslavia.
We should take as many as we can.
And that is what Mr Clarke has now agreed to do.
We would like to think that the number he announced yesterday was of his choosing.
Those in other countries who pressure us to take more refugees do not know of Britain's problems.
The decision must be our Government's alone and that is what seems to have happened.
Now it is up to the aid agencies to make life as comfortable and easy as possible for the refugees.
Legal liberties
WHATEVER anyone might think about the amazing Norman Lamont saga, everyone will be agreed on one point: How can lawyers run up a Pounds 23,000 bill so simply?
The firm used by the Chancellor charges £200 an hour.
That is fantastic enough.
But on top of that there are ‘extras’ which come to thousands of pounds.
Yet it was not ripping off Mr Lamont.
That is the way exclusive legal firms charge their clients.
Is it any wonder that the only people who can afford their services are rich companies, millionaires and those who are lucky enough to get legal aid?
And is it any wonder, too, that the legal aid bill is rocketing totally out of control?
Why, even the Chancellor of the Exchequer is said to be worried at that.
Doctor of evil
SEVEN years is a long sentence but it is hardly long enough for Dr Tom Courtney.
He is not just a rapist and abuser of women.
He used his position as a doctor to gain their trust and then committed hideous crimes against them.
Some of those who commit sexual crimes claim that they are mentally ill or were victims themselves.
Dr Courtney has no excuse at all.
He came from a good home, was well educated and had every advantage.
Yet he set out to trap and violate women.
He deserves all he has got.
And more.
Old master
YOU can't keep an old tough-guy down.
At the advanced age of 71, Charles Bronson's wizened features are returning to the big screen.
He is to star in Death Wish Five and plans to go on to Death Wish Six and Seven.
That is a bit much.
Surely he would be better advised to start a new series with Bus Pass Wish One.
The curious case of the Squidgy tapes
Clive Nelson
Diana's intimate telephone call was broadcast six times.
By whom?
THE Squidgy tape of Princess Diana talking to close friend James Gilbey was repeatedly broadcast to guarantee it would be intercepted by radio snoops, an investigation by intelligence services has discovered.
Officers have spoken to six radio hams who have heard versions of the recording on different nights.
Each one was slightly different — but key phrases were repeated.
A senior Special Branch officer said last night: ‘It looks to us as if one person kept replaying the conversation to ham operators.
Each broadcast seemed to be an edited version of the original.’
Intelligence sources now believe the conspiracy theory supported by some royal aides — that the Squidgy tape was part of a plot to damage the reputations of Prince Charles and Princess Diana.
One said: ‘It may sound far-fetched but it looks increasingly likely.
Someone was masterminding this whole operation.’
Both Scotland Yard and Thames Valley police were originally instructed by Palace officials to ‘take no action’ over the tape.
But after rumours that MI5 may have been involved, intelligence sources began their own unofficial investigation.
Officers were told at first that there were two different tapes in existence.
But as they questioned radio hams who use electronic scanning equipment to eavesdrop on mobile-phone conversations, they discovered four more individuals who claimed to have heard Diana in intimate conversation with Mr Gilbey.
All heard ‘remarkably strong’ signals transmitted on a mobile-phone frequency close to the Brackley radio mast, north of Oxford, between December 31, 1989 and the end of January, 1990.
Investigators believed that the conversations were different and intercepted as Mr Gilbey used his car phone on the outskirts of Oxford to call Diana at Sandringham.
But as the investigation continued, the plot began to thicken.
One source said: ‘Certain phrases cropped up in supposedly different conversations with alarming regularity.
If the scanners were to be believed, two people were talking about the same matters in similar terms night after night.
It didn't make sense.’
The sound quality of the tapes was found to be unexpectedly high.
One expert said: ‘People using scanners usually find that one side of the conversation is much clearer.
Here the signal was remarkably clear — quite inexplicably so.’
It was decided that the conversation was scanned on sophisticated equipment and electronically ‘cleaned up’ to improve the signal strength.
It was then replayed almost nightly by someone with a grudge against the Royals so that amateur scanners would pick it up and make it public.
The scanning expert said: ‘The easiest way to do that would be to enhance the quality of the original recording then just play it down an ordinary phone to a mobile phone in an area where the signal was strong.
‘Edited versions could be played repeatedly until it had been successfully eavesdropped.’
The first version of the tape to be discovered was made by Oxford secretary Jane Norgrove, 25, and her father Mick.
They made the recording on December 31, 1989, when Mr Gilbey called Diana ‘Squidgy’ and told him: ‘I want you to think of me after midnight.
Are you staying up to see the New Year in?’
Intelligence sources believe that at least this particular recording was made ‘live’, unlike others.
Miss Norgrove handed the tape to The Sun a year later.
She claimed she had never realised the significance of the tape, which she played for the first time ‘weeks later’.
Retired bank manager Cyril Reenan recorded his version four days later.
He sold his tape to The Sun and was later exposed as the ‘supersnoop’ who had eavesdropped on the royals.
But investigators have discovered that his tape was a shorter, less significant version of the sensational Squidgy tape made public this year.
Because it was made on January 4, the references to New Year's Eve appeared to have been edited out.
Other key phrases, including the extract in which Diana says: ‘You are the nicest person in the whole wide world’, were present.
Mr Reenan has revealed that other parts of his tape ‘simply didn't make sense’.
He made it at 9.30pm yet heard Mr Gilbey tell Diana he was about to meet friends for dinner.
‘By 9.30 I would have expected him to have already been at the dinner party,’ Mr Reenan said.
The Sun took no action after proving that the voices on the tapes were Diana and Gilbey.
A year later a tape was sent anonymously to a royal correspondent on another newspaper.
Nothing more was done until June this year when Andrew Morton published his best-seller Diana: Her True Story.
The book alleged that Diana was upset about the long-running relationship between Charles and Camilla Parker Bowles.
In July, a German magazine received a phone call from a man alleging to have vital information about the Princess and a man.
The caller demanded £40,000 for his story and was promised the cash when the voice was identified as that of Diana.
It was identified but the caller never collected the money, leaving investigators with the belief that the mole had another, more sinister motivation.
At the same time the National Enquirer, a gossip magazine in the US, received a transcript of the tapes.
They published some details — and that's when the tapes in Britain were made public and the controversy erupted.
The plotter had achieved his purpose.
Prince's polo injury made:him ‘unfit to rule’
Chris Hutchins
THE Queen and Prince Philip ruled out Prince Charles's chances of becoming King two years before the damaging Diana and Camilla tapes scandals, TODAY can disclose.
The writing was on the wall for Charles in June 1990 when he broke his arm in two places after a fall from his polo pony.
In a telephone call the Queen told him that it would be better if he hung up his mallet and jodhpurs.
But the Prince stubbornly told his mother that he had already resolved to play polo again the moment his injuries had healed.
‘At that point Prince Philip told his wife that their eldest son was unsuitable to become monarch in the foreseeable future — if ever,’ says a senior royal insider.’
Prince Philip has a far greater influence over his wife than most people realise.
She listens to him more than anyone, and it was his will which prevailed when she composed last year's Christmas speech, in which she made it clear that she would never abdicate.
‘Her husband obliged her to face the fact that there is no suitable successor available to relieve her of the heavy burden she carries,’ says the insider.
‘Because he believed that Charles just isn't going to make it — and the sovereign's relationship with her heir has always been difficult — Prince Philip urged her to assert that she had no intention of stepping down from the throne, that she must and will remain for the duration.’
When she wrote that Christmas message the Queen was not only acutely aware that her daughter's divorce was looming, but also that the marriages of Charles and Andrew had failed miserably.
She was also aware that MI5 and Scotland Yard held fat files on the ‘close friends’ of her children and their spouses, including tape recordings of incriminating telephone conversations dating back at least to Princess Anne's affair with a royal detective.
No one realised more than the Queen that her children were deeply flawed and that the monarchy might be better served if that generation was skipped altogether.
There is at least a decade to go until her grandson, Prince William, is ready to succeed her.
Beyond pouring oil on troubled waters, the Queen can do no more than dig in for the long wait, guided by her husband.
How the Queen is cracking down on young Royals
Jane Moore
YOUNGER royals from Prince Charles down have been warned by the Queen to behave as she strives to salvage her family's battered public image.
The message is being relayed by Prince Philip and the Queen's private secretary Sir Robert Fellowes in the wake of her decision to pay taxes and meet Civil List payments for other royals.
In telephone calls and private meetings they are saying: ‘Don't do anything to rock the boat.
The Queen has made major concessions to protect the monarchy.
We must not let her down.
‘Her Majesty is paying your bills now, not the State, but that does not give you the right to behave any way you like.’
The younger Royals are being reminded that the State still pays for many of their benefits.
But as the Queen made clear at the Guildhall, if the family is to answer its critics it needs understanding from without as well as obedience from within.
Once the Royal Family never needed to appeal directly to the British people.
Affection flowed naturally to it.
But the Annus Horribilis has ended all that, and now the Queen wants a serious debate on the future of the monarchy, free of scandal and innuendo.
To understand what IS happening in the Royal Family, TODAY has carried out extensive research.
These are our main findings…
THE QUEEN will not abdicate.
She will remain on the throne as long as her health holds.
DIANA and CHARLES will not divorce or separate officially.
Because of the Queen's determination to remain on the throne, Charles will never become King.
Diana and Charles will continue to move within their own circle of friends, under strict instructions to avoid the slightest breath of scandal.
WILLIAM and HARRY will be groomed to take over from the Queen.
William will be taught the old values of royal duty as well as being brought up in the modern world, mainly by his mother.
ANDREW and FERGIE will only divorce if one of them wishes to remarry.
Otherwise they will remain officially separated.
ANNE will marry Commander Tim Laurence, and the date may be announced at Christmas.
The shows are different but the faces stay the same
A BRAVE new face of broadcasting was launched yesterday — with the same old faces.
Carlton Television begins beaming into homes around the capital minutes into the new year, taking over from Thames.
Director of programmes Paul Jackson said: ‘Carlton can bring the best new talent in the independent sector to ITV screens.’
But viewers may get the feeling they've seen it all before.
One of the first faces on screen will be Chris Tarrant, already a familiar presenter.
Later Jonathan Ross and ITN anchorwoman Fiona Armstrong pop up with Fantastic Facts while comedy plays will feature former EastEnder Leslie Grantham with Bread's Jonathan Morris.
The flagship news show will be presented by former ITN man Alastair Stewart and Fiona Foster from BBC's 999.
Other programmes include documentaries by Desmond Wilcox, live debate with David Frost, and Anneka Rice on a daytime magazine show.
Samantha Norman, already familiar on London Weekend, will report on an entertainment show.
Regional programming sees the return of dumped ITV soccer pundits Ian St John and Jimmy Greaves on a sports debate programme.
The schedules also include the return of comic Dave Allen.
The new faces do include chat show host Chrystal Rose and Dily Braimoh.
Carlton will retain many of ITV's most successful shows, including Coronation Street.
Ordinary people
Jane Moore
FOUR-year-old Nicholas MacMahon, Britain's latest child prodigy, is already studying computers at university.
But will he be the software genius of the 21st Century?
If the experiences of some other child prodigies are any guide, Nicholas might end up as a teacher at an average school.
Danielle Salamon was also four when she was feted as a musical genius in 1953.
As well as speaking three languages, Danielle could listen to a tune, then sit at the piano and play it note perfect.
It was predicted she would become a world-renowned concert pianist by 1970.
Danielle still plays, but the only money she makes from her talent is as a piano teacher in London.
Now 43, she is married with a two-year-old daughter and says it took a long time to settle down to a ‘normal life’.
‘Just because I was a very talented and precocious child didn't mean that I was also a happy one,’ says Danielle.
‘I was never allowed to do anything for fear it would spoil my hands.
To this day I cannot ride a bicycle.
‘I was treated as something very special and talented.
It's quite difficult to live up to that at school.’
And it's at school that many gifted children — and their parents — encounter their first real obstacles.
If the child's genius is not recognised and nurtured they face boring lessons way below their intellectual potential and run the risk of becoming disillusioned and ‘problem’ pupils.
On the other hand, if they are taken out of the conventional school system they can lose touch with their age group and become socially isolated.
This in turn can cause adjustment and behavioural problems later in life.
Michael Short, the director of the National Association for Gifted Children, says prodigies should spend as much time as possible with their peer group.
‘It's common for a child to be academically gifted but be on a normal level socially and emotionally,’ says Mr Short.
‘But some parents find that their child's school is not up to catering for children with special needs.
‘Depending on the personality of the child, he or she can either become destructive or switch off completely.
These are the children who sometimes crack at university level because they are facing challenge for the first time in their lives.’
Alternatively, as adults they may make their own decision to live an ordinary life and not pursue brilliance.
John Knee is a quietly-spoken 40-year-old schoolteacher from Malvern in Worcestershire.
It's difficult to believe that he was expelled from nursery school at the age of three for being a ‘smart alec’.
At six he could solve complicated mathematical equations and play chess at an advanced level.
‘My mother told me it was like having red hair.
It doesn't mean you're better than anyone else — just different,’ says John.
At 17 he went to Cambridge on a scholarship to study maths in which he got a first-class degree three years later.
‘I was a bit young to go there because I found it difficult to get to know people,’ he says.
Ruth Lawrence's parents opted to educate her intensively at home.
She was the youngest student to attend Oxford when she started a maths degree at 12.
Today she is 21 and lectures in mathematics at Oxford.
She lives with her father and leads a very quiet life.
While some prodigies struggle without the right challenges and others burn out on reaching university, there are a few who face another obstacle — parental jealousy.
According to Mensa, some parents resent their child's special ability and do little to encourage their offspring's special gifts.
The National Association for Gifted Children says two to five per cent of the population is highly able, and about half of one per cent are exceptionally gifted.
Then there are those raised in a hothouse of their own parents' ambitions.
‘Hothousing is entirely different because it involves a pushy parent force-feeding their child to be bright — the natural spark isn't necessarily there,’ says Mr Short.
For Danielle, who had natural ability and a rather pushy mother, a concert career fizzled out because she didn't work at it.
But that's fine by her.
‘I've always had a strong desire to have a real family.
I've eventually got there — but it's taken me all these years,’ she says.
‘I now feel that I'm getting to be somebody in my own right, and not someone my mother wanted me to be.’
Charles names his choice for a variety of acts
By Tim Satchell
THE Prince of Wales has taken an extraordinary interest in next Monday's Royal Variety Performance.
It will be the first time that he and the Princess of Wales have attended together as the principal guests.
In telephone conversations with BBC TV director Kevin Bishop, 43, the prince requested a number of his own favourite acts and asked that the show should not, as is usual, overrun.
Mr Bishop is a royal favourite.
Educated at South Bromley College and Plymouth Poly College of Art, he has directed Terry Wogan, Kenny Everett, Paul Daniels, French and Saunders, Victoria Wood and The Queen Mother's 90th Birthday Gala.
He has also produced two Children's Royal Variety Performances.
‘The prince has expressed the wish that his wife should not be bored by an over-long show,’ Kensington Palace told the BBC.
The BBC refuse comment, except to say: ‘Prince Charles expressed interest in the show and wanted to know who was on the bill.’
However the liaison went further.
‘He was asked about every act and even made his own suggestions and they were all carefully noted,’ says a source close to the prince's office.
‘But he was most keen that the thing shouldn't go on and on like it usually does.’
The show will be recorded at London's Dominion Theatre for broadcast by BBC1 on Saturday December 12.
Leslie Caron will introduce stars including Michael Crawford, Barry Manilow, soprano Montserrat Caballe, Nigel Kennedy, Gloria Estefan, Mel Smith and Griff Rhys Jones.
TONIGHT ten City firms will compete for the title of Financial Brain Game Champions 1992 — and raise funds for the charity ActionAid.
The quiz evening and dinner, hosted by jazzman George Melly, is at Piccadilly's Cafe Royal.
KPMG Peat Marwick, Sakura Global Capital and BDO Binder Hamlyn are among the companies that have paid £1,000 for a table to seat their team of 10 contestants.
Mr Melly compered the first Brain Game, for the legal profession last month, which raised £5,000.
Cathy Dennis
By Tim Satchell
SINGER Cathy Dennis, above, has just returned from Houston, Texas, where she was a guest of honour at America's largest Thanksgiving Day parade.
Other guests of honour invited by the Mayor were Charlton Heston and Ian Ziering from Beverly Hills 90210, in which Miss Dennis will herself be appearing in the new year.
With her current single Irresistible rising in the charts, Miss Dennis, 23, is now working on the video for her next single Falling, taken from the album Into The Skyline to be released in mid-January.
Norwich-born Miss Dennis, who lives in Kingston, Surrey, made her name with Touch Me which reached Number 1 in America in May 1991.
It got to Number Four in the British charts.
And…
By Tim Satchell
A CUSTOMER reports that yesterday he phoned Harrods to ask for the barber shop.
‘Certainly sir, jackets or hairdressing?’
No luck of Irish for Lord
By Tim Satchell
ONE of the candidates in last week's Irish elections is still hoping to become a member of both the Irish and British parliaments.
Lord (Henry) Mount Charles, 41, stood for Fine Gael in Louth.
While he received a creditable 5,304 votes, this was not quite enough in the complicated multi-member system.
He is the son and heir of Marquess Conynghan, 67, who also has the title Lord Minster.
Lord Mount Charles tells me: ‘For a first-timer I got a good result.
I will almost certainly stand again next time around.’
The proprietor of Slane Castle in County Meath, father-of-four Lord Mount Charles has held pop concerts there.
Film shoot draws to novel ending
By Tim Satchell
THE final day's filming of the new David Hare movie, The Secret Rapture, starring Juliet Stevenson, Geraldine Wilton and Joanne Whalley-Kilmer, has taken place in the 18th century drawing room of one of Britain's oldest publishing houses, John Murray.
Murray managing director Nick Perren and 13 other members of staff have made their film debuts in a scene which focuses on an editorial meeting to discuss the book jacket of Ruth Prawer Jhabvala's new novel, Poet and Dancer, which is published in the spring by John Murray.
Mr Perren tells me: ‘By happy coincidence, on the very same day Ruth Prawer Jhabvala was in Bath on a film set too — the Merchant Ivory movie of The Remains Of The Day which she has scripted from the Kazuo Ishiguro novel.’
The Secret Rapture, which also stars Alan Howard, Robert Stephens and Neil Pearson, is being directed by Howard Davies.
Advent Calendar
By Tim Satchell
THERE is still time to buy your child an Advent Calendar.
Traditionally the first window should have been opened this morning.
Religious symbolism is preferred for each day.
However, many now follow the American practice of buying calendars with small chocolates behind each door with the day's date on it.
It is clearly inappropriate to eat chocolate first thing, therefore each window should be opened at bedtime before the children brush their teeth.
Harvey Nichols has used the Advent Calendar in its current magazine advertising campaign — the doors open to show merchandise on each of the store's floors.
I sold my teddy bears for £18 to help keep my mummy alive
Penny Wark
JOANNA Parkinson-Hardman was five when she was told her mother Ruth was dying of cancer.
She responded by selling her toys to raise money for cancer research and now, at the age of ten, has raised £4,000.
On Friday her remarkable courage will be recognised on Esther Rantzen's Hearts Of Gold (BBC1, 8pm).
A fund raising book of Joanna's poems is also being published (Heart Of Gold, BBC Books, £4.99).
Here, Joanna, her mother and father John tell Penny Wark of their struggle to come to terms with tragedy.
JOANNA'S STORY
MUM found out she had cancer when I was about two years old.
I didn't really understand then but when I got to about five my mum and dad told me.
I went to my bedroom and cried.
I wanted to touch her and make her better but I realised I couldn't do that.
So I thought, what can I do?
I came up with the idea of having a sale.
I set out my toys and teddy bears and put price tags on them for 25p and 50p.
Then dad and I made some cakes and I put notices about the sale through the neighbours' doors in Swadlincote in Derbyshire, where we live.
I raised £18 and I've since raised £4,000, but that's nothing really when you compare it with someone's life.
My dad says most children of my age can't cook but I've learned to help.
When mum feels terrible it gets really, really worrying.
I want to make her better but you can't do that so you've got to make some effort.
You don't say: ‘Oh, my mum's got cancer, we can't do this or that.’
We get on with life and take pleasure in things whether she's ill or not.
I started writing poetry when I was young.
My first was when mum was ill in hospital.
I did a story and thought, no, that's not right.
It doesn't suit the mood.
I looked for ideas in a book that belonged to my great grandad, and there were some really good poems there so I started writing poetry.
Whenever mum was ill I used to get a little card and write a poem and put it on her pillow.
There's a drawer in mum's room where she keeps every single one.
My mum's very loving.
She is too nice for words.
MUM'S STORY
Jo makes me believe I'll get better
HEN Jo was born a friend said she was sent from heaven.
I laughed then but now I can see what she meant.
She has kept me alive.
Both the children have brought me through extremely difficult times when I could easily have given up.
Charles, 16, is much quieter.
He doesn't say a great deal but he thinks a lot.
He doesn't like to be seen with mum and dad, but when I'm poorly and he takes me out in the wheelchair, he doesn't mind who he meets and he says: ‘Hi fellas, this is my mum.’
When Jo gets home from school she flies upstairs, gets a flannel and wipes my head.
She calls it the magic flannel and says: ‘Mummy you'll be fine.
I'm here, you've got nothing to worry about.’
She's just ten yet she seems like an adult.
When you're a little girl and you're poorly, all you want is your mum.
It's like that for me, just like my mum being there.
Jo isn't frightened.
She knows what I've got yet she is convinced that if she looks after me I'll get better.
It's stupid but when she's there I believe her.
She's literally keeping me alive.
By fund-raising she is doing something positive towards helping me get better.
She says if it doesn't make me better, it might make somebody else's mum better.
One day I was in the wheelchair and people were talking to John and Jo but ignoring me.
Jo said: ‘Why don't you talk to mum, she's sitting here.’
Then she went into a shop and said: ‘Do you realise mummy can't come into your shop because there's such a big step.’
Some families split up with the stress of this situation.
I've been very lucky, it's brought us so close.
We pull together when the need arises, but when Jo and Charles think I'm okay they're just like any other children, just as naughty.
I discovered the lump in my breast when Jo was a baby.
I had my first operation when she was 14 months old.
She was nearly five before she understood what was wrong with me.
She wanted to know what cancer was and when they said it was terminal, she asked what that meant.
She knows what it means now.
What's right for one family isn't necessarily right for another.
But the best way for us to deal with it was as a family because it's less frightening that way.
If we'd been secretive, the children would have worried more.
I think it's made life a lot richer for us.
You dispense with the trivialities.
Before we'd fall out over stupid things and not speak to each other for a day.
We don't do that any more so every day is a good day — a day to look forward to.
DAD'S STORY
THERE was a bad week in 1991 and the doctors said that Ruth had only six months to live.
We decided that as we weren't going to get our retirement together, we would spend all the time together we could.
I gave up my management job in industry and since then we've done as much as we can every day.
When you get a prognosis like that, trivial matters disappear and you concentrate on the really important things in life — home, family and caring.
We've been offered hospice places but that's not the way we want to do things.
No one can advise you because no one else is you or your family.
So you make mistakes and sometimes mistakes hurt.
Ruth was 34 when she first became ill.
She had a lumpectomy and then they found that the cancer had spread to her lymph glands, which are like a racetrack for the rest of the body.
Later she had a full mastectomy and was just getting over that when they discovered the cancer had spread to her bones.
In March 1990 they gave her about a year to live.
Telling the children was probably the hardest thing I've ever had to do.
They asked all the wrong questions, all the ones I couldn't answer.
We wept together.
After that they were very caring for about a month.
Abnormally so.
Then life started to get back to normal.
When I gave up my job I would try to do something positive every day.
We would go out to lunch or perhaps look around a stately home — life became extremely rich because we could control Ruth's pain with morphine.
But three months ago Ruth's energy went right down.
She found it very difficult to get out of bed, so we moved life to centre it in the bedroom.
We used to say we'll take life day by day.
Now it's almost hour by hour as it's very difficult to know what morphine dose Ruth should be on.
Enough and it takes the pain away, too much and you feel dopey.
When you have someone in pain and a child who wants to play, you have to deal with the pain first.
It is very difficult to tear yourself into enough pieces to make sure that everyone is as happy as they can be.
We're very conscious now that life hangs by a fine tendril.
But the kids are full of the future and we help them to plan.
There was a time when Charles was coasting at school and if I had been working, I would have told him to buckle down — which would have done no good at all.
Because I was at home, we sat down for two hours and talked it through.
We'd been drifting apart until then, and that talk brought us right back together.
Jo doesn't see herself as anything exceptional.
She is probably the least grasping person I've ever met, and ever since she's had pocket money she's given it to cancer research.
When she was five and did the first sale, I was so proud of her.
I came home from work and I could hear sobbing in her bedroom.
She said: ‘I've only got £18.
That's not enough to make mummy well.’
That blew me apart.
Then she went down to the cancer shop and asked if she could help them.
She's very determined and that was her way of coping.
The last garden sale we had was frantic.
She made over £1,000.
If she has any problems, she tells me about them now.
That's something that didn't happen when I came home after a long day at work.
I've always been someone who knows what needs to be done, and does it.
At one time I didn't let emotions sway me but now I tend to cry easily.
I can't talk about the future.
I'm 46, Ruth is 45, we've been married for 24 years.
When Ruth dies I don't know how I'll emerge.
But what gets me most is when somebody dies who hasn't really lived.
Ruth and I have lived, and the kids have lived, in an extremely difficult situation.
And it has given us all a richer life.
Like Windsor, Royals will rise from the ashes
Penny Thornton
ON OCTOBER 2 I gave a talk on the British monarchy at an astrological conference in Oslo.
I compared the planetary patterns at the time of the abdication crisis in l936 with those that are around now.
And there are some striking similarities.
I predicted that a dramatic event would soon strike at the heart of the Royal Family.
My initial feeling was, after the Full Moon of October 11, that the Prince and Princess of Wales's separation would be announced.
I also considered that the two eclipses this month, reminiscent of those in the days before Edward VIII's abdication, might trigger Charles renouncing the succession in favour of Prince William.
Although there wasn't a separation announcement, we were told that the Prince and Princess of Wales would no longer live under the same roof.
As yet, there is only speculation that Charles will relinquish his birthright.
Although this is unlikely to happen this year, the astrological pointers are that it will occur before the end of l993.
But the most dramatic event was the fire at Windsor Castle which brought the monarchy if not to its knees, at least to its senses.
In the wake of the outcry over the restoration bill, the Queen agreed to pay income tax.
So, rather like a Greek tragedy, the Royals have been made aware of hubris — an arrogance that invites disaster.
At 11.37am on Friday, November 20, a spark ignited a curtain that led to the Windsor fire.
At that exact time the same degree of Capricorn was rising as that of the Queen's birth.
The same degree of Scorpio was also directly overhead — as was Pluto, a symbol of hubris if ever there was one.
Such synchronicity is quite staggering.
Not only was the chart a perfect picture of a fire with consequences way beyond structural damage, but the repetition of the Queen's horoscope made clear that this was an event targeted at the heart of the monarchy.
Pluto's theme is transformation and his emblem the phoenix rising from the ashes.
This reveals that out of the destruction a new creation can emerge.
The castle will be transformed and a new monarchical order born.
While the Royals may lose their mystique, they'll show us the way forward and reveal that hubris is not just a Greek myth.
ARIES Mar 21-Apr 20
THERE is a sense of release about December's stars, perhaps a feeling that the worst is behind you or because you are launching into new territory.
Travel and widening your scope of experience is on the menu and, with Mercury back on form from the 1st, journeys, meetings and discussions over joint affairs — monetary and otherwise — look promising.
Nevertheless, with eclipses on the 9th and 24th, it is a powerfully transformative month, especially on the emotional front.
Your direction in life could be affected by what may seem a rather fateful set of circumstances or through the influence of a certain someone.
TAURUS Apr 21-May 21
IF IT weren't for the presence of two eclipses, December would be one of the better months of the year.
The full moon on the 9th hones in on finances and security issues and indicates that you must be protective of your assets and able to confront others with their part in your current state of affairs.
The time is ripe for a show-down or a major confrontation over money matters.
But elsewhere the planets are smiling on you and, around the 19th, you can anticipate a happy moment linked to love or career.
The Christmas period is highly charged, perhaps because you sense the drum beat of change in 1993.
GEMINI May 22-Jun22
THERE'S plenty to be thankful for in December, not least your ruler, Mercury, moving directly on the 1st.
Decisions or plans that went awry a few weeks ago may now right themselves and the momentum of life steps up markedly.
The eclipse, late on the 9th, represents something of a cosmic milestone, especially if you're an early June birthday.
Events over the next six months are likely to leave an imprint, and it seems a relationship is the catalyst for a major change or that a relationship is transformed from outside.
Christmas looks to be a time for burying the hatchet or exhuming it for re-examination.
Don't forget your Christmas spirit!
CANCER Jun 23-Jul 23
DECEMBER may be a hard-working month when you tend to be carrying more than your share of responsibilities.
And although you can enjoy yourself, you may find your time and thoughts are concentrated on your work situation.
The eclipsed full moon on the 9th indicates major changes on the job front and, even if these don't manifest immediately, the promise hangs heavy in the air.
Relationships too are an important feature and the second eclipse on the 24th points to a new stage in romantic and marital affairs.
You may be able to put the past behind you, either because of revivified feelings or the arrival of someone new.
LEO Jul 24-Aug23
WITH the sun at the heart of your horoscope until the 21st and Venus bringing her sweetness to bear on relationships from the 8th, December could be the most crucial month of the year for love and partnership matters — the 19th could be more than just a magical moment.
There is an aura of endings and beginnings but it might be wiser not to consider anything finally settled until after the 30th.
The solar eclipse on the 24th indicates a turn in the tide regarding work and you can anticipate some surprise developments here from the beginning of January.
Sometimes an initially unwelcome move takes you precisely where you need to go.
VIRGO Aug 24-Sept23
FAMILY and property matters appear to be a moving experience in December.
But with ruler Mercury in direct motion from the 1st, you can make headway.
The 9th's lunar eclipse spans the areas of professional and personal goals on the one hand and your base in life on the other.
At the very least this suggests your future does not lie in your hands alone.
It could also indicate that you have reached the end of the road with one enterprise.
But arrivals follow departures and the new appears very promising — even if you have to wait a little time for it.
December is a month when what is said and who you meet could have profound consequences.
LIBRA Sept 24-Oct 23
THERE is a tremendous amount of movement in your chart for much of December which may indicate situations that once appeared irredeemably stuck now do a 180-degree shift.
You may also be involved in a fair amount of travel.
But whether the accent on communications manifests as journeys or negotiations, the eclipsed full moon on the 9th will leave a lasting impression.
This is a time of tension when the stakes may be high and a future plan hangs by a thread.
But it is the solar eclipse on the 24th that holds the greatest potential for you: an addition to the family or change of location could be on the cards for next year.
SCORPIO Oct 24-Nov 22
UNTIL the 21st, money matters are to the fore.
However solvent you are, the eclipse on the 9th looks set to change the status-quo and it seems you have run out of road on one source of income or investment.
You've had your share of ups and downs this year and December does little to change this pattern.
Aspects on the 5th and 30th suggest another turning point has been reached, and although this may involve the home front, you may feel personally challenged by events.
In a way, the planetary message is: grow or get out.
Put more politely, December is a time when you must become bigger than situations in order to transcend them.
SAGITTARIUS Nov 23-Dec 22
THIS is usually the jolliest month of the year because you can justify buying up the High Street and nursing lots of hangovers.
But with a total eclipse in your sign on the 9th you may have pressing matters to attend to.
This is indicative of a conclusion to a chapter.
But because the moon is eclipsed, the stage drawing to a close is an ultra-important one.
Your personal life and relationships are primary candidates for a fateful event — whether in the next four weeks or six months.
While this could be wonderful, you are unlikely to feel over-the-moon about it all.
Some are born great, some achieve greatness and some have it thrust upon them.
CAPRICORN Dec 23-Jan 19
IT IS bad enough having your birthday when everybody has run out of money and the spirit of giving is distinctly thin.
But when you have a solar eclipse in your sign at Christmas, things are going a bit too far.
On the plus side, the eclipse on the 24th is a new-moon event and therefore indicative of brave new beginnings.
Either at New Year or before July you can anticipate a change in the everyday running of your life.
Although this may involve a job, a relationship or a house move, the feeling is that you are starting a new era.
With this in mind, you should take December's events on the chin and with a pinch of salt.
AQUARIUS Jan 20-Feb 19
WITH Venus in your sign from the 8th, life can't be all that bad.
In fact, the theory is that you should be inundated with praise, gifts, hugs and kisses.
Of course, the best way of getting these goodies is to give unreservedly.
And perhaps this is the theme for December.
You tend to withdraw into yourself if you feel got at by the world, especially if you have experienced a rejection in past months.
But now you should come out of your shell.
The 5th and 30th are times when your feelings could be powerfully affected by events and with eclipses on the 9th and 24th, this is a month of heart-affecting revelations.
PISCES Feb 20-Mar 20
THE sun is now directly overhead and illuminating your life-direction and your most sought-after goals.
On the face of it, this is a month when you should be concentrating on your future and accepting your share of the limelight.
But the full-moon eclipse on the 9th in this same area suggests an unexpected turn of events.
There may be a hiatus in family or property matters or pressures that have been rumbling underground may come forcefully to the surface.
Whatever your scenario in December, what is being brought home to you is that you can no longer stand on the sidelines of your own life.
It is up to you to take charge.
New Co-op card takes the credit
Stephen Ellis
IT'S bad enough paying crippling interest rates without having to pay an annual fee on top of that but if you shop around you can avoid the charge.
The Co-op Bank is bringing out a ‘free for life’ card in February which should prove popular.
The card is available only to home-owners earning more than Pounds 15,000 and with a telephone.
To qualify for the Robert Owen card — named after the man whose ideas formed the basis of the co-operative movement — people have to agree to use it at least ten times a year.
In return, the Co-op promises there will never be a yearly fee.
Provided you meet the requirements, the card makes good sense.
For although many companies are now cutting their interest rates, the annual fees mean that paying by plastic could still be expensive.
So anyone who pays the bill in full each month and never spreads the payments should pick the Co-op Card or National & Provincial's card, although the latter offers only a one-year ‘no fee’ guarantee.
TSB and Yorkshire, the only other main issuers not to charge fees, merely say they have ‘no plans as yet’ to introduce a charge.
If you use your card as a way to spread payments, of course, low annual percentage rate (APR) is more important than a fee.
The cheapest is National & Provincial, which will charge 21.6 per cent from the middle of January.
The Co-op has a three-level charge on its Robert Owen card but for monthly spending above £300 or repaying by direct debit, the APR is 22.42.
Barclaycard is shortly cutting its APR to 22.9, First Direct will be 24.3 from January 1, and the Yorkshire and Lloyds cards are 24.6.
Before you switch to a new card firm, don't cancel the old one until you have been accepted by the new issuer.
Some credit checks are now very tough.
Ornament worth its weight in gold
Adrian Furness
THAT old glass paperweight hiding in the back of the china cabinet may seem like a worthless ornament but it could be worth more than you think.
The best were made in Paris between 1840 and 1860 by Baccarat, St Louis and Clichy and now fetch between £100 and £900.
They were made by stretching out thin rods of hot, coloured glass which, as they cooled, would be chopped into short lengths called ‘canes’— rather like seaside rock.
At the end of the cane, instead of spelling out ‘Blackpool’, the pattern would be a flower or a tiny silhouette of an animal.
If you look carefully you may see a date and the maker's initials on one of the canes, which are covered with a clear glass weight.
In ‘millefiori’ paperweights, for which Baccarat was especially famous, there might be more than 100 canes crammed together in colourful profusion.
Other weights used larger canes spaced out in a more formal pattern.
Different techniques produced weights containing glass portraits or large glass flowers or vegetables.
The most sought after are those containing glass animals, such as a curled snake or salamander.
A fine salamander paperweight could fetch up to £10,000 today.
Most weights, however, are reasonably priced.
Phillips of London is selling a collection tomorrow and many are expected to fetch between £100 and £300.
Several Baccarat millefiori weights from the 1840s are at the top of the range.
The most expensive are expected to fetch between £600 and £900.
The curiosity value of a St Louis weight, in which the glassblower put the cane in upside down, reversing the date (1848) and the maker's intials, is expected to boost the price to between £300 and Pounds 400.
Glass paperweights are still made in the same style today.
If it isn't dated, how can you tell if yours is from the golden period?
‘There's an amazing difference in quality when you compare them,’ says Jo Marshall, of Phillips.
‘Most later weights are much lighter, the colours are muddier and they don't have anything like the control over the spacing of the canes.’
The paperweights are in Phillips' sale of Good European Ceramics and Glass at 101 New Bond Street, London W1 at 11am on Wednesday, December 2.
Take cover now to beat redundancy nightmare
Stephen Ellis
AS Britain's jobless total nudges three million, insurance companies are pulling the rug from under thousands of homebuyers.
For six years, they cheerfully raked in premiums for policies which paid the mortgage if you were made redundant or forced to take time off work because of sickness or accident.
Many also undertook to meet monthly costs such as credit card and hire purchase repayments.
But with the number of claims soaring, insurers now reckon they are losing money — so they are tightening up the rules or backing out altogether.
Three years ago, 38 insurance companies offered mortgage cover.
Now only 17 do and if times get harder, even they may stop.
Stricter terms and conditions don't just affect first-time buyers.
As agreements between insurers and mortgage lenders run on short contracts, the insurers can alter conditions or stop offering policies altogether, often at a month's notice, leaving your mortgage unprotected whether you took it out six months or several years ago.
One company which has stopped covering mortgage payments is Cornhill, which supplied mortgage policies to lenders Lloyds Bank.
Luckily Lloyds has found an alternative insurer — Pinnacle — for its 250,000 homebuyers, although the policy conditions are more restrictive.
Worse hit are the 3,000 people who bought homes through the Household Mortgage Corporation, who had also arranged policies with Cornhill.
No alternative has yet been found for them and unless HMC finds one, their mortgages will be unprotected from this month.
Another firm which has stopped offering cover recently is Consolidated Marine & General, who provided the policy sold by the Co-op Bank.
A Co-op spokesman says: ‘We have found an alternative firm but it has meant that instead of mortgage repayments being met for a year, they will now only be paid for six months — and the price has had to rise as well.’
At least they are still offering some form of policy to borrowers — as are the other firms listed in our table on the right.
The table shows how much you have to pay monthly for each £100 of mortgage repayment you need covered (second column), when it comes into effect (third column) and how long it lasts (final column).
First-time buyers and those starting a fresh finance agreement can still normally get this type of insurance, but they are likely to find tough terms and conditions attached to it such as higher premiums and delayed first payments.
All policies now stipulate that they must have run for between three and six months before claims will be considered — and most bar self-employed people altogether.
In times like these, insuring your mortgage still makes sense even with tougher conditions imposed — but you need to know exactly what those conditions are.
For instance, policies will not pay out if you have to stop work because of a medical condition which you knew about before starting the policy.
Kevin Sopp, for example, bought an insurance policy from Financial Insurance Group to cover his Barclayloan.
He was made redundant in March 1991 and received payments until returning to full-time work in July 1991, but suffered a prolapsed disc a month later and has been off work since then.
FIG claims that Kevin saw his doctor with backache before taking out the policy and despite letters from his doctor, refused to budge until TODAY became involved.
Now they say they will accept an independent medical report.
Nick Hickson was luckier with his General Accident insurance.
He was made redundant in 1991, having bought a house two years earlier.
‘Things went through smoothly,’ he says, ‘But now the terms have changed and payments only continue for a year.’
Checking accounts is in your interest
YOU could save a small fortune by paying £20 to have your bank interest charges checked.
In 1985 builder Tom Barnes became suspicious about a £4,000 interest charge for a three-month period.
He says: ‘I decided to devise a method of calculating what interest I should have been charged and the bank was miles out.’
Tom checked his NatWest statements for the previous five years and was repaid £14,974.
Tom's system is now available through many accountants or direct from Bank-Search, PO Box 1630, Poole, Dorset, BH14 8XN for £19.95.
NATWEST has a new telephone banking service giving small businessmen 24-hour access to their accounts.
As well as checking balances, the system provides details of recent transactions and allows transfers and bill payments.
‘It will help small businessmen keep track of cashflow, which is more important than ever,’’ says Jane Bradford, head of NatWest's small business service.
The cost is £10 a quarter.
SERVICEMEN and women are seldom in the same place long enough to put down roots and buy their own home.
But now there's a new scheme to encourage them to do just that.
Called the Services Home Savings Scheme, it involves tucking away between £50 and £200 a month into a savings account with one of four organisations.
If these payments are kept up for five years and are used to buy a home, the Ministry of Defence will add £1 tax-free for every £3 saved.
The firms taking part are the Bank of Scotland, Gartmore Money Management, and the Norwich & Peterborough and Skipton building societies.
The terms on offer vary slightly between the four organisations.
Charities
CHARITIES are losing money not so much because of the practice of suggesting the amount of donations but because they impose such high postal charges on the goods they offer.
I recently wanted a diary from one organisation and the postage was £3.
It's no wonder people are put off.
Euro MPs
IT IS disgraceful that Euro MPs can draw up to £40,000 a year in expenses.
I'm not even sure what these people do, let alone why they should be entitled to such a perk.
Female peerages
THE pathetic objections voiced by the Lords to allowing peerages to pass on through the female line really rammed home to me how outmoded this institution is.
Let's just scrap the place.
BBC fees
IF the BBC wants to secure its future the first thing it should do is cut down on the huge fees it pays to presenters.
None of them is worth this sort of money.
Catwalk model
I WAS really gobsmacked when I saw your picture of a catwalk model parading a hat with a toy airplane on it.
If this is style, I'm a monkey's uncle.
Pricing pets out of a home
PERHAPS the RSPCA shares the blame for the growing number of pets abandoned during the recession.
More people might be willing to adopt animals from shelters if the RSPCA lowered its charges.
It cost me, with sterilisation fee, £70 to take a puppy.
Our Jemma is a lovely pet and the family is glad we have her.
How many people, especially those on low wages, could afford to give a pet a loving home at the prices the RSPCA charges?
Pricing pets out of a home
IT IS ironic that Prince Philip was attending a conference of the Worldwide Fund for Nature in Buenos Aires last week while Prince Charles was busy shooting pheasants at Sandringham.
It would bring joy to millions of people if the Royals gave up bloodsports.
Britain can't afford Mr Lamont's excesses
I'M SURE the rest of Britain is wondering like me how a man who can't manage his own personal finances is running the country's economy.
I refer of course to Norman Lamont and the startling revelations that his Access card is £470 over its £2,000 limit.
This is hardly the best example to set to an electorate that is constantly being urged to display pay and other financial restraints.
Some members of this Government are becoming more ludicrous than their Spitting Image puppets.
It is no laughing matter, however.
Britain is in an economic mess and we need level-headed, responsible leaders to pull us out of it.
Mr Lamont doesn't fit the bill.
Britain can't afford Mr Lamont's excesses
IT'S a little unfair to pillory Norman Lamont so much over his credit card bill.
As anyone will tell you, it's easy to go over the limit, especially at this time of year when people are preparing for Christmas and buying presents.
All this proves is that the Chancellor is human like the rest of us.
Britain can't afford Mr Lamont's excesses
I WAS more startled at the amount Mr Lamont was allowed to run up on his card rather than his doing it in the first place.
I only have to go a few quid over and I get snooty letters threatening to take it off me.
Greedy Hawk
IT is obscene that TV Gladiator Hawk eats more than £120 worth of food every week when people in the Third World are dying of starvation.
I cannot see the point of building up your body by eating mountains of food just to pose before an audience.
Late telephone calls
I'M sure there must be many people like me who have been troubled by telephone calls at ungodly hours which have turned out to be BT testing the lines.
I think BT should compensate us for the concern and inconvenience these mystery calls cause, perhaps by reducing bills for that quarter.
MPs pay
WHAT a cheek of Labour and Liberal Democrat MPs even to consider voting against a freeze on their pay in the face of restraints on other public sector workers.
When you consider the U-turn antics of the crew in power, we must have the most-two faced politicians in the world.
Milestones
BIRTHDAYS: Film director Woody Allen, 57.
Golfer Lee Trevino, 53.
ON THIS DAY: In 1919, Lady Astor became the first woman MP to take her seat in the Commons.
In 1966, British post offices issued the first special Christmas stamps.
Things you didn't know you didn't know
Graeme Donald
THE expression ‘nosey parker’ has often been linked to people of that name but the epithet's origin actually lies with the Hyde Park rabbits and the Great Exhibition.
In 19th-Century London jargon a parker was a rabbit living in any city park, but especially Hyde Park.
Long used to the presence of humans, these were quite tame — even inquisitive — and the permanent twitching of the creature's nose would have done nothing to hinder the emergence of the expression.
Then in 1851, when the Exhibition was held in Hyde Park, London was invaded by thousands of visitors who gawped at anything and everything, so the interlopers soon acquired the nickname too.
The use of ‘rabbit’ for incessant chatter comes from the rhyming slang, ‘rabbit and pork’meaning talk, and the creature itself is so named from Rabbie, the Scottish version of Robert.
TODAY'S Book Of Things You Didn't Know…is now on sale, published by Simon & Schuster for £3.99.
Taxing our patience
THERE is a sense of deja vu about the council tax.
We have been here before when the poll tax was introduced.
This latest attempt to sort out local taxation has all the hallmarks of another fiasco.
Only this time the loudest howls of outrage will come from Tory voters in the South.
That does not mean the council tax is particularly unfair, even though it will be a burden on many householders.
No one likes paying tax but it has to be paid.
What the complaints will be about are the size of the bills, for throughout most of the South they will be even higher than the hated poll tax.
To make matters worse, the value of homes has dropped dramatically since they were fixed for the council tax more than a year ago.
That will make householders feel they are being doubly penalised.
There is no easy way out for the Government.
It is too far down this road to attempt a U-turn.
Some Tories have already warned that council tax could be the final nail in John Major's coffin.
That does not have to be.
There are sharper nails around.
The Government has to deal with the problems raised by this new tax with sympathy and understanding.
There must be no lecturing to those who are hardest hit and no attempt to suggest that a fuss is being made about nothing.
The introduction of council tax is going to hurt an awful lot of people and there is no point in pretending otherwise.
Counted out
ANYONE who has watched Carol Vorderman on the quiz show Countdown will have marvelled at the speed of her mathematical brain.
Given any number, it takes her only a second to work out the combination of smaller numbers which add up to it.
So rare is her talent that you might think she was irreplaceable to the TV game.
Who could take over if she decided to retire?
Now we have the answer.
It is John Onanuga who is currently suspended from his job in a Thresher wine shop.
He was asked by a TODAY reporter — the first in his shop after it was revealed that Norman Lamont had spent £17.47 at a Thresher's — what the Chancellor had bought.
Quick as a flash — or, to be more precise, quick as a Vorderman — Mr Onanuga announced that it was a £15.49 bottle of Champagne and a £1.98 packet of cigarettes.
Grand total: £17.47.
Now Mr Onanuga's bosses have suspended him for making up the whole story about Mr Lamont.
Perhaps, with such powers of invention and mathematical ability, he will be offered a job in television sooner than we think.
Blind prejudice
YESTERDAY Dr Julia Schofield received an MBE for her work in tailoring computer software to the needs of blind people.
She is blind herself yet she was not allowed to take her guide dog with her when she visited Buckingham Palace for the ceremony.
The Royal Family does a lot of sterling work for charity and the Queen is known to adore dogs.
Why then was the Palace so unsympathetic to Dr Schofield?
Protocol, presumably.
Yet this inflexibility spoiled a day that should have been special for Dr Schofield.
It does the Palace no credit that its officials cannot grasp that a guide dog is not a pet but a valued half of a very special partnership.
101 uses of a dead BMW
Liz Moore
IT'S a triumph for British engineering.
The BMWs slowly roll down the impressive new production line where the team of mechanics eagerly await their arrival — so they can carefully take the cars to pieces.
For rather than building sleek, new production models, they are interested only in giving the cars' components a useful role for the future.
In an age of increasing environmental awareness, the new £250,000 plant in Bolney, West Sussex is the ultimate recycling plant.
A joint initiative between BMW and Bolney Motors, it recycles everything in the damaged cars that are sent there for ‘treatment’.
The metal chassis that has seen thousands of miles may have a new life as dustbins, the fractured windscreens will metamorphose into recyled drinking glasses, the plastic interior may be transformed into the next generation's Super Marios and Ninja Turtles.
In fact the parts can be used in anything from high-tech warships to telephones and TVs.
Even oil and fuel in the engine is recycled.
In its first year the plant will process 500 BMWs, building up to its capacity of 2,500, by operating as a factory in reverse — working on the premise that everything that is bolted, welded, glued, screwed or sewn in can be used again.
In the Eighties, when everything was disposable, the scrap-yard was a car's final resting place — a crude graveyard where dented hulks were crushed beyond recognition and then sent to landfill sites.
But that disposable age is over.
In the green Nineties, every rusting heap has a life after death.
There is another motive — good old-fashioned business sense.
As the mechanics, now dubbed dismantlers, get to work their eyes are primed to search out every tiny component which could be used again or recycled into something else.
And out of the disorder of the mangled metal work comes a process as flowing and systematic as if it were building a pristine model from scratch.
First stop is a bay where all the car's fluids are drained.
The oil is used for the factory's own heating system with any surplus sent for refining.
The anti-freeze and brake fluid is collected to make more of the same, any petrol is used by factory vehicles, and the battery is taken to bits with every part -acid, lead and plastic casing — sent for recycling.
Once dry of all fluids the car is loaded on to the factory's rolling ‘D production’ line.
The first pit stop sees the car stripped of all external plastic and any other parts — such as bonnets, doors or boots — that could be re-sold to BMW owners.
The next stop gets rid of all the glass which is then collected by Pilkingtons for melt-down and re-use.
The dismantlers get inside the car to take out the interior trim, seats, dashboard and steering wheel which are all segregated into bins for different plastics and materials.
At the mechanical bay the engine is lifted from its casing and dismantled.
Any part with life left in it or potential for reconditioning is set aside for cleaning and re-sale.
Anything beyond hope is identified for its metal type and dispatched for shredding — the iron going on to steel mills, the non-ferrous metals to smelting pans, perhaps for reincarnation as a Ford gearbox or even a domestic dustbin and lid.
The engine gone, all that is left are the carpets and wiring which are all ripped out — the copper from the wiring resold as scrap.
The remaining bare shell is then cut up and sent off to its grave in the industry's melting pot.
The whole process is the first step on the road to re-using the 1.4 million cars which are scrapped in Britain each year — 16,000 of them BMWs.
By using traditional disposal methods, only 25 per cent of an average car is salvaged and re-used.
The remaining 75 per cent— much of it ground down to toxic sludge and non-degradable waste — ends up dumped in landfill sites.
With this new dismantling process, BMW hopes to reduce by 46 per cent the waste which is dumped in the environment and, in the years ahead, aims to cut it down by more than half again.
‘About 14 million vehicles in western Europe reach the end of their useful life every year,’ BMW's worldwide recycling boss, Dr Horst-Henning Wolf, said at the factory's launch yesterday.
‘Despite the removal of parts and metal reclamation from the shredding process, more than 3 million tonnes of automotive waste is dumped.
‘And this figure is growing because of the higher proportion of plastic used in modern cars.
‘Not only does this require ecologically valuable countryside in which to bury it, but the residues from industrial shredders are contaminated by operating fluids, many of which are classified as hazardous waste.
‘The challenge that faces car manufacturers is the development of a process and infrastructure which can achieve the most complete re-utilisation of materials from cars and the development of models which permit even easier recycling.’
So next time your banger lets you down, just remember — there really is some life left in the old heap.
The 12 sprays of Christmas
By Jane Gordon
IT ALWAYS used to be Chrismuzak — the sound of synthesised carols in stores and malls — that turned me into a Scrooge.
But this year an even more offensive marketing ploy is keeping me away from my Christmas shopping.
It's the chemically created aroma of the season — wood smoke, pine kernels, cinnamon and cloves — that is overwhelming every department store grotto in the country.
Intended to induce a feeling of nostalgia in the shopper (and a subsequent loosening of their purse) it only induces in me a feeling of nausea.
In fact, I have decided that the Christmas season is fast becoming a desperate nasal challenge.
Just the other day, rushing choking from the gift grotto in a famous store, I inadvertently stumbled into the perfume hall and a battalion of women promoting the fragrance of the moment.
Even nipping into Boots to pick up a bottle of shampoo or popping into Woolworths for some pick 'n' mix can turn out to be a major sensory-assault course.
And the worst of it is that this disturbing new trend has extended beyond the mall and into the magazine.
December issues of every publication you can think of include samplers of Calvin Klein's Obsession, Giorgi's Beverly Hills or Ralph Lauren's Safari.
Even reading your horoscope can get up your nose.
My little excesses are not for public Access
By Jane Gordon
IT'S not often that I am moved to feel genuine sympathy for a Cabinet Minister, let alone Norman Lamont.
But the thought that a credit card company — or some sleazy store — might one day reveal the contents of my shopping bag to the nation (or, more particularly, to my husband) fills me with a very real dread.
It's not, you understand, that I fear him discovering a private purchase of a packet of fags and a bottle of Veuve du Vernay.
I'm not the type.
What worries me, and probably a great many other people in Britain, are the other terrible truths that lie hidden in the small print on my statements.
Suppose he discovered that my new slimline look was nothing more than a £19.99 Playtex Secrets girdle purchased in October?
Imagine if he found out that the frock I claimed I'd bought two years ago in a closing-down sale had, in fact, arrived in my wardrobe a little over two weeks ago, having been purchased from a smart department store?
Or how about if he realised that the real reason I had been looking ‘better’ lately had something to do with a £6.99 bargain hair colourant from Clairol?
Worse, probably, would be the shocked reaction of the wider world (my mother, for instance) to the news that I was bringing up my children on a combination of take-away junk food and microwave meals.
Even the most innocent of statements and receipts — from Safeway, W H Smith or Marks & Spencer, to name a few — have the power to expose your most intimate of secrets, your dress size, your habit of bulk-buying Wispa bars and even your peculiar addiction to Des O'Connor or Barry Manilow records.
They might also reveal that you have been in some distant shopping mall far from your usual stomping ground on a day on which you had sworn (at least to the office) that you had been laid up with flu.
This latest leak might have been designed to expose the Chancellor but it has instead exposed the extremely lax security of Britain's banks and credit card companies.
Indeed, my guess is that this particular political scandal will have a far more profound effect on the spending patterns of the British public than any Autumn Statement incentive or cut in interest rates.
All over the country people will now be cutting up their credit cards.
So that the next time a shop assistant (particularly one who looks as if he might not know what day of the week it is) asks how Sir or Madam will be paying they'll say ‘Cash’ and make quite sure they rip up the receipt as they leave.
A time for compassion
By Jane Gordon
TWO months ago I travelled to the former Yugoslavia and visited hospitals and camps filled with the displaced and wounded of the Bosnian conflict.
I'll never forget the sight of babies with shrapnel wounds and children scrambling in the dirt for food.
Yet despite the known horrors of this dreadful war the British people have seemed oddly aloof to the suffering of the Bosnians.
But this week's news that the Government has agreed to offer sanctuary to 4,000 victims proves that public opinion is turning.
And, that even in difficult times, there is compassion.
Fergie trips up in Victoria's footsteps
By Jane Gordon
THE Duchess of York's desperate attempt to rehabilitate her public image involves much more than her recent glittering all-expenses-paid charity visit to Poland.
Fergie is busily working on a new book that has her following ‘in the footsteps of Queen Victoria’.
Curiously, the far-from-Victorian Duchess believes she has a personal affinity with the grand Queen.
She named Beatrice after one of Victoria's daughters and a previous book, Victoria And Albert, alluded to her spiritual closeness with her estranged husband's ancestor.
The Duchess has even taken up sketching to feel more at one with the subject of her new book (Victoria apparently relied on her own sketches rather than paparazzi snaps or pictures in Hello! as mementoes of overseas trips) and admits that she, like the late Queen, is a ‘tireless traveller’.
Frankly, though, I'm unconvinced.
I reckon the closest Fergie could ever get to her role model would be pulling pints in the Queen Vic down in Albert Square.
Baby, you're a genius
By Jane Gordon
COMPARISONS are never more odious than when they involve children.
But nevertheless this week's startling news that Nicholas MacMahon, the four-year-old Mozart-loving computer genius, could talk and read before he was a year old set me wondering about my own wild-eyed nine-month-old infant.
I mean, he seems to share many of Nicholas's earliest baby reactions — an extremely low boredom threshold, a destructive reaction to toys and household objects and a born love of music (well, he can bang a saucepan lid in time to the theme tune of Neighbours).
The more I read of the early months of Nicholas MacMahon the more convinced I became that I too was rearing a prodigy.
I even bought a set of those flash cards with pictures and words such as Cat, Dog, Rabbit, Mummy and Daddy in my attempt to awake in him a hunger for knowledge.
And I suppose you could say that in a way it it worked.
He ate them.
I should have realised that genius, as some bright spark in the office said, has a lot to do with genes.
And that even if my own son can't read, speak French or identify Mozart concertos, he can nearly walk and he's brilliant at heading a ball.
His early promise might not match that of Nicholas MacMahon.
But the way he's going he could just end up as the next Vinnie Jones.
Recession
By Jane Gordon
THERE has been much excitement in the past few days.
Optimistic economists are suggesting that the surge in shares and the increase in High Street retail sales indicates that we might finally be emerging from the recession.
I don't want to depress anyone, but might these latest ‘green shoots’ in the economy be nothing more than the bedecked branches of Christmas trees?
And will this recovery — rather like our festive firs — prove to be rootless and temporary, lasting no longer than Twelfth Night and the January sales?
Ooh la-la, Mrs Cantona
Graham Brough
CRITICS have branded French soccer idol Eric Cantona ‘Le Brat’— a brilliant footballer whose fiery temper makes him too hot-headed to handle.
But to his wife Isabelle, Manchester United's latest £1.2 million signing is a shy, gentle father with a passion for writing poetry and painting.
The French international, whose spectacular skills inspired chants of ‘Ooh, aah, Cantona’ at his last club Leeds Utd, is said to have been sold because he walked out when he was dropped from the team.
His early career in France was also marred by disciplinary problems.
But Isabelle, 30, is upset by the ‘bad boy’ tag her husband has been given: ‘Eric is very badly misunderstood,’she says.
‘They call him the enfant terrible but he's actually very shy and certainly not arrogant.
‘They don't understand that he's not difficult, he's just very honest and not afraid to say, ‘No, that is wrong’.
‘So many people agree with others for the sake of it but Eric can't do that and he has to tell the truth and say what he's feeling even if that is ‘no’ and it upsets people.
‘I think that takes courage and I personally like that a lot in him.
He's always been like that and he hasn't changed.
People think he's an aggressive person but at home he's absolutely adorable.
He's fantastic around the house, so calm and relaxed.
‘I might scream a bit but he just shrugs and says, ‘It doesn't matter’ no matter what it is.’
The Cantona home in a northern suburb of Leeds is a rather modest semi-detached house with simple furniture and none of the usual soccer star extravagances.
Isabelle and Eric's idea of a good night is to listen to music together or for Eric to write his poetry at the coffee table.
Their four-year-old son Raphael is also an important part of Eric's day when he's not training.
Isabelle says: ‘I can't believe they call him aggressive.
If they saw him with his son they wouldn't say that, or when he's playing with the dog.
‘He is a fantastic father and he's very good company, very pleasant and very generous with his time — completely different to how people see him.’
Isabelle says part of the reason for her previous reluctance to speak of their personal life is the rough handling they experienced at the hands of the French press, with their sarcastic digs at Eric's love of painting and poetry.
‘His poetry is sometimes very strong in the words he uses, sometimes very pretty,’ she says.
‘He has a very strong character and poetry, painting and football are just different ways of expressing himself.
‘Sometimes his painting is large and passionate and other times it is more pretty, it depends how he feels.
I didn't introduce him to either of those things, his father Albert paints and my husband took it from him.
We have a storage place in Provence full of his paintings.
Some of them are very good.
‘Unfortunately, it is difficult for him to paint in the house in Leeds because we don't have the space and we don't have the light.
‘But he still enjoys writing and one thing we love Yorkshire for is walking in the country.’
English footballers are not usually renowned for such artistic pursuits but Isabelle is quick to refute any suggestion of intellectual snobbery: ‘I don't like the word intelligent, we don't do things because we're trying to appear intelligent,’ she says.
‘It's just that in life we believe in doing what you want to do.
‘If you want to paint or write poetry or play football then it's up to you.
‘So often people criticise others for wanting to do things which are a little bit different as if it's wrong not to do things like everyone else does.
‘I'm not saying there's more culture in our family and that Eric plays football as well so that makes us more interesting, I'm just saying he expresses himself in one way and also in another and we don't want to be criticised for that.’
The couple met when Isabelle was a 20-year-old student of literature, philosophy and language at university in Aix-en-Provence and Eric was a 17-year-old at a nearby college for football skills.
‘I've known Eric since I was 20 and we have been married for nearly six years.
‘I met him through my younger brother who played football with him.
Later they played for Auxerre together.
‘Even when we met, Eric had very strong ideas and was very passionate about things.
I don't think I influenced him in his thinking, though, except maybe to make him more interested in reading literature.
‘But even now our tastes are very different, I'm reading a French classic novel at the moment and he's reading a book on Jim Morrison.
Despite Eric's move to Manchester, Isabelle says they will not be crossing the Pennines to look for a new home.
They have put roots down in Leeds.
‘I moved here in September so I have only been here a short time and we have had a lot of changes in the past because of the moves Eric has made,’ she says.
‘I moved over from our house in Nimes with Raphael after Eric but now he is going to Manchester we're staying here to live.
‘I like it in Leeds, I have nice neighbours and I want to settle down.
Also I have a job at Leeds University teaching French, which I enjoy, so Eric will be commuting to Manchester.
It's not so far.
‘It's the first time I have taught at a university.
‘I used to work in public relations in France so this is something new.
‘I'm not fantastic at English so all the students know they have to speak French in my classes.
‘Our son is at school near here so that's another reason for not moving to Manchester.
‘We have had a lot of change and travel and I'm tired.
‘I like it here and I want to stay for a while.’
Ticket to the altar
A TRAFFIC warden found love after booking a driver more than 20 times.
Dianne Jones, 24, said estate agent Nick Spalding, 23, took all his tickets for parking on a yellow line in Luton, Beds., with a smile.
‘He said if I didn't go out with him he would run me over,’ she said.
‘How could a girl refuse an offer like that?’
Nick, who paid £240 in fines, said it was worth it.
The couple plan to marry next year.
Michelle Lineker
MICHELLE Lineker, 27, wife of ex-England soccer ace Gary, is greeted by happy mascot Doctor Hope as she presents Maidstone Hospital, Kent, with an ambulance for children with cancer.
Their one-year-old son George is recovering from leukaemia.
Lenny Henry
COMIC Lenny Henry rivals the grin on the trophy he won for best TV comedy at the Radio Times Comedy and Drama Awards in London yesterday.
Bernard And The Genie, starring Lenny, 33, and co-written by Richard Curtis, was a BBC1 hit last Christmas.
Louis, son of Princess Stephanie of Monaco
MAGAZINES are bidding for the first photos of five-day-old Louis, son of Princess Stephanie of Monaco, right.
A Paris agency yesterday offered £400,000 for exclusive pictures.
Billy Warlock and Erika Eleniak
BAYWATCH couple Billy Warlock and Erika Eleniak will marry in the first episode of the next series, their last appearance in the hit TV show.
The real-life lovers have been signed for a movie.
Jason Donovan to cancel concert
POOR ticket sales forced popstar Jason Donovan to cancel a concert yesterday.
He claims the 2,700-seat Apollo Theatre in Manchester was too small.
Former leaders chew the fat at Claridge's
By Tim Satchell
FORMER US Presidents Richard Nixon and Ronald Reagan, who are both staying at Claridge's in London's Mayfair, had a private meeting with Lady Thatcher before she left for a visit to Indonesia.
No details of their discussions have been released, but the ex-leaders still share a deep conviction that their views on world matters — and their personal influence — are still vitally important.
‘They're not exactly strutting the world stage these days,’ a Foreign Office source tells me.
‘But they have access to those who are and they're determined to exert as much influence as they can according to their convictions.’
Tonight President and Mrs Reagan (ex-Presidents of the US retain the title) will join President Nixon — 80 on January 9 — and scores of other leading politicians and businessmen at Claridge's for the annual dinner given by the Los Angeles-based Atlantic Richfield company, one of the world's largest producers of oil and gas.
Later this week President Reagan, 81,— who had a meeting with the Queen at Buckingham Palace yesterday and is due to see JohnMajor at Downing Street tomorrow — is to address the Oxford Union.
Before leaving for the Far East, Lady Thatcher dined at Claridge's with Charles Price, the former US Ambassador to London.
‘Receiving briefings from him makes it even more like old times,’ says a Thatcher adviser.
Claridge's is a fashionable base for top Americans visiting London.
There are three main suites at the five-star hostelry, which is part of the Savoy group.
The Royal Suite — occupied by the Reagans — costs £1,035 a night, excluding VAT.
Two lesser suites — one of which Mr Nixon has — are each £905 a night.
Full English breakfast is £17 extra and a Continental breakfast costs £12.25.
And…
By Tim Satchell
DID you hear about the man with a microwave bed?
He gets eight hours sleep in three minutes.
Champagne to G Tatlow, Abergele, Clwyd.
Glenys aired
By Tim Satchell
GLENYS Kinnock is to take a big step towards achieving her political goal of becoming a Euro MP when on December 18 she will appear on Radio 4's Any Questions for the first time.
The other panellists on the current affairs discussion programme, presented by Jonathan Dimbleby, will be Lady Howe, Anthony Smith, president of Magdalen College, Oxford, and Sir Nigel Mobbs, chairman of property company Slough Estates.
The programme will be broadcast live from Banbury School in Oxfordshire.
Mrs Kinnock, 47, last month announced her intention to stand for the 1994 European Parliament elections in the South East Wales constituency.
Santa's debut
By Tim Satchell
A NEW tradition begins this week when the city of York holds its first annual St Nicholas Fayre.
St Nicholas was the original Santa Claus — a contraction of Santa Nikolaus — whose feast day is December 6.
The four-day fayre from Thursday will feature brass bands, choirs, folk singers, buskers, ghost walks and a fairground.
‘There will also be a medieval market,’ hotelier Andy Clark, the fayre's chairman, tells me.
‘We'll have children in medieval costume, mummers plays, braziers and chestnuts, spiced oranges and dancing bears.’
Real dancing bears?
‘No, people dressed up in bear costumes.
We have made that concession to modern times.’
Fiona to make a big scene
By Tim Satchell
ACTRESS Fiona Mollison, currently filming the two-part Lynda La Plante thriller, Seekers — to be shown on ITV in the New Year — will step behind the camera and turn producer for her next project.
With recent parts in On The Up, starring Dennis Waterman, and the Secret Agent, with David Suchet, Miss Mollison, 36, tells me she has bought the option on a book with a view to producing a TV film from it.
‘I adore the book although foolishly, there's no acting part in it for me.
Unfortunately I can't tell you any more about it yet.’
Married to director David Gilmore, whose current West End project is Radio Times at the Queen's Theatre, they have three sons and live in Wimbledon.
Miss Mollison is also developing an original idea for a three-part TV thriller.
‘And this time there is an acting part in it for me.
It's all very exciting.
There's so little work around so it's marvellous if you can generate it yourself.’
Sir John Mills
By Tim Satchell
SIR John Mills, 84, is back home with his family in Denham, Buckinghamshire, after a successful cataract operation.
A family member says: ‘He is feeling wonderful.’
Christmas will be spent with daughters Hayley and Juliet, son-in-law Maxwell Caulfield, granddaughter Melissa and wife Mary Hayley Bell.
‘Within four minutes he asked me out to dinner.
I sensed he was sinister’
Christian Gysin
IT was May Day bank holiday last year and Lynsey de Paul was enjoying a quiet morning on her own.
Then the sound of the telephone pierced the silence.
The singer-songwriter answered it cheerfully, expecting a friend.
Instead, it was a man who introduced himself as Dr Tom Courtney.
‘I'm calling about your work on self-defence for women,’ he said.
Lynsey was researching a project on how women could defend themselves from potential rapists and sex attackers and planning a BBC documentary on the subject.
‘I had never met the man, but a friend had given him my number in case he could help me with my research,’ says Lynsey.
‘I was hoping he could give advice on how women could and should react after they had been attacked.’
Although it was a bank holiday, Dr Courtney was very keen to meet her.
‘Within minutes he had offered to call round and discuss my work,’ she says.
‘I assumed that because he might be busy working during the week he was being helpful in offering to visit me that afternoon.’
Sitting in the living room of her Gothic house in Highgate, North London, she holds up her 1991 diary and points to the entry for May 6.
It reads: ‘Dr Courtney — 3.30 — 4pm.’
The terror was about to start.
Dr Courtney was on time, casually dressed in a brown patterned cardigan.
‘I immediately offered him a cup of tea or coffee and he followed me into the kitchen,’ says Lynsey.
‘His next move was quite unbelievable really.
‘He had only been in the house four minutes at the most when he suddenly turned to me and said: ‘Would you come to dinner with me tonight?’.
‘It was so sudden.
I couldn't believe he had asked me minutes after first meeting him.
‘I suppose I have become used to men ‘coming on’ to me — but this was so quick.
Immediately I felt uneasy.
There was something sinister about him.’
Shaken but still thinking straight, Lynsey remembered the advice she had been given on defusing difficult situations.
‘I was nice about it but I lied,’ she says.
‘I said I was going to dinner with friends.
I changed the subject and we moved into the sitting room.’
Dr Courtney sat down on a sofa.
Lynsey chose a chair.
‘I knew how to be assertive and perhaps even then I wanted there to be distance between us,’ she says.
‘My instincts told me that I should be aware of him and everything he did.
I was also alone in the house with him.
‘I'm not saying this in hindsight.
Even as he spoke to me I felt very uneasy.
The dinner invitation had caught me off-guard but then I told myself, ‘For God's sake, he's a doctor.
If he works in Harley Street that's like an endorsement by society, so don't be silly’.’
The pair chatted for some time about her work, then the conversation turned to his medical background.
At first, he appeared to offer sound advice.
‘I asked him specifically what women should do after being sexually attacked, especially raped,’ she says.
‘His advice was to go immediately to a Casualty unit at a local hospital.
He said a woman should aske for the senior registrar and make a full statement.
‘He was very clear that any statement had to be taken correctly, because if there were mistakes it might not be useful in evidence in court.
‘In retrospect I find his advice staggering.’
He then said he was an ‘emergency doctor’ called in by police to examine rape victims after attacks.
It was a lie.
The Metropolitan Police have said that Courtney offered his services — but he was turned down for any work.
Lynsey wasn't to know that, and Courtney's boast added to his aura of respectability.
But even as she began to shake off her suspicions, he changed the subject dramatically.
‘He talked about his work and it immediately struck me that, as a professional doctor, he had an almost unhealthy interest in the more sordid side of sex,’ she says.
‘In fact, the more I talked to him the more I felt he was not being detached about what he was saying and certainly not professional.’
Having discussed sex aids and prostitution, Courtney gave Lynsey a booklet outlining the aims and history of his charity, the Courtney Foundation.
‘Perhaps you could help me in some way by raising funds?’ he said.
Then he added: ‘I tell you what.
Instead of looking at the brochure why not come down right now and have a look at the surgery and building?’
It was still light and Lynsey agreed, despite her reservations.
But she refused his next offer.
‘Jump in my car and I'll drive you to Harley Street,’ said the smooth-talking doctor.
Lynsey quickly remembered her fictitious ‘dinner engagement’ and said she would take her own car and follow him.
‘I was already unsure about him,’ she says.
‘There was no way I was going to rely on him and his car.
I wanted to have my car with me if I wanted to get away in a hurry.
‘It was a bank holiday and I knew there would be few buses and even fewer taxis in Harley Street if I felt threatened.’
The pair took separate cars to the Courtney Foundation, where Lynsey had another shock.
‘I immediately noticed the basement was full of rubbish,’ she says.
‘Again I felt uneasy, but I allowed him to continue his tour of the premises.
‘He was a big man, but I had studied martial arts and felt confident that I could get away if he made the wrong move.
But I do remember that in every room he showed me I made sure I was near to the door, the safest point of exit if he tried anything.
I felt he was an undesirable character.’
The tour took just 15 minutes — and then came the moment on which Lynsey's destiny hinged.
Dr Courtney, who gave women drinks spiked with tranquillisers before assaulting them, offered her a drink.
‘I said no,’ says Lynsey.
‘I don't touch alcohol and by then I was just keen to leave.
‘It makes me feel cold to think I was with him in that situation.
‘I have thought about whether I could have been another of his victims.
Nobody knew I was there with him.’
Lynsey, chilled by the turn of events, said she had to leave for her ‘dinner date’.
‘I had learnt that as a woman, if you feel unhappy, you must be assertive.
I felt unhappy.
I said I had to leave because I was going to dinner.
‘But he followed me outside,’ she adds.
‘I remember he stood there, legs apart, very macho, watching me drive away.’
Back in the safety of her home, Lynsey was at last able to relax in relief.
‘I decided there and then that I wanted nothing more to do with him,’ she says.
But Courtney had other ideas.
In court, the jury heard how he pestered his rape victims with phone calls after attacking them.
While he had not attacked Lynsey, he started ringing her.
‘He rang the following day, or the day after,’ says Lynsey.
‘I said I was busy and would call him back.
I never did.’
Two days after the first call he rang again.
In a slightly threatening tone he said: ‘You didn't call me back.’
Lynsey fobbed him off again, telling herself he just wanted to date her.
‘I assumed he was unmarried and I was used to men coming on to me,’ she says.
‘I ignored his calls and they finally stopped.’
As the months passed, Lynsey put her fears to the back of her mind — until Courtney's trial.
‘When I first read a small paragraph about him being arrested I remember my eyes popping out on stalks like a cartoon character.’
Now, as she works on her next women's self-defence project — a book called Taking Control, due out in May, a sense of relief swamps her.
‘I still feel cold when I think about him,’ she says.
‘It's not hindsight when I say there was something cold and sinister about him.
He was unnerving.
‘The greatest irony is that I thought he could help me in my research on rape,’ she says.
‘Now I realise he could have raped me.’
The art of buying for flying
Jackie Annesley
IF YOU think balancing the family food budget is a battle, spare a thought for Karen Shearn.
Her weekly budget is almost £1 million and she is responsible for feeding the 17,000 passengers who fly with British Airways each week.
The thousands of items on her shopping list are brought in from all over the world in quantities that could feed a small town — 70 tonnes of sausages, 300 tonnes of tomatoes, 250,000 pints of milk, six million eggs and 350,000 litres of fresh orange juice.
And that's just for breakfast.
The job takes 29-year-old Karen, a former buyer for C & A clothes, around the world to identify what is available, in season and affordable.
The most important part of her work is finding food that will taste delicious and look great when served on a tray at 30,000 ft — and that is no simple task.
The 80,000 melons Shearn buys every year must all be the same ripeness and colour and the 1.2 million chicken breasts uniformly shaped.
‘The first thing passengers do when they are served is have a look at what their neighbour has got — their piece of chicken has got to be the same size,’ says Karen.
And to ensure every carrot is bite-sized and every strawberry perfectly small and red, suppliers are sent a picture of the product with a ruler next it.
‘It is actually quite important from a practical point of view as well.
‘If for example a muffin is too high, it can get knocked by the tray on top.’
Apart from low-flying muffins, Karen must ensure menu-makers go for food that is easy to reheat — spinach and roast potatoes get the thumbs down, rice and broccoli the thumbs up.
On top of this, food eaten eight miles up needs extra seasoning because at altitude taste buds are only 70 per cent efficient.
If Karen's shopping chores sound like a nightmare, her job has its perks.
Tasting delicious food is one of them.
She recently called in several pounds of mouth-watering smoked salmon for a review of the market with several BA personnel and top chefs including Michel Roux from the award-winning Waterside Inn in Bray.
‘He was so impressed with our salmon that he wanted to know who our suppliers were,’ says Karen.
But for the woman who travels the world filling her massive shopping basket, stocking her own fridge is a much less detailed affair.
‘I'm so pinched for time that I race around grabbing the first thing I see.’
And as someone who buys 80 tonnes of live lobsters from Canada and 75 tonnes of prawns from Thailand every year, lunch is a decidedly unglamorous affair.
‘It's usually a banana and satsuma.’
A school dinner with class
Robyn Foyster
Top chef serves up cordon bleu children's treats for 46p a head.
ASHLEY Cuddy scraped the last morsel off her plate with a sticky spoon before scurrying off, bright-eyed, to queue for her third mountainous helping.
But the school dinner she was wolfing down was nothing like the standard favourite of baked beans, burgers and ice-cream.
Instead it had been prepared by Bruno Loubet, master chef of the award-winning Four Seasons restaurant at London's Inn on the Park.
His aim was to show that you can cook wholesome, gourmet dishes for the same price as ordinary school dinners — 46p a head — and that children really love them.
‘You don't have to pay the earth,’ says Bruno, who cooked for 30 youngsters at St Joseph's Infant and Primary school in southeast London.
‘The most expensive ingredient that I used was fresh tomatoes.
Everything was cooked without any fatty ingredients or much sugar, and the fruit and vegetables are full of vitamins and minerals.
‘I made sure I had a balance, though.
There is no point in serving food which is good for kids but tastes so revolting that they won't eat it.’
His comments follow publication of the Caroline Walker Trust report, which criticises the poor standard of children's diet in Britain, blaming too many sweets and fatty foods.
The typical diet of the St Joseph's children was revealed when all but one raised their hands when asked who ate regularly at McDonald's.
Only seven-year-old vegetarian Alero Provo never did.
All the same, Only three children disliked healthy food like pasta and they all loved fruit.
While the lucky 30 guinea pigs in Bruno's experiment were sampling his alternative dishes, the other pupils were tucking in to a typical school dinner of beefburger in a bap, sautee potatoes and jacket potato in cheese, or open sandwiches.
They also had a choice of baked beans or coleslaw, followed by yogurt, fruit or ice-cream.
Most of the youngsters said they liked their normal school dinner, but Ashley couldn't agree.
‘My brother's naughty so he's got to eat the yukky stuff,’ she said.
‘But I've been a good girl so I get to eat Mr Chef's meal instead of lumpy mashed potato.’
Bruno's school dinner menu included ravioli with cheese sauce, sliced tomato on garlic pizza bread, and breaded fish cakes with tomato sauce and leeks.
For dessert he offered a choice of rice pudding with caramel sauce, stewed apple with a lemon cookie, or Fuity Snow White — a delicious raspberry coulis with meringue.
Most of the St Joseph's boys and girls finished everything on their plates — and went back for seconds or even thirds.
The garlic bread proved most popular for maincourse, then ravioli, then fishcakes.
For afters, Fruity Snow White took first place.
Six-year-old Colin Mwanamwalye proved to have the healthiest attitude of all the children.
‘I love vegetables — even this cabbage,’ he beamed (referring to the leeks).
Stephanie Kempton, four, said: ‘I liked all of it, especially the pasta.
But it doesn't look like what I usually eat.
Normally I have things like chicken legs.’
Patrick Molloy, 11, added: ‘I can tell you what my brother David chose for his dinner.
I bet he had the fish cakes.
Once we went to a fish stall and he bought 30 crab sticks for 20p each.
That was all of his pocket money.’
True to his brother's word, David had gone straight for the fish cakes.
But he said Patrick's story was inaccurate: ‘I ate 40 crab sticks,’ he corrected.
But despite the popularity of Bruno's dishes, there is no pleasing everyone.
Stephen Kyne, ten, said: ‘I hate the fishcakes.
I much prefer sausages and chips.’
BRUNO'S RECIPES
Garlic Bread With Tomatoes & Welsh Rarebit (Price per head: 35p)
INGREDIENTS: for the bread: 1kg flour, 30g yeast, 20g salt, 250ml tepid water.
Alternatively use 1 French stick or crusty white loaf.
1kg tomatoes, 100ml olive oil, 2 cloves garlic, 20g parsley, 1pt milk, 100g plain flour, 300g cheddar, 2tbsp Dijon mustard, 100g white breadcrumbs, salt & pepper.
METHOD: To make bread, place yeast in a bowl with 150ml of water.
Add 100g of flour.
Mix well and leave to rise at room temperature for 30 mins.
Add other ingredients, mix to a smooth dough.
Replace in bowl and leave to rise at room temperature for 1½-2 hours.
Knead, then shape into large loaf.
Leave until it rises to three times its initial volume, then cook in a preheated oven (220C/425F/Gas 7) for 30 mins.
To make Welsh rarebit, stir milk and flour on low heat until thickened, add grated cheese, mustard, breadcrumbs.
Stir until smooth.
Cut bread into ten pieces.
Chop garlic and parsley, mix with olive oil and spread on to slices.
Top with sliced tomatoes and rarebit mixture and grill.
Vegetable Ravioli In Cheese Sauce Cost per head: 20p
INGREDIENTS: For pasta: 3 eggs, 350g plain flour, salt, a little water.
For filling: 250g sweetcorn, 150g carrots, 150g onions, 100g courgettes, 100g celery, 2 cloves garlic, 100g breadcrumbs, 1 egg, 100g butter.
For sauce: 1pt milk, 40g butter, 40g plain flour, pinch nutmeg, 100g cheddar, 40g parsley.
METHOD: Melt butter for filling in a pan, add all vegetables — finely chopped.
Cook until soft, mix with breadcrumbs and egg.
Make pasta in food processor by combining flour, egg, salt.
Process, gradually adding water until a ball of dough forms.
Wrap in Clingfilm, refrigiate for 1 hr.
Roll pasta to 1mm thick, cut into circles, fill with stuffing, seal.
Boil for five minutes.
For sauce: melt butter, add flour, add milk, whisk.
Simmer for 25 mins, add grated cheese and parsley.
Place ravioli on dish, cover with sauce, heat in oven and glaze under grill.
Fishcakes With Tomato Sauce (Cost per head: 33p)
INGREDIENTS: 500g cod, 1½kg potatoes, 40g parsley, 2 eggs, flour and breadcrumbs to coat, 450g can tomatoes, 150g onions, zest of 1 orange, olive oil, salt, pepper.
METHOD: Season and steam fish.
Remove bones and flake with fork.
Boil potatoes, drain.
Dry in oven at low heat for 5 mins.
Sieve, then mix with fish and parsley.
Shape into 20 balls and coat with flour, egg and breadcrumbs.
Chop onion, cook in olive oil until soft.
Add tomatoes and zest.
Cook for 20 mins, liquidise.
Deep fry fish cakes and warm for 5 mins before serving with tomato sauce and lightly-boiled leeks and celery.
Fruity Snow White Cost per head: 34p
INGREDIENTS: 10 eggs, 320g caster sugar, 1 tbsp vanilla essence, 100g frozen red fruits, 2pts milk.
METHOD: Separate eggs.
Whip whites until stiff, add 80g sugar.
Shape mixture into quenelles, microwave for 12 secs or until meringue-like.
Mix yolks with 140g of sugar until pale and creamy, pour boiling milk over.
Return to heat, cook slowly until custard coats spoon.
Pour into bowl and place over ice cubes.
Boil 100g sugar with 200ml water, pour into liquidiser with defrosted red fruits, sieve.
Place quenelles of meringue on individual plates and decorate with custard on one side, fruit coulis on the other.
Stewed Apple With Rosemary Cost per head: 15p
INGREDIENTS: 2kg cooking apples, 100g butter, 1 bunch rosemary, 200g sugar.
METHOD: Peel and core apples, then cut into cubes.
Melt the butter, add sugar, apples, 200ml of water and fresh rosemary.
Simmer for 1 hour.
Serve with biscuits of your choice.
Supermarket Round-up
BARGAINS at Sainsbury's this week include 50 party-size sausage rolls for 99p (a 40p saving), Cornish Ice Cream at £1.95 for two litres (£1 cheaper) and fresh traditional rump steak at Pounds 3.38 per lb (down by £1.90).
Frozen chicken thighs are reduced from £2.68 to £1.98 for 3lb and Kiwi fruit are 9p instead of 15p each.
ARCTIC Salmon is £2.68 per lb instead of £3.18 at Tesco.
Other bargains are fresh, boneless shoulder pork (99p instead of Pounds 1.49) and Tesco Chilean Cabernet Savignon, 50p cheaper at £2.49.
SAVINGS can be made at Safeway with Somerfield Sultanas £1.25 instead of £1.45.
Flora sunflower oil is 10p cheaper at 89p a litre and Campbells french mushroom and garlic soup is down from 59p to 49p.
Whole fresh chickens are 69p per lb instead of £1.09.
AT Asda, clementines are down from £1.29 to 89p for a 1kg pack.
Deli cooked ham is 40p cheaper a pound at £1.80 and cooked turkey breast is £3.16 instead of £2.36 per lb.
And 12 Asda White Sliced Baps are 69p instead of 88p.
Off the Shelf
BABY vegetables look professional for dinner parties and Sainsbury's has extended its range to include exotic varieties like Patty Pan — tiny yellow and green squashes — at £1.75 per 250g and Baby Aubergines at £1.55 per 250g.
IF YOU like the flavour of Aqua Libra, try the new more herby and tart Aqua Libra Dry.
It is available in 75cl bottles from supermarkets, health food shops and selected off-licences for around £1.79.
The original is also in new slimline cans for around 89p.
IF YOU prefer fizz without buzz, Tesco has added four drinks to its range of light wine cocktails.
Cassis Fizz, Summer Fruit Fizz, Tropical Fruit Fizz and Bucks Fizz are low in alcohol and cost £1.99 a bottle.
TWO new nibbles from Danepack make ideal party food.
Bacon Bites (£1.99 for a 12oz pack) are bite-sized pieces of minced bacon in crumbs and Bacon Hoops (£1.59 for a 9oz pack) are minced bacon bites with cheese.
From Sainsbury's, Gateway and Asda.
Eating Out
Louise Allegaert
THE telephone rang on the restaurant table, the red light flashed.
I gasped.
This was my big chance — on the other end was bound to be some beefcake.
‘Table 56,’ I whispered huskily.
‘Oh no,’ shrieked a high-pitched female voice, ‘It's a girl!’
Click, the line went dead.
This scene was played out at Casper's 2 in Soho, the capital's newest theme restaurant.
The Cheers-style grill and bar boasts table-to-table telephones, for making steamy connections.
Bizarrely, the fun is punctuated by impromptu shower shows (yes, really, the restaurant has two showers installed in telephone boxes) of waterbabes and boys working themselves into a lather.
Whether watching performers in rubber hats and one-piece bathing cossies is an attractive proposition over dinner is a matter for debate.
But one thing is certain — you cannot ignore them.
Settling down to exotic Fizzy-Fuzzy Navel and Casper Bomber cocktails, we awaited further trilling of the phone.
They say a watched phone never rings and in this case they were right.
After 15 minutes we came to the comforting realisation that the phone had come unplugged from its socket.
The food at Casper's is usual American-style fare — spicy Cajun chicken, succulent red snapper with lime butter, honey-sweet baby back ribs, trendy warm salads and, of course, burgers.
The chips which, I was reliably informed, were American shoelace french fries, screamed out for flavour — any flavour.
An annoying aspect of Casper's is its two-sittings system.
Just when that dream person is deciding to redial your number he or she is in for a surprise — the second sitting has moved in on your table.
On the plus side, the young, all-action staff are enthustiastic and remain good-natured despite the number of postcard messages they are called upon to deliver to your table — for you to follow-up your (hopefully) successful telephone chat.
Dinner, cocktails and house wine came to £81 for four.
Telephone rental is £1.
Casper's 2 is at St Anne's Court, Wardour Street, London W1, telephone 071 494 4941.
Alberto Gonzalez
ALBERTO Gonzalez was rightly convicted of attempted murder after infecting several women with the Aids virus.
But surely there should have been more help for him at the beginning, when he first found out he carried the virus.
Like too many others, he found that help was not forthcoming.
Privatisation
IF privatisation is the cure-all for British Rail, perhaps the Transport Ministry should also be sold off to make it more accountable.
Get our priorities right
HALF the world is starving, Britain is reeling with unemployment and crime, yet a race horse receives over a thousand get-well cards.
Have we got our priorities right?
MPs books
I AM curious to know how so many of our caring, hard working and underpaid MPs find time to write books, serve as directors and appear on radio and TV shows unconnected with politics.
George Michael
HOW unfair that the career of a talent like George Michael should stumble in a court battle.
He should be left to do what he does best — sing.
Derail royal gravy train
NOW that the Queen has agreed to pay tax can we concentrate on scuttling the creaky old royal yacht, running the royal train into the buffers and grounding the Queen's flight?
The Royals seem to use the royal yacht purely for privileged leisure cruising — at our vast expense.
Ged rid of it.
It costs a fortune to run and cannot have many years left before scrapping, anyway.
The royal train seems to be used only very rarely these days.
And, is there any good reason the Royals cannot use the same commercial flights as the rest of us?
Prince Philip's use of the flight two weeks ago to travel to Argentina was a scandal.
He wasn't on UK business and it cost the earth.
Why should he — or anyone — be allowed to abuse the public purse?
Many of us have to forego our perks.
The royals should be told to do likewise.
Jobs not shopping are key to recovery
IT was surprising to see your picture of a busy Oxford Street taken last Saturday afternoon.
It's easy to say that a bustling street is a sign of economic recovery, but how many of the people in your picture were actually spending money?
I won't be rushing out to spend big this Christmas because I was made redundant a few weeks ago and have had no luck finding another job.
To claim that a packed Oxford Street is an indication of the green shoots of recovery is surely rather premature.
The real signs of a healthier economy will only be seen when factories stop closing down, employers start taking on staff, and consumers flock to the shops at a time of year other than the annual pre-Christmas splurge.
Your article also reported that a record number of stores are opening on Sundays in the lead-up to Christmas.
That's another indication of how tight things are in the High Street.
Jobs not shopping are key to recovery
ALTHOUGH it was pleasing to see so many people out shopping last Saturday, I did not approve of the Oxford Street poster which urged people to ‘Shop until you drop’.
That's hardly a sensible slogan in a time of recession, with more people being made redundant every day.
Match point
GOOD on Tatum O'Neal for sticking up for herself.
It's understandable that she would want to resume her acting career after having children.
What is incomprehensible is John McEnroe's apparent efforts to keep the little woman at home.
He's past his peak as a tennis player, so it's his turn to stay at home.
TV advertising
I WAS pleased to read of Maureen Lipman's BAFTA award for her British Telecom TV ads.
She was great as Beattie — and it was heartening to find that most of the other winning ads had humorous themes.
Let's hope advertisers get the message and give us more laughs and less po-faced hype in future.
High-tech learning
SCHOOLS of the future may use computers more than today's parents would believe possible, but terminals will never replace teachers.
Lewis Perelman, mentioned in your story about high-tech learning, is living in fantasy land if he thinks education can cut out the middleman.
Milestones
BIRTHDAYS: Former Wales soccer boss Mike England, 50.
Former US secretary of state Alexander Haig, 68.
ON THIS DAY: In 1697, the rebuilt St Paul's Cathedral was opened.
In 1942, the world's first nuclear chain reaction took place in Chicago.
Things you didn't know you didn't know
Graeme Donald
THE purging of dissidents from any organisation is widely known as a ‘night of the long knives’— and not without good reason.
This was the name that Hitler himself gave to a weekend of murder that was the culmination of a power struggle within the Nazi Party.
In a speech of justification made on July 13, 1934, ten days after the bloodletting, Hitler gave the action this name by quoting from a popular Nazi drinking and marching song.
The words of the song in turn harked back to the noble deeds of the Germanic Saxons whose tribal name meant the men of the long knives.
When the Saxons came to these isles, a number of Britons fled across the Channel to Northern France in search of a more peaceful life — thus giving the region where they settled the name of Brittany.
And when the Angles arrived here, they created the name England.
TODAY'S Book Of Things You Didn't Know…is now on sale, published by Simon & Schuster for £3.99.
Age of the home office
Stella Bingham
THE daily frustration of commuting to work on gridlocked roads and crowded trains is a thing of the past for Melinda Palmer.
All she has to do to get to work is walk out of her kitchen to her office just across the hall.
Melinda, who run the kitchen and bathroom design company Just So Design with her partner, is one of a growing number of people who are finding it easier, and more profitable, to manage their business from home.
Advances in telecommunications have meant that it is just as easy to work from a computer terminal at home as it is from a town centre office.
And with experts predicting that four million people will be ‘teleworking’ from home by 1995, properties with rooms which could be converted for office use are likely to be at a premium.
Developers are already cottoning on to the trend by building houses with ready made work rooms.
The four-bedroom Crest home which Melinda bought for £146,000 came complete with a full-size study.
Melinda, 39, made the decision to work at home a year ago.
‘We transferred the computer and the samples to a bedroom in the old house with a view to moving to somewhere more suitable,’ she says.
Then she found the Crest home with its purpose-built study.
‘The study means I can conduct all the business here,’ says Melinda.
‘It's just inside the front door so when reps come they don't interrupt the rest of the house.’
The benefit is in savings on overheads — which are then passed on to customers.
Melinda says she can sell her services 40 per cent cheaper than when she had a showroom.
Working at home has also had unexpected benefits for domestic life.
‘If one of the children is ill it doesn't matter because I'm at home, anyway,’ she says.
‘I just put the answering machine on.
‘I can put the washing machine on, type another letter, go back and check the washing.
I can make phone calls and no one knows I'm in jeans.’
Not all people who decide to work from home will be lucky enough to have a ready-made office space and they will need to make changes in their accommodation, even if it is only finding a place to keep the computer and the phone.
Teleworkers can operate at the kitchen table with a couple of filing cabinets tucked under it but most prefer to use a separate room they can shut the door on at the end of the day.
People who prefer older properties are currently snapping up country homes with outbuildings that will convert into offices, while others are finding that double-glazed conservatories — with prices from around £10,000 — are useful year-round work rooms.
Several companies are now offering prefabricated office buildings which can be installed in the garden.
Such is the growth in the number of people wanting to work from home that a new group, the National Association of Teleworkers, has been set up.
Founder member Tim Wickes says: ‘Our role is to promote the efficiency, cost saving and environmental benefits of teleworking, to link with other specialist groups and to help people using technology,’ he says.
Members range from major companies who have been using home-based workers for years to self-employed solicitors, translators and public relations people.
‘Teleworking is the future,’ says Wickes, who gave up a three-hour daily commuter round trip to run a specialist information technology service from his home.
‘It provides a far greater quality of life.
I've got to know people in my local community.
‘You can work when you want to.
You have fewer interruptions so you are far more efficient.
You save enormously on overheads and you save money and time by not commuting.
The only disadvantage is having to stay indoors on a lovely day.’
The National Association of Teleworkers can be contacted on 0761 413869.
Plant workroom in your garden
IF your house does not have a study and you can't afford to move, the answer could lie in the soil.
All you have to do is give up a few square yards of lawn space.
Homelodge, a Winchester-based company building free-standing ‘lodges’ for the garden says 80 per cent of its customers use the extra room as an office.
Prices start at £8,450 plus VAT for a 12ft-square lodge.
The price includes delivery and erection, lighting, heating, carpets and blinds.
Planning permission is not usually needed, except in conservation areas.
Another firm, Oakmoor Telecentres, provides made-to-measure prefabricated offices equipped with computer cabling.
About Pounds 10,000 buys a unit measuring 30 square metres with reception area, main room and two cubicles.
Homelodge Buildings Ltd, 0962 881480.
Oakmoor Telecentres, 0404 850977.
Countdown to verdict
OCTOBER 13: Board of Trade President Michael Heseltine announces 31 pits to close with loss of 30,000 jobs.
15: UDM leader Roy Lynk starts underground sit-in at his Notts pit.
16: Unrest at closures grows on Tory backbenches.
17: Protest marches are held in Tory heartlands like Cheltenham, Glos.
18: Ministers hold crisis meeting to work out how to defuse row.
19: Heseltine promises inquiry and 90-day stay of execution for 21 pits.
21: Labour fails by just 13 votes to defeat the Government in a Commons debate.
25: Protest march through London to Hyde Park wins widespread support.
NOVEMBER 5: British Coal gives undertaking to the High Court that 10 doomed pits will be maintained while row continues.
DECEMBER 21: High Court declares original decision to shut the pits invalid.
The Law and the Mighty
IT was always known that the decision to close 31 pits was economic, industrial and social madness.
Now we know it was unlawful, too.
If any private company had behaved like that, its bosses would have been savaged and ridiculed.
British Coal's deserve the same treatment.
But they, at least, can say that there were masters above them.
As a nationalised industry, British Coal is still answerable to the Government.
Responsibility for the outrageous pit-closure programme inevitably ends on Michael Heseltine's desk.
He cannot avoid the buck landing there, even if he continues to refuse to accept it.
Did Mr Heseltine not know the law?
Did he not have lawyers to advise him?
And — the biggest question of all — did he care about the law?
For this Government does not seem to.
Over pit closures, the scandal of the Matrix Churchill prosecution for arms sales to Iraq and the payment of Norman Lamont's legal fees, the Cabinet gives the impression of considering itself above the law.
Yet bigger men than them have learned to their cost that no one can behave like that.
The great judge Lord Denning in a historic judgment once said that no one, however mighty, was above the law.
Pressures
Over the past few weeks, the heirs to Lord Denning's mantle have proved themselves to be determined defenders of the people and upholders of justice.
The judge in the Matrix Churchill case refused to accept the attempt of four Cabinet ministers, acting on the advice of the Attorney-General, to allow three innocent businessmen to face near-certain imprisonment.
Now two High Court judges have refused to be cowed by the high-handed attitude and pressures of a Government which sought to impose a devastating pit-closure programme without following the proper legal procedures.
They were not swayed by the Coal Board's insistence that they could do what they wanted any more than by the unions' claims about the threatened mines.
They looked at the law and said it had been broken.
That, of course, is the purpose of having law.
It exists in every civilised society so that Governments, the rich and the powerful cannot abuse their position.
Yesterday's judgment raises two issues.
It throws the entire pit-closure plan back to where it was before the announcement of October 13.
The future of every mine must now be properly considered in the review.
That could have far-reaching implications for the country.
But even more crucial is the attitude and behaviour of those who govern us.
They must be made to understand that they are not above the law and that they are answerable to the people who elected them and whom they are supposed to represent.
If there was any honour in this Government, Mr Heseltine's resignation would have been on the Prime Minister's desk at the same time as the High Court judgment.
But honour is in short supply in a Cabinet in which arrogance and incompetence reign supreme.
Muck rakers
BIRDS do it, bees do it, but you used to be able to watch Emmerdale Farm with your granny and be confident that the cast wouldn't do it.
Yet progress comes to every backwater, especially when it is on television.
So perhaps we should not be surprised — though we are entitled to be shocked — at the steamy photos on the Emmerdale calendar.
Twice a week it might be at the moment.
By December, it will be five times a night.
Tax Bill scares fat cats into an early Christmas
Penny Wark
GORDON Gekko's assertion in the film Wall Street that ‘Lunch is for wimps,’ seemed to sum up the money-mad Eighties.
Today, the high-powered financiers on whom Michael Douglas's character was modelled might add that tax is also for wimps.
In a piece of fancy footwork of which Gekko would have been proud, America's fat cats have capped a record year by undermining President-Elect Bill Clinton's plans to soak the rich, before he has even set foot in the White House.
By awarding themselves hefty Christmas bonuses now they will be able to pay tax on the extra money at the current rate and save themselves thousands of pounds.
What they are doing is boosting their 1992 earnings at the expense of their income in 1993 when the Clinton government will be in power and hitting them with hugely increased tax bills.
British dealers, who have also enjoyed a profitable year, have not had to make the panic payments.
But had the Labour Party won the last Election they too would be facing hefty tax bills and precisely the same threat to their lavish standards of living.
The UK shares market has been one of the most buoyant in the world and over the past 12 months £80 billion has flooded in from investors.
Top equity and foreign exchange dealers have picked up a minimum of £200,000 before bonuses and perks — the real whiz-kids making upwards of £300,000.
Brokers such as UBS-Phillips and Drew, Smith New Court, Kleinwort Benson, Hoare Govett and County NatWest have made spectacular recoveries compared to the lean years of 1990 and 1991.
And in Britain, the Labour Party's failure to win the General Election meant the money men could enjoy the spoils without the threat of a big tax bill.
In America, though, it is a different story.
A significant part of Clinton's manifesto concerned tax.
While George Bush promised no new taxes, Clinton said that he would rebuild the economy by penalising high earners who have had it so good for so long.
His reforms will limit the tax allowance available to corporations, and the top rates of federal tax will climb from 31 per cent to 36 per cent for individuals or families who earn more than $150,000 (Pounds 96,000).
The average annual pay in Wall Street this year is expected to rise to $110,000, well short of the $150,000-plus bracket targeted by Mr Clinton.
But this figure is an average and includes everyone from junior clerks to bosses who have earned as much as $22 million in the past.
Tens of thousands of executives earn more than $200,000 a year and will certainly see their tax liability change in 1993.
Several thousand of the 226,000 people employed in the industry are also expected to clock up seven-figure incomes this year, making them targets of another Clinton tax proposal — a 10 per cent surcharge on earnings over $1 million a year.
Bonuses for stockbrokers and investment bankers can often make up between two-thirds and three-quarters of their annual salary.
They are usually paid in January or February.
In 1991, another bumper year, the bonuses accounted for as much as 80 per cent of the money earned by brokers, traders and investment bankers.
But this year nine of the top investment banks have been plotting ways to beat the tax increases.
Many large companies, including Merrill Lynch, Shearson Lehman, and Bear Stearns, have allowed employees to take at least part of the bonus money they expect to earn before December 31.
Companies have also been looking after their shareholders.
Earlier this month Bear Stearns, the New York investment bank, distributed 10 million shares that it had been holding as part of a deferred payment plan.
It said that a delay could cost its shareholders $165 million in lost tax deductions.
Among the individuals who benefited were 130 senior Bear Stearns executives, including the chief executive Ace Greenberg, who has openly criticised the proposed ‘excessive pay’ deduction limit.
Naturally Bear Stearns deny that self-interest has anything to do with their policy.
The firm ‘wouldn't have done this just to give employees the benefit of a tax rate differential,’ says William Montgoris, the finance director.
‘This was done with a complete focus on shareholders of the corporation,’ he insists.
There is just one snag though.
Pulling the bonus that would normally be taken next year into this year's earnings leaves 1993 looking a little thin.
That does not suit every executive, particularly as the growth in profits has levelled off in the second half of this year.
Some financial planners have worked out another loophole, telling their clients to hang on to the part of their income paid in company shares, because taxes on capital gains are unlikely to rise under President Clinton and may even fall.
No one in Clinton's administration has yet commented on the Wall Street tax dodge.
Earlier this month the top two executives at Walt Disney cashed in a record $253 million worth of personal share options.
The company admitted that they had done so to avoid paying the new higher taxes.
‘It's a free country,’ was all that Clinton's spokesman George Stephanopoulos would say.
His comment is restrained enough but then he knows that Bill Clinton will soon succeed in creaming off the excess fat that has kept America's top earners happy for so long.
If Gordon Gekko is still around, his days are numbered.
The first draft of Guinness
Dominic Mudgley
IT IS revered as the last word in wonderful facts, loved by schoolchildren and eggheads alike.
But the Guinness Books Of Records actually started life as a slim pamphlet designed to stop pub squabbles.
The best-selling book that will end up in 400,000 Christmas stockings this week was the brainchild of Guinness chief executive Sir Hugh Beaver and first published in 1955, a time when the brewery owned 84,382 pubs in Britain.
‘The idea was that each publican would have a booklet of facts behind the bar which he could use to settle arguments,’ says the current editor Peter Matthews.
Since then, not only has the number of records increased fourfold but advances in human learning have also led to amendments.
In the first edition the furthest known star was put at 1,000 million light years away.
Today's entry reveals it is 13,000 million light years away.
Other records are unlikely to be bettered.
St Simeon Stylites' world-beater for pole-squatting looks particularly safe.
The 5th-Century mystic spent the last 45 years of his life atop a stone pillar.
The British record in contrast is a relatively puny 40 days.
Another record that would require a Herculean effort by any contender and a large amount of time and money to break is in the underestimated art of domino tumbling.
Ten years ago the record stood, or rather fell, at 35,000.
Today it is 1 million.
‘To set up a million dominoes you need a huge hall that has to be totally isolated for more than six weeks,’ says Peter Matthews.
‘Even if you have a butterfly fluttering round the hall it can be disastrous.
‘These days they build breaks into them so that if they do knock one over by mistake, it doesn't take the whole lot with it.’
Foreign editions of the Guinness Book Of Records are now published in 40 countries and 3 million copies are sold internationally every year.
It has also bred a small publishing empire for Guinness, which brings out 50 reference books including the Guinness Book of Hit Singles and the Guinness Encyclopaedia.
Is that a record?
The Guinness Book of Records, Guinness Publishing, costs £13.99.
Not Wanted
Gerard Evans in Deadwood
Showdown in Deadwood as Costner makes town goldmine for gambling SCREEN hero Kevin Costner is playing the bad guy for once after fuelling a gambling war in a Wild West town.
The actor rode into historic Deadwood, South Dakota, with a 60-strong gang of architects and announced plans to turn 85 acres into a hotel and gaming city.
He already owns one casino and claims his £25 million plan will create 1,000 jobs.
But old timers fear a return to the violent, drunken days that saw Wild Bill Hickok gunned down in their local saloon.
They say land values are going to soar and are incensed at Costner's demand that local laws be changed to raise the maximum gambling stake from £3 to £60 — a move they feel is certain to attract crime.
All over town the depth of their anger is evident.
The entrance to Ayres Hardware shop on Main Street bears a notice reading: ‘Don't bother asking.
We ain't for sale.’
It was pinned up by 75-year-old widow Aggie Ayres.
‘I got fed up with people offering to buy me out so they could open another damn casino,’ Aggie says.
‘We have no shops now.
They got bought out.’
Aggie's ancestors supplied the dynamite for the blasting of the Mount Rushmore monument but now she'd like to light a fuse under Costner.
‘This was a nice place before gambling came back and we had a good tourist trade until Costner arrived.’
Costner fell in love with Deadwood while making the Oscar-winning film Dances With Wolves three years ago.
At the same time the ailing town re-introduced gambling, sparking a £60 million boom, Costner opened his £2m Midnight Star casino on Main Street.
Deadwood prospered and Costner was befriended by locals until they discovered he had drawn up plans for an 800-room hotel and conference centre nearby.
It will have a golf course, theme park, entertainment, swimming pools, waterfalls, nature trails and its own steam train service to Rapid City.
But opponents say it will almost double the population of little Deadwood, sending property prices skyrocketing.
There are already 80 casino operations and owners fear the star's Vegas-style resort will bankrupt them by luring away gamblers.
Equally alarming is Costner's campaign to pressure state legislators to raise the maximum betting stake.
Locals claim this will attract high rollers and sharks eager to buy them out and take profits elsewhere.
Even the Sioux Indians immortalised in Dances With Wolves are angry because it will divert money from their bingo halls which bring in revenue to poor reservations.
Either way, Sheriff Chuck Crotty has his work cut out for him.
‘Gambling is a big pain in the butt,’ he says.
‘A lot of casino guys don't care a bit about the townsfolk.’
Crime has risen 70 per cent since poker, blackjack and slot machines returned and there is even a three-month waiting list for the jail's cells.
Bad cheque passing has risen by 87 per cent and drunken driving by 205 per cent.
Enrolments at the local hospital's gambling addiction clinic have shot through the roof.
‘It makes me angry when I see guys spend two weeks pay in one night,’ says Crotty.
‘There are people on food stamps who will buy a pack of gum with stamps and get the change in coins for the slots.’
But mayor Bruce Oberlander favours ‘Costnerwood’, as it has been dubbed.
Revenues from gambling have meant an £18 million windfall for his Historic Preservation Society which has restored Main Street and Mount Moriah cemetery where Bill Hickok is buried next to Calamity Jane.
‘Deadwood was doing badly and this gambling brought a lot of money,’ he says.
Costner's Midnight Star casino is the plushest in town.
Floor manager George Picard says: ‘Kevin fell in love with the hills and wanted to put something back into the community, that's all.’
That doesn't cut any ice at the No 10 saloon where Wild Bill Hickok's death chair hangs over the door.
Owner Louie Lalonde will tell you how Bill broke his own rule by sitting with his back to the door the night Jack ‘Broken Nose ‘McCall crept in and shot him.
She'll even show you the poker hand he was playing.
Now Louie wants to see Costner run out of town.
‘I'm fighting him all the way,’ she says.
‘His project is too much for a town of 1,500 people.
I can see the spirit of Deadwood being forced out.
We have been here 30 years and I don't want to give up the No 10.
Costner's Taj Mahal could do that to me.’
Then Louie grins and says: ‘He is welcome to drink here but he'd better not choose the chair with its back to the door.’
Now Norman is doing up No 11 at our expense
By Tim Satchell
CHANCELLOR Norman Lamont and his wife Rosemary are redecorating their Downing Street home at a cost of tens of thousands of pounds.
Their plans for No 11 confirm that the couple are not expecting imminent eviction.
Interested firms of interior decorators have been tendering for the work of which Mrs Lamont is expected to take charge.
The cost will be met by the Treasury out of public funds — but unlike earlier controversy involving Mr Lamont and legal expenses arising over the eviction of a tenant from his Notting Hill home, this is accepted as normal practice for official residences.
Mrs Lamont, 45, has a well-developed aesthetic sense.
She studied Fine Arts at Leeds University and her first job was as a reporter on House and Garden magazine.
Understandably, perhaps, the Treasury are reticent.
‘We don't know of any decorating plans at present,’ says a spokesman.
However, the couple's plans to remain resident for some time to come seem confirmed.
‘Norman is safe now,’ says one Tory backbencher.
‘He is not going to be sacked over Christmas, and in the New Year the preparations for the Spring Budget would be disrupted by a change at the helm.
‘John Major feels that Norman has fought up the rough side of the mountain and that it would be unfair to get rid of him now.’
I can report that our Christmas postage stamps are nourishing.
Colin Pawson, the Royal Mail's head of philatelic marketing, has been telling me of the energy stored in the gum on the back.
The calorific value of that on an ordinary definitive stamp is 5.9.
The gum on the back of each of the bigger special issues, such as the Christmas stamps, is worth 14.5 calories.
Now that's something to chew over.
Crackers bang on target
By Tim Satchell
GREAT care has been taken in making the crackers for the Queen's family Christmas.
Two types have been produced by the Norwich firm of Tom Smith, which has held the Royal Warrant since 1906.
A children's version contains pencils and nursery toys while adults have ones with dog tags, key rings, whistles and desk knick knacks.
The odd grown-up cracker will occasionally reveal an Asprey trinket or an enamel box.
The royal crackers are made in secret by the firm founded by Tom Smith in 1847 who, inspired by a crackling log in his fireplace, contrived to make a pretty confection which produced a ‘mini explosion’.
And…
By Tim Satchell
WHY does Father Christmas say: ‘Ho, ho, ho’?
Well, wouldn't you if you had to work for only one night a year?
Georgina reins in tradition
By Tim Satchell
GEORGINA Lloyd, one of our most promising young event riders, is following the example set by the Queen when younger and riding side-saddle.
Miss Lloyd, 18, shortlisted for next year's British Young Riders' Tournament, specialises in eventing.
She also hunts side-saddle.
Miss Lloyd says: ‘It is more exciting riding side-saddle when jumping a fence.
You have a greater sensation of gliding through the air.
‘Also you are less likely to fall off as the saddle is constructed with two pommels to grip.
‘I was encouraged by my great aunt who is 96.
In her day, women only rode side-saddle.’
Miss Lloyd tells me she would like to see the tradition revived.
Here she is on Pascal, her nine-year-old Irish draught cross thoroughbred mare.
The elegance and grace of riding side-saddle is reiterated in the dress code.
A new outfit of coat and apron costs £450.
A reinforced riding top hat from Christie's costs £120 and the veil an extra £2.95.
A side saddle (Champion and Wilton: £4,500) has two pommels around which one wraps ones legs.
It is essential to sit up straight.
As well as riding, Miss Lloyd, who lives in Gloucestershire, caters for dinner parties and breaks in horses.
She is now seeking a sponsor to help her reach her dream of a place in the 1996 Olympics.
Connors aims for smash hit
By Tim Satchell
‘GOING the distance’ rather than‘going for the burn’is the message of the forthcoming keep-fit book by tennis champion Jimmy Connors.
In Don't Count Yourself Out, to be published as an original paperback by Pan in June, Mr Connors emphasises that stress need not be part of keeping fit.
‘Keeping in shape is not just a youth thing,’ a Pan spokeswoman tells me.
‘This is fitness for the thirtysomethings.’
Left-handed Mr Connors, 40, who at 5ft 10in weighs 11st 2lb, holds the men's career record with eight Grand Slam wins.
Knowing she was about to die, the brave little girl wrote on her gift ‘Nanny, I loved you.
Kelly’
Olga Craig
KELLY Good painstakingly glued a gold bow to the front of her pink velvet jewellery box and stuck down a Christmas label.
In black felt pen Kelly, 11, wrote: ‘To Nanny.
I loved you.
Love Kelly.’
Underneath she drew a line of kisses.
The youngster wrote in the past tense because she knew she wouldn't be around on Christmas Day when her Nan would open the box filled with her favourite jewellery.
Kelly would be dead.
All her life she had battled against cystic fibrosis.
Ten months ago she underwent a five-hour lung and heart transplant.
And when her body rejected the organs brave Kelly faced death with a dignity and understanding that few adults ever achieve.
This Christmas her parents Mike and Sandra won't grieve.
Instead they will celebrate the memory of a child whose life they feel honoured to have shared.
There will be tears but mostly they will toast her courage.
Just weeks before her death Kelly sat with her father at the computer keyboard in her bedroom and keyed in all the arrangements she had made for her funeral.
‘Don't wear black — I want you all to wear purple and pink.
And please, don't be sad,’ she instructed her mum.
‘People ask wasn't that heartbreaking,’ says Sandra.
‘But it was simply Kelly.
She'd lived all her life with this dreadful illness.
We're not an over-emotional family.
We told Kelly all along what the doctors were saying.
We told her when they said her transplant was looking good and she would have a future after all.
‘And we told her when they said she would die.
Kelly accepted it all.
She'd get depressed but she never gave up hope.’
Kelly's dream was one most girls of 11 would expect to come true.
She wanted to grow up, get married and have children.
The day after her double transplant one of the first things she did was to grab her mother's hand and say: ‘I'll be able to grow up and have kids now, won't I?’
But as her frail body began rejecting its new organs, Kelly realised her time was near.
‘I was driving Kelly to Great Ormond Street Hospital in London,’ Sandra says, ‘and out of the blue she said to me: ‘Mum, what happens when you die?
What happens to your spirit and what happens to your body’?’
Frantically negotiating the traffic, Sandra choked back tears as she tried to answer her daughter's question.
‘I tried to tell her in a matter-of-fact way that when you die you leave your body behind and go to Heaven.
But I felt out of my depth so I suggested she talk to Pat Phillips, the Deaconess at St Mary's in Newent, Gloucestershire, where we live.’
Kelly and Pat spent hours in the little girl's bedroom discussing what hymns, readings, type of coffin and flowers she wanted.
‘I want everything to be right,’ Kelly told her mum, between wracking coughs.
She left the inscription on her headstone up to her parents.
But she did make one request.
‘I'd like it to be in memory of my second cousin Russell too, because he died from cystic fibrosis as well.’
As the Goods sit in Kelly's bedroom surrounded by the bits and pieces that made up her world, Mike picks up her diary.
Kelly died on December 7 but had earlier filled in an appointment for December 8.
She had written: ‘Pat Phillips coming to plan funeral arrangements.’
The next day's entry, in Mike's handwriting, bears the words: ‘Kelly is now at rest.’
Flicking through the pages Mike stops at the summer months.
The pages are blank.
‘That's after the transplant when she felt so good and was out running about.
I suppose she was doing so much she didn't have time to write.
‘This was her school project,’ he explains, picking up a long computer print-out.
‘It's all about having a lung and heart transplant.
She was really proud that no one else could write about that.’
Sandra says: ‘In our hearts we knew Kelly wouldn't live until Christmas.
We thought about celebrating it early but Kelly seemed to see Christmas Day as something to work towards.
‘But she was practical.
When I asked her what she wanted for Christmas she said things that her seven-year-old brother Simon could have.
She wanted computer games like Sonic the Hedgehog, things that he liked too.’
Kelly was 12 months old when her mother first began to worry that all was not well.
A GP told the Goods their baby had whooping cough.
‘But we weren't convinced,’ says Mike.
In September 1983, at 18 months, Kelly was admitted to Gloucester Hospital for tests.
Ultimately the Goods learned she was desperately ill with a disease that was incurable.
‘Everything she ate went right through her,’ says Sandra.
‘She looked like a little Biafran with these spindly arms and legs and this big, distended stomach.
‘I was talking to my mum one day and I just blurted out: ‘Kelly is dying’.
It was the first time I was able to say it.
‘When the Cystic Fibrosis Trust called us it was a Godsend.
At last we were able to talk to people who'd been through this.’
By now Kelly needed extensive physiotheraphy several times a day to rid her of the excess mucus that clogged her lungs.
The Goods had a foam wedge fitted to her bed and they would take turns to pummel her chest and back.
By 1991 she was practically housebound and doctors first assessed her for a heart and lung transplant.
By then death had become an everyday subject spoken about openly in the Good household.
‘Kelly would tell her friends quite naturally that she was dying, she didn't fear it,’ says Mike.
Kelly was given a bleeper and the worrying wait for a heart and lung donor began.
On February 14, she went through her transplant and after a long and painful convalescence, came home to Newent.
‘It was like having a different daughter,’ laughs Mike turning to an entry in Kelly's diary.
It reads: ‘Went for a very long bike ride and I wasn't tired but Dad was knackered.’
As Kelly recuperated she was able to do more and more things.
‘She got a mountain bike in her favourite colours — purple and pink — and was out on it all the time,’ says Sandra.
‘She tackled everything with gusto — she just crammed in everything.
‘She even won a race at her school sports day, the egg and spoon race.
‘I'll never forget cheering her on.
All the parents ignored their own youngsters and yelled for Kelly.
‘She had this funny, lovely lolloping gait.
I'll never forget the look of concentration on her face as she ran.
Or the look of joy when she broke the tape.
‘Then she was asked to be the local carnival queen.
That took some planning but Kelly loved it.’
But by August Kelly was beginning to cough.
Soon she was barely able to walk and she had oxygen cylinders fitted in her bedroom.
Finally the doctors sat Sandra down and told her Kelly's body was rejecting the organs — and gave her six months to two years to live.
‘That was the only time we kept something from her and even then it was only for a short time,’ says Mike.
‘She had been so brave and she had a right to know, to set her life in order just like anyone facing death.’
That was when Kelly began arranging her funeral.
‘She loved art and colours and wanted everything colour co-ordinated,’ says Sandra.
‘She said she wanted to be buried in her pink carnival queen dress and wearing her gold butterfly stud earrings.
‘She spent ages deciding on the colour of the lining of her coffin and chose the exact shade.
Our dog Susy and she talked about meeting in Heaven.
‘At the end we were at her bedside and she couldn't really speak — she was slipping in and out of coma — but she was able to squeeze my hand.
Kelly and I had a cry then.
Shortly after that Mike said to me ‘I think we're losing her’.’
Kelly's funeral wishes were carried out.
Her school pals sang Morning Has Broken, The Colours Of The Day and Once In Royal David's City just as she asked.
And though they tried not to be sad as she had asked, many were in tears as they listened to the reading Kelly had chosen.
Taken from Watership Down — her favourite book — it told how rabbits' leader Hazel comes to the end of her life.
‘The story tells how she left her body behind yet went on to other things,’ says Deaconess Pat Phillips.
‘Kelly believed she, too, would go on to other things that God planned for her.’
By Christmas Eve Mike and Sandra hope to have their daughter's headstone erected.
On it will be the words: ‘She was the light.
There will be no darkness for we have our memories.’
In the meantime the Goods are concentrating on helping the Cystic Fibrosis Trust.
Kelly herself helped raise more than £15,000 for the Kelly Good Appeal.
‘You do think of all the might have beens,’ Sandra admits.
‘Kelly being a teenager, having boyfriends, marrying.
But the important thing is her memory.
My daughter's courage and dignity was way beyond her years.
ANYONE wishing to support the Cystic Fibrosis Trust can send donations to the Trust at Alexandra House, 5 Blyth Road, Bromley, Kent BR1 3RS.
Single parents and bondage
I OBJECT to Jane Gordon using single parents alongside bondage in a ‘right-on’ nursery frieze.
Single parents are a fact of life and should not have to feel ashamed.
Christmas cards
THE biggest Christmas casualty is the person whose birth gave us the excuse for rejoicing.
It's hard to find cards with a religious theme now.
TV repeats
WHY do TV companies feed us recycled rubbish for 50 weeks a year then put on all the good programmes at Christmas when we have no time to watch the box?
National Lottery
IT'S outrageous that the takings of the National Lottery will go to the arts, heritage, sport and charities.
All the money should be used to help this country's hospitals, the poor and the homeless.
Seeing red over green tax
THE Government is considering yet another way to steal our money in the form of a tax on carbon fuels which you call ‘a green crackdown’.
Minister Michael Howard says this is worth paying because global warming is ‘an issue of concern to everyone’.
We live in a climate where heat and light are essential, not luxuries.
People cannot afford to use gas or electricity wastefully.
Any price increases will cause even more financial distress.
If the Government was seriously concerned with the burning of carbon fuels, we would see investment in alternative methods of energy production and transport.
It cannot be denied that air pollution needs to be addressed but we shouldn't be fooled into paying more of our hard-earned cash which will be used to pay for Mr Lamont's bungles.
Don't force taxpayers to fund career mums
I WAS infuriated by your leader article claiming career mums are being sold short by the Government.
Having children is a life choice that is down to the individual.
Why should I and all the other taxpayers have to fund it?
I am a 40-year-old male, childless by choice, already paying a great deal of tax to satisfy the needs of women and children.
I refer to paid maternity leave, child allowance, single parent allowances etc.
My choice in life would be to tour the world on a £10,000 Harley-Davidson or fill my garage with motorcycles.
But would you seriously expect the Government to subsidise that?.
Of course not.
Why then should I subsidise the choices of others?
Don't force taxpayers to fund career mums
I WAS an infant teacher for 38 years and it always makes me angry when anyone says that a mother who stays at home caring for her child is ‘wasting her talents’.
To care for, teach and train a child, giving them the love and discipline they need in a secure home, requires all the intelligence and skill a woman possesses.
It is also hard work, which is why some women want creches, after school care and the like.
I can't help feeling that some women would prefer a doll than a child, something they can put back in the box when they're tired of it.
Thaw point
I WAS amazed to read in TODAY that actor John Thaw ‘doesn't enjoy people staring’ at him.
If they didn't stare at him on TV he wouldn't be in a position to spend £425,000 on a new house.
Count yourself lucky, Mr Thaw, that people want to stop and look at you.
Millions of us would love to be in your position.
Public school boys
MY grandson and my brother both went to public schools.
Both have made a success of their lives, both are very affectionate and both have children and happy marriages.
So much for your article which says public school boys are all ‘emotionally screwed up’.
Milestones
BIRTHDAYS: Pop star twin brothers Maurice and Robin Gibb, 43.
TV presenter Noel Edmonds, 44.
ON THIS DAY: In 1988, a Pan Am jumbo jet crashed on Lockerbie in Scotland, killing all 259 passengers and crew and 11 people on the ground.
Things you didn't know you didn't know
Graeme Donald
BEFORE the late 1600s, the Christmas pudding was a thick plum soup served at the beginning of the meal, filled with minced meat and dried fruit.
Similarly, the mince pie previously contained minced chicken or ox-tongue and, more than that, it was always large and rectangular.
The pastry crust was embellished with a tiny figure and the whole thing was held to be representative of Christ in the crib.
When the first Crusaders trudged home for a rest from rape and pillage, they brought with them unknown spices which imparted such wondrous new and strong flavours that the absence of meat could go unnoticed.
Gradually the meat was eschewed and the pie became round, as this was the easiest shape to seal.
A digression, but this is also why the motor tax disc is round; the law previously required them to be displayed in an external, weatherproof holder.
TODAY'S Book Of Things You Didn't Know…is now on sale, published by Simon & Schuster for £3.99.
The best of British sales
Karen Mellor
SEARCHING for genuine bargains in the New Year Sales can be a struggle but TODAY has made it easier with a comprehensive guide to the best buys on the High Street.
KAREN MELLOR has located the best deals in London, Britain's other major cities and in national chain stores.
Don't try to do too much in one day or you will end up making impulse buys that you will regret, and don't buy things just because they are cheap.
If you are buying clothes, remember that if a designer label is selling for a tenth of the usual price, there is probably a good reason — it may be an outdated style.
If the goods are faulty but repairable, haggle for a further discount.
But don't think that serious damage, such as a tear in a trouser leg, can easily be disguised — it can't.
NATIONWIDE CHAINSTORES
ACCESSORISE
Sale starts Monday, January 4 until the end of the month.
Discounts of up to 50 per cent, rising as the sale progresses.
AUSTIN REED
Sale starts Monday, December 28 (except Fenchurch St, Cheapside & Liverpool St branches in London, which start on December 29).
Five per cent extra discount for account customers December 28-30.
Grey flannel women's suit down from £210 to £139.
Pure new wool jacket £175 to £99.
Women's birdseye wool jackets £190 to £95.
Pure new wool suit for men £295 to £199.
All designer wear, including KL by Karl Lagerfeld and Yves St Laurent, reduced by up to 50 per cent.
BALLY
Sale starts Monday, December 28 at 49 branches.
Snaffle loafers reduced from £61 to £49.
Ankle boots £71 to £59.
Men's suede loafers £75 to £59.
BENETTON
Sale starts Tuesday, December 29.
Discounts vary between individual franchise holders.
BHS
Sale starts Monday, December 28, until end of January.
Discounts in all departments.
BLAZER
Sale starts at 11am on Monday, December 28, except at the Broadgate and Fenchurch Street branches in London, which start the following day.
The sale lasts for about two weeks.
Suits are down from £350 to Pounds 225, and from £250 to £175.
Jackets down from £135 to £85.
Half-price knitwear, silk shirts and chinos.
Formal shirts reduced from £35 to £20.
Formal trousers down from £70 to £35.
BLOOMING MARVELLOUS
Mail order company.
Sale already underway, with discounts of up to 50 per cent on some maternity and children's clothes.
Red tartan maternity dresses down from £34.99 to £26.99.
Babies' cerise-and-navy striped playsuit reduced from £16.99 to £10.99.
Ring 081 391 4822 to order.
BOOTS
Sale starts Monday, December 28 in 1,078 stores and runs while stocks last.
Offers in all departments.
BOULES
Sale starts Monday, December 28.
Selected items half price.
BURBERRYS
Sale starts December 28 for about two weeks.
Classic women's weatherproofs down from £300 to £150 and men's weatherproofs from £365 to £150.
CASA FINA
Sale starts January 14.
Reductions on selected household goods.
C&A
Sale starts Tuesday, December 29.
Reductions on men's, women's and children's clothes but not on skiwear.
CHURCH'S
Nationwide sale starts Monday, December 28.
Many shoes at half-price or less.
COMET
Nationwide sale starts on Saturday, December 26.
Special pre-Christmas offers available now, such as Panasonic Ladyshave half-price at Pounds 9.99, Phillips hostess trolley reduced by £40 at £159.99, Commodore CDTV Multi Media Pack down £100 at £499.99.
COUNTRY CASUALS
England: sale starts Monday, December 28.
Scotland: sale starts Saturday, December 26.
Reductions up to 40 per cent.
Women's coats down from £279 to £189
DEBENHAMS
Sale starts Monday, December 28 with discounts starting from 30 per cent on all ranges.
Special ‘early bird’ promotion between 8.30am and 10am with extra discounts.
DOLCIS
Sales start on December 18 (City of London stores), December 21 (West End stores) and December 24 (other stores nationwide).
All winter ranges half price.
EPISODE
Sale already underway with reductions of up to 40 per cent.
Leather jackets down from £199 to £139, leather skirts from Pounds 129 to £90, wool/angora coats from £299 to £209.
THE GAP
Sale starts on Christmas Eve with reductions of between 30 per cent and 50 per cent.
HABITAT
Sale starts at 9.30am on Monday, December 28.
Cairo two-seater sofa £199.
Boundary whitewashed pine bedroom furniture: 4ft 6in bed with footboard and tufted mattress, plus two bedside cabinets Pounds 650.
Albert sofabed £399.
Bamboo occasional table £69.
Chubb chair £49.
Selected 24-piece cutlery sets down from £120 to £79.
There is 30 per cent off all printed fabrics and 35 per cent off made-to-order curtains and blinds.
HENNES
Sale already underway.
Up to 40 per cent off in all departments.
HOUSE OF FRASER STORES
Sales start on December 26 (Scotland), December 28 (England).
Many items half price.
Three-quarter length Weekender jacket reduced to Pounds 34.99, Pringle lambswool sports sweaters down from £69.99 to £19.99.
Philips 736 dishwasher £100 off at £299.99, Moulinex C83 Food Processor down £30 to £29.99.
JAEGER
Sale starts Monday, December 28.
Reductions include tweed blazers down from £269 to £145, silk shirts in pale camel from £109 to £69.
Navy gaberdine trousers are reduced from £139 to £79 and grey flannel shirt-dresses from £159 to £99.
Three-quarter length black-and-white check blanket coats are down from £259 to £149, gold sequinned vest dresses from £149 to £99.
JIGSAW
Sale starts during the first two weeks in January.
JONES THE BOOTMAKERS
Sale starts on Monday, December 28.
Across-the-board reductions with many products under half price.
Shoes now priced at £56.95 will be £26.95, others at £72.95 will be down to £32.95.
KNICKERBOX
Sale starts Monday, December 28 in 57 stores (selected stores will open on Sunday, December 27 and will start their sales then).
Reductions vary but the bestselling satin range will be reduced.
LITTLEWOODS
Sale starts Monday, December 28 with reductions of up to 50 per cent.
MARKS & SPENCER
No sale as such, but see regions for special deals after Christmas.
MISS SELFRIDGE
Sale starts Thursday, December 17 with reductions of up to 25 per cent, increasing as the sale progresses.
MONSOON
Sale starts on Monday, December 28 but the following six branches will start early on December 26: In London: James St WC2, The Market Hall WC2, Piccadilly, Covent Garden.
In Scotland: Aberdeen, Glasgow.
Selected lines reducved by up to 50 per cent with further reductions later in the sale.
Washed silk button-through flared dresses down from £99.95 to £79.95, corded lace dresses down from £99.95 to Pounds 49.97.
NEXT
Sale starts Monday, December 28 (Scotland December 26).
Reductions of up to 50 per cent.
Women's bargains include blue check jackets down from £79.99 to £39.99, lilac microfibre sweaters from Pounds 24.99 to £12.49, chocolate double-breasted jackets down from £89.99 to £49.99 and matching trousers reduced from Pounds 46.99 to £23.49.
OUISET
Sale starts December 28.
Women's separates reduced by between 30 and 50 per cent.
PAPERCHASE
Sale starts Monday, December 28 for about four weeks.
Up to 50 per cent off selected items.
PHASE EIGHT
Sale starts at 11am on Monday, December 28.
Silk trouser suits and jackets down from £89.95 to £39.95, trousers reduced from £112 to £49.95.
PRINCIPLES
Sale starts December 26 with up to 50 per cent reductions.
RUSSELL & BROMLEY
Sale starts Wednesday, December 23 and lasts for about three weeks.
Brown suede over-knee boots reduced from £145 to £89.50.
Black suede court shoes with leg laces reduced from £89.50 to £49.50, suede slipper pumps from £79.99 to £49.99, evening shoes from £125 to £59.
Men's Moreschi leather shoes down from £125 to £69, loafers from £95.50 to Pounds 59.50.
SAXONE
Sale starts on December 17 (City of London), December 18 (other stores nationwide).
There are 40 per cent reductions on winter collection shoes.
SCOTCH HOUSE
Sale starts on Monday, December 28 for about three weeks.
Women's cashmere roundneck down from £140 to £99.50.
SNOW & ROCK
Sale starts at 10am on Monday, December 28 for three weeks.
Free ski bag with a pair of skis, free boot bag with a pair of boots, special ski package reductions and up to 20 per cent off new season skiwear.
SOCK SHOP
Sale starts Saturday, December 26.
STIRLING COOPER
Sale starts Monday, December 28 for one month.
Open New Year's Day.
Telephone 071 487 3783 for your nearest branch.
Pinstripe jacket down from £69.99 to £34.95, trousers reduced from £34.95 to £19.95, waistcoats from £29.99 to £19.95.
TIE RACK
Sale starts Monday, January 28 for four weeks.
Silk ties down from £9.99 to £6.99 or two for £12.
Winter scarves reduced from £3.99 to £1.99 or three for £5.
Selected silk scarves reduced to £3.99.
TOP MAN
Sale starts on Saturday, December 26.
Winter collection reductions include half-price wool sweaters, suits down from £79.99 to Pounds 40.
TOP SHOP
Sale starts Saturday, December 26 until January 24.
Patchwork leather jeans reduced from £59.99 to £39.99.
All Christmas party dresses half price.
WALLIS
Sale starts Wednesday, December 23.
‘W at Wallis’ collection will be reduced in 14 stores from December 28.
WHISTLES
Sale already underway.
Between 30 and 40 per cent off selected items.
Moschino jackets down from £490 to £245.
FW WOOLWORTH
Sale starts Monday, December 28 until January 15.
No general sale policy but widespread reductions.
LONDON
AGNES B
Parisian designer clothing for men and women.
Sale starts mid-January.
L'ASTRAGALE
Sale starts Monday, January 4.
Discounts of up to 40 per cent on Elizabeth Stuart shoes, Raysse clothing, Votre Nom suits.
ALLY CAPELLINO
Designer clothing in natural fibres for men, women and children.
Sale starts January 2 until mid-Feb.
Reductions of between 30 and 50 per cent on Ally Capellino and Hearts of Oak lines, and men's and children's clothes.
AQUASCUTUM
Classic English clothing for men and women.
Sale starts December 28.
Women's camelhair coats down from £749 to £395, botany knitwear down from £79 to £49.
AVIREX
Sale starts on Monday, December 28.
reductions of up to 60 per cent.
Leather flying jackets down from £350 to £150.
BALLANTYNE CASHMERE
153A New Bond Street, W1 Customer preview on January 2, sale starts January 4.
Cashmere blend swing coats reduced from £440 to £260.
Pure cashmere sweaters down from £180 to £108.
BETTY JACKSON
311 Brompton Road, SW3 Sale starts Tuesday, December 29.
All Winter collection at half-price or less.
BOX FRESH
Short's Gardens, Covent Garden, WC2 Sale already underway.
Box Fresh label reduced by 40 per cent.
BROWNS OF SOUTH MOLTON STREET
Sale starts early January, date to be announced.
Reductions of up to 50 per cent on all winter stock except cruisewear collections.
BUCKLE MY SHOE
19 St Christopher's Place, W1 Concession at Harvey Nichols Sale starts Tuesday, December 29.
Reductions from 25 per cent on winter collection.
BUTLER & WILSON
20 South Molton Street, W1 Sale starts Wednesday, December 30.
All costume jewellery half-price.
CAROLINE CHARLES
56-57 Beauchamp Place, SW3 Sale starts Tuesday, December 29.
Most items half-price (not jewellery and lingerie).
CELINE
28 New Bond Street, W1 6F Sloane Street, SW1 Designer jewellery sale starts at 2pm on Tuesday, December 29.
CERRUTI 1881
75-76 New Bond Street, W1 Sale now underway until mid-January.
THE CHANGING ROOM
10A Gees Court, W1 Sale already underway.
Reductions from 50 per cent.
CHARLES JOURDAN
39-43 Brompton Road, SW3 Sale already underway.
Reductions of between 30 and 50 per cent.
COLOURWASH
Fulham High Street Sale starts Tuesday, December 29 until January 30.
Open January 1.
Leading brand names up to 40 per cent off.
Bathroom suites from Pounds 350.
COMME DES GARCONS
59 Brook Street, W1 Sale starts January 2 with reductions of up to 50 per cent.
THE CONRAN SHOP
Fulham Road, SW3 Sale starts at 9.30am on Saturday, January 2 for one week.
Ex-display furnishings at 30 per cent discount.
DAKS SIMPSON
Piccadilly, W1 Sloane Street, SW3 Sale starts Tuesday, December 29.
Limited Edition silk ties reduced from £55 to £29, cashmere scarves down from £89 to Pounds 49.
DESIGNER SALE STUDIO
78 St John's Wood High Street, NW8; 241 Kings Road, SW3 Clearance sale already underway, to continue while stocks last.
DIVERTIMENTI
45-47 Wigmore Street, W1 139-141 Fulham Road, SW3 Three-week sale starting on Saturday, January 9.
Discounts of up to 50 per cent on handpainted earthenware.
Stainless steel-lined heavy copper pans reduced by 25 per cent.
EDINA RONAY
141 Kings Road, SW3 Concession at Harvey Nichols, SW1 Sale starts January 5 for about three weeks, with many items down 40-50 per cent.
Forties-style crepe evening dresses down from £309 to £217.
EMMA HOPE SHOES 33 Amwell Street, N1 Sale starts Saturday, January 9 and continues while stocks last.
EMPORIO ARMANI
Brompton Road, SW3 Long Acre, WC2 Sale starts at the beginning of January.
ESCADA BOUTIQUE
66-67 New Bond Street, W1 Sale now on.
ESPRIT
6 Sloane Street, SW1 Whiteleys, Queensway, W2 Bentalls Centre, Kingston, Surrey Sale starts Monday, December 28 for one month.
Up to 60 per cent off all sale stock.
Jeans reduced from £39.99 to £19.99, wool leggings reduced from £27.99 to £19.99, jackets from Pounds 119 to £59.99.
ET VOUS
126 Kings Road, SW3 Sale starts December 28 for three weeks.
Reductions include a short pleated skirt down from £80 to £40, jeans down from Pounds 60 to £40.
FENWICK
169 New Bond Street, W1 Sale starts on Monday, December 28 for three-and-a-half weeks with reductions of between 25 and 50 per cent.
Wool crepe jackets down from £319 to £199.
Leather shoulder bags half-price.
FERRAGAMO
24 Old Bond Street, W1 Sale starts Saturday, January 2 until January 15.
FORTNUM & MASON Piccadilly Sale starts Thursday, January 1.
FRATELLI ROSETTI 196 Sloane Street, SW1 177 New Bond Street, W1 Sale starts Saturday, January 9 for four weeks with between 30 and 50 per cent off shoes, accessories and leather goods.
GEORGINA VON ETZDORF 149 Sloane Street, SW1 Pickett, 41 Burlington Arcade, W1 Sale starts Wednesday, January 6 with reductions of between 20 and 60 per cent.
GEO TROWARK
10 St Christophers Place, W1 Sale starts January 29.
Jersey separates and winter collection reduced by between 30 and 50 per cent.
GIANFRANCO FERRE
20 Brook St, W1 Sale already on.
HARRODS
Knightsbridge Sale starts at 9am on Wednesday, January 6.
Bargains include Paul Smith moleskin trousers down from £110 to £65, French Connection men's duffle coats down from £175 to £105, Lolita Bis evening dress down from £305 to £180.
Krups 125 Toasters will be £14.99, Brabantia ironing boards £24.99.
Pure cotton plain dye table linens, garden furniture, selected clothing and toys, sports equipment and confectionery will all be half price.
HARVEY NICHOLS
Brompton Road, SW3 Sale starts December 29.
Reductions in all departments.
THE HAT SHOP
St Christophers Place, W1 Neal Street, WC2 Sale starts at the end of January.
HEAL & SON
196 Tottenham Court Road, W1 Tunsgate, Guildford, Surrey Sale starts Monday, December 28 for five weeks.
At Tottenham Court Road there are greatly reduced one-off pieces of furniture that are either shop-soiled, damaged or buyers' samples.
40 per cent off selected discontinued fabrics, 50 per cent off selected Descamps towels, 30 per cent off lace duvet covers and pillow cases.
HERBERT JOHNSON
30 New Bond Street, W1 Sale starts Tuesday, December 29.
Reductions of between 20 and 50 per cent on selected hats and accessories.
JEFFREY ROGERS
The Plaza, Oxford Street, W1 The Mall, Kings Road, SW3 Whiteleys of Bayswaters, W2 Sale starts December 28.
Half-price discounts.
Lambswool sweaters down from £39.99 to £19.99, long sarong skirts down from Pounds 26.99 to £12.99.
MALCOLM LEVENE
13-15 Chiltern Street, W1 Exclusive designer menswear.
Sale starts at 7am on Tuesday, January 12 with initial discounts of 25 per cent.
MARGARET HOWELL
29 Beauchamp Place, SW3 24 Brook Street, W1 Sale starts January 2 for about three weeks.
MASH
73 Oxford Street Sale starts Monday, January 4.
Up to 30 per cent off.
MAXMARA
153 New Bond Street, W1 32 Sloane Street, SW1 Sale starts January 2 for about three weeks.
Reductions of between 30 and 40 per cent on selected women's clothes and accessories.
PARIS CERAMICS
583 Kings Road, SW6 Sale starts Monday, January 4 until January 16.
Reductions include tiles down from £40 to £15, murals reduced from £500 to £100 and upwards.
PRINGLE OF SCOTLAND
Burlington Arcade, W1 Sale starts December 28.
Selected Pringle cashmere pullovers, cardigans and leggings reduced by 30 per cent.
ROBERT CLERGERIE
67 Wigmore Street, W1.
Sale starts Monday, January 4 with 30 per cent discounts.
ROBINA
25 Brompton Road, SW3 Sale now on.
SAM BROWN
56 Fulham Road, SW3 136 Wandsworth Bridge Road, SW10 Sale starts January 7, discounts of between 25 and 40 per cent.
SELFRIDGES
Oxford Street Winter sale starts at 9am on Monday, December 28.
One third off selected women's fashion labels including Jasper Conran and Caroline Charles, one third off selected menswear including Moschino, Kenzo and Valentino.
One third off perfect Wedgewood bone china.
Half price Butler & Wilson and Adrien Mann jewellery.
20 per cent off Chortex Royal Ascot towels.
SIMON HORN FURNITURE LTD
117-121 Wandsworth Bridge Road, SW6 Sale starts Saturday, January 2 until January 30.
Discounts of between 30 and 50 per cent on selected beds and furniture, and a standard 15 per cent reduction on divans and mattresses.
SIMPSONS
Sale starts Monday, December 28 until Saturday, January 30.
Between 25 and 30 per cent off all merchandise, 50 per cent off selected items and further reductions throughout the sale.
Simpson silk ties down from £25 to £12.50, Derek Rose dressing gowns down from £99 to £44.50, Church's Oxford shoes for men down from £125 to £85.
SMYTHSON OF BOND STREET
Sale starts at 9.15am on Monday, January 4.
Selected leather goods and stationery half price.
TIMBERLAND ANDERSON WHITEHILL
72 New Bond Street, W1 Concession in Harrods, SW3 Sale starts Monday, January 4 and lasts throughout January.
TOM GILBY'S WAISTCOAT GALLERY
2 New Burlington Place, W1 Sale starts Saturday, January 2.
Up to 50 per cent off selected fancy waistcoats in various materials, prices from £25.
THE WHITE HOUSE
52 New Bond Street, W1 Sale starts January 6, until January 16.
Substantial reductions on children's clothes and fine linens.
YOUNG ENGLAND
47 Elizabeth Street, SW1 Sale starts January 5.
Between 25 and 40 per cent off children's clothes.
YVES ST LAURENT RIVE GAUCHE
Womens: 137 New Bond Street, W1 Mens: 135 New Bond Street, W1 Mens and womens: 33 Sloane Street, SW1 Sale starts Saturday, January 2.
Discounts of up to 50 per cent on all accessories including jewellery, bags, belts, hats and scarves.
Up to 60 per cent off all clothing.
BIRMINGHAM
C & A
14 Corporation Street See chainstore guide.
LITTLEWOODS
67 High Street See chainstore guide.
MARKS & SPENCER
High Street See chainstore guide.
BRITISH HOME STORES
6 New Street See chainstore guide.
BAILEY'S RECORDS
Bull Ring Centre Sale starts January 4.
CDs reduced from £12.99 to £10.99, albums and tapes by 10-15 per cent.
NICKIES FASHIONS
Bull Ring Centre Sale starts January 1.
Specialises in children's clothes.
Denim dungarees reduced from £36.99 to £29.99.
Toddlers' trouser suits in denim or cord reduced from £35.99 to £22.99.
PETE'S ELECTRICAL
Bull Ring Centre From the first week in January, solid brass wall switches will be reduced from £8.99 to £3.50.
Toasters down by 20 per cent to £13.99.
ROY POLLARD
Coventry Road, Yardley Electrical appliances.
Sale starts December 28 with £20 off Zanussi fridges.
SHE BOUTIQUE
The Pallasades Shopping Centre Sale has started and and will continue until mid-January.
Knitwear down from £32.99 to £19.99, skirts from £13.99 to Pounds 8.99.
TOP TOYS
Bull Ring Centre Sale has started and will continue until the end of January.
Child's desk reduced from £29.99 to £19.99, Thunderbirds playsuits down £6 to £6.99.
BRISTOL AND BATH
DINGLES
Queens Road, Bristol Sale starts December 28.
Most men's and women's clothing half price.
JOHN LEWIS
The Horsefair Sale runs from December 30 until January 9.
Single storage divan down from £335 to £229.
Single sheets down from £15 to £9.95, fitted king-size sheets £22 to £15.50.
JOLLY'S
Milsom Street, Bath Sale starts December 28.
Philips dishwashers down from £399.99 to £299.99.
Hotpoint washer/dryers reduced from £549.99 to £499.99.
LITTLEWOODS
Horsefair, Bristol Sale runs from December 28 until the end of January, with 30 per cent off most autumn and winter ranges.
MFI
Patchway, Bristol Sale runs from Boxing Day until February.
RUMBELOWS
Kingschase Shopping Centre, Bristol Sale runs from Christmas Eve until the end of February.
CARDIFF
BOOTS
36 Queen Street See chainstore guide C & A 43 Queen Street See chainstore guide
HOWELLS
St Mary Street House Of Fraser store: see chainstore guide
NEXT
70 Queen Street See chainstore guide
ALEXON
15 Capitol Exchange, Queen Street Sale runs from December 28 until the end of January.
Sixty per cent of all stock at half price.
BEDYBUYS
St David's Link, The Hayes Sale runs from December 28 until the end of January.
Special offer of buy one, get one free — including a free Silentnight single deep divan set with every double or king size Silentnight Luxuryrest Divan set, costing £299.95.
DAVID MORGAN
The Hayes Sale starts at 8.30am on December 28 with extra bargains for the first hour of the day, lasts until end of January.
Women's raincoats at half price.
Half price men's shirts and trousers.
DIXONS
79 Queen Street Electrical store.
Sale starts 9am on Sunday December 27th.
GWENT MUSIC COMPANY
2 Wharton Street Sale has already started.
Offers include Tanglewood acoustic guitars reduced from £99.95 to £59.95, Alto saxophones reduced from £630 to £450.
HARVEY FURNISHING
47 Queen Street Sale already on, and will continue through January.
Country Manor floral-design quilt cover sets at half price.
Slumberland 12-tog duvets down from £14.99 to £9.99.
HUDSON + HUDSON
47 Capitol Exchange,(upper level) Queen Street Sale starts December 28 and continues until mid-January.
Twenty per cent off everything in the store, 35 per cent off suits.
LEARS
13-17 Royal Arcade Sale starts On December 28.
Half price for selected books.
LEATHER CENTRE
90 Queen Street Sale has started already.
Bomber-style jackets reduced from £99 to £59.
MAPLES
Capitol Exchange, Queen Street Furniture shop.
Doors open at 10am on December 26 and continues throughout January, with half-price offers on upholstery, carpets, bedding and some furniture.
A further ten to 15 per cent reduction on many half-price sale items during the first three days.
MARKS & SPENCER
72 Queen Street Starts at 9.30am on December 28, continues throughout January while stocks last.
EDINBURGH
AUSTIN REED
124 Princes Street See chainstore guide C & A 33 Princes Street See chainstore guide
DEBENHAMS
109-122 Princes Street See chainstore guide
DOLCIS
70 Princes Street See chainstore guide
WALLIS
122 Princes Street See chainstore guide
BEHAR CARPET SUPERSTORE
1 Seafield Road Starts on December 26 for four days when underlay and fitting will be provided free.
Main sale begins January 2 and runs for a month.
DROOPY AND BROWNS
37/39 Frederick Street Women's clothes shop.
Sale starts December 29 and runs until mid-January.
Between one third and a half off last season's stock.
EDINBURGH
CLASSIC PINE
37/39 Morningside Road Sale starts January 3.
Discounts of between 20 and 25 per cent on tables, bedroom furniture, wardrobes and mirrors.
FRASERS
West End, Princes Street Sale starts December 26.
Reductions in all departments.
GET SHIRTY
134 Rose Street Sale starts January 4 for three weeks.
Reductions on shirts and ties.
JAMES THIN
57 George Street Bookshop.
Sale starts January 16.
Some books at half price.
JANE DAVIDSON
52 Thistle Street Women's clothes.
Sale between Christmas and New Year.
Best bargains on designer wear, silk blouses, sweaters, jackets, suits, formal dresses.
JENNERS
48 Princes Street Sale starts December 29.
Many items half price.
Special reductions on knitwear.
LAURA ASHLEY
126 Princes Street Sale starts December 28.
Best bargains in party wear.
LES CADEAUX
121 Rose Street Sale starts on December 26 with biggest reductions in crystal and miniature pottery houses.
LEWIS UPHOLSTERY
22b Milton Street Sale runs from December 26 until end of January.
Up to 40 per cent off showroom suites.
Special offer of two nights five-star B & B for anyone spending more than £800.
LIBERTY
47 George Street Sale starts December 26.
Best reductions in designer clothing, furniture, fabric, rugs and gifts.
LITTLEWOODS
91 Princes Street Sale starts December 26.
Best reductions in household goods, bedding, dinner services.
MARKS & SPENCER FURNITURE STORE
103 Princes Street Sale of gifts on ground floor Christmas shop starts December 21.
MARTIN AND FROST
130 McDonald Road Furniture store.
Sale starts December 26.
Range of suites at half price.
SHAPES FURNITURE
33 West Mill Road Sale started last week and runs until middle of January.
Twenty five per cent off stock items and 15 per cent off ordered furniture.
SPORTS CONNECTION
134a Princes Street Sale started mid-December, and continues while stocks last.
Half price Adidas equipment and branded sports clothes.
LIVERPOOL
MARKS & SPENCER
Compton House, Church Street See chainstore guide
BRITISH HOME STORES
69 Lord Street See chainstore guide C & A Church Street See chainstore guide
BENETTON
Unit 11, Clayton Square Shopping Mall See chainstore guide
LITTLEWOODS
Church Street See chainstore guide
BEAVER HI-FI
20 Whitechapel Sale starts December 28, ends January 15.
Sony CD player down from £180 to £130.
COLORVISION
68 Lord Street Sale already on, runs until January 31.
Reductions up to 50 per cent.
14in colour TV down £30 to £119.
DRUM CLOTHING COMPANY
Unit 37, Clayton Square Shopping Mall Sale on, ends January 15.
Everything on offer at 25 per cent reduction.
GEORGE HENRY LEE
Basnett Street Sale starts December 30, ends January 9.
Glastonbury large double divan down from £1,700 to £1,400.
LEWIS'S
Ranelagh Street Sale starts December 28, ends January 31.
Reductions of up to 50 per cent.
OWEN OWEN
Clayton Square Sale starts December 28, ends January 31.
Reductions of up to 50 per cent.
TJ HUGHES
London Road Sale starts December 28, ends January 30.
Reductions up to 50 per cent.
Velvet curtains down from £59.99 to £29.99, knitwear reduced from £19.99 to £9.99.
WADE SMITH
5 Cavern Walks
Fashion and sports retailer.
Sale starts January 2, ends February 5.
Reductions of between 40 and 60 per cent.
Nike Air Max trainers down from £69.99 to £39.99.
MANCHESTER
BOOTS
Market Street See chainstore guide
BRITISH HOME STORES
Market Street See chainstore guide
WOOLWORTH
Arndale Centre See chainstore guide
DEBENHAMS
Market Place See chainstore guide
B&Q
Cheetham Hill Road Starts December 26, ends February 8.
DO IT ALL
Elizabeth Street Sale starts December 24, ends January 21.
Reductions mainly in paint, wall coverings, interior doors and bathroom suites.
Shower cubicle reduced from £300 to £150.
KENDAL'S
Deansgate Sale starts December 28, ends January 30.
Reductions in all departments.
LEWIS LTD
106 Market Street Sale starts December 28, ends last two weeks in February.
Reductions in all departments.
LITTLEWOODS
Market Street Sale starts December 29, for approximately one month.
All clothing departments offer 30 per cent off.
MARKS & SPENCER
Longridge Place Sale starts December 28.
Reductions of up to 30 per cent in the first week.
TEXAS HOMECARE
White City Retail Park Sale already on in some departments.
Kitchen sale already on, furniture sale begins Dec 23.
Special events sale in the last four weeks, plus an on-going end-of-range sale.
NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE
BAINBRIDGES
Eldon Square Sale starts December 30 with reductions of up to 50 per cent.
Stuart Crystal, 35 per cent reduction.
Double beds down from £1,500 to £1,200.
BINNS ON MARKET STREET
Market Street Sale starts on December 28.
Pringle sweaters down from £69.99 to £19.99.
Men's leather belts half price.
COLLECTABLES
Gateshead Metro Centre Glass and giftware store.
Sale starts on December 27.
FENWICK
Northumberland Street Sale starts in the French salon on December 28, and in the rest of the store on December 29.
Reductions of up to 50 per cent.
THE GOLF SHOP
Gateshead Metro Centre Sale starts on December 28 with reductions of up to 50 per cent.
Tristan Garel-Jones
Tristan Garel-Jones learned his political trade in the Whips Office where members are encouraged to keep their mouths shut.
The most revealing statements about Mr Garel-Jones have often been what others have said about him…
‘He is Machiavelli personified.’
A Tory colleague (on his personality)‘He is the school sneak.’
Anonymous politician (on his eyes and ears role for Downing Street)
‘He is one of the few teetotallers I know who can be entertaining after dinner.’
A friend (on his non-drinking)
‘I think you will find us a persuasive mix of principle and pragmatism.’
Tristan Garel-Jones (displaying his famous diplomatic skills on the eve of Britain's EC Presidency)
‘There are a hundred assassins lurking in the bushes, Prime Minister.
Those people will come back and kill you.’
Tristan Garel-Jones (to Baroness Thatcher several months before her downfall)
‘One day Tristan will just pack his bags and be off.’
Another friend (on Garel-Jones' wide-ranging interests)
For Europe's sake, go now
WHY, why, why?
Why has the Government's Mr Europe resigned his job?
Why has he done it now?
Why has Downing Street announced it now?
The obvious answer, of course, is that it is just another example of the Government's incompetence.
But that might be too charitable an explanation.
Tristan Garel-Jones is not a household name but he has been a key player in British, and particularly Tory, politics over the past two years.
He hosted the meetings where the rebellion was fomented which ousted Mrs Thatcher from power.
He is one of John Major's few close friends.
He is also as keen a European as you will find on the Government benches, especially the front bench.
Without him, Mr Major's job will be harder and the pro-Europeans will find life even tougher.
Yesterday's announcement that he will go after the Maastricht vote raises too many questions.
Speculating about their answers is pointless yet it is inevitable when Mr Garel-Jones's resignation letter crosses the boundary of credulity.
He says he wants to spend more time in his constituency.
With all due respect to his constituents, can anyone, particularly such a sophisticated European, honestly want to spend more time in Watford?
But even if there is no more behind Mr Garel-Jones's decision, what is inexplicable is why Downing Street chose to make it public yesterday.
It leaves a lame duck with the responsibility of pushing the Maastricht Bill through the Commons.
That was going to be difficult enough anyway.
Will anyone now be able to take Mr Garel-Jones's devotion to the Government's cause seriously?
How often will anti-Europeans sneeringly bait him by reminding the House that he is about to bail out?
The inevitable conclusion which will be jumped to is that he is going because there is about to be some momentous U-turn over Maastricht now that Britain's presidency of the EC is over.
Mr Major can ill afford to lose Mr Garel-Jones, yet if he is determined to go, he should be allowed to get out now.
There are already too many question marks hanging over this Government and too many lame ducks in it.
Solo, by choice
EVERY parent who has ever spent Christmas Day apart from his or her children will know what Princess Diana will go through on December 25.
She has shown just how normal are her feelings and even a member of the Royal Family must feel desperately sad and lonely without their kids on Christmas morning.
Yet the decision not to spend that day at Sandringham is hers and hers alone.
She was invited by the Queen but declined.
Whether that was through anger, embarrassment or stubbornness does not matter.
There will be thousands of separated parents who wake up on Christmas morning without their children.
There will be thousands more who spend the day with a partner they no longer love, maybe even hate, for the sake of the kids.
Diana could have done that.
She is entitled to sympathy for a broken marriage which was not purely of her doing.
But not too many tears should be shed for her loneliness on Christmas Day.
Hit and miss
JOHN MAJOR goes to Bosnia and hands our troops cassettes of Abba's greatest hits.
At least the poor bloody infantry in the trenches during the First World War didn't have to put up with that.
Jesus Christ supersell
Andrew Penman
How ad experts would help the Church win souls of consumers.
THE Church of England makes history next month with the first British television advertising campaign by a religious body.
But are the ten slots in the Central Television region, costing Pounds 7,500, the right way to promote a religion?
We asked five advertising agencies how they would market the ‘product’ and reverse its shrinking market share.
THE first TV commercial for the Church shows an abstract blue background and has a soundtrack of classical music for 20 seconds.
Finally comes the simple message: ‘The Church of England this Sunday.’
Central Television viewers will be able to judge it first-hand from next month.
But Richard Ingham, managing director of Beacham Peplow Noakes Advertising says he would opt for a more down-to-earth approach.
‘People react to the impressions of others,’ he says.
‘So I would get hold of a lot of avid church users and have them saying things like, ‘It's great to be involved’, ‘The whole family enjoy it’ and ‘An hour well-spent once a week’.
‘I would not need a big budget, soft lights and an abstract theme.
The public recognise reality and real people and the Church needs to be handled in a real way.
‘People generally believe in the efficacy of hospitals and the police and I would put the Church in that mould — not something to be revered or mystified.
‘The campaign should be plain — the British tend to be plain thinkers.
The more clever you try to be the more ineffective you become.’
‘There's an enormous advertising industry built around shock tactics and high emotions designed to get you to part with cash for various charitable causes.
The Church of England should have a more considered position to contrast with these more torrid campaigns.
‘It should talk about its benefits — the way the Church can enhance the quality of life and, dare I say, the afterlife, as opposed to threats of hellfire and damnation.
‘It's soft-selling, but that can be very successful — as the Gold Blend couple have shown.
Instead of sticking a jar of coffee in front of your face and saying ‘Buy this, drink this’, they have drawn you into a whole lifestyle.’
‘I am not sure the Church should use television advertising at all.
Television is a very evangelical medium and I do not think the Church of England can afford to or wants to compete with the evangelical churches.
It should rise above the personality cults that will come in with religious advertising on television.
‘I would go for a newspaper and poster campaign.
The Church's message could come across very powerfully and be aimed at adults.
‘The campaign will require sincerity, character and balls.
The religions which are burgeoning around the world are the ones taking positive, proactive stances.
They are demonstrating to their congregations that they are not just sitting watching events go by.
‘In order to get bums on pews you've got to give people the feeling they will have a tremendous experience and make a contribution.’
‘I would imagine the thrust of the brief would be to turn occasional Church users into regular users.
‘A strong element of any campaign should be to emphasise there's a benefit from buying into it.
‘The positive benefits could be almost purely social, such as getting to know other people with a degree of common interest.
‘Or they could be altogether more spiritual and personal.
‘There are some things that are too subtle for television advertising and you are not going to be able to tell the whole story in 30 seconds.
But you can achieve specific aims, and making people think about going to church instead of B & Q is a measurable objective.’
‘There are two routes, one being to take advantage of the Sunday trading debate, which we could turn around with slogans like ‘Church — it's more fun than a DIY shed’.
‘The second approach would be more profound, with slogans such as‘Make God your business partner’.
‘I would use a well-known voice, a household name — maybe Lovejoy.
‘The aim would be a semi-humorous approach to take away the image of the Church as boring.
‘It would also be informative, letting people know churches are places where you can talk to other people and discuss your problems.
‘In this sense it could be like the Sainsbury campaign, which is basically about celebrities teaching people how to cook.’
Recession is the mother of invention
Lucy Broadbent
IS your budgie lonely?
Do you have trouble finding your toothbrush?
Or perhaps your sink is always clogged with rubbish.
Fear not, you could find the solution to all your problems in your Christmas stocking — if your loved ones have looked hard enough, that is.
A tape which keeps pet birds amused, a disposable finger pad to clean your teeth and a gadget to unblock sinks quickly are among the weird and wonderful products dreamed up by inventors this year in a bid to beat the recession.
‘The British have a long history of being inventive and in this current climate we are being inundated with new ideas,’ says Richard Paine, marketing director of Inventalink, one of Britain's biggest agencies which sells the ideas to commercial companies.
‘One reason is because people who have been made redundant have more time to think up new inventions.
‘But we are also being sent inventions from people in need of a second income.
‘An estate agent submitted a gadget he had invented years before which was sitting up in his loft, but he needed the money so tried his luck and sent it in.’
One of the oddest of the new inventions is the Splashguard, a musical gadget which fits inside your toilet bowl.
It is actually a child toilet trainer, designed to encourage little boys to improve their ‘aim’.
When they are on target, the Splashguard plays a tune.
Gardeners with bad backs will be rushing to buy the Leaf-Lifter, a vacuum cleaner that sucks up autumn leaves directly into disposable bags — it has already been snapped up by a company wanting to market it.
The Plugpal, another vacuum gadget which sucks out the accumulated mess from sink outlets without pulling any plumbing apart, also looks set to be a big success.
This year's explosion of creative energy should come as no surprise.
Britain has been responsible for 52 per cent of all inventions worldwide in the past 30 years, according to a survey conducted by the Japanese Ministry of International Trade and Industry.
The Americans came up with 22 per cent and the Japanese, who seem to manufacture all the latest gadgets, actually thought up only six per cent.
Same old story for children
By Jane Gordon
EDUCATION Secretary John Patten's relentless attempt to turn back the school clocks continues this week with the release of the proposed new children's reading list.
Classics such as Just William and The Lion, The Witch And The Wardrobe are pushing out modern counterparts such as Roald Dahl's Big Friendly Giant.
What Mr Patten doesn't seem to realise is that most seven to 11-year-old children — and I don't mean his own privileged daughter Mary Claire — need to be eased and teased into acquiring a reading habit.
Doesn't the good minister understand that we are not living in an idealised middle-class world of Just William where chaps get caned and girls behave like Violet Elizabeth Bott?
Books today compete with computer games, TV and videos.
If Mr Patten really does want to promote literacy he should set accessible books that the modern child can relate to and enjoy.
Not books that just underline his own nostalgic view of education.
WHAT marvellous news that the Government has been judged ‘irrational’ by the High Court (who said the law was an ass?).
But I can't help feeling that the ruling for the miners and against the Government could have gone further.
I mean, since it's Christmas wouldn't it be a good idea to invoke a Sanity Clause against the entire Cabinet, committing the whole damn lot of them to some underfunded and desperate NHS asylum?
JULIA Somerville has had a horrible year.
She has been sidestepped for the chief slot on News At Ten, been desperately ill and has now been chopped from her Focus On Britain spot.
But axing Julia won't save the revamped News At Ten.
Fluent, intelligent and professional, she is not the reason for its ratings failure.
That honour belongs to Trevor McDonald.
Shouldn't he be first in line for an ITN News at P45?
Jo's missing link
By Jane Gordon
WHO knows what prompted 25-year-old Joanna Grenside to stage her own abduction?
It might have had something to do with her illness, the eating disorder bulimia.
It's true that bulimics are prone to wild mood changes and acts of desperation (just ask Prince Charles).
In this case, though, isn't it more likely that Joanna was looking for the same 15 minutes of fame achieved by Australian nightclub singer Fairlie Arrow a year ago?
Her disappearance resulted in a boost to a flagging career, offers to pose for girlie magazines and a £2,300 fine for wasting police time.
Ms Grenside is, apparently, unlikely to face such a charge.
She is, say police, clearly ill.
But in a week in which a 16-year-old girl died after being set alight, a 14-year-old was raped and a widow of 99 beaten to death, I don't think Joanna deserves too much compassion.
Oh come all ye fearful
By Jane Gordon
ISN'T Christmas a fearful time?
It wasn't the bomb in John Lewis that put my nerves on edge this year, even though I felt the echoing shudder of it.
Nor was it the disturbing rumours that by December 26 the country could be in the grip of a new and particularly alien ‘Made in Taiwan’ midwinter flu.
It wasn't even the sight of Alf Roberts in Coronation Street collapsing with a suspected heart attack after eating too much Christmas pudding.
What sent me into a fear-filled frenzy was the news — hidden somewhere between a report on the seasonal suicide rate and an article on bogus Santas — that I had bought a ride-on fire engine for my baby son that had a dangerous fault and should be returned to the manufacturers immediately.
For much of the past week I have had this dreadful, stomach-churning feeling of imminent disaster.
And even though I assure myself that it's just the annual resurgence of an old allergy (a distant relation of eczema — Xmasa), I am still incapable of keeping the worst symptoms at bay.
Perhaps it has something to do with the fact that we are in the middle of the media silly-season, a time when papers and TV news bulletins are full of doom-laden Christmas tales.
So far this year we have heard at least ten reports of families whose presents have been stolen from beneath their trees.
We've heard of a small baby who chewed through a gift and swallowed a battery, and of a granny who bought one of those talking baby dolls for her favourite grandaughter, only to find that it had a vocabulary of four-letter words.
Then, of course, there are the regular instances of inflammable cuddly toys, faulty tree lights and cut-price presents that can kill.
The fear that overtakes me seems to increase as we get closer to the big day.
At times I become so obsessive about the dangers that I find myself making lists of what could go wrong.
Is the baby coming down with something nasty?
Is it possible to get third-degree burns from a novelty cracker?
Could a turkey with a sell-by date of Dec 27 really be off by Dec 25?
Can children get repetitive strain injury from playing too much Super-Nintendo?
Can brussels sprouts breed botulism?
Thankfully, though, this annual bout of paranoia is short-lived.
Somewhere between the first drink on Christmas Eve (at around 5pm) and the first cup of tea on Christmas morning (at around 5am), the fear evaporates, leaving in its place a wonderful feeling of contentment.
But then isn't that the greatest thing about Christmas?
That marvellous feeling that, despite all the odds, you have survived.
That here you are at the end of another year, perhaps not healthy, wealthy and wise but — well — alive.
Be of good fear and have a wonderful Christmas.
Just William is back Playtex Secrets underwear helped make the year more enjoyable
IF you listened to the Queen or the Shadow Cabinet you might believe that nothing positive at all has happened in 1992.
But the year hasn't been all doom and gloom.
True, unemployment has reached a record one-in-ten high, marital splits are up to one-in-three and the pound has been devalued.
OK, so the Prince and Princess of Wales may have separated, house prices might have plummeted and Luton Town have been relegated — but there have still been some fantastic technological and social advances in the past 12 months.
Indeed I have managed to think of some ten things that have, in one way or another, made life a mite easier in 1992.
They might not compare favourably with the discovery of penicillin or the invention of the wheel but, at least for me, they have made the year more palatable:
1
Anchor Easy Spreading Butter
2
Jif Mousse — spray-on, no-rub bathroom cleaner
3
The Big Breakfast on Channel 4
4
Terry's Secrets chocolate bar
5
Sonic the Hedgehog 2
6
Kellogg's Pop Tarts
7
Playtex Secrets Lycra-control underwear (even if they can't make me look like Ulrika)
8
The Premier League
9
SuperMarioLand 2
10
Toe-sucking — with thanks to David Mellor, Fergie and Prince Albert of Monaco.
To promote goodwill TODAY will give a bottle of champagne to the three most uplifting and inspiring ‘Best of 1992’ lists.
Entries to Best of 92, TODAY Features, 1 Virginia Street, E1 9BS by Monday, January 4.
Jane Seymour
ACTRESS Jane Seymour could choose to spend Christmas anywhere in the world.
But the 41-year-old star decided there was no place like home and flew back to Britain from Hollywood yesterday with children Katie, 10, seven-year-old Sean and her film director boyfriend James Keach.
Jane, 41, has planned a traditional family Christmas at her mansion in Bath.
‘I wouldn't want to be anywhere else,’ she said.
Rolf Harris
SINGER Rolf Harris has added a new touch to the Led Zeppelin song Stairway to Heaven — a wobble board and an ‘altogether now’ chorus.
Australian Rolf, 62, is one of a variety of artists who performed the classic for a fun CD.
‘I thought at first, that's not my kind of song,’ said Rolf, more famous for Two Little Boys and Jake The Peg.
Scott Michaelson
NEIGHBOURS star Scott Michaelson is a real water-baby — both in and out of the hit series.
Scott, who plays surf-mad Brad Willis, recently dashed off to Bali for a surfing holiday with his pals.
‘It's the best thing, to be in the water with my mates and surfing,’ said Scott, 23.
‘It's my way of relaxing.’
Billy Ray Cyrus
COUNTRY singer Billy Ray Cyrus has admitted to streaking in his hometown of Flatwood, Kentucky, in the Seventies.
Cyrus, who had a hit with Achy Breaky Heart, said he would ‘jump out in front of cars and scare ladies’.
However he now admits: ‘It was stupid.’
TV's most famous bar
DRINKERS at TV's most famous bar may soon be saying cheers in another watering hole.
Cheers barmaid, Rebecca, played by Kirstie Alley may be opening her own bar across the street and taking most of the regulars with her.
NBC is considering the spin-off since Ted Danson quit after 11 years as bar owner Sam Malone.
London's Marquee club
Wrinkled rocker Roger Daltrey, 46, shares the spotlight with ever-boyish Queen drummer, Roger Taylor, 43, at London's Marquee club
…
Not to be out-done Taylor's girlfriend, Debbie Leng, 26, right, and Sloane party girls Susannah Constantine, 30, left, and Lulu Blacker, 32, also flaunted their talents.
Like Joanna I am bulimic, and I have taught aerobics.
I understand why she was in such dread of Christmas that she had to run away
Interview by Helen Renshaw
AS a victim of the eating disorder bulimia, Joanna Grenside could not face the Christmas season of family meals and parties.
Her solution, it was revealed this week, was to fake her own abduction.
Here, a 31-year-old fitness instructor reveals how she is suffering the same agonies that drove Joanna to make such a dramatic cry for help.
Her story shows how bulimics — doctors estimate Britain has 500,000 sufferers, including Princess Diana — binge on food, then vomit to purge their bodies of calories.
Their torment is kept hidden, but rules their lives.
THE tears are welling up as I speak.
I accept them.
They are just a part of trying to understand what's going on inside me as Christmas draws near.
My life is a nightmare and Joanna Grenside must be one unhappy lady, just like me.
She is dying inside and crying out for love, just like me.
Talking this way helps — and I hope it will help others, like Joanna.
When this nightmare is over I'd like to counsel other bulimics.
But first I have to get the Christmas season over.
There's no way of avoiding it.
There's love all around, yet I can't feel it within myself.
I don't know how to cope with that, and it frightens me.
At Christmas the pressure to sit down and eat with others is immense.
It's a pressure to pretend you're normal.
When I first started thinking about Christmas, I decided to spend it alone and stuff myself with food.
The shelves are full of wonderful food at this time of year and I thought of how I could binge and throw up all day long.
I thought of how I'd be in full control if I was alone.
I could do exactly what I want.
Then I thought: No.
I'll make an attempt to have one normal day.
Just one day when I'll not be dictated to by this thing inside me.
Just one day when I can be normal.
You see, for me the world revolves around food.
I spend my life in supermarkets — buying food I'll probably never eat, but buy just in case I might want to eat it.
I go to many different supermarkets to do my shopping, because you never know what is going through the cashiers' minds.
Of course they don't know whether I'm married or single, why I'm buying so much food, or how much money I've spent on food that week.
But my mind conjures up images of how they know my secret shame, and are talking about me behind my back.
It's just because I'm so ashamed of what I'm doing, yet there's no way I can stop.
I know what my problem is, so I think to myself at least on Christmas Day I can have one normal, decent day.
So I'm having an open house and I've invited a load of friends round.
Having said that, one friend is staying over until Boxing Day, and I very nearly lied to her.
I had to stop myself telling her that I had another party to go to on Christmas evening — just so I could stay home after everyone had left and stuff my face with leftovers.
When I do go to parties, I make excuses about leaving early, so I can get home and eat.
This is how my mind works: If I leave at 10.30 that gives me an hour before I go to sleep to stuff myself.
Then I vomit.
I never go to sleep with food in my stomach.
Then I can't sleep properly because my body is in turmoil.
I wake up hating myself and fabricating reasons why I've had so little sleep — I was woken in the middle of the night by a phone call, my cat kept jumping on my bed all night.
Anything to explain why my skin is sallow, why I look so washed out.
The saliva in my mouth dries up, my body dries up.
I tell lies.
I lie to myself.
But at the same time I want to go to parties.
I want to be loved.
But even when I go, I spend the whole evening nibbling, then calorie-counting every single thing.
I think, chocolate is hard to throw up, so I won't eat that.
I'll line my stomach with something, so when it comes up later I'll know that my stomach is empty.
That way I'll know I haven't put on any weight.
Isn't that a disgusting thing to admit?
I know it is — but I can't help myself.
I first became bulimic when somebody I loved rejected my love.
I went from 11 stone to seven stone.
But it goes back further than that.
I was rejected as a child.
And I think that is how it must be for Joanna.
She must be trying to deal with things in her past that she's frightened to face, frightened to admit.
I believe this illness is embedded from an early age.
It must be.
For anyone to destroy themselves to this extent, it must be a manifestation of a profound lack of love.
When I became ill, I became obsessed with exercise at the same time.
I started to teach keep-fit, just like Joanna.
I would take three classes and exercise at least another 12 hours each week.
I felt really good.
But it was all part of my compulsion to lose weight.
And I perceived myself as being totally unattractive.
Joanna Grenside is described as beautiful — but when she sees herself in the mirror, she won't see that.
There are plenty of women in the world of gyms, aerobics and body conditioning who suffer in the same way.
Exercise and food obsessions are linked.
At the moment I weigh 7 stone 10lb.
I should weigh at least 8½ stone, but I don't want to put on an extra pound.
If I do, I'll feel indescribably terrible about it and take laxatives.
When I buy them from the chemist, I pretend they're for someone else.
I know what I'm doing is so wrong.
I know I have to like myself.
I know that I have to believe in myself to overcome it but I can't when I'm destroying myself.
I've got some wonderful friends, but I don't want to get too close to anybody in case they stop me eating.
My flatmate moved out a month ago, and in that month I've used it as an excuse to binge.
I eat everything that's bad — fried food, chips, fish fingers, chocolate, cream.
I just never let people know I'm doing it — I save it for behind closed doors.
I'm really careful about putting the rubbish out.
I worry about what my neighbours might think, seeing me dumping three or four black bin-liners outside when they know I'm living alone.
Food is a substitute for love — I feel safe with it.
But I wake up begging: ‘Please, please, let this be a normal day.’
When I do a good workout, I feel fine, but then I start to think ‘I've just worked off 500 calories — what can I stuff my face with?’
And I binge and make myself sick again.
It's a constant see-saw, a constant nightmare.
I feel utterly sick with myself.
Now I hope that recognising the problem is the first step to getting better.
I have denied it for so long, and now I've had enough.
It has exhausted me, consumed me.
All my self-esteem, respect and confidence have been eroded away and need re-building.
Part of me would love to be in a relationship, but I'm cautious about getting involved, even though I desperately want to be loved.
I wouldn't want anyone to know what I'm really like, so I'd end up hiding food in drawers and cupboards.
Poor Joanna.
I can imagine how desperate she must be feeling.
If she wants to talk, I'm here.
Driven up the pole by a lack of frozen turkey
By Tim Satchell
ON Christmas day Sir Ranulph Fiennes and his companion Dr Michael Stroud, now attempting the world's first unaided walk across Antarctica, will have a choice to make as they near the South Pole.
It concerns what Christmas dinner they will eat together — quite possibly in a 120-knot blizzard — in the remote frozen wastes.
‘They are carrying four different main meals, which they rotate daily,’ nutritionist Brian Welsby, who has advised the explorers on food for the trip, tells me.
‘These are are dehydrated in very light-weight sachets.’
Dishes on the menu — supplemented by extra carbohydrate and calories — are shepherds pie, savoury stew with potato, spaghetti bolognaise and macaroni cheese.
‘Whichever they choose will be rehydrated with melted snow and cooked over a Primus stove,’ says Mr Welsby.
‘The meals are very different from what you would get at home, but once they are brought to the boil they give off a most delicious smell.’
Baronet Sir Ranulph, 48, and 37-year-old Dr Stroud are now well advanced in their 2,200-mile trek, which will raise money for the Multiple Sclerosis Society.
They began hauling their sleds across the Antarctic on November 9.
‘Now they are nearly two-thirds of the way to the South Pole,’ says MS Society spokesman David Harrison.
‘The Pole should be achieved around January 4 — although there are obviously ifs and buts before then.’
Whatever their choice for Christmas dinner, Sir Ranulph and Dr Stroud will have a piece of chocolate for pudding.
Sir Ranulph's full name is Sir Ranulph Twisleton Wykeham Fiennes, although friends, including the Prince of Wales, call him Ran.
His family motto is ‘Look For A Brave Spirit’.
At a photo-session violinist Nigel Kennedy would initially only pose with a one-stringed acoustic guitar.
Eventually, when he was persuaded to pose with some part of the violinist's equipment, it was with just a bow.
Nothing wrong with that, except that on the end was speared a tuna fish sandwich.
Says Mr Kennedy: ‘Music's got to be an adventure.’
At a party at the Hyde Park Hotel to celebrate his forthcoming 86th birthday on Christmas Day, Lord Grade told of a tricky moment during the filming of his film Jesus of Nazareth.
‘Can you name the disciples?’ asked one journalist.
‘Peter, Paul, Mark,’ he replied.
‘I don't know the others, I haven't read the script yet.’
Racing to save a Bosnian village
By Tim Satchell
THE Queen's racehorse trainer Lord Huntingdon sets off in a horsebox for Bosnia today to deliver supplies to an isolated village.
The handler, from West Ilsley, Berkshire, is making the journey in response to an advertisement in the racing Press appealing for horseboxes to make the trip carrying food and medical supplies.
Twenty two trainers and other industry representatives have offered support and convoys of five to 10 vehicles are to follow next month.
Lord Huntingdon is loading supplies at the appeal offices in Godstone, Surrey, this morning and is due to arrive in Bosnia on Boxing Day.
Claws out at White House
By Tim Satchell
THE latest member of the Clinton family to hit the headlines is Socks, the family cat, who will be seen in America next month on the front of Cats Magazine.
Socks is really the pet of Chelsea, 12-year old daughter of the President Elect.
Mr Clinton and wife Hillary are allergic to cats.
Dickens of a tonic
By Tim Satchell
CEDRIC Dickens, hale and hearty at 74 and great grandson of Charles, recommends the Christmas tonic, Long Life.
Place 12 washed eggs in a bowl.
Pour on the juice of 12 lemons and leave for five days.
Uncover and pour off the liquid and whisk in a pint of cream and a bottle of liqueur whiskey.
He adds: ‘Keep it for emergencies.’
And…
By Tim Satchell
A COLLEAGUE'S 4½-year-old son has asked him to set up the video camera in front of the chimney on Christmas Eve to catch Santa on camera.
Dad has agreed, banking on the explanation that the film runs out after 45 minutes.
Transport relies on sexy legs
By Tim Satchell
TELEVISION presenter Jayne Irving tells me she has become a forces' pin-up in Bosnia.
‘I had a letter from the 21st Squadron of the Royal Corps of Transport based in Tomislavgrad, Bosnia, voting my legs the sexiest in the world,’ Miss Irving says.
‘The wife of one of the guys who lives in Lowestoft had sent out a video of his son's birthday party which also had a bit of my Help programme for Anglia TV on it.
‘They asked if they could have some pictures, which I've sent out.’
Next week Miss Irving, 35, starts a new programme, On The Road, for West Country Television.
In February she is due to appear in the networked This Sunday.
Madonna
By Tim Satchell
MADONNA was seen deep in conversation the other night at Manhattan's fashionable Cafe Tabac with Spanish film director Pedro Almodovar, whose most successful film, Women On The Verge Of A Nervous Breakdown, can be seen on BBC2 tomorrow.
Rumours had already been circulating for some time in the movie world that Madonna, whose big new movie will be Body Of Evidence, was discussing a new film with Sr Almodovar.
Little sympathy for John Major
I HAVE little sympathy for John Major after his ‘exhausting’ 12-day schedule.
At least he has a job.
If he spent less time jetting around on EC business and more solving Britain's problems, perhaps a lot more people would have jobs, too.
George Soros
FINANCIER George Soros's £35 million donation to Bosnian aid agencies was generous but surely something should be done about the crazy money markets that allowed him to make so much money so quickly.
A Russell Newcastle-upon-Tyne
Drink-driving ads
THE shocking drink-driving ads may be effective but already we have had incidents of courts letting offenders walk free.
Unless proper punishments are handed out, all the money spent on the ads is wasted.
Time's up for greedy banks
ALTHOUGH I agree that many industries are run better by private enterprise than by the state, I think there should only be one bank.
This would mean that the Government could have complete control of the money supply and could set interest rates at different levels — say five per cent to industry and 15 per cent to importers of non-essential goods.
There would, of course, be no super-rich bankers.
But I am sure that the Treasury could run such a system and there would be few tears for the banks we have now.
Time's up for greedy banks
WHY, in the age of the microchip, does it take a few seconds to phone Australia but four full working days for a cheque to clear?
Surely this could be done by computer.
Or are banks just keen to extract more interest from people keen to clear their overdrafts?
Milestones
BIRTHDAYS: Emperor Akihito of Japan, 59.
Former West German chancellor Helmut Schmidt, 74.
ON THIS DAY: In 1834, Hansom cabs were patented.
In 1905, Britain held its first beauty contest in Newcastle.
We can all revive spirit of Christmas
I AM not a religious person, but I do think that if Jesus was around today he'd be horrified by the way we celebrate his birth.
He wouldn't mind that he doesn't get his picture on many Christmas cards these days.
He wouldn't even mind that hardly anyone goes to church at Christmas.
But he would be shocked and saddened by how utterly selfish most of us so-called Christians are at Christmas when there is so much hunger and grief in the world.
You can't open a paper or turn on the TV without seeing stories of plane crashes, women and children assaulted, famine in Africa and war in Serbia.
And what really bothers me is when people say they can't do anything about it.
I'm not suggesting we all become missionaries, but if every one of us did just one charitable thing this week — visited someone old or sick, sent a food parcel to Africa, gave away a toy to a hospital ward or even took in a stray animal — then Christmas really would mean something.
We can all revive spirit of Christmas
as if the fancy and unnecessary packaging which manufacturers use for Christmas gifts is not enough, we then destroy a few more forests to encase them in acres and acres of wrapping paper.
I for one am boycotting Christmas cards — which are mostly tasteless and tacky anyway — and making Christmas Day phone calls instead.
Branson's king
BRITISH Airways boss Lord King should take a few trips on Richard Branson's Virgin Atlantic.
He would be treated to the kind of service his carrier is struggling to achieve and might even pick up a few tips on how an airline should be run.
If only we could get Branson, right, to sort out British Rail.
Rover cars
WE should note when talking of the Rover car company's current success that it was Honda of Japan that modernised Rover's factories.
My Rover has a Honda engine and gearbox.
While I am all for buying British, very little of what we buy here today is entirely British.
Things you didn't know you didn't know
Graeme Donald
BEFORE turkey became standard Christmas Day fare, the medieval table groaned under the weight of boar's head on the big day.
Indeed, some institutions, such as the High Table at Queens College, Oxford, still stoically shun trendy turkey and feast on such old-fashioned fare.
In those days guests would retire to an antechamber after the main meal for a banquet of blancmange — neither term then meant what they do today.
A banquet, anything but a sumptuous meal, was a running snack or buffet served from a banquette, a small table or bench.
Blancmange, as the word bisected will show, is French for white food.
In the late Middle Ages this was a savoury dish of ground chicken, pork, rice and onions.
The mixture was moulded into shapes using a sugary bonding goo and, as 16th Century taste swung across to sweets, the mixture was reduced to become the modern blancmange.
TODAY'S Book Of Things You Didn't Know…is now on sale, published by Simon & Schuster for £3.99.
Leftovers in a nutshell
Sharon Davey
IT'S an old chestnut that crops up at this time every year.
You buy lots of brazils, peanuts, and walnuts because you know they will make your festive tablepiece.
But the annual over-indulgence means most of those nuts will still be in your bowl come the New Year.
However, they needn't go to waste.
Nuts are high in protein and essential fats, and add taste and texture to all sorts of dishes.
Nut roasts can be a tasty change after all that turkey, and the natural oils make for moist cakes.
Or, if you've over-ordered on the chestnuts for your turkey stuffing, how about chestnut soup?
And when you become fed up with the sight of your kitchen, try a quick-to-make snack that combines hazelnuts and creamy brie cheese in a savoury sauce.
So don't go nuts — use those leftovers in the following recipes.
Blackcurrant Nut Cake
150g plain flour, 2 tsps baking powder, ½ tsp salt, 75g All-Bran, 100g butter, 75g sugar, 2 eggs, ¼pt natural yoghurt, 100g chopped nuts, 100g blackcurrants.
LINE and grease a 1kg loaf tin.
Sift together the flour, baking powder and salt.
Stir in the cereal.
Cream the butter and sugar together until light and fluffy.
Gradually beat in the eggs, stir in the yoghurt and then flour mixture until just combined.
Lightly stir in the nuts and blackcurrants.
Spoon into the loaf tin and bake for 40-45 minutes at 180C/350F/Gas 4.
Insert skewer in the centre of the cake, if it comes out clean the loaf is cooked.
Leave for ten minutes before removing from tin to cool completely.
(Recipe from Hamlyn All Colour Vegetarian Cookbook, Hamlyn £7.99)
Tagliatelle with Creamy Walnut Sauce
1 tbsp olive oil, 450g tagliatelle, 125g shelled walnuts, 1 garlic clove, 150ml whipping cream, salt, pepper, Parmesan cheese.
FILL a saucepan two thirds full of water, add the oil, and bring to the boil.
Grind the walnuts and the garlic in a food processor, and gradually add the cream, salt and pepper.
When the water boils, add the pasta, stir, and cook for round about six minutes.
Drain, add butter, some salt and pepper, stirring gently.
Add sauce, mix gently and serve immediately with or without Parmesan.
Little Brie and Hazelnut Bakes
350g brie, 50g skinned hazelnuts.
CUT the brie, including the rind, into ½in pieces and place in ovenproof dish.
Chop the hazelnuts and sprinkle evenly over the top.
Place under a hot grill for ten minutes, until the brie is half melted, and the nuts have toasted.
Serve immediately with crisp salad, such as chicory, watercress and orange, and cranberry sauce.
Pork and Peanut Casserole
1 tbsp plain flour, 2 tbsp ground paprika, 1 tsp mustard powder, 675g cubed pork, 2 tbsp groundnut oil, 1 sliced onion, 3/4 pt dry cider or chicken stock, 1 sliced eating apple, 1 red pepper, 100g peanuts, 3 tbsp natural yoghurt, salt, pepper.
MIX flour, paprika and mustard.
Put pork in mixture.
Heat oil and fry onion until soft.
Add pork and fry until sealed all over.
Gradually stir in cider or stock, until thick and smooth.
Add apple, cover and simmer for 20 minutes.
Add red pepper, peanuts, salt and pepper, cook for a further 20 mins.
Just before serving remove from the heat and stir in the yoghurt.
Chocolate Peanut Pie
175g plain flour, 1tsp ground cinnamon, salt, 75g butter, 50g plain chocolate, 40g butter, 100g caster sugar, 50g Muscovado sugar, 50g Golden Syrup, 2 size-3 beaten eggs, 50ml milk, 75g peanuts, icing sugar.
SIEVE flour, cinnamon and salt into a bowl.
Rub in butter until the mixture resembles breadcrumbs.
Stir in 3-4 tbsps chilled water until a smooth, dough is formed.
Wrap pastry and leave in fridge.
Place chocolate and butter in a bowl over a pan of simmering water and heat until melted.
Remove from heat and beat in sugars, syrup, eggs, milk and peanuts.
Cool.
Roll out pastry and line an 8in fluted flan ring.
Bake blind for 12 minutes in a preheated oven at 220C/400F/Gas 6.
Remove lining and bake for a further five minutes.
Reduce heat to 180C/350F/Gas 4.
Pour filling into the flan case and bake for 35-50 minutes until firm to the touch.
Serve dusted with icing sugar.
Crumbly Nut Roast
40g butter, 1 chopped onion, 1 chopped celery stick, 225g mixed chopped nuts, 3 large chopped and peeled tomatoes, 175g wholemeal breadcrumbs, salt, pepper, 1 tsp mixed dried herbs, ¼ tsp chilli powder, 2 beaten eggs.
OIL a 450g loaf tin and line with oiled greaseproof paper.
Melt butter and fry the onion and celery for five minutes without browning.
Add the nuts, tomatoes, breadcrumbs, salt and pepper, mixed herbs and chilli.
Add the eggs and mix until fairly soft.
Spoon mixture into the tin, cover with oiled foil and bake at 220C/425F/Gas 7 for 50-60 minutes, or until set.
Serve.
Chestnut Soup
450g chestnuts, 1 tbsp olive oil, 1 chopped onion, 1 chopped celery stalk, zest of 1 orange, 1½pts chicken stock, 1 tbsp Madeira, salt and black pepper.
TO peel the chestnuts, use a sharp knife to make a couple of slits in the skin of each one, put them in a saucepan, pour over enough boiling water to cover and simmer over a medium heat for about 5 minutes, then take them out a few at a time, drain and refresh them under running cold water.
Peel off skins.
Heat the olive oil over medium heat, add the onion and celery and saute gently for 5 minutes.
Add orange zest and chestnuts and saute for a couple of minutes.
Add stock and bring to the boil.
Simmer for about 45 mins.
Put soup in a blender until smooth.
Return to pan, stir in the Madeira, season and bring back to the boil.
Serve.
Recipes and photos of tagliatelle with creamy walnut sauce and little brie and hazelnut bakes from Rose Elliot's Vegetarian Christmas, published by HarperCollins, price £14.99.
Recipes and photos of pork and peanut casserole and chocolate peanut pie from National Peanut Council of America.
Christmas Eve countdown
Sharon Davey
THE shopping's done, the presents are wrapped and the excitement is building up.
But while the children are looking forward to finding out what Santa has brought them, you are dreading the daunting task of preparing and cooking a huge Christmas dinner.
With a little advance preparation, though, you can ensure you have time to relax and enjoy Christmas morning.
Here is Good Taste's guide to planning ahead for your festive feast.
ENSURE a frozen turkey is defrosted and keep cool.
Weigh the turkey to establish a rough cooking time.
You will have to weigh it again once it is stuffed for an exact time.
MAKE or defrost the stuffing and keep it chilled.
PUT the cranberry sauce, brandy butter and cream into serving pots or jugs, cover and place in the fridge.
MAKE some turkey stock from the giblets (do not use the liver, it makes it bitter).
Drain, cool, chill.
MAKE the bacon rolls.
MAKE lots of ice for Christmas morning drinks.
CHECK you have enough pots, pans and bowls for your menu and plan hob and oven space.
PREPARE the Brussels sprouts and peel the chestnuts.
PEEL the potatoes and leave them covered in water in a cool place.
SHARPEN the carving knife.
CHOOSE plates, cutlery and crystal and set the table if practical, leaving all the glasses upside down.
CHOOSE the wine and make sure someone has the job of dealing with it on Christmas Day.
MAKE everyone in the house agree to breakfast at the same time so you (a) get a clear kitchen, and (b) know you can get some help.
Have a cool Yule.
Barn storming
Stella Bingham
Create a rural haven down on the farm.
MORE and more people are swapping their suburban semi-detached for a peaceful rural haven — and for many, barns are more appealing than cottages.
With prices down by up to a third in some areas, there are many bargains around for the discerning buyer whether you fancy a converted barn or like the challenge of renovating.
Barns in North Yorkshire sell for as little as £20,000 for a tiny village blacksmith's forge with no land, to £125,000 for a very large barn with a paddock.
Unconverted barns were one of the success stories of the property boom years, with near-ruins selling for fantastic sums.
But the cost of conversion often pushed the total outlay way over the property's market value.
These days, however, the recession has brought more realistic prices.
‘In the peak, we were selling barns for as much as £120,000,’ says Nick Wood of Stags in Totnes, Devon.
Today good, unconverted barns in his area sell for about £75,000.
‘But the cost of buying and converting a barn is higher than building something from scratch,’ says Wood.
There is no real rule of thumb for how much it costs to convert a barn.
‘To be on the safe side, double the price for the cost of converting,’ says Marcus Lyon of William H Brown in Malton, North Yorkshire.
‘You could hope to convert a £125,000 barn for Pounds 80,000, but by the time you move in you would probably find you have spent nearer the cost price of the barn.’
Nick Wood offers a conversion guide price of £60 a square foot compared with £45 to £50 for building a new house.
However, Stephen Jeffery of the country house department of Allen & Harris in Newbury, Berkshire, says conversion costs should be less than that these days.
Buildings in good condition in villages or forming part of a farm complex should be much cheaper to convert than a ruin miles from the nearest mains water and electricity — although even these sell.
‘You can get electricity from a generator and water from a spring,’ says Marcus Lyon.
‘We sold one which had no phone.
It was too low-lying for a mobile phone and completely isolated, but the buyers loved it.
They said no one would ever find them.’
Never buy a barn without planning permission for conversion, and be prepared to find that you are very restricted in what you can do to it.
So many barns ended up looking like suburban villas that The Society For The Protection Of Ancient Buildings launched a campaign to fight for the preservation and proper use of these distinctive and historic treasures.
Today most planning authorities enforce fairly strict guidelines.
‘They want to retain the character of the building,’ says Nick Wood.
‘The openings, the stonework and roof tiles usually have to be preserved.’
Perhaps the best bargains for barnstormers are to be found among converted barns.
‘No two are ever the same,’ says Stephen Jeffery.
‘Some are incredible, some are horrendous.
It is a very personal taste so they can be difficult to sell.
‘At the top end, barns are competing with traditional country houses.
They stand an equal chance only if you get the price right.
You get more for your money with a conversion.’
Says Marcus Lyon: ‘You are always going to get the lazy buyer who wants a barn conversion because they don't want to take the time and trouble to do it themselves.’
Anyone looking for a small rural base should find real value for money in ‘courtyard developments’ created from farms and their outbuildings.
‘They are generally one and two-bedroom units.
They used to sell for second homes but that market is very poor now,’ says Nick Wood.
Death of two legends
LORD Ted Willis, who created TV's best loved bobby, Dixon of Dock Green, died yesterday aged 74.
Jack Warner played Dixon in the film The Blue Lamp in 1949.
It was so popular Dixon became a TV series.
Lord Ted used PC Dixon's catchphrase ‘Evening All’ as the title of his autobiography.
BLUES musician Albert King, a major influence on rock guitar playing, has died in Memphis aged 69.
Missouri-born King made songs like Laundromat Blues and Born Under A Bad Sign into blues standards.
Young guitarist Eric Clapton paid tribute to King by purposely copying one of his hit solos.
Christmas Messages
YOU don't have to be the Queen to feel that 1992 has been a rotten year.
At home the recession has deepened, hundreds of thousands have lost their jobs, a record number of companies have gone bust.
Abroad, there have been the horrors of Bosnia and Somalia.
But however bad a year it has been, Christmas should always be a time of hope and happiness.
It marks not the dying of something old but the birth of something new.
It is inevitable that we think of children at Christmas but, as Father John McCullagh writes so movingly on this page, our thoughts should not stop there.
Much was achieved during the 1980s, particularly in international relations.
A new world order was forged from the disintegration of the Soviet empire, though there is a bitter harvest from that in ex-Yugoslavia and terrible threats still hang over Russia and some of its former satellite states.
Yet the 1980s were also associated with a cult of greed.
Individuals were given the opportunity to achieve much for themselves but too often they did it at the expense of others.
The 1990s shepherded in a new era of compassion.
Of working for others, not just for ourselves.
And that is the spirit of Christmas.
At TODAY, we hope the next few days will bring you peace and joy.
We trust there will be gifts galore, good food and jolly company.
But we ask you to spare some time during the holiday to think of those who are less fortunate.
Is there an elderly relative or neighbour whose Christmas would be made by a visit from you?
If there is, please give up just a little time for them.
Maybe the rash of new presents means there will be some toys in your house which will never again be needed.
Why not pass them on to a hospital or children's home where they will be treasured.
Are there friends you have not spoken to for months or even longer?
A call from you would be worth a hundred scribbled messages on Christmas cards.
Ever since there has been Christmas there have been complaints that it has become over-commercialised.
But there is nothing wrong in that.
This is a festival of celebration and it should be celebrated in every way.
It would benefit no one if we all sat around moping for the next week.
What is important, though, is that we should never forget the Christmas message.
At this time and throughout the year.
You do not need to be a Christian, or any sort of a believer in established religion, to want to live your life by the simple principles of goodness that are symbolised by the baby born in Bethlehem almost 2,000 years ago.
These fast-changing times should cause all of us to reflect on the lives we are leading and how we can better them for ourselves and those around us.
Certainly we should want to provide a comfortable home full of modern appliances for our families.
But even the wealthiest person in the land is poor without spiritual riches.
Life is truly meaningless if we cannot be moved by the stories of cruelty from Bosnia, of famine in Somalia and by a simple tale like that told by Father McCullagh.
What value is our own home if we cannot feel for those who are homeless?
What worth is our own job if we cannot feel for those who are unemployed?
What comfort can we get from our own happiness if we cannot feel for those who are condemned to live in misery?
All those who work at TODAY wish you a very happy Christmas.
But we also pray that you can achieve a truly happy, satisfied life throughout the year.
That can only be done if you spare just a few quiet moments away from the television and video, the toys and games, the table groaning with food and the glasses of cheer.
Spend them thinking of the meaning of Christmas and the meaning of your life.
Of what you can do to make things better for others.
Of what you can do to make this a better place to live.
Each of us can have only a tiny impact on creating a kinder, finer world.
But without each of us trying, it will never be done.
Old Joseph was glad he kept the Christmas cards
Old Joseph was glad he kept the Christmas cards from his son and daughter in 1987, for every year since then he has taken them out and displayed them as if they had come in with the post.
MOST Christmas messages see the season of goodwill through the eyes of children.
But Father John McCullagh has managed to convey the same sentiment in a very different way.
He recounts his message through his old friend Joseph.
The story is as much inspirational as sad, for with it we are made aware of the part we can play in our own Christmas story.
Father McCullagh, parish priest at Plumbridge in County Tyrone, Northern Ireland, first gave this remarkable CHristmas message on BBC Radio 4's Prayer For The Day.
For all those who missed it then, TODAY prints it here.
IT WAS always this week that the people who ran the residential home began to put up the streamers and tinsel of Christmas.
Old Joseph saw it as the beginning of his retreat into loneliness and isolation.
The advertising jingles and the emphasis on celebration and even the goodwill of the local carol singers did nothing but serve to underline the emptiness of the season without the presence of his own family.
He was glad that he didn't throw out the Christmas cards from his son and daughter in 1987, for every year since he had taken them out of the suitcase on top of the wardrobe and displayed them in his own room as if they had come in with the morning post.
The greetings —‘with love, Father’ and ‘to a dear Daddy’— had an empty, hollow ring to them five Christmases later.
Old man, I love you/but how can I tell you/your world is yesterday/mine is today.
We sit together/not so often now/in restless silence/drinking beer/or watching football/like you and I were young.
I love your calloused hands/they paid across the board/for my college education/yet its that same degree/that makes me a stranger/when I come to see you.
Are you surprised at the world's loss of memory/Still the spirit of the old/is born in their young/The apples fall not far away/from the family tree.
Paraphrase of Papal Bulls & English Muffins written by Joe McCarthy.
If the organ music swells this Christmas as we run down the lanes of childhood in search of sentiment or the values of yesterday, and if the early darkness on Christmas evening finds us replete and empty at the same time, maybe its because we have left the Josephs of this world alone in their silent day and all too silent night.
For so many old people the only Christmas gift they want is our presence and not our presents.
But we feel so ill at ease with silence that we want to fill it with endless clatter and talk about ourselves.
When they want us to listen, we begin by giving advice or telling them why they shouldn't feel the way they do, and we do nothing but trample all over their feelings.
Then when we fuss and do things for them which they can quite capably do for themselves, we do nothing but contribute to their fear.
But the worst silence of all is when we take it for granted that they know how much they are still appreciated and that the calloused hands or fingers are symbols to us of the love and caring poured into our lives.
If we can not tell our love to them, then there will be no vision or angels or heavenly choirs over the hill country beyond the window of these islands this Christmas.
Last Christmas my old friend Joseph had sunk lower in his chair from the year before but in the afternoon three old friends came to see him.
They each brought him a present — a book about the old Great Northern Railway, a box of American tobacco and a half bottle of his favourite whisky.
And for more than an hour they heard about the glory of steam and engines and old stations.
‘The Magi had come again,’ he later told me.
And as he closed the window of his room against the night frost, he was afraid to look out on the hills in case he heard angels sing and the other folk in the home would dismiss the story because of the two, long drawn out drinks he had before sleep closed down another Christmas Day.
God of all love, give vision to those dazzled by the bright lights of Christmas so that they see into the dark cribs beyond the packed inns and be the shepherd or the person of wisdom to those who have nothing to celebrate.
Amen.
Quick Gran, bury the telly
Jane Moore
THE TV was blaring in the corner, displaying EastEnders in black and white.
Clutching his mono TV licence, the householder seemed nervous as the TV licence enforcement officer approached the set.
With one twiddle of a button, the colour flooded back into the faces of the soap stars on screen and the owner sprang back in feigned amazement.
‘After all these years, I never knew it was a colour set,’ he gasped.
That might sound a ludicrous attempt to escape paying for a colour TV licence, but he obviously thought it was worth a try.
The TV detection team didn't fall for it, any more than they did for the man who claimed his set was never used.
When the officer pointed out that it was still warm, the man said: ‘That's where the cat sits.’
Other tricks are just as wily.
One old chap wrapped his set in aluminium cooking foil and put clingfilm over the screen, thinking the detector van would be unable to pick up the signals.
At another house, the officer was asked to wait on the doorstep ‘while the dog was put into the back garden’.
Looking into the garden, he saw an elderly lady sinking into the flower bed under the weight of a TV.
‘Oh don't mind her, it's just Granny,’ said the householder.
Christmas means the teams who go out from the TV licensing HQ in Bristol are getting ready to hear a lot more lame excuses.
There are currently 1.7 million people in the UK who have a TV but not a licence, and most will be doing a lot of viewing over the next couple of weeks.
They may just receive an unexpected knock at the door — and it won't be Santa calling.
‘We patrol areas at peak viewing times,’ says Kieron Brennan, the Field Operations Liaison Manager.
‘For instance, 7.30pm on Tuesdays and Thursdays is a good time to go out with the TV detector van because EastEnders is on.
Similarly, we catch them watching Coronation Street.’
The vans are used as an intimidatory measure, and also for when people deny they have a TV.
One man tried to do that — but forgot to hide the remote control.
At another house the officer noticed a low table in the corner with a dust-free area in the exact shape of a TV.
Another licence dodger had been nailed — to join the record 4,000 caught in Britain last year.
Most of the calls made to houses are as a result of information given out by LASSY — the largest computer database in Europe.
It stores details of 24 million UK households and 19.7 million TV licence holders, and addresses that don't have one are checked.
A letter is sent out, and if no reply is received an officer calls.
Most people pay up straight away, but there are a few who keep trying to bluff it out.
One man's excuse was: ‘Why should I buy a licence?
The TV works perfectly well without one.’
At another house where an officer asked about the aerial on the roof, the owner replied: ‘I've got a bottle of milk on the doorstep, but that doesn't mean to say I've got a cow in the kitchen.’
But a detector van makes most licence dodgers think twice.
Whenever it patrols an area, there is always an increase in requests for licences.
‘The local Post Offices like to be told in advance if we are going to patrol an area,’ says officer Graham Perrett.
‘One Sunday I drove around the well-to-do area of Stoke Bishop, and next morning the Post Office had run out of licence stamps.’
Axl Rose
SINGER Axl Rose thinks his fiancee Stephanie Seymour is a gem.
The £10,000-a-day model, above, has had a chain of rosebuds tattooed around her ankle and has also accepted a diamond ring from the Guns 'N Roses singer.
Liz Taylor
AILING Liz Taylor has cancelled her traditional Christmas break on doctor's orders.
Liz, 60, will stay in Hollywood, instead of her chalet in Switzerland.
Nikki Harris
MADONNA'S backing singer Niki Harris is to star as jazz singer Billie Holiday.
Actor Bruce Willis will play radio star Willis Conover.
The Krankies
COMEDY duo The Krankies found their latest role as theft victims very unfunny.
The pair were starring in Aladdin at Hull when £8,000 of gems, belonging to Janette Tough, who plays Jimmie, were stolen from their dressing room.
Eat, drink and be thin
Louise Roddon
IT WAS crisis time in the grotto.
Too many puddings and mince pies had wreaked havoc with Santa's waistline, and all those narrow chimneys to wriggle down on Christmas Eve meant he needed an instant solution.
Here we show how TODAY produced a slimline Santa and gave him a new modern look.
On the next page we show how easy it will be to pile on the pounds tomorrow — and give you an alternative diet for the day.
STRIPPED to his shorts, Santa had only his long white beard to save his blushes at one of Britain's most exclusive women-only club.
He was the first man ever to enter The Sanctuary in Covent Garden, London after TODAY smuggled him in.
Santa's first shock came from the tape measure — the Claus tum measured a bloated 47 inches.
With hips at 44.5 inches and thighs at 25 inches, it was no wonder Rudolph had been complaining about excess baggage.
We decided he needed help in slimming — and a new, up-to-date outfit.
Beauty therapist Suzanne set to work to reduce the Santa spread by preparing Frigi-Thalgo.
This is a French seaweed — applied at a temperature seven degrees below normal body heat — which tones up thighs and tum by restricting the body's normal blood flow.
Cold bandage wraps applied to plumper parts then encourage the breakdown of excess fluids.
Suzanne first gave Santa an exfoliating body scrub, then seaweed gel was applied to the Claus tum, hips and legs.
Santa shivered when Suzanne wrapped his body in cold, clammy bandages which had been pre-soaked in a solution of menthol, camphor, marine algae and alcohol.
He was happy about the alcohol content, but the damp bandage soon took the smile off his face.
Twenty minutes later Slendertone pads were placed on Santa's fattest points to break down fluid retention.
After another 20 minutes, the bandages came off and Suzanne massaged Santa's hips and thighs with a firming Thalgo-Mince cream.
Exactly 90 minutes after entering the club, Santa was re-measured.
He had lost 4 3/4 inches from his body.
The tum was an inch slimmer and 1½ inches had melted from his hips.
Above the knee, Santa shed 1¼ inches, and those flabby thighs had toned down by an inch.
Then we dressed him in a new outfit and persuaded him to reveal his own short beard instead of the fake white one.
The results surprised even Suzanne.
‘Men don't tend to store as many fats and toxins as women so the body wrap is usually less effective,’ she said.
‘But this worked well for Santa.
‘Every client I treat usually loses at least an inch — so it's ideal if you're going out for the evening and want to wear a specially tight outfit.’
With Frigi-Thalgo, inch loss is said to be almost permanent after six or more sessions — dieting and exercise included — and noticable loss is possible within a £35 one-hour session, with the effect lasting 48 hours.
Santa was thrilled.
‘My body feels fitter for going down chimneys,’ he said.
‘Best of all was the massage.
After all those clammy bandages, Suzanne had lovely warm hands.
Ho, ho, ho.’
Santa outfits can be hired from Angels, Shaftesbury Ave, London, W1
Proof that Nintendo can be good for you
Nigel Howard
SPENDING Christmas zapping aliens or helping Sonic the Hedgehog to dodge graphic nasties might sound mindless to parents — but it could be great mental exercise for thousands of computer game-crazy youngsters.
We invited 12-year-old James Freebody from Ilford, Essex, to play a Super Nintendo NES game and asked psychologist Dr Dorothy Einon to find out how it affected him.
Dr Einon, an expert in children's play, put James through a series of tests to probe his IQ, memory and creativity before and after four hours of playing Super Adventure Island, in which Master Higgins battles to rescue Jeanie Jungle from the wizard Dark Cloak.
She found no change in James's IQ.
But his memory and creativity scores increased after playing the game, even though he was tired.
Dr Einon says: ‘What is absolutely certain is that playing the game for this length of time did not make his scores worse.’
Dr Einon started by asking James to repeat telephone numbers, then to remember a sequence of words, then to repeat word lists after counting backwards from ten to one as a distraction (see graph).
Then James had to look at a tray containing 20 objects and, when the tray was removed, see how many he could remember.
She then tested his creativity by asking him to write down all the things he could do with various objects such as a brick or a shoe, and all the things that would happen if certain events suddenly occurred, such as everyone in the world losing their sight or having to walk on all fours.
James's improved scores are good news for all Britain's surrogate Santas who were persuaded to buy computer games for their children.
They may drive you crazy with their blips and bleeps — but at least they are not rotting your children's brains.
Spot the Christmas feast with 3,000 extra calories
STUDENT Debbie Andrews was delighted to be served our Christmas feast, and declared it all delicious.
But she was amazed when told how many calories she had just consumed.
These Christmas Day menus sound pretty average, but if you eat everything on the list you will have tucked away 5,472 calories by bedtime — around three times as much as a manual worker needs, and four times as much as an office worker's requirements.
The calorie counts are given after each item, and all the portions are average size unless exact measurements are stated.
BREAKFAST: One fried egg (104 calories), two rashers fried bacon (200), one slice of fried bread (170), two slices toast spread with margarine and marmalade (312), cup of tea with milk and sugar (75).
Total calories: 841
LUNCH: 160g helping of buttered turkey, roasted in fat and eaten with the skin (346), 100g sprouts or other greens tossed in butter (258), 170g potatoes roasted with lard (221), 100g roast parsnips (175), one helping of sausagemeat stuffing (167), three streaky bacon rolls (124), gravy (127), 76g helping of traditional Christmas pudding (221), 35g dollop of brandy butter (188)
TEA-TIME: 2 slices of bread with butter (292), 75g turkey with skin (128), 28g ham (28), mustard and tomato (10), 70g slices of Christmas cake (250)
Total calories: 708
SNACKS: Bag peanuts (300), handful of cashews (312), small bag Caribbean Mix (226)
Total calories: 838
SWEETS AND TREATS: Four soft-centred chocolates (180), three chocolate fudges (129), 3 caramels (135)
Total calories: 444
ALCOHOL: One pint of beer (240), two glasses of mulled wine (144), two spirits and mixers (210), two glasses sweet white wine (220)
Total calories: 814
NOW compare the waistline-busters on the left with this leanline alternative to Christmas we offered nurse Oonagh O'Brien.
The traditional elements that make up the perfect day are all here and it's equally delicious — but careful use of low-fat spreads, skimmed milk and steamed vegetables mean big savings in calories.
Again, the calorie counts are given against each item and at the end of each meal.
If you follow this day's eating you will get through only 2,778 calories.
BREAKFAST: One boiled egg (90 calories), one slice of toast and low-fat spread (99), two slices of toast with low-fat spread and marmalade (198), cup of tea and skimmed milk (33)
Total calories: 420
LUNCH: 160g turkey roasted but served without skin (165), 100g steamed sprouts (35), parsnip and carrot puree (98), 170g potatoes roasted in olive oil (157), low-fat mushroom and rice stuffing flavoured with onion, sage, parsley and thyme (147), three bacon and chestnut rolls (72), red wine gravy made with stock, wine and orange juice (100), 76g vegetarian Christmas pudding (221), 30g yoghurt brandy sauce, made using low-fat yoghurt, grated orange rind, mixed spice and brandy (39)
TEA-TIME: Two slices bread with low fat spread (198), 75g lean turkey (99), mustard and tomato (10), yule log slice (119)
Total calories: 426
SNACKS: Bag crisps (110), four satsumas (36), banana (95), small bag Twiglets (95)
Total calories: 336 SWEETS AND TREATS: Four Turkish Delights (100), three Mint Imperials (45), three liquorices (5)
Total calories: 150
ALCOHOL: Two glasses red wine (152), 1 litre diet Shloer (45), 250ml St Michael Sparkling Spring Water Herbal Fruit Drink (85), 2 spirits with low-cal mixers (130)
Total calories: 412 
And…here's the best from 1992
By Tim Satchell
EVERY day in 1992 I have rounded off the page with an And…
Here, in no particular order, are a selection of the favourites of the year, with special cartoons from our very own Dave Gaskill.
A nice Jewish lady rang up a newspaper to place a notice about the death of her husband.
‘That's £1 a word,’ said the clerk.
‘What would you like to say?’
‘Cohen dead,’ said the woman.
‘There's a £5 minimum, so you can have three more words,’ said the clerk.
‘Very well,’ said the woman.
‘Cohen dead.
Volvo for sale.’
A woman rushes home to her husband.
‘Pack your bags, I've won the pools.’
‘What shall I pack?
Summerwear or winterwear?’
‘Both.
I want you out by lunchtime.’
Diner to waitress: ‘Can I have a quickie?’
Second diner: ‘I think it's pronounced quiche.’
The boating lake attendant called out: ‘Come in Number Six, your time is up.’
No one returned to the jetty.
Ten minutes later the attendant tried again: ‘Are you in trouble, Number Nine?’
Overheard last night at Annabel's: ‘The people who say money can't buy everything don't know where to shop.’
Overheard at the Garrick: ‘Do you believe in clubs for women?
‘Yes, but I believe we should try kindness first.’
What's the difference between Graham Taylor and a pyromaniac?
A pyromaniac doesn't throw away the last three matches.
Irate boss to late arrival at Lloyd's: ‘You should have been here at nine o'clock.’
‘Why, what happened?’
‘In times of trial,’ said the vicar, ‘what brings us the greatest comfort?’
A small voice at the back piped up: ‘An acquittal.’
Have you heard of the man who was on two diets?
He found there wasn't enough to eat on one.
What's the difference between Arsenal and a tea-bag?
A tea-bag stays in the cup longer.
What do you do if you see a spaceman?
Park, man.
What's the difference between a small businessman and a pigeon?
A pigeon can still leave a deposit on a new car.
Government boffins have been explaining a new weapon that destroys people but leaves houses intact.
A mortgage.
Have you heard about the Tory moderate who hit the cheerful-looking palmist on the nose?
He told friends he always believed in striking a happy medium.
Seen at East Croydon railway station.
‘Lavatories out of order.
Please use Platform 5 or 6.’
Here is a late football result.
Real Madrid: 1
Surreal Madrid: Fish
What do elephants do before they make love?
They take off their trunks.
Did you hear about the two goldfish in a tank?
One turned to the other and said: ‘How do you drive this thing?’
Why do African elephants have big ears?
Because Noddy won't pay the ransom.
A magician, experimenting with a trick, accidentally changed his wife into a sofa and his two children into armchairs.
Too late, they were rushed to hospital.
Five hours later the desperately worried magician rang the hospital to check on their condition.
‘Comfortable,’ said the doctor.
More news of the magician who turned his wife and two children into a three-piece suite.
His insurance company told him: ‘Don't worry, they're fully covered.’
What do you call an irrational fear of train spotters?
Anoraknophobia.
Worrying sign of student degeneracy seen on the wall at Warwick University Philosophy Department: Sex is not the answer.
Sex is the question.
The answer is yes.
A pork pie walks into a pub.
‘Sorry,’ says the barman, ‘we don't serve food here.’
Simpsons croon a different tune
By Tim Satchell
BART Simpson aims to hit the charts in the spring with his second record — The Simpsons' Yellow Album.
The parents of 10-year old Bart — Homer (played by Dan Castellaneta) and Marge (Julie Kavner)— and his sisters Lisa (Yeardley Smith) and Maggie will also appear on the album, to be released by Geffen Records.
‘But there will be a couple of surprises,’ Matthew Walden, vice-president of music at Twentieth Century Fox, tells me.
Prince and Linda Ronstadt are said to have contributed.
Two of the tracks for Bart (Nancy Cartwright) have been written by David Cole and Robert Clivilles of C&C Music Factory.
The family's first album, The Simpsons Sing The Blues, which was released by Geffen Records in 1990 and went Gold with UK sales of 170,000, featured BB King, Joe Walsh and Dr John.
Two singles were taken from that album, Deep Deep Trouble and Do The Bart Man, which reached No 1 in the charts.
Michael Jackson, Ringo Starr and Madonna have already lent their voices to the popular cartoon series.
In the spring Tom Jones sings his hit It's Not Unusual to Marge, and on Sunday's BSkyB episode Elizabeth Taylor says Maggie's first word: ‘Daddy.’
‘I SAY, I SAY’
JANUARY
I HAVE not seen girls crying and screaming like that since the days of the Beatles.
They were sobbing, sobbing, sobbing.
Gloria Hunniford on Phillip Schofield's first night in Joseph And His Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat
LLOYD Webber's music is everywhere, but then so is Aids.
Royal Music Master Malcolm Williamson
A GOVERNMENT is not an old pair of socks that you throw out.
You don't throw out old socks these days anyway
Boris Yeltsin in rejecting calls for his government to resign
FEBRUARY
I LOVE him, I respect him and I honour what he's been through and what we've been through together.
And if that isn't enough then, heck, don't vote for him.
Hillary Clinton defending her husband Bill on television
THE idea of sitting on a desert island is sometimes very attractive.
And at 3.15 on Tuesdays and Thursdays it's very attractive indeed.
John Major on Desert Island Discs
SIXTEEN pounds.
How lovely.
The Queen on winning a family sweepstake at the races
DO you talk to your plants?
Princess Diana to a head gardener
ALL those prawn cocktails for nothing.
Never have so many crustaceans died in vain.
Michael Heseltine on John Smith's courtship of the City
IF I was an Australian I would be thinking very hard about it.
The Duchess of Kent on suggestions that Australia should break its links with the Queen
MARCH
IAN (Botham) may be overweight and overpaid but thank God he's over here.
England cricketer in Australia
POLITICIANS singing pop songs are as ludicrous as Kylie Minogue presenting the Budget.
Labour MP Tony Banks
THE Princess of Wales will be the Queen Mother of the 21st Century.
Royal expert Hugh Massingberd
IF you have a boil and it bursts, it often gets all right afterwards.
Of course it won't end in divorce.
APRIL
I SELL very well in Spain.
I cannot chuck them at the last minute.
Either you are in showbusiness or you are not.
Barbara Cartland on not attending the funeral of her son-in-law Earl Spencer due to having to appear on a chat show
I HAVEN'T done too badly for a  short-***** , bandy-legged Welshman.
Anthony Hopkins on winning an Oscar
I DON'T accept the idea that all of a sudden John Major is his own man.
Margaret Thatcher
CLEARLY she does not intend to retire and do embroidery.
Ex-Minister John Biffen on Thatcher
THIS has been the end of an era.
Ernie Wise on the deaths of Frankie Howerd and Benny Hill
MAY
I HOPE that I don't bump into Jason Donovan backstage.
I'm worried people might think I'm straight.
Sir Ian McKellen at the Olivier Awards
QUITE simply he was the greatest living English painter — until he died.
Former Arts Minister Lord Gowrie on the death of Francis Bacon
I AM strongly flavoured.
I am the political equivalent of curry.
YOU have done enough to harm great men like Burton, Todd, Wilding etc.
Why don't you swallow your diamonds and shut up?
Marlene Dietrich to Elizabeth Taylor
I'M not as nice as all that.
I swore only the other week.
Gary Lineker
MY message to women now is come to my shows, but keep your knickers on.
Tom Jones
JUNE
THE American lifestyle is not up for negotiation.
George Bush at the Earth Summit
IT'S not worth it any more.
My hips go, my knees get too sore, my back stiffens up and I can't bend.
Jimmy Connors after being knocked out of Wimbledon in the first round I'VE spent time with her and she is everything that a man could want.
She's warm, beautiful, intelligent and sexy.
Sylvester Stallone on Fergie
JULY
I DO not want us to be a little England, impoverished, devoid of influence, sour in isolation, languishing either on the sidelines of Europe or of history.
John Major
I'VE been told I retain a lot of moisture when I eat.
Gazza after a doctor's inquiry into why he has become the ‘fat boy’ of soccer
SHE loves sucking guys' toes.
Journalist Dominic Prince, an ex of Antonia de Sancha
AUGUST
WE have no co-ordinated policy.
We have no positive campaign and we have no agenda for government.
George Bush aide
NEW guys have been telling me I was too old.
But I've been getting faster as the years go by.
Age is just in the mind.
Linford Christie after winning the Olympic Games 100-metres gold medal in Barcelona
ANYONE who thinks the economy is turning the corner must be round the bend.
TUC General Secretary Norman Willis
GEORGE Bush is the most decent, most caring, wisest and, yes, healthiest man I know.
Barbara Bush
FRANKLY, the costumes aren't good enough.
Julian Clary squashing speculation that he might become an MP
SEPTEMBER
WHAT a hypocritical, ghastly group of incompetents you all are.
Businesswoman Elizabeth Smart in letter to John Major
MR Lamont is not widely regarded as a great Chancellor.
His reputation may improve.
It has little other direction in which to go.
Lord Jenkins of Hillhead
IN my previous life I used to be an Eldorado script.
Slogan on poster for recycled lavatory paper
I BELIEVE the decision I made was commonsense — the right one in the circumstances.
Norman Lamont on his economic policy U-turn
MAASTRICHT is like that famous dead parrot.
They may try to nail it on the perch again but nobody will believe it is still alive.
Norman Tebbit
OCTOBER
THERE is nothing more humiliating than loving him so much that you forgive the infidelities.
Jerry Hall on Mick Jagger
IN musical terms it's a tragedy.
In terms of the life of this part of Yorkshire, it's a disaster.
Frank Renton, conductor of Grimethorpe Colliery band, on the pit closure
I MUSTN'T let my heart rule my head.
Michael Heseltine on the pit closures
IN the name of God go!
And take the Prime Minister and the rest of the rag, tag and bobtail with you.
Labour MP Dennis Skinner to Heseltine
EXCEPT for the polls, everything is going well.
Vice President Dan Quayle
I AM walking over hot coals, supended over a deep pit at the bottom of which are a large number of vipers baring their fangs.
John Major
NOVEMBER
1992 is not a year on which I shall look back with undiluted pleasure.
In the words of one of my more sympathetic correspondents, it has turned out to be an Annus Horribilis.
The Queen
I'VE heard these rumours that my mother has £6.5 billion.
Absolute crap!
If only she had £6.5 billion.
Prince Edward
THERE are potential huggers within every household.
Princess Diana
DECEMBER
I HAVE the body of a young girl.
It's white and soft.
If I was Madonna I would probably have shown it to you.
Dame Barbara Cartland
JIMMY, I think he should do your job and you should have done his.
Tony Benn to Jimmy Young when asked about Neil Kinnock's Radio 2 debut
HAVEN'T you run out of film yet?
Prince Charles to photographers
THE House will wish to know that the decision to separate has no constitutional implications…there is no reason why the Princess of Wales should not be crowned Queen in due course.
John Major
THERE has been nothing amicable about this arrangement.
They have been at each others' throats.
IT is events which determine our policy.
John Major.
The good, the bad and the sexy
By Jaci Stephen
WITH any luck, 1992 will go down in history as the year in which a large proportion of the British people finally recognised the monarchy for the anachronism it has undoubtedly become.
If we travelled through the year asking questions like Will Charles and Diana separate?
Is John Bryan Fergie's lover?
Is Prince Edward gay?, we ended it by asking just one: Who cares?
While the Queen was pondering the question of whether to pay income tax, the rest of the nation was wondering whether they would have any income on which to pay tax.
But despite what appears to have been a rotten year for everyone, books were still written, films made, and people could still summon up the energy and enthusiasm for sex.
They just couldn't pay quite as much for it.
Here, then, is my choice of the best and worst of 1992.
SEX
A DIFFICULT category to judge, owing to the large number of nominees.
During 1992, everyone seemed to be Doing It, though generally not with their partners.
Mick Jagger, David Mellor, Michael Winner, and many other middle-aged, ego-tripping men who look as if they'd need a Zimmer frame to get a leg-up and a miracle to get it over.
It's only when you can put a famous face to sexual activity that the preposterousness of the whole event really hits home and even if that doesn't stop you from participating ever again, it will certainly put you off meat for 24 hours.
BEST PERFORMANCE BY A SEXUAL BEING: Woody Allen, for ridding himself of the insipid waif and compulsive adopter Mia Farrow by bedding her adopted daughter Egg Foo Yong, or whatever her name was.
Sharing a duvet with Mia must have been like sleeping with Unicef.
WORST PERFORMANCE BY A SEXUAL BEING: It has to be poor old Ronald Pickup, for his part in Melvyn Bragg's TV adaptation of his own novel, A Time To Dance.
A randy 54-year-old bank manager looked like being a difficult role from the start.
But at least it brought in a lot of new business for the organisation which now likes to call itself the listening bonk.
MOST COURAGEOUS FACE IN THE WAKE OF A SEXUAL SCANDAL: Jane Ashdown's dog, Luke, who was with his mistress (the dog's mistress, that is) when the Press hounds pursued him during his morning consitutional.
DEATHS
MOST MOVING DEMISE: Coronation Street's Ted Sullivan, who died of a brain tumour after less than a year's marriage to Rita Fairclough.
Barbara Knox, who plays Rita, is clearly considered the Street's leading mourning lady.
She's now lost two husbands (car crash, tumour) and one live-in lover (tram accident), which is a suspiciously high number by anyone's reckoning.
Not since Mavis mourned the passing of Harriet the budgie has a death been so dramatically evoked as that in which Ted finally succumbed to rigor mortis.
Many viewers nevertheless asked: ‘How could they tell?’
MOST UNMOVING DEMISE: EastEnders' Gill, who died of Aids.
That was one of Albert Square's less eventful days.
Tune in next time for homelessness, adultery, violence, arson, fraud and racism.
LEAST MOURNED PASSING: Punch magazine.
HEALTH AND BEAUTY
BEST TECHNICAL ACHIEVEMENT: The art of phalloplasty, in which fat is removed from different parts of a man's body and grafted on to his penis.
Somehow I can't see it catching on in the way Play-Doh did.
MOST OVER-HYPED MODEL: Cindy Crawford.
MOST BEAUTIFUL MAN: Harry Hamlin, Kevin Costner, Michael Douglas (just you bring that sexual addiction over here, Mikey), Bill Clinton…so many men, so little time.
LEAST APPEALING MAN: David Mellor.
But nothing that a good dietitian and orthodontist couldn't put right.
THE ARTS
MOST POPULAR COMPOSER: Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart.
Three claims were made about Mozart during 1992. (1) Listening to Mozart can help ease the pain while giving birth.
(2) Listening to Mozart delays the onset of baldness. (3) Mozart had Tourette's Syndrome, which was why he used such bad language.
Whatever will we hear next?
That Jim Davidson has Tourette's?
Give me a big break.
BEST TV PROGRAMME: A Doll's House, in BBC2's Performance season — starring the fabulous Juliet Stevenson, with Trevor Eve also in magnificent form.
WORST TV PROGRAMME: Anything with David Baddiel in it.
I'm told this ‘comedian’ has a cult following.
Many would say that a cult is considerably less than a minority.
BEST BOOK: Music And The Mind, by Anthony Storr (Harper Collins, Pounds 16.99).
WORST BOOK: Diana: Her True Story, by Andrew Morton.
Now that it's been revealed that this really was her true story and not a jolly pack of lies, there's no fun in reading it.
POLITICS
MOST POPULAR PRIME MINISTER: John Major, January — May.
LEAST POPULAR PRIME MINISTER: John Major, June — December.
POPULAR AWARDS
BEST BLACK CAB DRIVER: Number E12000, who gave me a free lift for Christmas after the bomb blast at Hampstead this week.
BEST RESTAURANT: The Armless Dragon, Cardiff.
BEST HAIRDRESSER: Martin Maxey in Belgravia.
BEST READER OF THIS COLUMN: Ron Turner, who has written me more letters than any other reader in my career to date.
To the many others, too numerous to mention, who have assisted in keeping my body and mind functioning throughout the year, a very happy 1993 to you all.
One's Year Of The Snake
Jane Moore
Game of royal family fortunes.
LIFE is full of ups and downs, as Her Majesty the Queen can testify.
The past year has been a rollercoaster one for the royals with a few highs followed by lots of depressing lows.
Now we're giving you the chance to experience the thrills and spills of life as a Windsor with our royal snakes and ladders game.
Simply use a dice and counters and see what fate has in store.
If your luck's in you could land straight away on square number six, a relatively peaceful Christmas, 1991, at Sandringham.
End up later on square 46 denoting Andrew and Fergie's separation and down that snake you go.
Then again a decent throw of the dice and you might find yourself on 47 and climbing the ladder thanks to Charles and Diana's romantic Greek cruise in August.
But avoid 74 at all costs.
That represents the publication of that infamous picture showing Johnny Bryan sitting by a poolside kissing Fergie's toes.
Never before has there been such a catalogue of successive shocks and scandals in the Royal Family, culminating now in the separation of Charles and Diana.
Let's hope our little bit of festive snakes and ladders fun is a pointer to a less fraught year ahead for the monarchy.
Christmas in Vienna concert
OPERA singers Placido Domingo and Jose Carreras, left, share the stage and the applause with former Supreme Diana Ross.
The trio were together for a Christmas in Vienna concert in the city hall.
Bill Cosby
COMEDIAN Bill Cosby has landed on his feet despite a decision by TV executives to axe his quiz show.
You Bet Your Life, which has been screened on Channel 4, was dropped due to poor ratings.
But Cosby will still pick up £7 million from the first series.
Cosby said: ‘I've never enjoyed doing a show more than this one.’
Lysette Anthony
ACTRESS Lysette Anthony is to star in a Basic Instinct-style thriller.
Jason Donovan
HEART-THROB Jason Donovan turned down an invitation to kiss Paula Yates on TV yesterday.
Cheeky Paula produced a sprig of mistletoe and asked for a peck on Channel 4's Big Breakfast Show.
Jason explained:
‘It took a long time for me to come to terms with the whole mistletoe thing.
It doesn't mean anything.’
Dolly Parton
COUNTRY superstar Dolly Parton played Santa yesterday by taking in a family of musicians whose house burned down.
She threw open her Nashville home to Terry McMillan, his wife and three children.
McMillan, who has worked with Johnny Cash, Ray Charles and Kenny Rogers, said he was ‘thrilled’.
Peter Sellers house becomes a Chinese restaurant
THE house where ex-Goon Peter Sellers was born has taken on a new lease of life as a Chinese restaurant.
The home, in Portsmouth, Hants, has been bought by restaurateur Lim Walters who has named his eatery The Mayfair.
‘Peter was born in the room above the restaurant and we are often asked about his links with the building.
It's a piece of local history,’ he said.
Princes' first lesson in duty is to smile through the pain
PRINCESS Diana would have been proud of them.
On their first Christmas Day without mum, Princes William and Harry proved that they have learned the first lesson of royal duty.
Smiling bravely through the pain of separation from the princess, William, 10, and eight-year-old Harry joined the rest of the royal family for the traditional Christmas morning service at Sandringham Church.
The brothers chatted with their father Prince Charles and the Duke of Edinburgh while the family lingered in front of a crowd of around 600 who braved a cold misty Norfolk morning to stand outside the church.
As the boys left with their father they stood close by him throughout, politely waving and smiling as well-wishers shouted ‘Merry Christmas’.
The Queen, wearing royal purple and carrying a posy of African violets, and the Queen Mother, wearing hyacinth blue, were surrounded by toddlers who edged forward from the crowd offering them flowers and Christmas cards as they emerged from church at the end of the 45-minute service.
Looking relaxed and smiling, most of the family strolled down the gravel path from the church into the grounds of Sandringham for the short walk to the main house.
The Queen Mother and Princess Margaret, who arrived with the Queen, returned in a chauffeur-driven limousine.
The young princes, dressed smartly in dark blazers, helped their grandmother collect the flowers and were later rewarded by a lady in the crowd who offered them gift-wrapped bars of chocolate.
The boys thanked her politely and returned to the rest of the royal party grinning and clutching their gifts.
Also attending the service were the Duke of York, Prince Edward, who read the first lesson, the Princess Royal, her new husband Commander Tim Laurence and her children Peter and Zara.
Princess Margaret's children, Viscount Linley and Lady Sarah Armstrong-Jones, were also present.
Rector George Hall, who led a service including four carols, offered prayers for the Queen and the whole Royal Family.
He said: ‘Together with her, bless we beseech thee Elizabeth the Queen Mother, Philip Duke of Edinburgh, Charles, Prince of Wales, the Princess of Wales and all the Royal Family.’
As the Queen's ‘annus horribilis’ neared its end, the rector also offered a prayer for those suffering sorrow and sadness.
The other absent member of the family was the Duchess of York.
Fergie and her two children, the princesses Beatrice and Eugenie, are spending Christmas at Wood Farm, two miles away from the main house but still on the Sandringham estate.
The duchess has two house guests, her sister Jane Makim and their mother Susan Barrantes.
Fergie was not invited to the church service or the traditional turkey lunch in the green dining room at Sandringham, but was spotted in nearby King's Lynn on Christmas Eve shopping with sister Jane.
The duchess is due to return to Wentworth with her daughters tomorrow.
Although they are not involved in the formal festivities it is known the Duke of York and the Queen wanted them nearby so they could enjoy seeing the children.
The same invitation was extended to Diana.
But yesterday she was 75 miles away at Althorp House, and it was left to her two young sons to put a brave face on the royal separation.
A dash of Madeira
Emma Campbell
AT THE 600th step I finally stopped counting and paused to take in the view.
A few weeks before I couldn't have found Madeira on a map — now what I saw made me vow to return every year.
That was if I ever got to the bottom of the steps that make up one of the island's most spectacular walks.
Carved out of the rock and only a few inches wide, they require a certain agility.
I was congratulating myself on my fitness when I passed a middle-aged German couple climbing up — with a good deal more spring in their steps than me.
Madeira is not for the faint-hearted.
Set 270 miles north of the Canary Islands in the Atlantic, it is a volcanic island bursting with brilliant contrasts: the green of banana plantations, the red of vines, the dazzling blue of the sea.
Wild orchids bloom by the roadsides, and round every bend is another breathtaking view.
No wonder it's known as ‘the garden in the Atlantic’.
Madeira owes its appearance to its farmers, who have hacked terraces out of the rock.
Almost every square inch of land on the cliffsides is cultivated simply because there is no flat agricultural terrain.
They have also built ‘levadas’— irrigation channels which supply their crops with water from the wetter northern region — and these are what attract tourists year after year.
Walking the levadas is possible all year-round, amid scenery to rival anything in the Alps.
The guidebook which every Madeiran quotes and which is invaluable if you want to go levada-trekking is Landscapes Of Madeira (Sunflower) by English couple John and Pat Underwood.
It screams with exclamation marks about the dizzy heights of certain walks and the lack of twilight in Madeira.
I was inclined to laugh until I found myself shuffling along the edge of one levada, eyes fixed to avoid looking at the drop below.
For the really determined walker there are two Government-run hotels or pousadas in the mountains, which are so isolated there is nothing to do each day but hit the trail.
For the less fanatical who want a choice of restaurants and the chance to tour the Botanical Gardens or the busy food markets, the place to stay is the capital, Funchal.
It is also the place for those who want to soak up the sun on their hotel terraces or at the Lido, a huge pool so close to the sea that waves frequently wash into it.
Madeira is not the place for the dedicatad sun-worshipper: it has no beaches and year-round temperatures vary between 19C-23C (66F-73F).
But with several hours of sunshine almost every day during my stay in December, it was certainly possible to get a moderate tan.
The island has its own cuisine including tomato and onion soup with a poached egg floating in it, superb beef kebabs or ‘espetadas’.
I wasn't keen on the deep-fried banana served with many fish dishes, and the habit of using photos of food instead of a menu.
But the meals are generally excellent.
Make sure they are well digested though before you venture on Madeira's most exhilarating tourist attraction — a toboggan ride through Funchal.
It should have been a warning to me when I noticed that none of the other foreigners was going anywhere near the wicker-basket toboggans, each with two dapper attendants.
Thinking they were just showing their age — most tourists here are 50-plus — my companion and I clambered in.
Our escorts, both dressed in blazers and boaters jumped on-board — and promptly steered us straight for a garden wall.
Zigzagging our way down the street we saw a car coming towards us and thought some terrible error had allowed the driver on to the toboggan track.
Then we realised the mistake was ours: we were heading down one of Madeira's ordinary roads, with cars hooting to overtake on both sides.
Choking on traffic fumes, we climbed from the basket and vowed to return — but never to do the toboggan ride again.
DEPARTURES
Horizon Winter Sun Selection (081-200 8733) 1wk B&B at the Vila Vicencia, £271 (Jan/Feb), £314 (March).
Further information: Portuguese Tourist Office, 22/25A Sackville Street, London W1 (enclose a SAE).
Great Escapes
RIDING out with the cowboys at the Double JJ ranch in Michigan is The Club's (formerly Club 18-30) latest idea for packages next summer.
Activities include horse-riding, watersports, evening hayrides and barbeques.
One-week full-board packages start on June 4, cost from £536 and include car hire.
Flights extra.
Details: 081-313 9123.
FOR those curious about taking a canal boating holiday, Bridgewater Boats is holding two Open Days on December 27 and January 3 at Berkhamstead.
Details: 0442 863615.
FRANCE VOYAGES is offering 2 nights at EuroDisney with British Airways flights to Paris for £99pp, based on six sharing a chalet at Camp Davy Crockett.
Details: 081-332 0909.
FREE skiing holidays are available to children travelling with two adults.
American Independence is offering a free place for the first child, in Lake Tahoe in California, with the second child paying Pounds 169.
One week is £499 (adult) on a room-only basis.
Details: 0371 874848.
A LOW-COST direct charter from Gatwick, Manchester and Glasgow to Vancouver is due to start in May.
EuroExpress will be running weekly charters on Caledonian Airways DC 10-30 until late October, with return fares from £349.
Details: 0444 235678.
A FREE publication, Holiday England 93, lists hundreds of ways to enjoy a break in this country.
Available from Tourist Information Centres.
In the tracks of a downhill racer
Rory Clements
FIRST the good news.
The snow in Austria is stunning, of a quality and depth unheard of in mid-December for many years.
Now the bad news.
Once you're there, skiing is going to cost you an arm and a leg (hopefully only financially).
The plunge of Sterling means you only get 16 Austrian schillings to the pound, compared to about 20 last winter.
This makes all those necessary little extras of a winter holiday — ski and boot hire, equipment purchases, lunches and drinks — very expensive.
It's certainly difficult to pay less than £110 for a lift pass now.
But money and the recession were forgotten as I skied in the brilliant sunshine of Obergurgl just a few days before Christmas.
One of my companions was Ronald ‘Boris’ Duncan, Britain's No 1 downhill racer.
And as I marvelled at his breathtaking skiing the cost of a coffee in the Nederhutte mountain restaurant was not top of my concerns.
Boris, a quiet, humorous Scot from Aberdeen, is 30 now and he knows that time is not on his side as he tries to improve his world ranking of 35.
But he has never been fitter and, with sponsorship from Lunn Poly for the first time, is giving his best shot at winning for Britain.
‘I started the sport relatively late, but I'm still improving,’ he said as we took a breather at the end of a run through soft but stodgy powder (he floated over it with extreme grace while I plunged head first into it like a deranged puppy).
‘I'm sure I can do well in the downhill,’ Boris continued.
‘But I've got a lot to make up in the slalom events.’
He certainly deserves to make it.
Years of hard training, injuries and arduous touring have taken him ahead of British brothers Martin and Graham Bell, but have brought him little remuneration so far.
But his attitude was positive as he returned to Obergurgl for the first time in years for our jaunt.
The slopes of Obergurgl are split into two sections, accessible to each other only by bus.
But as this runs every ten minutes it's not really a problem.
The skiing is relatively easy and is ideal for a family.
At 1,930 metres, it is Austria's highest resort and snow is virtually guaranteed right through to May.
So apart from the risk of bad weather — and that's a risk anywhere — you can't go wrong in Obergurgl.
DEPARTURES
Tour operators to Obergurgl, bookable through Lunn Poly Travel Agents: Ski Enterprise, Crystal Ski, Bladon Lines, Ski Thomson, Ski Inghams, Neilson.
Renting is as safe as houses
OWNING your home is still the best way for most people to live.
It provides a unique pride, as well as security.
But the sad experiences of thousands over the past three years show that home ownership is not always a path to happiness and contentment.
Encouraged by the Thatcher Government, there was a surge in owner-occupation during the 1980s.
It was sold as the fulfilment of a dream but it became a nightmare for many.
Mortgage rates increased dramatically and seemed as if they would never fall.
Unemployment caused problems for some and the plummeting value of property, particularly in the South, has robbed up to two million owners of their savings.
Far from bringing an end to worry, home ownership became a struggle to stay in the place called home.
A struggle that a record number lost when houses and flats were repossessed.
The cruel lesson is that home ownership is not necessarily suitable for everyone and should, in any case, always be something which you have to work towards.
That is why it would be sensible for the Government to encourage more people, particularly young people, to rent.
Mass owner-occupation is relatively new and does not exist in many other countries.
There is nothing shaming in not owning the place where you live and there is something positively encouraging about having to save for a deposit before you plunge into the housing market.
The secret is to get the balance right.
That was not achieved in the late 1980s and too many couples and families paid the price.
What matters is that people should have somewhere to live.
Owning it, as the nation has found to its cost, must take second place.
Joining forces
SINCE the first police forces were founded 150 years ago, everything about them has changed except the way they are organised.
Officers now work with cars instead of bicycles, radios instead of whistles, riot gear instead of truncheons, plus a range of computers and technical wizardry.
Yet the old-fashioned system of county forces does not reflect their modern methods of working — nor the sophistication of the modern criminal.
Crime does not stop at county borders when it is possible to drive through three counties in an hour.
That is why the Home Secretary's proposal to amalgamate many of the forces is to be welcomed.
It should lead to a greater efficiency among the police and give a much-needed boost to the fight against crime.
There have already been some improvements in organisation in the forces which battle drugs and terrorism, two areas of crime which recognise no geographical boundaries.
But the police need to stay ahead of all crimes in this increasingly lawless society.
Our only worry is that this re-organisation might be used as an opportunity to cut funds to the police.
It must not be.
The police must have the cash and the organisation they need.
The only people who don't want that are the criminals who are the curse of Britain today.
Slippery soap
THE cast list of the real-life royal soap opera is now getting so long and so complicated that all except its most avid followers can be forgiven for losing track.
After the latest manoeuverings and revelations, perhaps the next episode will feature Camilla Parker Bowles working as a waitress in Marco Pierre White's restaurant.
Sigourney Weaver
ALIEN star Sigourney Weaver, 43, above, is letting her hair down for her latest role as America's first lady in a comedy called Dave.
‘She has all the bearing of a first lady,’ said director Ivan Reitman.
Britt Ekland
MOVIE star Britt Ekland has turned her panto debut in Aladdin at Birmingham's Hippodrome into a family affair by inviting her four-year-old son Thomas Jefferson and 14 relatives.
‘It's going to be nice for TJ,’ said Britt.
Sophia Loren
FIERY actress Sophia Loren, 58, stormed out of a Rome diner after her favourite waiter was sacked for taking time off to care for his sick wife.
She found him another job and is paying for a private nurse.
Tara's show stoppers
By Alison Veness
UNTIL now actress Tara Fitzgerald has been famous for what she doesn't wear.
But in her latest role it is her clothes, rather than lack of them, which take centre stage.
Keith Waterhouse's acclaimed West End play, Our Song, stars Tara as Angela, a beautiful gold-digger and mistress of an advertising director played by Peter O'Toole.
She appears in a range of stunning designer outfits which brought her wardrobe bill for the production to a hefty £15,000.
‘It was flattering that they wanted to spend so much on me,’ says Tara.
‘It's really quite unusual to spend that amount on costumes, especially for a modern-day drama.’
Her wardrobe was put together by the debonair O'Toole who took Tara to the chic London designershop, Burns.
Owner Ricci Burns says: ‘Peter has a wonderful eye and he vetted all the outfits and knew exactly what would suit Tara.’
The play is set in the late Eighties when power dressing was at its peak — which explains the bold jackets, short hemlines and figure-hugging dresses.
Tara's 11 scene-stealing outfits by designers such as Dior and Lacroix, make every entrance a show stopper.
‘I love dressing up but lots of actresses do — that's part of the attraction,’ says Tara, who appeared in the television series The Cammomile Lawn and more recently in the award-winning film Hear My Song.
Her own wardrobe is extensive — with an outfit to match every mood.
But she's not a designer label snob.
‘I shop in High Street stores but I love second-hand markets and charity shops.
Originality is important.’
Tipped as the next Greta Scacchi, Tara looks set for a glittering career.
So how will she spend the fortune she will undoubtedly earn?
‘I like quality but not flashy things.
I'm not a stretch limo girl and I certainly wouldn't spend £15,000 on my own wardrobe.’
Can Edward turn next year into an annus mirabilis?
By Tim Satchell
CAN the Princess of Wales remain the big fashion and social icon of 1993?
That is the question confronting British society.
One of her greatest supporters and confidants tells me: ‘She did get half her power from her husband and without him she is going to have to work twice as hard.
Will she carry it off?
I really don't know.
‘It's a tragic scenario and Prince Charles has such a high sense of duty I am amazed he allowed himself to get them both into this situation.
I just hope they both survive.’
Optimistic courtiers suggest that only the marriage of the Queen's youngest son, Prince Edward, to a suitable bride could redeem the popularity of the Monarchy.
In the coming year, the Government will also face its greatest crisis over public sector borrowing, having to borrow too much to pay the interest on its debts — the trap that caught so many in the last few years.
John Major should have more chance to recruit new talent to his Cabinet after the turbulence of 1992.
Tory junior ministers who can expect promotion include Michael Forsyth, currently number two at the Department of Employment, and Local Government Minister John Redwood.
They are both members of the right-wing No Turning Back group.
Two other NTB members, Michael Portillo and Peter Lilley, are already in the Cabinet so if Mr Redwood and Mr Forsyth join them this will reassure Tory Euro-sceptics, one of Mr Major's political priorities.
Another junior Minister Stephen Dorrell, currently at the Treasury, is also in line for promotion.
However, he is more sympathetic to European federalism and this may prove a barrier.
In Labour's ranks Marjorie Mowlam, the shadow citizen's charter minister, is tipped for a higher profile job.
It could also be the year in which either shadow home secretary Tony Blair or shadow trade and industry secretary Robin Cook emerge as Labour's leader-in-waiting.
Business leaders to watch are Lord Hanson, Sir Paul Girolami of Glaxo and Sir Colin Southgate of Thorn EMI.
Nigel Mansell will defy critics who lament his departure from Formula One and make a success of Indy 500.
Cry will be wolf
By Tim Satchell
THE Chinese Year of the Rooster starts on January 23, but 1993's Animal of the Year will be the wolf.
Already the Canadian government has retreated from a plan to cull 300 wolves and they have been reintroduced into American national parks.
Farmers are being compensated for sheep which are eaten.
It will happen here next year, with huge pressure for wolves to make a comeback in the Scottish forests.
Wolves, which don't attack humans, are loyal and only mate once.
They improve the stock of their prey, such as deer, by killing the inferior or injured animals.
Electric impact
By Tim Satchell
1993 will be the year of the electric car, the video phone and the computer notebook — you write by hand and it comes out in print.
The American GM Impact will be the first lightweight, purpose-built electric car.
And if Sir Clive Sinclair's Zike sells well he has ambitions to get into this new market.
Also from the States will come a new craze, 8 Ball, the American version of snooker.
Meanwhile from eastern Europe expect investment to become a two-way traffic.
Hungarian and Romanian restaurants will open up, giving extra variety to the range of cuisine on our high streets.
And…
By Tim Satchell
HEARD in a City tavern last night: ‘I expect my husband to be just the same in 20 years time as he is now.’
‘But that really is most unreasonable.’
‘Quite, that's what he is now.’
MP books a winner
By Tim Satchell
ONE of the big books of next year is bound to be Jonathan Aitken's Nixon: A Life.
Mr Aitken, a Conservative MP and defence minister, is a great-nephew of the newspaper tycoon, Lord Beaverbrook.
He recalls in his teens being summoned to Cherwell for dinner parties when a Cabinet minister might say to Lord Beaverbrook: ‘What do you think of Germany?’
Lord Beaverbrook would say: ‘On important matters like that I never decide without consulting my nephew Jonathan.’
Sadie Frost
By Tim Satchell
A BIG star of 1993 will be Sadie Frost, 25, above, already making a big name for herself as she sinks her teeth into Dracula.
Her husband Gary Kemp, of Spandau Ballet, stars in the new British comedy, Heirs and Graces.
Emma Thompson will continue her rise in Remains of the Day and Much Ado About Nothing.
Ralph Fiennes, star of Wuthering Heights, will make a major appearance in Steven Spielberg's Shindler's List.
This is based on the winner of the Booker's Prize, Thomas Kennealy's Shindler's Ark.
Also look out for Wolfgang Bodison.
Signed as a location manager for Rob Reiner's A Few Good Men, with Jack Nicholson and Demi Moore, Mr Reiner decided that Mr Bodison would make a great performer.
Indeed he is right.
Mr Bodison all but steals the show.
Twenty super facts about your hero
1 MARIO was the 1980 brainchild of Japanese computer genius Shigeru Miyamoto but originally had only a walk-on part in the game Donkey Kong.
2 HIS brother Luigi is not only his plumbing partner but also shares his adventures.
They are known as the Super Mario Brothers.
3 HE is romantically linked to a princess who is variously called Daisy, Mushroom and Toadstool in different games.
4 IN the movie, due for release next summer, Bob Hoskins plays Mario and Dennis Hopper plays King Bowser.
5 SUPER Mario Bros is the best-selling video game ever, with American sales alone of 25 million.
6 IF super Mario Bros 3 had been a film it would have been the biggest earning movie of all time.
It raked in more than £300 million.
7 HE features in a series of US TV cartoons, including the Super Mario Bros Show.
8 HIS hobbies are running, jumping, flying, swimming and space travel.
9 SUPER Mario's image appears on a string of Nintendo merchandise ranging from cakes to wallpaper.
10 THE games' catchy tunes have become pop hits.
Super Mario Land by the Ambassadors Of Funk featuring MC Mario made it into the Top 10 in November.
11 NINTENDO now controls 85 per cent of the American video games market.
US sales topped £3 billion in 1992.
12 ALTHOUGH he is an Italian, created by a Japanese, a recent New York Times editorial said: ‘Not having a Nintendo is like not having a baseball bat.’
13 AUTHOR Martin Amis was dismissive of Super Mario when he first appeared in Donkey Kong.
His verdict: ‘This game is a poodle’.
14 A DECADE later sales of Super Mario games have topped 100 million.
15 SUPER Mario's home town is Brooklyn, New York.
His job description is ‘plumber and superhero’.
16 NOT all Americans have been won over by Super Mario.
When Nintendo tried to buy the Seattle Mariners baseball team a huge row broke out over possible Japanese ownership.
17 SUPER Mario's left hand is known as his Block Bopper to punch his way through walls, and his right foot the Steel-toed Turtle Tromper, for stamping out deadly Koopa Turtles.
18 ‘NINTENDO’ means ‘hard-working’in Japanese, which is apt given Super Mario's constant battles.
19 IT took 16 people three years to create and complete Super Mario World.
20 ACCORDING to one American commentator: ‘When the history of the late 20th Century is written, the chances are two plumbers from Brooklyn will get a chapter to themselves.’
English Electric
AFTER 26 years our English Electric fridge has just packed up.
Would a new, imported one last as long?
Mandy Smith
INSTEAD of blaming her woes on Bill Wyman, Mandy Smith should examine her motives for marrying him.
Perhaps the champagne lifestyle was a factor.
Sunday trading
PEOPLE who believe in Sunday trading don't realise that those who live near shops have to contend with crowds and parked cars seven days a week.
Corporal punishment
On the subject of smacking, my gran used to say: ‘Feed children when they're hungry, nurse them when poorly and smack them when naughty.’
She had nine and they're all fine citizens.
Stamp out vigilantes
THE rise of vigilante justice in Britain is alarming and I'm glad your article Getting Away With Murder highlighted it.
Businessman Norman Weller may have acted in self-defence when he killed a thug but he should have called the police.
When we begin to take the law into our own hands we become little better than those individuals who vandalise our homes and mug old ladies.
That juries and courts should appear to be taking an increasingly lenient view of these acts of retribution is more disturbing again.
The legal system should be stamping out vigilantes, not encouraging them.
Stamp out vigilantes
ACTING to protect your loved ones or property is not murder.
The real crime is that burglars and muggers usually get a light sentence, while their victims receive only time to repair their shattered lives.
Going solo
I ADMIRE Freddie Starr and his wife Sandie for the mature way they are handling the end of their 18-year marriage.
Such a sensible approach should ease some of the pain.
Freddie is spot-on when he says only lawyers get rich from couples who bicker over who gets what from the divorce.
Milestones
BIRTHDAYS: Violinist Nigel Kennedy, 36.
Footballer Terry Butcher, 34.
Actress Dame Maggie Smith, 58.
ON THIS DAY: In 1937, The Irish Free State became the Republic of Ireland.
In 1908, an earthquake almost completely destroyed Messina, Sicily.
National Lottery
MONEY raised by the new National Lottery would be well spent on breast cancer research.
According to the charity Breakthrough Breast Cancer, Britain has the world's highest death rate from this terrible disease which kills 15,000 women a year.
Drive these killers off Britain's roads
ONCE again we've had to witness the horrifying sight of Christmas carnage on the roads because a few stupid people fly in the face of common sense and drive like lunatics whatever the conditions.
My sympathy goes to all those who have lost loved ones in motorway smashes over the holiday season, but the emotion I feel most is anger.
It really seems as if some drivers fall prey to a death wish when freezing fog descends.
Warnings have no effect whatsoever.
And how my heart aches for the baby son of Sarah Monelle, the young mum killed when a speeding car mounted the pavement, again in freezing fog, and ploughed into her and three of her pals.
It really is time for the courts to stamp down on motoring infringments.
Drink-driving, for example, should carry an automatic prison sentence.
And I'd like to see police motorway units given the power to throw those who ignore hazard lights and warnings straight into jail, confiscating their cars to boot.
It seems to me there is no other way to get the message over to some of the morons out there.
Until we can ram that message home, we are going to see more families robbed of their nearest and dearest in the most senseless of tragedies.
Things you didn't know you didn't know
By Graeme Donald
ON DAYS like Christmas and New Year's Day, the ancient game of piggie, better known now as tip-cat, was played.
Piggie involved hitting a wooden wedge with a type of hockey stick.
Rival villages would line up at either end of the green to do this.
They would take turns in whacking the wedge, or piggie, into the no-man's land between them.
The hitter would then nominate the number of strides he needed to fetch the pig.
If his estimate was wrong, batting was turned over to the rivals.
The pig spent the whole time being smacked to and fro, hence ‘piggie in the middle’.
This name has been more recently used to describe the children's ball-throwing version, where a third party in the middle tries to intercept.
Being ‘sold a pup’ at fair was also used in reference to a pig.
The unwary were apt to buy a ‘pig in a poke’(sack) and find out later they'd been sold a muted pup.
New year, same old Chancellor
YOU might think that after a year like this, the Chancellor of the Exchequer would be older and wiser.
Older he undoubtedly is, but he is not a jot wiser.
Norman Lamont has learned nothing from the debacle of the past months.
Nothing from the failures of his policies.
Nothing from the desperation and misery that the country has been forced to live through.
He has not even learned that Britain is suffering from a recession bordering on a slump.
For yesterday he arrogantly announced that the nation is in good shape.
Good shape?
Good shape despite unemployment almost reaching 3 million?
Good shape despite the tens of thousands of firms which have gone bankrupt this year?
Good shape despite the dire forecasts still being made by much of the business world?
According to Mr Lamont, if there is gloom about the British economy the fault lies entirely with the British people.
It is they who are responsible by seeing problems where there are none.
The Chancellor seems to think that the statistics on unemployment, bankruptcies and industrial production are figments of a pessimistic national imagination.
Yet this is the same Chancellor who was forced into a humiliating climbdown on his economic policies a mere three months ago.
Not only does he not appear to recognise that, but he still treats the British people with the insensitivity which so infuriates them.
The best debate in Britain this year took place at the Conservative Party conference when speaker after speaker analysed and criticised what was happening to the economy.
In his reply, Mr Lamont ignored everything that had been said.
And he is still doing so.
The country deserves better.
It is the ordinary people who are suffering in the recession.
They should not have to suffer Mr Lamont's arrogance as well.
Deaf to appeal
ON December 14 TODAY warned of the threat posed to women by the dangerously short sentence given to the multiple rapist Dr Thomas Courtney.
We called on the Attorney-General to refer his case to the Appeal Court so that the sentence could be increased to one which would protect women for a long time.
There was a sympathetic response immediately.
We were told that the papers in the case were being examined and it was clearly implied that action would be taken.
But on Christmas Eve, the final day on which anything could be done, it was announced that the sentence would stand.
Courtney will be out of jail in two years.
The behaviour of the Attorney-General's office appears to be underhand and contemptible.
They could at least have given the court the chance to increase the sentence.
The risk of Courtney, an apparent sexual psychopath, committing further offences against women is high.
If he does, the Attorney-General will share the responsibility for his crimes.
The Attorney-General seemed to think that we would forget all about this scandal over Christmas.
But we have not.
And we will not.
That is a solemn pledge.
Royal flash
THE Palace press officers — who are to public relations what Jim Davidson is to marriage guidance — yesterday got a BBC TV crew to film newspaper photographers.
The idea was to show what a tough life the Royals have.
Unfortunately, many of the photographers were not there.
They were at Klosters, snapping Fergie on her first skiing holiday of the season.
Dilemma facing parents of every 14-year-old
Virginia Ironside
EVERY parent of a teenager knows the fear when their youngster is late home.
Few suffer the agony of Johanna Young's parents and find that their worst nightmare has become a reality.
Yesterday 14-year-old Johanna's mother and father were going through a double agony.
Not only was the daughter they loved dead, but they were saying to themselves: ‘If only…’
If only they had not let her go out that night.
If only they had known where she was going.
If only they had insisted she come home earlier.
If only they had been stricter with her.
If only they had done something — anything — differently.
But they know that no amount of wishing, no number of ‘if onlys’ will bring Johanna back.
They must spend the rest of their lives mourning her and blaming themselves.
Yet the problem they faced over letting their daughter go out which now, with hindsight, leaves them so open to criticism, is a very familiar one for parents.
Children these days stay over at each other 's houses far more often than they did 20 years ago.
During my son's teenage years he spent his life like a hobo, sleeping-bag packed into his satchel in case he wanted to doss down on a schoolfriend's floor somewhere.
On the nights he was in, the house would be stuffed with similar spotty friends who'd be staying the night with us.
But I always knew where he was.
And if he ever decided to stay over when he hadn't told me in advance, he'd always ring and tell me where I could reach him.
Some children baulk at this idea.
‘Why should I tell you where I'm going, mum?’ they say.
‘You don't trust me.
I can look after myself.’
On the one occasion this was said to me, my reply was: ‘OK, imagine I go out to dinner and don't get back.
In the morning you wake up and there's no one in the house.
What would you think?
You'd be hopping mad and sick with worry.’
Telling your loved ones where you're spending the night or what time you'll be back isn't something that parents only demand of their children.
It works for all members of a family.
Husbands or wives who are away on business tell their other halves which hotel they will be staying at.
If women go out with a bunch of girlfriends or men disappear with ‘the lads’, they too tell their partners when, approximately, they'll be home.
But at what age should you allow a child out alone?
The answer depends on so many things.
Are they going out with a friend you feel you can trust?
Two are safer than one.
How mature are your children?
Do they generally behave responsibly?
Can you trust them to tell the truth about where they're going?
If you can't, check up.
And if they come out with that line: ‘Oh but mum, everyone else's mum lets them stay out until three in the morning/hitch a lift home from Glastonbury/take the short cut across the meadow at night/ride a bike without wearing an orange band…’ then find out what other parents really think.
Ten to one you'll find that they hate the idea but are going along with it because they don't want to be thought of as the oldest fuddy-duddy parents in town — little knowing that their consent is the only reason why other parents are being unnecessarily liberal.
One phone call to other parents will bind you together — and give you the parent power to put all your combined feet down with a loud stamp.
But unless you collaborate about rules with other parents, the kids can invent their own.
You must also say to your children: ‘If you are going to stay out, you must ring me however late and I won't be angry.’
And you must mean it.
It's no good expecting your child to let you know where he or she is and then get hopping mad when they ring at three in the morning.
Strangle the fury and say in a sweet, gentle voice: ‘Thank you very much for ringing me.’
Finally you must always tell them that if they're stranded anywhere, they must ring you — and that somehow you will arrange for transport home.
Maybe you have to throw a coat over your nightie and pick them up from miles away in the car.
Maybe you'll have to wait up and pay for a cab to bring them home.
It may be inconvenient or pricey but if you get angry about it, they won't ring you next time.
Instead they will come on their own, alone.
And who knows what creep will be waiting on the roadside to accompany them.
It is no good not following those rules and then worrying when your teenager is not back at the expected time, looking nervously at the clock and twitching the curtains every time a car pulls up in your road.
Behaviour like that is not going to save a son or daughter.
Yet apparently many parents still treat their children like that.
It is a funny world in which a child, however mature they may seem, is allowed to just go out without leaving an address or phone number and simply does not come home.
If you didn't think that before, ask poor Johanna Young's parents what they think.
Crime pays for killers
Isla Whitcroft
FAMILIES of murder victims are suffering the added heartache of seeing their loved one's killers make a fortune from book and film rights.
The trend has provoked outrage in the US where this week Mark Chapman, the man who gunned down John Lennon, is touting his autobiography.
Now the mother of a young woman victim is taking legal action to stop her killer cashing in.
Alice Pennings is consulting lawyers to ensure the family receives a sizeable chunk of the fee promised to murderess Lawrencia ‘Bambi’ Bembenek from a planned TV movie called Woman On Trial.
Bambi was jailed after she shot her husband's ex-wife in 1981.
A former Bunny girl with striking looks and a keen brain, she was a charismatic figure to the American public and soon film makers were queuing at her jail cell door.
The case has echoes of the row that erupted in this country over The Krays movie.
Jailed gangsters Reggie and Ronnie Kray were reputed to have earned £250,000 for the film about their rise and fall.
The list of people who have profited from crime and murder through book or film rights is growing almost daily to the consternation of victim support groups and grieving relatives.
In August it was revealed that Karen Smith, the Birmingham girl currently languishing in a Thailand prison after being convicted of drug smuggling, had been signed up by agents IMG.
Now everyone's attention is focused on the Bambi case — and the moral implications of making a convicted murderess rich almost overnight.
In The Godfather, Don Corleone says: ‘A lawyer with a briefcase can rob more money in a week than a man with a gun can take in a year.’
Today his advice might be: ‘A man with a gun and word processor can make more money in a month than his lawyer can in a lifetime.’
Have we got News for You
Angus Deayton
THIS year had more than its fair share of depressing news, but one TV programme managed to make light of it all.
Channel 4's Have I Got News For You team, headed by Angus Deayton and starring Private Eye editor Ian Hislop and comedian Paul Merton, mercilessly ridiculed anyone.
Now, exclusively for TODAY, Angus has put together a quiz of the year.
Score over 50 and you too could be a Deayton.
Between 25 to 50 means you could scrape a living as a comic with appalling taste in T-shirts.
Under 25?
Apply for a job on Private Eye.
WHO DID WHAT
Score one point for each correct answer
1
What did Princess Anne do at Heathrow Airport in April before catching a plane?
2
Which footballer was sold for £4½ million but couldn't get into the first team for 16 months?
3
Who paid £20 towards the cost of trying to keep the pound in the ERM on Black Wednesday?
4
Whose lunchbox attained an average speed of 23mph?
5
Who put on weight but finished several millions pounds short of the figure she wanted?
6
Who offered every one of his subjects a $10,000 tax rebate?
7
Who threw a pair of miner's underpants across the House of Commons at Michael Heseltine?
8
Who is nicknamed The Rottweiler?
9
Who announced she was going to divorce her husband, claiming he had been finding satisfaction with model Carla Bruni?
10
Who took Paddy's pants down?
11
Which vegetable couldn't spell ‘potato’?
12
What nickname was given to the American fertility expert who artificially inseminated 75 women with his own seminal fluid?
13
Whose big white bottom was observed through a keyhole, going up and down?
HEADLINERS
These are some of the more memorable newspaper headlines from the past year.
Score 2 points for correctly identifying the news story each headline refers to
1
WILLIAM'S ROYAL FLUSH
2
ER, SORRY, THE END OF THE WORLD ISN'T NIGH
3
IT'S HEIL THATCHER
4
GALILEO WINS 359 YEARS LATE
5
QUEEN TO LIVE AT TESCO'S
FILL IN THE MISSING WORDS
1 point for correct answer, 2 for a funnier headline 
1
Jason: I don't dye my hair, I use ——
2
I won't go back to Blue Peter says ——
3
Madonna in — at Tesco
4
No disguising it — Fergie's on — again
5
Mellor in — for 5 years
6
Tim — the ideal royal —
7
Norman keeps — says PM
8
BBC loses £60 million in ——
9
Tebbit wanted to be —
10
Betty Maxwell sells —
11
Major cannot recall ———
12
Princess calls on — to show love
13
Charles' secret bedtime —
14
Lamont says no plans to — the Queen
15
Kinnock is refused — job
WHO SAID
Score 2 points for each correct answer
1
Who said ‘it's completely absurd to suggest that there is anything unprofessional in my friendship with the Duchess.
I am acting in a purely professional manner.’?
2
Who, according to The Times, ‘wobbled alarmingly on September 16th’?
3
Who allegedly said Princess Diana was ‘a wise old thing’ who ‘understood pain and suffering’and would ‘go out and conquer the world’?
4
Who wrote ‘the secret of life is blonde 12-year-old girls’?
5
Who described Bill Clinton as ‘a two-faced Arkansas pumpkin’?
6
Who said ‘I do not want this to look too much like a cynical photocall’?
7
Who said ‘ P*** off, we don't get up for another hour.
I'm about to call the police’?
8
About whose Spitting Image puppet did the programme's producer complain ‘only nutters would complain about the puppet’?
9
Who said of whom ‘when you talk (to him) about FM, I want to be talking about frequency modulation, not fuzzy monsters’?
10
Who said of whom that they had ‘stolen the sky and put up a sham sun’?
11
Who said ‘all I desire is to be left alone’?
12
Who said ‘there will be no sex in paradise’?
ODD ONE OUT
Score 2 points for choosing the correct odd one out, 3 points for anything funnier
1
Phil Collins/Andrew Lloyd Webber/Freddie Starr/Neil Kinnock
2
Ian Paisley/Valerie Singleton/YasserArafat/The Irish Football Squad
3
Sue Lawley/Kenny Dalglish/Harold Wilson/Ben Elton
4
Nigel Mansell/David Gower/Gary Numan/Stevie Wonder
5
Magnus Magnusson/Robert Kilroy-Silk/Sir Michael Checkland/Harry Secombe
6
Cyril Smith/Madonna/Tim Curry/Captain Kirk
7
Madonna/Prince Edward/Johnny Bryan/Antonia de Sancha
8
Bruce Gyngell/Boy George/The Dalai Lama/A llama
9
Max Bygraves/Kim Philby/Mark Phillips/The Archbishop of Canterbury
ANSWERS
WHO DID WHAT: 1 Sign her divorce papers.
2 Paul Gascoigne.
3 Every person in the country.
4 Linford Christie, in the Olympic 100 metres.
5 Mandy Smith, who had to accept £580,000 in her settlement with Bill Wyman. 6 Colonel Gadaffi. 7 Dennis Skinner.
8 Camilla Parker Bowles.
9 Jerry Hall.
10 Tricia Howard, his ex-secretary. 11 Dan Quayle, who spelt it ‘potatoe’.
12 The Sperminator. 13 Eugene Terreblanche, South African extremist leader.
HEADLINERS: 1 Prince William was disciplined at Ludgrove School for ramming a fellow pupil's head down the lavatory.
2 Korean Christian Lee Jang Lim had to admit he'd misled his followers when the world failed to end on October 28, and it was discovered that he'd banked over £2½ million of their money in long-term savings plans.
3 An unidentified vandal drew a Hitler moustache on the portrait of Maggie Thatcher in the Commons tea-room. 4 The Roman Catholic Church finally admitted it had been wrong to condemn Galileo for saying that Earth orbited around the Sun, in 1633. 5 Following the Windsor Castle fire, it was suggested the Queen might move into Prince Andrew's house Sunninghill, nicknamed ‘Tesco's’ by the Daily Star.
MISSING WORDS: 1 Lemon juice.
2 John Noakes. 3 Ban.
4 Hols. 5 Cold.
6 Husband.
7 Job.
8 Cash bungle. 9 PM. 10 Memoirs.
11 Seeing key memo.
12 Parents.
13 Phonecall. 14 Tax.
15 Euro.
WHO SAID…: 1 John Bryan, before being photographed with her foot in his mouth.
2 John Major.
3 Allegedly Princess Diana on the phone to James Gilbey. 4 Woody Allen, in the film Love & Death.
5 George Bush.
6 David Mellor, organising a cynical photocall with his family.
7 Pandora Maxwell, to policemen who had arrived to take away her husband.
8 Jesus Christ, shortly before dropping the puppet after Moslem complaints.
9 BBC director general Michael Checkland, referring to the chairman of governors, Marmaduke Hussey.
10 The Chinese Government, referring to Chris Patten's democratic reforms in Hong Kong.
11 Antonia de Sancha before going on the Richard & Judy Show and then posing half-naked in The Sun.
12 The Pope.
ODD ONE OUT: 1 All except Neil Kinnock were quoted as saying they'd leave the country if Labour won the election.
2 All except Ian Paisley have had an audience with the Pope.
3 All except Kenny Dalglish have presented a chat show.
4 All except Gower can fly a plane.
5 All have children working at the BBC, except Kilroy-Silk. 6 All except Cyril Smith wear, or have worn, a corset.
7 All except Prince Edward are self-confessed toe-suckers. 8 All except the llama are Buddists. 9 All except the Archbishop have sired love children.
Kirstie Alley
CHEERS star Kirstie Alley yesterday revealed the happiness her adopted baby has brought her and Baywatch husband Parker Stevenson.
Kirstie, 38, who miscarried a Down's Syndrome baby two years ago, was handed William just a few days after he was born in October.
‘My baby is the cutest in the world,’ she said.
‘When I first held him in my arms I cried and cried.
My tears fell on his tiny cheeks and I thought, ‘He looks just like Park’.
‘Parker was overtaken with emotion too.
It was the beginning of a new family we have dreamed of for years,’ added the actress whose Californian mansion is also home to 40 pets including racoons.
Michael Bolton
SINGER Michael Bolton's wedding plans are at risk after his lover, L A Law actress Nicolette Sheridan, told him: ‘The straggly long hair goes or I go.’
Bolton, who hoped to marry Nicolette as soon as she divorces co-star Harry Hamlin, says: ‘My fans love my hair — it's part of my image.
Why can't she love me the way I am?’
Julia Roberts dress
THE dress Pretty Woman Julia Roberts ordered for her cancelled wedding to Brat Packer Kiefer Sutherland could end up being auctioned off for charity.
The £5,500 creation is currently in mothballs in a warehouse in downtown Los Angeles.
Its Australian designer Richard Tyler said: ‘It was the best thing I've ever done — a high-necked, very fitted lace mini-dress, encrusted with pearls, with a full overskirt for the ceremony.
Julia was stunning in it.
‘When the time is right, we'll probably use the dress to raise money for charity.’
Neil Diamond looses hair-dryer
CROONER Neil Diamond blasted American ABC television staff when he lost a prized possession in one of their dressing rooms.
A hapless stage hand said, ‘He went nuts, you'd think he'd lost one of his kids.
I've never seen someone so obsessed over a hair-dryer.’
Ride the 50s heatwave
Alison Veness
THE pink pout, structured cut and thrusting chest say it all — the Fifties beach belle is back.
Next year's swimwear recalls an era when Deborah Kerr frolicked in the waves with Burt Lancaster in From Here To Eternity, and Esther Williams was the original bathing beauty.
But even for those who don't have the assets of a Monroe or Mansfield, underwiring on both bikinis and swimsuits underlines the bust while added volume is created using ruched material on cups.
The waistline on bikini bottoms has been pulled up while the usual high leg cut has fallen to something less severe.
A frill around the hips or a rose bud design adds to the girlish feel.
The Fifties polka dot is also resurrected in a variety of vibrant pinks and purples.
Add jewellery and a sexy split skirt wrap-around and these creations will grace any dance floor.
But perhaps a pink Cadillac and James Dean to drive you away are the most desirable extras.
Your stars for 1993
WHEN Princess Diana needed to glimpse the future, she turned to Penny Thornton.
Now you can let TODAY astrologer Penny help you gain an insight into what 1993 holds for you.
Tomorrow in TODAY don't miss Penny's exclusive eight-page pull-out guide to love, money and your life for the coming 12 months.
Your world may never be the same again, so make sure you don't miss out.
Sir James pushes the boat out for a double celebration
By Tim Satchell
RECESSION proof billionaire Sir James Goldsmith is to throw a huge joint birthday party for himself and his daughter Jemima.
It will celebrate his 60th and her 20th.
Sir James, whose birthday is February 26, plans to lay on a ferry for 400 guests to take them over to France.
Other guests will fly in from around the world.
Then the festivities will get fully underway.
There will be no danger of the champagne running out.
‘James doesn't actually throw that many big parties, but when he does, he makes sure he does it in style,’ says a friend.
Miss Goldsmith is a student at Bristol University reading English.
‘Some of her college friends will be joining the party,’ a fellow undergraduate tells me.
Daughter of Sir James's third wife, the former Lady Annabel Birley, Miss Goldsmith is keen on horse riding and has won prizes.
Sir James, who although a Tory supporter was knighted in Harold Wilson's resignation honours in 1976, has seven children by three wives.
His daughter by his first marriage, Isabel, 38, and his brother, Teddy, 64, are environmentalists.
Sir James himself has become preoccupied with Green issues.
He owns a 16,000 acre estate in Mexico, a mansion in Surrey and homes in London, Paris and New York.
Anglo-French, he is half Jewish, half Roman Catholic.
After leaving Eton, he built up interests in food, clothing, pharmaceuticals, shops, mining and forestry.
‘Goldsmith is a master of timing.
He sold all his shares before Black Monday in 1987,’ says a City analyst.
US President-elect Bill Clinton has been awarded an Honorary Fellowship from University College, Oxford, where he studied in 1968 and '69.
And…
By Tim Satchell
AT a Boxing Day meet in Torrington, Devon, the royal separation was strongly debated.
One elderly farmer said: ‘I never did go much on Princess Diana.
Always looking up through her eyelashes.
If a horse did that, I'd know he was a bad 'un.’
An-ice way to banish Misery
By Tim Satchell
CAGNEY and Lacey actress Sharon Gless, who is currently in London starring in Misery at the Criterion, has treated her colleagues at the theatre to her favourite Haagen-Dazs ice cream.
Miss Gless, 49, who last year married Cagney and Lacey creator Barney Rosenzweig, ordered 10 medium tubs of chocolate ice cream.
Each costs £3.85, for about a pint.
She asked that the supply be delivered to the theatre in Piccadilly.
‘We often have famous people in here as we have a good location,’ says the store manager of the recently opened Kings Road branch.
‘Robin Williams, Paula Yates, Will Carling and Jane Asher have all come in.’
A big night in the Big Apple
By Tim Satchell
ACTRESS Minnie Driver, who tonight stars with Bill Paterson and Sinead Cusack in Channel 4's premiere of the film God On The Rocks, has flown off to see in 1993 in New York.
‘My sister Kate works in the film business as a production assistant out there,’ she tells me.
‘I'm going to have a general look round and meet agents.’
Miss Driver, 22, has appeared in the television series Lovejoy, House of Eliott, Casualty and Kinsey, and has only just returned from Budapest — filming a Maigret adventure.
‘I play a nightclub dancer who gets strangled,’ she says.
In February, by contrast, she is to be one of Mr Wroe's Virgins in BBC2's serialisation of the Jane Rogers novel about a 19th-century religious sect.
Charles's beach treat
By Tim Satchell
THE Prince of Wales has given generous presents to his Highgrove staff.
Handyman Paddy Whiteland and his wife had an all expenses paid two weeks holiday in Spain, including a Royal car to the airport.
Sisters Mary and Joan Baker also went on the trip.
Joan, who supervised Highgrove and Princess Anne's Gatcombe Park household laundry with her sister until their retirement, says: ‘The Prince has always been very kind.’
Kevin Eason
I SYMPATHISE with Kevin Eason after his car accident but it's a pity he didn't mention the fire brigade whose members help save thousands of lives on our roads.
Miners rights
THE courts have ruled that miners' rights were ignored by the Government and the pit closures were illegal.
Let the judges now rule on our right to vote on Maastricht.
Sheffield Council
HOW can Sheffield Council question Sunday trading?
If it attracts customers then it is the key to economic recovery.
Store decorations
WHILE driving through London I saw store decorations being removed.
Do retailers think that Christmas ends on December 24?
What happened to the 12 days of Christmas?
Exiled from unholy land
I CANNOT judge the rights and wrongs of this interminable conflict between Israelis and Palestinians.
But I do recognise barbarity and inhumanity when I see them.
The 415 Moslems expelled by Israel do not deserve to starve in a freezing no man's land, no matter what crimes they have or have not committed.
And if they are criminals, Israel has no right to push them over the border into a neighbouring land.
How would we feel if France started putting its criminals in boats and sending them over the Channel to us?
Israel has gone too far this time.
Exiled from unholy land
ISRAEL is a tiny land forced to fight time and again for life.
While there may be Arab people who honestly desire peace, the world must realise that Israel only survives by putting fear into its enemies.
Church must capture spirit of the Nineties
I WAS rather intrigued to read that the Church of England intends to launch a TV advertising campaign next month.
How ironical that in some aspects the Church is entering the modern world, but in so many other ways it is still stuck in the past.
The reaction to female ministers is a prime example of how the Church is only now entering the 20th Century kicking and screaming.
It still preaches old-fashioned family values, rather than rolling up its sleeves and doing something to help the single-parent families and the thousands of homeless who exist on Britain's streets.
It also tells us how bad drugs are, when surely it would be better to try to cure the poor unfortunates who are under the curse of drug addiction.
These are the worries of the modern world, and a Church being seen to tackle these problems head-on would be a much better image-builder than 10 TV ads trying to entice people into church on Sundays.
Church must capture spirit of the Nineties
HOW sad that the Church of England has to resort to advertising as a way of encouraging people to attend services.
In my younger days the Church was the very heart of the community, and was always the place to bump into friends and family.
I hope the advertising campaign is a success.
Kevin's bad bet
WELL done to the residents of Deadwood, South Dakota, who are fighting Kevin Costner's £25 million plan to make their town a gambler's paradise.
The only certain bet is that crime and misery always follow gambling.
If Costner loves Deadwood so much, he should leave it alone.
Rent rather than buy
IT seems that home-owners are now being told they can save Pounds 2,000 a year if they rent rather than buy a property.
I just hope fallen tycoon Trevor Deaves gets the message — it will save the DSS paying £1,883 a week for the mortgage on his million-pound mansion.
Milestones
BIRTHDAYS: Singer Marianne Faithfull, 46.
Actor Jon Voight, 54.
Show-jumper Harvey Smith, 54.
Cricketer David Boon, 32.
ON THIS DAY: In 1940, London's Guildhall was destroyed in an air raid.
In 1845, Texas became the 28th state of the Union.
Things you didn't know you didn't know
Graeme Donald
THE name of the current month shows in its Latin origins that it used to be the 10th month of the year, not the 12th.
Similarly September, October and November used to be the seventh, eighth and ninth months, and March was the first month of the year according to the old Julian calendar instituted in 46BC.
Some time later January and February were invented and incorporated into the year.
This caused everything to move forward two places to make room.
To Romans, January was sacred to Janus, the two-faced god of doorways and harbours and guard of those coming and going.
The modern janitor is given that title for having the keys to all doors in a building.
As god of the harbour, Janus was better known as Portunus.
Our word ‘opportunity’ is based on a ship being ‘ob portunus’, about to enter port and trade cargo.
TODAY'S Book Of Things You Didn't Know…is now on sale, published by Simon & Schuster for £3.99.
Police need self defence
THERE is no doubting the bravery and commitment of police constable Leslie Harrison.
But it is appropriate to ask whether the brutal attack on her would have happened if she had been armed with the kind of baton the Home Secretary has banned.
Yesterday the Merseyside Police Federation Chairman, George Crichton, said that PC Harrison would have been better able to defend herself if she had been armed with an American-style side handled baton.
Plans for British police forces to test the batons were cancelled by the Home Secretary, Kenneth Clarke, after American police used them on Rodney King during the videotaped attack which sparked the Los Angeles riots.
The Home Secretary believes that the batons would make British police seem aggressive.
But if they were used only after proper training and in self-defence, how can that be construed as unprovoked aggression?
Anything that can prevent the kind of attack suffered by PC Harrison is worth using, at least on a trial basis.
The Home Secretary should reconsider his decision.
British policemen and women must be given the chance to defend themselves.
Table talk
THE Government is very keen on issuing league tables.
First schools and now women employed by Government departments, and sex crimes.
This is the Citizen's Charter in action and we have no objection to the public being given more information.
But if the Government thinks that the public is gullible enough to be happy with a table or two every now and again, it is quite wrong.
There is only one good reason to issue information and that is as a basis for action.
Two important issues emerge from today's sex crimes statistics.
The first is that the figures are indeed horrifying.
No woman can take her personal safety for granted and every parent must instill into their children the need to be vigilant and sensible.
But taking care is not enough to stop the kind of terrible crimes that are so often carried out by people who are truly evil or sick.
That is the second point: that the British criminal justice system is failing to do anything to stop these crimes.
Women and children must be protected from sex offenders and that means imposing heavy prison sentences which do not merely recognise the degree of hurt the offenders have inflicted, but which keep them off Britain's streets.
The new Criminal Justice Act was designed to cut costs by punishing people within the community rather than in prison.
As a result judges award far too many soft sentences — the seven years given to Dr Tom Courtney for two rapes and two indecent assaults is by no means the only example.
Magistrates also fail when they give bail to dangerous men who are likely to reoffend.
And far too many sex offenders are released from prison when experts know that they are likely to strike again.
The feverish spewing-out of statistics in the name of the Citizen's Charter is a poor apology for the Government's failure to control these appalling crimes.
Two cheers
THE shops are full and estate agents report a healthy upsurge in the number of people looking at properties.
Both are signs that maybe the recession is past its worst.
Dare we hope that we can look forward to better times with a little confidence?
That is what Britain needs as we move into what we all want, a really Happy New Year.
Why there will never be a Lord Dodd of Knotty Ash
Chris Hutchins
SHOULD Des O'Connor have suffered sleepless nights wondering whether he will wake up tomorrow to discover that Ken Dodd has become Lord Dodd, I have some words of consolation.
Don't worry Des, it will never happen.
When the New Year's Honours List is published, Britons will learn once again that the snob system is functioning as it always has.
Comedians and sportsmen, who are mostly from a working-class backround, will be limited to the OBEs, MBEs and CBEs.
Those with a touch more class — middle that is — will gladly grab their knighthoods and damehoods.
But it is the real powerbrokers, the businessmen and the politicians, who top the honours list and take their pay offs in peerages.
There is no more danger of a stand-up comedian entering the House of Lords (some may argue that there are already plenty there) than there was of the British Airways boss (Lord) John King being fobbed off with a mere MBE.
Those who manipulate these trite accolades occasionally throw their critics off the scent by making exceptions in the middle-ground category — such as Sir Stanley Matthews, Sir Len Hutton and Sir Jimmy Savile.
But basically they dish out their awards in accordance with strata of society — influential architect Richard Rogers got a knighthood — rather than genuine appreciation for the good the recipients have done their country.
The system goes something like this.
Peerages are for those who control industry, politics and the media and who invariably were educated at the top public schools.
Retiring BBC chairman Sir Marmaduke Hussey might well have managed one this time around.
Knighthoods go to the class acts, the Andrew Lloyd Webbers of this world, as well as the dull but self-important people who have merely turned up at their desks in Whitehall for enough years.
Of the former criteria, arts broadcaster Melvyn Bragg could be on this weekend's list.
For the rest, it is merely letters after the name rather than a title before it.
You don't even have to change your cheque book.
Actor David Jason is a likely candidate for one of these.
In reality Jason has done more to keep Britain's spirits up during these recessionary times than any Whitehall bureaucrat and raised more for charity than our greedy captains of industry.
The honours list simply shores up Britain's class system guaranteeing that those with grand hereditary titles remain at the top of the heap.
In addition to its class prejudice in what John Major promised would be a classless society, the system is outrageously abused by the government of the day.
It is a shameless form of payola for those who have helped a political party to get elected.
Of the industrialists given peerages by Mrs (oops, sorry, Baroness) Thatcher during her 11 years in control of the system, seven out of ten were from private sector companies which had donated to the Conservative Party.
Their firms' donations throughout her period of office, admitted in company accounts, totalled more than £4,380,000.
Fifty-four more companies — just over a third — giving to the governing party were thanked with knighthoods.
Such political use of the honours makes it all the more imperative that its class system is maintained.
After all, the chairman of a transport conglomerate which had tipped hundreds of thousands into party funds would not thank a prime minister who gave him the same reward as a Blackpool entertainer.
On the subject of titles, none could be grander than those of princess or duchess, yet this year's events in the Royal Family have totally devalued such privileged labels.
Could you really address Princess Diana as ‘Your Royal Highness’ after hearing her babble on for 20 minutes to a man who calls her Squidgy?
And by all accounts no one but Fergie's stepmother even bothers curtseying to the disgraced Duchess of York since she was photographed topless and having her toes sucked by her money man.
But perhaps the royal sisters-in-law have done us all a favour by chipping away at these hypocritical accolades.
The rest of Europe laughs at the feudal system that most of them got rid of centuries ago.
Says a German publisher: ‘Britain's class system does more to hold back its real entrepreneurs than anything else.
‘As long as you have all these lords and ladies lodged at the top of the heap, no one else can break through except those they allow in.
‘Your country's old-boy network holds it back a century.’
Camilla more popular than Diana
Liz Moore
PRINCE Charles's friend Camilla Parker Bowles has achieved what Diana lost years ago…popularity in the baby naming game.
For the first time Camilla has made the top 20 in the 1992 league table of Christian names, entering the spotlight at No 13.
Meanwhile Diana, who has not figured regularly in up-market births col-umns since the Fifties, again fails to make a mark.
Charles, a solid top 10 performer for years, this time lies in sixth position and another name with royal links, William, comes third.
For the first time in many years in the annual survey of births columns, James has been ousted from top spot by Thomas.
George beats Alexander to fourth position.
When it comes to the girls, Charlotte is still the most popular choice followed by Emily, Sophie and Lucy.
Newly fashionable are Rosie, Henrietta and Louisa.
But there's another blow for the Queen as Elizabeth plunges to 18th place.
The real state of the union
By Jane Gordon
THE small ad in The Times' Golden Anniversary column this week was refreshingly honest.
It read: ‘Toye — Les and Peg.
50 years of internecine warfare and still no armistice.
Commiserations to Fincham, Norfolk.’
Les and Peg seemed to have uncovered a simple truth which has evaded so many of us.
That marriage, rather like life, is not perfect.
Most of us spend our lives believing that the best marriages are those rare unions where two hearts really do beat as one.
Whereas, in fact, many of the longest-lasting marriages are those between people who exist in perpetual conflict.
Perhaps more of us would have accepted that marriage was not necessarily a licence for eternal happiness if those in the position to influence us — such as agony aunt Marje Proops — had been as honest as Mr and Mrs Toye.
But Marje, we discovered last week, lived a double life for over 20 years, privately despising her husband while publicly referring to him as ‘Proopsie’.
It's unfair to blame Ms Proops for our current one-in-three divorce rate.
But I can't help but feel that her duplicity has contributed to the nation's unrealistic belief that marriage should be perfect.
When actually, as Marje and the Toyes know, it rarely is.
Political football
By Jane Gordon
HAVE you noticed how the Chancellor is sounding more and more like England football manager Graham Taylor.
His latest excuse — that the recession is masking the success of the economy — is the equivalent of ‘we only lost because they scored more goals’.
Future excuses could be ‘our name wasn't on the cup’‘we had possession but we couldn't convert’ or ‘the ball wouldn't go in the net’.
Fragile face of a child-woman
By Jane Gordon
THERE was something particularly touching about the picture of murdered teenager Johanna Young that dominated newspaper front pages this week.
Her hauntingly beautiful face seemed to perfectly encompass the vulnerability of adolescence.
At 14 a girl is no longer a child and not quite a woman.
Moody, sensitive and sometimes secretive she is at the same time a little girl needing to be cuddled and a teenager requiring her own space.
Helping her to progress from the infant she was to the adult she will become is, I believe, the hardest task of parenting.
Caring for babies or smaller children can be physically taxing and occasionally irritating but it is not as emotionally demanding a job as protecting and nurturing an adolescent.
And not just because as teenagers it is no longer that easy to keep them safely by your side.
By turns a 14-year-old is silent then outspoken, affectionate then agressive, questioning then dismissive, morose then amusing.
They can be mercenary then generous, charitable then selfish, sophisticated and then infantile.
They can be the best friend you have ever had in the world at one moment and an indifferent stranger the next.
And the worst of it is that, unlike the small child, they have learnt so many of the tricks of the adult world: How to play on parental guilt, how to manipulate, how to hide their real feelings and how to convince those that love them most that they are ‘OK, honestly, mum’ when actually they are consumed with anxiety and doubt.
It isn't that difficult then to imagine how Johanna's parents found themselves on Christmas Eve in the position they did — unsure whether their daughter was with her friends or in terrible danger.
There can of course be no comfort for Mr and Mrs Young as they come to terms with their tragedy.
But at least for the rest of us Johanna's lovely face will serve as a terrible reminder that our teenage daughters — however self-sufficient they might seem — are probably more at peril as they blossom into womanhood than they ever were as little girls.
Nice job, pity you have to marry it
By Jane Gordon
A COUPLE of weeks ago in the busy London evening rush hour I came across Britain's hardest-working Royal travelling to another demanding job.
As four fierce police motor cyclists held back commuting commoners with the aid of rather frightening piercing whistles and violent hand gestures, a flotilla of glossy limousines swept past.
Inside the central car, dressed in a sparkling gown and tiara, sat Princess Anne on her way to some lavish dinner.
Nice work if you can get it, I thought as the tail lights of her Daimler (or was it a Rolls?) disappeared into the night.
I mention this because the annual list detailing the working year of the Royals is published this week.
And while the Princess Royal — with 471 official engagements — might be judged the hardest-working Royal, can she really, on your or my terms, be considered a workhorse?
What, after all, does a working royal day involve?
Being bundled up and escorted from old peoples home to movie premiere, from infant school to racecourse, from hospital to Cup final.
The only real job requirements, as viewers of this week's repeat of Elizabeth R will have noticed, are the ability to smile, nod your head sympathetically and offer the occasional bland comment.
Indeed as a job description I'd say that ‘member of the Royal Family’ could sound rather appealing.
And should the current two vacancies within the Windsor firm find themselves listed at the local Job Centre it's impossible to calculate how many of the nation's three million unemployed might apply.
Imagine it: ‘Situations Vacant — Princess Of Wales/Duchess of York: Openings exist for two senior positions within a challenging organisation.
Applicants — preferably female — must be well-mannered and presentable.
No specific qualifications necessary although a good speaking voice, a love of horses and an interest in charitable works are an advantage.
‘Successful applicants will be expected to travel extensively and meet a wide variety of people.
Salary package includes a considerable income, five-star personal accommodation, as many frocks as you can wear, a company limousine and at least ten weeks holiday a year.
‘Promotion to top slot within firm possible within a few years.
Apply in writing to Buckingham Palace, SW1 inclosing SAE and a recent photograph.’
Of course there is one job specification that wouldn't appear in the ads for these particular vacancies.
It certainly put off the previous incumbants and could be the one snag for any new applicants.
When you weigh it up, would any amount of perks make up for the fact that joining this particular firm involves waking up next to the Prince of Wales or the Duke of York?
Ads carry a weighty message
By Jane Gordon
THERE is something horribly cyclical about television advertising.
For at least a month before Christmas we were subjected to an endless barrage of ads for fattening festive foods.
And for at least a month afterwards we'll be pummelled by a series of commercials for regimes and products guaranteed to take off ‘at least seven pounds in seven days’.
Indeed, if there is one thing surer than a pre-Christmas ad for turkey stuffed with Paxo it's a post-Christmas campaign for yet another Rosemary Conley thin-thigh theory.
(Surely, Rosemary, it's time to hang up that leotard?)
As I said to my husband only last night (just after I had eaten my miserable Lean Cuisine but just before I finished the box of Black Magic): ‘Isn't it terrible the way we allow advertisers to manipulate us?’
Sons shine with Charles
By Jane Gordon
IT was heartening to see those intimate pictures of Prince Charles with his sons on Christmas morning.
At last there seemed to be a visible bond between them.
I would hate to find myself part of any anti-Diana conspiracy, but it did cross my mind that some of her critics were right when they claimed that she deliberately sought to dominate family photographs.
With Diana out of the picture, Charles is emerging as a fitting father figure.
Fear of rape that stalks our big cities
Paul Wilenius
Figures released for the first time by the Home Office prove our city streets are more dangerous for women than lonely country roads.
The table below, for 12 months to June, shows where they are at risk.
AREA RAPE SEX ATTACKS TOTAL
1
Met London 1,143 3,128 4,271
2
West Midlands 195 888 1,083
3
Greater Manchester 225 825 1,050
4
West Yorkshire 195 812 1,007
5
Hampshire 133 626 759
6
Nottinghamshire 110 630 740
7
Kent 147 543 690
8
Thames Valley 111 543 654
9
Humberside 75 497 572
10
Northumbria 102 426 528
11
Merseyside 88 402 490
12
Sussex 73 414 487
13
Devon and Cornwall 59 394 453
14
Avon and Somerset 94 352 446
15
South Yorkshire 70 363 433
16
Essex 77 329 406
17
South Wales 88 282 370
18
Lancashire 48 291 339
19
Staffordshire 55 273 328
20
Surrey 38 271 309
21
Cambridgeshire 66 243 309
22
Derbyshire 43 239 282
23
Durham 51 228 279
24
Cheshire 41 234 275
25
West Mercia 53 220 273
26
Norfolk 59 207 266
27
Wiltshire 63 201 264
28
Leicestershire 38 220 258
29
Suffolk 69 185 254
30
Dorset 43 199 242
31
Gloucestershire 37 199 236
32
Hertfordshire 46 187 233
33
North Wales 51 181 232
34
Cleveland 57 174 231
35
Dyfed-Powys 46 173 219
36
Bedfordshire 52 154 206
37
Gwent 44 155 199
38
Northamptonshire 35 144 179
39
Lincolnshire 36 142 178
40
Cumbria 20 119 139
41
Warwickshire 19 104 123
42
North Yorkshire 15 107 122
43
City of London 0 20 20
WOMEN face a greater risk of being raped or sexually assaulted in the South and big cities, according to worrying new figures.
The biggest danger is in London where there were 1,143 rapes in the 12 months to June this year.
The next worst streets of fear are in Birmingham and Manchester.
Official Home Office figures, released for the first time, show parts of the South have far more sex crimes than the North or East of England.
Hampshire, Kent, and the Thames Valley are among the worst 10.
The streets of North Yorkshire and Warwickshire are some of the safest.
The Home Office has previously only given national rape statistics and none on indecent assaults, fearing it would increase women's worries.
Now minister Michael Jack has produced figures showing the Metropoli-tan Police area of London is the rape capital of the UK.
There were 4,271 sex crimes in the year to June.
Police fear many more were not reported.
In the West Midlands, there were 195 rapes and 888 sex assaults.
Greater Manchester saw more rapes with 225, but fewer sex attacks.
Another dangerous area is West Yorkshire, with 195 rapes and 812 sex assaults over the same period.
Also in the worst 10 are Nottinghamshire, Humberside and Northumbria.
While Sussex, Avon and Somerset, and Surrey are among the most dangerous 20 counties, the built-up area of Cleveland is near the bottom of the list with 57 rapes and 174 sex attacks.
My guilt and my lover, by Marje
IT was the guilt of living a lie for 50 years that forced agony aunt Marje Proops into confessing her secret love affair.
‘The guilt was becoming too great to bear,’ she has confessed.
Marje now admits that her carefully nurtured image has been torn apart by revelations from a new biography.
Why did she agree to have it written?
Because, she said, she simply wanted to be honest.
Her secrets are revealed in the book, Marje: The Guilt And The Gingerbread by Angela Patmore.
It tells of her loveless marriage to her husband Sidney — whom she called Proopsie — and her 30-year-affair with a colleague, newspaper lawyer Phillip Levy.
Now the agony aunt, in her mid-seventies, has revealed the emotional trauma of confessing the ‘sin’ of the two men in her life, now both dead.
She found her husband Sidney sexually repulsive.
She spoke of him affectionately in public, and few guessed the coldness she felt towards him.
Only the fear that he might win custody of their son Robert held the marriage together.
Marje found the love she so desperately needed, and true happiness, in the arms of Levy.
Marje wept as she opened her heart during interviews for the biography.
‘I would howl my eyes out,’ she said.
‘You do re-live all the old torture and horror and despair.
‘It was probably the most painful experience I have ever had, going back through this life, this long life, which has not been the tranquil, easy existence people assume it to be.’
Marje adds: ‘If you live a double life of lies and deception as I did for years and years, you need to speak about it eventually.
‘In the same way as some people might go to church and seek absolution, accepting that I have confessed to these sins makes me feel better.
‘I haven't had an abortion but apart from that there is barely a problem that I haven't had.’
She adds: ‘I lay awake at nights wondering whether I was going to be honest.
‘Finally I decided to tell all.’
She has few regrets, now that the truth is out.
Marje says: ‘When I first read the book, it seemed like fiction.
‘It could have been about anyone.
‘It was only when a few of the details were released that I realised it was me.
My life that I had exposed.
‘And then I began to ask myself the questions all over again.
Should I have done it?
Was I wrong?
Was I foolish?
‘And then I decided the answer was no.’
When she told Robert that she was going to confess her dark secret, his reaction was to ask if she expected criticism.
‘I said I did and he simply replied that they should get a short, sharp answer,’ she said.
Marje is pleased that she has Robert's understanding.
She hopes, too, that her confessions will not damage her relationship with the grandchildren she adores, Anya, a 23-year-old student, and Daniel, 24, who is an artist.
Marje says: ‘I think I'm not so different from my readers, who write and say they have brutal husbands, and how they are beaten night after night by drunken swine who abuse them in every way and yet they still go on living with them.
‘I write back and ask why.
‘They say that they have nowhere else to go, but I know that facing the world on their own would be even more frightening.’
She reveals that she has always carried a photograph of Levy in her handbag and still does so today.
‘I would have done nothing differently,’ Marje says.
‘I would have changed nothing.’
Just one anxiety lingers.
Marje is uncertain whether her husband ever knew of her infidelity.
‘If Proopsie knew, I regret any pain I caused him,’ she says.
‘I don't think he did know, although Robert believes he did.’
It is the one anxiety Marje Proops will carry with her to the grave.
One of Marje's secrets remains — that of her age.
Hugh Cudlipp, the newspaper baron who launched her on her career, advised her never to say how old she was.
‘One day, he would tell me, I would be in the record books and so I should remain ageless.
‘It was part of Hugh's invention of me.’
Mike takes his free mornings lying down
By Tim Satchell
WHAT next for Mike Morris, TV-am's genial co-host, who tomorrow morning presides over his last breakfast show?
He, alone among the TV-am presenters, has yet to find a new position.
Mr Morris, 45, who has served for 10 years at TV-am's Camden Lock headquarters, says: ‘I'm going to have a lie-in in the morning and then a holiday for a couple of weeks somewhere sunny.’
He tells me: ‘Quite frankly after 10 years on shift work I'm looking forward to a bit of a break.
I've had a couple of nice chats with the people at GMTV, but I told them I wasn't in a hurry to decide what I would do next and frankly I don't envy the people who are going straight on to another show.’
He says his pay-off has left him comfortable, although he will eventually want to find a new career, possibly even returning to journalism.
‘A blank page is rather exciting,’ he says.
Among other things he plans to spend more time gardening at his home in Bookham, Surrey, where he lives with his wife Alison and two teenage daughters.
The famous TV-am sofa is to go to the Museum Of The Moving Image on London's South Bank, but staff and contributors have been invited to put in sealed bids for everything else.
There are many splendid things to acquire, including the equipment from the recently installed gymnasium with its rowing machine and computer print-out, so you can envisage yourself sculling on the Thames.
When the gym was recently installed managing director Bruce Gyngell said: ‘We may all be out of work, but at least we'll be in peak condition.’
Congratulations to Leicester East MP Keith Vaz, 36, who is to marry City immigration solicitor Maria Fernandes, 26, in a Roman Catholic ceremony at Westminster in the New Year.
Football enthusiast Mr Vaz, also a solicitor, met Kenyan-born Miss Fernandes in August.
Haydn's back at the double
By Tim Satchell
HAYDN Gwynne is to play two lead roles in the London version of the hit Broadway musical City Of Angels, which opens in the West End at the end of March.
The Tony Award winning show, written by MASH's Larry Gelbart with music by Cy Coleman and directed by Michael Blakemore, combines the world of 1940s private eye films and musical comedy.
Miss Gwynne, 30, will play Oolie, the private detective's secretary and Donna, the movie mogul's secretary.
A former lecturer at the University of Rome and fluent in French and Italian, Miss Gwynne, currently seen in the advert for Cadbury's Secret, made her name as Alex in Channel 4's Drop The Dead Donkey and Robyn in BBC's Nice Work.
ACTION Man is back!
Born in 1964, but out of production since 1984, this once all-conquering hero will be re-emerging in late February, ready to do battle with upstart Thunderbirds and other toytown insurgents.
In keeping with the interventionist Nineties Action Man will come complete with ‘peace-keeping weaponry’, electronic battle lights and sound synthesizers, a far cry from the original GI Joe with his battle-scarred right cheek.
Standing a magnificent 12 inches high, Action Man looks set to see off Ken — Barbie's beau — who stands just 11½ inches tall.
And…
By Tim Satchell
I HEAR that Esso are planning a new petrol for 1993 that will ‘put a rabbit in your tank’.
It's designed for short hops.
Struggle will win reward
Penny Thornton
ARIES — A YEAR dominated by Uranus, Neptune, Saturn and Pluto cannot be easy, and Arieans must expect to face some difficulties and setbacks somewhere along the line.
However, you will also have more than your share of compensations.
The passage of Jupiter through your opposite sign will bring opportunities to expand your field of experience, whether through career or your personal life.
And with Venus in your own sign between February 2 and June 6, there has to be more love and fulfilment around than for some time.
Then again, if it is not love that puts a bit of sparkle in your life, it will be some other form of much sought after success or happiness.
This is a year when your struggles pay off, a year when you go places and find real togetherness.
Penny is on line for your Aries year ahead on 0839 444 561.
CAREER
EXPECT changes, changes and yet more changes, especially if you were born between April 8 and 12.
While you should continue to work steadfastly towards your goals, never allowing a sense of defeat to interfere with your long-term ambitions, you must anticipate some devious manoeuvres on the part of others and some strange developments — even a serious attempt to knock you off your perch.
April is the most challenging month here.
Recognition, success and fulfilment can be yours — but don't expect an easy ride.
And be prepared to change your job or to branch out into more unusual and stimulating areas.
MONEY
YOU are capable of earning more than enough money, but you are hopeless at budgeting or saving.
1993 offers opportunities to increase your bank balance, particularly in May and June.
But if you have to manage on meagre resources, you will cope well.
Avoid over-spending in the first half of the year and set aside as much as you possibly can in the event of any tax demands or unexpected large financial outlays later.
The main problem appears to lie in joint arrangements.
Either a partner has financial troubles, which means you must take greater responsibility, or someone you have an emotional or financial link with will make it hard for you to enjoy the fruits of success.
HOME LIFE
WITH your ruler Mars in this area of your chart until April 27 you can expect a lot of activity on the home front.
House moves are possible, as are additions to the family.
July is the most likely month for major changes regarding the home itself and within the family unit.
The first four months of 1993 could be a tricky time for family relationships and an acrimonious parting of the ways cannot be ruled out — even if it is just a temporary estrangement.
Stand up for your rights, Aries, but don't dig your toes in so much that you create more problems for yourself.
RELATIONSHIPS
THIS is the most outstanding area of life for you in 1993.
Existing relationships can only get better, although those at breaking point will be unlikely to make it through the year — at least not without an awful lot of work and sacrifice.
And is it worth it, you must ask yourself.
1993 is a year to really find the right person, so it may be that an unsatisfactory relationship has to go in order for the appropriate one to come in.
Marriage is on the horizon or meeting that special individual.
Late April, May, October and November are especially important for relationship matters, and with Venus in your sign between February 2 and June 6, you really are primed to fall in love.
Just don't be too impetuous and put too much pressure on the object of your desires.
Taking life by the horns
Penny Thornton
TAURUS — WE HAVE to be realistic about 1993.
This is a difficult year for the world as a whole, so Taureans must expect their fair share of pressure.
What you have going for you is the ability to withstand whatever is dished up and to come out on the winning side.
Saturn and Pluto are almost single-handedly responsible for presenting you with obstacles, and late March and early October are times when they are most active in your chart.
All Taureans, especially those of you born between May 9 and 17, will find life easier if you let go of the past without a struggle and become open to different avenues of opportunity.
New and better frontiers can be claimed from November onwards.
Consider each impasse that you meet as a stepping stone along the path to eventual happiness and fulfilment.
Penny is on line for your Taurus year ahead on 0839 444 562.
CAREER
SATURN remains in the area of ambitions and career matters for most of the year, so this looks like being a time when hard work will pay off later rather than sooner.
You could reach a position of authority, although there seems to be some cost in personal terms.
Your success could be resented by others, which may mean that you have to fight for dear life to hang on to what you've got, or there will be little time to enjoy your personal or social life.
1993 is a time to put everything you've got into your career and ambitions, even if it means sacrificing some fun.
By the end of the year, when you will have established your platform and built some security for yourself, you will be free to enjoy the fruits of life.
MONEY
YOUR earning potential is greater in 1993, so in theory there should be fewer problems with money and material security.
But because of the general economic climate, you may still feel as though you must manage on a tight budget.
July and November are good months for money matters.
Major investments can be made, particularly at these times, bearing in mind that what you pay out will bring you great dividends in the future.
Cutting back on credit is absolutely essential to your financial well-being — and avoid keeping all your money in one place.
HOME LIFE
THE property market will continue to be depressed through 1993, although this is not a reason for you to become depressed.
If you are in fluid situation house-wise, you could make the purchase of a lifetime.
But otherwise a move could prove tricky and rather protracted.
Ideally, you would be better waiting until the end of the year before selling and buying.
The family scene may not be as smooth as silk — but is it ever?
Teenagers could test your patience and older members of the family may add to the problem, either by interfering or because of their own situations.
You role will be that of diplomat.
August and September are times of peak changes and of arrivals and departures.
RELATIONSHIPS
THIS is a crucial year for your relationships in general and your love life in particular.
Other people are likely to have a transformative effect on your existence, in some cases influencing your career.
It seems that those you become closest to this year will act as teachers for you.
Some lessons will be a joy, others frankly a bit of a pain.
Power struggles are not out of the question and, if you are single, you may be drawn into a passionate, even obsessive liaison.
There will be some powerful alliances made and shattered in 1993.
Watch out in June, September and November.
Total eclipse of the heart
Penny Thornton
GEMINI — THREE eclipses in your sign in May, June and November portend a year of life-changing and perhaps life-enhancing events for Geminis.
And even if you have never believed in the compelling force of destiny, you should develop considerably more respect for it by the end of 1993.
Fate's twists and turns will bring some new players on to the scene and possibly even a whole new game plan.
In many ways, this is a year of great contrasts — in some areas you will face restrictions, in others expansion.
You will have reality thrust upon you in regard to long-term objectives and will need to be far more structured in your thinking and planning.
The expansion you will face in 1993 could well be on the creative front, making this an ideal year to go into production or take on a major commitment.
Penny is on line for your Gemini year ahead on 0839 444 563.
CAREER
KEY months concerning your future as a whole will be February, May to June, September and December.
It is at these times that fate may appear to step in and take over the proceedings.
You are a sign well able to juggle several balls at once so in many ways the volatile planetary climate could suit you down to the ground.
You need to keep your options open in order to change courses at a moment's notice.
It is also wiser not to treat every offer as an 18-carat-gold certainty.
Remember it's not what you know that counts, but who.
Creativity pays off in 1993.
This is a year when you could realise the attractions of being self-employed.
If you have become disenchanted with the run of the mill, go into something more artistic or unorthodox.
MONEY
THERE is a strong accent on getting your financial house in order.
Up until April, you have Mars giving you the incentive to earn more and to stand up for yourself whenever the threat of a monetary show-down appears over the horizon.
Joint interests could cause you more concern than anything else and you may feel that a partner has bungled matters here.
In keeping with the career pattern of your chart, it seems as though money will come in from a variety of sources.
But you must watch for underhand dealings, if not deception, in early April and July.
HOME LIFE
IT is this area of life that may see some of the biggest changes of the year, especially around the time of the two eclipses on May 21 and June 4.
Any major developments regarding family and your base in life later in the year — most notably around September 1 and late November — should be traceable to this early summer period.
A change of residence might be welcome, but there will be a certain amount of stress and some nail-biting moments attached to it.
And even if you remain in the same location, you could still feel unsettled.
Don't worry.
Peace will come after the storm.
RELATIONSHIPS
THOSE three major eclipses can be held responsible for the tremendous highs and lows in your love life this year.
The people that we fall in love with, form an emotional bond with or marry are an integral part of our destiny.
That is why there is often a sense of knowing that person already.
The potential for fateful encounters is greater than ever this year, especially during July.
Even existing relationships will face some unusual challenges, some because of external events, others because of a partner's behaviour.
If your heart is open, its desire will be met this year.
Dreams set to come true
Penny Thornton
CANCER — THIS could be one of the most important years in many Cancerians' lives.
The Uranus-Neptune conjunction of February 2, August 20 and October 24 indicates that at one end of the scale your dreams can at last come true, while at the other your illusions will be shattered.
Those with birthdays between July 10 and July 14 are particularly earmarked for a year of turning-points.
It seems as though every area of your life is poised for some new influences, but because of your cautious nature and natural attachment to the past, you may feel somewhat overwhelmed by the rush of momentous events.
Yet in among the periods of sudden change and confusion are some real and remarkable opportunities for increase and advancement, notably regarding your base in life and your standing in the world.
Make the most of them.
Penny is on line for your Cancer year ahead on 0839 444 564.
CAREER
YOU may not be an overtly ambitious sign, but 1993 is a year when you should adopt a very direct approach to your goals.
The more uncertain and defensive you are, the more difficult it will be to attain your objectives.
Despite the recessional climate, your sign is one that can thrive by going into expansion mode.
Until November, the more entrepreneurial spirit you can muster the better.
You have the gods on your side from February until early June.
MONEY
FOR the first half of the year you should have plenty of attack, although you may be on the receiving end of a show of force.
You must avoid being manipulated by other people or letting yourself become too dependent on others for your financial security.
You can manage well on your own if you have the confidence.
March and early September present opportunities for increase, February and August require careful handling.
Once again, a positive attitude triumphs.
HOME LIFE
THIS is one of the most crucial areas of life for Cancer.
Without a happy and secure nest, you feel more than a little crabby.
With Jupiter in Libra until November, this area could be the success story of 1993.
Whether you stay put or move, there is greater happiness and security to be found in your home life.
Mid to late October and early November look the most sensitive times.
RELATIONSHIPS
THE Uranus-Neptune effect is aimed most of all at your one-to-one relationships, so 1993 is potentially a time of both great breakthroughs and disappointing setbacks.
July and August are months to watch, although the whole year is an extraordinary mixture of sunshine and tears.
You must learn to flow with your experience, not make others dance to your tune.
Rise and meet challenge
Penny Thornton
LEO — WITH Saturn still in your opposite sign — albeit at the end of his marathon run — and Pluto muscling in too, this is not a year for faint-hearted Leos.
It is when you and everyone else will realise the stuff of which you are made.
From February, the challenge will have well and truly begun, especially if your birthday falls between August 13 and 23.
You will need to be in top form during March, June, August, October and November.
The challenge is a personal one because no matter what experiences you are fated to meet, it is how you respond to them — what you make of them — that counts.
Although from time to time you may find it hard to believe, this is a year of immense personal growth.
And because of this, there will be attendant material, professional and emotional rewards.
Penny is on line for your Leo year ahead on 0839 444 565.
CAREER
YOU are a determined and talented sign which is why you fear failure so much and resent setbacks.
And to an extent this is why 1993 will be hard at times.
The Saturn-Pluto ‘square’ of March 20 and October 9 will cast a shadow over coming months, making you highly aware of how much influence you can bring to bear and how circumstance and other people can block you.
Bear in mind that a block could indicate you are resisting a radical change of direction.
Travel figures prominently, though it may well apply to the widening of your field of experience.
MONEY
MONEY matters will be either wonderful or seriously fragile.
Save rather than spend.
Others may limit your way so that no matter how promising your situation or how creative you can be with money, you are not free to make the most of it.
Take care in September and October.
HOME LIFE
THIS area of life is also subject to the slings and arrows of Pluto, although his transformative influence is ultimately for the good.
Just remember that, in nature, what is well-pruned invariably produces the most fruit.
This year you must prepare the ground, sort out family relationships and establish a stronger material and financial base.
RELATIONSHIPS
YOU continue to have the pleasure of Saturn in this area for another year.
This planet is the task master of the zodiac so your sunny nature is bound to find Saturn's pressures and responsibilities difficult — it is no fun having so many rude awakenings about human nature.
The up-side is that you have reached a stage where you can make some decisions.
This may mean you are ready to make a long-term commitment.
The down-side may be that you now see without any shadow of doubt that you cannot exist in an emotional or sexual wilderness indefinitely.
The period from May to September is crucial.
Courage will win the day
Penny Thornton
VIRGO — BY THE end of 1993 your life will look very different from the way it does now.
Three eclipses will activate parts of the Virgo horoscope, open your eyes to possibilities and ensure that you get out of any ruts.
In many ways, you will have to throw away the rule book because the tried and tested that you have set so much store by will prove inadequate for the job.
World events will create some of the situations that affect your course.
This you have in common with the rest of the zodiac but Virgos, in particular, will discover aspects and talents within themselves that have not yet seen the light of day.
The year calls for courage, daring and optimism.
With these in place, the long term is looking good, even if the short term proves to be a challenge.
Penny is on line for your Virgo year ahead on 0839 444 566.
CAREER
IF you are a career Virgo, this is probably the area that will see the most interesting developments.
The eclipses of May 21, June 4 and November 29 set in motion changes that could put you in a new professional space by 1994, if not before.
You may have some contact with the media or communications industry.
Although the Saturn-Pluto connection could make work hard and aspects of job hunting depressing, Jupiter is well placed to bring results in terms of both money and reputation.
Aside from the eclipses, January, February and March are key months for professional matters and your personal aspirations.
MONEY
YOU are the only sign with Jupiter in this sector of the horoscope.
And Jupiter spells increase.
Nevertheless, it must be remembered that 1993 is a difficult year for the economy.
On the other hand, there's no reason why you cannot make material gains, particularly if you follow the suggestions earlier to break out of old patterns and courageously go forth into new and uncertain territory.
Joint financial endeavours are blessed, especially between February and June and mid-October and mid-November.
Don't be afraid to cash in policies — banks and financial institutions aren't always as safe as houses.
HOME LIFE
THE eclipses also portend some major events here.
Your job situation, or a partner's, could necessitate a change of location — probably in the second half of the year.
But changes in the home could also come about through the affairs of other family members.
A relative could experience a crisis and it may not be just your emotional support that is needed.
Be prepared to give up your spare bed more than once in 1993.
Parents and children may also be the source of some unexpected developments and there could be a celebration or happy family gathering in June to July or December.
RELATIONSHIPS
YOU should make the most of this year because when Saturn lands in your opposite sign next year, you want to be in as strong a position as possible.
This means taking every opportunity in 1993 to sort out flaws and differences in existing relationships.
Honesty is vital — honesty with yourself about your feelings and honesty with your partner.
Prime times for endings and beginnings will be around the full moons of March 8 and November 16 and the eclipses.
The full moons and the eclipses will seek out the best and worst in your love life.
Love can enter your life this year, but you must be prepared to unlock your heart.
And sometimes that's a risky business.
Uncork the champagne
Penny Thornton
LIBRA -EVERY twelve years, Jupiter makes a transit of Librans' sign — and this is it.
Jupiter is the planet of increase, which is worth considering not in terms of financial and material improvements but in the expansion of your awareness and self-understanding — an expansion which will lead to better things in the future.
So do not be disappointed if you fail to receive a windfall or secure your greatest ambition.
First, you must expand your psyche to accommodate the bigger and better.
Nonetheless, 1993 is a year of promise — albeit in the midst of global difficulties.
Hardly a month goes by without an event having you uncorking the champagne or counting your remaining blessings.
April, May, October and November are the most spectacular months of an extraordinary year.
Penny is on line for your Libra year ahead on 0839 444 567.
CAREER
UNTIL late April there is tremendous activity in your horoscope regarding your goals — both professional and personal.
This is a four-month period when you will need to be incisive and single-minded.
You may not escape some head-on collisions with others, and at times you may feel that this area of life is nothing short of a battleground.
But where there is energy there is life, so it is unlikely that you will be jobless or unsuccessful for long.
July is a significant month for your future, and with Uranus and Neptune involved it may be that you have to put your trust in the universe rather than try to control events.
Keep remembering the Jupiter principle.
MONEY
THE angle between Saturn and Pluto on March 20 and October 9 homes in on the financial sector of your chart.
As a long-term resident in this area, Pluto has the potential to transform your material security — either through your own earning capacity or through inheritance or a partner.
But there is no use pretending the Saturn-Pluto effect will be a piece of cake.
Any debts will have to be repaid which may mean you come under pressure to do so, or it could be that other people will be unable to pay you.
And you must also be careful with property transactions — particularly in the months of March and October.
Trust yourself first and financial institutions second.
HOME LIFE
URANUS and Neptune have been trundling through this part of your chart for some time which may explain all the false starts, not to mention the general instability.
The two planets meet on February 2, August 20 and October 24.
The implication of this is that something that is no longer capable of supporting you — this may involve beliefs and people as much as material structures — will fall by the wayside.
The strange factor is that what may evoke this process could be a rather wonderful event, perhaps linked to a relationship or career matter.
July is also important for home and family matters.
RELATIONSHIPS
WITH Venus in your house of relationships between February 2 and June 6, how can you go wrong?
If you are heart-free and not at all stuck in your ways, then 1993 could produce the most stunning liaison.
And if you are blissfully happy in your relationship, even if the odd unexpected event occurs, you can only become more united.
But because of the general volatility of the astrology, anything that is weak will wilt under the pressure.
Jupiter's principle of expansion will apply to partnerships so that you can add to the relationship in some way or you will find your self-esteem rocketing because you are adored.
Watch April, May, October and November.
Let fate take its course
Penny Thornton
SCORPIO — YOU are a sign renowned for your strength, loyalty and resourcefulness.
And you will need all three of these Scorpio qualities in triplicate for 1993.
Not that this cannot be one of the most achievement-full years of your life — for indeed it can.
What makes this year so outstanding is that your ruling planet, Pluto, makes a 90-degree angle to Saturn — something that hasn't happened for 20 years.
Aside from this speaking volumes about the worldwide potential for struggle and conflict on the one hand and great reform on the other, it says a lot about your capacity to triumph over the circumstances that you meet.
And with your remarkable gifts, you may be drawn into situations that you had never dreamed possible.
Penny is on line for your Scorpio year ahead on 0839 444 568.
CAREER
SCORPIOS may not like to appear outwardly ambitious but you set yourself specific goals and work relentlessly towards them regardless of the opposition.
You can be truly successful this year, especially if you have learned to diversify at the same time as pursuing the well-beaten track to your objectives.
What you may have to take into consideration is the well-being of companies or individuals you are dependent on for your future.
This is a year when fate is in the ascendancy and you will have to bend with every light breeze or every hurricane.
March, May-June and October are powerful times for your ambitions.
Stand by your principles but don't waste time on lost causes.
MONEY
IN May, June and November three eclipses falling in the money market of your chart indicate a degree of changeability.
Your financial situation can improve, but you may have to wait until next year before you are entirely out of the woods.
It may be tempting to go into schemes that promise a way out of difficulties but on no account apply your all-or-nothing approach to financial risks.
Awareness that the world-wide economic situation will be crisis-ridden in 1993 should help keep a perspective on your actions.
The latter part of the year looks the most promising, so remain calm earlier.
HOME LIFE
WITH Saturn influencing your base in life, it may be that you have not felt out-and-out joy regarding the home itself or your relationship with one or two members of the family for some considerable time.
Improvements will be slow here, but they will be there eventually.
You may have to remain with an unsatisfactory state of affairs through most of 1993, which means that any planned moves will prove heavy-going or much resented.
It's probably better to set your mind to the possibility that you may not get what you want that quickly this year — which doesn't mean you won't get it ever.
Be patient and remain strong in the knowledge that the universe knows what's best for you.
RELATIONSHIPS
THE path of true love is not renowned for being easy and you would be wise to remind yourself of this in 1993.
Venus will be in the area of love and relationships in January, June, July and November, so there are opportunities for you to find happiness and fulfilment this year.
The problem is that when Venus is prominent, you're having to cope with other planetary stresses.
It may be that you are happy with your partner but there are outside pressures to contend with.
On the other hand, you may find that others interfere with the smooth running of your love life.
Remember that you cannot lose what's right for you.
Surrender to Venus
Penny Thornton
SAGITTARIUS- THE year gets off to a cracking start for Sagittarians: The eclipse on December 9, 1992 was the first of four to exert a powerful effect on your life — especially if your birthday falls between November 22 and December 11.
Whatever the main life-affecting events of 1993 may be, it is you as a person who is being challenged to move and grow.
And every time a bolt from the blue heads in your direction, you must ask yourself: What is this trying to awaken me to?
The more hard work you are prepared to put in during these 12 months, whether this applies directly to your job, a personal ambition, a family matter or a relationship, the better set up you will be for 1994.
Now is a time to focus on priorities and to strip away anything in your life that is superfluous.
Penny is on line for your Sagittarius year ahead on 0839 444 569.
CAREER
THIS is a mighty year for your life direction, and it seems that you are not solely responsible for how well you do.
Much of what happens to you professionally, or with regard to your major aims, is subject to the actions of others.
You are by nature a fluid and adventurous sign, and you would do well to keep more than one iron in the fire in 1993.
By 1994 your life will stabilise so you need to cover as much ground as you can now.
It may be that you will find success in alternative or more unorthodox fields.
March, September and October are vital months for your ambitions.
MONEY
THE epoch-making Uranus-Neptune conjunction of February and October falls in this area of your chart, presenting a con-fusing pattern for your finances.
It is entirely possible that you will do extraordinary well in 1993, especially by following an unorthodox route — intuitive hunches could also pay off.
But Neptune and Uranus may well create rather more chaos than anything else so you must be careful with your spending, and anything but trusting of other people's interference: in fact less than trusting with anything to do with borrowing or lending.
Mid-September could produce an amazing boost to your material assets, but tread carefully in June, July and October.
HOME LIFE
SATURN makes a brief appearance in this arena between May 21 and June 30, earmarking this time as less-than-easy for property matters and family life.
March and early September are also far from brilliant.
The main problem may be a lack of definition about your plans.
Although you may think you know what you want, sub-consciously you may want something else.
This conflict could lie behind the events that occur around the time of the full moons of March 8 and September 1 and the eclipses of May 21, June 4 and November 29.
If the rug is pulled from beneath your feet, learn to dance on a shifting carpet.
RELATIONSHIPS
ECLIPSES have a way of introducing new people into your life and, with four of them between December 1992 and November 29 1993, there are four major opportunities for fateful encounters.
Venus is also in the heart centre of your chart between February and June — a sign if ever there was of romance, or at least some heady company.
It seems as if the time has come for you to bring this side of life to the fore, and even without your co-operation other people will persuade you that being independent does not mean being alone.
Conversely, if you have been papering over the cracks of a relationship these same eclipses will seek them out.
Remember this is a year of movement and growth.
Break free from chains
Penny Thornton
CAPRICORN — VERY few Capricorns have had a whale of a time in the past few years.
You may have made progress, you may have known times of happiness and fulfilment, but they have been few and far between.
In many ways 1993 marks the end of this pattern, but it may take the whole of the year to do so.
Uranus and Neptune occupy the same degree of your sign on February 2 and October 24 and, although these periods may coincide with an awakening of sorts, you are bound to experience some sense of unreality.
But this conjunction is not just about your life but about the transition humanity is undergoing — a transition that involves the dissolution of outdated structures in order for the new to come in.
If you relate this to your own life, 1993 will be not just purposeful but rewarding.
Penny is on line for your Capricorn year ahead on 0839 444 570.
CAREER
LUCKY you to have Jupiter lording over this area until November.
Whatever else may or may not be happening in your life, the seeds of success are being planted in 1993 and, if at no other time, between November 13-15 you may get a hint of what they are.
You are a natural for taking on positions of power and authority but sometimes you act like a domestic Goat instead of the mountain variety and allow yourself to become tethered to some safe little post.
This year will find you either determined to break into higher ground, or being forced to do so.
April, September and October are peak months for your ambitions.
MONEY
THE other major planetary event of 1993 involves your ruling planet, Saturn, and mighty Pluto.
And the area concerned is the financial one.
This aspect is not the best indicator of a boom time for money matters.
Nevertheless, with Jupiter so well placed, things cannot be all that bad all of the time.
February and March look to be the most volatile months and a stringent cutback or a rationalisation of your financial situation could be essential.
Being economical comes naturally to Capricorns, but you must avoid becoming over-protective about money and material concerns.
The more you fear financial loss, the blinder you become to solutions.
1993 is a year of reckoning.
HOME
YOU score points here with Venus since this lovely planet hovers around the domestic centre of your chart between February and June.
The year is full of changes on the home front, which can imply moving your base of operations or experiencing rather a lot of comings and goings within the family.
March, April and May are the periods to watch for the sudden and the unexpected, although virtually every month contains a potential departure or arrival point, an ending or a beginning.
Resist hanging on to something that wants to go and consider change to be the best way of increasing your lot rather than depleting it.
RELATIONSHIPS
THE Uranus-Neptune contact is aimed at changing your personal horizons in the sense of opening you to the idea that life can be different — and so can you.
And the medium through which you are most likely to experience this is relationships.
It seems that even if you have loved and been loved, there could well have been some loss to bear in the recent past.
Birthdays from January 8-11 are in the front line of change in 1993 and it may be that no matter how you try to reach out and claim what you want, it eludes you — for now.
However, the positive side to the cosmic pattern is that you can find not just a fleeting romance but true love, if not your soulmate.
June and August are starred months here.
Hurdle the challenges
Penny Thornton
AQUARIUS — IN TIME to come Aquarians will look back on the period between mid-1991 and the end of 1993 as a watershed.
These have been the Saturn years — during which that planet's insistence that you measure up to your potential has placed hurdles of all sorts in your way.
And although you are nearing the end of this time of trial, Saturn is going out in style.
On March 20 and October 9, Saturn and Pluto cross swords for the first time in two decades.
While this may provide some considerable challenge to governments, nations and institutions across the globe, it could also represent something of a personal challenge to you — especially if you were born between February 8 and 18.
Go for broke, and be undeterred in your search for the possible dream.
Penny is on line for your Aquarius year ahead on 0839 444 571.
CAREER
PLUTO continues to dominate career matters and your long-term aspirations.
When this planet is dominating, there is almost always a certain amount of upheaval.
You may have a rough idea of where you are going and if it fits in with the cosmic blueprint, doors open easily.
But when you are way off-course all manner of booby traps, such as job changes, occur.
No wonder your ambitions are sometimes thwarted.
It seems as though you may run into opposition, either from the powers that be or the effects of economic cutbacks, and you may have to wait until November before this pattern changes.
But change it will, and your future will be bright.
MONEY
YOU are not the most mercenary sign of the zodiac, which is probably a good thing considering that the more you chase after your pound of flesh this coming year, the less likely you are to get it.
The best attitude to have towards money matters in 1993 is: wait and see.
You also need to be inventive and prepared to look to untried and untested ways to earn money or to make it work for you.
The Uranus-Neptune effect — strong in February, April, July and October — could create worldwide economic confusion, and you would be advised to become as liquid as possible in 1993.
It is not a particularly gloomy financial picture for you, just a rather unstable one.
HOME LIFE
DOMESTIC bliss is not an illusion but it can prove elusive.
And when there is stress in other areas of life it is all too easy to take it out on those closest to you.
It seems that from time to time, but most notably in February and May, you will experience some frustrating moments regarding property matters and family relationships.
Good communication between all concerned is the answer.
Do not be surprised if you come up against some very authoritarian characters — even among your own family — and while confronting feelings and situations is a must, do not consider compromise a weakness.
Anticipate new faces on the scene.
RELATIONSHIPS
DESPITE all the planetary ups and downs, the loyalty of friends will stand you in good stead.
And although close partnerships may suffer from a surfeit of external problems and internal dilemmas, you are not without love in your life during 1993.
May, June and August are months in which romance and relationships feature prominently, although for most of the year you may find yourself debating whether a commitment is worth making or abiding by.
This is a year when a partnership is not only important in itself, but when you should ask whether it can take you where want to go.
Stand by to be liberated
Penny Thornton
PISCES — THE coming year is certain to be a challenging one by anybody's standards.
Yet if it were not for the eclipses of May, June and November, Pisceans might think they could get off comparatively lightly.
These eclipses are significant, however, especially if you were born between February 20 and March 11.
Finding a direction and sticking to it is not Pisces' strongest suit, and the powerful effect of eclipses may well coincide with events that affect your life's course.
It is vital that you make some long-term decisions this year and sort out any aspects of your life that are weak and inadequate.
With Saturn's transit of your sign from 1994, you want to have as much in place as possible.
Some amazing events may happen to you during the coming year — events which confirm or test your faith.
Penny is on line for your Pisces year ahead on 0839 444 572.
CAREER
PERHAPS the greatest challenge for you in 1993 is regarding your ambitions.
The eclipses of December 9, 1992, and those on May 21, June 4 and November 29 in 1993 all home in on the area of profession and your personal hopes and dreams.
The eclipses portend a fork in the path of your destiny, whether this comes about through your own actions and decisions, or those foisted on you.
Yours is a sign synonymous with artistry, spirituality and compassion, which is why the arts and the healing professions are Piscean bastions.
Yet all too often you sacrifice your dreams for a safe option.
1993 could well be a time when you can no longer put up with frustrating dead-ends.
One way or another you will be liberated.
MONEY
WITH the two great abundance-bringers, Venus and Jupiter, operating in this area of your chart for much of the year, someone is smiling on you.
No matter how volatile the economy you seem to have divine protection, whether this is because you have saved for a rainy day or you are just downright lucky.
A windfall or an inheritance is not out of the question, and we could be looking at the end of March, May or October-November for a material or financial boost.
If you experience economic gloom, you should be able to find financial assistance because you are well placed astrologically in 1993.
HOME
IT'S far from roses all the way here, if only because other members of the family are experiencing difficulties and you end up having to bear the emotional brunt of it all.
The eclipse months of May, June and November are the most testing, and February, July and October look rather unstable.
You can make a move in 1993 but even if it is to bigger and better things, there may be some apprehension, possibly even sadness, attached to it.
Likewise, increase on the family front is possible and most probably in the form of a marriage.
Yet again it is the summer months that look the most fertile.
RELATIONSHIPS
JUPITER has been influencing your love life since late 1991 and will continue to do so until the end of 1993.
This planet inflates anything it touches so, on the one hand it will make you even more seeringly aware of the flaws in a relationship and, on the other, it will bring the great and good out of an appropriate union.
You can establish a much deeper contact with a partner through much of this year and, if you have been passion-less for some time, be prepared for things to change considerably.
February to June and September are powerful months for new alliances and relationships across the board.
And with three eclipses, you may not be able to avoid a fateful attraction.
Tax on food
IF Norman Lamont goes ahead with a tax on food he will be signing his own death sentence.
On second thoughts, maybe we should let him.
Three Wise Men
I CAN'T believe the stupidity of the school that changed the sex of one of the Three Wise Men in a Nativity play.
Equal rights aside, you can't alter facts to suit your beliefs.
After Christmas sales
PEOPLE may be flocking to the sales — not because the recession is ending but because they are seeing the most realistic prices in years.
Law betrays brave police
HOW many more police officers have to be stabbed, shot or beaten before the law is changed to protect them?
As PC Lesley Harrison lies fighting for her life in hospital the Government should take immediate steps to ensure that anybody who attacks a member of any of the security services is imprisoned for a long time.
There should be mandatory minimum jail terms for crimes like these and if a police officer is killed in the line of duty it should be classified as a capital offence.
Even though I do not support the death penalty for most crimes, it will only be when the threat of death hangs over their heads that the thugs who attack our unarmed officers will think twice before they act.
And the families of those in the forces will be able to breathe a little easier, instead of fearing the worst every time their loved ones go out to work.
Let's have a Major miracle at Bart's
IF anyone in the Government has a conscience, I hope it was pricked by your terribly moving picture of Belinda Giles asking Santa to keep open London's St Bartholomew's Hospital, where she is being treated for cancer.
In fact I suggest John Major snips it out, frames it and hangs it in the Cabinet room to remind himself and some of his more heartless colleagues of just how much Belinda and hundreds of other children need this wonderful hospital.
Perhaps it may even spur them to have a rethink (miracles have been known to happen at this time of year) and remove the threat of closure not just from St Bart's but many other wonderful facilities up and down the country.
After all, if the Government can waste billions of pounds trying to bolster Norman Lamont's disastrous ERM policies, I'm sure it can find the money to keep Belinda's dream alive.
Let's have a Major miracle at Bart's
I SUPPOSE every organisation in the land will be claiming a slice of the cash from the new National Lottery.
But wouldn't it be a wonderful New Year gesture if the Government declared here and now that the first few million will be set aside to save St Bart's.
Queen Victoria
MY best Christmas present came from Victoria Wood — the gift of laughter.
Her Christmas show proved she has not lost her touch and it's time she was fully acknowledged as the comic genius she is.
After Jennifer Saunders's triumph in Absolutely Fabulous, we have final proof that women are the funnier sex.
Dr Thomas Courtenay sentence
I HOPE the Attorney-General is ashamed of himself in allowing the sentence of rapist Dr Thomas Courtenay to stand.
There were several attacks on women over Christmas.
No doubt the offenders were heartened by the fact that if caught, they will serve only a few years.
Milestones
BIRTHDAYS: Comedian Tracy Ullman, 33.
Athlete David Bedford, 43.
Footballer Gordon Banks, 55.
ON THIS DAY: In 1803, the US took possession of Louisiana.
In 1932, the London-Brighton line was electrified.
In 1947, Romania's King Michael abdicated.
Things you didn't know you didn't know
Graeme Donald
IN 1751 the Julian calendar was abandoned by the Chesterfield Act which instituted the Gregorian calendar, but all hell broke loose.
To facilitate the change over, 11 days were dropped — the 2nd of September being followed by the 14th — to realign with the solar year.
This caused the peasantry to revolt in the belief they were being robbed of 11 days wages and that they would die that much sooner.
Previously, March 25 had been New Year's Day with attendant ceremonies leading to a climax on April 1.
Even after the change over, people continued to mark April 1 with small gifts or pranks.
We still do this but call it April Fools Day.
At the time of the change nearly all the nation's wealth was linked to farming and the land.
The animals and crops couldn't change their breeding and growing habits to suit, so the financial year stayed tied to April.
TODAY'S Book Of Things You Didn't Know…is now on sale, published by Simon & Schuster for £3.99.
Instant buffets
Karen Mellor
IT'S New Year's Eve and you can barely look at food, let alone spend another day preparing a mountain of it for tonight's hungry party guests.
But a little forethought will help you avoid the drudgery of mixing, baking and cooking your New Year spread.
Just nip round to the supermarket now and stock up on the latest in buffet catering.
Supermarket aisles have endless stocks of ready-to-eat prawn cocktails, smoked salmon parcels and vegetable samosas — and they are going fast.
Marks & Spencer predict they will sell one prawn for every person in Britain this month — 56 million in all — and that's just from one brand.
On sale in M & S food halls is a ring of 40 king prawns with their own pot of mouthwatering cocktail dip.
At £11.99, it may seem expensive but does feed a lot of people.
Smoked salmon appetisers come in packs of 18 from M & S and are priced at £6.99.
They are the ideal tasters for a drinks party or guests who are just arriving.
You can also try M & S crispy prawn wontons (£3.99 for 24).
Perfect for drinks parties are Asda's crispy crumbed mushrooms with garlic dip (£1.49 per pack) and Waitrose's assorted mini smoked salmon roulades with pate or cream cheese fillings.
Slightly more substantial are Marks & Spencer's mini salmon en croute at £4.50 for 12.
These are puff pastry parcels filled with fresh Scottish salmon in a light creamy sauce and are one of the most luxurious buffet items around.
Sainsbury sell packs of 12 mini party eggs at £1.19, and vegetable rolls at £1.25 for 30.
Also try their tuna and sweetcorn quiche made with shortcrust pastry at £1.39.
Safeway have produced the pick of the crop with their Party Trays — a range of food platters individually prepared to order at in-store delicatessens.
All you have to do is indicate the number of guests you will be feeding and the sort of food you wish to serve and the Safeway team will do the rest.
Choose from seafood platters or Oriental-style selections, country meat platters or a Continental selection, antipasto and cocktail kebabs.
Priced from a very reasonable £10.99, Party Trays come in two sizes to serve either 12 or 20 people and are the solution to everyone's catering problems.
Simply order them a couple of days in advance and pick them up the night before or on the day they are required.
For dessert opt for one of Sainsbury's wonderful frozen gateaux.
Their Liberty Chocolate Indulgence is the ultimate dish for confirmed chocoholics (£2.99).
Or there is the Amaretto Liquer Gateau (£3.25), a light cake with just a hint of naughtiness about it.
Asda's box of 24 chocolate cakes will have something for everyone, and all the stores offer a selection of cheeseboards and cheese biscuits which are ready to lay on the table as soon as the packaging has been removed.
Safeway offers platter-style cheeseboards to serve 12 or 20 people.
Prices start at £6.50.
Success on a paper plate
HERE are some handy tips to follow when you're catering buffet-style.
ALWAYS use paper plates and plastic cutlery to make clearing up easy.
TRY to measure in individual portions how much people will eat.
For a drinks party, five or six savouries per person is about right.
For buffets and fork suppers, serve one or two main dishes with a choice of salads and nibbles.
Allow about half a bottle of wine per person or the equivalent in other drinks.
DO not have too many exotic and clashing tastes in one menu.
It will confuse your guests.
If you decide to serve a rich pudding, always offer a light alternative.
THE texture of a meal is important so try to make it varied.
INCLUDE lots of colour.
Don't serve endless pastry-based dishes without salads, fruits and sweets to balance them.
OFFER vegetarian alternatives.
Even if none of your guests is a vegetarian, these dishes are still a delicious alternative.
MAKE the table look attractive by varying the height of displayed foods.
Use cake stands and boxes.
YOU can buy plastic holders so that wine glasses can be attached to plates.
They will prevent people losing their drinks and pouring another.
BISCUITS, petit fours, little cakes and cocktail canapes look good arranged in rows, each consisting of one variety.
Pay attention to contrasting colours, taking care not to put two rows of the same item side by side.
Tap into the true spirit of Hogmanay
THE air is clean, the earth cool and moist and the water is soft and pure.
Scotland's Spey Valley contains the perfect conditions for whisky making.
Speyside in the Highlands is home to the malt whisky industry — the top of the range Scotches that attract a fanatical following among whisky buffs.
While ordinary Scotch is made from a mixture of grains blended with the finer malts, a malt whisky must be made only from malted barley.
Each malt has a distinctive character — Highland versions are rich and full-bodied, Lowland malts are lighter and sweeter while the Island spirits have a peaty, seaweed flavour.
‘Single malt whiskies are like the Chateaux of Bordeaux,’ says Allan Schiach, Chairman of The Macallan, one of Scotland's best known malts.
Allan is unusual as company chairmen go, combining his job with a career as a Hollywood scriptwriter with hits such as Don't Look Now, Castaway and Witches.
The Macallan is a smooth, sumptuous whisky that gets its character and rich, dark amber colour from the sherry casks in which it is aged for at least ten years.
But the real skill in producing it lies with one man, ‘Sniffer In Chief’ Frank Newlands.
Whisky, because of its strength, is ‘nosed’ rather than tasted and it's Frank's job to sniff his way through barrels when their ten years are up.
While most experts believe the best way to enjoy a good malt is neat or with a drop of water to release the flavour, Allan Schiach says you can add any mixer you like — even a cola.
‘When I'm asked with what should you drink whisky I always say with moderation.
If you want to get drunk there are cheaper ways of doing it.’
Euro sun spots from £20,000
Stella Bingham
THE holiday ads are tempting you away with the usual images of fun and sun but rather than taking a package why not invest in that longed-for overseas home?
The market for places in the sun was the first to be hit when high interest rates and the recession at home began to bite but, with mortgage rates now in single figures, people are once more looking abroad.
And the buyers of 1993 have a host of well-priced properties to choose from.
Countries where prices have tumbled like our own have been the first to benefit from the spark in the market.
‘There's a slight return of interest in Spain and Portugal,’ says John Esplan of agents Babet.
‘The French market has been hit more than other countries by the devaluation of the pound.
And Italy has to cut prices.’
Here is a rundown of the present position in the four European countries most popular with British buyers.
SPAIN
‘THERE are slight signs that the market is picking up,’ says Jane Taylor of IPI.
‘People who had their money in high-interest accounts are looking for something else to do with it.
‘In some areas prices are down by as much as 40 per cent.’
In the unspoiled Denia and Javea areas of the Costa Blanca, prices start at £25,000 for a resale one-bedroom flat and £40,000 for a villa.
At La Sella, a new golf-course development near Denia, one-bedroom apartments cost £27,000.
Costa Brava property is slightly cheaper.
Andrew Vaughan, of Bradley & Vaughan, specialists in inland, older property, quotes prices as low as £7,000 for small village properties needing restoration in northern Spain.
Habitable village homes start at £20,000.
Farmhouses cost from £30,000.
Villas inland from the Costa del Sol can now be found for about Pounds 40,000.
FRANCE
THERE is plenty of interest but very few buyers, says Vivian Bridge of Northern France Properties.
‘People are adjusting to the new exchange rates and hoping the franc devalues.’
Prices have fallen by about 20 per cent in Northern France, less in the South.
Reckon on paying about £25,000 for a habitable, two-bedroom detached cottage in Western Normandy.
A similar sized property in the Dordogne would cost at least £35,000, less in the Charente and Lot et Garonne.
ITALY
PRICES in Italy have gone up and stayed up, although Nikki Keep of Italian Country Homes says sensible sellers are now open to offers.
‘Now is a good time to buy.
This is the last year of the real recession and people are beginning to wake up to the opportunities.’
Nikki is looking for £80,000 for a mainly converted four-bedroom farmhouse in Umbria with enough land for a swimming pool.
A similar price would buy an unconverted farmhouse in Tuscany.
Ruins in Umbria cost from £20,000.
PORTUGAL
THE Algarve is a mixture of the most expensive and exclusive holiday homes in Europe and monstrous concrete high-rise blocks built before the authorities realised they were killing the golden goose of tourism.
Golf-based developments are particularly sought after.
Quinta do Lago's 1,700 acres include golf courses, tennis courts, riding stables, water sports and strictly-controlled development.
Prices have fallen a little but are still higher than in Spain, says John Esplan of Babet.
He quotes about £30,000 for a small inland farmhouse or ruin needing restoration and about £25,000 for a small apartment.
Prices are a little higher at the western end of the region.
Northern France Properties 081-287 4940.
IPI 0273 724369.
Bradley & Vaughan 0444 412551.
Italian Country Homes 0737 814880.
Babet 0460 76213.
American Barbie vs English Rose
By Jane Moore
WE THINK they are brittle, transparent women who are obsessed with weight-loss and cosmetic surgery.
They think we are cold fish and sloppy in our appearance.
The American versus British female stereotype is a trans-Atlantic difference of opinion that has been raging for decades.
And now John Cleese has added more fuel to the debate.
The Fawlty Towers star nailed his colours firmly to the mast when he married his third American wife this week in a secret ceremony in Barbados.
‘I find myself attracted to American ladies in a way I don't to English ladies.
Odd, isn't it?’ says 52-year-old Cleese who met new wife Alyce-Faye Eichelberger two years ago.
‘During the three months I was in America a few years ago, it would happen again and again.
‘The character that Jamie Lee Curtis played in A Fish Called Wanda was wilful, determined, exciting, and manipulative.
‘I suppose that is what I find so fascinating about so many American women.’
Certainly the US has its fair share of spectacularly successful, strong females.
One of the most notable is supermodel Cindy Crawford who has been hailed a ‘global role model’ for women.
‘Lots of American women try to be like Cindy,’ says her personal trainer Radu.
‘They spend hours working out and are very aware of how they appear.
They don't just give up at 25 or 30 to worry about the children.
‘They also enjoy competing with men on an equal level, and many guys find that attractive.’
How can the British version rival that?
Jamie and Cindy's opposite numbers here could be actress Emma Thompson and model Paula Hamilton.
While Jamie is regarded in Hollywood as having the perfect body, Emma adopts a no-nonsense approach to acting that keeps the work flooding in.
Similarly, Paula is one of Britain's most famous models.
Although a recovering alcoholic and noted for temper tantrums, she could never be accused of being bland.
In the political arena, too, American and British women demonstrate noticeably different qualities and values.
First Lady elect Hillary Clinton is a shrewd, ambitious lawyer who was the driving force behind her husband Bill's pitch for the presidency.
By comparison, Britain's first lady, Norma Major, is a quiet, unassuming woman who almost squirmed with discomfort when her husband became Prime Minister.
She stated she would be staying in their Huntingdon home rather than moving to London and admitted her wardrobe was sorely lacking in power outfits.
She is a golden labrador to Hillary Clinton's rottweiler.
But the Brits come out tops for humour.
Banker Alan Clarke, who has spent years working in America, says: ‘The American women I have been out with have always been successful and good-looking but they don't have the ability to laugh at themselves.
The Brits don't mind looking scruffy occasionally or doing something childish.’
In the past we have also been able to show off our own fairytale Princess — the Americans worshipped Diana for her beauty and commitment to motherhood.
But since the failure of her marriage to Prince Charles she has plummeted in popularity.
Now Americans boast of their own ‘princess’— Maria Shriver, attractive niece of the late John F Kennedy, wife of film star Arnold Schwarzenegger and powerful TV news anchorwoman.
Cleese, who underwent years of psychotherapy, has always leaned on strong American women including first wife Connie Booth and spouse number two, film director Barbara Trentham.
But one can't help wondering why, after two failed trans-Atlantic unions, he didn't decide to try British for once.
He might have been pleasantly surprised.
Long years of cheating
MARJE Proops has always refused to reveal her exact age but she married husband Sidney on November 21, 1935.
Four years later she joined the Daily Mirror for the first time.
Marje and Sidney's son Robert was born in 1941.
When he was four, Marje joined the Daily Herald.
Marje returned to the Daily Mirror in 1954 and began her long affair with Mirror lawyer Phillip Levy in the early 1960s.
He died in April 1987.
The following year, in September 1988, Sidney Proops died aged 80.
In December 1992, Marje eventually confessed to her amazing double life.
Dear Marje
Agony aunt Virginia Ironside asks Marje Proops why she ignored her own advice.
SO it turns out that your eternal triangle wasn't one after all — it was an eternal square.
While you were deceiving your husband Proopsie with lawyer Phillip Levy, he was all the time deceiving you with his true love, Meli.
When readers have written in, worried about whether to tell about a secret lover, you've so often given them the excellent advice: ‘Keep mum’.
You've been so wise about other people's problems.
Where, I wonder, did you slip up with your own?
I always scan readers' letters for the hidden message.
I often find it between the lines.
And there were some things about Mr Levy that I found very odd when I read your book.
That he very rarely said he loved you rang a warning bell, as did the fact that you appeared to think he spent his time alone if he wasn't with you.
You painted a picture of such a red-hot lover, too, that the idea that he was content with snatched secret nights made me suspicious.
If a reader had asked you if she should reveal all in a frank autobiography I think you'd have advised her not to.
You'd have warned her about all the people her revelations would hurt.
And I bet you would have added: ‘You might hurt yourself, too.’
You'd have been right.
You'd have known so well that when you turn over a stone all kinds of creepy-crawlies come clambering out.
A secret can't be kept in a time warp.
It collects barnacles and slime, and when you release it it's never quite the same as when you locked it away.
Most humans are not very good at keeping secrets.
Little bits leak out, destructively.
It turns out your son knew about your affair.
And under that stone your secret has been breeding another — a secret kept by your lover.
I wonder what you'd say if a reader wrote to you, appalled to find out the truth about her lover?
Would you have put on your disapproving hat and talked about tangled webs and reaping what you sow?
Or would you, as I suspect, have taken the more kindly line for which you are loved?
A woman once wrote to me, desperately upset, because, while going through her dead husband's effects, she'd found love letters he'd written to another woman.
What I told her is what I'm sure you'd say, too — she should forget the letters.
People can love different people in different ways.
The fact that her husband had a mistress didn't diminish the affection he had for his wife.
And, as consolation Marje, you really can hang on to the hope that as he was the secret true love of your life, perhaps you were the secret true love of his.
A secret that, like you, he even kept from his partner.
Big toe to Big Breakfast
CHANNEL 4 steals a march on GMTV's debut tomorrow by serving up their own breakfast show tonight as a New Year's Eve special.
But the best The Big Breakfast can manage is Antonia de Sancha — famous for her toe-sucking affair with David Mellor — flirting with puppets Zig and Zag.
Viewers will see the interview interrupted when a voice announces that a Mr D. Melons is on the line asking for the actress.
Antonia simply grins and continues with the interview.
Do not adjust your set
Pam Francis
Four new stations start tomorrow, but will anyone tell the difference?
AS Big Ben bings its last bong at midnight tonight it will be out with the old ITV and in with the new.
Those of you partying will doubtless be too busy having a good time to care.
But for dozens of TV executives, it's a nail-biting start to 1993.
Midnight marks the demise of TV-am, Thames, TVS and TSW — all scuppered in the franchise shake-up — and the debut of respective new stations GMTV, Carlton, Meridian and Westcountry TV.
But will we notice any screen-shattering difference?
The answer is no — at least not immediately.
Eighty per cent of the ITV schedule remains untouched so you can stop panicking about your old favourites such as Coronation Street, Home And Away and The Bill.
Viewers in the south will get their first chance to judge Carlton, which replaces Thames, when presenter Chris Tarrant goes live in Trafalgar Square at the witching hour tonight to introduce a 90-minute New Year party with Hollywood stars, the Chippendales, a hypnotist, a female impersonator and Paul McCartney — who will probably be watching it in bed since his part was recorded days ago.
Along the South Coast, Meridian is playing things down with a ten-minute introduction to new faces and programmes followed by a movie.
The same applies in Devon, Dorset and Cornwall as Westcountry TV takes over with a two-minute slot explaining the change.
Most of us of course will be occupied seeing in the New Year.
The nation as a whole won't notice the changes until tomorrow morning when GMTV takes over TV-am's breakfast slot.
Don't expect chatty presenters on a comfy settee just yet.
Instead you can look forward to Paddington Bear as the station has decided to screen mostly children's programmes on its launch day.
The first proper weekday show hosted by Fiona Armstrong and Michael Wilson on the inevitable sofa — peach coloured, by the way — comes on Monday.
It features a strong line-up including Michael Aspel and his wife, EastEnders star Lizzie Power, Rod Stewart's wife Rachel Hunter and an exclusive on the Southampton mums whose babies were swopped at birth.
What will happen as the stations find their feet is TV Editor that a selection of new dramas, documentaries and entertainment shows, mainly from Carlton and Meridian, will trickle gradually into the network, starting at 4.15 pm tomorrow with Surprise Party.
Hosted by Michael Parkinson, this is a sort of This is Your Life.
A celebrity or entrepreneur will have a surprise party packed with friends, family and old acquaintances thrust upon him when he least expects it.
Other Carlton programmes to look out for include Head Over Heels,(Jan 11), a seven-part Fifties rock and roll drama featuring rebellious leather-jacketed teenager Camilla de la Mer who becomes the latest pupil at the Gracie Ellis Academy of Elegance.
Comedy king Dave Allen returns for a series of six half-hour performances starting on January 5 and Margi Clarke looks at the ins and outs of sex from every conceivable position in The Good Sex Guide (Jan 11).
And in a series of individual Comedy Playhouse productions, Wendy Craig, Sheila Hancock, Sheila Gish and Jean Boht star in Brighton Belles, the British equivalent of America's Golden Girls.
Meridian Broadcasting will make its comedy drama debut on January 5 with Full Stretch, a six-part series starring Kevin McNally as ex-Chelsea footballer Baz Levick who runs his own limo hire company from a garage in North London.
In Tracey Ullman: A Class Act (Jan 9) the British comic takes a wry look at the class system in the first of three 45-minute specials.
Changes will be more apparent in regional news programmes.
The most impressive comes from Carlton's London News Network (LNN) which will provide an hour-long evening show London Tonight hosted by Alistair Stewart and Fiona Foster.
CARLTON
THE station taking over from Thames inherits 10.6 million viewers and promises a strong blend of drama and comedy.
AT A GLANCE
Drama series include Routes, a twice-weekly show about battling transport families, airline security thrills in Cleared For Takeoff and Head Over Heels with Jackie Morrison and Ian Embleton (left).
Body And Soul is based on an ex-nun who goes into business.
The Comedy Playhouse series features stars such as Leslie Grantham and Dave Allen returns.
GMTV
FRONTED by Fiona Armstrong and Michael Wilson, GMTV promises its potential 40 million viewers it will ‘inform and entertain in a popular but authoritive way’.
AT A GLANCE
Familiar sofa format with domestic and international news bulletins on the half hour.
Also promised is a game show with Jeremy Beadle and a keep fit programme with model Linda Lusardi called Healthy Hunks.
A Sunday morning family show will be hosted by Eamonn Holmes and Anne Davies.
MERIDIAN
COMEDY is set to be one of the strong suits of Meridian which takes over the TVS area and its 5.2 million viewers.
AT A GLANCE
Proposed is A Class Act starring Tracey Ullman and Michael Palin (left), the sitcom Full Stretch about a limousine rental company and Coltrane In A Cadillac, featuring Scottish comedian Robbie Coltrane travelling across America.
Also scheduled is the drama Harnessing Peacocks based on Mary Wesley's novel and starring Serena Scott-Thomas.
WESTCOUNTRY
THE smallest of the new stations with two million viewers, Westcountry takes over from TSW, promising programmes with a local flavour.
AT A GLANCE
Pencilled in are shows featuring heritage, local arts, education and entertainment.
Children aged 10-plus will have their own Sunday lunchtime programme.
Also scheduled is a local quiz show, Anybody Out There?, and Commando (left), a documentary series on the Royal Marines.
Additional reporting: Ivan Waterman.
Charles keeps a Czech on his heritage fund
By Tim Satchell
WITH the divorce of the two republics of Czechoslovakia at midnight tonight, the Prince of Wales and Vaclav Havel have a formed a remarkable alliance.
Later this year they will launch the Prague Heritage Fund, of which they will be joint patrons.
At a private dinner last week in Prague the prince and Mr Havel, playwright and former President of Czechoslovakia, discussed all the details of the organisation, which they hope will raise funds for the preservation of Prague's architectural heritage.
In May 1991 the prince visited Prague, a city which survived the Second World War unscathed, during an East European trip with the Princess of Wales.
‘The prince was impressed by the beautiful Czech capital but he was also struck by the problems faced by Mr Havel's newly elected democratic government in restoring the buildings after years of neglect,’ a British Embassy spokesman in Prague says.
‘The prince has been forging contacts, and speaking to industrialists and politicians to find ways of helping conserve the city.
The exact mechanisms for the Fund's administration have not been finalised.
Work at the moment is being done by the prince's office.’
The Prague Heritage Fund will be launched in the summer with a major cultural event in the city.
A BBC documentary about the prince's involvement will be broadcast at the same time.
Lorne Thyssen
By Tim Satchell
LORNE Thyssen has successfully launched a New York stage career.
The son of steel magnate Baron Heini Thyssen, 29-year-old Lorne recently appeared as Mephistopheles in an ‘off off’ Broadway production of Dr Faustus.
‘It was great fun and I really enjoyed the three-week run,’ Lorne, above, tells me.
Now enjoying a skiing holiday in Gstaad, in late January Mr Thyssen returns to New York for his next project: producing and starring in Richard III.
‘It will be a slightly odd version of the play, incorporating bits of Henry VI.’
he says.
Mr Thyssen, a Moslem, reports that he currently has no girlfriend.
And…
By Tim Satchell
AT the firm's dance an ambitious employee bopped with the boss's American wife.
Eventually she protested: ‘Sorry, I'm danced out.’
‘I wouldn't say that,’ he replied.
‘Just pleasantly plump’.
David's on the ball
By Tim Satchell
DAVID Mellor, who has made a variety of television and radio appearances since his resignation as Minister for Fun, is about to take a major step in his broadcasting career.
He has been booked for a series.
Mr Mellor is to present Six-O-Six, the Saturday evening phone-in programme on Radio 5.
Each week he will host a live football forum lasting 80 minutes in which fans will call in with their comments and test his knowledge.
Mr Mellor's contract will run for six weeks, starting on January 9.
‘He will have the same pay and arrangements as previous presenters,’ Radio 5 spokeswoman Judy Leighton tells me.
‘The programme deals with anything under the sun about football matters.
People ring up about the match they've just been to and complain or say who they think should be the next England manager, etc.
‘It is important that the presenter has a good knowledge of sport.’
Jeffrey Archer
By Tim Satchell
AUTHOR Jeffrey Archer tells me that he is still signing his name ‘Jeffrey Archer’ in his books, rejecting the easy option available since his peerage of signing just ‘Archer’.
‘People expect value for money, and that's what I try to give them,’ he tells me.
Tomorrow he is off to Chequers to join the great and the good and John Major for drinks.
The girls get into jackets
By Tim Satchell
DESIGN consultant Charlotte Hopkins, 29, left, has created a new range of ladies clothing for Savile Row tailors Bernard Weatherill, the family firm of former Speaker Lord Weatherill.
Miss Hopkins, a former model, says: ‘I have tried to create a line of very smart and very wearable clothes that will have wide appeal.’
One of her designs is for a lady's version of the Norfolk jacket, which has been worn by Prince Charles on Sandringham shoots.
A fashion expert writes: ‘The Norfolk jacket was first designed for the Duke of Norfolk.
It has high buttons, belted waist, big pockets and clever tailoring for freedom of the arms.’
Miss Hopkins wears an elegant pleated skirt, while the prince favours Plus Twos — Plus Fours have four extra inches of cloth in the leg, Plus Twos have two.
Aah-Tishoo
Nigel Howard
THIS picture shows why so many of us are currently suffering from a cold.
In particular, a strain called Respiratory Synciatial Virus is causing a mini-epidemic in the South of England.
RSV gives adults two weeks of dripping noses and fuzzy heads and can cause croup in babies.
If a sufferer sneezes anywhere near you, the chances are you will catch it too.
Sneezes are devastatingly effective at spreading infection.
Each sneeze from a nose streaming with cold can blast more than one million bugs into the air at speeds of up to 125mph, putting at risk anyone within a 10-metre range.
Dr Hamish Inglis, director of the regional virus laboratory in Edinburgh, Scotland, says: ‘The amount of virus in each sneeze depends on the stage of the illness.
At the beginning of a cold the viral load will be very high.
As the cold progresses the amount of virus will drop.’
Sneezing is a reflex action to dislodge foreign particles or irritating material from inside the nasal passages.
Irritation can also be caused by inflammation such as when we suffer from a cold or allergy.
The sinuses make extra mucus to soothe irritation in the nostrils causing the nose to become congested.
Sensory receptors inside the nose send impulses to the brain, triggering the sneeze reflex.
Chest muscles expand the ribs and contract the diaphragm, the powerful muscular floor which separates the chest from the stomach, sucking about 2.5 litres of air into the lungs.
The windpipe and vocal cords close to trap the air.
Stomach and chest muscles then contract, pumping up the pressure in the lungs.
The windpipe and vocal cords then snap open and the air rushes out.
As this happens, muscles at the back of the nasal passages partially close off the throat so that the air mainly shoots out through the nose, although some escapes from the mouth.
Dr David Tyrrell, former director of the Common Cold Unit, says: ‘The bottom of the nasal passage is lined with mucus and foreign particles stick to this.
When you sneeze the rush of air shoots the top layer of this mucus, and everything stuck to it, out of the nose.’
Dr Tyrrell says the real danger of infection from a sneeze is invisible: ‘It is not the big blobs of mucus that are the problem, it is the smaller, invisible droplets which hang around in the air for several minutes after a sneeze.’
Although we may suffer several colds each winter we are not being re-infected with the same virus.
Dr Hamish Inglis says: ‘Once you have had a cold you build up immunity to that particular virus.
But there are over 200 different cold viruses and, if you lived to 70, you could become infected with three different strains a year throughout your life and never meet the same one twice.’
Sneezes are not the only way of catching a cold.
Viruses can live on surfaces such as tables, desks and telephones for up to three hours.
People touching infected surfaces and then touching their eyes, nose or mouth will probably soon be snuffling themselves.
Unfortunately, catching a cold is easier than getting rid of one.
Dr Tyrrell's unit on Salisbury Plain, which closed for financial reasons in 1990, tried unsuccessfully for 44 years to find a cure for the common cold, conducting experiments on more than 18,000 volunteers.
Cold remedies have little effect.
According to research by Which? magazine, many of the cold medicines on sale are no more effective than rest and lots of water to keep your fluid levels up.
Remedies which contain decongestants may help to clear a stuffy nose but inhaling the vapour from a bowl of hot water is just as effective.
Some hot lemon drinks contain only a painkiller as the active ingredient and these can cost a lot more than an unbranded painkiller.
The GP's Surgery
EVERY expecting parent dreams of having a healthy baby, but much of this depends on lifestyle during pregnancy.
The ante-natal clinic is a useful place for advice, and I also like to pass on tips to women planning a family.
Mrs Jackson came in to discuss going off the Pill.
I suggested that it might be worth using a barrier method of contraception, such as the cap or the sheath, for a couple of months before trying for a baby.
This has two advantages.
It allows the lining of the womb to return to normal, and would give her some idea of how long her menstrual cycle was.
This is important when determining how far developed a baby is.
My next advice regarded rubella.
If caught during the early weeks of pregnancy it can cause deafness, blindness and heart problems in the baby.
Most schoolgirls are vaccinated against rubella, but it doesn't ensure immunity.
I did a blood test to check Mrs Jackson's immunity.
If it was negative she would need to be vaccinated, and it was essential that she didn't get pregnant for three months afterwards as the vaccine also can damage the baby.
So I suggested she stay on the Pill until we knew the result.
Next we talked about smoking during pregnancy, which reduces the blood flow to the placenta and may stunt the baby's growth.
Even in the early weeks it may increase the risk of a miscarriage.
Excessive drinking during pregnancy can cause mental retardation and physical problems with the child.
I suggest limiting alcohol to a couple of drinks a week.
Although most women watch their diet during pregnancy, few alter it in the months beforehand.
I reassured Mrs Jackson that a balanced diet would probably be all she'd need.
Finally, we talked about folates.
Folate deficiency causes anaemia, but occasionally is associated with neural tube defects such as spina bifida.
Folates are found in wholegrain cereals, fruit and vegetables, so as long as her diet included plenty of these the risk of spina bifida was low.
Blind Man's Sniff
Louise Bowen
HOW TO PLAY
ALTHOUGH any couple can try, people who live together are more likely to be familiar with each other 's body odour.
Ensure each male arrives at the party freshly showered and with a clean shirt.
For the next couple of hours chat, jostle, mingle, dance and generally get hot, sweaty, and happy.
The men then stand in a line with their shirts off.
Each girlfriend is blindfolded and led down the line, burying her nose in the chest of each man — who must keep quiet — and taking a sniff.
Avoid very sweaty armpits because sweat quickly decomposes in areas where air does not circulate freely.
The girl then decides which man is her partner.
START — FOLLOW your noses for the great Health Works party game — Blind Man's Sniff.
All you need to play are a group of live-in couples, a New Year's Eve party, a blindfold…and a sense of smell.
We invented this game after investigating the latest scientific research into pheromones, the sex hormones which help us find and identify our partners.
Men have a greater concentration of pheromones, which constitute an important and often unconscious part of their appeal to women.
2.
‘BASICALLY, all human pheromones have the same chemical structure,’ says Dave Kelly, senior lecturer in bio-chemistry at University College, Cardiff.
‘What makes them unique is the action of bacteria on the skin.
A person's individual cocktail of microflora oxidises and modifies the pheromone to produce that person's ‘scent fingerprint’.’
Pheromones circulate in the bloodstream and escapes through the pores and sweat glands in the armpits and groin, where it is modified by skin bacteria.
Kelly says that couples living together soon start to share the same skin bacteria, and it is this familiarity that enables women to pick out their men so successfully.
We put the theory to the test at top Cardiff nightspot Coca Savanna — with startling results.
3.
DJ Simon Wedgewood coaxed six student couples from Cardiff University under the spotlight and, in a variation of Blind Man's Bluff, persuaded the men to take off their shirts which were put in a heap on the dancefloor.
We blindfolded girlfriends Dawn Morris, Sinachi Ubbar, Claire Barrack, Jane Gibson, Maxine Davies and Adele Rogers and asked them to sniff out their boyfriends' shirts.
Without any hesitation all the girls chose the correct shirts belonging to, respectively, Jim Foster, Stewart Ayres, Dave Jolly, Gavin Davies, James Burt and Matthew John.
Results proved just as accurate — and more fun — with girls asked to smell their boyfriends' bodies.
‘I never thought I'd be able to pick out Matthew, but I found his individual scent unmistakable, without really being conscious of it,’ said Adele.
4.
IN large enough doses, pheromones have an attracting, and calming effect on women and at this time of year they are at their most powerful.
Kelly believe winter — allowing the results of that animal attraction to be born nine months later at a time of peak autumn plenty.
Most animal groups have the musky-scented pheromones that act as a form of communication.
In humans, those scents are the first form of communication between mother and baby.
Mothers can pick their child's T-shirts by smell alone, and young children have a particularly acute sense of smell.
Tests show that breast-fed babies can tell, from as young as one-month old, the smell of their mother from other nursing women.
5.
BUT what makes pheromones, part of the natural steroid group of chemicals, smell different on different humans?
People who are basically unhealthy may have their pheromones soured by an imbalance of bacteria on the skin, and generally not smell as attractive as a person in the peak of fitness.
This could act as an evolutionary warning device to ensure only top specimens mate and pass on thriving genes.
Another cause of unpleasant body odour is sweat souring when trapped in areas where air is unable to circulate, such as the armpits.
Millions of pounds have been spent on research into deodorants and anti-perspirants to combat these malodorous extremes.
In the United States, researchers are working to find the chemical responsible for odour changes.
6.
DR GEORGE Preti of the Monell Chemical Senses Center in Philadelphia took on the unenviable task of ‘harvesting’ sweat from the acrid armpits of scores of male volunteers.
So far he has tracked down the chemical 3-methyl-2-hexenoic acid.
Although its origin is not known, it is caused by skin bacteria acting on our body chemistry.
The world of business is also aware of the power of sexual scent — that lovely aroma of freshly baked bread you get in stores has the same chemical structure as the smell of human semen.
US jungle troops used to spend a week eating local food before starting active combat, to ensure their body odour — partly derived from Western foods — did not give away their location to the enemy.
7.
WOMEN are more sensitive than men to these odours, especially in the years between puberty and menopause.
That sensitivity rises when they are ovulating, becoming up to 10,000 times more acute than at menstruation.
Although men secrete the pheromone androsterone from their underarm glands, 50 to 60 per cent of males cannot even smell such musky odours — which rather damages the claims that women's musk-based perfumes drive men wild.
‘The reason women don't have such a strong odour is that they don't depend on scent to attract,’ says Dave Kelly.
‘The correct choice of a suitable male is much more important to them, so it is not in their evolutionary interests to signal their reproductive status.’
That does not mean women do not have their own scent — it's just sweeter rather than musky.
8.
HISTORY tells us that a large part of Napoleon's attraction to Josephine pertained to smell.
‘Don't wash.
Coming home,’ Napoleon wrote to Josephine after one of his campaigns.
Dr Glenn Wilson, senior lecturer in psychology at the University of London, says nasal titillation is important in pair bonding.
‘We have not totally escaped our evolutionary past,’ says Dr Wilson.
‘We tend to form attractions on all kinds of bases.
Vision and hearing is processed consciously, but smell is an important component as it affects our unconscious at such a primitive level,’ he says.
In the pheromone stakes it seems men either have it or they don't.
But if the smell of your skin scent fails to make women swoon, there is hope.
HUMANS have a very similar physiological make-up to pigs.
To get their sows in the mating mood, pig breeders spray a manufactured porcine pheromone — chemically very similar to the human type — on their boars.
Called Boar-Mate, it is available from farm suppliers at about Pounds 2.50 a tin and is good for more than 100 matings — just don't take your girlfriend for a romantic walk near a pig farm.
A game of Blind Man's Sniff might be a better option for starting the New Year in style.
20 New Year resolutions to revolutionise your life
Louise Bowen
FOR a healthier 1993 I, Louise Bowen, resolve to:
1.
RESPRAY my car.
Statistics suggest that you have 25 per cent more chance of having an accident in a black car than in a yellow or brown one.
Cars in the latter colours had 133 crashes resulting in injury per 10,000 cars in 1991.
Green ones had 134, silver 142, grey 147, blue 149, red 157, white 160 and black a hefty 179.
2.
GO and live in Liechtenstein.
The inhabitants of this tiny country next to Austria have the longest life expectancy in the world, with women living to an average 82.6 years, and males to 77.6.
Britain is 20th in the table with 71.4 years for men and 77.2 for women.
3.
BOP until I drop once a week.
Dancing, like other forms of intense physical activity, releases endorphins into the blood and brain which produce a ‘high’ leaving people happy, calm and relaxed.
4.
HIRE a gardener and avoid becoming one of the 30 people the Consumers' Association estimates will be killed in gardening accidents this year, or one of the more than 30,000 injured.
Some 45 per cent of all accidents will involve power tools and lawnmowers, 24 per cent will be by tools with blades.
Two per cent of people will poke their eye with canes while tending the dahlias.
5.
BRUSH my tongue daily.
Its rough surface traps the microflora responsible for halitosis and tooth decay.
Saliva glands produce only 10 ml at night compared with 500 ml during the day, so the mouth becomes a stagnant pond for more than 1,600 billion bacteria overnight.
6.
KEEP my heart healthy.
Diseases of the circulatory system — including heart attacks — are Britain's biggest killer at 295,794 deaths last year.
What better motivation to follow a low-fat diet?
7.
SWIM regularly.
The Sports Council says it the best means of acquiring all-round fitness.
Next on the list is cycling, followed by rowing, gymnastics, judo, dancing, football, jogging, brisk walking and squash.
8.
NOT have an accident in Nepal, which has the highest number of potential patients per hospital bed.
At 7,316 people, you could be in for an uncomfortable wait.
If you're going to break a leg, do it in Nauru with only 39 people to a bed!
9.
GIVE up fishing.
More people are killed angling than motor-racing, according to the Office Of Population, Censuses And Surveys.
In 1989 13 people died fishing — 11 by drowning — compared with 11 in all the year's circuit racing, rallying, motorcycle racing and scrambling put together.
10.
INCLUDE plenty of fibre in my diet.
An extra tablespoon sprinkled over the breakfast cereal can help control irritable bowel syndrome, piles, appendicitis and bowel cancer.
It also lowers cholesterol levels.
11.
NOT go back to work next week.
Officially it's bad for your health.
About 5,500 people a year qualify for compensation after being seriously disabled by work-related disease such as deafness, RSI, skin disease and lung damage.
12.
STAY grubby.
Apart from DIY accidents and those in the kitchen, nearly 80 per cent of other home accidents are caused by people falling in or out of the bath.
13.
TAKE up transcendental meditation.
Experts claim daily meditation makes you better at simply everything — physically and mentally.
14.
CARRY on drinking.
Experts say that two glasses of red wine a day — taken with meals — helps prevent heart disease.
Regular intake dilates blood vessels and keeps blood flowing smoother.
15.
KEEP the cap on my asthma inhaler.
Doctors last year noticed a big increase in the numbers of insects inhaled after they had crawled into inhalers.
One sufferer nearly died after gulping two earwigs.
16.
HAVE an aspirin a day.
In the over-60s this can have a better effect than an apple a day at keeping doctors away.
Doctors say an aspirin a day reduces the risk of strokes by stopping platelets in the blood from clotting.
17.
GET that embarrassing tattoo removed.
Doctors have developed a new, painless technique involving ultra-sound.
A special laser breaks down the pigment molecules in the skin, which are then absorbed by the body without scarring.
18.
GIVE up skiing.
You have a one in six chance of coming a cropper on the slopes — which is trebled if you are under the influence of tranquillisers.
19.
TO really give up smoking.
Smokers have a one in three chance of dying from their habit due to lung cancer, heart diseases, strokes and a wide variety of other cancers.
20.
TO keep to all my resolutions.
Seventy nine per cent of people who make New Year's resolutions keep them only a week.
Mugging triggered diabetes
Yvonne Swann
MY WORST and only health problem developed after I was mugged five years ago outside the Embassy Club in Manchester, which I've run for 32 years.
I was on my way to the bank with £7,000 when a masked gang, carrying guns, attacked me and a friend who was with me.
He was the goalkeeper for Manchester United and I joked later that I threw him the bag of money and he dropped it!
But it was no laughing matter at the time.
It was terrifying.
Before running off with the dough the men beat my arms with pickaxe handles.
I thought all my bones were broken, but it was only bad bruising and swelling.
I thought I'd got through the trauma, but as the days passed I started to feel constantly thirsty.
I couldn't stop drinking everything in sight.
I went to the doctor who did some tests which showed I had diabetes.
I was astonished — no one in my family had ever suffered from it but the doctor explained that it had happened entirely because of the shock of the mugging.
It stayed with me and I keep it under control by taking eight tablets a day — and, of course, avoiding all the lovely cream cakes I used to enjoy.
But it's no problem and I feel fine.
Most importantly for my health I never go to the bank with the takings any more.
I use special guards.
The diabetes can sometimes disappear if you lose weight and maybe that will happen to me one of these days as I've lost quite a lot recently.
I used to be 20 stone and now I'm 15 stone, which isn't bad.
But I didn't do it with dieting — it's just that as you get older, and I'm 62 now, you don't need as much food.
Not that my diet is ideal — it's terrible.
I still love my chips and pies and lots of roast potatoes and I drink pints and pints of milk.
I also smoke, but at least I don't drink much alcohol.
I've never missed a day's work through illness in my life and I'm still rushing around the country appearing in theatres and clubs.
But I don't do panto.
My stuff is not quite right for the kiddies.
I'd have to be in a grown-up panto — called something like Mother's Goosed.
My mother has lived with me and run my house since my wife died four years ago.
Mum is still spry and energetic — and she's 91.
Turn over a New Year leaf
Sarah Broadhurst
NOW that the worst of winter is about to set in, there's no better way to while away those long, dark evenings than curled up by the fire with a good book.
But with shelves and shelves of titles to choose from in the shops, where do you start?
To help you spend all those Christmas gift vouchers, TODAY has compiled a list of some of the most entertaining books to suit everyone's taste.
Novels aren't everyone's cup of tea, of course.
If you like a challenge — and the chance of a £5,000 prize to boot— The Key To The Kingdom (Pavilion Books, £12.99) will keep you occupied for many an hour.
The package includes a pack of cards and a booklet which has a riddle running through its pages.
The first person to solve it wins Pounds 5,000.
It is devastatingly hard to work out, but on the plus side you do get more than a year in which to solve the problem.
Amateur mystics will love Russell Grant's new Astro-Tarot Pack of cards which comes with an instruction booklet (Virgin, £14.99).
You'll be able to spend many an hour amazing your friends with your newly-acquired fortune-telling skills.
Outdoor types who would like to know more about dowsing will be able to get started with The Pendulum Kit (Virgin, £12.99).
The kit includes a fine brass pendulum and chain along with a detailed book to point you in the right direction.
If you like reading about animals and country life, try ace vet James Herriot's warm and humorous tale Every Living Thing (Michael Joseph £15.99).
Armchair travellers will appreciate Michael Palin's Pole To Pole (BBC, £16.95) which faithfully follows his TV series in which he raced through 17 countries in colourful style (there is also a video out).
Other interesting books that tie in with TV series are John Sparks's Realm Of The Russian Bear (BBC, £18.95), and Geoff Hamilton's The Living Garden (BBC, £15.95).
The latter is written with Dr Jennifer Owen and is well illustrated with photographs and line-drawings.
It concentrates on improving soil pollination, pest control and propagation the natural way.
However, the gardeners' bible has to be the Royal Horticultural Society Encyclopedia of Gardening (Dorling Kindersley, £29.95).
This comprehensive guide has 3,000 full-colour photographs and includes more than 500 step-by-step sequences.
With outdoor pursuits in mind, sports fanatics will devour The Top 10 Of Sport (Headline, £14.99), a book that is packed with lists, facts and figures.
And while on the subject of record-breakers, there's always the Guinness Book Of Records 1993 (£13.99).
On a lighter note, Maureen Lipman's perceptive view of life and delightful tongue-in-cheek humour brings many a chuckle in When's It Coming Out?
(Robson, £14.95).
As will Mr Bean's Diary (Boxtree £6.99).
Many of the pages are almost obliterated by his unintelligible scribblings, notes and drawings and you'll have much fun trying to decipher them.
If you are fascinated by celebrities, try Margaret Forwood's The Real Benny Hill (Robson, £15.95) and Norman Wisdom's Don't Laugh At Me (Century, £14.99).
Film buffs will enjoy Barry Norman's 100 Best Films Of The Century (Chapmans, £16.99).
One of the biggest films of the coming year should be Dracula — and if you can hang on to your book token for a few weeks, it will be worth your while waiting for the publication of Bram Stoker's Dracula — The Film And The Legend (Pan, £7.99).
This is a great picture book on the making of Francis Ford Coppola's film, as well as an interesting portrait of ol' red eyes himself.
Film fans also shouldn't miss biographies of Maggie Smith by Michael Coveney (Gollancz, £16.99) and Judy Garland by John Fricke (Little Brown, £19.99).
Music lovers will be entranced by the biography of Pavarotti by his wife Adua (Weidenfeld & Nicolson, £17.99).
The book is as gloriously colourful as the great maestro himself and the many pictures document his youth, marriage, family life and pastimes.
La Tante Claire
COOKS cannot go wrong with the charming cookbook-come-autobiography by Pierre Koffmann, pictured above.
Entitled LA TANTE CLAIRE (Headline, £19.99) it follows on from last year's Memoirs Of Gascony and tells of his days at catering college and his early jobs.
It then goes on to describe how he joined the Roux brothers in London and finally opened his own restaurant in Chelsea.
With beautiful illustrations and 150 recipes, it is a fine addition for the kitchen shelf.
Charities
THE news isn't all gloomy for charities despite the recession.
Within a week of launching the Oxfam Cold Front Appeal we reached our target of half a million coats and jumpers.
Public generosity is still alive.
Support services
SOMETHING is severely wrong with our support services if a confused woman feels that the only thing she can do with her newborn child is to leave it on a golf course in freezing conditions.
Today quiz
IN A quiz published this week in TODAY and based on the popular TV show Have I Got News For You, we wrongly attributed the programme to Channel Four.
The show, hosted by Angus Deayton, is of course shown on BBC2.
We apologise for any embarrassment this error may have caused.
Spare no tears for Diana
I HAVE always supported the Royals but I was furious to see Princess Diana described as ‘the loneliest mother’ this Christmas because she was parted from Wills and Harry.
I was even more infuriated to read that their short separation was a ‘tragedy’.
I am sorry Diana's marriage has failed but she doesn't know what a tragedy is.
What about the father who arrived home to find his four children had died in a fire?
Or the father of four who was knocked off his bike and killed?
They had no choice in the matter, unlike Diana who has only herself to blame for turning down the Queen's invitation to join the other Royals.
Spare no tears for Diana
IT WAS great to see Prince Charles pictured with his children at Sandringham this Christmas.
I'm sure that like any other dad the Prince loves his offspring.
It's just that Diana hogs all the photo opportunities.
Sack dunces behind failed schools plan
IT CAME as no surprise to me to learn that school inspectors have branded the new national curriculum a flop.
Millions of parents have been saying this for months.
Not that we can take any joy from declaring ‘I told you so’.
News that standards had stayed the same or actually fell in several instances is pretty alarming, especially the apparent deterioration in reading skills among less able pupils.
Quite frankly it makes me angry to realise how the politicians, and fuzzy-thinking educationalists have cocked up my child's schooling.
They should be sacked.
Why couldn't they just leave well alone and let pupils concentrate on the three Rs?
The sad thing is that there's probably little we can do about it now.
I doubt if the schools system could cope with another overhaul to undo all the harm done.
One thing's for sure, the sons and daughters of all those rich Tories who bulldozed through this crackpot curriculum won't be hindered in any way.
They'll all be going to private schools.
Sack dunces behind failed schools plan
MY SON is a teacher and I've seen how hard he has worked to make the new national curriculum a success in his classroom.
I just wish its critics would give the scheme time to work.
Sophia's choice
WE often read of uncaring stars so it was a joy to learn that Sophia Loren had bailed out her favourite waiter after he was sacked for taking time off to care for his sick wife.
Sophia's decision to pay for a private nurse was a super gesture.
Let's hope that sort of spirit prevails in Britain in 1993.
Palestinian deportees
I RANG the Israeli Embassy on Boxing Day to protest at their treatment of Palestinian deportees, only to find it closed until December 29.
If the Israelis are adopting British holidays then perhaps they will adopt our democratic ways and no longer deport citizens without trial.
Milestones
BIRTHDAYS: Singer John Denver, 49.
Actors Ben Kingsley, 49, and Anthony Hopkins, 55.
ON THIS DAY: In 1923, the chimes of Big Ben were first broadcast.
In 1938, breath tests were introduced for motorists by police in Indianapolis, America.
Things you didn't know you didn't know
Graeme Donald
THE revels that once took place at the New Year turned everything base over apex.
Master waited on servant and beggars became king for the day.
In Rome and Greece, men and women even cross-dressed for the occasion.
Each noble household chose its beggar-king, who would take the head of the table to ‘rule the roast’.
This expressions survives today as ‘rule the roost’.
This jester-king was a hand-me-down from darker times when the blessings of the New Year were guaranteed by the sacrifice of the mock king after he had a jolly good time.
In early Rome this took place at the old New Year which was in March — the Ides of March to be precise.
This was the ritualistic time for the slaying of a leader, as Julius Caesar found out to his peril.
TODAY'S Book Of Things You Didn't Know…is now on sale, published by Simon & Schuster for £3.99.
Are you sitting dangerously?
Sylvia Woods
EC rules on office comfort
NEW EC directives that come into force tomorrow are sure to put many backs up.
But before you write a complaint to your Euro-MP, that is exactly what millions of office workers need.
For the regulations are aimed at improving health and safety — particularly posture — for regular users of VDU screens.
And the onus will be on employers to ensure their offices comply with the Display Screen Regulations.
The rules define the minimum standards for work organisation, the working environment, and the design of equipment such as desks, chairs and VDUs.
‘Anyone installing new work-stations after January 1 should comply with the regulations immediately,’ says a spokesperson for System Concepts Limited — a consultancy which advises manufacturers and designers on the health and safety aspects of their products, and employers on how to implement the regulations.
‘Employers with work-stations already in place will have four years to make any improvements, providing there is no immediate health or safety risk to employees.
But new equipment will have to comply straight away.
‘All employers must assess any forseeable risks to employees using their workstations and premises, and should inform employees of the results of these assessments.
‘They must also provide health and safety training, and it will be up to individuals to point out their own needs or problems.’
The regulations will be policed by Environmental Health officers and factory inspectors, and any employers not complying could be prosecuted.
Also coming into effect tomorrow are the Manual Handling Operations Regulations, which require employers to assess any risk of manual handling injury to workers.
These cover all lifting tasks, and shouldn't be thought of as just applying in an industrial environment.
If you're moving offices and lifting heavy boxes, they apply equally to you.
For advice on reputable ergonomics (posture) consultants, contact the Association of Professional Ergonomics Consultancies on 071-636 5912.
Easing that pain in the neck
THE picture above shows the ideal set-up for the modern work station, and the new EC regulations go a long way to achieving this.
Designed to reduce back and neck strain and Repetitive Strain Injury (RSI), they insist that chairs must have seats that are height adjustable and backs that are height and tilt adjustable.
Screens should be at eye level so the neck and shoulders are straight, and employers will be obliged to provide appropriate stands to raise screens to the required height.
Workers should sit so their upper arms fall down by their sides, and their lower arms slope slightly from the elbows.
Once they have established this position, they should adjust the height of their screen and chair to suit.
If this means raising their chair, workers may find their feet are dangling.
Under the regulations, employers are required to supply footrests.
Forgotten heroes
THE glow of recognition will be sweet for those who have been singled out in the New Year Honours list.
There is no doubt that this is a proper way to acknowledge the fine achievements of sportsmen and women and others who have done work for charity.
It is also right to reward physical bravery and moral courage.
We applaud all those honours.
But, as usual, the list also pays tribute to hundreds of individuals for their contributions to politics, the Civil Service and the armed forces.
No one disputes that these people have been stalwart in carrying out their duties.
But we do question whether their service is any more worthy of recognition than that of the average hard-working nurse, policeman on patrol or the small businessman who is struggling to keep his company going in the face of the recession and determined not to make his employees redundant.
It is true that some of these people are recognised with honours.
But the majority of these heroes are unsung while their peers in the Civil Service can be almost certain of collecting a medal with their gold watch.
John Major is aware of these anomalies and that is why he is to review the system.
Next year he will begin to bring it ‘up to date’ and emphasise that honours should not be automatically awarded to people who have kept their noses clean in certain jobs, but that they must be earned.
He is right to change the emphasis of the list and we urge him to stand up to the civil servants who are resisting change.
But it is rich that John Major should talk of earning honours when his own Government is widely regarded as inept in so many ways.
If the Prime Minister is really keen on people earning their dues, he should start by taking a critical look at his own Cabinet.
Home truth
CHILDREN love the Home Alone films because the notion of being independent is their ultimate fantasy.
Real life, however, is rather different, as an American family has proved by trying to live out the film.
The parents went to Mexico for Christmas and left their two little girls at home to look after themselves.
Not surprisingly, the children found the separation bewildering and frightening.
Perhaps the adults will understand that now that they have been arrested.
And perhaps their foolishness will make everyone understand that however much fun Home Alone is for children at the cinema it is fiction and can not be made real by acting it out.
Price is right
THREE cheers for the supermarket price war.
Of course the supermarkets' aim is to make fat profits and they are not really in the business of doing their customers favours.
But we must all welcome the opportunity to make savings on things we buy every day.
Cutting the price of essentials will do far more to help the people who are struggling than any number of £100 reductions on clothes that are out of reach for most of us.
Marje's tears
FIVE years after the death of the man she loved passionately for 30 years, Marje Proops still carries his photograph in her handbag.
She never told her husband about her relationship with Phillip Levy and it was only after both men had died that she made the difficult decision to confess her secret life.
How tragic that the one man she trusted and felt close to should have deceived her.
The real knights and dames of Britain
Christian Gysin
UNLESS you live in their village, town or just around the corner from one, it is unlikely you have ever heard of the six people on this page.
They are the ordinary citizens for whom the honours system was designed — people who have dedicated their lives to duty.
Many like them have raised money for local charities or simply made a genuine and lasting contribution to their communities.
They are not the well-paid politicians we see on our TV screens, the high-profile sportsmen and women of this country, or even the many civil servants who seem to fill the list.
In many cases they have given up their spare time to pursue a personal dream of making life better for those around them.
They range from the churchman who has dedicated his life to fighting racism and the coastguard who spends his days battling against the hazards of our seas, to the voluntary hospital worker and tireless parish councillor.
Our list highlights the magistrate who has helped those coping with unemployment or sudden redundancy and the woman who has spent her life helping animals.
Each person has never sought an honour or payment for their selfless work, preferring quietly to get on with the job.
Here, CHRISTIAN GYSIN highlights their remarkable achievements.
ANTI-RACISM CAMPAIGNER
The 64-year-old minister was nominated for the honour by colleagues at Walworth Methodist Church, south London, where he has spent the past 15 years campaigning tirelessly against racism and working to improve race relations within inner cities.
Described by colleagues as a ‘champion of the race movement’, Mr Watson was a founder member of MELRAW (Methodist Leaders Racism Awareness Workshop) in 1977.
He built up a hostel linked to the church for overseas students and asylum seekers.
He says: ‘I am absolutely delighted by the honour — but more because of the people it has come from rather than the award itself.
‘I have discovered that the black people I have been working with in the inner cities proposed me for the award.
That makes the honour all the more special.
‘I have worked with immigrant communities and the police so they can see each other 's problems more clearly.’
WRVS ORGANISER
A Women's Royal Voluntary Service organiser for more than 38 years, Eileen says: ‘Honours should be given to people who decide to work voluntarily in the public interest.
‘This is the reason they were first given and I would like to think that I have been given this award because of that.
‘I am not so sure the awards were conceived for people such as sportsmen and businessmen who are paid to do their job.’
Eileen, from Sedgley, West Midlands, leaves work at her son's butcher's shop every Tuesday to go to Burton Road Hospital in nearby Dudley and returns after completing her trolley rounds on the wards.
She says: ‘People tend to forget that WRVS volunteers have jobs and give up their spare time willingly to help the public.
I just do it because I like helping others.’
AUXILIARY COASTGUARD CHIEF
Doug, 59, is the head of the auxiliary coastguard service in Torbay, Devon, the second busiest area in Britain.
He has spent 37 years in the service, the last 12 in charge.
In an average year he and his 17-strong team of volunteers attend 150 incidents, mostly cliff rescues.
‘It's pretty demanding work,’ says Doug.
‘But saving lives is a great thrill and gives tremendous satisfaction.
There is also the pleasure of working with a fantastic team of lads.’
Doug prides himself that his company has won five Chief Coastguard's Commendations — the highest honour in the service.
He is also proud that in 37 years he has never lost a single victim whose life he has been called on to save.
‘We've had to lift countless bodies from the bottom of cliffs.
But I've never lost a live one’, he says.
‘I remember one who was literally hanging on by his fingertips when we arrived, but we've always got them up in the end.’
ANIMAL WELFARE WORKER
Almost for longer than she can remember, Joan Scott has dedicated her life to animals.
She cares for them so much, that she even sold her home to help set up a sanctuary to look after them.
Now Joan, 72, has been rewarded with the British Empire Medal for her charitable work.
‘I was so suprised when I got the letter telling me about the award that I burst into tears,’ says Joan, a widow.
For someone who never expected to be officially recognised for her work, the BEM is ample reward.
‘It's an honour to get something like this, especially when it's a complete surprise,’ says Joan, from Hambleton, near Selby, North Yorkshire.
‘As far as I am concerned, the honours system is a wonderful thing which should be retained.’
COMMUNITY WORKER
Magistrate Mrs Granger founded the Stockport branch of the Volunteer Bureau 21 years ago.
Part of a national network, it helps recruit and place volunteer workers into community projects helping the elderly, disabled or needy.
She says: ‘It is a very valuable function because it helps people who are unemployed or have just been made redundant to do something which is worthwhile.
‘It gives them a feeling of self worth by contributing to their local community.
It has been very rewarding and enjoyable.
It has shown me there is a lot of good out there.
‘I feel very flattered to be getting this award because it is a recognition of the work done by the voluntary sector in Stockport.’
Mrs Grainger, 60, has been retired from the bureau for 18 months but still does voluntary work for the Victim Support Scheme and the Reddish Care Scheme in Stockport.
She is also a lay member of the Stockport Family Health Authority.
PARISH COUNCILLOR
Retired accountant Mr Collins was nominated for the honour for being a true pillar of his community, the village of Wrington, near Bristol.
He spent 33 years as a parish councillor, 24 of them as parish council chairman.
He has served for 30 years as the local church warden and he spent 42 years as treasurer of the local branch of the Royal British Legion.
‘I have never sought an honour in my life — I just did what I could for my home village where I was born and raised.
I was staggered to realise I had been honoured and to this day I don't know who put me forward.’
His proudest achievement has been the restoration, with other villagers, of the run-down village green to its former glory as focal point of the community.
Sally goes for roar power
ACTRESS Sally Kirkland really earns her stripes as a tiger trainer for a TV Christmas special.
The 48-year-old star of US soap Falcon Crest is also no pussycat with men.
Former lovers include Robert de Niro and Dustin Hoffman and she has dated Bob Dylan for years.
Robbie Coltrane
COMEDIAN Robbie Coltrane and partner Rhona Gemmell have called their three-week-old son Spencer.
The name is said to be a tribute to 42-year-old Robbie's screen idol Spencer Tracy.
The Scottish comic's agent would not confirm the rumour.
‘It's quite a common name in Scotland,’ she said.
Todd Bridges
BABY-faced actor Todd Bridges was arrested yesterday on drugs and firearms charges.
Los Angeles police, who had the star of the sitcom Diff'rent Strokes under surveillance, allegedly found drugs and a handgun in his car.
Bridges, 26, is already on probation for other offences.
Sir Ranulph Fiennes
EXPLORER Sir Ranulph Fiennes was within 200 miles of the South Pole yesterday on the 50th day of a 2,200-mile trek for charity.
Sir Ranulph, 48, and Dr Michael Stroud, 32, hope to reach the Pole on January 12 in their attempt to cross the Antarctic on foot.
Bruce Willis
DIE HARD tough-guy Bruce Willis will pick up £5 million to play a fairytale prince.
In a modern day Sleeping Beauty, set in New York, he wakes a medieval princess with a kiss.
The film will be produced by the 37-year-old's own production company, Flying Heart.
Zsa Zsa Gabor
EIGHT-times-married Zsa Zsa Gabor believes the Prince and Princess of Wales's split will not last.
‘Charles will be back — how can he get a more beautiful woman?’ said the 73-year-old as she flew to Los Angeles with latest husband Prince Frederick Von Anhalt.
The couple were in London to record a breakfast TV show.
Paul McCartney
EX-BEATLE Paul McCartney is comedian Eddie Murphy's hero.
‘This cat had everything and could have gone down any road,’ said the Beverly Hills Cop star.
‘But he wound up on his feet with a beautiful family, still making music.
That really inspired me.’
Good Taste
IN yesterday's Supermarket Round-up we listed best buys available at Safeway this week.
These savings are to be found at Gateway stores NOT Safeway.
We apologise for any inconvenience caused.
The public fights back
THE British have a reputation for not complaining.
We politely put up with just about anything.
Turning the other cheek is the national pastime.
But something has happened to raise our hackles.
The British people are fighting back against the shoddy treatment with which we have put up for so long.
Yesterday the Banking Ombudsman revealed that the number of complaints he received last year jumped by 60 per cent.
Part of that increase is doubtless accounted for by the contempt with which banks have treated many of their customers.
Yet in the past a lot of those customers would simply have accepted the way they were treated.
Now a substantial number insists on standing up to protest.
Does it do any good though?
For one of the reasons given by people for not complaining is that it is a waste of time to do so.
That is shown to be wrong by yesterday's announcement from British Telecom that the cost of calls is to be frozen, although phone rentals are rising.
BT can afford to take a smaller profit, of course, but it is only doing that because it has been shamed into doing so by its customers.
There has been an enormous and very genuine outcry over the vast sums it has made from a virtual monopoly position.
And BT, to give it credit, has responded.
It has also introduced ‘Sunday special’ low rates, again in response to protests from ordinary consumers, and yesterday said it plans to extend the scheme.
It is rare for any big business to take initiatives like that on its own.
But it makes commercial sense for them to respond to pressure.
That is a job for all of us.
Don't just leave it to the media and politicians to protest — get up and do it yourself.
That way we will all get the services we want and deserve.
Right response
THE greatest survey ever into sexual habits reveals that the Great Aids Scare never became the nightmare that was feared.
Those who are not in the two high-risk categories of intravenous drug users and travellers from certain countries are very unlikely to become HIV positive.
But that does not mean safe sex should be abandoned.
There is no reason to become complacent.
There is still no cure for Aids and once you have got it, there is no point in wishing you had been careful.
Yet the survey shows that there is also no reason to live in fear.
And that applies not just to young people — too many of whom are still dismissive of safe sex — but the parents who worry that their teenagers will become infected with the virus.
Some critics say there has not been enough action over Aids while others complain there has been too much.
This survey suggests that the Health Department has got it just about right.
Role call
THE delicious Britt Ekland will add some excitement to the Radio 4 serial The Archers when she makes her guest appearance.
But in case other soaps feel dull in comparison we suggest they do some rapid recruiting.
Rod Stewart could liven up EastEnders, Princess Margaret (who has already appeared in The Archers) could add some class to Eldorado and Kenneth Branagh could make Ken Barlow feel inferior in Coronation Street.
As for Home And Away, who else could star but Fergie?
Tap into the world of water
Isla Whitcroft
EACH person in Britain uses an average of 30 gallons of water a day.
THE biggest domestic culprit for wasting water is the toilet cistern, which accounts for nearly one third of household consumption.
REDUCED annual rainfall means that East Anglia ‘lost’ the equivalent of one year's rain since 1988.
DEMAND for water in Britain has increased by two thirds in the last 30 years.
By the year 2010 it is expect to have doubled from the 1960 level.
HUNDREDS of animals were treated by St Tiggywinkle's hospital for dehydration due to the lack of moisture in the soil this year.
BRITAIN'S driest spot is Lee Wick Farm, Clacton which has only 2½ inches of rainfall each year.
THE current drought, now in its fourth year in some parts of the country, is the worst this century.
UP to one quarter of the nation's water supply is lost because of leaks in the mains pipes.
THERE are enough water pipes in Britain to stretch three-quarters of the way to the moon.
THE production of an average size family car gobbles up 3,000 litres of water while a pint of beer takes eight pints of water.
POWER stations take up 11.5 billion litres of water a day while the rest of industry uses up only 3.4 billion litres per day.
DOMESTIC consumption rockets by 70 per cent at weekends, mainly due to gardeners using hoses.
SPALDING in Lincolnshire has adapted to the drought by using semi-tropical plants for landscaping.
BRITAIN and Ireland are the only two countries in the EC that do not meter all water supplies.
THE Scilly Isles employed a water diviner to pinpoint water sources last April.
The islands are also installing a desalination plant to produce 50,000 gallons of water a year.
THE average household pays 27p per day in water rates.
With the pending abolition of the rates, the water authorities are obliged to find a replacement charging system by the end of the decade.
INCIDENTS of damage to homes from subsidence caused by drought has risen from 3,000 in 1980 to 100,000 in 1991.
One deluge won't end the drought
Andrew Penman
AS rivers burst their banks, homes were flooded and hundreds of livestock were swept to their death, there was one key question that could still be sensibly asked yesterday.
Is there still a drought in Britain?
In a country that has known hosepipe bans in autumn even as gardens disappear under floodwater, it is reasonable to wonder how much good the downpour of the past 48 hours has achieved.
The answer is that despite the wettest November since 1984 the depleted underground water tables in some parts of the country have barely started to recover.
The problem with British rain is only partly that there has not been enough of it.
We have also suffered from rain in the wrong place and at the wrong time.
Rain in August tends to be soaked up by dehydrated plants and trees or sits on dry, baking former water courses waiting to evaporate.
Summer flash floods achieve little beyond destroying crops.
The bulk of the water is quickly washed through rivers to the sea.
Winter rain is more useful.
But while the current downpours brought flood alerts to rivers in Wales and the West Country, over in East Anglia, where the drought has been worst felt, the impact was less spectacular.
There half an inch of rain has fallen in the same period.
Much more is needed.
More useful than the rainstorms has been the steady drizzle over the past few weeks.
Rivers have been restored to healthy levels and, more importantly, this rain is at last reaching the water-permeable rocks deep underground.
In the Anglia Water region, underground levels had dropped 15 inches over the past four dry winters.
‘Our reservoirs are all topped up but we're only beginning to see recovery in water tables,’ says John West of Anglian Water.
The National Rivers Authority says we need one thoroughly wet winter to restore water levels — and two wet winters in southern regions.
Some water companies aren't prepared to wait.
Many are speeding up investment in technology to make their water gathering facilities more efficient.
But the water watchdog Offwat is against costly new reservoirs.
In wet-weather they would be a waste, it argues.
The watchdog sees more purpose in changing demand with domestic water meters.
No solution will work without rain.
Two months ago six million people faced hosepipe bans — it could be the same story next year.
The trouble with sex
Olga Craig
It can get you legally sacked if you have an office affair.
THE office Christmas party is in full swing and Mr Smith from accounts and Miss Jones from sales are canoodling under the mistletoe.
When they turn up at the office next day looking as if they've missed out on their sleep, however, they could get more than teasing comments from their colleagues.
They could get their marching orders.
For although thousands of people meet their partners in the workplace, an office affair is a sackable offence.
As many couples have found, often only one half of the relationship will be asked to leave.
And it's nearly always the woman.
But an employer can legally sack you or your partner if he can prove it is disruptive of other work relationships, it could harm business or that it affects job performance.
Even married couples working for the same firm can be fired if the boss can prove that their relationship makes their employment impractical, or that it is against company policy.
Ann Tomen, a marketing assistant, knows all about that.
She married a colleague who then left to work for a rival firm.
Within days, Ann was demoted because of the risk of an ‘inadvertent information leak’.
Her salary was maintained, but the post carried far less responsibility so Ann refused it.
She was dismissed, went to an industrial tribunal and lost.
One woman was sacked the day after her wedding to a rival firm's employee.
She later found out that the bosses of the two companies had got together to work out which one of the couple would be the cheapest to sack.
Gillian Howard, a barrister who runs her own company offering employ-ment law advice, says many bosses draft an ‘office affair’ charter before the annual party.
‘Once they get their fingers burned over an affair they want proper legal guidelines,’ she says.
‘One said the director and his secretary were having an affair.
He promoted her above her ability and she was saying he had promised she could travel the world first class.’
A Labour Research magazine spokesman says employers who believe workers will ‘pillow-talk’ can dismiss staff.
And more disturbingly, bosses can act within days of discovering a relationship.
One employee was sent to his chief executive's home to do some work.
He was soon dismissed for what an industrial tribunal described as ‘indulging in behaviour short of intercourse’ with the executive's wife.
Even an innocent relationship can be viewed suspiciously, as Audrey Montgomery and Robert Gannon found.
They took a holiday together and their employers, Brocks Explosives, fired them both.
Both appealed and won.
Mr Gannon won because there was no evidence of a relationship, while Ms Montgomery claimed sex discrimination.
If two male colleagues had gone on holiday, she said, neither would have been sacked.
Britain emerges from shadow of Aids
Nicki Pope
ONE in four British men have had ten or more sexual partners — yet a major survey reveals that Aids poses only a small threat to them.
The survey, funded by the Wellcome Trust, asked 19,000 people about their lifestyles to find out more about Aids in Britain.
The survey team believes the Aids epidemic will now be restricted to injecting-drug users and people in high risk populations from Africa and Asia.
One in seven of the people surveyed has had an Aids test.
Many people said the test took place because they were blood donors, but more than four per cent of men and nearly three per cent of women had felt the need for a test anyway.
Researcher Dr Anne Johnson said these people were from the group with the highest risk of contracting Aids.
‘It is quite clear that the heterosexual epidemic in the UK remains a small problem,’ she said.
The survey revealed that 100,000 people had injected drugs in the past five years, with more than half sharing needles.
One in 16 men reported sexual experiences with other men.
The survey found that 39 per cent of British women are faithful to one partner over a lifetime, while one in 17 men and women under 59 have never had sex.
It's all rather silly and dull on Radio One, say teenagers
Helen Renshaw
TEENAGERS were promised ‘wall-to-wall sex’ when Radio 1 Talks About Sex was launched last night.
But a panel of youngsters asked by TODAY to review the show declared it to be more damp squib than hot stuff.
Although the three-part series is aimed at older teenagers, we deliberately sought the opinion of younger children who would still be listening to their stereos when the show is transmitted at 8.30pm — half an hour before the traditional watershed for adult programmes.
The BBC lured young listeners with promises of explicit talk about masturbation, oral sex, and lesbian and gay experiences.
Over a soundtrack of appropriate chart hits, unidentified teenagers talked about coming to terms with their own sexuality.
One youth told of emerging from a drunken stupor to find himself in bed with the boy next door.
A middle-aged man recalled his feelings of being ‘the only 12-year-old queer in Great Britain’ and a girl confided a desire to snog her best friend.
LIAM NEWNHAM, 13, thought the programme was ‘a bit silly’.
‘It was pretty dull really.
You can't learn much by just hearing people talk about their own experiences.
‘They should have had an interviewer questioning people and going into things more deeply — maybe in a phone-in format,’ he said.
Although next week's show concentrates on Aids issues, LAURIE YOUNG, 13, was disappointed that the first programme failed to address the problem.
‘I found it too long and not very informative,’ she said.
‘It didn't heighten awareness about Aids at all— and that's what young people want to know about.
It was quite lame.’
ANDREW QUINN, 13, said the show would be of more interest to 16 or 17-year-olds.
‘We are not really doing the things they talked about.
Perhaps it would have been more interesting if we were,’ said Andrew.
‘It droned on a bit— and there was nobody there to answer any of the questions that were raised.’
Fourteen-year-old RACHEL SEATON was so bored she'd have rather spent the 30 minutes doing her homework.
‘It would have been more interesting if it had been more explicit,’ she said.
The programme would have captured the imagination of TAMZIN DAVIS, 14, if she'd stumbled upon it while tuning her radio — but only for two minutes.
‘After a while I felt I knew what they were going to say.
Real people don't come out with things like that anyway — I think they were actors,’ she said.
Heike Henkel
OLYMPIC high jump champion Heike Henkel leaped at the chance when she was asked to star with top model Naomi Campbell in a fashion shoot.
Designer Otto Kern reckoned the blonde 28-year-old German and sultry Naomi, 22, would be a breath of fresh air for his new spring and summer collection.
Anthony Hopkins
SILENCE Of The Lambs star Anthony Hopkins, 57, has a perfect recipe for success.
Hopkins, right, says hello to the camera every day.
‘I want it to like me,’ he said.
Shannon Doherty
SHANNON Doherty, 21, of Beverly Hills 90210, has been charged with battery after a fight at a Hollywood club.
Sandie Frost
DRACULA star Sadie Frost, 25, was lost for words in a love scene she was supposed to punctuate with moans.
‘I couldn't make a sound,’ said Sadie.
The woman who saved Eldorado
Tim Ewbank
IT SOUNDED the most thankless task in television: to turn a sagging soap into a runaway success story.
But that is just what Corinne Hollingworth believes she has done with Eldorado.
Corinne, a TV producer who has worked on EastEnders, flew out to Spain, took a long, hard look at the BBC's £10 million sangria soap and set about revolutionising it.
Four months later, and with viewing figures up a million, she reckons she has a winning formula.
‘Eldorado has the image of something that went off half-cock and wasn't very successful or very good,’ she says.
‘But it's a totally different programme now.
‘I had a very strong reaction to the first episode.
There were many, many things wrong with it.
When I took over there were a lot of things I felt needed to be dealt with.
But you can't always prevent, you have to cure.’
Corinne's cures included axing seven characters from the cast of 31 — beach bar brothers Darren Newton and Jon Morrey, odd-job man Patch Connolly, German toy-boy Kai Maurer, French teenager Arnaud Leduc, teenage bride Fizz, played by Kathy Pitkin, and her ageing screen husband Bunny (Roger Walker).
The Fizz and Bunny marriage was the main storyline when the soap started but Corinne felt it was distasteful.
‘Kathy was a beautiful girl but what was she doing with this man Bunny?’ she says.
‘In a way it was all slightly unpleasant.
The basic relationship was wrong.
‘I felt terribly sorry for Kathy.
She was an untrained actress who was given an enormous task of carrying so many episodes in the early days.’
Those early days of Eldorado were masterminded by producer Julia Smith, who was Corinne's boss on EastEnders.
The situation could have been embarrassing when Corinne took over — but it did not turn out that way.
‘When I first came out I stayed with Julia and I've since heard from her to say well done,’ says Corinne.
‘I think in the end she was quite pleased to have the burden taken from her.’
While Corinne had to steel herself to be ruthless when she axed key characters, she was also having to cope with a sense of loss.
For moving to Spain meant leaving behind her husband, TV director Robert Gabriel, and son Jonathan.
‘Initially I thought I could just pack up my son and bring him here,’ she says.
‘I live 20 minutes away from the set, but when you are working 16 hours a day the last thing you need is to be in a foreign country with a small child.
‘They came over in the summer and at half-term and I'll be in England for Christmas.
I phone twice a day but I can't deny I miss them.’
Meanwhile Corinne's changes at Eldorado include more storylines for the reduced cast.
‘There seemed to be an awful lot of rushing around before,’ she says.
‘They were all bumping into other characters but never really talking.
They do that now.’
Other changes include moving the scriptwriters to Spain and banning the odd words of Spanish, French and German which had crept in.
‘I decided everybody would speak English,’ she says.
‘If foreign nationals in the cast were speaking to each other, we had to get them to speak English.
‘We had problems in the quality of their English but we've brought in a dialogue coach, which has helped.’
With all her changes in place, Corinne now has one task left — changing public attitudes to Eldorado.
‘The advance publicity about sun, sex and sangria diminished the product,’ she says.
‘It made it seem as if it was going to be superficial.
‘You can't sell something on that basis because it's vacuous and vapid and would never sustain on a weekly basis.
‘These programmes are about human emotions.
‘But comedians still use remarks about Eldorado in their routines.
There was a disparaging remark about it recently in Birds Of A Feather.
‘Eldorado is substantially different now but to get people to admit that is an uphill struggle.
‘I'm very proud of it.
I know if people stopped carping and gave it a chance, they would get hooked.
‘Even though the viewing figures are up to 7.5 million — from an all-time low of less than four million — there's no doubt they are not as high as they might be.
But there's a tremendous spirit here.
‘We all love Eldorado and we want other people to love it.’
Pop over, MP Gyles tells old pal Mr Clinton
By Tim Satchell
TORY MP Gyles Brandreth has invited Bill Clinton, President elect of the United States, to visit his constituency, Chester.
He finds they were contemporaries at Oxford University.
Mr Brandreth tells me: ‘I discovered that we were at Oxford when an American reporter rang me some months ago to ask about him.
‘I replied that my memories weren't vivid.
The reporter then said: ‘Well, he seems to remember you.’
That was why I have now decided to write to him.
‘In my invitation I told him that in Chester we have everything to offer that is best in Britain.
‘It is as modern as tomorrow with lots of time for yesterday,’ says Mr Brandreth, suggesting that Mr Clinton could fly to Manchester Airport and stay at the Chester Grosvenor, the Hotel of the Year.
Will Oxford have been a good background for the US Presidency?
‘It has to be a bonus,’ says Mr Brandreth.
‘I am sure it is a civilizing influence.’
Mr Brandreth was President of the Oxford Union in 1968 and stayed on the following year, a high profile position which may explain why Mr Clinton remembers him.
While Mr Brandreth was at New College, Mr Clinton was at University College from 1968-70.
IN the preface to next year's edition of The Wine Diary, published by Grants of St James's, wine lecturer Neil Hadley warns against ‘the threat of creeping prohibition’.
Mr Hadley, who teaches at the Grants School of Wine, cites studies which have found that compared with lifelong abstainers, moderate drinkers show a 26 per cent reduction in the incidence of heart trouble.
‘And on the psychological side,’ says Mr Hadley, ‘a review of the results of 66 different studies has shown that moderate alcohol intake is associated with increased powers of expression, happiness and conviviality, and reduced stress, tension, depression and self-consciousness.’
The message, says Mr Hadley, is ‘Drink wisely and be merry.’
And…
By Tim Satchell
HAVE you heard about the dyslexic devil worshipper?
He sold his soul to Santa.
Champagne to G.K. Bower, Leicester.
Caring Kanga's fashion fun
By Tim Satchell
ROYAL confidante Lady Tryon is giving 10 per cent of the proceeds of a special pre-Christmas fashion sale to the Leonora Children's Cancer Fund.
The appeal was set up by her friend, Lady Romsey in memory of her daughter Leonora Knatchbull who died last year at the age of five.
Australian-born Lady Tryon — dubbed Kanga by Prince Charles — is holding the sale at the Manor House, Great Durnford, Wiltshire, the Tryon family home into which she and her husband, Anthony, and four children recently moved.
Prices of the Kanga range of dresses and accessories have been dramatically reduced by up to 50 per cent.
‘The sale is not any reflection on the business — in fact we have had a brilliant year,’ Lady Tryon tells me.
‘We thought it was a good idea to hold a pre-Christmas sale rather than a New Year one because many of our dresses are suitable for Christmas.’
Brooke branches out into suspense
By Tim Satchell
DIRECTOR Terence Young has been telling me about his new film project — a suspense movie, Metal Tree, starring close friend Brooke Shields.
‘It's an upmarket Psycho,’ says Mr Young.
‘Twenty-five years ago I made a suspense movie, Wait Until Dark, with Audrey Hepburn for which she got an Oscar.
‘I thought it was about time I made another.’
Filming of Metal Tree, to be distributed by MGM, starts next month in Sicily, Vienna, and the south of France.
James Spader, who took the role of Miss Shield's brother in the 1981 Franco Zeffirelli film Endless Love and won a Cannes Film Festival award for his part in Sex, Lies and Videotape, will also star.
Mr Young, 77, who directed the James Bond movies Dr No and From Russia With Love, has lived in Cannes for the last 20 years.
His wife, Dosia (writer Dorothea Bennett), died seven years ago.
Miss Shields, 27, is currently filming a CBS TV movie, I Love You To Death — The Laura Black Story.
Everybody's worst nightmare
Nigel Howard
IT'S night time.
Freddy Krueger is chasing you down an alley, his knives raised menacingly.
Just before the brutal end he laughs hysterically and says the words you most dread: ‘You are fired.’
This is 1990s Britain's worst nightmare, according to scientists who have launched a unique investigation of the terrors that wake us in a cold sweat.
After a public appeal, more than 800 people who have regular nightmares flooded the Nightmare Research Unit at Bethlehem Royal Hospital, Beckenham, Kent with pleas for help.
All nightmares fit into at least one of three categories: Threats to our survival, to our security and to our self-esteem.
Each is translated through images.
In the Freddy dream, for example, death is obviously adminstered by the demon from the Nightmare On Elm Street movies.
Loss of esteem is signalled by his derisive laughter and loss of security is the words ‘You're fired’.
Research suggests that this third element, fears about the security of jobs and homes, is occupying more of our dreams as the recession continues to bite.
Dr Jacob Empson, a psychologist who runs a sleep laboratory at Hull University and the author of Sleep And Dreaming, says: ‘When people are worried about the future it shows in their subconscious.
Nightmares are associated with anxiety.’
We asked psychotherapist Sara Cooper for an insight into some of the 800 dreams:
A man dreams of being chased by a killer whale.
This could reflect fear of aggression.
The large, powerful mammal possibly represents his parents when he was a child.
An accountant is rooted to the spot as sheets of glass plummet towards her.
Because glass is transparent, this could indicate she is afraid of being ‘seen through’, or of feeling separated by unseen barriers.
Another woman dreams she is strapped into a burning airplane.
Like a womb, a plane is something which contains us, so a crashing plane could represent insecurities about our mother or those close to us.
A 50-year-old man dreams of drowning inside a sinking ship.
This may point to a powerful repressed feeling which we fear will overwhelm us.
In her nightmare a woman is forced to watch a madman slaughter her family.
Freudian teaching interprets this as heavily repressed feelings of hostility towards her family.
Modern teachings allow for a more straightforward reason — fear of loss.
A woman dreams of arriving at work naked.
This is a classic dream symbolising threats to self-esteem.
Another woman dreams she is rooted to the spot.
This can signal indecision.
Fit Tips
EATING more fruit and vegetables can control mild hypertension or raised blood presssure in the elderly without the need for drugs.
They increase the level of potassium in the body and this leads to a reduction in blood pressure, say researchers at Leicester General Hospital's University Department of Medicine For The Elderly.
OTHERWISE healthy women who suffer from swollen lymph nodes in their armpits may find their deodorant is to blame.
Researchers at Mount Sinai Medical Centre in New York have discovered a strong association between the condition and the use of roll-on deodorant.
They suggest avoiding the roll-on may resolve the problem and save thousands of needless biopsies each year.
AN anaesthetic gas used by many dentists may reduce the fertility of their female assistants.
Nitrous oxide, or laughing gas, appears to reduce the chances of conceiving by more than half, according to scientists at the National Institute of Dental Research in the United States.
DOCTORS are warning parents to take care when heating baby formula milk in microwaves as incidents of scalding have been reported.
Many microwaves heat unevenly leading to hot spots in the milk.
The US journal Pediatrics says it is crucial to remove the cap or nipple of the baby's bottle before heating and to shake it well before feeding.
It recommends formula milk be heated in volumes of at least 4 oz and that 8 oz bottles should not be heated for more than 45 seconds.
AT least a quarter of drivers with diabetes are breaking the law by not informing the licensing authority or insurers, according to a new survey by Leeds University.
Diabetes can cause road safety problems.
Hypoglycaemia, the abnormally low levels of blood sugar that occur in insulin-dependant diabetics, produces dizziness, palpitations, confusion and visual problems.
The £15m Casualty
Katy Bravery
State-of-the-art operating theatre may be axed before opening if Bart's closes.
THIS is the most advanced operating theatre in Europe, equipped with life-saving devices that are pushing back the frontiers of medical science.
It is equipment that may never be used.
The theatre is part of a Pounds 15 million complex at St Bartholomew's — one of four London hospitals threatened with closure under an NHS shake-up.
The theatre is due to be opened by the Duke of Gloucester on January 21.
At the same time, Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley is due to decide on the future of Bart's.
If she decides to implement the Tomlinson Report's closure proposals, the entire complex could be mothballed before it is officially open.
At the moment the only sounds in the operating theatres are made by a lone cleaner mopping dust from the floor.
Millions of pounds worth of state-of-the-art equipment is lying idle.
Among the innovations is a medical mass spectrometer, which will analyse the gases breathed and exhaled by patients, virtually ruling out any risk of brain damage under anaesthetic due to equipment failure or human error.
Apart from America where it was designed, there are only two others in the world, in Japan and France.
‘I just can't believe it may all go to waste,’ says Alison Knapp, a theatre manager who has seen the whole project through since it was first planned in 1983.
‘But I suppose nothing closes overnight, so it may get some use.’
Consultant anaesthetist Dr Mike Jordan, who has been on the planning team for nine years, adds: ‘It would be crazy for it not to be used.
Part of the high cost was because we had to shoehorn the suite into a difficult-shaped space.
‘This also means you can't dismantle it and use it elsewhere.’
The suite of seven theatres, which could handle 10,000 operations a year, is due to open for surgery on January 25.
If it does come on stream, each theatre would be able to carry out roughly ten per cent more operations than the 1930s theatres the suite will replace.
At peak capacity some 56 people — seven teams of eight surgical staff — could work at the same time.
The only hope for the suite is the rescue plan put forward by Bart's to turn the site, in central London, into a specialist referral unit and health centre for the City.
This would retain a selection of clinical services, including specialist cancer and neurological centres, and the new theatre suite which has an intensive-care style recovery room.
In our picture below, we identify the key innovations in one of the new operating theatres at St Bart's.
END AIR SYSTEM
AIR supply is triple-filtered and super-cleaned, delivered in gentle streams over the operating area.
The air is changed 20 times an hour and is humidity and temperature-controlled.
Regular microbiological checks ensure it is bacteria-free — especially important in the orthopaedic operating room, where the slightest infection inside open joints can be disastrous.
Colour-balanced lights mean the surgeon can see instantly any colour changes in the patient.
SERVICES PENDANT
RETRACTABLE ceiling ‘pendant’ is supply centre of operating room.
Laser socket provides power for high-tech laser cutting instruments; when in use, warning signs outside theatre are automatically lit.
Interfaces connect patient's personal computer with central database and, like a flight recorder, tracks all vital functions before, during and after operation.
High electric sockets, along with all gas supplies and vacuum, ensure no cables or tubes trail on floor.
WALL CHART
THIS wipe-clean wall chart keeps a check on the number of swabs, instruments and needles which come into the theatre during the operation and all those going out.
This ensures nothing is inadvertently left inside the patient, although modern-day swabs do show up on X-rays.
THEATRE TROLLEY
THE operating theatre is designed for the patient to arrive and recuperate in the special recovery room in his own bed, instead of the more familiar method of patients being transferred via hard trolleys for an uncomfortable ride to and from theatres.
Operations are now carried out on special trolleys which are hinged to allow the head to drop below the feet, ensuring a continuing blood supply to the brain in the event of sudden loss of blood pressure.
CONTROL PANEL
THE nerve centre of the theatre.
A closed-circuit TV control panel sends video images from the theatre to a special lecture theatre in the suite, where students can watch operations without increasing the risk of infection by being present.
The TV can be connected to endoscopes, which travel inside the body, enabling surgeons to specialise in ‘keyhole’ and laser surgery techniques.
A special intercom linking the theatre with the pathology lab means surgeons can find out the results of a biopsy within a few minutes to establish, for instance, if a tumour they are operating on is malignant.
The panel also includes an X-ray viewing screen and a wipe-clean board for surgeons to describe procedures to students.
Controls include dimmers for the main light sources, designed to cast no shadows, no matter where the surgeon stands.
Alarms sound if gas supplies break down, and automatically connect reserve tanks.
Humidity and temperature controls are turned up if any babies or children are brought in for operations.
There are even sterile controls for the piped music.
GAS RECYCLER
A PRODUCT of space programme technology, which had to find a way to recycle astronauts' air, this ‘circle absorber’ is designed to recycle expensive gases exhaled from patient, thus saving money and cutting down on pollution.
Volatile anaesthetics, such as Enflurane, Halothane and Isflurane, are vaporised into the gas mixture administered to the patient.
When they are exhaled they are filtered through the white crystals of soda lime, and a bacterial filter.
Any anaesthetic remaining goes back to patient via the analyser, which adjusts other elements, such as oxygen and nitrous oxide, to the mixture.
The contents of every breath the patient takes are logged in the computer monitoring his progress.
Carbon dioxide and other unwanted exhaled gases are sucked away through ceiling pendant into filter cleaner.
ECG SCREEN
CATHETERS probing inside the body read blood pressure in veins, arteries and the heart, and check levels of blood oxygen.
This is displayed on the electro-cardiograph screen, along with heart rate.
An alarm sounds if the beat falters.
The ECG also monitors the amount of blood being pumped around the body — crucial in major surgery where blood loss and supply have to be carefully balanced.
MASS SPECTROMETER
A COMPUTER screen linked to Britain's only medical mass-spectrometer gives a constant read-out of gases inhaled and exhaled by patient.
This provides warnings to prevent brain damage from oxygen failure, too much carbon dioxide intake, or accidental over-administration of aneasthetic.
Wave charts show breathing pattern, and alarms sound if breathing falters or gas supplies are affected.
A separate oxygen analyser directly below screen checks oxygen levels and cuts off other gases if supply fails.
Below that, long flow meters show levels of nitrous oxide, oxygen and purified air coming from ceiling pendant.
Steel flasks to their right contain liquid anaesthetics.
31.7% pure fat
Louise Bowen
But these girls aim to lose 10% with our diet.
MEET Nicholle and Janine, the bravest dieters in Britain.
They agreed to reveal (nearly) all to kick off our ten-week Cellulite Roadshow diet and exercise challenge — and you can join in by following our weekly guide.
Nicholle and Janine's body-fat ratios have been measured at up to 31.7 per cent, but women of their age should shape up at between 20-22 per cent .
‘Since I've had a sit-down job I can't seem to get the weight off,’ says Nicholle, a publishers' assistant from Bristol.
Janine had another common complaint.
‘Since I had my second baby, Amber, I just can't seem to get rid of my tummy.’
Two members of our Cellulite Roadshow panel have come to the rescue.
Fitness leader of the year Martica Heaner will give them exercise advice, and TV nutritionist Amanda Ursell will oversee their diet.
One of the clearest messages from our Cellulite Roadshow was lack of motivation scuppered most peoples plans.
Nicholle, from Bristol, and Janine, from London, will try to combat this by becoming body-buddies, phoning each other to scold and encourage.
Exercise physiologist Dr Nick Walters, who took our pair's measurements at the University of Westminster's labs, says although Nicholle and Janine are not vastly overweight, the key point is they are not happy feeling sluggish.
‘It's crazy to think you must have an ‘ideal’ skinny shape.
Just get to a shape you feel happy with,’ he says.
‘Regular, low-intensity, long-duration exercise will burn off fat reserves, rather than just carbohydrates.
Over time it will also adjust the metabolism and help you burn fat easier.
‘And the health benefits of getting into shape are immeasurable.’
NICHOLLE
Nicholle Wicks, 30, publishers' assistant from Bristol
Weight: 9st 8lb
Height 5ft 3ins
Medium frame
Body fat percentage: 30.2
Waist circumference: 27½ ins
Thigh circumference: 23½ ins
Fitness leader of the Year Martica Heaner writes:
NICHOLLE'S goals are to strengthen her legs — particularly the inner-thighs — and abdomen and to lose some fat.
She has been walking for an hour a day for more than a year, but very slowly.
She does high-impact classes 2-4 times a month, dabbles in Callanetics and swam once a week for a month.
Although her walks keep her healthy, her body has probably got used to this form of exercise.
She needs to do more and stick to it.
Sporadic exercise can help general health and gives positive mental effects, but in order to change shape the body has to be consistently challenged.
I recommend she attend one aerobics class and one step class a week.
She should also swim for 30 minutes once a week and do my video Thighs, Tums & Bums 1-2 times a week.
Nutritionist Amanda Ursell, of Channel 4's Food File, writes:
NICKY eats around 2,100 calories a day.
Cereal and toast start the day followed by an apple mid-morning and a cheese sandwich at lunch.
By the afternoon she's tucking into three or four chocolate digestives and in the evening has something like baked beans on toast and the odd glass of wine.
By making simple changes such as swapping ordinary margarine for low-fat spread, the cheese for reduced-fat cheddar and by sticking to just one biscuit instead of four Nicky could cut the total calories down to 1,850.
The simple changes reduce the total fat in the diet by quiet a large amount.
Vitamin C is on the low side so it would be a good idea to have some citrus fruit like an orange or some fruit juice each day, and to have some vegetables with the evening meal.
JANINE
Janine Beddelem, 29, beauty therapist and mother of two from north London.
Weight 11st 4lb
Height 5ft 8½ ins
Medium Frame
Body fat percentage: 31.7
Waist circumference: 29½ins
Thigh circumference: 24ins
Fitness leader of the Year Martica Heaner writes:
JANINE wants to improve her abdomen, legs and breasts.
To change her body shape she needs to do calorie-burning aerobic exercises, like those on home video tapes, and swimming but first she needs to build up strength and endurance in her muscles.
She has 5lb dumbells, so I suggest conditioning exercises with weights, like those in Jane Fonda's Workout With Weights video, three times a week.
I also recommend Kathy Smith's Beginning and Pregnancy workout tapes, and my own Thighs, Tums and Bums.
Alternate them, starting at three and working up to five days by Week Four.
She should also have a 30-minute swim.
Nutritionist Amanda Ursell, of Channel 4's Food File, writes: JANINE is packing away about 3,600 calories a day.
Most of the food she eats is healthy.
She just eats too much.
She drinks a litre-carton of orange juice a day which contributes around 350 calories.
Evening snacks present the main problem.
Until then hot breakfast is just a bowl of porridge with a banana, followed by some fruit as a morning snack and a filled chunk of French stick and yoghurt for lunch.
Dinner is something like a chicken stew with lots of vegetables and potatoes.
This is followed however by pitta bread, a cheese sandwich, crisps and a midnight bowl of porridge.
By sticking to a glass of juice a day, removing skin from the chicken, and having three pieces of fruit in the evening instead of all the snacks would bring the calories down to 2,300.
This leaves plenty of scope for Janine to reduce this further to lose extra weight.
WEEK 1: Squat kick
F you want to join in with some home exercises, Martica Heaner is the person to listen to.
Over the coming weeks we will reveal some of her exercises to help get you in shape.
This week she has devised the Squat Kick.
Exercises for the thighs and buttocks are nearly always done lying down but by standing you use body weight and gravity to increase resistance.
POSITION ONE: Begin in a ‘sitting’ position as shown.
Make sure the weight is in your heels and your hips push back.
Take care not to tilt your pelvis forward.
As you look down at your feet, avoid letting your knees cover your toes from your view.
Hold your elbows close to your ribcage, fists front.
POSITION TWO: From the squat, push your right heel into the ground and squeeze your left buttock as you push and lift your left leg behind you.
As your leg lifts raise your arms in front of your body.
Try to keep your body upright, but slightly tilting forward so you do not arch your back.
If you find this difficult avoid lifting your leg too high.
Try concentrating on squeezing your buttocks as tightly as you can instead.
Squat again and lift your right leg.
Continue alternating lifts, 6-10 on each side.
Queens pay
THOSE who insisted that the Queen pay income tax were barking up the wrong tree.
Her contribution will not help our unemployed.
All thinking people know income tax is the biggest disincentive to work ever invented.
Only with its abolition will unemployment fall and prosperity return.
Sinead O'Connor
SINEAD O'Connor came in for a lot of flack when she tore the picture of the Pope on American television but by selling her home for charity she has put her money where her mouth is.
Child prodigies
CHILD prodigies like Nicholas MacMahon must be nurtured if they are to reach their full potential.
Too many bright sparks have been lost to Britain in the past.
Robert Maxwell's home
TODAY's pictures of Robert Maxwell's sumptuous home must have been galling to MGN pensioners.
Let's hope the money from the sale goes to them.
Lamont shames Britain
THERE was a time when nepotism and fleecing the public purse were associated with Third World countries, while our government and civil service were held up as models of rectitude.
Alas, how we have fallen.
MPs fiddle their expense accounts, councillors' relatives top the lists for council jobs and houses, and senior members of government routinely land top jobs upon leaving parliament.
And now ministers think there is nothing wrong in having the taxpayer pay their bills.
Worse, a spokesman for the Treasury implies this is a frequent occurrence.
I sympathised with Norman Lamont when his Access Card dealings were disclosed, but now that feeling has evaporated.
Funds for Legal Aid to the poor have been cut yet Mr Lamont, who hardly qualifies on grounds of economic hardship, receives help with his legal costs.
Milestones
BIRTHDAYS: Singer Andy Williams, 62.
Skier Franz Klammer, 39.
ON THIS DAY: In 1810, Britain captured Mauritius from the French.
In 1967, Dr Christiaan Barnard performed the first heart transplant.
In 1984, a gas leak at Bhopal, India, killed 2,500 people.
Price worth paying to save 4,000 lives
IT IS shameful that some people are saying Britain should not give sanctuary to refugees from the civil war in Yugoslavia.
The hardships we are suffering in the recession are nothing compared to the hell of the Bosnian detention camps, and if we cannot find the cash to help what amounts to very few of them then we are morally as well as economically bankrupt.
We may have to cut down on holidays and buy cheaper Christmas presents but these refugees have been lucky to escape with their lives.
If they stayed in the war zone they would face almost certain death.
The Government has said it will accept around 4,000 refugees for six months.
That is a very small percentage of the total number whose lives are in danger.
And the fighting is likely to last a lot longer than six months.
Those who begrudge these people a safe haven should remember that these refugees are ordinary people like them.
They had homes and jobs in their own country but these have been burned and stripped away from them through no fault of their own.
To turn them away would be callous and barbaric.
Price worth paying to save 4,000 lives
THE plight of the Bosnian refugees is terrible but there are equally pressing problems on our doorstep.
Many of the homeless on London's streets would be glad of warm clothes and a roof over their head.
If the Government can do it for the Bosnians, why can't they do it for the homeless?
Rooting for Pam
THE BBC need not worry about its future if it continues to show programmes like Arnold Wesker's play Roots.
Pam Ferris (right) was magnificent, as was Jane Horrocks.
Let the Corporation stick to stories like this instead of the usual rubbishy old American (or British) films.
Carjacking
AFTER the recent reports of carjacking I now lock the doors if I am travelling alone or with just my children, but this makes me uneasy because of the risk of being trapped after an accident.
Women and children's freedom is already limited on the streets.
Now we risk being carjacked or burned alive.
London's Oxford Street
I WAS astonished to see your picture of London's Oxford Street crowded with shoppers.
How on earth did they all get there?
I was driving in London recently and was sent crazy by roadworks and closed bridges at almost every turn.
Things you didn't know you didn't know
Graeme Donald
LONG before we started telling naive people to take what they were told with a pinch of salt, the Romans were issuing the same advice in the form of ‘cum grano salis’, which was actually a mild pun.
Even the Romans recognised the Greeks to be a leading culture and referred to their turn of wit and wisdom as Attica salt.
Attica was the old name for Athens and this ‘salt’ added taste to the conversation.
Basically, the expression means to use your wits to assess what you are being told.
With the resurgence of the neo-classical architectural style in Victorian times most imposing buildings were erected with great attention to Greco-Roman columns and low, wide vaulted roofs.
The facade of the triangular wall supporting the roof was adorned with figures from classical mythology, so it was not long before people started referring to the loft space behind as the attic.
Drawing on incredible success
Nigel Howard
THIS incredible cross-section of an airplane shows why one publisher is giving its rivals a lesson in how to succeed in a recession.
Dorling Kindersley's Incredible Cross-Sections (Price: £12) is hard to put down.
The formula of matching information to beautiful illustrations is repeated in many of the company's other titles and explains why turnover this year has risen by 66 per cent to £70 million.
Incredible Cross-Sections has sold over 35,000 copies since its autumn launch.
Illustrator Stephen Biesty spent 18 months creating the wonderfully-detailed pictures which take the reader inside 18 of the world's greatest buildings and machines.
His artistic talent combines with a wry humour — a man on a toilet is hidden in each of the intricate drawings.
Can you find him in our picture?
Dorling Kindersley's best-selling book to date is the Family Medical Guide which has sold almost six million copies, in 14 languages, while its most successful children's title, The Way Things Work, has worldwide sales of almost two million.
Its Royal Horticultural Society Gardeners' Encyclopaedia Of Gardening cost £2.5 million to create and had over 100 editors working on it.
When it was finished, it took 66 lorries to deliver the heavyweight UK edition from the printer to the warehouse.
This year's best seller was Save The Earth by Jonathan Porritt which was published simultaneously in 17 countries in local languages and has so far sold more than 500,000 copies.
The company, founded in 1974 to create and publish practical reference books for adults, now sells its titles in over 80 countries and in 37 languages and almost 90 per cent of the 560 titles originated over the company's history are still in print.
Rights have even been sold for a 3,000 copy Faroese edition of the Children's Encyclopaedia — one copy per household in the Faroe Islands.
Decorating your Christmas tree with chains made up of red chillies is just one of the original ideas in the company's seasonal title Malcolm Hillier's Christmas (Price: £12.99).
It's packed with alternative ideas for Yuletide food, drink and decorations — chilli chains are just one of 11 novel ways of decorating the tree.
Inspired by the success of Incredible Cross-Sections, Dorling Kindersley is planning follow-up titles for next year — one on castles and the other concentrating on Men-o-War, two of the most popular illustrations in the current book.
Paperback Round-Up
TO MAKE gift-buying easy here is the best of what's new this Christmas, as well as some old favourites.
Good reads among the new releases include Dick Francis's COMEBACK (Pan, £4.99), his 34th racing thriller and as pacy as ever, Danielle Steel's NO GREATER LOVE (Corgi, £4.99) about the Winfield family whose lives are changed forever the night the Titanic sinks, and Mary Stewart's STORMY PETREL (Coronet, £3.99), an atmospheric suspense story set on a Hebridean island.
For horror fans, there is the latest Dean R Koontz, HIDEWAY (Headline, £5.99), about a resuscitated accident victim.
If SF appeals, try Arthur C Clarke's THE GHOST FROM THE GRAND BANKS (Orbit, £4.99).
Robert Jordan's fantasy series The Wheel Of Time has a growing band of fans, who will enjoy his latest, THE DRAGON REBORN (Orbit £5.99).
For TV buffs, Lynda La Plante's FRAMED (Mandarin, £4.99) is based on her new ITV series.
David Jason returns to the small screen this weekend in a new role as Detective Inspector Jack Frost in a series adapted from R D Wingfield's A TOUCH OF FROST, FROST AT CHRISTMAS and NIGHT FROST (all Corgi, Pounds 4.99).
Out for some time but still popular are Jilly Cooper's POLO,(Corgi, £5.99) and Jeffrey Archer's AS THE CROW FLIES (Coronet, £5.99).
Frederick Forsyth's THE DECEIVER (Corgi, £4.99) is an exciting read with the hero being interrogated by his SAS masters about four past missions.
Stephen King's frightening NEEDFUL THINGS (NEL, £5.99) centres on a strange and mysterious shop.
And Peter James's TWILIGHT (Signet, £4.99) is a good choice for those who enjoy the paranormal.
In THE RAG NYMPH (Corgi £4.99) Catherine Cookson gives us an engrossing tale of human trauma.
While human emotions are delicately portrayed in Rosamund Pilcher's collection of short stories FLOWERS IN THE RAIN (Coronet, £4.99).
Robert Goddard's INTO THE BLUE (Corgi, £4.99) won the W H Smith Good Read Award and is a contemporary mystery that leaves you guessing to the end.
Joanna Trollope writes sophisticated relationship tales, and her new work THE RECTOR'S WIFE (Black Swan, £5.99) is wonderfully evocative of village life.
THE CHOIR (Black Swan, £5.99), just republished, plays out a battle in a cathedral close between the headmaster of a choir school and the dean in a truly atmospheric tale.
William Horwood's fantastical DUNCTON TALES (Fontana, £4.99) takes his moles on a further quest fighting evil as they search for the book of stones.
Terry Pratchett is one of funniest satirists writing today.
WITCHES ABROAD (Corgi, £3.99), is his 12th Discworld novel and is a clever yarn centred on the witches from a previous tale, Wyrd Sisters.
WORLD BOOK WINNER
CONGRATULATIONS to Kimberley Beales of Hereford.
She is the winner of our recent contest to win a superb £500 World Book Encyclopedia for her school.
Delighted ten-year-old Kimberley, a house captain at Broadlands Primary School, says: ‘It will be an ideal addition to our library.’
Patents (and a fortune) pending
Louise Bowen
INVENTOR Roy Rogers believes there are only two types of truly great money-making ideas.
‘Those that bring the inventor wealth and fame, and those that make a fortune for someone else,’ he says.
Walter Hunt's case is an example of the second type.
He gave away the rights to his oddball invention to settle a $10 gambling debt.
Later the gadget acquired a popular name — the safety pin — and made someone else very rich.
Protecting your idea fast is the key to success, says Rogers in his new book, How To Make Money From Ideas And Inventions (Kogan Page, Pounds 9.99).
For no matter how brilliant, an invention is not your own until it is patented.
If two people are struck by the same brainwave, it will belong to the one who lodges a patent application first.
So resist the temptation of telling everyone.
Running down the street shouting ‘Eureka’ has emotional appeal but is the wrong approach.
Lodging an application gives you the option of pursuing full patent protection in 60 countries, and proves the idea was yours first.
But the idea must be a patentable one.
This means it has to be new, capable of industrial application, involve an innovation, and not be excluded as a special case — such as military inventions.
Descriptions or drawings of ideas are also afforded some protection under copyright law.
Simply put your idea into an envelope and send it, registered post, to yourself — first ensuring the Post Office stamps all the joins of the envelope.
Do not absent-mindedly open the package when it arrives.
The sealed letter is dated proof of your copyright to be opened in court if someone claims your idea.
To help inventors, most libraries and the Patent Office have the booklet How To Prepare A UK Patent Application.
First, you will need a description of the concept of your product (the broader your description the harder it will be for rivals to find a new, unprotected, form of the idea) and a £15 fee, which will bring 18 months of secrecy.
In this time, you can file new applications if further modifications to your idea strike.
You will need to take the application to its last stage within a year, which will cost around £120.
This pays for a series of searches by the Patent Office to make sure your claim is original, and a similar idea has not been lodged before.
An ‘abstract’— a summary of your claim in not more than 150 words — needs to be written for this stage, which may go on for some time.
If the searches uncover similar ideas you may need to modify your invention to get around areas others bagged first.
Patenting ideas is fairly complicated, but cheap.
If money is no object, you can take your idea to a patent agent, who will know exactly how to word specifications and will prepare professional drawings.
And once in your hand, a patent can be worth its weight in diamonds — so treat it with care and remember the case of Walter Hunt.
Further details: The Patent Office, 25 Southampton Buildings, London WC2A 1AY (071 438 4724).
Chartered Institute Of Patent Agents, Staple Inn Buildings, London WC1V 7P.
Andy's switch of fortunes
ANDY Chipling sat back and admired the computer programme he had just completed, bent down to switch on his printer at the powerpoint and stared in horror as a week's toil disappeared off the screen.
What he'd done was switch off his terminal's power by mistake.
After the initial dismay he began to wonder why nothing had been devised to protect switches.
By the next morning Andy, 32, had developed the SwitchGuard — a small plastic arm that can fit over a switch.
He had the invention patented, and as soon as companies heard about it there was an offer of investment.
It is used by the laboratories of Boots and Glaxo, and in the intensive care units of Bupa hospitals.
And in January it goes on sale at Ryman so homeowners can ensure their freezers or video recorders are not turned off by mistake.
‘I haven't become a millionaire but it was exciting — rather like giving birth and watching your baby grow,’ says Andy, from New Haw, Surrey.
A pack of five SwitchGuards is £4.69 (incl p&p) from SwitchGuard, Clarence Chambers, 113 Victoria St, St Albans, Herts AL1 3TJ.
Grade takes a shot at movie master Barry
By Tim Satchell
MICHAEL Grade, head of Channel 4, is to make a concerted attack on the movie world supremacy of television presenter Barry Norman.
On January 17 Mr Grade launches a new programme, Moviewatch, to be broadcast on Sunday night, a day before Mr Norman's weekly show on BBC1.
‘It's amazing that Barry Norman, a cosy sort of guy, has ruled the roost on British television for 20 years and there has never been a real attempt to displace him before,’ says cinema historian and Anthony Hopkins biographer Quentin Falk.
‘Millions are spent on the film business each year and the BBC deal with the subject with a programme that costs pennies.’
BBC2's programme Moving Pictures, returns with Howard Schuman next month.
ITV has the early morning three-times-a-week CinemAttractions, while Selina Scott has a new BBC TV entertainment programme.
But Mr Norman rules the roost in the film field with a regular 4 million audience, twice the weekly cinema audience.
Moviewatch is being presented by Philip Edgar Jones and City Limits assistant editor Tania Guha, a former doorman at Fred's club in Soho.
Both are new to television.
Charles McDonald, for Moviewatch, tells me: ‘We think this will be a major new force in the movie industry and it won't just be based on what is happening in London.
‘We like to think that the programme isn't in competition with Barry Norman, but we do want to give him a run for his money.’
Author Salmon Rushdie has been busy Christmas shopping.
The Satanic Verses author spent an hour buying presents at the famous Bloomingdale's store in New York.
‘He tried to go incognito but his bizarre disguise drew confused stares from some fellow shoppers,’ I'm told.
For Mr Rushdie wore huge, bright orange-rimmed sunglasses and a baseball cap.
While in New York he took time to visit some friends including his publisher Sonny Mehta.
Mr Rushdie has spent the last few months in Helsinki, Finland, completing a new book.
And…
By Tim Satchell
ADVANCE leak from the Queen's Christmas Day message.
The introduction runs: ‘Christmas is a time for looking forward to the future and remembering the past while remaining keenly aware of the present.’
Lisa Bryer
By Tim Satchell
PRODUCER Lisa Bryer, 34, has signed a deal with Island Pictures for the rights to her psycho-drama movie, Phone.
Directed by her partner in Cowboy Films, Tim Pope, 35, Miss Bryer, above, sister of much photographed television presenter Tania Bryer, tells me Chris Blackwell's Island Pictures have paid Cowboy £80,000 for the the half-hour movie.
‘We shot Phone in LA.
Casting and screening in just a week.
Previously we have done advertising, which is more about style than content,’ says Lisa Bryer.
‘We are planning two new films and Tania will be in one if there is the right part.’
Julie's new life
By Tim Satchell
TODAY Julie Kavner, the voice of Marge in The Simpsons, opens in the lead role in the film This Is My Life, with music by Carly Simon.
Miss Kavner, 41, who played Brenda the sister in Rhoda, also appeared in Woody Allen's Hannah And Her Sisters.
Designer print for Nina
By Tim Satchell
ROYAL decorator Nina Campbell has written her first book.
She has completed a biography of society figure and pre-war decorator Elsie de Wolfe.
Mother-of-three Miss Campbell, who has been married twice, decorated Sunninghill for the Duke and Duchess of York's marriage and did Romenda Lodge for the Duchess after they separated.
With Caroline Seebohm, Miss Campbell took three years to write the 160-page book, which is published in February by Arum Press.
The currently fashionable leopard skin look was first promoted in the 1930s by American-born Miss de Wolfe, who died in 1950 aged 85 and claimed Noel Coward, Cole Porter and the Duke and Duchess of Windsor among her closest friends.
Miss Campbell managed to complete the manuscript in between commissions this year which have included Rod Stewart's Epping Forest home and Wilbur Smith's Chelsea residence.
Virtually real estate agents
By Tim Satchell
VIRTUAL reality is being developed by the Massachusetts Institute of Science and Technology so estate agents will be able to show prospective clients properties without having to leave their offices.
The technique uses video equipment which produces a three dimensional impression.
What makes it seem real is that you are able to change where you appear to be in the room.
MIT Virtual Reality is also being further developed for computer games.
Mondeo roars out as sun sets on Sierra
THIS is the Mondeo, Ford's new Belgian-built replacement for the Sierra which goes on sale in March.
Unlike the Sierra, the Mondeo has front-wheel drive so there is more space inside, and a bigger boot, although the new car is slightly shorter.
Work started on the car eight years ago, just months after the original Sierra went on sale.
Initially, power for the Mondeo will come from three 16-valve petrol engines of 1.6, 1.8 and 2 litres, and two 1.8-litre diesel engines.
There will be a full range of saloons, five-door hatchbacks and estates.
Later models will include a 2.5-litre V6 engine for top luxury versions.
Recognising that safety is a growing issue, the Mondeo will come with driver's side airbag as standard, and passenger side optional at a later date.
The car has surpassed current and predicted crash safety tests so should feel exceptionally solid and safe in which to ride.
Manufacturers such as Ford believe they are now narrowing the gap to perceived superior rivals like BMW and Audi.
Mondeo prices are expected to be from about £12,000 to £17,000 for the luxury 2-litre ghia.
ALSO due in the UK next year is the Maverick, Ford GB's first off-roader.
Built in Spain by Nissan, it will rival Vauxhall's popular Frontera models.
And in three years time Ford will unveil its challenge to the Renault Espace multi-purpose vehicle.
The so-far unnamed car is being jointly built with Volkswagen in Portugual.
The road that eats noise
Russell Bray
SPEND a weekend in the country and the first thing to hit you is the silence.
Noise has become one of the great pollutants of modern city life and increased traffic is the greatest culprit.
But new technology is about to make things quieter by half — in the shape of specially developed road surfaces that ‘eat’ noise.
Two types of road are being tested by Government research centres.
One is a development of porous asphalt already used extensively in Europe, and the other is called ‘whispering concrete’.
Porous asphalt was developed to reduce spray in heavy rain and cut the risk of aquaplaning.
‘But it was found to have another benefit,’ says RAC environmental affairs manager Dr Jeremy Vanke.
‘The tiny holes also absorb tyre noise.
The reduction is equivalent to halving the volume of traffic.’
Tests on the A38 near Burton-upon-Trent have been 100 per cent successful, says a Department of Transport spokesman.
Progress is also being made with a new concrete exposed-aggregate surface known as ‘whispering concrete’.
It will be tested shortly on the A564 Hatton-Foston bypass.
Noise from vehicles is something the Government has been trying to tackle for more than 20 years.
Since 1970 the amount of noise allowed from cars has been cut from 82 decibels to 77, and that has to drop to 74 by 1995 under new European Commission proposals.
‘The reduction is more than it looks because the decibel scale is a logarythmic one,’ says Dr Greg Watts, of the Transport and Road Research laboratory at Craythorn.
‘The drop represents halving the amount of sound energy.’
The measurements are taken by accelerating the car in low gears at full throttle as it approaches and passes the noise meter.
Car makers have worked hard to make engines and exhausts more refined and are now encapsulating diesel engines to muffle the sound.
‘As the permitted sound level limits fall, tyre noise is becoming increasingly significant,’ says Rosemary Bailey, project engineer in the noise and vibration department at the Motor Industry Research Association at Nuneaton.
SOUND SCALE
Pain inducing level 140
Jet taking off 130
Loud car horn 120
Rock band 115
Pneumatic drill 110
Noisy moped 95
Express train (25m away) 90
Heavy truck 84
Car 77
Vacuum cleaner 70
Conversation 65
Quiet office 45
Whispering 20
Falling leaf 10 Silence 0
Measured in decibels
IRA evil can never win
IT is impossible to know what the IRA hopes to gain from its current wave of bombing.
What does it think it can achieve by wrecking the centre of Manchester and injuring 64 in the carnage?
Surely it cannot expect to win sympathy for its cause.
For there hardly seems to be a cause any more.
Destruction and death have become the end as well as the means.
These acts, whether in Northern Ireland or on the mainland, in London or outside, bring nothing but feelings of utter revulsion to every British citizen, except the handful of warped minds who commit such atrocities.
The hoax warnings, the bombs which fail to explode and the few which do are undoubtedly disrupting normal life, especially in London.
But the disruption is slight and only hardens attitudes against the terrorists.
At times like this, there is always talk of how to defeat the IRA.
The reality is that it was beaten long ago.
It can never achieve anything but slowing people's journeys and damaging a few buildings.
And that is no achievement at all.
Surely the terrorists cannot believe that killing and maiming ordinary people is an achievement.
What we must cling to as these atrocities go on is that eventually the IRA will be crushed.
For the British people never will be.
Doleful future
THE toll of job losses seems never-ending.
Yesterday the Post Office announced 16,200, Royal Ordnance 1,300 and Ford may shed 3,000.
The day before it was revealed that Cammell Laird is to close with the loss of 900 jobs, virtually banging the final nail into Merseyside's unemployment coffin.
There is always a reason for each batch of redundancies — it is done in the name of greater efficiency or due to changing economic conditions or is blamed on world recession.
But it doesn't matter what or who has caused it.
The real concern is the misery and sense of hopelessness it leads to.
There is also the fear that with unemployment increasing so fast and remorselessly, Britain could still collapse into slump.
Not much time is left to prevent that.
And every new wave of redundancies brings the terrifying prospect closer.
Cheat prospers
THE award of more than £18.5 million to the American athlete Butch Reynolds is an outrage to justice and sport.
Reynolds was banned from athletics for two years after testing positive for steroids.
He was fortunate the punishment was so slight.
Now an American court has awarded him that ludicrous sum against the International Amateur Athletic Federation.
Not only is the amount absurd, but around £4.5 million of it is supposed to be for loss of earnings.
Is that really how much an amateur athlete earns?
This disgraceful court judgment rewards Butch Reynolds for cheating.
It is as shameful as the use of drugs in sport.
Costume drama
THE author Salman Rushdie is not one to let death threats prevent him doing pretty much what he wants to, as flamboyantly as he wants to.
So he has popped over to New York to do his Christmas shopping.
Just to fool any assassins, he wore huge orange-rimmed sunglasses and a baseball cap.
He would have attracted less attention if he had worn a red gown and long white beard.
How to complain about absolutely anything
Dominic Midgley
BANKS have been reeling this week with the news that customer complaints to the industry's Ombudsman have risen by 60 per cent.
And it is likely that there would have been thousands more if more people had known exactly how to raise a complaint with him.
So here we explain how you can complain effectively about anything, from a problem at the bank, an inflated gas bill or a TV set that breaks down after two days.
On the right is a cut-out-and-keep guide that shows exactly where to take your complaint if you are unhappy with a company's response to your problem.
‘As soon as you have decided that you want to complain you should put it in writing, setting out all the facts and saying what you want out of it,’ says Keith Richards, a senior lawyer with the Consumer Association.
‘And make sure you keep copies.
There is no point in setting out your case and then sending the only copy to the opposition.
‘If you are not happy with the response, take the complaint to a higher level — usually the chairman or managing director at head office.
‘If you are still not satisfied after that you can threaten to issue a court summons or to take it to the ombudsman.’
Ombudsmen only deal with complaints after all other channels have been exhausted, and will ask you to fill in a form detailing the complaint and what action you have taken.
If the ombudsman decides the case should be examined, investigators will get to work.
Investigations can take several months, ending in a formal report which will be sent to you.
If the ombudsman finds in your favour he may order the guilty party to pay compensation, or take other action to put matters right.
The Parliamentary Ombudsman was the first to be created in Britain in 1967 after a series of incidents highlighted how powerless people were against an abuse of power by central government.
An inquiry had determined that ‘over most of the field of public administration no formal procedure is provided for objecting or for deciding on objections’.
The Parliamentary Ombudsman was followed by a Local Government Commissioner in 1969 and a Health Service Commissioner four years later.
Since then many more have been established, some created by the Government to oversee newly-privatised industries and others set up by private companies attracted by the idea of a ‘righter of wrongs’ whom the public see as independent and impartial.
WHO TO CONTACT IF YOU HAVE A PROBLEM
ADVERTISING
Advertising Standards Authority, Brook House, Torrington Place, London WC1. 071-580 5555
BANKS
Banking Ombudsman, Citadel House, 5-11 Fetter Lane, London EC4 1BR. 071-583 1395
BETTING SHOPS
The Bookmakers Committee, 52 Grosvenor Gardens, London SW1W OAU.
071-333 0043
BUILDERS
Federation of Master Builders, 14-15 Great James St, London WC1N 3DP. 071-242 7583
BUILDING SOCIETIES
Building Societies Ombudsman, Grosvenor Gardens House, 35-37 Grosvenor Gardens, London SW1X 7AW. 071-931 0044
CARS AND GARAGES
Retail Motor Industry Federation, 201 Great Portland Street, London W1N 6AB. 071-580 9122
Scottish Motor Trade Assoc, 3 Palmerston Pl, Edinburgh EH12 5AF. 031-225 3643
Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders, Forbes House, Halkin Street, London SW1X 7DS. 071-235 7000
Vehicle Builders' and Repairers' Association, Belmont House, Gildersome, Leeds LS27 7TW. 0532 538333
COUNCIL TAX
(NB.
No formal appeals can be heard until April 1, 1993).
Contact the Listings Officer at your local Valuation Office (contact your local authority).
ELECTRICITY
Office of Electricity Regulation (Offer), Hagley Hse, Hagley Rd, Edgbaston, Birmingham B16 8QG. 021-456 2100
ESTATE AGENTS
Office of the Ombudsman for Corporate Estate Agents, PO Box 1114, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP1 1YQ. 0722 333306
Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, 12 Great George St, Parliament Sq, London SW1P 3AD. 071-222 7000 
Your Local Trading Standards department (see phone book) or the local Citizen's Advice Bureau (see phone book)
GAS
Office of Gas Supply (Ofgas), Southside, 105 Victoria Street, London SW1E 6QT. 071-828 0898
Gas Consumers Council, Abford Hse, 15 Wilton Rd, London SW1V 1LT. 071-931 0977
GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS
Complain to your local MP initially and, if unsatisfied, the Parliamentary Ombudsman, Church House, Great Smith Street, London SW1P 3BW. 071-276 3000/2130
HOSPITALS AND DOCTORS
The Health Service Ombudsman, Church House, Great Smith Street, London SW1P 3BW. 071-276 2035.
(Other offices in Cardiff and Edinburgh.)
Also your local Community Health Council (see phone book)
Doctors only — General Medical Council, 44 Hallam St, London W1N 6AE. 071-580 7642
INSURANCE
Insurance Ombudsman Bureau, 31 Southampton Row, London WC1B 5HJ. 071-242 8613
Association of British Insurers, Aldermary House, 10-15 Queen Street, London EC4N 1TT. 071-248 4477
LAWYERS
Barristers — Bar Council, 11 South Square, London WC1. 071-242 0082
Solicitors — Law Society, 113 Chancery Lane, London WC2A 1PL. 071-242 1222
Both — The Office of Legal Services Ombudsman, 22 Oxford Court, Oxford St, Manchester, M2 3WQ. 061-236 9532
LOCAL AUTHORITIES
Local Government Ombudsman.
Regional offices in London, York, Edinburgh and Bridgend (see phone book)
MAIL ORDER
Mail Order Protection Scheme, 16 Tooks Court, London EC4 1LB. 071-405 6806
THE MEDIA
Television and radio — Broadcasting Complaints Commission, Grosvenor Gardens House, 35 Grosvenor Gardens, London SW1W ODF. 071-630 1966.
Newspapers — Press Complaints Commission, 1 Salisbury Square, EC4Y 8AE. 071-353 1248
PHONE-TAPPING and TAMPERING WITH MAIL
Interception of Communications Tribunal, PO Box 44, London SE1 OTX.
PLUMBING
The Institute of Plumbing, 64 Station Lane, Hornchurch, Essex RM12 6NB. 04024 72791
POLICE
Police Complaints Authority, 10 Great George Street, SW1P 3AE. 071-273 6450
RACISM
Commission for Racial Equality, Elliot House, Allington St, London SW1.
071 828 7022
SEX DISCRIMINATION
Equal Opportunities Commission, Overseas House, Quay St, Manchester M3 3HN. 061-833 9244
SHOES
British Footwear Manufacturers Federation, 72 Dean Street, London W1V 5HB. 071-437 5573.
The Shoe and Allied Trades Research Association (Satra), 0536 410000
TELEPHONES
Office of Telecommunications (Oftel), Export House, 50 Ludgate Hill, London EC4M 7JJ. 071-822 1650
TRAINS AND BUSES
Your local Transport Users' Consultative Committee (see the phone book)
TRAVEL AGENTS
Assoc of British Travel Agents, 55-57 Newman St, London W1P 4AH. 071-637 2444
UNFAIR DISMISSAL
Industrial Tribunals (central office for England and Wales), 93 Ebury Bridge Road, London SW1W 8RE. 071-730 9161
WATER
Office of Water Services (Ofwat), Centre City Tower, 7 Hill Street, Birmingham B5 4UA. 021-625 1300
Shoppers who get a raw deal can write to an ombudsman
I  enVizage selling up
Jane Moore
The Fat Slags can be yours for £10m, says editor Chris Donald.
IT IS the magazine that gave us Sid The Sexist, Biffa Bacon and the Fat Slags and made a fortune for editor Chris Donald.
But the Geordie cartoonist says producing the anarchic Viz is no longer a laughing matter.
Started in 1979 as an amateur effort to amuse and impress his friends, Viz's lavatorial schoolboy humour appealed to so many people that the Newcastle-based cult comic grew into Britain's third highest selling magazine.
It has made him a millionaire but 32-year-old Chris would sell it all tomorrow if he could find a buyer.
‘Some mornings when I wake up I just want to give it all up.
It started off as a laugh, but has become a job to me.
It's not as much fun any more,’ he says.
‘When I see my postman driving around in his van with the radio on, I crave his job.
I'd love to do something with hardly any responsibility.
‘I preferred the days when we were smaller and I could work when I felt like it.
There's no time to be childish any more.’
Married to Dolores with a three-year-old son, Dale, and 12-month-old daughter, Chris regrets that he doesn't spend enough time at home.
‘I bought a house in Northumberland with a big garden, but I never get the chance to use it.
I even had to pay someone to cut the grass the other day — I wanted to do that.
‘I don't even take many holidays and when I do they are pretty disastrous.
‘We went to Tunisia last year and had a dreadful time on a supposed safari.
‘The guides claimed to have taken us to the edge of the Sahara but when I looked on a map it was the Atlas mountains, the bastards.’
Chris is deadly serious about wanting out.
‘I've got to the stage where if someone said ‘here's £10 million’ I'd sell like a shot.
‘The trouble is we are Viz and if anyone bought it they'd probably want us as part of a package.
Otherwise it'd be like selling the title of The Rolling Stones to five new musicians.
The only guy who would have been stupid enough to buy went overboard and drowned last year.’
Not only is Chris tiring of his creation, he has doubts about the publication's long-term appeal.
‘Viz will only have a certain life before everyone starts to become bored by it.
We make jokes about Shakin' Stevens and John Noakes.
Today's kids don't know who they are.
We're getting to the stage where we are older than our readers.’
Chris may be pessimistic about the future but, with one million sales every bi-monthly issue and 60,000 Fat Slags diaries already gone from the shelves, Viz doesn't show any sign of losing popularity.
‘Even if we lost a bit of circulation it wouldn't worry us.
We could sell 60,000 copies and still break even.
I might have to cut the cleaners' hours down a bit,’ says Chris.
He drives a BMW Estate —‘a family car’— and doesn't have any expensive hobbies.
‘I'm not the type who'd look good on a yacht.
My wife criticises my clothes and is always going on at me to dress better.
‘She thinks I don't take any care over my appearance.’
You can see her point.
Wearing an unremarkable stripy T-shirt and jeans, and with his unkempt hair straggling over his broken glasses, Chris doesn't exactly exude wealth.
He shares the profits with publisher John Brown, who worked for Virgin Publishing when it signed Viz in 1984.
Brown started his own company in 1987 and took Viz, though Virgin kept a 10 per cent interest.
‘The only time John interfered editorially was when we wanted to introduce a character called The Milky Bar Yid.
He put a stop to it because his wife's Jewish,’ says Chris.
Nothing and no one is safe from Viz's wit.
‘In the early days we worried a bit about comeback, but over the years we've just got more outrageous,’ he says.
Articles blurbed on the front of the comics include ‘Has Fergie got a fat arse, or what?’ and ‘I'm scared of dinosaurs, says TV's Spender’referring to Jimmy Nail.
‘We always have a laugh about what would happen if these things went to court.
‘We'd insist on Fergie having her bottom measured, and we'd get Jimmy Nail in the witness box and wave a huge plastic dinosaur in front of him.
‘We probably wouldn't win the case, but it would be good for a laugh.’
If a buyer can't be found for Viz, Chris hopes to employ extra staff so he can simply take more time off.
‘I'll probably advertise in the Guardian media pages and hope someone takes it seriously.’
That would be a first.
Sales take off for the jet lag store
Isla Whitcroft
YOUR body clock is totally confused, your ankles are swollen, you are dehydrated and generally feel like death.
It's jet lag and it affects nearly everyone on long-haul flights.
Now London businesswoman Daniele Ryman aims to make all the suffering a thing of the past with the world's first jet lag shop next to London's Park Lane Lane Hotel.
‘We have been supplying anti-jet lag products to businessmen in the City for years,’ says Daniele's marketing director Farrol Kahn.
‘Then we realised there were plenty of tourists who could also use our products, so we took a risk and opened the shop.
‘We provide skin rehydration products and sinus and nasal refresher sprays.
We also sell eye compresses to get rid of that awful red-eyed look.’
The disrupted body clock is the most difficult problem to deal with, but Mr Khan reckons Ryman products have it solved.
‘Somehow, we had to come up with a method of telling the body that it was daytime when it thought it was nightime and vice versa,’ he says.
‘Sleeping tablets will get you to sleep but can cause hangovers and a bleary feeling, and businessmen often have to be at meetings within half an hour of landing.
‘It is crucial that they don't feel drowsy — it could cost them a fortune.’
So instead of prescription drugs, Daniele Ryman has produced ‘wake up’ and ‘sleep’fragrances — both containing a blend of 50 natural herbs.
‘The wake-up fragrance has pine, ocean and citrus aromas, all of which trigger alertness,’ he says.
‘And the sleep fragrance releases smells of roses, the tropics and things that remind you of sleepy lazy days.’
Nasty game is odds-on winner
Andrew Penman
THE Really Nasty Horse Racing Game was an outsider from the off.
Made by a small independent firm, it stood little chance against the big toy companies with huge promotional budgets.
But the long-shot has defied the odds and cantered into the winners' enclosure of top selling games.
‘We're in the WH Smith Top 40 and it has only taken us four years to get there,’ says Tom White of makers Upstarts.
Known as Really Nasty for short and winner of two toy awards, the game puts players in the twin roles of stable owners and punters — creating great possibilities for pulling a fast one such as betting on a rival's horse and nobbling your own.
It is one of the few new entries to a chart dominated by old favourites.
Scrabble is still the best seller and there's no sign of the Trivial Pursuit bubble bursting either.
It has six editions in the Top 40 — Genus III the highest placed at Number 3.
Other oldies in this month's chart, compiled by 300 WH Smith branches, include Monopoly, Cluedo, Risk and Mini Mastermind.
For younger children, there's Snakes And Ladders at number 29 and Frustration — a game like Ludo — new in the chart at 32.
There are also three chess sets and two playing card packs being snapped up by Christmas shoppers with a taste for the traditional.
The highest new entry — not counting new editions of existing games — is the beautifully simple Jenga.
Straight in at Number 12, it consists of a tower of wooden blocks.
The object is for players, taking it in turns, to remove one of the pieces and place it on the top without the whole structure collapsing.
But beware playing this with Really Nasty addicts — they will probably take advantage of your Christmas hangover to win huge bets.
My father's passion for Tracey Childs prepared me for a life of drama
Tim Ewbank
ALONG with 12 million other viewers young Christien Anholt watched enthralled as his father Tony conducted a passionate on-screen affair with Howards' Way co-star Tracey Childs.
But nothing prepared the 14-year-old for the shock when Tony ran off in real life with Tracey.
‘I remember the first thing that I said when I found out was ‘Right, I'm never getting married’,’ says Christien.
Seven years later, however, Christien has not only got over the pain but has used the experience to make him a better actor.
That maturity has won him his first TV starring role in ITV's new £2 million, three-part drama serial The Blackheath Poisonings which starts on Monday.
‘My parents' break-up made me grow up very quickly which really helps quite a lot in my profession,’ he says.
‘Without that I don't think I'd have been able to leave home at 17, be mature enough to manage my own career and be in a steady relationship for three-and-a-half years.
‘I'm not your average 21-year-old and I don't think I'd be able to maintain the sort of life I lead if I wasn't so mature.’
In Howards' Way Christien's father Tony played wealthy Charles Frere and Tracey was headstrong yachtswoman Lynne Howard.
Tony, with his dark, youthful good looks, and glamorous Tracey were the ideal screen couple.
But away from the cameras few people gave them much chance of a future together.
They appeared to be playing out a familiar soap opera scenario — smoothie, 45, dumps wife for a sexy young blonde half his age.
But they stayed together, married and more importantly have the blessing of Christien.
‘Despite what I felt as a teenager it hasn't put me off marriage,’ he says.
‘In fact my girlfriend Claudia and I have talked about marriage and I don't see why we shouldn't wed sometime although we have not set a date.
‘When my parents split up, it was all very adult and open.
It was spelled out to me what was happening and why.
I knew what was going on.
I quickly told them that it was their problem and they who had to sort it out.
‘Don't use me as an instrument, I said, and I'll have to sort out my own feelings.
‘I decided to look at it from my point of view.
Neither was given custody so I moved between both of them and lived with whomever I chose.
It seemed to work at the time.
The good thing is that I was introduced to Tracey right from the start.
‘She's only seven years older than me and so I've never looked on her as a mother figure.
‘She's more like a big sister or a good friend.
‘There has never been jealousy on my part that she has taken my mother's place.’
Just now Christien's thoughts are more preoccupied with making his name in The Blackheath Poisonings.
The series involves the tangled relationships of two families in the London suburb of Blackheath.
It leads to death and a scandalous murder inquiry which threatens to expose some dark secrets.
Christien plays Roger Vandervent, the teenage son of one of the families who has a crush on his father's mistress.
It's his big TV break and comes five years after he left school with just one O-level.
‘I'd wanted to be an actor since I was seven,’ he says.
‘But I was cautious about it too as I'd seen both sides — the periods of unemployment as well as the glossy side of my father being in something so popular like Howards' Way.’
Christien knows Tony and Tracey and mum Sheila will be rooting for him on Monday night when the series starts.
He'll probably get their congratulations first hand.
‘I get to see dad and Tracey once a week if not more,’ he says.
‘I see my mother too.
I can say I have a great relationship with both my parents — individually.’
Keith Richards
KEITH Richards has taken time off from the Rolling Stones to perform with his own band, the X-Pensive Winos.
Their surprise gig, at London's Marquee, was watched by Mick Jagger and his brother Chris, above.
Keith, 48, right, is to tour with the Winos to promote their album, Main Offender.
Loyd Grossman
TV busybody Loyd Grossman says he would think twice about appearing on his own show Through The Keyhole.
‘My house is in complete chaos, because four years after moving, most of our possessions are still in packing cases,’ says Loyd, 41.
Edward James Olmos
FORMER Miami Vice actor Edward James Olmos may run for Mayor of Los Angeles.
James, who played Lieutenant Castillo, became a folk hero during the LA riots by appealing for calm and helping to clean up.
Jason Priestley
BEVERLY Hills 90210 star Jason Priestley keeps loaded guns at his Hollywood home because of threats to his life.
Jason, 26, who plays Brandon Walsh, spends hours in target practice with co-star Luke Perry, who also has a private arsenal.
Now zap to the future
Jane Adams
GAME players still reeling from this year's wealth of super graphics and intricate formats had better recharge their batteries now — 1993 is going to be even more of a challenge.
To help you get to grips with this new world of adventure here is a guide to the best of the New Year releases and when they will be available.
ANDRE AGASSI TENNIS
Agassi has managed to sign up a licensing deal with Tecmagik and this looks like being the long-awaited definitive tennis game on Sega systems.
A must for all tennis fans.
Master System, Mega Drive, available from Tecmagik in April.
ANOTHER WORLD
French programming house Delphine brings its sci-fi romp to the Mega Drive.
Experience the brilliant cinematic graphics and gameplay as you help nuclear physicist Lester Chaykin, transported by a freak accident to another world, find his way home.
Available on Mega Drive from Virgin in March.
BATTLETOADS
Now Amiga owners are in for a treat with Mindscape's home computer version of the Nintendo toads.
Join Zitz, Rash and Pimple as they tackle the evil Dark Queen.
Available on the Amiga from Mindscape in March.
DESERT STRIKE
The hugely playable Gulf War-based flight simulator has been converted for the SNES and the Amiga.
Find yourself at the controls of a fighter helicopter over 27 hair-raising missions.
Available on the SNES and the Amiga from Electronic Arts in March.
ECCO
This is packed with brilliant graphics and gameplay, environmental friendliness and above all originality.
Where else will you be cast in the role of a dolphin?
Available on the Mega Drive from Sega in January.
FLASHBACK
Set to be Delphine's smartest Mega Drive offering yet, this features a scientist who discovers that aliens have landed but loses his memory — an ideal scenario for flashbacks.
Great graphics and a perfected cinematic rendering.
Available on the Mega Drive from Delphine/US Gold in April.
LEGENDS OF VALOUR
If you are an Amiga owner jealous of Ultima Underworld on the PC, check out this new fantasy role-playing outing which promises to be one of the most impressive yet on ST and Amiga.
Fight your way through a mass of dungeons meeting unusual creatures beautifully rendered in smashing tecture-mapped 3D.
Available on ST and Amiga from US Gold in January.
LEMMINGS
The lovable but stupid lemmings will be making their debut on the Lynx in this classic save 'em up.
The Game
Gear version proves the game can be superbly converted to mini-vision.
Available on the Lynx from Atari in January.
MARIO PAINT AND MOUSE
A novel jaunt for Mario as he puts his name to the SNES first art package.
It's not the most sophisticated of art programs but does allow you to animate frames and add sound.
The mouse is exceptionally good and paves the way for its use in future game titles.
Available on the SNES from Nintendo in January.
PARODIUS
One of the weirdest and most amusing shoot 'em ups of all time will finally be released in the UK on the SNES.
It's a wicked parody of space blasters, in particular Gradius.
Frantic gameplay and frolics.
Available on the SNES from Konami in January.
PRINCE OF PERSIA
The game that is available on most formats finally hits the NES.
Play the pyjama-clad Prince as he swashbuckles his way through dank dungeons and corridors in search of his kidnapped beloved.
A classic and set to be equally good on the NES.
Available on the NES from Mindscape in February.
ROLO TO THE RESCUE
From the makers of James Pond comes this cute number involving an elephant called Rolo and his animal friends.
With 110 levels of gameplay and a wealth of humorous touches, it's a must for James Pond lovers.
Available from Electronic Arts on the Mega Drive in January.
JAMES POND III
The long-awaited sequel to Robocod, now on the Mega Drive and Amiga.
Help James continue his battle (this time in space) against the evil Dr Maybe who has heinous plans for the world's cheese supply.
Available from Millenium/Electronic Arts in April.
STAR TREK
Fans of Captain Kirk, Spock, Scotty and Co can live out their Trekkie fantasies in this NES treat.
Explore weird planets and fight the Klingons and other strange creatures in your search for fuel for the stranded Starship Enterprise.
Available on the NES from Ultra Games in January.
STREETS OF RAGE 2
The sequel to the famous Mega Drive beat 'em up.
Join Axel and Blaze for more gob-smacking action as they again take on the hordes of Mr Big.
Available on the Mega Drive from Sega in January.
SUPER STAR WARS
The SNES version of Star Wars looks being one of the most awesome treats of '93.
Brilliant graphics, scaling and impeccable scrolling together with an excellent soundtrack.
Available on the SNES from Lucasfilm in January.
SUPER KICK-OFF
This classic soccer game hits the Mega Drive in all its premier division glory.
A definite must for footie fans.
Available on the Mega Drive from US Gold in March
SYNDICATE
It's been a long time coming but Syndicate, the latest from Populous and Powermonger creators Bullfrog, looks worth it.
You enjoy a more corporate role governing a company and controlling a squad of cyborgs in a bid to wipe out other syndicates.
Available on PC and Amiga from Bullfrog/Electronic Arts in April
ULTIMA UNDERWORLD 2
The sequel to the classic first-person dungeon exploring romp that set a new technological milestone this year promises to go even further.
Outside locations will join the dungeons.
Available from Origin/Electronic Arts in April.
Test Drive
Amaya Lopez
SNES-owning Mario fans, enviously eyeing Super Mario Land 2 on Game Boy, will feel a warm glow of contentment when Super Mario Kart goes on sale on Monday.
Mario is in the driving seat of a funny little go-kart.
On closer inspection it becomes clear that this is, in fact, Mario meets F-Zero, the super-fast, futuristic racing sim that took the SNES by storm — thanks to brilliant 3-D graphics and Mode 7, the SNES's 360-degree rotation feature.
You can pick from the Mario World characters, including Mario, Princess, Luigi, Koopa Trooper, Donkey Kong, Toad, Bowser, and everyone's favourite dinosaur, Yoshi.
Your driving skills will vary depending on who you choose.
In addition, each driver has a unique power-up.
For example, Princess and Toad can shrink their sturdy karts into a tiny kid's toy, while Donkey Kong will drop banana skins in your path.
Get your own back by watching out for little blocks offering bonuses such as invisibility.
You can even steal your opponent's power-up.
There are three ways to play:
Grand Prix, where you race all the other karts to the death choosing from a wealth of different tracks; Time Trial, where you are on your own trying to beat the fastest time; and Battle Mode, where you have to burst three balloons attached to your opponent's kart before he bursts yours.
Super Mario Kart is split-screen racing heaven.
With top-notch graphics, humorous sound effects and catchy ditties, it's a most addictive game.
Score: 9/10.
Bit Parts
Jane Adams
THEY are the most recognisable people in the world — unless you catch them in their computer games guises.
Technology has produced mind-boggling graphics recently but you would be hard-pressed to tell one Hollywood star from another in the movie game images on the right and left.
Sometimes it's only the character's outfit — for instance Indiana Jones's battered hat and jacket — that gives them away.
But that's all about to change.
New technology will enable movie games to have sprites (electronic character images) that are virtually a photographic likeness of stars such as Harrison Ford and Bruce Willis.
‘Until recently, the architecture of the hardware did not allow a realistic representation of a face,’ says Gary Bracey of Ocean Software in Manchester.
‘But the next generation, with its 32-bit process, greater memory and CD storage, will be incredible.’
It is important to get it right.
Creating a game from a film costs hundreds of thousands of pounds and can take as long as making the movie.
Software companies look for specific films to translate into games such as sci-fi thriller Robocop.
‘The studios know what we need,’ says Gary.
‘For instance, they won't be sending Rain Man.’
Ocean is working with Steven Spielberg on his new film Jurassic Park.
‘This is Jaws with dinosaurs,’ says Gary.
‘In the film they have genetically created dinosaurs from the blood of mosquitoes and made a theme park for them.
The special effects are stunning.
‘With something like this, we get the storyboards and stills of the movie.
We can usually make visits to the set and take our own pictures.
‘Spielberg is a games fanatic himself and has a hands-on involvement to ensure the final result is as faithful as possible to his original idea.
He would not allow any Mario-type figure to start jumping all over the dinosaurs.’
In the meantime try our spot-the-star game.
There are clues under each graphic on this page and, if you're stuck, answers below.
A: A tough customer who promised ‘I'll be back’
E: This chap has a chimp and his game's a thriller
B: You might have a ‘thing’ about this weird family
D: A daring character who likes nothing more than to crack the whip and digs anything that has a bit of a history connected to it
F: These three go boldly into their next adventure
C: A rather hair-raising adventure for this actress
G: When not moonlighting he swoops on his foes
D: The old hat probably gave away Harrison (Indiana) Ford
B: Raul Julia, or that ghoulish Gomez of The Addams Family
G: Bruce Willis was the star who sprouted wings in Hudson Hawk
C: Sigourney Weaver shaved off her hair to star in Aliens III
A: Big Arni Schwartzenneger made a fearsome Terminator
F: Space hero Captain James Tiberius Kirk (William Shatner)
E: Superstar Michael Jackson here minus Bubbles the chimp.
Best Sellers
HERE are the best-selling games for Sega Mega Drive at Virgin Games Centres nationwide:
1
Sonic 2
2
European Club Football
3
LHX Attack Chopper
4
Aliens 3
5
Tazmania
6
Speedball 2
7
Corporation
8
NHLPA 93
9
Senna Super Monaco
10
Terminator
Cracking the system
YOUR children may be pestering you to give them a games system for Christmas but you may be better off with a real computer instead.
A games console may be cheaper but you can't type a letter on it, and while the children are playing games they'll be monopolising the television screen.
For £299 you can buy an Amiga 600 that can run over 2,000 games.
For £50 more the same machine comes with three games and a paint programme.
The basic design is pretty ancient in computer terms.
It has a floppy disk drive to load programmes, and a megabyte of memory to store them.
You can use it with a television screen but an extra £199.99 will buy a monitor, making your games look better.
Most Amiga games can display between 32 and 64 colours on screen at once.
The Amiga has good sound capabilities and can be plugged into a stereo.
For £399.99 you might look at the Amiga 1200.
This is Commodore's second-generation Amiga with a faster processor, twice as much internal memory and improved colour and sound capabilities.
Unfortunately, because most Amiga owners have Amiga 500s and 600s, it may be months before new games use these extra features, and while new games should all work, some older ones might not.
You may also be tempted by the Atari 1024STE Family Curriculum II Pack that costs £299.95 and comes with three educational programmes, a paint programme, a word processor and two games.
The Atari 520 STE Discovery XTRA Pack costs £249.99 and comes with four games, an art package and a word processor.
But an ST is not recommended because support for the machine among software writers is dying.
And while both the Atari ST and the Amiga can be used in the office, with word processors and databases available, the quality of software can be poor.
The dominant office machine is the PC, giving you access to dozens of games.
Even a modest PC has more raw power than an Amiga 600 or Atari ST and comes with hard, as well as floppy, disks, allowing programmers to include more levels and better graphics.
They tend to have at least one, and often two to four megabytes of memory and can display 256 colours at once.
Prices for a PC with the extras required to play games start at Pounds 700.
Leisure bundles are available from several manufacturers.
The practical games PC should have a 386SX processor, 2Mb of RAM, a 40Mb hard disk and an Ad-Lib or Sound Blaster-compatible sound card.
Probably the best deal is the PCS11, from Olivetti, which features four games and starts at £703.
The ultimate compromise is the Amstrad MegaPC 386SX, costing £999.
It comes with a Sega Mega Drive, worth £99.95, so you can play Sonic The Hedgehog.
Cheat Spot
HERE are a couple of handy tips for Joe and Mac Caveman Ninja on the SNES.
To leave a level you've completed, pause the game and press Select.
The advantage is you can also use this to gain unlimited 1-ups.
TO gain 30 lives in Probotector on the NES, pause the game and press Up, Up, Down, Down, Left, Right, Left, Right, A, B, B, A and Stat.
HERE'S a selection of useful level codes for Star Trek 25th Anniversary on Game Boy.
Stage 1: 0523.4.
Stage 2: 4262.0.
Stage 3: 6841.2.
Stage 4: 3310.7.
Stage 5: 7057.3.
Stage 6: 6046.2.
TO find a special game in the Mega Drive version of Klax, merely hold down the Left and Up diagonal plus A, B, C and Start simultaneously at the title screen.
WANT to start on the Hard Way in Paper Boy 2 on the SNES?
Go to the route option on the player selection screen and enter 6479 by pressing Right on the control pad.
TO reach a certain level in Afterburner 2 on the Mega Drive, simply hold down A, B and C and press Start on the title screen.
All being well, a level select option will then become available.
THOSE of you with Hudson Hawk on ST should type in SANITYCLAWSISCOMINGTOTOWN on the title screen.
Amiga owners can use SCIENCEFICTION.
Both should activate infinite lives.
Germanic Saxons
GRAEME Donald is wrong to write of ‘the noble deeds of the Germanic Saxons’ in his piece on ‘the night of the long knives’.
British chieftains were slaughtered in their sleep by the Saxons during a peace conference, and in Welsh history this is known as the ‘treason of the long knives’.
Virginia Bottomley
VIRGINIA Bottomley thinks that making patients write their own prescriptions will make them more responsible for their health.
It's clear from all the hospital closures that she has relinquished her responsibility towards us.
Wrong baby
PEOPLE who leave hospital with the wrong baby amaze me.
Surely if you had seen your child only once you would always remember it.
Children to divorce parents
CHILDREN are allowed to divorce their parents, so why can't the public divorce bad politicians?
Animal experimentation centre
SACKING the head of welfare at an animal experimentation centre because of poor standards is a positive move, but isn't it time we stopped using animals for testing altogether?
G Bell Coventry
Excuses are running dry
NOW that the heavens have opened, dry rivers are flowing and our reservoirs are full, it's comforting to think that summer hosepipe bans will be a thing of the past.
But even though there is water everywhere, I just can't help wondering what excuses our profit-hungry water authorities might come up with next year for increasing our water rates rather than reducing them now the rains have come.
Excuses are running dry
I HAD to laugh when I read recently that a water authority had charged a customer for collecting rain-water, claiming that it belonged to them.
I hope they will still claim that rain belongs to them when people put in insurance claims for flood damage.
We can't afford to lose shipyard skills
THE Government is quite prepared to fork out millions to repair the damage at Windsor Castle yet it is obviously happy for Merseyside's historic Cammell Laird shipyard to sink without a trace.
Some of Britain's most illustrious ships were built at this yard.
Indeed, our history is as inextricably linked with shipbuilding as our royal heritage.
But in its stupid quest for short-term solutions to our economic woes, the Government is prepared to lose this precious heritage for ever.
Shipbuilding skills have been handed down from generation to generation and now these proud men who helped to put the ‘Great’ into Britain are tossed aside because the Government doesn't know how to get out of the hole it has dug.
The public needs to stand up as strongly over this issue as it did over the miners.
The Goverment was forced to re-think their plans and some pits were reprieved.
We can't afford to lose shipyard skills
IT'S tragic that some of our most skilled workers, such as the Cammell Laird shipbuilders, are among the growing ranks of the unemployed.
What will we re-train them as, shop assistants?
We can't afford to lose shipyard skills
SINCE Barclays Bank has just won an award for being model employers despite laying off hundreds of workers, I suppose the Government deserves three gold medals for allowing Cammell Laird to close.
Tom's on target
HOORAY for actor Tom Conti (right) and his ‘buy British’ policy.
If more of us thought the same way, this country wouldn't be in such a mess.
We should be boycotting French goods, particularly farm produce.
French farmers should be punished for the way they treated our sheep farmers.
RSPCA
LIKE your correspondent I think the RSPCA makes it too hard for people to adopt pets — it refused to consider us because our garden was not fully fenced, even though there's half an acre of it well away from a main road.
I can't help wondering whether the Society actually prefers to put down animals.
Mail Order figurine
CAN anyone explain why a mail-order figurine takes eight days to arrive from Marseilles in France, but when I order a similar item from Canterbury — just 15 miles up the A2 from here — they advise me to allow 28 days for delivery.
Is it any wonder that I choose to shop abroad.
Milestones
BIRTHDAYS: Comedian Ronnie Corbett, 62.
Actress Pamela Stephenson, 42.
Actor Jeff Bridges, 43.
ON THIS DAY: In 1154, Nicolas Breakspear became the only English Pope, as Adrian IV.
In 1798, Income Tax was first introduced by Pitt the Younger.
Things you didn't know you didn't know
Graeme Donald
MANY people believe that the Royal Navy is referred to as the Senior Service because it has some sort of superiority to the Army, but the term was not even heard before the 17th Century.
On December 31, 1600 the East India Trading Company received its royal charter to move into the lucrative Indian spice trade.
This had previously been the monopoly of Portugal and Spain, but they were still in disarray following the defeat of the Armada in 1588.
The company had some of the finest ships afloat, on board which pay and conditions were far better than on regular ships of the line.
Many officers resigned their commissions to take up jobs with the new company.
Only then did the navy begin calling itself the Senior Service — reference to the fact that it was around long before the East India Trading Company.
TODAY'S Book Of Things You Didn't Know…is now on sale, published by Simon & Schuster for £3.99.
Streep goes for Goldie in battle of the blondes
Sue Heal
THIS week's recipe is How To Make A Star Vehicle.
Take a large pinch of Meryl Streep, an equal measure of Goldie Hawn and a light seasoning of Bruce Willis.
Stir in oodles of special effects and hand the wooden spoon to Robert ‘Back To The Future’ Zemeckis.
Cook for 1 hour 43 minutes and you have Death Becomes Her, a frothy souffle whose first bite melts deliciously in the mouth but soon leaves you champing for some meat.
This is a sarcastic little L A story about ageing, made for two female stars on the other side of 40 who examine their crow's feet and cellulite like a pair of prospectors panning for gold.
Streep grabs the opportunity to mock such concerns with undisguised relish, providing one of the best comic performances of her career, while Hawn seems curiously ill at ease and takes great care to show us she remains in superb bodily nick.
Bitchy, neurotic Madeline Ashton (Streep) is a fading star of stage and screen whose minimal talent and ferocious envy just about keep her afloat in the Hollywood piranha pond.
Her childhood chum Helen Sharp (Hawn) goes into major decline after Streep steals and marries her fiance, the wimpish Ernest Melville (Willis bumbling around ineffectually).
Desperate to halt the march of time on face and figure, Streep is directed to a large Gothic mansion where mysterious Lisle Von Rhuman (Isabella Rossellini in large gilt choker and very little else) sells her the Elixir of Eternal Youth.
In one of a series of flashy special effects that often intrude rather than enhance the action, Streep's upper and nether regions instantaneously tighten as if bolted into an invisible vice.
Streep is splendidly narcissistic as Ashton, lashing all-comers with her viper's tongue in a script that allows full rein to her over-mannered acting style.
For once all her sneers, inflections, eyebrow raisings and shoulder shruggings are wholly appropriate.
When a miraculously re-vamped Hawn returns to claim her long-lost beau, the duo file their claws with a vengeance.
It turns out that both ladies have been at the Rossellini anti-wrinkle juice — with increasingly disastrous consequences.
So far, so good and we have the movie that the misconceived She Devil should have been.
But you can't sell your soul without a hefty penalty and for eternal youth read everlasting life as every bump and scratch sees the women crack up like second-hand cars.
When they both snuff it — Streep is pushed down the stairs and Hawn shot — the movie's special effects come into their own as failed plastic surgeon Willis sets to with the spray paint and filler to patch up the damage.
Death Becomes Her is a glitzy, glossy affair which glides through its paces in vapidly enertaining Zemeckis style, but a movie which starts out with a huge talent to amuse loses its impetus.
A fascinating satirical theme is never properly pushed to its limits and all concerned sadly bottle out, with plot and action drooping along with its protagonists' derrieres.
Before it goes phut Death Becomes Her manages to show us Streep at her best and confirms Robert Zemeckis as the ultimate purveyor of films for the fast-forward MTV generation.
Nothing disturbing.
THIS IS MY LIFE
THERE are mothers, clinging mothers and then there are Jewish mothers.
Nora Ephron, the New York screenwriter who gave us When Harry Met Sally, has taken this dynamite theme for another angst-ridden head-bang around the block.
It is a light, fluffy effort in which everyone says exactly what's on their minds at all times.
It therefore bears scant resemblance to human relationships as we know them.
Julie Kavner, a rasping-voiced favourite of Woody Allen, is all wild hair and wilder emotions as would-be comedienne Dottie Ingels, struggling to bring up two frighteningly upfront daughters single-handed.
It's all cuddles and late-night snacks until Dottie is discovered one night by agent Claudia Curtis (Carrie Fisher), and whisked off to LA and emerging stardom.
Ten-year-old Opal (Gaby Hoffmann) and 15-year-old Erica (Samantha Mathis) simmer with resentment at their mother's abandonment and completely flip their tiny lids when she takes up with talent spotter Arnold Moss (Dan Aykroyd).
Two Jewish daughters left alone with babysitters after a lifetime of copious kisses is psychic pain enough — but when mother has the gall to start a sex life then it's time to lie down on an analyst's couch.
The two girls decide instead to opt for a frantic search for their long-lost father.
This Is My Life begins with a hint of promise as Kavner rushes round the set like an uncontrolled greyhound, Hoffmann and Mathis do a neat job of tight-lipped anger and all concerned knock six mental bells out of each other at every turn.
The problems, however, are immense and grow larger with each reel.
As Kavner's hysteria mounts, Ephron ups the ante on the sucrose front and the whole mish-mash descends swiftly down the toilet.
To cap it all, Kavner's stage act is one of the most deeply unfunny routines I have ever heard.
But her vast collection of hoary old Jewish jokes, most of them pinched from the Dead Sea Scrolls, are greeted with paroxysms of guffaws and rolling in the aisles.
Not even those who share the faith would get much for their money out of this one.
Nothing disturbing.
ELECTRIC MOON
WHAT do post-Empire Maharajahs do when they are down on their luck after a lifetime of strutting around India showing off their public school educations?
Before you reach for your collecting tins let me say they develop a good wheeze of taking in gullible Western guests and faking a few midnight tiger sightings with the aid of a collection of clockwork beasts and some carefully concealed tapes.
The toffs in question in this charming, often acerbic tale are Roshan Seth as mild-mannered Ranveer, his brother Raja, known as Bubbles (Gerson Da Cunha) and their awfully polite sister Sukanya, known as Socks (Leela Naidu).
This wily trio dispense the sherry and old wives' tales with an impeccably manipulative air as ancient servants creak round in turbans and white gloves.
Being a lapsed nob has its compensations for Bubbles when young Sloane wife Phoebe Fenton (Francesca Brill) refuses to leave the compound after a fortnight of sleeping with him, much to the chagrin of hubby Ian (Gareth Forwood).
American spinster Louise Robinson (Alice Spivak) also fancies a Third World title by marriage.
Meanwhile the ethereal life of Ranveer, Bubbles and Socks, an unworldly trio who react in a childlike way to every sling and arrow as if permanently looking for Nanny, starts to unravel when a new administrator takes over the game park with thinly veiled hostility towards his country's nobility.
Electric Moon is a lovely atmospheric piece wonderfully played by the major characters and delightfully illuminating the bat-squeak tensions between classes and the bureaucratic hindrances that can bring Indian life to a dead stop.
There are some glorious cameos full of subtle humour and insight, such as when Seth desperately invites an Indian film crew to visit as they re-enact a truly dreadful song and sitar number on the back lawn.
The movie's dilemma is that its luxurious pace ambles all over the shop, never really getting anywhere or bringing any of the characters to a satisfying conclusion.
But for all that Electric Moon is brimful of charm and many small gems of enlightenment.
Minor sex scenes.
SLACKER
THIS Is my favourite film of the week by a mile.
It reeks of wonderful originality, quirky playing, wackily-observed vignettes and serious derangement in no particular order.
Slacker, a term denoting a Twentysomething who wants no responsibility and loves a good time, was a major US cult hit last year for director Richard Linklater — and deservedly so.
The cast is a multitude of would-be actors, friends and passers-by who drift in and out of the bizarre action in sultry Austin, Texas.
They have character names like Looking For Missing Friend, Grocery Grabber Of Death's Bounty and Hitch-Hiker Awaiting True Call.
They all look the same, in cut-off jeans, tee-shirt, unwashed hair, and appear to be a motley collection of idle college students.
There is absolutely no coherent plot or narrative.
They have snatched conversations about the Meaning Of The Universe…and I absolutely adored it.
Slacker is very funny indeed and highly innovative in its use of roving camera and juxtaposing various disparate conversations.
It is highly evocative of that time in everyone's life when a mortgage meant nothing, music was all and your friends could be as mental as barking hens.
There is one particularly hilarious moment when three people meet in an alley and one tries to sell the other two a cervical smear in a bottle allegedly from the great Madonna herself.
The sales pitch is a wonderful movie moment.
This is one of those low-budget efforts that just has to be experienced.
See at your earliest opportunity.
Some bad language.
THOUSAND PIECES OF GOLD
A SMALL mention for this unusually accessible epic from our much-maligned British Film Institute.
This is a US pot-boiler set in the Old West of Oregon, where Chinese girl Lalu, played by the luminous Rosalind Chao, has been sold to a brother keeper but feistily refuses to play ball.
Lalu falls in love with mule skinner Jim (a rather lacklustre Dennis Dun), who lopes off to raise the readies to buy her from slimy Hong King (Michael Paul Chan) leaving her in the care of his friend Charlie Bemis (Chris Cooper), a compassionate but cowardly Yankee with a booze problem.
The movie is strong on performance, scenically stunning and interesting on the plight of the Chinese community and the wave of prejudice against them.
But it takes a mighty age to tell its tale and dives head-first into the soap suds along the way.
I never thought I'd live to say that about a film from the BFI.
Some bad language.
CAST LIST
DEATH BECOMES HER
Stars: Meryl Streep, Goldie Hawn, Bruce Willis
Director.
Robert Zemeckis
Running Time: 103mins
Rating: PG
THIS IS MY LIFE
Stars: Julie Kavner, Carrie Fisher, Dan Aykroyd
Director: Nora Ephron
Running Time: 93mins
Rating: 12
ELECTRIC MOON
Stars: Roshan Seth, Leela Naidu, Gerson Da Cunha
Director: Arundhati Roy
Running Time: 103mins
Rating: 15
SLACKER
Stars: Everyone in Austin Texas at the time.
Director: Richard Linklater
Running Time: 97mins
Rating: 15
THOUSAND PIECES OF GOLD
Stars: Rosalind Chao, Dennis Dunn, Chris Cooper
Director: Nancy Kelly
Running Time: 120mins
Rating: Uncert
Top 20 Movies
1(10)
SISTER ACT: Farce starring Whoopi Goldberg as a nightclub singer who takes refuge in a convent after witnessing a murder.
Cert: PG London: Camden Plaza, Notting Hill Coronet, Odeon Kensington.
National:
General release
2(1)
SINGLE WHITE FEMALE: Stylish thriller with Jennifer Jason Leigh as Bridget Fonda's flatmate from hell.
Cert: 18.
London: MGM Chelsea, Odeon Leicester Square, UCI Whiteleys.
National: General release
3(2)
LAST OF THE MOHICANS: Rip-roaring yarn with Daniel Day-Lewis as a native who falls for English Rose Madeline Stowe.
Cert: 12.
London: Camden Parkway, MGM Fulham Road, UCI Whiteleys.
National:
General release
4(5)
PETER'S FRIENDS: Self-indulgent drama with Kenneth Branagh and chums as Oxbridge graduates meeting for a crisis-ridden Yuletide reunion.
Cert: 15
London: Empire Leicester Square, MGM Trocadero, Plaza.
National: General release
5(3)
SNEAKERS: Robert Redford leads a group of computer hackers into the world of espionage.
Cert: 12
London: Empire Leicester Square, MGM Baker Street, UCI Whiteleys.
National: General release
6(4)
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST: Dazzling Disney animation.
Cert U. National:
General release
7(6)
BOOMERANG: Love 'em and leave 'em adman Eddie Murphy gets his come-uppance when his firm is taken over.
Cert: 15
London: MGM Baker St, Plaza, UCI Whiteleys.
National: General release
8(8)
STRICTLY BALLROOM: Stunning Australian film about an unorthodox ballroom star.
Cert: PG
London: Screen On The Green, UCI Whiteleys, Odeon Kensington.
General:
Selected locals
9 (9)
TWIN PEAKS — FIRE WALK WITH ME: Prequel to David Lynch's cult TV series about the last year of Laura Palmer's life.
Cert: 18
London: Lumiere.
National: Selected locals
10(7)
UNLAWFUL ENTRY: Retread of Fatal Attraction with Ray Liotta.
Cert: 18
London: Camden Parkway, MGM Oxford Street, Odeon Marble Arch.
National:
General Release
11(-)
BLADE RUNNER: Director's cut of Eighties sci-fi classic set in the year 2020, starring Harrison Ford, Sean Young and Rutger Hauer.
Cert: 15.
London: MGM Shaftsbury Ave, Fulham Rd, The Screen, Islington.
National:
Selected locals
12(-)
OF MICE AND MEN: Epic starring John Malkovich as a mentally retarded American living through the Depression of the Thirties.
Cert: PG.
London: Curzon, West End.
National: General release
13(11)
PATRIOT GAMES: Retired CIA man Harrison Ford is back in action after witnessing an assassination attempt on a British royal.
Cert: 15
National: General release
14(13)
THE CRYING GAME: Atmospheric drama about an IRA volunteer who guards a kidnapped British squaddie.
Cert: 12
London: Camden Plaza, Curzon West End, MGM Fulham Road.
National:
Selected locals
15(18)
GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS: Superb version of David Mamet's acclaimed play about the high-pressure world of real-estate salesmen.
Potential Oscar-winning performances from Al Pacino and Jack Lemmon.
Cert: 15
London: Odeon Haymarket.
National: General release
16(14)
HUSBANDS AND WIVES: Woody Allen's vivid tale about a middle-aged lecturer who falls for a student.
Cert: 15.
London: Gate Cinema, MGM Chelsea, Odeon Kensington.
National: Selected locals
17(12)
RAPID FIRE: Brandon (son of Bruce) Lee karate kicks his way through this surprisingly strong martial arts movie.
Cert: 18
London: MGM Haymarket, MGM Oxford Street, MGM Panton Street.
National:
Selected locals
18(16)
1492 — CONQUEST OF PARADISE: Ridley Scott's spectacular epic starring Gerard Depardieu as Christopher Columbus.
Cert: 15
London: Empire Leicester Square, MGM Shaftesbury Avenue.
National:
General release
19(15)
WHITE MEN CAN'T JUMP: Buddy movie set in the world of basketball, starring Woody Harrelson and Wesley Snipes.
Cert: 15.
London: UCI Whiteleys, Odeon Kensington, MGM Oxford Street.
National:
General release
20(19)
CALIFORNIA MAN: Wayne's World-style comedy about a pre-historic rock dude.
Cert: PG
National: General Release
Your Movie Verdict
ALTHOUGH critics give their judgment on the latest movie releases, it is the public that determines which films become hits.
This week London audiences gave ET their verdicts on Of Mice And Men, adapted from John Steinbeck's novel, and The Waterdance.
The former won top marks from Paula MacMahon, 32, a dental hygienist from north London.
‘I definitely recommend this film,’ she said.
‘The friendship between the two poor farm workers is very sentimental.
It was nostalgic and very enjoyable.’
Her enthusiasm was echoed by music store assistant Helen Dawson, 23, from Bromley, Kent.
‘This is a very good film.
It's a simple story but strong emotionally.’
Jennifer Calder, 27, a legal secretary, from Barnet, north London, said: ‘John Malkowich was superb.
This film proves he has a great range as an actor.’
The Waterdance, which charts the struggles of a novelist trying to come to terms with sudden paralysis, also drew great praise.
Keith Hoult, 31, a hotel manager from Earl's Court, west London, was pleased that the film avoided being over-sentimental.
‘I thoroughly enjoyed it.
It stuck to the facts and wasn't a weepy.’
But some people were moved to tears, such as nurse Fiona Sexton, 22, from Hackney: ‘I cried a bit because it's so sad.
I will be thinking about this film all night.’
The film also impressed James Lewis, 23, from Leatherhead, Surrey, who looks after the disabled.
‘If the public saw this film they would get a much better idea of what it is like to be disabled,’ he said.
Coward is cast to perfection
Tony Rennell
IF YOU like Noel Coward, this brilliantly acted and visually stunning revival of HAY FEVER (Albery Theatre) is for you.
Here is the appalling Bliss family in their anyone-for-tennis country home: actress mother, artistic father, precocious children — all of them vain and selfish and looking for amusement and romantic intrigue from their weekend guests.
The guests are their toys: welcomed, mocked and discarded.
This is a faultless and funny cast.
You won't better Maria Aitken as a Coward woman — tall, grand, always posing.
Nor will you find a better scene-stealer than Sara Crowe (a face familiar to Philly cheese fans), reduced to a wreck of nervy mannerisms as the true awfulness of the weekend overwhelms her.
It's all so blissfully witty, if you like that sort of thing.
I don't.
By the end, can anyone give a damn about these silly people and their empty lives?
Coward's snobbish game-playing is history.
The world has moved on.
But if you like the playwright and the period, go for it.
Marvellous Mac leads charge of hits brigade
ALONG with turkey, hangovers and The Great Escape, one of the enduring traditions of Christmas is a deluge of Greatest Hits albums.
They are always popular stocking-fillers, especially for those who are keen to re-live younger and perhaps more vibrant days.
One album that is sure to bridge the generation gap and be near the top of the charts by the time Santa hitches up his sleigh to Rudolph and friends is 25 Years — The Chain (WEA), an anthology covering the career of Fleetwood Mac.
It ranges from the 1969 instrumental number one Albatross to Everywhere and Little Lies from the Tango In The Night album.
It comes in two versions — the first of which is a four-CD box-set with all 23 UK hits, four new songs and dozens of album tracks including 10 alternative versions.
If 72 tracks is too much for you, there's the two-CD/two-cassette package featuring 37 songs.
Both come with a 68-page booklet on the band's history.
But Mick, Stevie, John, Christine and Co will have plenty of opposition in the race for Christmas business.
Leading the way is Erasure's Pop!
The First 20 Hits (Mute), capturing the camp audacity of the band that's made Seventies disco fashionable in Nineties clubland.
Theirs is just one of eight compilations already in the top 10.
Abba are riding high with a collection of 16 of their biggest songs on Abba Gold — Greatest Hits (Polydor).
Flying the dance floor banner is Gloria Estefan with her Greatest Hits (Epic) compilation.
The kings of stadium rock Simple Minds are offering Glittering Prize (Virgin), featuring their hits from 1981-92.
Easy listening is supplied by Michael Bolton with Timeless — The Classics (Columbia).
Freddie Mercury fans can opt for a retrospective album of solo tracks, including the Christmas number one single contender — In My Defence.
Like the other ten tracks on The Freddie Mercury Album (Parlophone), it is a remix of the original.
Cher wins the prize for longest run of success.
Her Greatest Hits (Geffen) album covers 27 years, beginning with the 1965 hit All I Really Want To Do.
The live Genesis compilation from this year's world tour covers a shorter time span but it at least has an unusual, if clumsy, title — The Way We Walk, Volume 1: The Shorts.
Outside the top ten, but destined for thousands of Christmas stockings, are compilations from Belinda Carlisle, The Police, Huey Lewis And The News, AC/DC, Jimi Hendrix, Bob Marley and Gary Glitter.
Another prime candidate for nostalgia this Christmas is Otis Redding.
Next Thursday is the 25th anniversary of his death and Atlantic Records commemorate it with re-releases of all his work, including the classic album Otis Blue.
Available for the first time on CD are Tell The Truth, Live In Person At The Whisky A Go-Go and Love Man.
Reaching back even farther is Ruby Trax which covers 40 years of music in 40 cover versions — to celebrate 40 years of the New Musical Express, with all profits going to the 40-year-old Spastics Society.
Tracks include Maggie May by Blur, Shaddup Your Face by EMF, My Sweet Lord by Boy George, Ring My Bell by Tori Amos and Brass In Pocket by Suede.
Finally there's Hush And Listen (Permanent Records) by the London Community Gospel Choir.
I'll Take You There, Knockin' On Heaven's Door, Ball Of Confusion and Abraham Martin And John all get a little extra help from The Lord, with spectacular results.
Classic Choice
Andrew Penman
PRESENTS could be stunningly original before the days of pop-up toasters and his and hers towels.
Mozart composed his Haffner Serenade for the wedding of Elisabeth Haffner, daughter of a rich Salzburg merchant.
This magnificent present has been recorded for Philips by Frans Bruggen and the Orchestra of the Eighteenth Century, an authentic note being struck by omitting cellos, as was contemporary practice.
Lucy van Dael sparkles in the mini violin concerto at the heart of the serenade, Philips' engineers producing an ideal balance between soloist and orchestra.
DANISH composer Neils Gade wrote his fifth symphony in 1852 as a wedding gift for his bride.
Suitably upbeat, it is noted for the ubiquitous piano part, played with endearing understatement here by Amalie Malling, with Michael Schonwandt conducting Copenhagen's Collegium Musicum (Marco Polo).
It is coupled with Gade's third symphony, a work combining originality with clear debt to Mendelsshon's symphonic style.
IS this the ultimate present for opera buffs who sing in the bath?
The double CD Karaoke Opera (Imp Classics) gives you 16 popular arias and 37-page lyric booklet.
The first CD lets you sing along with the Czech Symphony Orchestra and Prague Philharmonic Choir, while the second plays the full arias including vocal part.
Papering over Windsor blaze
THE report into the fire at Windsor Castle is just not good enough.
At £60 million for two copies of a 1½-page document, it must be the most expensive publication in history.
Is it a whitewash or an accurate representation of the result of a searching investigation?
Who knows.
But there must be more to say about a fire which caused a national disaster, destroyed part of the British heritage and is going to cost the taxpayer a fortune.
The fire did not break out in a deserted building in the middle of nowhere in the wee small hours of the morning.
There were many people around yet the flames were able to spread uncontrollably.
How was that allowed to happen?
What about the state of the alarm system?
Should the castle have been insured?
Should there have been a better on-site fire squad?
Was the fire brigade hindered in any way?
Even without the cost of rebuilding the castle, the public is entitled to know the answers to those questions.
Lessons learned need to be applied to other historic sites.
The impression left by the report issued yesterday is that its main aim was not to upset anyone.
That will not do.
We are entitled to a full and proper report after a full and proper investigation.
Two faced
THE catalogue of horror stories coming out of the banks' treatment of their customers seems to have no effect on the high-handed, arrogant way they behave.
You would have thought that after so many months of bad publicity, they would have learned how to treat their clients, if only for the sake of their public-relations image.
The latest story is of the woman who was charged £25 for going 25p overdrawn.
That follows the bank which charged a pensioner £3 for changing a £10 note into coins.
The banks spend a fortune advertising themselves on television.
What is the point of doing that when they present precisely the opposite image in real life?
More importantly, don't they think their customers deserve to be treated with courtesy and respect?.
‘I say, I say’
I HAVE a touch of regret that I didn't become Prime Minister.
Lord Tebbit IT is wrong for people who no longer play to enforce changes on those who do.
England rugby captain Will Carling on the controversial new laws WHAT has Britain come to and where is there left any integrity in Cabinet ministers and officers of the Crown?
Liberal Democrat MP Simon Hughes on the Lamont affair WHEN he goes to see a Shakespeare play he wants to know what happens at the end.
It's very refreshing.
Actress Jeananne Crowley on Carlton Television boss Michael Green I CHEERED like mad when a couple of papers got clobbered with damages of half a million pounds.
Labour MP Clive Soley on the libel laws I HAVE the body of a young girl.
It's white and soft.
If I was Madonna I would probably have shown it to you.
Dame Barbara Cartland, 91 JIMMY, I think he should do your job and you should have done his.
Tony Benn to Jimmy Young when asked about Neil Kinnock's Radio 2 debut I'M asked how I feel when they get the questions wrong and lose everything, and I say I try not to laugh.
Jim Bowen, host of TV quiz show Bullseye
Only a free Press can save democracy
David Seymour
THERE are times when you have to stand up to be counted and that time is here for the British Press.
Newspapers are under the greatest peacetime threat to their freedom this century.
Yet there has never been a time when the British people were more in need of a vigilant and free Press.
The Conservative Party has been in power for almost 14 years.
Even the most saintly of people would drift towards complacency and arrogance after such a long period.
Meanwhile the Labour Party continues to be as inadequate in Opposition as it would be in government.
Without proper interrogation and criticism, government leans away from democracy towards autocracy.
For the health of the nation, there must be an Opposition.
And in Britain today it comes from the Press.
That is why the politicians want to muzzle us and control what we write and you read.
More than a hint of the attack which is coming was dropped yesterday by Norman Lamont, the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
In an interview in The Times, he said: ‘I think if they are not careful, the Press will become a major political issue of the 1990s, as the unions were in the 1970s.
They are both over-mighty subjects.’
He also said: ‘It seems to me the Press have a powerfully destructive herd instinct, which I believe will be their undoing.
I think the Press has now finally over-reached itself.’
On the contrary, Mr Lamont.
I believe that the major political issue of the 1990s is going to be the Government itself.
For too many of its members consider themselves to be over-mighty.
It seems to me that the Cabinet has an obsessively self-protective herd instinct which could be its undoing.
It is the Government which is in danger of over-reaching itself.
Mr Lamont is not happy because he has been the subject of more criticism and speculation over the past three months than most Ministers suffer in a lifetime.
But when he attacks and threatens the Press, he is not doing it merely on his own behalf.
He is speaking for a Government which has been in power so long that it believes it has a God-given right to govern and denies anyone the right to criticise.
Twenty years ago the Watergate crisis proved that even the most powerful man in the world could be brought to account by the people and their representatives in the Press and courts.
Mr Lamont and his colleagues should beware of falling foul of that power, too.
He says dismissively in The Times: ‘Tabloid newspapers are entertainment.’
Certainly, part of our function is to entertain.
But we do a lot more than that — and that is what the politicians don't like.
The tabloids would never describe themselves as completely serious but we are serious about serious news.
The past few months have been remarkable for that.
The monarchy has been rocked to its foundations and a Government still basking in the glow of re-election has been brought to its knees by a series of disasters.
The Press has played a crucial role in every story, despite being accused of lying, invention and worse.
It was the Press which led the battle to cut the Civil List and persuade the Queen to pay tax.
That was what the British people wanted but the Establishment didn't.
It was the Press which took up the Andrew Morton book on Princess Diana and the state of her marriage.
The story was utterly denied by the Palace yet turned out to be correct.
It was the Press which took up the cause of the miners when British Coal wanted to sack 30,000 of them.
The Government could have ignored the outcry from the unions and Labour but it could not ignore the unexpected media attack.
It was the Press, too, which really drove home the scandal of the three executives from the Matrix Churchill company who were threatened with jail for supplying armaments to Saddam Hussein.
Four Cabinet Ministers, on the advice of the Attorney-General, signed declarations in an attempt to keep from the court documents which would have cleared the men.
The Labour Party utterly failed to grasp the point, let alone the enormity, of what the Government had done.
The Press did, though.
Even over the economy, in particular interest rates and membership of the Exchange Rate Mechanism, the newspapers argued and argued and argued against the Government's destructive obstinacy.
If green shoots are now appearing, the media is entitled to claim some credit for watering them.
Yet the Government has reacted to all this with growing paranoia.
Mr Lamont said in The Times that he was forced to leave a meeting with Jacques Delors in Brussels last Friday ‘to answer questions about whether I had bought a bottle of wine in Paddington’.
Why did he have to do that?
A lot of people can't understand why anyone cares about ‘Threshergate’.
But Mr Lamont certainly cares and should understand.
The Press has a duty to investigate.
Without investigation there can be no genuine reporting.
Newspapers would be reduced merely to printing what they are told — which means what the politicians want you to hear.
That is a long way from the Chancellor's unsubstantiated allegation yesterday that tabloid newspapers ‘encourage people to tell unsubstantiated allegations’.
The Government believes that the Press has declared war on it.
It has not.
But it has appointed itself Her Majesty's Opposition in the absence of any other.
The past few months have proved how effective we are at fighting for the British people.
Now we must show we can fight for ourselves.
Lamont makes the twitchers grouse
Adrian Lee
IF accusations of bungling the economy and his personal finances were not enough, Norman Lamont has now ruffled feathers in the bird world.
It was a simple mistake.
After all, what's a wing tip and a Continent between friends?
The Chancellor often felt like a rare bird, he said, facing a barrage of flashbulbs every time he emerged from his Downing Street nest.
‘A North African Pallas' Sandgrouse perhaps,’ said the avid bird watcher.
Perhaps it was just wishful thinking.
The Pallas' Sandgrouse, to which Mr Lamont likens himself, has a smaller belly than other family members.
Alas, as any self respecting twitcher will tell the chancellor, it is not a native of Africa.
With its ‘chack, chack’ call the Pallas' Sandgrouse (Syrrhaptes paradoxus) lives several thousand miles away in Asia.
The male has highly absorbent belly feathers which enable him to store water after immersing his underparts in a water hole.
Mr Lamont was clearly confusing it with the Black-Bellied Sandgrouse (Pterocles orientalis), whose natural habitat is North Africa, said the RSPB yesterday.
The dumpier, seed-eating, Black-Bellied Sandgrouse, gathers in flocks of several thousand.
Its call is a more gurgling or bubbling sound and it is chiefly seen in the mornings, when it likes to drink.
In regions where water is scarce, much jostling and squabbling takes place as each bird drinks its fill.
‘Yes, I'm afraid a factual error has been made,’ said RSPB spokesman Derek Niemann.
‘I am surprised because Mr Lamont is a very dedicated bird watcher and knows his subject well.
‘He even gave us a talk about his love of birds at the Tory Party Conference.
‘I can see the point he was trying to make — the Pallas' Sandgrouse only turns up in this country once every 10 or 20 years.
‘When they come to Britain they attract an army of photographers.
One arrived in the Shetlands two or three years ago and caused quite a stir.’
Stallions but no horseplay
By Jaci Stephen
SO BBC1's Trainer finally galloped off into the knacker's yard, leaving nothing but the memory of bad acting and even worse scripts in its wake.
Last year they were calling it Howards' Way with horses, this year they've been calling it Howards' Way without boats.
But was it really as bad as they said?
I'm afraid it was.
In series one, Mike Hardy (Mark Greenstreet) couldn't get his leg over anything that didn't need shoeing first.
And when he finally produced a son in series two, you didn't so much ask ‘when?’ as ‘how?’
I recently met a ‘star’ from the series, who explained that one of the difficulties for the actors was their not ever being made aware of where their character might be going in future episodes.
To think they could have saved themselves the worry.
THE advertisement says ‘how to meet people and make friends’.
It goes on to list some of the tips to be found in a book (price £12.95) of the same title — techniques which will apparently enable you to become ‘more popular, more confident, more successful and happier in life’.
It will tell you, for instance, ‘the three best ways to start a conversation’(that seems obvious enough — buy someone a drink; get drunk and fall on people; pass out and be carried to someone's house to sober up).
Then there's ‘the secret of being totally relaxed while talking to anyone’(er…get drunk?)
‘The best way to end a conversation’(pass out drunk?)
‘How to never feel out of place at a social function’(get drunk?)
Sounds fairly easy to me.
I'd rather spend the £12.95 on…well, getting drunk — and making friends.
Royal victims of the parent trap
By Jaci Stephen
WHY do people continue to propagate the ridiculous idea that a couple's problems will fade into nothingness if they simply make babies?
Bookmakers William Hill currently have 5-2 odds on Prince Charles and Diana having another child next year.
Spokesman Graham Sharpe is optimistic about a reconciliation and asks: ‘What better way of proving it than having another child?’
I'll tell you, plonker.
Any enhancement that children bring to couples' lives is incidental.
The reality is that a child is a time-consuming, all-engulfing creature who disrupts any semblance of pleasurable home life.
The best route to any reconciliation is to pack the kiddies off to Grandma and try to recapture some of the fun you had as a couple before the pressures of parenthood took over.
If they hadn't rushed into breeding so early in their marriage, maybe Charles and Diana could have avoided many of their problems.
By all means, make babies.
But spend a good few years enjoying the practice rounds before they turn up.
Diana Ross
By Jaci Stephen
DIANA Ross turned up on Des O'Connor Tonight with the song that has alrady been a hit in America, As Clouds Roll By.
These seemingly harmless four words are repeated several times to form the lyric ‘As clouds roll by for you and I’.
I'm sorry to be pedantic Diana, but this is grammatically incorrect.
In this context, the line should read ‘for you and me’.
I can see that this would have given you a problem finding a rhyme for ‘by’, but you should have tried a bit harder.
How about ‘As clouds roll by for me and Dai’, or ‘As clouds roll by I spit in your eye’.
It may not be romantic but at least it's linguistically sound.
Brits have sex on their minds and nowhere else
By Jaci Stephen
THE British have more sex surveys than they have sex.
That was the only thing which emerged clearly from the latest survey among 19,000 people in England, Wales and Scotland.
In fact, if we all had sex as often as we had surveys we wouldn't have time to answer the surveys in the first place.
The study, funded by the Department of Health, offers insight into the spread of HIV and Aids, but while doing so repeats the age-old cliches and stereotypical ideas relating to male and female sexuality: namely, that men do it more than women.
But it begs the question who are they doing it with, if the female averages are really so much lower than the male?
They're certainly not doing it with other men (only 3.6 per cent claim to have had homosexual intercourse), so can we presume yet again that men just like to say they do it more often.
A more interesting survey is the one by Durex, which reveals that Lancastrians have sex on average 77 times a year — which astonishingly makes them top of the league.
That's not even twice a week!
If you can't manage it twice a week in a part of the country which hasn't seen any action since the Wars Of The Roses, what hope is there for the rest of us?
Even in Yorkshire, where you would think that watching all those frisky animals might have some sort of knock-on (or knock-up) effect, the people only manage 67 times — which makes them the lowest in the league table.
These surveys come in the week when Carlton Television, which takes over the Thames franchise in the new year, announced its schedule.
One highlight is the Good Sex Guide, which will offer advice on relationships and feature full-frontal nudity.
Like all other sex programmes, this one will have no impact on the sex lives of the British; it will simply provide another excuse for people to watch sex on television rather than participate in the practicals.
Most Brits don't want any sort of sex, let alone good sex; they just don't like it.
What they really like is talking about it, talking about others doing it, and feeling mighty relieved when their partner arrives home with a headache.
It is the idea of sex, rather than the actual performance, which gives them their real sexual pleasure.
If, as the Department of Health survey reveals, most Brits are monogamous, it has less to do with morality than the fact that they believe a sexual partner is someone who helps you change the duvet.
Thank heavens for the French.
And the Italians.
And the Australians.
Especially the Australians.
Pup star is muzzled
By Jaci Stephen
REMEMBER Baftagate, when Lynda La Plante picked up an award for Prime Suspect although the majority of the jury allegedly voted for Alan Bleasdale's GBH?
Now there's Baftagate II.
At last week's advertising awards, the Esso tiger picked up the Best Animal trophy when to me it was obvious that the Andrex puppy was the better creature.
The people who voted for the puppy are up in arms.
But then that's all they have left since the tiger paid them a visit.
People Today
WHO's this strolling down London's fashionable King's Road?
The grinning skull on the back of the mystery woman's jacket is keeping mum.
Despite the hat pulled down over her face, below, the smile is unmistakable.
Katy Kass, 20, not only has the looks of her mother Joan Collins, left, but also her approval for her choice in men.
For with Katy is Jeff Stuart — alias PC Reg Hollis in The Bill.
A friend said: ‘Joan is thrilled Katy has found such a nice chap.’
The curry doors of power
Fergus Kelly and Helen Renshaw
NEIL Kinnock's fondness for spicy food made headlines when he ended up brawling with a lout outside his favourite curry house in Ealing, London.
But the fiery ex-Labour leader isn't the only MP who likes to bury a biryani or murder a madras.
Politicians from Premier John Major downwards often escape the pressures of the Commons by heading for their favourite Indian restaurant.
Mr Major enjoys chicken tandoori while his wife Norma loves a korma.
‘Curry seems to be the first choice for many MPs when they go out for a meal,’ says Peter Grove, publisher of Patak's Real Curry Restaurant Guide.
‘Indian restaurants are always contacting us to say that they've had celebrities in, and more often than not they turn out to be MPs.’
Peter even received a hand-written reply from Mr Major when he sent him a copy of his book, saying it would come in ‘very useful’.
When the Parliamentary Curry Club was launched at the Red Fort restaurant in Soho last month, the celebration boasted 79 MPs — not least of whom was the aptly-named Edwina Currie.
Ironically one of those who couldn't make it was the Conservatives' first Asian Tory MP Nirj Deva, who is serving a life ban at the restaurant for becoming ‘too exuberant’ there seven years ago.
The political curry connection stretches a lot further than London.
Liberal Democrat MP Malcolm Bruce and his Labour opponent Peter Snape both rave about the Misbah curry house in Monmouth, while new Tory member and former Olympic champion Sebastian Coe recommends Falmouth's Hannan restaurant in his constituency.
One Staffordshire tandoori has even sported a parliamentary logo on its menus since local MP Michael Fabricant told the Commons the curries there were so good that they should be served at Westminster.
‘MPs don't seem to go for the very expensive end of the Indian restaurant market,’ says Peter Grove.
‘They tend to head for the middle-of-the-road establishments — still quite cheap but a cut above the red-flock wallpaper places.’
Here we look at four of the top London curry houses favoured by MPs and other ‘pilaus of society’.
The Kundan Horseferry Road, SW1.
NAYAB Abbasi's customers read like a Westminster Who's Who.
He has served prime ministers, presidents and princes, and the pictures on his office walls are a gallery of the rich and powerful.
Pride of place in this collection goes to the snap of him with John and Norma Major.
According to Nayab, the PM is a confirmed curry fanatic.
Mr Major is only one of a majority of politicians who like it hot at the Kundan.
Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley is a regular, and the restaurant also goes a long way to explaining Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke's well-rounded appearance.
It's not surprising that so many ministers and MPs head there — it's only a five-minute walk from the Houses of Parliament.
The restaurant even has a division bell on one of its walls to alert dining MPs when a vote is about to be held.
‘It can go off at any time,’ says Nayab.
‘But they don't have to finish their meal too quickly because it is only a short walk back to the Commons.
‘Mr Major's big favourite is chicken tandoori (£6.95) or jalfrezi (£6.60), always with pilau rice (£2.85), and often with a side dish of mixed vegetables (£3.90).’
His wife Norma likes a korma (£7.25).
‘She tends to prefer milder dishes but she also really enjoys Indian food,’ Nayab says.
‘Since he became Prime Minister, Mr Major comes in about once a year but before that he was more of a regular.
It always startles our other guests when he visits.
They call us over and whisper ‘is that the real John Major?’’
Virginia Bottomley, who often dines with her MP husband Peter, has even recommended it in restaurant guides.
She usually plumps for a lamb rogan josh (£7.25), a traditional dish cooked with spices, browned onions, ginger and garlic and simmered in yoghurt.
She admits: ‘Curry is a great favourite for all the family, especially when the weather is cold and wet and we're out fighting an election.’
Like Mr Major, Kenneth Clarke has a taste for chicken jalfrezi, but the Cabinet's heavyweight diner also has a great soft spot for a grilled king prawn curry (£12.50).
Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd, ex-Premier Lord Callaghan and former ministers Lord Parkinson and Alan Clark have all dined at the Kundan.
And Michael Caine, Imran Khan, Omar Sharif and the president of Pakistan have been spotted at its tables.
Nayab's restaurant has provided catering for two functions attended by Prince Charles, who ordered 33 separate vegetarian dishes.
Lady Thatcher attended a similar banquet.
‘But I don't think she is a very big fan of Indian food,’ says Nayab.
The restaurant is still waiting for a visit from Opposition leader John Smith.
‘He will never make Downing Street otherwise,’ jokes restaurant director Abul Arshad.
‘Neil Kinnock never came in and look what happened to him.’
Putney Tandoori Lower Richmond Road, Putney.
POP into the Putney Tandoori and it is more than likely you will bump into David Mellor, the local MP who is a regular there.
He and wife Judith took Norman and Rosemary Lamont there earlier this year.
The Chancellor noted his appreciation of the evening by writing ‘simply delicious’ in the comments section of the visitors' book.
But even on a quiet night out, the luckless Chancellor couldn't escape the recession.
‘Some of the other customers stood up and demanded to know what the Chancellor was going to do about the economy,’ says proprietor Moziruddin Ahmed, who was far too discreet to say whether Mr Lamont paid by Access.
‘He replied he was only doing his best.
He is a very polite man.’
Although their choice of dishes was less than adventurous — they all chose Britain's favourite curry chicken tikka masala (£6.25 with £1.60 pilau rice) apart from Rosemary Lamont, who opted for lamb pasanda (£6.10)— the foursome had a riotous time by all accounts.
‘David Mellor and his family have been coming to my restaurant for 18 years and they are my very good friends,’ says Moziruddin.
‘It breaks my heart that his career has been ruined.
He has so much charisma and we should all be allowed to make one mistake in life.’
Moziruddin's clients also include Labour frontbencher Michael Meacher and Party colleague Peter Hain.
The Red Fort Dean Street, Soho.
NOT surprisingly considering its name, the Red Fort is particularly favoured by Labour MPs.
Leader John Smith dined there earlier this week and other regulars include Shadow Cabinet members Jack Cunningham, Robin Cook, Frank Dobson, and ex-GLC leader Ken Livingstone.
As one of London's best-known Indian restaurants, this was the natural place for the politicians' Curry Club to be launched.
Commons curry eaters have dined out together for many years, according to Tory MP and founder member Emma Nicholson.
Their numbers were growing so quickly that the club was formed.
‘The Curry Club is really a front for the Anglo-Indian parliamentary group, and we frequently get the most wonderful lunches at the Indian High Commission as well,’ says Mrs Nicholson.
Her curry love affair stretches back to the mid-Seventies when she worked as a volunteer in a children and old people's home.
‘I like milder curries, and my favourite is a king prawn in a creamy sauce.’
Like the Kundan, the Red Fort has a parliamentary-division bell and lays on a cab service for members to rush back.
‘You always get the most informed political chatter there with the waiters, which isn't surprising as India's is the biggest democracy in the world and ours is the oldest,’ says Mrs Nicholson.
‘Curry is great value and it is bound to have a big appeal for MPs because we are so often in a hurry.’
Imperial Tandoori Kennington Road, SE1.
FORMER Speaker Bernard Weatherill used to put a hard day calling ‘Order, order’ behind him by ordering a range of his favourite vegetarian dishes.
His letter of appreciation still adorns the walls, along with those of many other MPs.
It's a favourite haunt for many backbenchers.
Northern Ireland minister Michael Mates was also a regular before being sent to Ulster.
‘He used to come in twice a week and was one of our best customers,’ says manager Moni Ahmed.
Mr Mates favours lamb tikka (£4.70), chicken tikka masala (Pounds 6.45) and prawn bhuna (£4.65).
The restaurant crosses all party boundaries.
Labour MPs Rhodri Morgan, Keith Vaz, James Wray and Jimmy Hood can be found there most weeks.
So can Tory opponents such as Sir James Hill and junior environment minister Robin Squire, who has a liking for the lamb pasanda (Pounds 6.45), again with pilau rice (£1.60).
Little Liphook dishes out rough justice
Mark Simpson
MENTION the Liphook Golf Club to anyone who has played there and a faraway look will come into their eyes as memories of the classic heathland course flood back.
Liphook is the perfect example of a short course which still presents a stiff test of a golfer's skills.
Well known for its naval connections, the club which was founded in 1922 straddles the border of Sussex and Hampshire on the main London to Portsmouth road.
At one point it boasted 13 members who were admirals — not many clubs in the world can stage an annual match called Admirals v The Rest.
However, one admiral arrived on the scene a little too early for a round of golf.
Admiral Lord Nelson is said to have stopped for tea in the local Anchor Hotel on his way to join the British Fleet at Trafalgar.
The trend in golf-course building is towards courses over 7,000 yards, but Liphook shows this emphasis on yardage is rather misguided.
Small greens and plenty of trees and heather, not to mention sand, make the 6,247-yard Liphook layout a test of accuracy rather than raw power.
The architect and writer Frank Pennink was right when he described it as ‘an outstanding course where anyone who can play to his handicap is doing well’.
One unusual feature is that there are five par-three holes.
The 207-yard first requires a long iron or wood, but the rest are all excellent mid-iron testers.
I was just congratulating myself on negotiating the first and second holes fairly well when disaster struck at the 142-yard par-three third.
This is the shortest par-three but is guarded by enough sand to build at least a four-bedroom castle.
A tee shot hit slightly fat into a steep-faced bunker at the front of the green led to several bunker shots hit even fatter, a score approaching double figures and an instant bout of depression.
But it is impossible for anyone to feel depressed for long at Liphook.
Sooner or later an approach shot to one of the closely guarded greens will nestle near the hole and suddenly all is right with the world.
Perhaps my favourite hole is also the most famous.
The 503-yard par-five at Liphook is called Two Counties because the tee is in Sussex and the green in Hampshire.
Dirty Harry once said ‘a man needs to know his limitations’, and nowhere is this more true than on the 13th.
Here the wide fairway beckons you seductively towards a second shot which will test your nerve.
Do you lay up short of the stream, which is around 110 yards shy of the green?
Or do you strain every sinew to go for that elusive target set on a small plateau?
The result may make your day, or break it.
Club pro: Ian Large Course length: 6247 yards Green fees: Weekdays £24 round, £33 day.
Saturdays: Pounds 35 round, £45 day.
Sundays: £40 day only after noon.
Telephone: 0428 723785.
A to Z of Golf
Nigel O'Mahony
DROP: A player drops a ball when he has hit out of bounds or lost his original ball.
He may also drop his ball back into play, though no nearer the hole, when given relief by the rules or under penalty of one shot if he thinks the ball is unplayable.
DUCK HOOK: This is when a ball is mishit and flies very low and fast while veering rapidly to the left, usually landing the unfortunate player in terrible trouble.
As Lee Trevino says: ‘You can talk to a fade but a hook just won't listen.’
DUFF: To strike a very bad shot, usually by hitting the ground well before the ball.
The most common duffed shot is that delicate chip.
Every weekend golfer knows that awful feeling of being within 20 yards of the green in two on a 500-yard hole and taking another three shots to get on to the putting surface.
DUNES: To most people dunes are sandy hillocks to enjoy a stroll around but to golfers they are the enemy.
Ask any player who has been unfortunate enough to fire a ball into the thick marram grass of a dune on a links and he'll tell you there is only one way out — pick it up and start again.
DUNHILL CUP: Played annually at St Andrews, the Dunhill Cup is a knock-out event contested by eight countries with three players on each team.
Each player takes on another in stroke-play.
England, led by Jamie Spence, was this year's victorious team.
EAGLE: Almost as rare as the American bald version, an eagle in golf is two strokes under the par of a hole.
Anna and Colin's strokes of genius
WELL done to these readers entering The Hall Of Fame.
Anna Dyer won the Aberystwyth Golf Club monthly medal in May, August and September.
Besides a hole-in-one in February, Anna also scooped three other big tournaments at the club.
Colin Magee, of Douglas, receives our accolade for a hole-in-one at the demanding 188-yard second (stroke index 6) at Rowany Golf Club, Port Errin, Isle of Man.
He used a TPX 7 wood for added height to stop the ball dead on the green, placed behind an out-of-bounds fence.
‘My heart leapt as 40-yard chip went right in the hole’
Carol Barnes
IT IS normally gratifying enough for me to hit the ball in the air and in the general direction of the green.
So you can imagine how I felt when, one marvellous day, I sunk a shot 40 yards from the hole.
Reading the news for ITN means I sometimes work peculiar hours but I often have a weekday morning off, and that's when I play golf.
I'm a beginner.
I tried the game years ago and gave up because I was so bad.
Then, last year, my husband took it up and I thought I'd have another go..
And I wasn't quite so hopeless.
I usually play with some of the women of East Brighton Golf Club, and my day of fame came last summer — going round in under 120.
I love walking the course, never mind the golf, but on this occasion it all came together with a good score as well.
I had reached the 11th but was a long way off the green.
My driving isn't too bad — I'm making about 150 yards — and I'm improving my chipping.
So I chipped, the ball flew sweetly…and into the hole it went.
Of course I came down to earth on my next round.
But I love golf.
I can escape other troubles and concentrate on just the one problem — how to make that damn ball go where I want.
Good shepherd saves an Algarve Christmas
Sarah Whitfiles King
THE shepherd stared at us in disbelief.
It was Christmas Eve, dusk was falling fast and we were hopelessly lost in the wilderness.
On a rocky unmade track through the olive groves, we might have strayed through a time warp into a Biblical landscape.
But luckily this was Portugal not Palestine, our transport was a hire car not a camel and yes — there was room at the inn.
By scrawling with his crook in the dust, the shepherd redirected us and by nightfall we were holed up in a cosy bar.
Soon we were once again toasting our good sense at booking Christmas week in the Algarve.
Self-catering in Southern Portugal is easy.
The shops all stock familiar goods, the markets are full of good-quality produce and eating out is cheap and enjoyable.
Admittedly, we were lucky with the weather.
The warm sun allowed us to eat outside every day, while chilly evenings were spent in front of a log fire in our villa.
Instead of rainy high streets there were orange and lemon orchards, instead of crowds there were slow-paced villages.
At our local market I stocked up on walnuts, satsumas and last-minute presents of leather goods, then on Christmas Day the sun blazed down as we tucked into a roast chicken and raised glasses of cheap local champagne.
After Christmas Eve, though, we limited our exploring to familiar roads.
We couldn't be sure of coming across our friendly shepherd next time.
DEPARTURES Meon Villas (0730 266561) Algarve villas and apartments from £307 pp (March) including flights & car hire.
Travel Club of Upminster (0708 225000) 1wk self-catering over Christmas in a two-bed villa at Vilamoura, £284 pp; special offer 12 nts at Golden Beach apartments £278 (1st child 50 per cent off, 2nd child free), 1wk car hire £58.
Thomson Airfares (081-200 8733) Christmas flights £245.
Further info (enclose sae) from: Portuguese Tourist Office, 22/25A Sackville Street, London W1.
Hooked on Hong Kong
Ian Fletcher
CATCH it while you can is the message for holidaymakers who have not experienced the alluring magic of Hong Kong.
This most exotic of the British colonies will return to Chinese control in 1997, and no one knows how drastically life will change in a land where the pursuit of the HK dollar is almost a religion.
Hong Kong casts a spell over the visitor almost as soon as your aircraft weaves its way between high-rise blocks to land at the chaotic airport.
It's just as hectic in the 400-square mile colony outside, with six million people scurrying among glass and concrete skyscrapers that stand like giant guards above the bay.
Hong Kong buzzes from dawn to dusk at a dizzy pace.
Just getting away from the madding crowd proves to be a major feat on the most crowded island on Earth.
Virtually anything is possible here and, for a relaxing change of pace, it is worthwhile hunting out a slow boat instead of sticking to a frenetic dash in the fast lane.
A key to survival is knowing how to wind down — whether it be at the races, on a trip up the stunning Victoria Peak or dining on dim sum on a floating restaurant.
Whatever you choose, it won't be long before you are hooked on Hong Kong.
The full drama of the place is best sampled while sipping a cocktail on the top floor of a gleaming international hotel, with the ever-changing panorama of the deep-water harbour bustling with container ships, passenger liners and junks far below.
Whether they are jamming the bustling streets of Kowloon, elbowing their way on to ancient trams or leaping about on the terraces at the races, Hong Kong people are enthusiasts.
I squashed into the middle of 50,000 betting-mad horse fans at the immaculate Shatin racecourse to witness their mania for gambling, and found the atmosphere more infectious than on the terraces of Aintree or Ascot.
What many of the six million tourists who visit Hong Kong each year have discovered is that it is much more than a traditional eating-out and shop-till-you-drop paradise.
Buying a ticket for less than £2, I joined hordes of Chinese families on a Sunday cruise to Cheung Chau island.
Just like trippers heading for the Isle of Wight, they had packed their picnic baskets and sat chatting on deck as their excited children played.
On reaching the island I strolled through the market stalls surrounding the harbour and followed paths to peaceful coves hiding mysterious prehistoric rock carvings.
The majority of visitors to Hong Kong, however, develop an instant buy, buy, buy mania.
And the fact that a package trip can be snapped up for about £600 has put the exotic destination within the reach of many Britons.
Whether it is silks or suits, jewellery or watches, there are hundreds of shops and stalls offering bargains to haggle over.
But the thing that everyone leaves with are memories of a special holiday experience that remains vivid long after the tan has faded.
DEPARTURES BRITISH Airways (081-897 4000) flies daily to Hong Kong, apex return £468 (Dec), £408 (Jan).
Conrad Hotel (UK office 0800-289 303) £60 pp per night in a double room.
Simply Tropix (081-875 1777) is offering a free night if you book 5 nights at the Excelsior (guaranteed harbour view) £630 (Feb).
Flights included.
Further information: Hong Kong Tourist Office, 125 Pall Mall, London SW1.
Anyone booking a six-day or longer package is entitled to an A la Carte discount booklet that covers Hong Kong shopping, restaurants, nightlife and sightseeing trips.
Vicar's Swiss role suits you to a tea
Henry Rix
MORE tea, vicar? is not the sort of thing I expected to ask minutes after arriving in a Swiss ski resort.
But I soon discovered that in Wengen a casual welcome and a cuppa with the local English clergy was a taste of how the Brits have made a mark on this German-speaking village.
It's home to The Ski School Of Great Britain and nearby Murren has been the backdrop for films including James Bond's On Her Majesty's Secret Service — remember the revolving restaurant?
Wengen is at the foot of the Jungfrau range.
It is traffic-free (motorised baggage trolleys) which means that getting there involves a delightful half-hour train journey.
From the village, a 10-minute cable car ride delivers you to the slopes.
By train you arrive at Kleine Schiedegg at the foot of the north face of the Eiger, a stone's throw from the famous Lauberhorn downhill run.
The slopes suit all abilities.
And a full day's trek to neighbouring Grindelwald or Murren is a must.
Perhaps the most enjoyable trip is the final schuss into the village centre after a hard day's skiing and an essential stop-off for a limb-loosening rum chocolate at Cafe Oberland.
Wengen is also home to Europe's highest railway which makes an ideal half-day trip in itself.
A 45-minute journey takes you to the ‘top of Europe’, better known as the Jungfraujoch.
Here there are ice caves and sculptures, a once-in-a-lifetime view of Europe's biggest ice-flow and husky-drawn sledge rides.
But beware altitude sickness.
The village boasts an ice rink, nursery ski school and boutiques, hotels and restaurants.
But those seeking an exhaustive nightlife may be disappointed — neither disco is recommended.
Our chalet was spacious and the meals laid on by the live-in girl were cordon bleu quality.
For us, a comfy night in with excellent company was more than enough.
I'm sure the vicar would approve.
DEPARTURES Bladon Lines, 56-58 Putney High Street, London SW15 (081-785 3131) have one week half-board in the Chalet Boss, £437-£513 (Feb-March), two weeks £638 — £725.
Six days lift pass is Pounds 98, ski and boot hire £65, ski school (mornings) £70.
Further information: Swiss Tourist Office, Swiss Centre, Swiss Court, London W1.
Enclose SAE.
Great Escapes
Sarah Whitfield King
THERE'S a free bottle of bubbly for anyone who fancies a Brollie Break weekend in Wales.
The Lake Vyrnwy Hotel in Montgomeryshire is welcoming rain-sodden guests with a free umbrella, rubber ducks in the bathroom and green-wellie soaps.
The two-night break costs £125 pp full board, with an optional free third night (excluding meals).
Details: 0691 73692.
THE most frequent query on a travel editor's desk is how to travel on a cargo ship.
Gdynia America Shipping Lines has a brochure giving details of all their ships which take passengers.
Details: 071-251 3389.
TIME OFF is offering a free night on selected three and four-night stays in Italy until mid-March (excluding Christmas).
Prices are 4 nts in Florence, £313, 3 nts in Rome, £412, and 3 nts in Venice, £247.
Details: 071-235 8070.
THE first 50 people to book their car on the new Calais-Feldkirch and Worgl motorial service to Austria will get a week's ski pass to selected resorts.
The French Rail service starts on Dec 18 and runs until April 2.
It leaves Calais every Friday evening.
Return price for car and driver is £357, extra adults £75 each, child £47.
Includes couchette accommodation.
Details: 071-409 3518.
CRYSTAL Holidays is offering a bargain week's skiing over Christmas for £189.
Among the resorts featured are Val d'Isere, Meribel, Courcheval, Tignes, Val Thoren and La Plagne.
Accommodation is in chalets on a B&B basis.
Chalets offering half-board and a special Christmas dinner are also available for £259.
Regional flights available.
Details: 081-399 5144.
On Sale
By Steve Howard
CANADIAN Lothaire Bluteau, star of the recent epic Black Robe, first made his mark in the superb satire Jesus Of Montreal.
The English-subtitled film is released on Monday (Artificial Eye, £15.99).
THOSE romantic softies at CIC Video have brought out a Ghost gift set.
For £19.99 young hearts can have a copy of the blockbuster Patrick Swayze movie and a silver-plated picture frame.
WITH Christmas in mind BBC Video is rushing out the Michael Palin's current TV odyssey Pole To Pole on December 10.
The double tape set is £19.99.
Video View
By Steve Howard
THERE is something delicious about watching Hollywood turn on its own.
Everyone gets it in spades in director Robert Altman's wicked satire The Player (Guild, 15, out now).
Altman, himself nursing a few wounds inflicted by tyrannical studio bosses, lays bare Tinseltown with the help of 65 stars including Bruce Willis, Cher, Nick Nolte, Jack Lemmon — you name 'em, they've got a bit part.
He gives us the archetypal wolf in Armani threads in script executive Griffin Mill — Tim Robbins — whose job entails dashing the hopes of thousands of writers each year and making a handful rich.
Griffin kills one of his rejects who he suspects of sending him death threats but such is his oily smoothness that he not only conceals his guilt from lady cop Whoopi Goldberg, but also has the wherewithal to outmaneouvre a pretender to his throne.
He's a cruel customer all right and an ideal looking-glass to spy on the greed, gloss, arrogance and vanity of his fellow Hollywood's denizens.
You must also listen closely for the vitriolic jewels that emerge from behind the gold-capped smiles.
But Altman's biggest victims, you sense, are ordinary Joes like you and I who feed the arrogance of these dreamworld fat cats.
I'M as big a Trekkie as they come but even I was shocked at the grey hairs and swollen girths of my heroes in Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country (CIC, PG, out now).
Scotty in particular resembles a small planet.
That said, the crew of the Enterprise still gives value for money as the reluctant honour guard to a Klingon delegation suing for peace.
Captain Kirk (William Shatner) hates the idea — he can't forgive his old enemies for the death of his son.
So when the Klingon mission is fired on and their chancellor killed, Kirk is arrested and carted off with Dr McCoy to an icy prison world.
Will he escape to save civilisation as we know it?
The comparision to the break-up of Soviet Russia is purely intentional in what is a superbly shot adventure boasting lots of light moments.
Christopher Plummer is great too as a hammy, Shakespeare-spouting Klingon warlord.
THE first Batman film left me wondering what all the fuss was about.
Batman Returns (Warner 15, out now) is better but still not worth all the hoo-hah.
What gives this sequel the edge is Danny DeVito.
His Penguin is a wonderfully monstrous creation, while Michelle Pfeiffer obviously has a ball as kinky, leather-clad villainess Catwoman.
Penguin starts life as a hideously deformed tot who bursts on to the scene years later as a fat, big-beaked freak determined to rule Gotham City and do away with Batman (Michael Keaton).
He teams up with Catwoman and tycoon Christopher Walken and, aided by an army of radio controlled penguins, does his worst.
Although director Tim Burton has recreated the futuristic urban nightmare of the first film and DeVito is a ghastly joy, this fishy business isn't so memorable.
Classic
By Steve Howard
THE cinema vampire is about to rise again thanks to Francis Ford Coppola's Dracula, but one of the earliest and most fascinating incarnations is now available on video.
Nosferatu, made in Germany in 1922 and starring Max Schreck — the actor who looked more like a rat than a rat — has been released by The Aikman Archive (£14.99).
Another German horror classic, The Cabinet Of Dr Caligari, is due out on Monday (Aikman, £14.99).
This 1919 film is notable for its stunning expressionist sets and super plot twist at the end.
Shame of our dirty tricks
DOWNING Street insists that President-elect Bill Clinton is not angry with the British Government and so is not snubbing John Major by refusing to meet him in Washington later this month.
If that is so, Mr Clinton has the disposition of a saint.
He is entitled to be so furious with the way the Home Office and Conservative Central Office behaved during the presidential election that Mr Major will never even make it on to his Christmas card list.
It is a basic rule that governments never get involved with other nations' politics.
That is carried to such an extreme that we will recognise dictatorships and ignore the coups which bring some despots to power.
Yet in just about the most sensitive election, the one to choose a President of the United States, there was interference from Britain.
And, in keeping with the general incompetence of this Government, it chose to interfere on the side which lost.
Officials from the Conservative Party went to America to help President Bush's campaign.
They advised on the tactics that had been successfully used to defeat Labour in April, particularly in attacking their leading opponent personally.
The Tories might have got away with that but the latest revelation that the Home Office trawled through 25-year-old confidential files to try to dig up dirt on Mr Clinton is as outrageous as it is mind-boggling.
The pathetic official Home Office reaction, that they would not have released anything they had found, only compounds their breathtaking stupidity.
It is said that the investigation was ordered by a civil servant, not a Minister.
In that case, the civil servant should be sacked.
That was the fate of the American official who ordered a similar search through Mr Clinton's files.
Despite the prominence given to Britain's role in Europe, this country needs to maintain its special relationship with the United States.
It is too late to undo the meddling in the Presidential election but John Major should leave Mr Clinton in no doubt that he bitterly regrets what was done.
To prove it, he should make those responsible pay the price.
Anne's reward
PRINCESS Anne deserves the happiness which the whole nation surely prays she will find with Commander Tim Laurence.
You don't need to be a member of the Royal Family to know how hard it is to maintain dignity during your marriage break-up.
Yet Anne always did.
That was in keeping with the respect in which she is held for her tireless work, especially on behalf of the world's children.
It is a pity that other royals cannot behave like her, particularly during the personal crises in their lives.
The marriage of Anne and Tim does not just have a personal significance for them.
For it represents another step in the royal progress towards real life.
It was only 16 years ago that the first royal divorce of modern times was announced in a whisper so the country would not be too shocked.
Now we have the first royal re-marriage and it is barely raising a ripple.
There will be learned articles written about the historic and moral significance of that.
But in Crathie Church next Saturday, the only concern should be that Anne is finding the joy that she so richly deserves.
Short order
THE shortest-ever television commercial has been made, lasting just one second.
Perhaps they could now get each episode of Eldorado down to that length.
Do five-year-olds need lessons on gay love?
Jim Gallagher in New York
Outrage in US at the school textbook that defends homosexuality.
THE five-year-old boys and girls listen attentively as their teacher explains that men who live with men are not figures to be frightened of.
Lesbian lovers are not nasty, they are told, but women involved in stable relationships.
Gay lovers are just one of many different types of households in a multi-cultural world.
This is the message being introduced to nearly one million schoolchildren in New York in the face of unprecedented outrage.
A full-scale rebellion broke out last week when one of New york's 32 local education boards was suspended for refusing to implement what it called ‘dangerously misleading propaganda promoting homosexuality’.
At the heart of the controversy is a 440-page guidebook, Children Of The Rainbow, which advises teachers how to encourage pupils of five and six to respect homosexuals.
Rainbow was developed in 1989 as a multi-cultural education policy statement to create anti-bias lessons.
The book says its message that gay relationships are perfectly acceptable should be hammered home in every subject including maths, science, reading and social studies.
The Children Of The Rainbow curriculum urges the use of such books as Heather Has Two Mommies, Daddy's Roommate and Gloria Goes To Gay Pride.
Heather is the artificially-inseminated daughter of a lesbian couple, while Daddy's Roommate is about a father who leaves the family home to move in with his male lover.
Furious parents have demanded the suspended board's reinstatement and savaged plans to ‘brainwash children into homosexuality’.
Local education officials opposed to the guidebook have been given standing ovations at public meetings, and churches of numerous denominations have slammed the education policy as immoral and irresponsible.
They condemn as absurd, lessons that teach children about homosexuality years before they can understand the meaning of the word.
Cardinal John O'Connnor, head of New York's Catholic Church and one of the programme's most vigorous critics, insists youngsters should be left in their innocence.
‘It is very wrong to teach a five or six-year-old that to have two mummies is quite as right as to have a mummy and daddy,’ he says.
‘The controversy comes down to how one values children's mental, emotional and moral health.’
Critics claim that gay activists were closely involved in the creation of the curriculum, which is being pushed by Schools Chancellor Joseph Fernandez.
Some of its supporters have publicly announced they favour efforts to ‘recruit’ converts to homosexuality, rejecting the notion that gays are genetically predetermined.
The curriculum justifies itself by saying that unless teachers deliberately introduce the subject of homosexuality to the classroom it would be unlikely ever to arise among the children themselves.
‘That is just the point,’ claimed one scathing newspaper editorial.
‘Six-year-olds aren't exactly brimming with curiosity about gays and lesbians — or sexuality in general.
Any parent would be able to confirm this.
‘Parents who don't want their kids taught about homosexuality in the first grade are not bigots.
‘They rightly want input into what their children are taught.
The chancellor would do well if he spent more time worrying about whether New York's children are learning the three Rs — subjects in which they are sadly deficient.’
Other critics say New York children are already more tolerant of homosexuality than any other major city in the world.
But, they argue, the fact that there is a thriving gay culture does not mean schoolchildren of five should be bombarded with information about that lifestyle.
‘I'll be the first to pull my kids out of the school if this curriculum is introduced,’ says Anna Saez, parent association head of the Elmhurst public school.
Jose Martinez, father of a six-year-old girl and eight-year-old boy, says: ‘I send my kids to school for an education, not to have them used in some political game.
‘They are just kids, for God's sake.
What do they need to know about homosexuality for?’
Parents and teachers claim Rainbow deliberately plays down the risk of contracting Aids from homosexual relationships by suggesting there is nothing frightening about the gay lifestyle.
One extract from the guide reads: ‘Before children have the vaguest ideas about who or what is a homosexual they learn that homosexuality is something frightening, horrid and nasty.
They become homophobic long before they understand what it is they fear.’
Mary Cummins, president of the suspended board that opposes Rainbow, says she refuses to demean legitimate minorites, such as blacks or Asians, by lumping them with homosexuals.
‘One passage tries to transform multi-cultural education into a form of Orwellian thought control by telling teachers that children must be taught to acknowledge the positive aspects of homosexual and lesbian households,’ she says.
Sweet scents ensure success
Neville Thurlbeck
YOU are sitting in the dentist's chair, every nerve and muscle tense as he swings the drill towards you.
Suddenly you detect a reassuring scent which takes you back to being a baby safe in your mother's arms.
Designer smells, which can take the anxiety out of a trip to the dentist or make your synthetic upholstery smell like real leather, are now being released on an unsuspecting public.
As well as the scent of ‘mother's scalp’— the first reassuring odour a new-born baby smells — there is a natural sea scent to overwhelm the chlorine in swimming pools, and even cow-pat perfume for which no one has yet come up with a use.
The bizarre selection of artificial aromas has been created by London firm Marketing Aromatics.
While some of the smells are merely for aesthetic use, the company's main customers are in commerce and industry where the scents can be used to motivate employees or attract customers.
The firm's commercial director David Fellowes explains: ‘For years, shops have used colours to attract people.
Customers will walk towards warm colours and walk away from cold ones.
‘It is the same with smells.
Warm odours such as floral or woody scents will make people linger and perhaps buy more.
‘Citrus smells make people more alert and more likely to dash off.
This is particularly useful where long queues are forming.’
Dozy sales teams can also be motivated by the sniff of citrus without even knowing it, he claims.
An ‘aggression’ smell has to be handled with more care.
It seems the musky, pheromone-based odour has a useful role in board meetings.
‘If there is a particularly nasty piece of business to be got out of the way, a quick dose of this will bring it to a head quickly.
A calming smell can then be introduced to bring people down to earth,’ says David.
The scents, which can be distributed via ventilation systems or through aerosol sprays, are manufactured by industrial chemists throughout Europe and are incredibily accurate.
One woman fainted on smelling the sea potion — it reminded her of when she nearly drowned as a child.
But the most sought-after smell — the one which women find irresistible — still eludes the experts.
Teens' pain in Spain
Jane Moore
IT MAY be creeping up the ratings but as far as Britain's teenagers are concerned, Eldorado is the pits.
The £10 million soap was voted ‘worst TV programme’ by readers of Smash Hits, Britain's most popular teen magazine, at its annual awards ceremony.
The best TV programme was Home And Away.
Actors Les Hill and Rebekah Elmaloglou from the show were voted best TV actor and actress respectively.
Top Of The Pops, reported to be in its dying days, trailed in as the seventh best TV programme.
Premier John Major was voted the villain of 1992, with Madonna in second place.
Paradoxically the singer was voted the worst dressed, least fanciable female and worst film actress and best female solo artist and most fanciable female.
Take That won the best British group award.
Best male solo was Michael Jackson and best film was Wayne's World.
The worst male singer was Jason Donovan and worst female singer was Dannii Minogue.
Fluff's 30-year hit parade
Chris Hutchins
HE MAY be a pensioner but pop icon Alan Freeman is still a teenager at heart.
He wears jeans, sneakers and leather bomber jackets and talks in teenage jargon, but — at the age of 65 — Fluff has decided his time as a pop picker is up.
At his own request, in three weeks' time Fluff will quit the Sunday lunch-time show on Radio 1 which launched his amazing career as Britain's premier disc jockey.
He has seen music legends come and go but, until the end of this month, Fluff has fought and won his battle with time.
‘There was a time when I coloured my hair,’ he says.
‘Now I think ‘no way’.
What's the great deal?’
Although his voice rides the airwaves as fresh as it ever did, he admits that physically he is past his prime: arthritis brings him recurring pain in his legs although he has already lived 18 months longer than he was told a 60-a-day smoking habit would allow.
After his show yesterday we asked Fluff to tell us about the most memorable records from his 32-year career.
1961:
Let's Jump The Broomstick, by Brenda Lee.
She was such a bubbly lady with a great edge to her voice.
Every time I heard her it really turned me on.
1962:
Bobby Darin's Multiplication.
Even Frank Sinatra said that Darin would be his successor — he had the same tremendous phrasing — although death cheated him of that.
1963:
The Night Has 1,000 Eyes, by Bobby Vee.
Tremendous.
I did a few concerts with him, he was a very good performer.
1964:
Can't Buy Me Love.
In 20 years radio stations will still be playing the Beatles, and they'll still sound fresh.
1965:
Keep On Running, by The Spencer Davis Group.
I'm an absolute fan.
1966:
Got To Get You Into My Life, by Cliff Bennett.
It's an enormous mystery why this talented man never made it.
1967:
Respect, by Aretha Franklin.
I met her in New York.
She's a very serious lady — music has taken over her life.
1968:
The Moody Blues' Nights In White Satin.
When life gets too stressful, I play a Moody Blues album from end to end.
1969:
The Isley Brothers' Behind The Painted Smile — not that there is anything behind mine.
What you see is what you get.
1970:
Simon and Garfunkel's Bridge Over Troubled Water.
A sensational record.
1971:
George Harrison's My Sweet Lord.
Of all George went through in his Beatle days, there was this kind of commitment within himself to say ‘I really want to see you’.
1972:
Without You, by Nilsson.
Never met the man.
A tremendous song.
1973:
Frankenstein, by the Edgar Winter Group — again just because it's a great record.
1974:
Elton John's sensational Candle In The Wind.
His manager John Reid invited me to New York that year to introduce Elton on stage at Madison Square Garden.
Can you believe that?
I almost died of fear.? 1975: I Get The Sweetest Feeling, by Jackie Wilson.
It comes from his shoes, up through his heart and out through his mouth.
1976:
Bohemian Rhapsody, by Queen.
I'm just echoing the whole country when I say what a venture to make such a track.
1977:
Smoke On The Water, by Deep Purple.
The band was playing in Switzerland when they saw a building on fire.
Great inspiration for a great track.
1978:
Rose Royce's Love Don't Live Here Any More.
A great lyric: Love had bloomed, love had blossomed and love had died.
I've never really got attached to anyone, I've been married to my career.
I never thought of getting old.
Now I go home at night and think: ‘I'm on my own.’
I might have married and had children and they might have hated me.
But no one should be alone.
1979:
Breakfast In America, by Supertramp.
I remember their first UK showcase.
Their supporting act was a guy dressed in black playing acoustic guitar.
I said he'd be a star.
His name was Chris de Burgh.
1980:
Randy Crawford's One Day I'll Fly Away.
On Top Of The Pops I told her I was in love with her — and she laughed like a drain.
1981:
Tainted Love, by Soft Cell.
1982:
AC/DC — I'm a great fan of theirs — with Let's Get It Up.
It's a wicked title, isn't it?
1983:
Every Breath You Take, by Police.
Such a fine performance from Sting.
1984:
Relax, by Frankie Goes To Hollywood.
Holly Johnson is a god.
1985:
Elaine Paige and Barbara Dickson with I Know Him So Well.
Lovely ladies, lovely song.
1986:
Billy Ocean's When The Going Gets Tough.
Just a record I love.
1987:
Freddie Mercury, The Great Pretender.
He was sending himself up to a degree, but it doesn't matter.
He was such an important talent.
1988:
Iron Maiden's Can I Play With Madness.
1989:
Cinderella's Don't Know What You've Got ('Til It's Gone).
1990:
Pavarotti with Nessun Dorma.
What can I say?
I went to see him at Covent Garden and came away thinking ‘What am I doing with this miserable life?’
1991:
Hey Stoopid, by Alice Cooper.
He talks about Alice as if he were a separate person.
Interesting.
1992:
Annie Lennox's Why because she is such a great talent, and (as it's my last year) Iron Maiden with Be Quick Or Be Dead.
Will we miss him?
Not 'arf.
This week's Top 20
1 (1)
I Will Always Love You Whitney Houston
2 (3)
Heal The World Michael Jackson
3 (2)
Would I Lie To You Charles & Eddie
4 (-)
Slam Jam WWF Superstars
5 (4)
Temptation (Brothers In Rhythm remix) Heaven 17
6 (8)
Tom Traubert's Blues (Waltzing Matilda) Rod Stewart
7 (9)
I Still Believe In You Cliff Richard
8 (5)
Out Of Space Prodigy
9 (-)
Could It Be Magic Take That
10 (-)
Deeper And Deeper Madonna
11 (-)
In My Defence Freddie Mercury
12 (16)
Step It Up Stereo MC's
13 (-)
Boney M Megamix Boney M
14 (11)
Montreaux EP Simply Red
15 (14)
Who's Gonna Ride Your Wild Horses U2
16 (19)
If We Hold On Together Diana Ross
17 (7)
Never Let Her Slip Away Undercover
18 (6)
End Of The Road Boyz II Men
19 (10)
Everyday People Arrested Development
20 (-)
So Close Dina Carroll
Ulrika Jonsson
ULRIKA Jonsson make a spectacle of herself when she flashed her glasses, a smile and a thigh at the British Comedy Awards.
The London Television Centre was full of TV's finest including LA Law's Amanda Donohoe and Boon's Michael Elphick.
Jonathan Ross hosted the show and celebrated later with wife Jane.
Christie Brinkley
FORMER model Christie Brinkley, 39, has blasted CNN bosses after being sacked from her TV Lifestyles show.
She said the cable network had stopped her taking more control.
‘I was just hired to do mundane work,’ she said.
CNN's Bob Furnad said the programme was a flop.
Cindy Crawford
CINDY Crawford fuelled rumours that she and husband Richard Gere are expecting a baby by buying a pregnancy tester kit in a Los Angeles supermarket.
Annie Lennox
DIVA Annie Lennox has said Sinead O'Connor is ‘uniquely talented’.
In a letter to a Sunday newspaper, the former Eurythmics star wrote: ‘More power to her.
Those who admire her should stand up and be counted.
I am among them.’
Hot bodies
Karen Mellor
IF you want to make a splash at the Christmas party without sinking into the red, it's easy to make your own outfit.
We asked three fashion designers to customise a plain red bodysuit on a budget of just £10.
The results show how, with a little effort, you can create your own ‘hot body’.
Bella Freud, a protege of Vivienne Westwood, unpicked the body's turtleneck, adding a white silk collar and cuffs.
She stitched satin ribbon under the bust, bows at the hips and tied a silk cravate.
Stirling Cooper's Annalise Kjaer unpicked the body sleeves, using them as a pattern for new ones in black lace.
Using sleeve fabric and velvet she made cuffs, which she stitched on and fastened with buttons.
She chalked a keyhole shape on the front, which she cut out and neatened with bias binding.
Charms were stitched to the neck.
Sue Hall of Lee Jeans went for the workwear look, stitching on small spanners, nuts and bolts.
Prudent Adam has faith in Russian future
By Tim Satchell
ADAM Faith is buying a home in Russia.
It was there that Mr Faith, 51, and his co-star Zoe Wanamaker, 43, filmed the new series of the BBC1 drama Love Hurts which starts on New Year's day.
‘I was anticipating a bad time but my wife was thrilled because she loves Russia — that's why my daughter is called Katya,’ says Mr Faith.
‘We filmed a great deal in St Petersburg.
The hotel we stayed at was called The Leningrad when we arrived, but before we'd left it had changed to the St Petersburg.
‘Now I am trying to buy a flat for Katya there.
She may be going to St Petersburg next summer to do her thesis for Harvard.’
Mr Faith adds: ‘I'm thinking ahead so that in 25 years' time my daughter will say to her children ‘Wasn't grandad clever?
When nobody else thought about it, he bought a flat in Russia.’
The business of buying property in Russia, though, is a nightmare.’
Mr Faith was born Terry Nelhams, son of an Acton coach driver.
He was an odd-job boy with Rank Film Services.
Before he first entered the charts he had appeared in the film Beat Girl and in ITV's No Hiding Place.
His wife, then Jackie Irving, had earlier stepped out with Cliff Richard.
Unusually among popular music entertainers Mr Faith has always had a strong awareness of financial matters, trading up his homes and investing wisely.
He has always appreciated the finer things in life and can often be seen lunching at London's Savoy Grill.
Although fox hunting has not taken place in Hyde Park for many years, an impressive Hunt Ball was held in the Polish Hearth Club in Kensington last week for Shropshire's United Pack.
Six Masters of Fox Hounds turned out resplendent in their hunting pink (their red coats), including the United Pack's Rory Knight Bruce.
Other literary figures and socialites present included Jesus Christ's biographer A N Wilson, Winston Churchill's granddaughter Emma Soames and Wessex regionalist campaigner Lady Henrietta Rous.
Dancer Bryony Brind
By Tim Satchell
DANCER Bryony Brind, above, is the star attraction of this winter's London City Ballet season at Sadler's Wells when she dances Juliet to Mark Silver's Romeo.
This may be one of the last chances for admirers of 32-year-old Miss Brind to see her dance, as she has a burgeoning acting career.
Producer Michael White saw her in Monotones at the Royal Opera House and signed her as the haunting governess in the Julian Sands-Patsy Kensit film, Turn Of The Screw.
She has also starred in advertisements for Harp and Lenor and been named in Tatler as one of the six most beautiful women in London.
Sir Angus gets on his Zike
By Tim Satchell
THE Queen's cousin, Sir Angus Oglivy, has bought himself an early Christmas present — a Zike, the invention launched last summer by Sir Clive Sinclair but which has only just reached the shops at £499.
Sir Angus, 64, is keen on fitness.
When he was a director of Sotheby's he would bicycle into work each day.
Sir Clive's earlier innovation for easing transport problems, the C5, was a commercial failure.
Indications are that the Zike will be more successful.
Sir Clive, 51, also invented the pocket calculator, home computer and the digital watch.
The Zike is a battery-powered bicycle which recharges itself when free-wheeling downhill.
The rustproof Zike weighs less than 25 lb, making it convenient for taking into the office.
Students feed ideas to MPs
By Tim Satchell
NATIONAL Union of Students leaders have been busy dining Conservative MPs such as George Walden to lobby against Government plans to introduce voluntary student unions.
‘The cost is covered by our campaigns budget,’ said an NUS spokesman.
And…
By Tim Satchell
US President Ronald Reagan, 81, told the Oxford Union Society: ‘I am delighted to be with you today.’
There was a brief pause for applause before the great actor/president added: ‘At my age I'm delighted to be anywhere.’
Princess Diana skirts the rules of fashion
By Tim Satchell
THE Princess of Wales has once more caused disquiet among fashion commentators by sticking to her own rules.
While fashion magazines announce that longer skirts are in style, the princess has again appeared in the multi-coloured striped skirt she has been wearing for more than a year.
Chanel has published advertisements of Claudia Schiffer wearing long dresses, but out of the studios Miss Schiffer also wears short skirts.
One top Australian fashion commentator says: ‘Diana looks great in the long slit skirts, but she's got the figure and the legs for short skirts, so if she wants to wear short, good on her.’
The amazing rise of Tiger Tim
Dominic Midgley
THEY were a typical Seventies university football team — boozy, rowdy, long-haired fun-lovers who liked nothing better than a riotous party.
Except for one.
Tim Laurence, tallest player in the Durham University College squad and as tough as they came in a challenge, sported his hair above his ears, and at lectures his tie would always be knotted properly, his jacket and trousers immaculate.
When a woman entered the room T J H Laurence, as he signed himself in typical British stiff-upper-lip fashion, would immediately stand up, his old-fashioned courtesy drawing amused glances from classmates.
Clicking his heels together and bowing slightly, Tim — or Tiger Tim as his pals dubbed him — would formally introduce himself and his sniggering friends.
They had no idea that his old world manners and charm would win him the love of the most eligible divorcee in the land, the Princess Royal, Princess Anne.
That's understandable.
To his teammates, Tim was pecularliarly unremarkable.
‘He was always nice — there was nothing untoward about him in any way,’ says David Sim.
Fellow player Mark Evans adds: ‘I seem to remember him being solid and reliable in defence — the sort of person he is in life too.’
‘He did not make a strong impression,’ says Tony Rex.
‘I hadn't even made the connection until a friend mentioned he had seen Tim in the papers with all the Princess Anne business.’
But the consensus is that Commander Tim Laurence probably has a little more upstairs than the man he has replaced in Princess Anne's affections, Captain Mark Phillips.
If Mark merited the nickname ‘Fog’, then Laurence could perhaps be summed up as ‘Mist’.
The son of a former naval commander who went on to become a sales rep for a marine- engines manufacturer, Tim was educated at Sevenoaks School, a minor public school in Kent where he became house captain.
He went to the University of Durham to study geography on a Navy scholarship and became secretary of the junior common room and college treasurer.
In his third year he was — briefly — editor of the university paper, Palatinate.
So was it a controversial and scintillating read under his guidance?
‘Not when he got his hands on it, it wasn't,’ says another teammate.
‘He quit after a fairly short time — I think he may have done it for only two terms.
I think it was more time-consuming than he thought it would be.’
The nickname he acquired at this stage — Tiger Tim — was less to do with his crusading journalistic style than his relentless pursuit of late contributors to the magazine.
When he stepped down from the editorship, the November 1975 issue carried a story slamming student apathy and a cartoon captioned: ‘Will Tiger Tim's boat sink without a replacement?’
But despite his lack of flair Tim was obviously a conscientous and hard-working character who had the Dunkirk spirit.
‘He was very secure and competent,’ says teammate Paul Askew.
‘Of course, he had the advantage of his height.
He was about 6ft 4in and I think he played in the middle at the back.
‘We used to say: ‘Here's a header, leave it to Tim’.’
Tim also enjoyed cricket.
His sport and study schedule, coupled with his natural diffidence, perhaps explains why he is not remembered as a great socialiser.
Paul Askew says: ‘He was the soul of discretion, very well organised and disciplined.’
Nigel Lowson, however, now head of geography at the £9,150-a-year Tonbridge School in Kent, remembers Tim not so much as a staid, jolly, reliable type as a chap with a sense of humour.
‘He was as bad at football as everyone else in the team but he was very good value, a very able and genuinely funny man.
‘I hope you're not going to write anything nasty about Tim, because he was one of life's sweeties, really.’
The only woman in Tim's early life who anyone can remember is Gillian Malpass — a tall, good-looking brunette who is now a senior editor at the London office of prestigious US publisher Yale University Press.
She hasn't seen him for 20 years and remembers him as a ‘nice guy’.
Tim first met Princess Anne when he was an assistant navigating officer on the Royal Yacht Britannia in 1979 and received an unexpected invitation to dine with the royal family.
He was given command of his first ship three years later and named the Queen's Equerry in 1986 following the death of Major Hugh Lindsay in an avalanche at Klosters while skiing with the Prince of Wales.
Tim sprang to public prominence when personal letters he wrote to the Princess were stolen from her briefcase and offered for sale to a tabloid newspaper, which promptly handed them over to Scotland Yard.
Tim lost his job as the Queen's equerry and was made commander of the Pounds 140 million frigate HMS Boxer.
His continuing place in the Princess Royal's affections was confirmed when he shared a picnic with Anne and her children at Balmoral.
A week later it was announced that she and Mark Phillips would separate.
Now Tim appears to have rekindled Princess Anne's interest in sailing — she paid £94,000 for the 36-footer Blue Doublet earlier this year — and last year she made a glowing contribution to a celebrity compilation of ideas of Paradise.
‘Sailing on a sunny day, with a fresh breeze blowing, with maybe somebody you really care for is the nearest thing to Heaven I will get on this earth,’ she wrote.
Paradise is finally within reach with the news that Princess Anne will wed Tim in a quiet ceremony at Crathie Church, the Queen's Scottish chapel on the Balmoral estate, next Saturday.
For Tim, it will be the final seal of approval from the Queen, who once banned divorced people from the royal box at Ascot.
But as footballing Tim might say: ‘It's a game of two halves, Ma'am’.
From Jewish trader to royal son-in-law…
Jackie Annesley
IN THE late 18th Century, an Italian trader called Zaccaria Levy emigrated to Britain to seek his fortune.
Two hundred years later Tim Laurence, the great-great-great-grandson of this Jewish merchant of Venice, is set to enter the Royal Family.
That leap up the social ladder from selling goods from a gondola to having the British monarch as your mother-in-law spans six generations.
Born in Venice in 1751, Tim's paternal ancestor Zaccaria died in London at the age of 76, leaving his eldest son Joseph to carry on the family name.
This Joseph did by promptly changing it to Laurence.
The next generation saw an even greater move away from the family's roots when Joseph's son Percival became a Church of England clergyman.
His rise was secured when he wed into the British middle class by marrying army captain's daughter Isabella Sarah Moorsom.
Their eldest son Henry rekindled the family's desire for travel and adventure by marrying a solicitor's daughter, Mary, and travelled out to Guyana in South America as a barrister.
After a lifetime in the tropics he returned to England and died aged 59 in Middlesex.
All the Commander's other forefathers lived well into their seventies and eighties, including his father Guy who, after a career in the Royal Navy, died in Kent aged 86.
By marrying Anne, Tim will cement the strong ties that have always existed between the armed forces and royalty.
But, in keeping with Princess Anne's past wishes, it is unlikely that he will be given any special title.
Anne's ex was referred to as Captain Phillips and her children — unlike all the other young royals — are untitled despite being the Queen's eldest grandchildren.
Though he won't be getting a title Tim is moving up in the world — he's about to swap his modest semi in Winchester for the grandeur of Anne's residence, Gatcombe Park, Glos.
Allied Carpets
THE court case over Allied Carpets' bogus sale did not surprise me.
These days the ‘Sale’ signs seem to up permanently in many High Street stores as they try desperately to drum up business.
But if they were always selling their stock at genuine bargain prices, they would never make any money.
Pensioners
WHY should pensioners living in ‘sheltered’ accommodation pay only £5 for TV licences?
Many of them are well off, so the BBC should sort out this anomaly before charging other pensioners for second sets.
The Queen and her tax
NOW the Queen is to be a taxpayer, I assume tax will also be charged as a benefit in kind for private use of her yacht, train, aeroplane and homes.
Women messier in cars
I DIDN'T need a survey to tell me that women are messier in cars than men.
My wife treats ours like a second handbag — it's full of rubbish.
Sack for having an affair
I WAS amazed to learn that firms can sack people for having affairs with colleagues.
I met my husband at work and I'm sure lots of other couples meet that way.
Law must cure rogue medics
I WAS surprised that the exposure of Thomas Courtney practising as a Harley Street gynaecologist without specialist qualifications caused such outrage.
Anyone would think there was a law which stipulated that to call yourself a specialist in private medicine, you needed the necessary training and experience.
Ludicrous as it is, there is no such statute.
For years now, self-appointed surgeons without the appropriate training have been performing life-threatening operations usurping the skills of consultant plastic surgeons.
Some of their unwitting victims have been left paralysed or disfigured for life and yet this barbaric practice is acceptable within the law.
Even animals have better protection than people — only qualified veterinary surgeons can operate on them.
Now that's what I call outrageous.
John Terry, National Hospital For Aesthetic Plastic Surgery.
America's might is right over Somalia
I CAN understand why some people fear the Americans might have another Vietnam on their hands by intervening in Somalia.
But who can look at the images of starving children on the news each night and not believe that they have right on their side?
The US involvement is a plain and simple humanitarian act.
After all, Bush has nothing to lose — he's handing over the White House to Clinton.
Unlike Vietnam and El Salvador, this is a situation where America's military might can be used for good, rather than for their own political ends.
Bush has made it plain that US forces are there simply to ensure that relief gets through to those who need it, although it might help more if the troops sorted out the renegade gangs stealing the food.
I know that the problem is likely to recur once US forces pull out of the region but no one should lambast them for taking action now.
The people of Somalia have already had to wait too long.
Contrast the time taken by the West to take action in Somalia to the instant reaction to the invasion of Kuwait.
It seems protecting oil supplies comes a lot higher on the priority list.
America's might is right over Somalia
WHEN is the United Nations going to get its act together in Bosnia?
The UN convoys have been tamely allowing gunmen to hijack relief supplies.
What is the point of having armed escorts if they won't shoot?
Comic cut-off
VIZ magazine creator Chris Donald is right when he says it might be time to call it a day.
It was a revelation in its heyday, but Viz is now starting to look rather tired.
It can't go on for ever because characters such as the Fat Slags (right) can only go on so long before the joke starts to wear thin.
Would-be homebuyers to be quizzed
HOW strange that building societies are going to start quizzing would-be homebuyers on their private lives to assess what mortgage rate they should pay.
Not so long ago lenders were falling over each other to offer mortgages.
Now, with defaults rocketing, they decide to get tough.
Well, it's a bit late.
Baby mix-up
THE baby mix-up at the hospital in Southampton was a rare mistake, we are told.
Perhaps so — but the acute distress caused to both sets of parents should make all hospital staff take the warning to heart.
This is one type of stupid error that should never, ever be allowed to occur.
Milestones
BIRTHDAYS: Actress Ellen Burstyn, 60.
Australian cricketer Geoff Lawson, 34.
ON THIS DAY: In 1732, Covent Garden Opera House opened.
In 1783, Pitt the Younger became Britain's youngest Prime Minister, aged 24.
In 1941, Japan attacked Pearl Harbour.
Things you didn't know you didn't know
Graeme Donald
BEFORE giving a precis of events, people often say: ‘To put it in a nutshell.’
In the past, anything neatly encapsulated was said to be ‘like The Iliad in a nutshell’— a reference to the ancient Greek epic which Roman historian Pliny maintained could be written on a piece of paper small enough to fit in a walnut.
In 1714, Pierre Huet, the Bishop of Avranches in north-west France, put this to the test.
He proved that all 17,000 verses could be minutely inscribed on a piece of parchment 10.8 in by 8.4 in, which could then be folded up and placed in a walnut shell.
The smallest book ever produced, The Story Of Old King Cole, measures one millimetre by one millimetre, and was published by Gleniffer Press in March, 1985.
The book could be read only with the aid of a magnifying glass on pages turned with a needle.
TODAY'S Book Of Things You Didn't Know…is now on sale, published by Simon & Schuster for £3.99.
Mobile phones offer the right connection
Susan Glass
IN THE early days of mobile phones, the advertising slogan ‘It doesn't cost much to keep in touch’ was a bit of a joke.
You practically needed a mortgage to buy a mobile phone of any description, some costing several thousand pounds.
And a ‘trunk call’ could have described the weight of the equipment that you lugged around with you.
The days of the pin-striped yuppie with his ubiquitous phone in hand are long gone.
New technology has produced phones so light that they can be carried unobtrusively in a shirt pocket.
With the plunge in cost, a major outbreak of phone wars has broken out across the country, with dealers offering spectacular cut-price deals.
And as phones get cheaper, they are within the reach of more people than just businessmen.
This month Cellnet launched its Lifetime tariff system which is aimed at the light user — the lone woman motorist or people who only make the occasional vital call.
Cellnet was already operating the Primetime tariff aimed at heavy users.
An indication of just how diverse the mobile phone market has become is provided by Lorraine Smith, a director of Network Telecom Communications Ltd, who recently sold a phone to a 92-year-old woman.
‘This lady just wants to be in touch,’ says Lorraine.
‘The new tariffs have opened up the market and I'm selling to all sorts of people now.
Prices are coming down daily.
It used to be only the City yuppie, but now most people can afford a mobile phone.
They are a leisure tool.’
NTC has several special offers available for a limited time.
It is offering free connection to the Cellnet system on the Lifetime tariff with a special low monthly line rental of £12.77 instead of £25.
The Primetime connection charge is £65.
The company also operates a part-exchange scheme where, for example, a Motorola 8800X can be part-exchanged with any old portable for £69.
A new phone is £159.
There are reconditioned phones available on both systems, from Pounds 110 on Lifetime and from £75 on Primetime — new ones are Pounds 199 and £159 respectively.
All new phones are guaranteed for a year and, in the unlikely event that they fail, will be replaced free at any NTC nationwide dealership.
Calls on mobile phones are now 25p a minute (peak rate) on Primetime with half-minute billing, and 20p a minute (off peak) with half-minute billing.
‘With some Lifetime monthly bills of just £15 the phone can now be a lifeline,’ says Lorraine.
‘All this has made it a very cut-throat market and we are probably the most competitive company.
We started the trend in part-exchange, for example.
We've been prepared to take gambles, and they have paid off.’
Up Up Up 101,347
WHAT's more popular than Madonna and has greater pulling power than Michael Jackson?
You guessed it — TODAY, the fastest growing newspaper in Britain.
Latest figures show that TODAY now sells 101,347 more copies than we did this time last year.
That's more than flock to watch Madonna OR Jackson at Wembley — and it's all thanks to you.
You've responded to TODAY's unique combination of hard and honest news, bright features and the best in sport, which has seen circulation soar to 548,502.
We try very hard to live up to our slogan, Proper News Not Propaganda.
This is more than can be said for the ever-decreasing Daily Mirror and Daily Express, both in terminal decline.
These so-called rivals are now paying the price for being tired, dull and unimaginative.
The Express has lost millions of readers since its heyday in 1964 when it had 4.2 million circulation — and the deadly decline continues this month.
The broken Mirror, with its tired old political bias, has lost a massive 158,970 circulation compared to this time last year.
It's no wonder you're turning to us, the brightest alternative.
Our growing army of loyal readers has now topped 1.8 million, because we try every day to be simply the best.
All I ever wanted to do was kill a copper
Stephen Farrell and Christian Gysin
EVIL Nicholas Vernage had only one ambition in life — to kill a policeman.
After he had stabbed a lone sergeant to death the callous murderer kept gory souvenirs of his crime in the glove compartment of his car.
Described by police as ‘one of the most evil and dangerous men in Britain’ his grisly plan was fuelled by deep loathing of authority.
While on remand in Brixton prison the arrogant killer boasted to warders: ‘I've killed a copper — I'll have two of you next.
I mean it, I'll kill two warders in this place.
Don't forget it.’
Said one: ‘He wasn't joking.
Many of think he would do it if he was given half a chance.
‘He is a madman who is vicious and evil.
Perhaps a secure mental institution would be a better place for him to be held.’
Horrified police found ‘murder souvenirs’ taken from his victims and kept in his car, including a passport, wallet and even the radio belonging to Sergeant Alan King.
At his east London home Vernage had crude pictures and photographs of police officers pinned to a wall.
Systematically he had gouged at each one with a screwdriver.
Even a picture of a police dog had been viciously stabbed.
On remand at Edmonton police station, he scribbled on his cell wall in red ink: ‘Detective Sergeant King was killed, stabbed to death in red, boiling, unbearable blood.’
Underneath, in a chilling insight into his twisted mind, he scrawled: ‘Red blood, red rum when you run.’
Red rum is murder backwards.
One senior detective who investigated Vernage said: ‘He hated us.
‘He used to watch programmes like The Bill swearing at the police and cheering the villains.’
A horror film fan, Vernage said he got the idea for murder from the cult Stephen King movie The Shining, about a psychopathic killer who tries to wipe out his family.
Ironically, he was released early from a previous prison sentence a year ago because of good behaviour.
On October 11, 1991, Vernage walked out of prison after serving five years of a seven-year burglary sentence.
Vernage, 27, spent his years inside fuelling a hate against the police and authority.
He bragged to friends: ‘All I want is to kill a copper.
If one gets in my way I will put him to sleep.’
Within weeks three innocent people were dead and two more were fighting for their lives in hospital.
The killing began on November 21 last year.
His first victim was 30-year-old Lorna Bogle, a former girlfriend.
Her ‘crime’ was not to write to him as he served his five-year prison sentence.
Her punishment was death.
She was found with 21 stab wounds, eight of them piercing her heart, at her flat in Walthamstow, east London.
Police discovered later that Lorna and Vernage had met at a children's home years earlier.
One officer said: ‘Vernage is a very strange creature.
If he spoke to a girl a couple of times he would tend to look on her as a girlfriend.
He regarded Lorna as his girlfriend.’
Three days later Vernage killed again.
His second victim was minicab driver Javaid Iqbal.
He was unlucky enough to interrupt Vernage breaking into his home in Leytonstone, east London.
Mr Iqbal, 37, was a black belt judo expert but he was no match for Vernage's knife.
One strong stab to the heart killed him.
Five days later Vernage was to achieve his gruesome ambition to kill a policeman.
It was 1am when Sergeant Alan King spotted Vernage unloading stolen gear into a house.
He stopped his patrol car to investigate and Vernage simply slaughtered him in the street, cutting off his police radio to stop him calling for help.
Repeatedly he plunged his knife into the bewildered officer's head and chest until he collapsed.
Sergeant King, 41, a father of four, was stabbed four times in the head and neck and four times in the chest.
Still holding the bloodstained knife, Vernage walked into the house and woke his accomplice Peter Grenfell.
Together the men went out to push away the police car, which was blocking Vernage's own Cortina.
Then Vernage noticed Sergeant King staggering down the road in a desperate bid to flag down a car.
He set off in pursuit of the fatally wounded officer shouting: ‘He is still alive, I am going to get him.’
As Sergeant King struggled to get into the car of a passing motorist, Vernage continued his attack, plunging his knife again and again into the policeman.
Vernage and his terrified sidekick Grenfell, 29, went on the run.
They were only caught after being stopped for a burglary they didn't commit.
PCs Simon Castrey and John Jenkinson approached their car, little knowing what awaited them.
Vernage slashed them across the throat and chest with his wood knife and fled, but the officers managed to radio for help and within hours both men were captured.
Vernage was finally cornered by police dogs in a garden shed on November 29.
He was still intent on murder.
As officers moved in to arrest him he waved a knife and snarled: ‘Come on then, do you want some of this?’
In the 12 months after his arrest Vernage said nothing to police about the murders.
There was no remorse, not one admission and no protestations of innocence.
His only reaction at being accused of murder was to spit rice over the sergeant reading the charge.
Once behind bars Vernage was desperate to escape.
He turned up for a remand hearing at Redbridge court covered in baby oil to make it difficult for warders to grab hold of him.
Police even found he had hidden a piece of metal, which they believe he planned to file into a knife, hidden in the sole of his shoe.
During his four-week trial Vernage mocked the system of justice and insulted the memory of his victims.
When questioned in the witness box about the murder of Sergeant King, Vernage laughed out loud as the policeman's widow, Monica, watched from the public gallery.
Asked if he had any sympathy for Sergeant King's family he said ‘No.’
Vernage spent his early years in a succession of children's homes.
As he grew up he bitterly accused his mother of having shown little interest in him.
Friends claim he underwent a drastic change when he served his first prison sentence for burglary.
Former girlfriend Gill Grenfell, the half sister of Vernage's sidekick Peter Grenfell, said: ‘He was a very friendly guy.
His mother used to visit his older brother Simon and make a bit of a fuss of him but she totally blanked Nick and he was hurt.
‘He used to be bitter because his father never visited him either but he never let his feelings out.’
Gill lost contact with Vernage but a month before his killing spree he reappeared.
‘He was still nice, or I thought he was.
He didn't treat us any different, but he was a completely changed person.
‘He would just sit there on a chair and laugh to himself.
He said he talked to himself in prison to keep himself sane, but if you told him he was still doing it he wouldn't believe you.’
Vernage was jailed with his older brother John in 1987 for his part in a series of pub robberies where landladies and barmaids were brutally raped by John while he watched.
Another friend who had known him since his teens said: ‘He was different when he came out, he scared people.
He'd been a tearaway before but now he was vicious.’
Now Vernage is back behind bars and it will be at least 25 years before he comes out to scare anyone again.
Let us vote on Europe
NOTHING more clearly illustrates how out of step the politicians are with the people than the latest survey on Europe.
It reveals that 75 per cent of the British population wants a referendum on the Maastricht Treaty.
Only 16 per cent of the 7,000 voters polled by Gallup for the BBC were happy to go ahead and let Parliament ratify it.
Yet the overwhelming mass of MPs — Conservative, Labour and Liberal Democrat — are determined to deprive the country of a vote on this fundamental change to our constitution.
The politicians don't want to listen to the nation's voice because they believe they know best and are scared that the people will vote against.
That displays an arrogant contempt for the wishes of the majority.
If they think the issues are not properly understood, it is their job to explain them.
If they think the right decision will not be taken, it is their job to persuade people to vote differently.
That process is called democracy.
Forcing your views on others is called dictatorship.
What makes the situation in Britain today so worrying is that the leaders of both main parties agree on virtually everything.
Certainly on Europe, they are hell-bent on pushing through the Maastricht Treaty.
There is virtually no one in the Government who disagrees.
There is almost no one in the Shadow Cabinet who doesn't, either, since Bryan Gould resigned.
Why do they think they are always right?
Tory and Labour were united in supporting Britain's membership of the European Exchange Rate Mechanism, and look how wrong they were over that.
The Gallup/BBC survey shows that Britons do see their future as part of Europe while remaining rightly sceptical about the benefits so far of EC membership.
That is far more sensible and realistic than the politicians' attitude that everything in the European garden is rosy.
The voters are entitled to have their say on Maastricht and should be given it.
Politicians who are scared of the will of the people do not deserve to represent them.
Sobering up
EVERYONE who has played a part in the remarkable reduction in the number of deaths due to drink-driving deserves to be congratulated.
The Department of Transport, the advertising industry and the police have combined to crack down on this menace which is still responsible for so much carnage and misery.
Doubtless the adverts produced at this time of year have been successful in getting the message home.
But it is the police crackdown which has been the crucial factor.
As the figures we carry on Page 7 show, there is now virtual random breath-testing in this country.
The police deny it, because it is against the law, but there are few motorists who don't believe it exists.
The Government could confirm its determination to wipe out drink-driving by making random testing legal.
Then police would know they had the power they need and motorists would know that just one drink too many would cost them their licence.
This is war and those who are fighting it deserve to be given every possible weapon.
Fit to drop
EXERCISING in front of a keep-fit video on your television is likely to do you more harm than good, says the magazine Which?
Way To Health.
So just carry on slumped in an armchair in front of the set.
If anyone sneers, tell them Which? told you to do it.
The most feared woman in Britain
Ian Fletcher
THE nondescript chap in the grey overcoat smiled his thanks as he picked up his new camera.
Another satisfied customer, thought the sales assistant.
She could never have suspected that at that very moment, the camera maker's future prosperity hung in the balance.
For in a few days, this same man would be reporting back to the most feared woman in Britain.
She is Sue Leggate, editor of the immensely influential Consumers' Association magazine Which?
Sue has an army of researchers testing products and companies know that if her monthly magazine gives an item the thumbs-down, they can almost certainly write it off.
Whether it be supermarkets, banks, car giants, finance houses, tour operators or manufacturers, the impact can be devastating and cost millions in wasted advertising and lost sales revenue.
But Sue is quick to justify the power she wields since she took over the editorship in 1989.
‘Today there is such a plethora of offers available in the stores that the average shopper gets overwhelmed and confused,’ she says.
‘In difficult times like a recession, getting the best value is absolutely crucial for a great many people.
‘When money is tight they simply cannot afford to take a gamble on making a mistake and getting the wrong product.
They want something that is going to be reliable.
Our aim is to help them make the right purchase by giving them all the information they need.
‘Of course, the reports and test results we issue are not all welcomed by manufacturers but there really is only a tiny percentage who end up carping about the magazine.’
Sue, who is married and lives in Hertfordshire, says she finds it diffi cult to escape from her role as the watchdog in the nation's High Street.
‘I have been a consumer researcher for so long that I am Consumer Correspondent always on the look-out for a new subject to investigate.’
One of the biggest nightmares for company chiefs is to wake up in the morning to be greeted by Which? headlines branding their latest product as ‘rip-off’ or ‘death-trap’.
But a good rating from the independent assessors can make all the difference.
Just to be dubbed a ‘best buy’ in a range of rival tumble driers, answering machines or camcorders can lead to a rush to the store by discerning customers.
Each year more than 850,000 Britons pay an annual subscription to ensure they get their copy of Which? magazine.
It may be the last word in consumer issues but it has never been available on news stands.
The Consumers' Association says that rather than give half the cover price to retailers, they prefer to sink the money into campaigning work and more investigations.
It insists that all research is totally impartial to give readers objective facts about products and services.
No free samples are accepted by staff and products to be tested are paid for anonymously.
Nor do its pages feature advertisements.
The Association beleives that accepting ads would compromise its independent stance.
Non-party political, Which? gets no grants from government or industry or any other similar source.
It raises funds from subscriptions and sales of books and research sources.
The Association says the magazine's determination to maintain complete editorial independence is the key reason why readers have remained loyal over the years and trust its judgment.
It's a formula that is obviously working.
Since the main Which? magazine appeared more than 35 years ago a whole new breed of special interest publications have been spawned including Holiday Which?,
Which?
Way To Health, Which?
Gardening and Which?
Wine Monthly.
Now even teenagers can get a direct mail delivery of their own Check it Out! publication.
When the Association was founded in 1957, it had no paid staff and only £10 in its bank account.
Now, under the direction of an elected, unpaid council, it has an income of £45 million a year and a workforce of more than 500 with a plush head office near Regents Park.
Which? says that before its first issue hit the streets in the Fifties, the consumers of the day were virtually on their own.
Dangerous products, underhand practices and outright frauds were even more common than they are today.
Consumers deprived of the information and advice they needed were quite simply at the mercy of every rogue in the marketplace.
One by one the Association battled to end the loopholes in the regulations needed to protect the gullible shopper.
Sue Leggate says: ‘Consumer rights have come on in leaps and bounds since Which? first appeared.
‘But there is still a long way to go and we will keep on striving to end injustices against consumers.
‘British Rail, the EC, car manufacturers — these and others should take note that we will not be letting up in our battle for consumer rights.’
…even fitness videos feel her wrath
Nicki Pope
THE Chippendales might be great movers on stage but follow their fitness video and you're more likely to feel the pain than the burn.
Many of the current crop of celebrity exercise videos can actually be bad for you, reports the Consumers Association magazine Which?
Way To Health.
Nearly half the regimes in the 15 tapes reviewed by an expert panel carry the risk of injury from dangerous or outdated exercises, while others don't live up to their claims.
The panel rated the videos on safety, effectiveness and presentation.
The Chippendales tape Muscle Motion was voted worst for safety and worst overall.
‘It is totally unsafe,’ said the panel.
‘The person who put this together must have been living in a box for the last 10 years.’
Exercises were branded outdated and even presentation Medical Correspondent was rated below average.
One neck exercise could damage the top of the spine while straight leg sit-ups could put strain on the back.
Jane Fonda's New Workout was deemed out of date with risky exercises and lots of jogging and bouncing movements.
‘Burn all copies,’ was the verdict of one expert.
Lizzie Webb's Total Health And Fitness Video features potentially dangerous side lean bounces and other maneouvres, leaving it below average.
In Nick Berry's Physical Pursuits, the former EastEnder appears for a mere 10 minutes but declares: ‘With this new approach you can shift the flab and even cure a hangover.’
Not so, say the experts.
The aerobic content may help you lose some weight but exercise is not a cure-all.
Callanetics — a Fergie favourite — are out, with exercises on the Original Callanetics video considered unsafe by all but one of the experts.
Which?
Way To Health editor David Dickinson says: ‘An interesting video which allows you to work harder as you get fitter and vary your workout is most likely to keep you motivated.
‘You're not bound to hurt yourself doing some of the risky exercises we found, especially if you are already fit, but there are safer ways to get the same effect.’
The panel didn't review supermodel Cindy Crawford's new video which has already come under fire in some fitness circles but Mr Dickinson adds: ‘It clearly contains some of the exercises the panel had elsewhere criticised as outdated’.
Not all the celebrities rated badly however.
Cher, who left the instruction on her tape to an expert, scored above average marks for producing an entertaining workout although not one for beginners.
Princess Diana's personal trainer Carolan Brown, an advocate of the step workout, also rated above average with a ‘simple but challenging video’.
Best of all was the non-celebrity tape The Y Plan Fat Breaker.
This is the video to huff and puff away to in the privacy of your living room — it received an overall thumbs-up as safe, enjoyable, well-presented, high quality exercise.
With Christmas just over two weeks away, a fitness video at between £11 and £12 may seem like the ideal stocking filler.
But it may be wise to follow the Which? team's advice before making your choice — otherwise the recipient of your gift could be limping into the New Year.
How the admen keep on shocking
Emma Campbell and Dominic Midgley
THE woman's green eyes stare blindly ahead.
Her left pupil is horribly dilated and blood trickles from one nostril and her hair.
Her slim body shakes with electric shocks as paramedics try to restart her heart.
In the background a man's voice pleads: ‘Is she going to be all right?
Make her be all right.’
A policeman intervenes.
‘Are you the driver of this vehicle, sir?
Have you been drinking, sir?’
The desperate voice replies: ‘Just a quick one.
I thought it would be okay.
Is she going to be all right?’
As the attempt to revive the woman fails, the voice adds: ‘I didn't mean it.’
That is the graphic commercial launched by the Government yesterday to spearhead its hard-hitting anti-drink-drive campaign this Christmas.
It is so shocking that it can be shown only after 9pm.
That's also the time when most men aged between 18-35 — the worst group for drink-driving smashes — watch TV.
The extra edge of horror is given by the 40-second ad's realism.
Although the ‘dying’ woman is 18-year-old actress Denise Douglas, paramedics Adrian Clark and David Whitmore are just that in real life.
It's the latest in a series of grim, hard-hitting ads that have helped to cut by more than half the tally of deaths in accidents involving drunken drivers.
In 1990, a pretty blonde child called Kathy listened as her mother screamed at her husband who had killed a small boy in one such accident.
Again this was shown after 9pm.
Last year's advert showed the humiliation of arrest through the eyes of a drunken driver.
It was one of the most forceful ads seen since the launch of the first TV campaign in 1976.
‘We need to come at the issue fresh each time,’ says Nigel Pike of the Department of Transport's ad agency D'Arcy Masius Benton and Bowles.
‘We've got to make people realise that drink-driving is still a live issue.
We need to surprise people.’
There is no question that such tough campaigns are effective.
In 1982, the total of deaths in alcohol-related road accidents stood at 1,670.
By last year it had been slashed to 700.
A mammoth enforcement campaign by the police has also produced dividends.
With more than half a million driversstopped and breathalysed last year, people are more aware than ever that detection is a real possibility.
When deaths were at their peak in 1982, just 207,000 drivers were screened.
‘I make no excuses for the starkness of this commercial,’ says Transport Minister Kenneth Carlisle.
‘I know it may disturb many people sitting conmfortably at home.
But the reality is harsh.
‘The truth is that even one drink can impair driving performance.
Alcohol slows your reactions and affects your judgment.
‘The more you drink, the greater the effect.’
This new ad had barely been launched before it came under attack from drink-driving campaigners who say it will miss the very people it is aimed at — because they will be at the pub.
But DoT Press officer Paul Moore says: ‘We have researched this carefully.
‘Our target audience is men aged between 18 and 35 because they get involved in more drink-related accidents than anyone else.
‘The fact is they tend to watch TV after 9pm when they're back from the pub.’
In 1978, a DoT study showed that 55 per cent of adults thought being caught over the limit was simply ‘bad luck’.
By 1989, and thanks to the impact of the ads, the figure had dropped to 19 per cent.
In 1978 29 per cent thought that drink-drivers should go to prison.
By 1989, 64 per cent said they should.
In the late Seventies, drink-drive advertising was in its infancy.
It was just ten years since the introduction of the breathalyser and people were beginning to get complacent.
A DoT expert says: ‘The breathalyser had a dramatic effect on people's behaviour but it's fair to say that people got used to it and began to take various avoiding actions.
‘By 1976, the Government decided it had to act and that led to the first TV campaign with the line ‘Don't take your car for a drink’.’
That slogan sounds inappropriately lightweight to today's viewer.
But by Christmas 1978 ads warned you could get caught, lose your licence, your job, your girlfriend — and your passengers' lives in a crash.
This was followed by the ‘Stay Low’ campaign, which pursued the now heretical approach that if you had to drink, then you could but make sure you stayed within the limit.
‘It encouraged drivers to limit their drinking because there might have been the conception that you couldn't tell people not to drink at all,’ says the DoT spokesman.
The next year tactics had changed and the line read: ‘If you think you can drink and drive, think again’.
By the next Christmas, the message was blunter still: ‘If you drink and drive you are a menace to society.’
But since 1987 the message has remained the same: ‘Drinking and driving wrecks lives.’
If ever an image can ram that home, it is the new advertisement and its terrible sight of a victim with lifeless eyes.
Rod Stewart
AGEING rocker Rod Stewart flew into London yesterday from New York with wife Rachel Hunter and baby daughter Renee.
Rod, 47, sporting a bushy beard, plans to give six-month-old Renee a traditional Scottish Christmas.
‘We thought we would bring her over here for her first one,’ he said.
‘It's the only place to be.’
Jeremy Irons
JEREMY Irons' steamy love scenes with Juliette Binoche in the film Damage have been shortened to avoid an adult rating, despite protests that they were artistic and necessary to the plot.
Sir Richard Attenborough's Chaplin movie
SIR Richard Attenborough's £30 million Chaplin movie has been panned by critics.
The only saving grace was Robert Downey Junior's performance as the comic genius they said.
Liz Taylor
AILING Liz Taylor, 60, is to defy doctors and make her annual trip to Swiss ski resort Gstaad where she and ex-husband Richard Burton spent their happiest moments.
Queen Mother will miss wedding
Clive Nelson
THE Queen Mother will not be attending Princess Anne's wedding to Commander Tim Laurence at Balmoral on Saturday because it is feared the 1,000-mile round trip would be too much for her.
‘It's a long way to go for a 45-minute service and a reception — even if you're not 92 years old,’ said one of her aides, who insisted that her absence was not intended as a snub.
Instead, Anne and Tim are expected to call at the Queen Mother's London home, Clarence House, on their return from Scotland.
News of the Queen Mum's absence sparked a health scare but staff members stressed that she was ‘perfectly well’.
After the 3 pm wedding at Crathie Church, which will be a private family affair, Anne and Tim will hold a reception in Craigowan Lodge, a mile from Balmoral Castle.
The couple are also expected to spend their wedding night in the secluded lodge and are expected to leave Balmoral on Sunday.
Which one will suit Anne on Saturday?
Karen Mellor and Simon Trump
Our experts offer three outfits for the royal bride.
PRINCESS Anne was keeping her wedding dress strictly under wraps yesterday.
After a fitting for the outfit the Princess will wear when she marries Commander Tim Laurence on Saturday, her dressmaker left Gatcombe Park with a black plastic sheet hiding the material in the back of her car.
But Anne is unlikely to wear white and will almost certainly opt for something less formal than a traditional wedding gown for the ceremony at Crathie Church near Balmoral.
TODAY asked three wedding fashion experts to give their vision of what Princess Anne should be wearing on Saturday.
All agreed that she would look best in a smart suit.
For her wedding to Captain Mark Phillips in 1973, she wore a high-necked, princess-line bridal gown in ivory silk by Maureen Baker of the design house Susan Small.
But the Princess Royal has never enjoyed the grandeur of formal royal occasions and the second time round she will most likely go for something along the lines of the more relaxed and comfortable clothes that she usually favours.
Liz Savage, deputy fashion editor of Brides magazine, suggests a sophisticated suit in cream: ‘I think she should wear a three-quarter-length straight skirt in cream crepe, with a long-line cream lace jacket and a neat, smart hat.’
‘The Princess should avoid wearing anything fussy and I hope that she chooses an English designer.
I think flowers in her hair would be wrong, but a small posy of Christmas roses from Pulbrook & Gould would look pretty.’
Polish-born Tomasz Starzewski, one of Diana's favourite designers, was also responsible for the gown worn by Victoria Lockwood for her marriage to Viscount Althorp.
‘The Princess Royal would look elegant wearing a pastel pink or champagne dress in wool crepe, just skimming the knee, and a smart jacket,’ says Tomasz.
‘She should wear a small matching hat.’
Fulham-based bridal designer Phillipa Lepley, who designed the wedding gowns for Caron Keating and Ulrika Jonsson, would dress the Princess in a hand-beaded suit of cream silk faille ottoman.
‘I would heavily bead the fabric with tiny faux pearls, bugle and satin beads in an antique-style scroll pattern,’ she says.
‘I would make her a long, single-breasted jacket with a nipped-in waist, long sleeves and a stand-up mandarin collar to keep out the cold.
‘With this I would make a simple straight skirt that sits just on the knee, and a large cartwheel hat trimmed with the suit fabric.’
Liz Savage will be talking about Princess Anne's wedding on Good Morning With Anne & Nick today at noon.
Come in International Rescue, we need you
Matthew Benns
Thunderbird fans' plea to end sell-out in toy shops.
THE seconds are ticking away and thousands of children are heading for disaster.
Container ships with vital supplies are stranded on the high seas.
Resources are stretched to the limit and, unless someone helps, the country will be awash with tears on Christmas morning.
It sounds like a job for International Rescue — but the trouble is it's all their fault.
TV re-runs of the hit Sixties puppet show have sparked enormous demand for International Rescue toys.
The biggest seller is Tracy Island, a £32.99 model of the organisation's secret base, complete with collapsing palm trees.
Unfortunately demand vastly outweighs supply and the response thousands of parents have had from stores around the country as is: ‘Thunderbirds are gone.’
Hundreds of parents yesterday slept outside Toys R Us stores in Swansea and Bristol in a desperate bid to get their hands on the island.
Just 24 walked away with them.
Giant London toy shop Hamleys has been getting more than 500 calls a day for the last two weeks from people asking about Thunderbird toys.
Spokesman Peter Skinner said: ‘The last delivery was cleared off the shelves within an hour.
For every Tracy Island we have had we could have sold thousands.’
It is a similar story across the country.
Starlings, in Sheringham, Norfolk, said: ‘The toys are rare as hens' teeth.’
W H Smith said: ‘We have sold out everywhere and the manufacturers have told us we cannot have any more before Christmas.’
At Asda a spokesman said: ‘One or two stores do still have Tracy Island but I dare not say where in case I start a stampede.’
Parents have bedded down outside Toys R Us at the MetroCentre in Gateshead, Tyne and Wear, every Saturday night for the past six weeks, waiting for deliveries.
Fred and Joan Avery, both 34, waited 14 hours to get one for their son Philip, six.
Fred, of Fence Houses, County Durham, said: ‘We queued for the last three weeks and left empty handed.
This time we were determined to be first.
‘By the time the doors opened there must have been 100 people.
There were only 24 islands, the father who was 25th in the queue was devastated.
‘Philip wasn't interested in anything else, it had to be Tracy Island.’
Thousands of islands have been dispatched from factories in China and are on a ship somewhere between here and Asia.
Makers Matchbox last night promised deliveries but said: ‘There is no way that what is coming will meet demand.’
Other models, including Thunderbirds One and Three and Lady Penelope's car FAB1, are available.
But as one store owner said: ‘How many boys want a pink Rolls-Royce for Christmas?’
Putting the skids under birthday boy Franz
By Tim Satchell
FRANZ Klammer, one of the world's greatest downhill skiers, has celebrated his 39th birthday in the Colorado ski resort of Copper Mountain, where the resort went to extraordinary lengths to enable him to indulge his other passion, golf.
Unknown to the man who won more downhills than any other racer in history, the local ski patrol spent most of the night clearing snow by hand from the third tee and green at the local golf course in Copper Creek, the highest 18-hole golf course in North America, so that he could play golf on his birthday.
Herr Klammer thought no one knew of his birthday.
To his surprise a huge cake was wheeled out depicting the 1976 Olympic champion playing golf on one half of the cake and skiing on the other.
After a champagne toast, more than 20 skiers from all over Europe taking part in a Klammer ski clinic were taken by coach to the golf course where Herr Klammer, still in ski boots, was given a set of clubs.
‘I thought this was supposed to be a happy birthday,’ he groaned after making a mess of two strokes.
He found his ski boots a handicap, but persevered until he was hitting the ball well.
‘It's almost impossible to play golf in ski boots,’ he said.
‘I've been practising golf for two weeks in Florida and now I can't hit the ball properly.
‘Ski boots were invented for skiing, not golf.
‘I'll have to come back in the summer without the boots to play properly!’
Austrian Herr Klammer now spends his time giving ski clinics and playing golf.
This week he is skiing in a downhill competition in Deer Valley, Utah.
Rumpole writer follows in Hitchcock tradition
By Tim Satchell
JOHN Mortimer has been telling me about his first ever speaking role in Rumpole of the Bailey, his popular television series.
‘In true Hitchcock tradition, I always make one appearance in each series of Rumpole, but this time I decided to give myself a speaking part,’ he says.
Mr Mortimer popped up in the last episode of the seventh series of Rumpole as a guest at Mr Justice Oliphant's lunch.
As he passed a decanter, he spoke his single line: ‘Madeira, bishop?’
Did Mr Mortimer, 69, who has an Equity card, enjoy himself?
‘That one scene took up a whole morning and I did think to myself I could have written half a script in that time.
I also learnt how extras are treated — they're not told a thing.’
Mr Mortimer, currently at work on a play for the BBC and a drama series for Meridian, tells me he hopes there will be another Rumpole series: ‘But not for a little while.’
Mr Mortimer, who is a QC, has a classical thespian background.
He played Richard II at Harrow.
He has concentrated on writing for some years, but says he will go back into court when, and if, he finds a case that appeals to him.
Yvette Fielding to be in pantomime
By Tim Satchell
YVETTE Fielding, above, who presents ITV's Saturday morning children's show What's Up Doc?, is about to achieve her great ambition to be in pantomime.
Miss Fielding, 24, plays Dick Whittington at the Assembly Hall Theatre, Tunbridge Wells.
The panto starts on December 17 with Dave Lee Travis as King Rat.
‘I'm really delighted,’ she tells me.
‘Pantomime is something I've always wanted to do.’
Before joining What's Up Doc?
Miss Fielding, from Stockport, presented Blue Peter for five years until she left in the summer.
Last year in Bramhall, Greater Manchester, she married policeman Barry Sweeney, 29, a station sergeant at London's Paddington Green.
Private wine lines
By Tim Satchell
LAST night Coates, the City wine bar in London Wall, introduced a new Phone Zone of 46 telephones placed at each table so customers can call the bar or other tables.
‘Each table has a large number on a notice and customers also have a floor plan,’ says Coates spokesowman Sarah Heward.
‘In future it will run on Thursdays and it's designed for people who are a bit shy or who want to protect their anonymity.’
Carols raise the House
SIR Edward Heath will conduct a choir of MPs and Peers during Britain's first Carolothon which takes place at Central Hall, Westminster, on Thursday next week.
The Carolothon is being billed as the biggest carol concert ever and will last from 10am to 10pm.
Much of the charity marathon will be broadcast by Radio 2.
Over the day presenters Ken Bruce, Jimmy Young, Gloria Hunniford and John Dunn will also feature other Carolothon events around the country.
More than 100 carols will be sung at Central Hall.
‘About half will be traditional and the rest will be either more modern carols or contemporary arrangments of old ones,’ producer Jamie Thomson, 39, tells me.
‘There will be a great variety but over the day some carols may be repeated because we want to make sure we have enough truly popular ones so people can sing along and raise the roof.’
Labour leader John Smith will give a Christmas reading.
Among others participating will be Jean Boht, Peter Bowles, Tessa Dahl, Jeremy Irons, Geraldine James, Anneka Rice, Ned Sherrin, Gwen Taylor, Simon Williams and Catherine Zeta Jones.
And…
By Tim Satchell
WHAT do Alfred the Great and Sonic the Hedgehog have in common?
They share the same middle name.
All right Jacques
By Tim Satchell
THE Delors Discount Deli is being set up by the Consumers Association in Edinburgh to coincide with the European Community Summit.
Some food stuffs will be a third cheaper than usual.
A pound of topside of beef will be £1.54.
There is a more modest reduction for a loaf of bread at 4p off.
The shop is planned for the fashionable Princes Street.
They will quote non-EC prices.
‘We will open on Friday, Saturday and Sunday throughout the summit with a big display showing the prices that would be charged if it were not for the Common Agricultural Policy,’ says a spokesman.
CAP guarantees farmers high prices with the EC buying up surpluses.
Extra: John Mortimer
Car recycling
IN her article on car recycling, Liz Moore claimed that in the Eighties, scapped cars went eventually to landfill sites.
Not so.
For 40 years, Britain's professional scrap processors have been turning unwanted cars into furnace feed to help make British Steel more efficient — at no cost to the public.
Fergie and the plight of orphans at Kochedwice
AS Fergie was so upset by the plight of orphans at Kochedwice in Poland, maybe she should donate her £3 million profit from Budgie The Helicopter products to them.
Cliff Richard
CLIFF Richard owes his fame and fortune to his female fans.
So why is he so opposed to women priests?
Presumably he sees women's main role in life as buying records.
The Queen and Spitting Image
WHAT a spoilsport the Queen is for objecting to the Spitting Image royal puppets being displayed in the window of Liberty in London.
Lighten up, Ma'am.
It's only a joke.
Somalia crisis
IF so many countries can pledge troops to help relieve the crisis in Somalia, why is Britain's support limited to two planes?
We should do more.
Learn baby-swop lesson
WHILE my heart goes out to the parents in the baby-swop drama, I have to agree with the midwife interviewed on TV who said that it was ‘a disaster waiting to happen’.
Our hospitals are so short of cash thanks to the shortsightedness of the Government that it's a wonder hospitals function as well as they do.
Add to that the dreadfully long hours that doctors and nurses have to work — sometimes 16-18 hour shifts — and it's little wonder that mistakes are made.
Come on Virginia Bottomley, let's have some action instead of endless cutbacks.
Learn baby-swop lesson
EVERYBODY makes mistakes at work.
Sadly, those mistakes cannot be covered up in hospitals.
Although the baby-swop case was tragic, I bet the staff involved will suffer guilt for the rest of their lives.
Milestones
BIRTHDAYS: Flautist James Galway, 53.
Footballer Geoff Hurst, 51.
ON THIS DAY: In 1864, the Clifton Suspension Bridge opened.
In 1941, Britain and the US declared war on Japan.
In 1981, Arthur Scargill was elected leader of the NUM.
Poetry in motion
HOW refreshing to read that Eric Cantona (right) enjoys painting and writing poetry.
Good luck with Manchester United, Eric, and let's hope your example leads more soccer players to take up such creative hobbies.
Perhaps someone could suggest to Vinny Jones that he takes up, say, flower-arranging?
Euro MPs' perks
I WAS amazed to read about Euro MPs' perks.
Their £140-a-day living allowance alone is about what pensioners get for their keep a month.
Euro MPs can claim travel expenses without producing receipts, yet to claim Income Support pensioners must supply a whole booklet of information.
It's an insult.
Desert Orchid get-well cards
YOUR correspondent is wrong to begrudge the get-well cards sent to Desert Orchid.
The flying grey deserves them all in return for the joy and thrills he has given thousands while humping 12 stone in weight around on his back.
A braver animal would be hard to find.
Things you didn't know you didn't know
Graeme Donald
THOSE who are charged with looking after the royal stables are given the title of equerry, but this has nothing to do with equus, the Latin word for a horse.
The term has its origins in the Old French word ‘ecurie’ which meant a barn or a stable.
This in turn was derived from the word ‘ecu’ which meant a shield, or in this case, a shelter.
The shield is behind the name of the Ecu that the Brussels Eurocrats want to force us all to use.
Rather than being an acronym for European Currency Unit, the name is a revival of an 11th-Century gold coin which sported a shield motif.
As well as equerry, the hierarchy of the French royal stables has given us another, more common title — that of the constable.
This is derived from the French Conte de Stable, the count in charge of the stables.
TODAY'S Book Of Things You Didn't Know…is now on sale, published by Simon & Schuster for £3.99.
The 12 traps of Christmas
Stephen Ellis
YOU long to shower gifts on everyone and hate the thought of being called a Scrooge.
But remember — raid your savings now and Santa won't pick up the bill.
The stark truth is that thousands of families whose budgets are already stretched face financial ruin unless they moderate their Christmas spending.
Here are some of the traps to avoid:
TRAP ONE: Some 100,000 homebuyers are expected to skip a mortgage payment, thousands more will try to dodge the rent man so they have more cash to spend.
Don't do it.
This year 75,000 people have lost their homes through mortgage arrears.
TRAP TWO: Running up big bills on credit cards means you'll have trouble paying off the full debt when the statement arives.
In most cases you have up to 56 days interest-free credit but if you miss the deadline, you'll have to pay high interest rates of up to 30 per cent.
One advantage of using Barclaycard, American Express or some of the Gold cards is that they offer ‘purchase protection’.
This means that if what you buy is stolen or damaged, you'll get your money back.
TRAP THREE: Going over your limit on a credit card can lead to two main headaches.
First you'll have the embarrassment of being told that payment has been refused.
Then you'll be unable to use the card — and may even have it taken away.
TRAP FOUR: Using store cards can also prove expensive.
Some firms charge as much as 30 per cent interest.
TRAP FIVE: Instant credit offers in shops are a big temptation — but they too usually involve high interest charges.
A number of firms are offering interest-free credit, especially on big electrical items, but you must be convinced that you can keep up all the payments.
TRAP SIX: Running up an overdraft at the bank without first checking with the manager can be very costly.
Lord Alexander, the head of NatWest, admitted last week that customers who overdraw without authority are charged 36.3 per cent yearly interest.
TRAP SEVEN: Check that you have enough funds in your account.
One bounced cheque could ruin your reputation with the shop and will lead to bank charges — probably including one for a letter from the manager.
TRAP EIGHT: It never makes sense to borrow from backstreet money lenders.
Once they've got their hooks into you, they will never let go — and the Office of Fair Trading has reported cases of interest charges topping one million per cent.
TRAP NINE: Payment cheques, such as those issued by Provident Financial, are an expensive way of spreading the cost of spending.
TRAP TEN: Don't try to beat the taxman over any tips you may receive.
The Inland Revenue is well aware that people in certain jobs, such as hairdressers, receive extra cash from their customers at this time of year.
All tips are counted as part of your earnings and must be declared.
If the taxman thinks you've been cheating, he'll look at all your affairs with extra care and may check back on tax returns for previous years.
TRAP ELEVEN: Don't insist on your boss being over-generous.
Any bonus you receive, even a turkey, counts as part of your pay.
It must be declared and tax paid on the cost to your employer (a Christmas party is exempt if it is the only one held in the year and costs no more than £50 a head).
TRAP TWELVE: Don't think it's easy to avoid overspending.
Many try but few succeed.
Badges make more than pin money
Adrian Furness
BADGES have long been a cheap, effective way of making a statement — whether it's Ban The Bomb or I Love Madonna — but don't throw them away when your fervour wanes.
They could be worth a lot of money one day.
So-called ‘button’ badges, paper print covered with celluloid, are highly collectable as well as being a fascinating guide to social history, says Leicestershire teacher Frank Setchfield, who has a 40,000-strong collection.
‘The ones from World War Two supporting campaigns to raise money for the war effort, such as Spitfire Funds or Warship Weeks, are especially desirable, fetching £10 or £15,’ he says.
‘With the advent of TV in the Fifties you got lots of kids' badges, while in the Sixties they grew larger and more colourful, and in the Seventies you had weird punk badges.’
Setchfield runs The Badge Collectors' Circle which publishes newsletters and organises swap sessions.
Button badges were invented in America in 1896 as a cheap way of promoting candidates in a presidential election.
Today, the rarest US election buttons can be worth more than £7,500.
In Britain, those from the late Fifties and Sixties fetch about Pounds 1, while pre-war badges can usually be picked up for a few pounds.
The big money doesn't go to button badges, but to the enamel Robertson's Gollies, first issued in 1928.
‘Pre-war Gollies fetch £100 or more, rising to £200 or £300 for a 1937 Coronation Golly with his Union Jack waistcoat,’ says Frank.
The Badge Collectors' Circle, 3 Ellis Close, Quorn, Loughborough, Leicestershire.
Give present with a future
THE toy of the moment this Christmas may cost a small fortune but when the kids get bored with it, you're left with more junk.
Cash can be a more enduring present, especially if you open an account in trust for your child.
Everyone has a tax allowance so children can receive interest gross or claim back tax paid on dividends.
If the cash comes from a parent, however, and the income tops £100 a year, it will all be added to the parent's income.
Here are some other ways of making festive gifts pay dividends: SMALL SUMS: The best deal in bank or building society accounts is Halifax, which pays at least 4.5 per cent gross and gives you a money-box.
Good rates are also available from TSB and Nationwide.
A fiver will open a National Savings investment account that pays 6.25 per cent gross.
You can still buy £10 worth of Premium Bonds, but the minimum is £25 for the issue E Children's Bonds which return 7.85 per cent gross a year.
£50 PLUS: Stock exchange investment is possible through the Invesco MIM special Rupert Unit Trust (0800 010 733).
The minimum is £50 or £10 a month.
Large sums can get you Rupert scarves and puppets.
The Trust was launched four years ago and an original £50 would now be worth £70.50.
There is no minimum investment in Fidelity's off-shore money fund (0800 414 161), but there is a 1 per cent management fee.
It's paying 6.54 per cent.
£100 PLUS: The minimum purchase of National Savings Capital Bonds is £100, with a current interest rate of 7.75 per cent.
Friendly society schemes involve either a £100 or £200 sum, or £9 or £18 a month.
The value will grow in line with the stock market.
However, payments must continue for ten years.
For details of investment trust schemes, ring the AITC on 071-588 5347.
Fairer shares for family
IF more than one member of your family has shares to sell then a new scheme might be of benefit.
Waters Lunniss, the stockbroker owned by the Norwich & Peterborough Building Society, will allow up to four members of a family with the same surname to pool all their shares and pay commission of only 1½ per cent or £10 a person, whichever is greater.
The offer is only available at the firm's offices in London, Norwich, Peterborough and Northampton for batches of shares worth less than £5,000.
But instead of the long wait often involved with the sale of shares, you will receive a cheque for your shares immediately.
Driving us to the wall
WHAT is going on in the car industry?
First British car manufacturers cut their prices.
Then the Chancellor helped the industry by abolishing car tax in his Autumn Statement.
His aim was to boost flagging sales, and for the first time during the recession new cars came within the grasp of those who still had some cash.
Then yesterday, less than a month after the Chancellor's statement, Ford announced that its prices will increase by between 4.5 and ten per cent from January.
This makes no sense and echoes the Government's record of U-turns.
In recent months the car industry has laid off thousands of workers and put many more on short time.
It pleaded for Government support which it got, and sales began to pick up.
What it needed next was a period of stable sales.
Instead Ford has decided not to pass the Government's tax cut on to the motorist but to pour it into its own pockets and profits.
Ford has blamed the price increases on the devaluation of the pound which has increased the cost of imported parts.
Ironically that is also the reason behind yesterday's good news for motorists that petrol prices are to drop.
But 3p off a litre of petrol will do little for the men at Ford who need their jobs.
The Government should take action to force all car manufacturers to pass on its tax cut.
Britain needs jobs and that need should be every company's first priority.
Police patrol
WE should never forget that there are many brave and highly professional policemen and women.
But there are also a few who do not behave properly in their dealings with the public.
Yesterday the Home Office and the police force acknowledged that by launching a new code of ethics.
The Police Federation criticised the move, saying that it was superfluous because police standards are already guided by an existing code of discipline.
That may be so, but while a quarter of the public does not have complete confidence in the police that code can not be said to be working.
The success of the police depends upon a sound relationship with the public and the new code is a sensible recognition of that.
Julie's gift
IT is still too early for Tim Godwin to contemplate the future without his wife Julie, who was so brutally murdered in South Africa.
But he is right to remember his wife's vibrant presence and to take pride in her achievements.
That is Julie Godwin's legacy and it will give her husband and her daughter strength as they come to terms with her loss.
Snooze flash
TONIGHT one in five of us will have a sleepless night.
We won't be able to nod off as news presenters drone on about the world's woes and mother-in-laws ring with the latest family crisis.
Or it could be the computer in the corner that keeps us awake.
Now experts say that the key to a good night's sleep is to keep the bedroom for sleeping and sex.
Of course that is just what it used to be for before the invasion of the television and the mobile office.
No wonder five and a half million people can't sleep.
The Big Mac poll
Chris Hutchins
Labour's Mo Mowlam helps us to test Bill Clinton's ‘Talk to the people’ method.
TALKING to the diners in a McDonald's restaurant helped Bill Clinton to win the hearts, minds and votes of Americans everywhere.
But how would the British react to being given the chance to air their views face to face with a politician?
TODAY headed off to London's Clapham High Street with Mo Mowlam, MP for Redcar and Labour's spokesperson on the City, to find out what the man on the Clapham omnibus — well, in the Clapham McDonald's — really thinks.
There was none of the back-slapping and encouragement the President-elect enjoyed when he toured US hamburger joints.
In fact Miss Mowlam's ears were ringing more loudly than the tills as the people made their feelings known.
Audrey Gray, a single mother of three, was quick to point out that Father Christmas would not be calling on her children this year and she had firm views on who was to blame.
‘Politicians haven't done a lot for me,’ she said as she shared a burger with her three-year-old daughter Joanna.
‘The four of us share a two-bedroom, fourth-floor flat and things are going from bad to worse.
They just keep taking money away from me.
‘They demand poll tax.
I can't afford it but they say I've got to pay it so they'll take me to court.
That's why I don't bother voting.’
What, Mo asked, would tempt her back to the polling booths?
‘If they gave me more money, I suppose.
The big boy's asking for a bike for Christmas and Joanna wants dolls.
My mum and dad have been very good but I can't go on relying on them.’
Reasoning that the father of Audrey's children might be able to help, Mo asked how she felt about Mrs Thatcher's scheme to trace such men and re-introduce them to their responsibilities.
‘I don't want him round my front door, thank you very much.
He doesn't know where we are at the moment and if the authorities catch up with him and give him my address it will be more trouble than it's worth.’
Sensing there was no dialogue here, Miss Mowlam moved in on Jim Compton, a 33-year-old bus driver on his lunch break.
Jim was convinced that politicians were ‘more interested in Westminster gossip about David Mellor than getting human rights established in law’.
Looking up from her tray of Chicken McNuggets and chips, Mo admitted that parliamentary question time had become a farce.
‘It's a ritual,’ said Jim.
‘About as good as Blind Date?’ asked the MP.
‘Blind Date's better — the contestants are prettier,’ he said.
‘What about the American system of public hearings, would that suit you?’
‘I'd be quite interested in that but I can't see it happening here.
There are too many vested interests.
Look at the way Waldegrave's initiative for openness collapsed as soon as people saw it was going to land them in it,’ said Jim.
Mo decided to try another tack: ‘I'd like to see the relationship with the monarchy changed,’ she said.
‘I'd like to see it abolished,’ replied Jim.
‘Then you could get on with real issues such as a transport policy instead of a scheme to privatise it.
I've seen the transport systems in Barcelona and Paris and they are so much better than ours it's embarrassing.’
‘What do you think about Norman Lamont?’ asked Mo.
‘If you rattle most people's cages, you'll find something.
I still don't think we've heard the full story about that business at the off-licence.’
At an adjoining table, Sharon Dudley and David Wilson described themselves as consultant marketists — they sell discount cards on the basis that ‘it gives people the stuff they want for three-quarters of the normal price and the shops would rather get 75 per cent of something than nothing in recessionary times’.
But they were more interested in telling Mo about their experiences of being out of work.
‘Do those people at unemployment offices know what it's like to come face to face with them?’ said Sharon.
‘They make you feel as though it's their money instead of our money.
I'd been paying tax and national insurance for 12 years before I found myself having to make a claim and if I'd been putting the money in a building society I'd have had a lot more than I eventually got out of them.’
‘I know what you're saying,’ said Mo, ‘but a lot of the people working in those offices are on such low pay they're on income support themselves.’
‘I bet they don't keep themselves waiting for six weeks for it then,’ Sharon snapped back.
‘Getting to see your MP is a hassle, too,’ said Dave.
‘What do you have to do to get an appointment at their surgery?
I ring up and they say ‘it'll be three weeks’— I could be out on the streets by then.’
Mo was on the defensive here.
‘I do a combination of appointments and open-meeting time,’ she said.
‘But it does mean that some people have to wait as much as three hours.
There's also the telephone.’
‘It's not the same as seeing your MP face to face,’ said Dave.
When Mo said she was in favour of overhauling the system, Sharon asked: ‘How?
You politicians don't actually ask us how you should do it.
You say: ‘This is our manifesto and this is what we are going to do’.
It leaves us saying ‘We don't like this one but we like that one less’, so we have to opt for lesser evils.’
Mo agreed that even politicians could not please everybody and moved to talk to 31-year-old Sandra Gordon-Morgan, a part-time dressmaking teacher who lost her job when the local authority cut its adult education budget.
What did she think about the job politicians were doing?
‘I think most of you are in it for what you can get.
You don't do much for us,’ said Sandra.
‘Personally I'm optimistic about life in Britain but most people round here are emigrating and putting Britain down.
That makes me feel bad because I don't want to go anywhere else.
I was born here and I try to stick up for Britain — but things are bad.’
‘Never mind,’ said Mo.
‘We've been in a recession before and come through it and we'll do it again.’
All in all, Mo had been given a pretty torrid time by the nation's voters.
But she still thinks the exercise was worthwhile and says Bill Clinton will be wise to stay in touch with the ‘small fries’.
‘The public are quicker to shift opinion than we give them credit for.
Unless you talk to people regularly you can't claim to be in touch with what they are thinking.’
New soap box for Kinnock
By Jane Gordon
IT WAS impossible to miss Neil Kinnock on TV on Saturday.
In fact it was rather like the dark days just before the last election when prime-time television was regularly disturbed by party political broadcasts.
Except that on three separate programmes this weekend, Neil was urbane, witty, direct and honest — so much so that it is now rumoured he might go into TV presenting.
But then isn't TV the natural graveyard of politicians, as discovered by Brian Walden, Matthew Parris and Robert Kilroy-Silk?
What else can all those live debates, public barrackings and strange hours equip you for?
The only problem I can foresee is that Mr Kinnock's move could stimulate two-way traffic.
Presenters with ratings problems might attempt to use their talents in politics.
How about Terry Wogan for PM, Clive Anderson for Leader of the Opposition and Anne Diamond as Speaker of the House…
Real care is long overdue
By Jane Gordon
THE shocking scandal of Frank Beck — given five life sentences for sexually abusing dozens of children put in his care — has finally produced a positive result.
The 200-page report of the Warner Inquiry, set up after Beck's conviction, is expected to prompt an immediate clampdown on the present recruitment procedure used for care workers in children's homes.
It's a tragic fact that children most in need of sensitive care, those living in institutions, are sometimes the least likely to get it.
Sadly, over the years, it has been far too easy for men such as Beck to infiltrate the sloppy system used by many local authorities and it was high time that the Government took steps to prevent further scandals.
I'm sure nothing will ever truly compensate the children Beck abused.
But these vital new moves to ensure that in future all care workers will be true ‘carers’ must offer them some satisfaction.
So that's where she gets those handbags
By Jane Gordon
THE Palace's attempts to make the Queen seem more accessible to her subjects are becoming increasingly obvious.
Just days after she had agreed to pay tax the new monarch-of-the-people was pictured travelling on a regular scheduled train and slipping out of an Oxfam shop in a public relations exercise that had as much subtlety as a Jeremy Beadle prank.
Indeed this latest move to de-mystify Her Majesty was so unconvincing I couldn't help but wonder if — at any moment — Beadle himself (albeit heavily disguised) might not appear beside the Queen to inform her that she had been framed.
This awkward, contrived and frankly tasteless stunt will have done little to lift the Queen's image.
But I suppose it might explain one of the greatest mysteries of her 40-year reign — where she gets those shoes and handbags.
Baby love
By Jane Gordon
Why new mothers will bond with anybody's child.
PERHAPS the most extraordinary thing about parenting is the speed with which you bond with the nondescript bundle presented to you in the delivery room.
Nothing about the infant in your arms distinguishes it as your own.
Its tiny slit eyes, uncertain hairline and wrinkled features are scarcely recognisable as human, let alone a mirror image of its mother or father.
Yet within hours of giving birth both parents, as well as visiting grandparents, uncles, aunts and siblings, have attributed to this child unique family characteristics.
‘He's got his father's nose’ they mutter fondly.
‘Look at that expression — it's Uncle Harold!’ they'll say or ‘She's the spitting image of her mum’.
Day-old babies suddenly take on almost adult qualities.
They have, suggest relatives, their father's temper, mother's nature and grandmother's charm.
Barely able to open their eyes, and months away from holding up their heads, they are burdened with their genetic lot — the physical and psychological make-up of their ancestors.
At least in the eyes of relatives.
In the days after Marie Coyle and Maureen Bursey, the mums in the baby mix-up drama, gave birth to their new daughters Gemma and Carla Marie, I am sure they too indulged in this ritual.
Their families will have remarked on the babies' likeness to them.
Of course to a stranger — or even to an experienced midwife — the only real link between any baby and its parents is the arm or leg tag bearing its mother's name, own weight and date of birth.
But the bonding between an infant and his or her family is so strong that within a few days, as in the case of Marie and her partner Peter, you are convinced you know your own baby from any other in the world.
So that even when suspicions had been roused and blood tests called for, Marie was convinced the baby she was nurturing was her own.
While Maureen, who raised the alarm, began to detach herself from the child she had taken home, returning it briefly to hospital, Marie held the infant she called Gemma tightly to her.
‘Everybody reassured me.
They kept saying ‘Oh, she's your baby.
You can see it’,’ she said.
Even when the results came through and the babies were exchanged in a dramatic midnight meeting, Marie found it difficult to believe that she had been nursing the wrong child.
‘My head tells me that the results are the truth.
In my heart I cannot accept it.’
Of course, as time passes and the dreadful memories fade, I'm sure she will accept that this other baby is her own.
Because as the days and weeks unfold so will the true identity of her baby.
The face will fill out, the limbs will unwind and the real Gemma will emerge, so that by the time she is six months old even a stranger will be able to tell her from Carla Marie.
And Marie and Peter will love her as their own.
Anne's happy end
By Jane Gordon
PRINCESS Anne must take much of the credit for bringing royalty into the 20th Century.
Before she arrived on the scene the world expected princesses to be fairy-tale creatures with sweet, submissive dispositions and waist-length blonde hair.
In real life, as Anne proves, they can do and be whatever they want nowadays.
They can be plain, assertive and still find two handsome husbands without kissing a single frog.
Fickle teens desert Jordan
By Jane Gordon
THE most baffling thing about the weekend's Smash Hits Poll Winners Party was the way the best and the worst in categories crossed over.
Madonna had the dubious honour of being voted Most Fanciable Female and Least Fanciable Female by readers aged between 11-16.
Such is the fickle nature of teen tastes that the most predictable thing is that this year's winner will be next year's loser.
This was never more humiliating than in the category Most Fanciable Male.
Last year's winner Jordan Knight of New Kids On The Block not only had to accept his slide from the peak of female adulation, but also had to present Mark Owen (of Take That) with this year's trophy.
Pre-pubescent girls have always had a quick turnover in teen idols.
But didn't the rise and fall of Bros and The Bay City Rollers take a little longer than one mad year?
John McEnroe and Tatum O'Neal
TENNIS ace John McEnroe's marriage to Tatum O'Neal looked well and truly over yesterday.
The 33-year-old Wimbledon champ, right, was seen moving possessions out of their £600,000 New York apartment.
Michelle Pfeiffer
SEXY Michelle Pfeiffer looked like the Catwoman who'd got the cream as she showed off her new love last night.
The 34-year-old, left, and LA Law producer Dave Kelley cuddled at the premiere of her new film Love Field.
Shannen Doherty
BEVERLY Hills 90210 bad girl Shannen Doherty claims she was the victim in a brawl with aspring actress Bonita Money at a Hollywood club.
‘I didn't say two words to her and she decked me,’ said the fiery 21-year-old.
Abba
SWEDISH rockers Abba may yet regroup after the success of their album Abba Gold.
The four, who re-release their single Thank You For The Music next week, split up 10 years ago.
‘It would have to be a stunning offer,’ said guitarist Bjorn Ulvaeus, 47, yesterday.
Pavarotti heckled
ITALY'S La Scala opera house threatened yesterday to take ‘extreme’ action against rowdy Milan audiences after Luciano Pavarotti, left, was heckled during his first performance there in five years.
The 57-year-old tenor made two mistakes in the lead role of Verdi's Don Carlos.
Why the Queen Mother is still head of The Firm
Isla Whitcroft
THE row over whether the Queen Mother will attend Princess Anne's wedding on Saturday has at least clarified one point.
At 92, ‘the nation's grandmother’ still considers herself head of the family firm.
And for good or ill, once she makes up her mind nobody tells her what to do — not even the Queen.
The troubled Royal Family desperately needs a show of unity — an occasion, however low-key, to remind us of its importance.
So even if the Queen had disapproved of her daughter's remarriage, she would not have risked a national outcry by snubbing the wedding.
Yet the Queen Mum has made it quite clear that she will decide for herself.
And in doing so she has proved herself a mightier force than the Palace propaganda machine, which suggested that she might not attend because she was too old and frail to make the long journey to Crathie Church.
Last night her private secretary, Sir Martin Gilliat said she was perfectly healthy but claimed she had ‘other engagements’.
If this is the case, and reports that the Queen Mother has reservations about attending the marriage of a divorced woman are false, courtiers will have tried to make her change her mind.
But whether or not the Queen Mother is out of step with public opinion on divorce, she has made it clear no one will tell her how to behave.
‘Behind the gentle smiles and the cheery waves she is an utterly determined woman who does not give up her grip on her family easily,’ says royal-watcher Margaret Holder.
The Queen Mother's power can partly be explained historically.
When her husband, King George VI, inherited the throne in 1936 from Edward VIII the monarchy was in crisis.
Edward's affair and subsequent marriage to divorced Mrs Simpson had left the family's popularity at an all-time low.
George VI, a shy man, was terrified of his new position and many feared that the monarchy would not survive into the next decade.
But the shrewd and hard-working daughter of the 14th Earl of Glamis turned the dire situation completely on its head.
She made the country love her.
‘The Queen Mother invented royal public relations,’ says Margaret Holder.
‘All those cosy pictures of the family around the fire, all that stiff upper lip during the war — and now she is determined not to see all her work go down the drain.’
The Queen Mother is also a shrewd judge of character who makes it her business to keep an eye on new members of the family and, if necessary, step in to protect her beloved ‘firm’.
Like all great survivors, she has a ruthless streak.
She coldly snubbed the Duke and Duchess of Windsor for years, and it was revealed recently that she failed to visit two cousins who had been committed to mental institutions.
Her granddaughter Princess Anne has not been spared, and neither was her own daughter.
When Princess Margaret told her mother she wished to marry Group Captain Townsend, she was outraged.
She could not believe her own daughter would even consider marrying a divorcee — and sure enough, the romance was called off.
The official line was that The Queen had advised her sister against the union — the real truth was the Queen Mother had once again made her wishes known and her daughters had rushed to obey her.
‘The Queen Mother has put the image of the Royal Family before every other consideration,’ says Margaret Holder, ‘but her family has paid a price.’
Her manipulation of royal power did not diminish as the Queen Mother grew into old age.
She was the first witness to some of the most distressing scenes between the Prince and Princess of Wales, and was determined that the same mistakes would not be repeated when another newcomer joined the firm.
For months the Duchess of York was a daily visitor to Clarence House, where the Queen Mother tried to instil a sense of duty into her.
Of all the Royal Family, it is the Queen Mother who has felt most let down by Fergie's behaviour.
She has always relied on instinct, and for 55 years it has served her well.
That same instinct has prompted her to dissociate herself from her granddaughter's second wedding.
Whether or not she has finally lost touch with the sympathies of her daughter's subjects, only time will tell.
Suzie to stay with Lineker
By Tim Satchell
ACTRESS Suzie Aitchison, daughter of June Whitfield, is to keep her part in the play An Evening With Gary Lineker, when it goes on tour in February with an otherwise entirely new cast.
Other parts will be played by Samantha Beckinsale, Tom Watt, Floyd Bevan and Nick Conway.
‘The cast change should keep it fresh,’ says Miss Aitchison, 30.
‘And we are going all over the place.
Then after four months I will have a long holiday.’
Meanwhile, Miss Aitchison's mother is in pantomime in Cardiff performing alongside Roy Hudd in Babes In The Wood.
Miss Whitfield, 65, can currently be seen in BBC2's Absolutely Fabulous and also in Terry and June being shown on UK Gold.
Miss Aitchison will be going to Cardiff for Christmas to join her mother and father, chartered surveyor Tim Aitchison.
She says: ‘It will be interesting to see what people who spend Christmas in a hotel are like.’
She is currently looking after her mother's dog, Rabbit, a cross between a Jack Russell and a Tibetan terrier.
Roxburghe branches out
By Tim Satchell
THE Duke of Roxburghe is to be presented with a splendid new £3,500 desk made from timber on his Roxburghshire estate, Floors Castle.
The desk — one of a limited edition of 250 — has been made from the last commercially viable elm wood left in Britain.
‘To all intents and purposes elm is finished as a commercial product in this country after the ravages of Dutch elm disease,’ Lucia Ercolani, whose company Ercol Furniture is manufacturing the desks, tells me.
‘We discovered there were elms which we could use on the Floors Estate and so the Duke agreed to sell them to us.’
Each desk comes complete with a brass plaque, a signed letter of authenticity from the duke and a brochure extolling the virtues of Floors Castle.
The 60,000-acre estate is home to the duke, 37, and his second wife, former interior designer Virginia Wynne-Williams.
His first wife Jane, sister of Britain's richest man, the Duke of Westminster, lives nearby with their three children Lady Rosanagh, 13, Lord Beaumont, 11, and Lord Edward who is eight.
Winner's snap covers years of Gielgud's life
By Tim Satchell
FILM director Michael Winner has lent his photographic talent to help Sir John Gielgud publish the third volume of his autobiography.
Veteran actor Sir John did not have a suitable photograph of himself to adorn the cover of Backward Glances, the concluding volume of an autobiographical trilogy begun in 1939 and due for paperback publication in the New Year.
Mr Winner did have such a picture.
He had snapped his old friend in the garden of the 88-year-old thespian's country home, South Pavilion, in Oxfordshire, several years ago.
‘Johnny rang me and he said my photograph was awfully good and could he use it for the front cover of Backward Glances,’ Mr Winner tells me.
‘He was delighted when I said yes.
Perhaps this is the beginning of a new career for me: Karsh of Kensington.
Maybe I will get offers to do weddings and bar mitzvahs.
They would all be gratefully received.’
Mr Winner, most of whose efforts with the camera thus far have been studies of his girlfriend, actress Jenny Seagrove, was paid £200 by the book's publishers for his Gielgud picture.
Sir John's voice, meanwhile, is currently being heard in a stage version of Charles Dickens's A Christmas Carol which opened in Los Angeles yesterday.
He has recorded the narration for the production.
Arty party for Kilroy
By Tim Satchell
BBC TV presenter Robert Kilroy Silk is holding his Christmas party tomorrow night in Roy Miles's Art Gallery in Mayfair, cheerier surroundings than his Teddington studios.
Guests expected include Britt Ekland, solicitor Sir David Napley and Education Secretary John Patten.
‘I love Jan, Robert's wife,’ says Mr Miles, who has a collection of Chinese paintings priced from £300.
He now opens on Sundays.
‘It's to escape the traffic wardens who are paid on commission,’ he says.
And…
By Tim Satchell
A traveller in Scotland went into a pub and asked for a pint of bitter.
‘That'll be 2p,’ said the landlord.
‘2p?’
‘Yes, it's our centenary and we are charging the prices we charged a hundred years ago.’
‘That's wonderful,’ said the man, but then he saw four Scots sitting at a table without a drink.
‘What are they doing?’ he said to the landlord.
‘Och, they're waiting for Happy Hour.’
Sophie asks me every day when mummy is coming home.
I can't bring myself to tell her that she's dead
Olga Craig
TIM Godwin's wife Julie had left for her South African holiday barely hours earlier and already he was missing her badly.
Then he found a little card under his pillow.
‘It was from Julie, one of those soppy little things couples leave for each other,’ Tim says.
‘It had two teddies on the front and the printed words: ‘You are never far apart from someone you love’.’
Inside Julie had written: ‘I am really going to miss you.
I wish we could share the experience of the next week.
I can't wait for us to be together.’
But Tim and Julie will never be together again.
Days after finding the card which promised so much happiness for the future, Tim learned that his wife and her best friend Elizabeth Over had been beaten and knifed to death, their bodies mutilated.
Their bodies were later found washed up on a northern Natal beach close to the Mozambique border.
In one shocking instant Tim, 32, had become a widower, and his 23-month-old daughter Sophie motherless.
Nine days later he still hasn't been able to tell her.
‘What can you tell a little girl of Sophie's age?’ he asks.
‘I've told her mummy is away travelling with Lizzie.
But every day now she is asking where mummy is.
‘I took her to a little friend's birthday party yesterday — life when you're almost two has to go on as near to normal as we can make it.
But I heard her friend Ben ask: ‘Where's Julie?
Where's your mummy?’
‘Sophie said nothing for a minute and then she said: ‘On a plane to see Lizzie’.’
Tim and Sophie had been due to fly out to meet Julie and Elizabeth within a few days.
‘I just wish, I just wish I could have been there,’ he blurts out.
‘But I was 8,000 miles away.’
Tim knows the if-onlys are pointless.
Right now the practicalities of organising Julie's funeral at the church where their daughter was christened keep him going.
But he can't repress a shudder as he recalls the day he learned of his wife's death, at first being told that she had drowned.
‘Because we were having work done on our house, Sophie and I were staying in a rented place and it didn't have a phone.
‘It was about 5.30pm, pouring with rain outside and I was making Sophie's tea when a preacher came to the door and broke the news, but like everyone in that situation you just don't believe it.
‘How could Julie and Elizabeth have drowned, I thought.
Julie could have swum all the way home from South Africa, she had so much stamina in the water.
All I knew at that stage was that the girls had drowned in a sailing accident.
I had a mobile phone but I couldn't get any international calls.’
So Tim ran though the driving rain to find a phone.
In his wake trailed the baptist preacher, his words of comfort drifting off in the wind.
‘I ran for ages.
It wouldn't be true, I thought.
But it was true.
And it's still true.’
Tim found out the appalling details of his wife's killing when he finally got through to Elizabeth's fiance Cuan Cronje.
As we talk Tim unlocks the door to Julie's office at the couple's marketing consultancy company, Ranzau, in Milton Keynes.
There's no doubt who was the driving force behind their stunning business success.
It was Julie who had the sharper, more ambitious business mind and Tim is proud that it should have been so.
Her talents and determination in building up a company, and her love for her family are among Tim's most cherised memories.
On her office desk sits a picture of mother and daughter laughing together as they stroll through the Lake District.
‘See how tidy, how organised it all is,’ Tim says, opening drawers to reveal Julie's neatly labelled folders.
‘That was Julie — really organised.
Do you know when she left on that trip she left behind a list of about 28 things I was to do.
And she went round to friends telling them to get me organised when she was away.
‘She and Elizabeth, they were just so talented and so go-getting.
They were like that from the first time I met them.’
Tim and Julie met 11 years ago in Bath where she was training to be a teacher and he was starting out as a trainee accountant.
‘I met them at the same time,’ Tim recalls.
Laughing, he adds: ‘I spent the evening chatting up Elizabeth and then asked Julie out.’
Julie and Tim fell in love and before long Julie's best friend Elizabeth became Tim's close friend too.
‘Things always happened around Julie and Elizabeth,’ he says.
Eventually Tim, Julie and Elizabeth and two other girls all moved into a shared house.
‘I'd come home and find things like the kitchen practically blown apart because the girls had put a tinned steak and kidney pudding in the oven and forgotten to take its lid off,’ he laughs.
Julie and Tim married in August 1984 and later Julie, deciding teaching was too tame, set up an import and export business and then became a marketing consultant promoting boysenberries, a New Zealand soft fruit.
It was a best seller.
Several successes under her belt, she diversified again and began marketing for information technology companies.
Along the way she found the time to set up Ranzau, and in March this year the couple ploughed their capital into beefing it up.
As always, Julie was the driving force.
She wasn't overly interested in showy, materialistic status symbols but she did buy one — her open-topped Mazda car with its distinctive JLG number plate for Julie Louise Godwin.
‘She only bought it in October and she had me wash it every Saturday since,’ says Tim fingering the glossy body of the car he now drives.
‘The first time she went out in it she came back into the house giggling that she'd driven through town with the top down, even though it was freezing.
And she'd got five wolf whistles.
‘She said she felt like someone out of Dynasty.
I knew exactly the accessories she'd want.
The Ray-Bans and all that, I was getting it all for her for Christmas.’
Tim's voice trails away.
He is not looking forward to Christmas and Sophie's second birthday on January 15.
‘The family will all get together, trying hard for Sophie's sake,’ he says.
‘The way she died,’ he repeats twice as we talk of Julie's murder.
‘I just hope it was quick and that they didn't suffer…’
Tim can't go any further with that line of thought.
Yesterday he went into the office for the first time.
He is conscious that his wife would not want him to let slide everything she worked so hard to achieve.
‘Julie was a loving mother and we both wanted more children but her career was very, very important to her and it's important to me that people know just what a clever woman she was.’
He now has the heart-breaking task of bringing her body home.
‘I will go to South Africa at some stage because I want to arrange a foundation or some sort of memorial to Julie and Elizabeth.’
Then his mind drifts back to more personal matters.
‘All her jewellery was taken,’ he says softly, ‘except for her five-diamond engagement ring, her sapphire and diamond eternity ring and her wedding ring.
It was beautiful, an antique that we picked up at a flea market in Bath.
I know she would want Sophie to have those.’
His voice suddenly stern, Tim goes on: ‘They weren't two naive young women joy-riding round the world.
They read all about South Africa, its politics and its people.
And all this talk about topless sunbathing and stuff, it's sickening.’
He feels some of what has been written about Julie tarnishes her image.
She was a loving wife and mother and an exceptional career woman, and Tim wants everyone to know that.
His friends already know there couldn't have been two closer pals than Julie and Elizabeth.
‘They adored each other,’ says one sadly.
‘Julie used to say that if anything happened to her she wished Tim would share his life with Elizabeth.
‘She could never have dreamed that they would both be lost.’
Christmas Cook Books
MANY people spend more time worrying about how they are going to cope with catering for Christmas than they do actually cooking the bird and all the trimmings.
But this year a number of books have been produced to help you cope.
For the real enthusiast who wants to know why we cook what we do, as well as how to do it, Paul Levy's FEAST OF CHRISTMAS (Kyle Cathie, £9.99) is the answer.
Produced to accompany his Channel 4 television series, Paul's work reveals a wealth of obscure facts — such as Christmas pudding used to be served as a liquid broth, and turkeys are immensely fond of stinging nettles.
There are some good off-beat recipes too.
For those who don't want to eat meat, there is Rose Elliot's VEGETARIAN CHRISTMAS (HarperCollins, £14.99).
A big, glossy hardback with lavish colour pictures, it is handsome enough but now that so many general cookbooks include first-class vegetarian recipes it seems an expensive extra.
Much better value at £1.95 is chatty TV cook Glynn Christian's TRADITIONAL CHRISTMAS COOKING, produced for Sainsbury.
It is full of good, down-to-earth advice about how to tackle your turkey.
It also has some nice original variations on the Christmas theme such as mincemeat crackers made with filo pastry, and pilgrim's pudding — an American alternative to Christmas pudding.
This is the perfect stocking filler.
Although not new, DELIA SMITH'S CHRISTMAS (BBC, Books, £12.95) is just the gift for anyone who has never coped with Christmas before.
With simple-to-follow, step-by-step instructions, Delia holds your hand through every stage of the ordeal.
Prue's Christmas treats
Fiona Beckett
AHOMELY smell of baking gingerbread fills the kitchen of Caroline Waldegrave's London home.
Apron on, sleeves rolled up, she and the children are busy baking their own decorations for the Christmas tree.
Despite juggling a high-powered job as principal of Prue Leith's cookery school with the demands of being a mother-of-four and the wife of Citizens' Charter Minister William Waldegrave, Caroline still finds time for a traditional Christmas.
Now she and her colleagues, Fiona Burrell and cookery writer Prue Leith, have assembled a guide to getting through the festive season, entitled Leith's Complete Christmas (Bloomsbury, £14.99).
Caroline is a strong believer in keeping Christmas rituals going.
The children, Katie, 12, Liza, nine, Jamie, eight, and four-year-old Harriet, help with the cooking, stirring the cake mixture and putting 5p pieces in the pudding.
As a professional cook, Caroline finds the Christmas meal plain sailing — but she knows it's a task which sends many people into a flap.
Her advice is to try and treat it as a normal meal.
‘It's really just like a Sunday roast with a bit of cranberry sauce and brandy butter thrown in — and you can make those beforehand.
‘It's best to make yourself a timetable for Christmas Day, then you know what to do and it cheers you up as you cross things off.’
Caroline is also well aware of the huge dent that Christmas can make in the family budget.
‘People often make the mistake of buying far too big a turkey,’ she says.
‘You only need a pound a head.
A 10lb turkey will easily feed 10 people with leftovers to spare.
‘It's sensible to make use of seasonal produce.
Root vegetables, for instance, are very cheap and can be made into purees and soups.
‘We've included a lot of ideas in the book for using up leftovers — not just the turkey but odd lumps of cheese or tired bits of fruit.’
She adds: ‘Even if you feel at times that you can't face the extra work in the kitchen that Christmas seems to involve, it's worth making the extra effort once a year.
When the time comes you're always glad you did.’
Here are some of Caroline's Christmas tips, followed by some mouthwatering festive recipes:
BUY yourself a plastic bulb baster to get rid of the grease on your gravy.
Just tip the turkey juices into a glass jug while you leave the turkey to rest.
Then skim off the fat, pour the juices back into the roasting tin and bubble them up.
TO speed up carving, cut one side of the breast off and slice it up beforehand.
Then carry the bird in uncut side first so it still looks like a whole turkey.
SAVE yourself a steam-filled kitchen and the risk of pans boiling dry by microwaving your Christmas pudding.
It works perfectly well.
IF you're nervous about icing the cake, decorate it with glazed dried fruits instead — or buy some ready-made fondant icing and pipe it over, then decorate with silver balls.
DON'T leave your cooked turkey lying around for too long.
Once it's cooled, remove any stuffing, strip leftover meat from the bones and refrigerate it.
Then you can boil up the carcass for a turkey soup or stock.
RECIPES
Old-Fashioned Gingerbread
THIS can be cut into small festive shapes and used for Christmas tree decorations.
Simply cut a hole in the baked biscuits while they are still hot, leave to cool on a wire rack, then thread with ribbons and tie to the tree.
12oz plain flour, 1tsp baking powder, 1 tsp salt, 1 tsp grated nutmeg, 1tsp ground cloves, 2 tsp ground cinnamon, 2 tsp ground ginger, 8oz butter, 8oz caster sugar, 60z dark brown sugar, 2 beaten eggs.
METHOD: Set the oven to 180C/350F/Gas 4.
Sift flour, baking powder, salt and spices into a large bowl.
Melt butter in a pan, add caster sugar and dark brown sugar, mix and allow to cool.
Add eggs.
Make a well in the dry ingredients and gradually add butter and sugar mixture.
Place in refrigerator until completely cold.
Cut into four pieces and roll each one to the thickness of a pound coin.
Stamp into different shapes, place on a greased baking sheet and bake in batches in the pre-heated oven for about 10 minutes.
Warm Turkey Salad (Serves 4)
12oz cooked turkey, salad leaves (eg gem lettuce), 4oz baby sweetcorn, 4oz broccoli, salt and pepper, sunflower oil, 4oz chestnut mushrooms, 1 bunch chopped chives, 4 tbsp walnut oil, 1 tbsp balsamic vinegar.
METHOD: Break turkey into large bite-sized pieces.
Put salad leaves into a large salad bowl.
Cook sweetcorn and broccoli in a small amount of salted boiling water.
Meanwhile fry mushrooms, then add turkey and warm through.
Drain sweetcorn and broccoli and transfer all ingredients to the salad bowl.
Toss together, season and serve.
Tired Fruit Ice Cream (Serves 6)
THIS can be made with whatever tired-looking soft fruit you have left in your fruit bowl.
This basic recipe can be adapted by adding grated lemon or orange rind, or four pieces of chopped stem ginger just before freezing.
2oz granulated sugar, ¼ pint water, 1lb prepared fruit such as peeled bananas and kiwis, 4 egg yolks, 1 pint lightly whipped double cream.
METHOD: Put sugar and water into a small, heavy pan and dissolve over a gentle heat.
Boil for three minutes.
Remove from heat and cool for one minute.
Process prepared fruit in a liquidiser to a fine puree.
Put egg yolks into a large bowl and whisk lightly.
Pour on the warm sugar syrup and continue to whisk until well mixed.
Fold in fruit puree and cream.
Taste and add extra flavouring such as citrus rind or ginger as required.
Freeze.
When the ice cream is half-frozen, whisk again and freeze again.
Remove from freezer 30 minutes before eating and scoop into a glass bowl.
Fruit Topping
THIS makes a pretty and less fiddly alternative to icing on your Christmas cake.
12oz mixed dried fruit and nuts, 12oz apricot jam.
METHOD: Put the apricot jam in a pan with 15ml/1 tbsp water.
Heat to boiling, then push through a sieve.
Allow to cool slightly, then brush top of the cake with apricot glaze.
Arrange fruit and nuts over the top then, using a pastry brush, glaze carefully with apricot glaze.
The glaze will stay shiny for a few days but after a week will begin to lose its gloss, so don't decorate the cake too early.
Bread Sauce (Serves 8)
1 large peeled onion, 12 cloves, 1 pint milk, 2 bay leaves, 10 peppercorns or 1 pinch white pepper, pinch nutmeg, salt, 4oz fresh white breadcrumbs, 4oz butter, 4 tbsp cream (optional).
METHOD: Cut onion in half.
Stick cloves into the onion pieces and put with milk and bay leaves into a saucepan.
Add the peppercorns, nutmeg and a good pinch of salt.
Leave to stand for 30 minutes, then bring to the boil very slowly.
Take the milk from the heat and strain on to the breadcrumbs.
Butter and cream are optional.
Mix and return to saucepan.
Reheat the sauce carefully without boiling.
If it is too thick, beat in some more hot milk.
It should be creamy.
Supermarket Round-up
SAFEWAY bargains this week include large honeydew melons at £1.29 (a 20p saving).
Cocktail prawns (450g) and thin-cut ham (454g) are both £1 cheaper at £2.99 and six Mr Kipling Country Slices, worth 83p, are free with 80 Brooke Bond PG Tips Tea Bags (£1.54).
SHOPPERS at Iceland can save £1 on 400g of North Atlantic prawns (£2.99).
Boneless chicken breasts are £3.99 for 2lb (instead of £4.99) and Great American Pizzas are £1.99 (a 60p reduction).
SCOTTISH salmon steaks are down £1 to £3.99 for 3lb at Asda.
Honey-roast turkey is 80p cheaper at £3.16 per lb, and KP Hula Hoops are £1.29 instead of £1.49 for a 10 pack.
SAINSBURY has 40 frozen, thin pork sausages at £1.99 instead of £2.39.
Fresh sirloin steaks are 50p cheaper a pound (£4.38), and tomatoes are 49p for 2.5kg (instead of 77p).
Also, Kellogg's Crunchy Nut Cornflakes (750g) are £1.99 instead of £2.45 and baby beetroot is down to 79p from 99p.
Off the Shelf
WAITROSE has new long-life Presse Juices made with single-strength juice rather than the reconstituted concentrates others use.
The range includes grapefruit, orange (each 99p a litre), apple (89p a litre) and tomato (69p a litre).
EACH day Britons munch and dunk three-million McVitie's Rich Tea biscuits.
Now two new varieties have arrived to lure the sweet-toothed.
Chocolate Rich Tea will come in thick plain or real milk chocolate and cost 69p for a 250gr pack.
MARS gets in the festive mood with its Christmas 1992 collection.
Luxury Galaxy Truffle fir cones will be sold singly (25p) or in three-packs (75p).
For party animals, the Twix tape pack includes three twin bars and a cassette of Christmas party music (£1.89).
LOOK out for Asda's new Novelty Christmas Cakes — the larger Father Christmas (£6.89) and smaller snowman (£3.69).
Both are light sponge cakes with jam and vanilla filling, decorated with soft fondant icing.
Cooks' countdown
IF you want to avoid spending the whole of Christmas Day in the kitchen, try following this timetable.
9.15am: Turn on oven.
Stuff turkey and weigh.
For 10-13lb stuffed bird, cook for 3-3¾
hours at 200C/400F/gas 6.
For 13-16lb, cook at that heat for 30 mins then 180C/350F/gas 4 for 3¼-4 hours.
9.30am: Wrap turkey and put in the oven.
10.30am: Lay the table.
11.30am: Part boil the potatoes.
11.45am: Put the potatoes in the oven.
12pm: Steam pudding — keep checking water level.
12.05pm: Put sausages, bacon rolls in oven.
12.40pm: Make the bread sauce.
12.45pm: Check contents of oven.
If cooked put on dishes and replace in turned-off oven.
1pm: Make gravy.
Put on water for sprouts.
Wash and clear up as you go.
Warm plates.
1.15pm: Cook sprouts, reheat the sauce and gravy.
1.30pm: Serve.
2pm: Warm mince pies and rum sauce.
Alsatian attack
I FEEL sorry for the parents of the little boy who had his face ripped open by an alsatian.
I have a six-month-old German shepherd dog but he is under my constant control when there are children around.
If people trained their dogs properly from the start we would not have these problems.
War on violence
THE war on violence will be won only if the world makes a determined effort to stop the flow of arms to trouble spots.
Denise and Jean-Lois Lavergne
EVEN though Robert Doisneau denies Denise and Jean-Lois Lavergne are the Paris lovers in his famous 1950 shot the similarities are too great to be coincidental.
Baby swop story
REGARDING your baby-swop story, how could a mother identify as her own a baby taken from her at birth and not returned until later?
Nicky Piper
IF NICKY Piper (MENSA rating 153) is to out-think Nigel Benn in their bout, he'll need to know more about boxing than he seems to about chess.
The board he's sitting at in your picture has the pieces the wrong way round.
Sheik up British justice
WHY all the fuss over whether or not David Brown would get 50 lashes with a 6ft bamboo cane in Saudi Arabia?
He knew when he went there what might happen if he broke the laws of that country.
And who are we to pass judgment on the Saudis?
In this country we can kill people on the roads and walk free, and rape women and get away with around four years in prison — yet we have the cheek to call the Saudis barbaric.
It is about time we had some real law and order in our own country and made the sentences fit the crime.
Then perhaps we would have the lowest crime rate in the world — instead of Saudi Arabia.
Sheik up British justice
I DON'T agree that putting up armed roadblocks in Britain is giving in to the IRA.
I for one will be happy to be stopped and searched if it is going to help protect us from terrorist bombs.
Milestones
BIRTHDAYS: Actor Kirk Douglas, 74.
Australian statesman Bob Hawke, 63.
Singer Donny Osmond, 35.
ON THIS DAY: In 1960, Coronation Street was first screened.
In 1961, Tanganyika became independent.
In 1980, John Lennon was murdered in Manhattan.
Rich band together to escape home tax
BY NO stretch of the imagination is the new Council Tax fairer than the Community Charge, which at least provided equal treatment.
Restricting property assessments to just eight bands with a top level of, in effect, £320,000 is blatantly in favour of those privileged, wealthy occupiers whose homes have a value of anything between £650,000 to £20 million — and that includes many staunch Tory supporters.
But I can see why the instigator of this new tax was reluctant to have higher bands.
Michael Heseltine has a very fine residence and estate in Oxfordshire.
There should be at least five extra bands taking in properties from at least £650,000 to £20 million and over.
Rich band together to escape home tax
THE Government's Homeswap Scheme is designed to help council and Housing Association tenants exchange properties but so few people seem aware of it that it hardly works.
We want to swap our nice, two-bedroom bungalow near the Essex coast for somewhere nearer Herts or Sussex yet in three years there hasn't been a decent inquiry.
Why have a scheme if it's not publicised?
Rich band together to escape home tax
YOUR writer David Seymour is right to say only a free Press can save democracy, but is there any democracy left to save in Britain?
By refusing a referendum on Maastricht this Government has declared that it has no respect at all for the wishes of the electorate.
Golden touch
HOW many television actors can claim all their series are an unqualified success?
The excellent David Jason can.
Only Fools And Horses, Open All Hours, A Bit Of A Do and Darling Buds Of May were all wonderful.
Now in A Touch Of Frost, David is absolutely superb.?
Gold Blend
SO Gold Blend's glamorous careerwoman, alias Sharon Maughan, has finally got her man after a five-year courtship — if you can call a series of 30-second meetings that.
He might be able to make a decent cup of coffee but I hope for her sake that he is good at washing up afterwards too.
Bosnian refugees
THE letter from F Harrison said that we should accept Bosnian refugees because they have lost their jobs and homes in the conflict.
We have thousands of people in Britain who have lost their jobs and homes and there isn't even a war raging here.
Things you didn't know you didn't know
Graeme Donald
READER Dave Fanti of Folkestone asks why quid, dosh and spondulix mean money.
Quid is the Latin word for ‘what’, and is used in the context of ‘what is necessary’.
Dosh is an Australian blend of dollar and cash, and spondulos is a type of sea shell that was used widely for trade in Africa.
How ‘monkey’ came to mean a sum of £500 is less clear, however.
It is possible that the origin is naval and dates from the 16th Century when ‘sucking the monkey’ described the tapping and topping up of a coconut with rum before the milk mix was sucked from it.
By the 18th Century, ‘monkey’ had come to mean the full five-gallon rum ration that was issued to the mess on a man-of-war.
This could well have caused ‘monkey’ to indicate any lot of five and, by extension, multiples of five such as 500.
TODAY'S Book Of Things You Didn't Know…is now on sale, published by Simon & Schuster for £3.99.
The home alone solution
Stella Bingham
WISH you were here can so easily become ‘wish we'd never gone’ when you arrive home to find that burglars have emptied the tool shed, the pipes have burst and the dog has picked up fleas in the kennels.
One solution is never to leave your home unoccupied again, but if you can't face life without holidays you could pay someone to be there when you aren't.
Homesitters, with 12 years' experience, is probably the longest-running agency in the home-minding field.
It has 460 people on its books — all of them far better qualified than Macaulay Culkin in the hit film Home Alone — who are ready to take up temporary residence anywhere from John O'Groats to Land's End.
‘They are all of retirement age, mature and responsible.
Most are couples but we have some singles as well,’ says director Pauline Sturgeon.
‘They do it because they enjoy meeting people and like a change of scene,’ she says.
‘The sitter is really a family guest.
The client contributes to their food and travelling expenses.’
Security is obviously one of the main reasons for paying someone to homesit.
‘People in isolated situations worry about burglaries and New Age travellers, but those in cities also feel vulnerable.’
For some, peace of mind about their pets is even more important.
‘Clients tell me that they are not worried about their property as long as their pets are all right,’ says William Lewis, managing director of Home & Pet Care.
‘We often get asked to look after elderly pets whose owners are worried that going into kennels may be too big a shock.’
Most sitters are over 60, sensible and probably have pets of their own.
‘We'll take on any pets.
It's more and more common for people to have chickens, ducks and ponies.
We don't have many sitters capable of milking goats but we will provide someone if we can.’
Homesitters also provides pet care.
‘A lot of our sitters like a touch of the Good Life — donning wellies and going out to feed the hens,’ says Pauline.
In the nicest possible way, homesitters are supposed to make themselves at home, watering the plants, unblocking drains and deterring burglars.
Both Homesitters and Home & Pet Care have rules for their employees.
Homesitters must not leave home for longer than three hours in the day and one hour after dark.
Home & Pet Care limits the after-dark period to half an hour but clients can be less restrictive if they choose.
Sitters are most in demand over Christmas and school holidays.
It is wise to book well in advance, although Home & Pet Care will do its best to provide emergency cover at short notice, and Homesitters offers a back-up service if your sitter becomes ill.
7.5,7.5Homesitters charges £15.50 a day plus VAT.
Cats 65p extra a day, dogs more (0296 630730).
Home & Pet Care is £16.50 a day (no VAT) plus £1.50 for dogs, 50p for cats (06998 515).
Glad to be living in the past
FINDING a grand old house to renovate is an ambition cherished by thousands.
Fed up with living in ‘little boxes all the same’, they want to stamp their own personality on an older building and have the chance to lovingly shape a new home exactly as they want.
Demand is so high that there is bound to be plenty of interest in two new properties in need of some tender loving care which have just come on to the market.
One is perfect for the first-time buyer or those seeking a second base, and the other is an ideal family home.
The first, Fourways, is a two-bedroom detached period property with a front garden in need of complete modernisation.
It is situated in Hilcott near Pewsey, Wiltshire.
The asking price is £39,950, and the agents are Allen & Harris.
The second property is a 17th-Century, five-bedroom stone farmhouse in Pickworth near Grantham, Lincolnshire.
It boasts mullioned windows, flagstone floors and open beams.
William H Brown is asking Pounds 85,000.
When buying a house for renovation remember that most people will not be able to do all the work themselves and the extra cost of labour and materials should be added to the asking price.
What will happen to them now?
THE marriage breakdown presents the Queen with the gravest crisis of her 40-year reign.
The best hope for Buckingham Palace must be that the couple can avoid divorce, put their disappointments aside and agree on a distant but reasonably amiable working partnership.
To be reduced to a collection of single-parent families cannot be a future the monarchy relishes.
But in the worst-case scenario, if the heir to the throne cannot hold his marriage together, there could be no throne left for him, or his eldest son, to inherit.
Many questions and consequences flow from today's announcement.
Here are the answers to those questions from leading constitutional experts and legal authorities:
Q What is going to happen now?
A Both will establish separate homes, but constitutionally it has never mattered whether the Prince and Princess of Wales were happy and together or not.
They have long acted independently, rather like managing directors of rival companies.
Q Can the princess still become Queen?
A The Prime Minister has said Yes.
Q What is the position on divorce?
A Only time will tell.
Both may eventually wish to remarry, but the Queen has always insisted on a cooling-off period of at least two years before the start of divorce proceedings.
Q What is the divorce law?
A The law allows any couple to seek a divorce on the grounds of the irretrievable breakdown of marriage once they have been separated for two years.
If one of the parties contests the action, a separation of five years is necessary.
Q Will their separation have to go through the courts?
A Unlikely.
A privately-agreed separation should give both parties what they want and allow them to lead lives apart while remaining Prince and Princess of Wales.
Q How can the princess part from the future king and retain a royal role?
A Separate staffs, households, budgets and agendas are what the princess has long wanted to make her a royal in her own right.
She will need a host of advisers and consultants on finance and protocol.
The princess could receive income from the Duchy of Cornwall which make about Pounds 3 million a year for Prince Charles, who voluntarily surrenders 25 per cent in tax.
Q Will today's announcement and the possibility of divorce have constitutional repercussions?
A Divorce would divide the nation, undermine the monarchy, and damage the Prince and Princess of Wales.
But it would not be a constitutional issue unless perhaps the Prince decided to marry again.
Q Could a divorcee inherit the Crown?
AGeorge I divorced and imprisoned his cousin Sophia before succeeding Queen Anne in 1714.
Brian Hanson, legal adviser to the Church of England's General Synod, said: ‘There is nothing in law that talks about divorce of the sovereign and, therefore, in law there is nothing to prevent a divorcee becoming king.’
Q Who will have custody of Princes William and Harry?
A Both parents.
But in the event of divorce, the question would be complicated.
Princess Margaret and the Princess Royal both retained custody of their children, but the Princess of Wales is the mother of two potential kings.
The boys are expected to go to Eton, spending their holidays with both parents.
Their parents and grandparents will have agreed that William, in particular, must be groomed to inherit his responsibilities as Head of State and the Commonwealth.
The princess will ensure that their upbringing is secure within the Royal family.
That excludes a life in exile.
Q Could Prince Charles marry again?
A He could, but would need the Queen's consent under a 1772 Act.
There is no precedent.
A throne with 1,000 years of history has seen nothing like this before.
Q Could the Princess of Wales marry again?
A She could, but she would almost certainly then forfeit her title of Royal Highness and Princess, and probably any income obtained at the time of the divorce.
Q What would be the status of any children of Prince Charles's second marriage?
A They would take their place in the order of succession after Princes William and Harry and their issue.
A fatal blow to monarchy
THE last time there was a comparable announcement was on December 11, 1936, when Stanley Baldwin told the Commons Edward VIII was abdicating.
Yesterday it fell to John Major to announce that the Prince and Princess of Wales are to separate.
Both those statements were momentous for the Royal Family but the historical impact of Charles and Diana's separation is likely to be greater.
In 1936 a king gave up his throne so he could marry the woman he loved.
In 1992 a future king renounces the wife he no longer loves but says he won't give up the throne.
Buckingham Palace and Downing Street insist that is the end of it.
There will be no divorce and no constitutional implications.
Charles will still sit on the throne and Diana, with whom he will not have lived for years, will be crowned beside him.
Frankly, it just does not ring true.
When Edward abdicated there was an immediate crisis.
Yet by the time George VI and his wife had guided Britain through the war and their daughter had come to the throne, the monarchy seemed stronger than ever.
The Royal Family was a constant in a fast-changing world though it seemed ready to change with the times.
But there was one thing for which it was not prepared — Lady Diana Spencer.
The shy 19-year-old who married the heir to the throne has gone on to shake the British monarchy to its roots.
She has taken on the sophisticated royal machine and beaten it at its own game.
Sensitive
Over the centuries, the monarchy was weakened at times when kings were not liked.
Diana has weakened it by being popular.
She has shown grace, dignity and humanity while those born to the House of Windsor have appeared cold and out-of-touch.
She has never abused her position while appearing determined that her sons will be brought up in the sensitive, caring manner denied to their father.
Both the Palace and Government were quick to blame the Press for the separation.
Presumably they would have preferred the British people to be kept in the dark about the state of the royal marriage as they were about Edward's love for Mrs Simpson.
There are now two questions to be answered: Where does the monarchy go from here?
And where do Charles and Diana go?
Both are as entitled as any other separating couple to find happiness, though it is hard to see how they will find it with a new partner while remaining married to each other.
Certainly both will continue with the public work to which they have dedicated themselves but Diana has indicated that she wants something more fulfilling in her personal life.
How she finds it will remain a source of fascination to the country and the Press, no matter what the pontificating politicians say.
As for where the monarchy goes, that matters more.
The rational view after yesterday's announcement must be that Charles will never become King.
The crown will pass directly to William.
Or, possibly, not pass at all.
Just a few months ago, only the most rabid anti-royalist thought that the monarchy would not go on and on.
Today, the odds are that it will not survive in its present form for more than another generation.
Yesterday's announcement was not just the failure of another marriage.
It was the bell tolling for the end of the British monarchy.
How Di won everything she wanted
Chris Hutchins
IT WAS the granting of her final demand.
When Prime Minister John Major stood up in Parliament yesterday, he was the mere messenger sent at the end of a marital power struggle to announce a victory that belonged to Diana.
John Major's declaration that the Princess of Wales can still be queen despite the failure of her marriage proved Diana's ability to manoeuvre the Royal Family to suit herself.
For years Diana may have been the victim in an evidently loveless marriage, but in the decade since she entered the family as a shy teenager she has learned how to become boss.
While Prince Charles must be relieved to be free of a marriage which had become a sham, he, his family and in the end the British Government have met Diana's terms.
This was the year she finally emerged from her shell to win every round in a public relations battle she was determined should go her way.
In India in February, when Charles attempted to kiss her for the first time in public in four years, Diana defiantly turned away in a clear move to embarrass her husband.
A month later in Egypt she sat forlornly on her own in front of the Pyramids, knowing full well that the media would again sympathise with her lonely vigil.
But the greatest coup of all was engineering publication of her side of the story of her failed marriage.
With enormous skill she manipulated friends and assisted long-time royal watcher Andrew Morton to secure her ticket to freedom.
No one can be in any doubt now that she was pulling the strings behind the royal side show that has preoccupied Britain for the past six months.
But it was Morton's book Diana: Her True Story that revealed the most damning evidence against Charles.
Again and again the book got across Diana's point of view that behind the hallowed institution of the monarchy exists a family incapable of accepting outsiders.
For years Diana suffered their uncaring ways in silence, making herself ill in the process.
The end result, however, was not a woman whose spirit was crushed but one whose incredible inner strength was fashioned by her adversity.
But the spoils are enough to cushion the realisation that she will never be totally free of this marriage.
It became clear last night that the separation agreement was only reached after her demands had been met in full.
During discussions with palace officials and advisers to the Queen, the princess stipulated her key claims.
She retains virtual control of her sons, the eldest of whom firmly remains second in line to the throne.
She will have responsibility for their upbringing, including a say in their future schooling and development.
Friends say that this was the demand she put first and foremost on the list of what she wanted to achieve.
Secondly, she stipulated that she should continue to receive total financial support from the prince for herself and her children — with the right to make her own decisions on how her portion of the allowance should be spent.
She will get the magnificent Kensington Palace home, where she will be free to entertain whoever she wishes in royal splendour.
Some sources believe that Diana may even eventually move into St James's Palace.
And to meet close friends without the attendant royal household staff, an aide is said to have approached top estate agents to secure a discreet flat in the Kensington area.
She would be willing to pay up to £750,000 for it.
Diana went on to demand that she should be allowed to continue as a full member of the Royal Household, free to accept or reject her own official engagements and free to pursue her own special charity interests.
To ensure she and her children are not quietly excluded from the Royal inner circle, she insisted she should be allowed, on State occasions, to join the Prince for official functions such as the Remembrance Day service at the Cenotaph and that, from time to time, she and her children should be official guests at Sandringham and Buckingham Palace.
Perhaps most significant of all, in the weeks prior to yesterday's announcement Diana established a personal powerhouse within the monarchy — her own court.
After spoiling that futile exercise organised by Buckingham Palace last month — the disastrous Korean trip — Diana responded with a cleverly-devised venture of her own.
Her three-day trip to France was the catalyst of all that was and is to come.
For the first time she paraded her new team.
At the core is her sister Lady Sarah McCorquodale, who acted both as her lady-in-waiting and personal assistant.
She in turn was supported by Lieutenant Commander Patrick Jephson, the princess's much-trusted private secretary and confidant.
On the security front Diana has drafted in two of her favourite bodyguards, Detective Inspector Ken Wharfe and Sergeant Dave Sharpe.
To head her media team the princess selected easy-going Australian Geoff Crawford who had never worked for her before but whose loyalty was assured by members of her household.
Expect him to become her Press attache.
Even Sam McKnight, hairdresser to top models, was among the image makers who accompanied her to Paris.
The results were dazzling.
She achieved a success with the French that John Major can only dream of.
If Charles had bothered to watch his wife's stunning performance, he would have seen France's top statesmen fawn in her presence.
Yet Charles still has the power to cheat her of the ultimate prize — her throne.
Despite the Prime Minister's pledge, Diana may never be queen — because Charles may surrender his right to be king.
It is the only card he has left in a game which has so far seen her win every hand.
Why Charles was tipped over the edge
Penny Junor
THE end, when it came, was inevitable.
Charles and Diana could no longer pretend their marriage was working and both knew their only chance of future happiness lay in being honest.
These were the motives that lay behind yesterday's momentous announcement on the end of their marriage, says leading royal biographer Penny Junor.
‘It is jolly sad that it has come to this but I am not surprised,’ she said last night.
‘I am sure that both Prince Charles and Princess Diana will feel a tremendous sense of sadness and of failure too, as they have done for some time.
‘The whole thing had come to a horrible head and a lot of hurt has been suffered by both of them throughout the summer.
‘I would guess they will see this announcement as the end of that, as well as the end of their marriage.
‘It will certainly release a lot of the pressure that has surrounded them and made their personal lives very difficult.
‘Now they can stop pretending and make a clean break and a clean start.
So they will also feel a sense of relief and release.’
In his statement yesterday the Prime Minister emphasised that Charles and Diana are separating and have ‘no plans to divorce’.
The same words were used when Princess Anne's separation from Mark Phillips was announced, and Penny Junor believes that just as Princess Anne eventually divorced so she could remarry, so Prince Charles and Princess Diana will divorce in time.
‘I would be very surprised if this does not lead to divorce,’ says Penny.
‘In many ways I think Prince Charles is a natural bachelor but I can't believe that the princess, who is now 31, will be happy to spend the rest of her life on her own.
You can't expect ordinary people in this situation to live like hermits, and it would be unreasonable to expect Charles and Diana to live like hermits.
‘But I don't think we will ever have a situation where we have a king and an estranged queen who has a live-in lover.
So if Charles is to become king and Diana is to have other relationships, they will have to divorce.’
But will Charles become king?
Or is he more likely to waive his right to succession in favour of Prince William?
Penny Junor does not think this decision has been taken yet but believes that the second option is possible.
‘I expect that the Royal Family will wait to see what happens to both Charles and Diana, and to the Queen.
There is no constitutional or legal reason why Charles should not become king with an estranged wife.
‘But public opinion will be taken into consideration and that may be the deciding factor.
‘As king, Charles would also be head of the Church of England and it is debatable whether the public would want that status to be held by a man with an estranged wife.
‘The coronation ceremony is a religious ceremony.
‘Maybe in 10 years time the public won't mind a man who doesn't live with his wife having such an important religious role.
But I think that could be difficult.
‘I am not entirely certain that Charles will become king.
‘The Queen is in good health and will not hand over to him in the foreseeable future unless her health suddenly deteriorates.
‘But assuming that the Queen's health continues to be good, Prince Charles will be well into middle age himself, and will be very aware that history could repeat itself if he puts William through all those ghastly years of waiting that he has gone through.
‘In 10 or 15 years William will be an adult capable of taking on those responsibilities, and the Royal Family may well feel that is the best option for everybody.’
In the meantime Charles and Diana have brought the charade of their marriage to an end.
They will no longer face public scrutiny of their relationship, and their public appearances will be few.
‘I don't think it will make much difference to their day-to-day lives,’ says Penny.
‘They have been leading separate lives for years now.
Charles has been living at Highgrove and Diana has been based at Kensington Palace.
They have had different offices and different staff.
What this announcement does is put that arrangement on a formal basis.
‘Their relationship may even improve.
And the rest of us will get used to it.’
Book that lit fuse under royal myth
Nicki Pope
THE book which finally blew apart the myth of Charles and Diana's marriage was born in a humble cafe in the London suburb of Ruislip.
Royal author Andrew Morton sat at a table as one of Diana's close friends poured out the truth about the Princess's deep unhappiness.
The revelations in Diana: Her True Story shocked the world when it was published on June 16, 1992.
While there had been much speculation about the state of Diana's marriage, the stories Morton gathered from friends such as Caroline Bartholomew, James Gilbey and Diana's brother Charles were dynamite.
His book, serialised in The Sunday Times, revealed that almost from the early years, the marriage was in trouble.
In early January 1982, her first New Year within the royal family, the pregnant Diana threatened to take her own life and then hurled herself down the stairs at Sandringham.
Four other suicide attempts, including slashing her wrists with a razor blade, were also detailed.
James Gilbey was quoted as saying: ‘They were messages of complete desperation.
Please, please help.’
Further shocks were to come: the reason behind Diana's sometimes gaunt appearance was her battle with the binge-and-vomit eating disorder bulimia, from which she had suffered since the first year of her marriage.
Two days after the serialisation began, Gilbey confirmed that interviews with him were presented ‘fairly and accurately’.
In the following weeks, readers were told that Diana was reconciled to the fact she would remain married to Charles, but that they would lead separate lives.
The storm over the ‘Squidgy’ tapes kept the pressure on their marriage, and the paperback version of Morton's book was published last month with a new chapter which alleged Prince Philip had written a letter to Diana in June.
It was said to be strongly critical of her role in its publication, her relationship with her husband and her role within the Royal Family.
The new, strong-willed princess, who at one time would have crumbled under pressure, was alleged to have fired off a stiff, legalistic reply.
It was written in the stars
‘Full moons are often times of strong emotions and profound yearnings, but when there's an eclipse such responses are evoked in triplicate.
Whether you are in the middle of a relationship crisis or some anxiety-making moves at work it seems you must be prepared to move on.
And that may mean letting go, certainly in the psychological sense.’
That was what TODAY astrologer Penny Thornton uncannily predicted for Cancerian Princess Diana in this newspaper yesterday.
How right she was.
Four years ago Penny — who is Diana's personal astrologer — said Charles was unlikely to become King.
She predicted: ‘Prince Charles is destined to lead a troubled life.
‘In the early 1990s there will be an opportunity to free himself from a role he does not want.’
At the same time Penny said of Diana: ‘If she were to fall in love with someone prepared to go through hell, fire and water — not to mention Royal opposition — for her, she might think about separation.’
Last night Penny forecast more royal problems.
‘If the Queen thinks this year was Annus Horribilis, then next year is going to be Annus Catastrophicus,’ she said.
The fairytale marriage that was doomed from the start
IT WAS meant to be a marriage made in heaven.
He was born to be King and was looking for a princess.
She craved a fairytale wedding followed by a home bursting with children.
But there was never a chance of a happy ending for Princess Diana and Charles.
Their 11-year marriage was to become scandalised by the revelation of the Squidgy tapes and tales of clandestine meetings with Camilla Parker Bowles.
In truth, it was doomed from the very start.
But then, of course, the starry-eyed Lady Diana, besotted and deliriously happy, didn't notice.
‘Are you in love?’
Angela Rippon asked the newly-betrothed Prince of Wales and his bride-to-be.
‘Of course,’ answered Diana impulsively.
Charles saw it differently.
‘Whatever ‘in love’ means’, he added curtly.
Then, when they announced their engagement, love, marriage and a lifetime wedded to the monarchy meant very different things to the future King and Queen.
She was the product of a broken home who wanted romance and a happy family home, even if it was in a palace.
He foresaw a partnership in which he would pursue his sporting and eccentric intellectual interests and keep in close touch with female confidantes.
‘It had a lot stacked against it at the beginning,’ agony aunt Claire Rayner said last night.
‘It was a dynastic marriage designed to fit in with rules and regulations, a political arrangement rather than a personal one.
‘Everyone tried to dress it up as a love match but it wasn't.’
Finally, it ended it as it had began, with a problem of communication.
Between Charles and Diana there was too little, and from their gangs of friends, far too much as they queued up to blame one side or the other.
What began as differing expectations of life soured into a barrage of slanging matches and petty petulances.
Finally, it degenerated into cool dislike.
‘Prince Charles is contemplative and highly educated,’ Claire said.
‘He married a fashion-model type of girl who by her own admission makes no claims to intellect.
‘It is rare for that kind of relationship to work.’
From the start, Charles's austere upbringing forced a wedge between them.
He was weaned on a diet of rigid discipline and duty.
She, by contrast, though affection-starved, was brought up in an easy-going atmosphere.
Their childhoods, like almost everything else about them, were poles apart.
Their first battle began in earnest over the heir own children.
Diana, revealing her iron will, decreed her sons would have a love-filled childhood.
Their age too, was a bigger barrier than either ever thought.
Dire Straits and discos filled him with horror.
She was soon bored with the fishing weekends on the River Dee at Balmoral.
Eventually, Diana decided if life was not to pass her by, she would socialise with her own circle of friends.
She took up with old pals like Carolyn Pride and Kate Menzies.
Former flames James Gilbey and James Hewitt became dinner companions.
It was a move that was to blow up horribly in her face.
Charles was outraged by the intimate Squidgy tapes of Gilbey cooing ‘I love you’ into a portable telephone.
But all the time he himself was carrying his own torch for a lost love.
Back in 1972, he and Camilla Shand found first real love.
But Charles dithered and went off to sea.
Within weeks Camilla was engaged to Guardsman Andrew Parker Bowles.
Devastated, Charles was determined not to lose her love for good.
For almost a decade, the pair have kept their romance alive — he with private phone calls telling her he loved her and she with intimate presents like the pair of cuff-links engraved with the initials of Fred and Gladys, their pet names for each other.
Diana, who dubbed Camilla the Rottweiler, no longer cares.
She has broken free.
‘Whatever the future holds they can't be any worse off,’ Claire said.
‘Prince Charles should have been running an organic farm, with special interests in the arts.
‘Instead he was born into a role that wasn't right for him.
He would be happier with a partner of equal mental capacity and who shares his interests.
‘Diana needs someone sparky who likes to whoop it up a bit.’
Even though she has become Princess of Wales, the price Diana will probably pay is that she never gets to wear a crown.
Not even the British could stomach the sight of the King and Queen arriving at a Coronation in separate carriages.
James Gilbey told Diana on the telephone: ‘I love you Squidgy’.
Close friend James Hewitt was the princess's dinner companion.
Lonely Diana decided to set up her own select circle of trusted courtiers, male and female.
Split puts a final nail in horrible Royal year
THE Queen's 40th anniversary on the throne turned out to be one she christened ‘annus horribilis’— horrible year.
After just three weeks there were signs that 1992 was going to prove difficult.
Charles and Diana were to take centre stage in the drama.
JANUARY
Pictures of the Duchess of York on holiday with Texan bachelor Steve Wyatt are found.
FEBRUARY
The Prince and Princess of Wales tour India where Diana visits the Taj Mahal alone.
MARCH
The Palace announces the Duke and Duchess of York are to separate.
Charles Anson, the Queen's press secretary, tells a reporter ‘the knives are out for Fergie’.
APRIL
The Princess Royal and Captain Mark Phillips are divorced.
MAY
The Duchess of York moves out of her home with Princesses Eugenie and Beatrice.
The Princess of Wales makes a solo visit to Egypt where she is pictured alone in front of the pyramids.
JUNE
Diana: Her True Story by royal watcher Andrew Morton claims the princess feels ‘trapped in a loveless marriage’.
The princess breaks down in tears during a visit to Merseyside.
AUGUST
Publication of intimate photographs of the Duchess of York and her financial adviser John Bryan rocks the annual family gathering at Balmoral.
The Dianagate tape scandal breaks.
Details are published of a telephone conversation between Diana and James Gilbey, in which he calls her ‘Squidgy’.
SEPTEMBER
The Duchess of York weeps at her first public appearance since the publication of the topless photographs.
NOVEMBER
During a four-day visit to Korea, Charles and Diana are dubbed ‘The Glums’, with reports that they are unable to bear one another 's company.
Diana denies allegations of a rift between her and the Queen and Duke of Edinburgh.
The Camillagate tape emerges, alleged to be a recording of an intimate telephone conversation between Charles and Camilla Parker Bowles.
Fire breaks out at Windsor Castle.
Seven state apartments are severely damaged.
The final 100 days during which the Charles and Diana remained living together as man and wife began with reports that the princess was threatening to walk out.
August 31: Reports that Diana will ‘quit as a Royal’ within a month unless she gets a legal separation follow the revelations of the ‘Squidgy’tape.
September 1: The Palace says a letter on Buckingham Palace notepaper, branding the Princess a martyr, is a fake.
September 2: Report says Diana has told close friends that she will ‘leave’ in the autumn.
September 5: Charles has an operation on a torn knee ligament.
September 12: Buckingham Palace dismisses as ‘speculation’ reports that the Queen's lawyers are investigating how Charles and Diana can divorce without affecting the accession to the throne.
October 14: Camilla Parker Bowles attends a thanksgiving service for the 50th anniversary of El Alamein at Westminster Abbey, also attended by Diana.
October 26: Charles and Diana attend the Queen's 40th anniversary gala at Earl's Court.
November 2: They start a tour of Korea.
November 3: A picture of the couple reveals the depth of the rift.
The Queen is said to have persuaded a reluctant Diana to go to Korea.
November 6: Diana denies a rift with the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh.
November 13: In Paris Diana shows she can make successful lone royal tours.
November 17: Diana, launching European Drug Prevention Week, talks of the problems of broken marriages.
November 21: After the Windsor Castle fire Diana packs her possessions from Highgrove for removal to Kensington Palace.
December 7: Charles and Diana attend the Royal Variety Performance.
December 9: Buckingham Palace announces the separation.
Patten's girls head East for noodles of fun
By Tim Satchell
LAURA PATTEN and her older sister Kate are to fly out to Hong Kong on December 20 to help their father, Governor Chris Patten, put aside local problems and enjoy a family Christmas.
Laura, 18, who is currently taking a one-year cookery course at Leith's School of Food and Wine in Kensington, made a big impression at her father's inauguration as Governor of Hong Kong in July when she wore a stunning short navy suit from Jigsaw and large-brimmed straw hat.
Kate, 19, visited the colony in late summer before starting her languages course at Newcastle University.
Alice, 12, the youngest daughter of Mr Patten and his wife Lavender, lives with her parents at Government House, and goes to a local English school.
Laura has been living with family friends Foreign Office minister Tristan Garel-Jones and his wife Catalina and their four daughters and one son.
Mrs Garel-Jones tells me: ‘They leave on the 20th and are looking forward to seeing their parents.’
In Hong Kong Mike Hanson at the Governor's Office says: ‘It will be a traditional family Christmas.’
The sisters will be travelling back on different days.
Kate's university term starts on January 18, and Laura is due at the Leith School, where a one-year course costs £6,280, on January 11.
Trainer's Audrey moves to Bay watch
By Tim Satchell
THE equine star of BBC's Trainer has been sold at Ascot Sales and is to have a new career as a three-day eventer.
Bay gelding Gyminsky earned acclaim playing the roles of both Blacksmith's Boy and Black Deed (in racing circles one horse running under the name of another is known as a ringer).
His co-star, actress Audrey Jenkinson, apprentice jockey Mo in the series, was there to say goodbye to her favourite horse, and to ensure he would go to a good home.
‘If the knackers had bid for him I would have outbid him and kept him myself, I don't care how much it would have cost,’ she says.
‘I wouldn't have slept, not knowing what had happened to him.
I fell in love with him during the two years of filming.
‘He is a lovely horse and such a character.’
In fact Gyminsky was sold for 1,100 guineas to retired Newbury businessman Larry Lambourne and will go eventing, ridden by his daughter Melanie, 28.
‘I've invited Audrey down to see the horse anytime,’ says Mr Lambourne.
‘It's a great shame Trainer has ended.
I have written to the BBC asking them to reconsider and do a third series.
‘It did a lot for the sport and so many people enjoyed it.’
Christie's pillow talk
By Tim Satchell
TONIGHT Julie Christie, 51, makes her debut as a reader on BBC Radio 4's Book At Bedtime when she reads a book of short stories by Fay Weldon.
Miss Christie says: ‘Fay is a wonderful writer and it's a great to be asked to do it.’
She was approached by talking book company chief Clive Stanhope who tells me: ‘I met Julie when she was in rep in the 60s in a comedy called The City Madam — she was marvellous but the play hasn't been performed since.’
And…
By Tim Satchell
DRUNK policeman: Knock, knock.’
‘Who's there?’
‘Irish stew.’
‘Irish stew who?’
‘Irish stew in the name of the law.’
Champagne to Michael Browne of Silverton, Devon.
Shebah Ronay
By Tim Satchell
MODEL turned actress Shebah Ronay, 20-year-old daughter of fashion designer Edina Ronay, has just completed shooting two episodes of the Thames TV series Covington Cross.
It's a medieval family saga and Miss Ronay's co-stars are Cherie Lunghi, Nigel Terry and Ione Skye, daughter of 60s pop singer Donovan.
In the series, for which Thames are currently looking for a buyer, Miss Ronay, pictured above, plays the part of a serving girl.
‘You've got to start somewhere,’ she tells me.
Kisses chart collapse of the royal marriage
Helen Renshaw
IT STARTED with a kiss — the tender rapturous moment the world had held its breath to see.
In a balcony scene worthy of a real-life Romeo and Juliet, Charles and Diana crowned their marriage with a passionate embrace.
And at that moment their mutual adoration seemed beyond question.
Eyes closed, their mouths met in a lingering caress — and all Diana's dreams came true.
She was the girl with everything — fame, riches and most of all the undiluted love of her new husband — or so the world believed.
The kisses that followed chart the gradual disintegration of a fairytale into a horror story.
It took time for the first cracks to appear.
As the couple returned from their honeymoon to Balmoral, romance was still very much alive.
Charles took his bride's hand and tenderly kissed it on the banks of the River Dee.
Diana smiled, her eyes full of delight.
Three years on and passion still appeared to linger.
After a polo match at Cirencester Charles caught Diana's arm and suppressed the flirtatious giggle on her lips with an ardent kiss.
Another three years later the passion had cooled somewhat but genuine affection remained.
Their lips met again as Diana presented Charles with a polo trophy — but it was the kiss of friends rather than lovers.
A year on and yet another polo match.
But by then the world knew that Diana loathed the sport — and suspected she had fallen out of love with Charles.
The lip-to-lip contact had been replaced by a polite peck on the cheek and the royal couple behaved more like acquaintances than lovers.
By February of this year the cracks had turned into a rift which could not be healed.
On a tour of India, Diana turned her face away as Charles forced himself into a stilted show of affection and his kiss turned into an ugly grimace.
Palace officials still did their best to disguise the rift.
But that kiss gave away the truth they had done their best to suppress.
It told a story of an empty and loveless marriage, of dreams shattered and hope vanquished.
It started with a kiss.
Who ever thought it would come to this?
1981 The famous kiss on the balcony of Buckingham Palace on their wedding day showed Charles and Diana in the first flush of romance.
As their lips met, the nation glowed with happiness
1981 Charles warmly presses his lips to Diana's hand in a tender show of affection at Balmoral, shortly after they return from their honeymoon.
Diana's smile of delight is truly radiant.
1984 Passion is clearly still in the air as Charles grips Diana's arm masterfully and suppresses her flirtatious giggles with an ardent kiss on the lips after playing in a Cirencester polo match.
1987 Another polo match, this time at Windsor, but now the passion and flirtatiousness have gone.
Although as Diana presents Charles with a trophy, their kiss is still full of warm affection.
1988 The fact that Diana is bored by Charles's polo obsession is now common knowledge and, significantly, the kiss on the mouth has now been reduced to a mere peck on the cheek.
1992 The extent of the rift between Charles and Diana is made plain to the world on their tour of India as she turns her face away and his attempted kiss turns into nothing but a grimace.
Their days of joy…and years of torment
1981 — AFTER a short engagement in which Charles demands that Diana call him Sir, the marriage takes place on a beautiful summer's day on July 29 with a fairytale ceremony at St Paul's cathederal.
The wedding is seen on TV across the world and Britain celebrates with a national holiday.
The couple fly off for what appears to be an ideal honeymoon in the Mediterranean.
But on their return, Diana is already starting to look thin with evidence of what we now know was bulimia.
On November 5 her pregnancy is officially announced.
1982 — FOUR months' pregnant with William, the future king of England, the Princess crashes down a Sandringham staircase in an alleged suicide attempt.
On June 21 Prince William is born.
In July, looking thin and strained, the Princess is said to be suffering from post-natal depression during the Balmoral holidays.
She returns to London for treatment from a psychotherapist.
Her first royal trip alone is made in September for the funeral of Princess Grace of Monoco.
Being alone is a state she will soon become accustomed to.
1983 — IN the spring the royal couple leave for Australia on Diana's first official tour abroad.
William goes with them, staying on a farm while Diana enchants Australia.
Commentators say she went out to Australia and New Zealand as a girl, and returned as a woman.
Charles becomes increasingly jealous of his wife's popularity.
And despite the tour's success, Diana still harbours deep-rooted fears and anxieties.
She consults astrologer Penny Thornton who tells her ‘One day you will be out, but you will be allowed out as opposed to divorcing.’
1984 — DIANA is pregnant with Prince Harry, and during the summer before his birth the royal couple are said to enjoy some of the happiest times of their marriage.
But Diana is aware of the increasingly close relationship Charles is forging with old flame Camilla Parker Bowles.
It marks the beginning of the end of their marriage.
The fairytale finally ends when Harry is born on September 15.
Charles's reaction is ‘Oh, it's a boy — and he's even got rusty hair.’
Diana is later to tell friends their marriage died on that day.
1985 — WITH the introduction of her fun-loving pal Fergie to the royal family this year, the Princess begins to criticise Charles openly.
By September friends say the Prince has become increasingly ‘lonely and eccentric’.
The couple begin to lead separate lives and for the first time there is public concern over the marriage.
Diana is photographed at a David Bowie concert in leather jeans and accompanied by David Waterhouse, a captain in the Household Cavalry.
She infuriates Charles in December by dancing on stage with Wayne Sleep at the Royal Opera House.
1986 — DURING a skiing trip to Klosters, Fergie and Diana dare to defy royal protocol by fooling around on the slopes in front of the cameras, crashing into each other and giggling like schoolgirls.
Charles is not amused.
During Andrew and Fergie's wedding preparations in June, Charles causes raised eyebrows himself by appearing completely uncaring when Diana faints at the opening of the Expo exhibition in Vancouver.
The Princess's eating habits have become increasingly irrational and people remark on how ‘pencil slim’ she has become.
1987 — THE marriage rift between Charles and Diana becomes increasingly obvious prompting furious speculation in the media about a possible split.
By now Charles has a totally separate set of friends and the couple share few common interests.
The togetherness of the early days has gone.
During the summer, he spends 33 days apart from his wife and family at Balmoral.
On a visit to Portugal, the royal couple attract more attention when they officially stop sharing the same sleeping quarters.
1988 — IN March Prince Charles narrowly escapes death in an avalanche that kills the couple's friend Major Hugh Lindsay.
Diana's reaction to the tragedy teaches her she can cope with a crisis and take control.
She decides to seek medical help for bulimia, the nervous illness that has been dogging her marriage almost from the start.
On Charles's 40th birthday in November, Diana confronts Camilla Parker Bowles for the first time in what ultimately turns into a heated row over her close friendship with the Prince.
1989 — FOLLOWING the avalanche tragedy, Diana becomes increasingly involved in charities and helping others.
She wants to be known as a workhorse and not a clothes horse.
The royal couple are rarely seen together outside official engagements.
In July rumours of a rift are fuelled when the princess spends an evening without her bodyguard, playing bridge with Old Etonian James Gilbey at his London flat.
On New Year's Eve the two are taped having an intimate conversation.
1990 — BY February Charles and Diana have been seen in public together only twice in the previous six months.
Charles breaks his arm on the polo field, incurring Diana's wrath by ignoring medical advice and getting back on to his pony as soon as possible.
To help his recuperation, Charles holidays in the Majorcan sun.
Diana stays at Highgrove and entertains her old friend David Waterhouse for lunch.
Her own increasingly obvious troubles fuel her interest in the marriage guidance group Relate, of which she is a patron.
1991 — IN March the Princess is reported to be a close friend of Life Guards officer Major James Hewitt, and by June Charles's reaction Prince William's playground head injury confirms that the marriage is loveless.
At Great Ormond Street hospital doctors tell the royal couple that William has a depressed fracture which needs an immediate operation.
Charles departs for the opera, leaving a distraught Diana to keep a bedside vigil for two days by herself.
By the end of the year Charles and Diana are sending separate Christmas cards.
1992 — THE Prince tries to kiss his wife in public for the first time in four years on the Indian tour in February.
She turns away.
The bombshell drops in June with the publication of Andrew Morton's book claiming the Princess feels ‘trapped in a loveless marriage’.
She breaks down in public soon afterwards.
During the Royal Family's Balmoral holiday the Squidgy tape scandal breaks.
When the final announcement came yesterday, it was on a winter's day as cold and dull as their marriage had become.
Nicholas Vernage
I HAVE never been as sickened by any criminal as much as I have by Nicholas Vernage, who murdered Sergeant Alan King.
His cruel and callous comments about the murder made me shiver.
He cannot be let out of jail after 25 years.
A life sentence must mean exactly that.
It's time the courts agreed.
John Major and Royal separation
WE were amazed John Major put off his meeting with Jacques Delors just to announce the formal separation of the Prince and Princess of Wales.
This is something we have all known for the past few months.
Surely the meeting with Mr Delors was more important to Britain at this particular time.
Protected animals
I CAN'T believe the reader who claimed animals were better protected than humans.
Has he never heard of vivisection?
Nigel Havers donation
What a wonderful Christmas gesture by Nigel Havers to donate £300 to a woman whose plumber charged her that amount for unblocking a toilet.
I hope the plumber's firm are suitably ashamed of themselves.
Free Press is good news
I AGREE with your article regarding the protection of a free Press in Britain.
The Tories have been in power so long that they have forgotten how to listen, while Labour is still fragmented and inadequate.
That means the only way the public's voice can be heard is through newspapers, radio and television.
Government policies are so short-term that by the time the recession is over, the country's industrial base will have been destroyed, and we could end up with a Third World economy.
Free Press is good news
IT is true that we need a free Press to curb Government excesses, but intruding into people's privacy and using heavy-handed tactics in stories concerning tragedy is to play into the Government's hands.
The Press must exercise self-control so that it can continue to do its vital work.
Thunderbirds could rescue our economy
I AM one of the thousands of parents who have worn out their shoe leather and their patience in a vain search for the Thunderbirds toys made by Matchbox.
Tracy Island is about as easy to locate as Atlantis and all the models except Lady Penelope's pink Rolls seem to have taken flight.
We went through all this a couple of years ago with the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles toys and at first I thought Matchbox must be deliberately creating a shortage to whip up demand.
Now I read in TODAY that the extra supplies are on a slow boat from China and won't arrive until after Christmas.
My question is, why on earth can't Matchbox make these models in Britain?
The answer is probably that workers come a lot cheaper in China, but the money they have saved that way could surely have been doubled in extra sales — not to mention saving on shipping costs — if they had been made in a British factory.
By the time the shops are full of Thunderbirds toys again, the craze will be over — as it was with the Turtles.
But that won't be any consolation on Christmas morning when my kids empty their stockings and find no trace of the Tracys.
I WAS astonished to see in a High Street shoe shop shoes made in China, Spain, and Turkey, with only 25 per cent made in Britain.
The Government should promote a Buy British campaign by cutting business rates and taxes to encourage firms to keep prices down.
WHAT delightful news it is that Leslie Crowther, right, is back on his feet.
As one of the best TV presenters around, he has given pleasure to millions of people and now deserves the best of luck.
And how heartening his recovery must be for the families of other coma victims.
This is a message to them not to give up hope.
Anti drink driving ads
IT'S reassuring to hear that the anti-drink-driving ads are having an impact.
I suppose there will still be people complaining that the ads are too realistic, but if they save lives it's tough if they upset the squeamish.
Such people would be even more distressed if their loved ones were killed.
Pensioners TV licences
YOUR reader P Brown, of Norfolk, believes that pensioners who live in sheltered accommodation pay only £5 for their TV licences.
Well, I live in sheltered accommodation and, believe me, I have to pay the full licence fee.
Milestones
BIRTHDAYS: Actor Kenneth Branagh, 32.
Squash champion Jahangir Khan, 29.
ON THIS DAY: In 1868, Britain's first traffic lights went into use.
In 1902, the Aswan Dam opened.
In 1941, the British battleships Repulse and Prince Of Wales were sunk.
Things you didn't know you didn't know
Graeme Donald
THE phrase ‘come off it’, usually directed at someone believed to be lying, began life in late 19th-Century America as ‘come off the side’.
This was a pool hall expression alluding to a cue ball played with side, or spin, which caused it to behave in a deceptive way.
Long after America had thrown off the yoke of colonial rule, Americans still held such a poor opinion of the perfidious English that such a pool shot was also described as Putting on the English.
This is still heard in America today in both the literal and the metaphorical sense.
Now that relations have improved, some have tried to explain away this usage as being a play on the French ‘angle’, which supposedly sounds like ‘anglais’.
Nice try, but the French have no such word as ‘angle’.
A more recent spin-off, if you like, is the use of ‘spin-doctor’ to describe a manipulator of information.
TODAY'S Book Of Things You Didn't Know…is now on sale, published by Simon & Schuster for £3.99.
Being cruel to be kind is a real killer
Isla Whitcroft
FORMER intelligence agent Albert Martins is a man obsessed with his corrupt wife — and will go to any lengths to protect her from herself.
He was noted for his cruelty during the Vietnam War, while working for the CIA, and is now making a living in the world of international money laundering.
Things go wrong for him in Marc Olden's KRAIT (New English Library, £15.99) when his business partner kidnaps the girlfriend of a man Martins betrayed in Vietnam.
The two are caught up in a desperate race to save their women — knowing that the rescue of one means the destruction of the other.
The main characters are all glorified psychopaths, with little to choose between hero or villain in terms of basic humanity.
But this works in the book's favour.
You can sit back and enjoy the plot without worrying how it is going to turn out for your favourite character — because you won't have one.
Olden is good at capturing the paranoia that taints the minds of the ultra rich, and his chase scenes are well described and exciting.
The only problem I had with the book is that it is hinged on the premise that hardened psychopaths are capable of deep love — somehow that doesn't ring true.
Now is the season to be very merry
Sarah Broadhurst
CHRISTMAS is guaranteed to be full of good cheer with a stocking full of humour from some of Britain's best comedy writers.
Mel and Griff grace the front of a large paperback of their television scripts in Smith And Jones Head to Head (Fontana, £5.99).
Dawn and Jennifer have a slim volume of their TV scripts in A Feast Of French And Saunders (Mandarin, £4.99).
And in The Penguin Book Of Comedy Sketches (£8.99), Simon Brett and Frank Muir introduce a collection of wonderful scripts — from Irene Handl through to Pete and Dud, Alan Bennett and Fry and Laurie.
Perhaps the most irreverent joke book (even worse than the Essex Girls Joke Book of last Christmas) is The Official Ministry Of Fun Joke Book (Grafton, £2.99), which targets celebrities, royalty and the Government among others.
Most of the gags are offensive and cruel but some are very funny indeed.
Among the cleaner, tamer ones is: How do you make a small fortune at Lloyds?
Start with a large one.
Michael Rosen's collection of Rude Rhymes (Signet, £3.99) sent to him over the years by members of the public are rather lavatorial — and that's probably the best place to keep it.
Some are old, familiar ditties with new words, some nice little rhyming couplets, some just plain filthy and some printable here: every little bean must be heard as well as seen.
Another witty idea comes from Roger Planer with his Zen And The Magic Of Roundabout Maintenance,(Fantail, £4.99).
Here the cast of the children's series become embroiled in various adventures, including a cross-Channel trip in which Dougal gets impounded.
The Maxwell Pensioners' fighting fund will receive the publisher's profits from the Robert Maxwell joke book, A Drop in the Ocean (Corgi, £4.99).
The funniest contributions are the cartoons but there are numerous ‘true’ quotes as well as jokes, such as: Did you hear that Robert Maxwell bequeathed his body to medical science?
Medical science is contesting the will.
Various cartoonists' collections are available including Giles, Doonesbury and Steve Bell.
Patrick Wright has produced a tasteful visual study of Worthless Pursuits (Penguin, £5.99) in which subjects such as‘smoking fish’ or ‘buying and trying to sell Old Masters’are beautifully interpreted in wacky drawings.
The Joy of Fax (Gorilla, £3.99) is a wonderful parody of the better-known sex books, illustrated in the ‘Wicked Willie’ style of Gray Jolliffe.
Feminist humour is astutely observed by Jackie Fleming in Never Give Up (Penguin, £4.99), where women always have the last laugh.
While The Official Politically Correct Dictionary And Handbook (Grafton, £4.99) offers amusing definitions such as‘Death: failure to fulfil one's wellness potential’.
Others include ‘Crazy: emotionally different and ‘Book: processed tree carcass’.
Non-sexist correct-speak turns brotherhood into siblinghood and ballboy into ballchild.
So be careful you don't pull the stolen non-human animal fibres (wool) over someone's eyes or use the differently logical (wrong) word this Christmas.
Urban Myths (Virgin, £3.99) is a fun little stocking-filler of more than 200 tall tales that stretch truth to breaking point — like the one about the poodle in the microwave.
Lists of the strange, the incredible, the improbable and the inevitable are always fun and Journolists (Chapmans, £5.99) is probably the best.
Something cat lovers will find irresistible — for surely all proud owners believe their cat to be ultra intelligent — is Melissa Miller's Definitive I.Q. Test for Cats (Signet, £3.99), which includes a couple of tests for the owners too.
And when the celebrations are over have a nice soak in the bath with The Grown Up's First Bath Book (Windrush, £7.99) a plastic book full of puzzles, anagrams and trivia, complete with a felt-tip pen.
How much are you worth?
Louise Bowen
WHEN Norman Lamont wanted to be untied from the scandal of renting his house to a ‘sex therapist’, he signed libel lawyer Peter Carter-Ruck's firm for £240 an hour.
For the same outlay he could have hired 120 childminders at £2 an hour or ten secretaries at £25 an hour.
But, according to Mr Carter-Ruck, his final bill was ‘not unreasonable’.
We took a look at the going hourly rate for a range of trades and services to see how they compared with Mr Carter-Ruck's.
We chose all our services in London — knock ten per cent off to compare with the rest of Britain.
To help you get out of the red you could call on a qualified chartered accountant for between £50 and £60 an hour.
Senior partners, however, command higher fees, according to Jeffrey Rose, who runs an accountancy firm in Jermyn Street, central London.
Should you want to escape reality for a while, £12 would buy you the skills of a trained, uniformed chauffeur for an hour.
The drawback is that your expert driver from the London Limousine Company (SE1) only turns up for a minimum of eight hours — a standard feature of chauffeur hire.
If the Roller breaks down, Rolls-Royce mechanical engineers will charge £44-an-hour labour to fix it.
Should the worst happen and your company becomes one of the thousands going bust every year, London financial experts Coopers and Lybrand say the rate for an insolvency firm to wind up your business ranges from between £130 to £270 a day.
This works out at £16 an hour.
The services of a partner would cost between £33 and £35 an hour.
But if things have got that bad, one way of forgetting your problems would be through the attentions of workers from Angels Escort Agency in Chelsea.
The basic fee for a ‘guaranteed attractive’ woman to be your partner for an evening is £50 an hour.
And chatting — no funny stuff — is the order of play.
But for half that — £25 an hour — you could hire an expert secretary with a range of skills, from copy-typing to letter-writing to faxing.
‘I'm in the wrong job!’ moaned Sara Lineker, head secretary at Chesham Secretarial Services in Regent St.
At home, if the washing machine blows up, M.V. Services in Thamesmead will charge you £23.44 for an hour of a washing machine engineer's time.
The good news is that he charges in 15-minute slots of £5.86, so you don't have to pay for a whole hour if he's only worked five minutes of it.
The bad news is that there is also a one-off, call-out charge of Pounds 29.40, which makes a one-hour job £52.84 — a fairly normal rate for washing machine experts.
If the washing machine floods and damages the house, JPF Clarke builders in Crouch End, North London, work out their day rates by a range of set charges for various craftsmen.
Their electricians come at £18.50 an hour; carpenters are £16.50, and labourers are £14.50 — based on a minimum eight-hour day.
‘That's middling to cheap for London, although a one-man band could be had for as little as £6 an hour.
They don't have the office and staff overheads that I do,’ says firm spokesman Neil Baker.
Self-employed plasterer Clive Jones of Bow, East London, upheld the theory and gave the lie to Harry Enfield's overpaid plasterer character by charging £70 for a minimum of eight hours — £9 an hour.
One parting thought.
Every hour we are paying for the services of the Chancellor of the Exchequer, at an annual salary of £63,047.
Assuming he works five days a week, 52 weeks a year, that works out at £30.30 an hour.
And you couldn't get an escort girl for that…
Call-out service helps Nick tap into fair profit
PLUMBER Mick Clarke uses a ‘falling charge’ system when he comes to sort out your rumbling heating system or dripping tap.
He charges £40 for the first hour and £25 thereafter — which neatly incorporates the call-out fee in the first hour.
‘It's really based on market rates and keeping in touch with other plumbers to see what they are charging,’ says Mick, who is based in Camden, North London.
‘I think I'm pretty good value — you wouldn't get a barrister to come to your house at all hours.
On a freezing, frosty night, no barrister would get out of bed for less than £150.
‘I can't say I've actually worked out penny for penny what my overheads are.
‘But I've got to cover the costs of things like a van, the office, telephones and accountants' fees.
‘Also I do free estimates for people considering installing heating systems, which take about four hours each — including all the paperwork.
‘If these efforts don't result in a firm order, then I've made absolutely nothing.’
Pammy and Charles console each other in Happylands
Charles Rae, Simon Trump and Ian Key
The lady who lives in the cottage called Happylands has put a smile back on the face of her landlord.
Both have been unlucky in love, but have found comfort in each other.
She is attractive 44-year-old brunette Pammy Jane Farquhar and he is Prince Charles, two soulmates who have offered each other a shoulder to cry on.
She is not ‘the other woman’, Pammy Jane said.
‘If I was he would be rather stupid to tuck me up here so close to him.’
The two are just good friends, and close neighbours.
Her cottage is on the prince's 325-acre Highgrove estate in Gloucester, a polo ball's throw away from his own home.
She moved into the four-bedroom Happylands farmhouse with her three daughters before Christmas last year, after her marriage to 47-year-old Captain Ian Farquhar, a close hunting pal of the prince, ended in divorce.
Friends say they have spent hours together discussing their marital problems.
Pammy Jane knows Charles rather better than she does Princess Diana.
‘I've only met the princess once,’ she said.
‘In fact, I shook hands with her.
I don't know her, but I would like to.’
Her first meeting with Charles augured somewhat better for the future.
‘We met then at the local hunt polo match at Down Farm,’ she said.
‘We were a player short and he made up the numbers for us.’
They soon found that polo was not their only common interest.
Since then ‘it would seem people are putting two and two together and coming up with ten,’ Pammy Jane said.
‘It's absolute rubbish to suggest I've been even a confidante while his marriage has been breaking up.’
She is sympathetic about the royal marriage split.
‘I think the announcement of their separation is terribly sad,’ she said.
But the parting has brought some sweet sorrow to her and her landlord.
‘When I first split from my husband the prince said he was terribly sorry, but I didn't reciprocate,’ she said.
‘You just don't do that.
Anyway, their problems then weren't as apparent as they are now.’
Soon Pammy Jane was moving to her new home.
She said: ‘The former leaseholder of the cottage, who is a good friend, asked the Duchy of Cornwall if they would like a new tenant when he moved on.
‘They thought it would be a good idea and he recommended me.
It all fell into place nicely.
‘I'm on a short lease but I've never discussed in personally with the prince at any stage.
‘I'd like to stay on here when it runs out, though, because I think of this as my home now.’
Adjoining the house is a stable block which houses a hunter and three ponies.
They belong to her daughters Emma, 15, Victoria, 13, and Rose, nine, who are weekly boarders at a convent near Lechlade, Glos.
Pammy Jane added: ‘I hope they won't be dragged into this.
‘I just don't know what all the fuss is about.
I've never even been to Highgrove, and that's the truth.
‘I think I'll have to have a few words with whoever has been saying this.
I may have to consult my solicitor.’
Pammy Jane is the daughter of retired businessman Charles Chafer and comes from a wealthy hunting family in Pickering, Yorkshire.
Her former husband is Britain's most distinguished amateur huntsman and Master of the Duke of Beafort's foxhounds.
Captain Farquhar, who farms at Tormarton, near Badminton, Avon, split from his wife towards the end of 1991.
They divorced after 20 years of marriage and he is expected to marry 37-year-old heiress Charlotte Morrison, Britain's second richest woman.
She inherited £40 million from her mother two years ago.
Pammy Jane spent some time with her parents after the split before moving to the Highgrove estate near Tetbury, Glos.
She has ridden all her life with the Bicester and Beufort hunts, which are also great favourites of the prince.
A mutual friend revealed last night: ‘Pammy Jane is very popular and she and the prince are close friends.
‘They are great pals, the prince enjoys her company and he has found her of great help in the recent troubles he has had at home.
‘Pammy Jane is very easy to talk to and they relax in each other 's company.’
But Pammy Jane's father dismissed any suggestion of a special relationship with the prince.
Mr Chafer, 73-year-old former Master of the Derwent Hunt, said: ‘The suggestion is absolute rubbish.
‘My daughter lives near the prince and that is that.
‘She lives on the estate but so do other people.
‘It's a big place and she sometimes sees the prince but there's certainly nothing going on between them.’
Mrs Farquhar's mother Elsie Chafer also dismissed any suggestion that her daughter was having an affair with Prince Charles as ‘absolute nonsense’.
Mrs Chafer, who has been divorced since the late Seventies, said the prince came to Pammy Jane's rescue after the divorce and personally offered to let her use one of his tied cottages.
‘They know each other well and the prince thinks the world of her but their relationship is purely platonic,’ she said.
‘There's no suggestion of a romance at all and she even calls him Sir.
‘This speculation makes me very angry.’
Charles and the Church
THE Bible teaches us how to behave to the sinner that repents, but stays understandably silent on how to deal with the prince who breaks the Church's rules.
That seems to have confused the senior churchmen who spoke out after the separation of the Prince and Princess of Wales was announced.
The Archbishop of York said that Charles's position of Supreme Governor of the Church of England would not be affected by the breakdown of his marriage — not even if he was divorced.
That may be the constitutional position — though no one knows for sure as the situation has not arisen since Henry VIII created the C of E for this purpose — but it is certainly not one which is acceptable.
The British monarch is head of the Church of England.
That is not just a ceremonial position.
If it does not stand as a moral example to the followers of the Church, it counts for nothing.
Had Prince Charles been an innocent party in the breakdown of his marriage, he could still have gone on to take not only the throne but the leadership of the C of E. But he is not.
Although it is no easier to blame either him or Diana completely for the separation than it is with any parting couple, it is beyond doubt that he is principally responsible.
It was his behaviour which led to problems in the marriage.
It was he who refused to change, even when he knew the unhappiness he was causing.
How can he now ever sit at the head of the Church, representing morality and the essential values of love within marriage and devotion to family life?
Maybe he thinks he can.
Maybe the Archbishops think he can.
But the British people certainly don't.
It would be an affront to the fundamental beliefs of many churchgoers and insensitive hypocrisy of the worst kind.
The message would be: Do as I preach, not as I do.
There was a time when people accepted double standards from Church and monarchy.
The events of the past few weeks show that time has long gone.
The British people are not willing to accept a sham royal marriage or a non-taxpaying monarch.
And they will not accept at the head of the established Church a man who was largely responsible for the break-up of his own marriage.
Euro sham
THE Edinburgh summit of European Community nations starts today more in desperation than in hope.
After the disasters of the past few months, a result which would previously have been called disappointing will now be hailed as a triumph.
That won't fool anyone, though.
The reality is that the six months of the British presidency have brought the EC to the brink of crisis.
The most that can be achieved by the summit is to keep the Community from toppling over the edge.
The European Exchange Rate Mechanism is dead.
The Maastricht Treaty is irrelevant.
The frictions between nations and inconsistencies in the Community have been exposed as never before.
What needs to be done is for the leaders who gather in Edinburgh to accept all that and begin to forge the new kind of European Community which is needed.
Unfortunately, there are no indications that will happen.
Instead, there will be attempts to paper over the chasms and put on a united front for the sake of appearances.
The great European ideal is still worthwhile.
But the politicians are looking for it in the wrong direction.
Edinburgh could be the start of something new.
It looks, though, as if it will be another step towards the end of something that has had its day.
Why I believe this will be the death of our monarchy
Eben Black
LABOUR MP Dennis Skinner believes three things will bring down the Royal Family and turn Britain into a republic — tax, television and history.
He proudly declares that he has never met a Royal.
But he has strong views on the monarchy, which he was quick to express in the House of Commons on the announcement of the Prince and Princess of Wales's separation.
Here he spells out why he thinks the British monarchy's days are numbered.
IBELIEVE the Royal Family are destroying themselves.
If I had been one of their advisers when TV came along I would have said: ‘Don't meddle with it.’
For the Royal Family to remain secure they have to remain aloof — I do not believe that is right, but that is what they should have done.
When the monarchy goes, it goes — and it is going.
Once you have destroyed the myth of somebody in a different situation to yourself, it is over.
The moment they step out of the mystery they become ordinary.
And you cannot have ordinary and royal at the same time.
What they decided to do many years ago was what lots of people in public positions do — use the TV to step out into the public gaze.
Before this most people never saw the Royal Family.
Then suddenly they became part of the social background like film stars or professional football players.
TV can pull people up and it can pull them down.
The more people see them the more they see the human frailties.
And that breaks the spell.
They decided to use the media on their terms.
Once they made that decision it was really all over.
MR SKINNER believes the monarchy and the structures built around it are what holds Britain back from what he calls ‘real democracy’.
He insists that they have to go so real equality can be achieved and the class structure ended.
WE should get rid of the monarchy, the House of Lords and the honours system.
They are all part and parcel of the same thing.
If you are a nurse who has saved the lives of five people you get a British Empire medal.
If you are a royal official or a Tory MP you end up with a knighthood.
The whole thing exacerbates the class system in Britain and that is why if you want a classless society — as the Prime Minister claims he does — then you have to act on it, not just talk about it like John Major.
But this is not about personalities.
It is an historical process.
It is not about the behaviour of individual members of the Royal Family.
It goes back to the second world war, really.
People stood shoulder to shoulder, they had to go and fight together.
There is a lot of equality when you are in that position.
That was a watershed.
But then along comes TV.
It has changed most people's lives.
Everybody who is connected with it is changed by it.
You see things you could not see before.
The Royal Family decided to use it.
They stripped away the veneers of mystery.
People can now see them warts and all.
Everybody has frailties.
They were portrayed as somebody above us — and once it was seen they are not, everyone could see they are like the rest of us.
BEFORE the historic decision of the Queen to pay income tax, says Mr Skinner, it was the poll tax which focused public anger against the Royals' wealth.
When Her Majesty decided that she would not pay poll tax, even though it was supposed to be levied on every adult in the country, it changed people's thinking, he says.
She should have said: ‘I am going to pay like everybody else.’
But she didn't.
That was a crucial part of turning the Royal Family into no more than a diversion for the public.
THE Queen might last for a considerable time but people are going to be questioning the role of the monarchy more and more.
A lot of working-class people turn out when the Royals arrive.
But there is not much excitement in people's lives and there is no difference to the reaction to pop stars like Madonna or Michael Jackson.
It is not something peculiar to the Royal Family — people have very humdrum existences and the Royals provide a bit of excitement.
But they have helped to preserve the class system in Britain.
I regard their wealth as obscene.
Buckingham Palace is at one end of the Mall, and at the other end people are sleeping in cardboard boxes.
Personally, I do not think we need an alternative god to look up to.
I do not want a president elected or otherwise.
You should just elect people to Parliament and have collective responsibility.
It is not just a question of the monarchy to me.
It is a question of changing the system so you can start from anywhere in life and represent people democratically.
I have never met or even seen a member of the Royal Family.
I do not believe in patronage even from the Labour front bench.
I believe in democracy and people being elected to a position of power so people can say ‘we have had enough of you’ and chuck you out.
There will be a lot of people in the House of Lords who will be saying to the Queen ‘stand your ground’.
But I think it is all over.
When people talk inanely about a bicycling monarchy, it is ridiculous.
You are not talking about a little state.
You are talking about a country of power, privilege and class.
The Queen is at the top of the pyramid.
The House of Lords is below, and below that all the other hangers on.
As they used to say when I was a kid, people keep to their station.
That has got to change.
We know how Wills and Harry must feel
Jackie Annesley
BROTHERS Steven and Matthew Rivers were almost the same ages as Princes William and Harry when their small world fell apart.
Although it was 12 years ago, both vividly remember the day they learned about their parents' seperation.
‘I was 11 and it's still very clear in my mind.
You never forget something like that,’ says Steven, a 23-year-old supervisor at Heathrow Airport.
‘Dad had taken us shopping and he'd bought us loads of things — extravagant presents that were sort of unnecessary.
On the way back he pulled up on the side of the road and just said mum and him couldn't live together any more.’
Both boys burst into tears, but it was eight-year-old Matthew who took the news the hardest.
‘I remember crying for about half an hour,’ says Matthew, now 20 and working as a bank teller in Kew.
‘Although Steven said he'd heard arguing, I never had so it came as a complete shock.’
Their father made it clear they were not to blame for the situation and today neither recalls feeling guilty.
But the split affected both in different ways.
In a scenario not dissimilar to Prince William's position at Kensington Palace, Steven was told by his father: ‘Now you are the man in the house.’
At only 11 he was burdened with the responsibility of helping his mother cope while trying to support his younger brother.
‘It was quite difficult to handle at that age.
I had to tell Matthew to do things, regardless of what he wanted.
It's probably why we're never really that close.’
Steven's childhood ended the day the split was announced.
In the years that followed, his mother's friends would often comment that he had an old head on young shoulders.
Although he still hoped that one day his dad would turn up on the doorstep, Steven was aware of the reality of the separation.
Matthew wasn't.
‘I always hoped it would sort itself out,’ says Matthew, who became quieter and more introverted after the split.
His teachers became increasingly concerned and one in particular would regularly ask how he was feeling.
‘I just couldn't talk about it.
When she asked me it would almost bring a tear to my eye.’
The finality of the separation became clear two years later when their father and his girlfriend Alison made a suprise announcement one evening at McDonald's.
‘We're getting married,’ they told the boys.
Up until then, neither boy had even been told of their parents' divorce.
Matthew burst into tears and ran out of the restaurant.
‘It just killed all hopes I had.
I remember dad running after me and having a long conversation trying to make me understand.’
Meanwhile Steven was sitting with Alison, politely giving his congratulations.
‘I was very mature and said I was very pleased for them both and that dad really needed a woman to look after him.
But it really killed off any hopes I had too.’
By this time Steven was old enough to come to terms with the divorce, but Matthew still found it difficult.
‘He began getting very rebellious and started hanging around with the wrong crowd, says Steven.
‘Mum was finding it very difficult to cope.
But then something just clicked when he was about 15.
I don't know exactly what it was but he started really working hard at school.
I just thank God it happened.’
The pain of the separation was made more bearable by the fact their father was in constant touch.
Ann Mitchell, author of When Parents Split Up, says children need two types of reassurance when their parents separate.
‘They need information — and parents are usually very bad at telling them exactly what is going on.
Then they need to know they will be able to see the other parent regularly.
‘The sad reality is one in three children never sees the other parent again.’
While both Steven and Matthew feel their parents' divorce was ultimately for the good, it has left Steven, at least, with strong reservations about marriage.
‘I think the only lasting effect it's had on me is that if I get married, it's got to be forever.
I wouldn't dream of putting my kids through what we went through.’
Royal scandalometer
ANNE & MARK
FIRST CRACKS
A ROMANCE which had its origins in a mutual love of equestrian sport culminated in a Westminster Abbey wedding on November 14, 1973.
But there were early reservations about the union which was once described by Barbara Cartland, the romantic novelist, as an ‘historical experiment’, a rare match between a princess and a commoner.
CRISIS
MARK failed to penetrate the Palace's inner circle, and Prince Charles was said to have nicknamed him ‘Fog’ because he was thick and wet.
In 1981 her private detective Sergeant Peter Cross was dimissed for being ‘over-familiar’ with Anne.
The Palace went on to say he had ‘misunderstood the Princess's friendship’.
SEPARATION
IN 1989, love letters written to her by Commander Tim Laurence were stolen and offered to a national newspaper.
Four months later Anne and Mark announced their separation.
Mark has since been accused by New Zealand teacher Heather Tonkin of being the father of her six-year-old daughter, though he has denied paternity.
DIVORCE
THE divorce came through in April of this year but the couple have remained on friendly terms.
The Princess Royal and her two children Peter and Zara live at Gatcombe Park while Mark lives on Aston Farm which is part of the Gloucestershire estate.
She will marry Tim Laurence tomorrow at Crathie Church near Balmoral.
ANDREW & SARAH
FIRST CRACKS
THREE months after their wedding on July 23, 1986 at Westminster Abbey, Andrew and Fergie had a very public lovers' tiff on a visit to open a flood barrier in Holland.
Andrew's job as a Royal Navy helicopter pilot, based in Somerset, meant they spent just 100 days together in their first year and it was a parting that Fergie felt particularly keenly.
CRISIS
IN July, 1990, the first speculation about Fergie's friendship with Texan millionaire Steve Wyatt surfaced in an American newspaper.
They had met eight months before in Houston where she was on a promotional tour for her Budgie books.
In August, however, she and Andrew were billing and cooing about each other in Hello! magazine.
SEPARATION
EARLY this year there were reports of a ‘blazing row’ after Andrew had been shown pictures of his wife with Wyatt on holiday.
On the sixth anniversary of their engagement, the Palace announced they were to separate.
Then came the scandal of Fergie being photographed frolicking topless with her ‘financial adviser’ John Byran in the south of France.
DIVORCE
NEGOTIATING a settlement acceptable to both sides has proved difficult but a divorce is thought to be imminent.
Fergie is understood to have been offered a lump sum and a handsome yearly allowance of around Pounds 150,000 but the sticking point now appears to be the extent of Andrew's access to their two children Beatrice and Eugenie.
CHARLES & DIANA
FIRST CRACKS
CHARLES and Diana married at St Paul's on July 29, 1981.
On their honeymoon, Charles wore a pair of new gold cufflinks inscribed C & C — a present from Camilla Parker Bowles.
When confronted by Diana he said they were a ‘gesture of friendship’.
Their 12-year age gap was also a problem — neither liked the other's circle of friends.
CRISIS
CHARLES'S disappointment at the birth of a second son rather than a daughter marked the beginning of the end.
Arguments were fuelled by Diana's bulimia which produced wild mood swings.
Things came to a head this year when the full extent of Charles's friendship with Camilla Parker Bowles was revealed by royal author Andrew Morton.
SEPARATION
THE news of the separation on Wednesday surprised few people.
The ‘Squidgy Tapes’ scandal was quickly followed by a similar tape of Charles telling Camilla Parker Bowles he loved her.
The couple's feelings about each other increasingly surfaced in public, culminating in an uncomfortable visit to South Korea which left their hosts seething.
DIVORCE
THIS is more complicated for these two than either Anne or Andrew.
While Charles could technically be King and head of the Church of England as a divorced man, it is unlikely.
Diana is determined not to lose the children but, with William as heir to the throne, the Palace is equally adamant that their upbringing is not left in her hands alone.
Oh, I say, a remarkable man
AMONG the most memorable Maskell phrases were:
‘Oh, I say’— used for moments of high drama or controversy.
‘What a peach of a shot’— mainly in applause of great artistry.
‘A dream of a backhand/forehand’— admiration for full-blooded shots.
‘That cross-court angle was so acute it didn't exist’— the occasional hyperbole was always forgiven.
‘Superb’— his stock adjective used to describe great moments.
‘Truly remarkable’— reserved for something extra special.
‘Oh dear’— to express dismay at the less than gentlemanly antics of players.
‘Out of this world’— usually used to describe rallies of high quality.
There were the occasional gaffes, such as:
‘When Martina is tense it helps her to relax’ and ‘A textbook shot there from Nastase — nobody can improvise better.’
Every mother's ideal sons
Jane Moore
THERE was a time when no self-respecting pop star would admit to being a non-smoking teetotaller.
After all, it's not exactly ‘rock'n'roll’, is it?
But Britain's latest ‘fab five’ Take That are proud of the squeaky-clean image that has won the hearts of millions of teenagers — and parents too.
Their latest single Could It Be Magic has shot into the chart at No 9, and earlier this week they were voted Best Band In The World by the all-powerful 11-16 year-old group in the Smash Hits Awards.
What is it about these lads that excites teenagers?
They don't drink, they don't smoke, they don't take drugs, and their last tour was sponsored by the Family Planning Association to promote safe sex.
From Elvis to The Stones to Iron Maiden parents have long been unnerved by the latest outrage on Top Of The Pops.
Now it seems that — after nearly 40 years in which pop has been seen as a threat to our children — it is finally safe to unlock your daughters.
All the boys in Take That are careful with money, three of them still live at home with mum — and their parents make cups of tea for the adoring fans who wait outside their homes.
Take That are Robbie Williams, 18, from Stoke-on-Trent, Gary Barlow, 21, from Cheshire and Mark Owen, 18, Howard Donald, 22, and Jason Orange, 22, all from Manchester.
Ask what their biggest vice is and you get four admitting to bad organisation while Mark says he's ‘a worrier’.
Jason, the breakdancing expert in the group, says: ‘A lot of people have a problem with the fact that we are clean-living with a largely teenage following.
But that's their problem not ours.
‘When I used to watch Bros on the telly and they said they loved their fans, I used to think it was a really naff thing to say.
But now I understand what they meant.’
With five top 40 hits under their belt and a top ten album, you might think Take That are rolling in it.
Not so.
Jason says: ‘Gary's got more money than the rest of us because he gets publishing royalties for the songs he's written, but the rest of us just get a modest wage.’
Accordingly, Gary has bought his own house, while Jason shares with his brother and the other three still live at home with their mums.
And when they stay in hotels they use call boxes in the foyer — to call mummy presumably — rather than the more expensive phones in their rooms.
Spend more than five minutes in their company and you realise that success hasn't affected them.
They are refreshingly free of the ‘attitude’ that makes many bands so tedious to interview.
Their charm is that they are all so different in character — and each Take That fan has their favourite.
Robbie is the joker, Mark is the pretty, constantly smiling one, Gary is the serious-minded musician, Howard is the quiet, romantic one and Jason is the sexiest, as well as being an incorrigible flirt.
But it's ‘little Mark’ who has the most fan mail from adoring teenies who voted him ‘most fanciable male’in the Smash Hits poll.
‘I spent thousands of pounds on stamps to make sure I won,’ he jokes.
‘I suppose they like me because I'm little and they want to look after me.’
Mark gets teased by the others about his height — five feet seven compared to the six-foot frames of the others.
But as soon as he appears upset, they instantly reassure him with ‘only joking mate’.
Although the band formed just three years ago, Take That behave like brothers, and they really do look out for each other.
Gary says: ‘Sometimes it's quite frightening being on the road so much.
You wake up in yet another hotel bed and you don't know what day it is or where you are.
We need each other then.’
Howard warms to the theme.
‘Yeah, I don't know how I'd cope as a solo artist because we're a real support group to each other.
Obviously we do have the occasional minor disagreement, but we never really argue.
That's why it's important to have time off every so often so we can get away from each other for a short while.’
Robbie says: ‘Any problems we do have, we sit down and sort them out straight away because we're in each others pockets all day and every day and it wouldn't do to fall out badly.’
Needless to say, with such a busy schedule none of them has any time for girlfriends.
It's all a far cry from the days when Jason and Howard were on £40 a week YTS schemes, Gary was touring the cabaret circuit, and Robbie and Mark were still wondering what career direction to take.
Jason says: ‘We all try to keep in touch with our old mates as much as possible, but obviously it's difficult because we are on the road so much.
‘Sometimes we have to watch what we say when we go home because we do so many interesting things now that it would seem like we were boasting.
‘Mind you, if they are really good mates you should be able to say what you like and not be judged on it.’
Initially the reaction of many to Take That was that they were just a bunch of pretty boys with no talent.
But their recent tour received rave reviews from the critics.
‘It was important to us to prove that we can actually dance and sing,’ says Howard.
Mark adds: ‘It was a big step for us to sing live, but we did it.
We work very hard to be as good as we are.’
It was after the tour that Take That-mania reached fever pitch and the band were forced to employer a minder — Gerry — to make sure they don't get into any sticky situations.
A recent signing tour of record shops was cancelled by the police because of the volume of fans that was bound to turn up.
Because their climb to success has not been an overnight one, the boys find fame easy to handle.
They don't feel they've been robbed of anonymity.
‘Getting noticed and being hassled is a lot to do with how you conduct yourself when you're out,’ says Mark.
‘Obviously if all five of us went out and walked past a school at home time, we'd be asking for trouble.
But if we go out in twos and look inconspicuous we can get away with it easily.
‘Even our families have got used to the attention because a lot of the fans know where we live.
‘It used to be just a couple of fans outside but there are more now.
My mum and dad deny that they make them a brew, but when I get home there's usually 20 dirty cups outside the door.’
In the current climate Take That can do no wrong, but they are acutely aware that their success may not last forever.
Howard says: ‘If it all stopped tomorrow, we can say we've had a really good time, and that's what matters.
‘We'll have seen parts of the world we would never have had the chance to visit otherwise, and we'll have been a lot luckier than most.’
Billboard Music awards
ACTOR Bruce Willis, above, had a close shave at Hollywood's Billboard Music awards but his severely cropped hair gave him plenty to laugh about.
Singer Billy Ray Cyrus and model Christie Brinkley, below left, went for hands-on-hips poses and Beverly Hills 90210 star Shannen Doherty, below right, managed a smile despite being booed off stage.
U2's Achtung Baby album won five trophies but they stayed home — preferring to celebrate in their favourite Dublin pub instead.
Queen finds time to put Euro art into perspective
By Tim Satchell
BEFORE the Queen hosts the Edinburgh Summit dinner on the Royal Yacht Britannia this evening, she will visit the first exhibition of the European Parliament's art collection, Twelve Stars.
Since 1979 the 12 European Community members have taken it in turn to spend an annual £70,000 on works of art.
Since Britain's year to spend has coincided with its EC presidency, MEP Patricia Rawlings, decided it would be a good idea to put a selection of the parliament's contemporary art on view.
The Art Council's Andrew Wheatley and Miss Rawlings, who with Tate Gallery Director Nick Serota chose the 15 new British acquisitions for the collection, will show the Queen around the exhibition at Edinburgh Castle late this afternoon.
Miss Rawlings, formerly married to Lord Wolfson, tells me: ‘We felt strongly that young artists from all around Britain should be supported, though we also chose pieces of two established artists, Michael Craig-Martin and Boyd Webb, and also a lovely bronze by Kenneth Armitage.’
After the Edinburgh Summit the exhibition, which features both the new works and existing pieces from the collection, is at London's Barbican Centre from December 26 until January 17.
It then moves to Brussels and Milan before returning to its Strasbourg home.
‘Nick Serota and I are lobbying to get a curator for the collection,’ Mr Wheatley tells me.
‘If it simply goes back to the parliament's corridors, lots of hard work will be wasted.’
On December 13 concert goers at the Barbican are to be served with complimentary glasses of the traditional Swedish drink Glogg.
The Swedish embassy says: ‘It is a sort of mulled wine with schnapps and spices like cinnamon and cardamom, plus almonds and raisins.’
And…
By Tim Satchell
Q.Why can't you play cards in the jungle?
A. Its full of cheetahs.
No explanation to hand
By Tim Satchell
THERE is interest in society circles that William Waldegrave, the Cabinet minister responsible for pushing through the Citizens Charter, wears a signet ring on his right (that is to say his wrong) hand.
Mr Waldegrave's constituency agent in Bristol West, Philip Stephenson, says: ‘I don't know why he wears it on his right hand.
He is not left handed.
I wear mine on my right hand as well but then I am odd in all sorts of ways.’
Mr Waldegrave is married to Caroline, head of Leith's School of Food and Wine, which is providing the catering for the Edinburgh Summit.
An old Etonian, Mr Waldegrave, 46, is the younger son of Earl Waldegrave.
One of his sisters is Woman of the Bedchamber to the Queen.
Traditionally a signet ring, with a family crest engraved on it for marking wax seals, was the only jewellery worn by a man.
It was worn on the left hand, so as not to hinder sword play.
The dancer Fred Astaire was among those in modern times who have worn a signet ring on the right hand.
Hoskins to star in The Changeling
By Tim Satchell
COCKNEY actor Bob Hoskins has landed the starring role in BBC television's The Changeling, Thomas Middleton's Jacobean play about thwarted love.
‘Bob accepted The Changeling because he wanted to get his teeth into some really good British heavyweight drama,’ his agent Liz Souissi tells me.
‘Recently he has been working on American films and he was very keen to get back home and work with some of his old mates.
He's a great advocate of British talent.’
Mr Hoskins, 50, lives in North London with his wife, Linda and their two children Rosa, 9, and Jack, who is five.
They spent most of last year in Hollywood.
His latest American film, Walt Disney's The Super Mario Brothers, comes out next year and he has plans for another movie in the States.
The Changeling is being made for BBC 2's Saturday night Performance series.
Filming starts on January 9.
It co-stars Hugh Grant, 31, who made his name in the film of E M Forster's Maurice.
He starred in Bitter Moon and will soon be seen in The Remains of the Day.
Norma Major was spotted yesterday outside the Hard Rock Cafe, off London's Hyde Park Corner, deep in conversation with the Cookie Monster from the TV series Sesame Street.
Mrs Major was with two girlfriends before the chance encounter.
She then tucked into a California club sandwich — grilled marinated chicken, swiss cheese, bacon, lettuce, tomato and mayonnaise, costing £6.95.
The Cookie Monster's colleague, Big Bird, was later seen at Mrs Major's neighbour Mrs Rosemary Lamont for a children's charity event.
3/8.
Sally forecasts a bright future
By Tim Satchell
SALLY Faber, wife of Westbury Tory MP David Faber, has gone back to school to prepare for her new job as a weather girl with the London News Network, the new London television service.
‘I have been doing a meteorology course at the Met Office College in Reading,’ she tells me.
‘And I have exams on December 21.
‘What if I fail?
I'd better not as we are going on air on January 4.’
She will be sharing weather duties with Rianna Scipio.
Mrs Faber, 27, was formerly a sports presenter on Super Channel and the BBC's Ski Sunday.
Daughter of a West Country dentist, she married Mr Faber, 31-year-old grandson of Harold Macmillan, four years ago.
Their son Henry was born just before the General Election.
The right way to sell whisky
By Tim Satchell
THE Adam Smith Institute has produced a batch of its own label Scotch.
This follows success with its Wealth of Nations mead (‘As sweet and as strong as the free market itself’) which was presented to John Major, Chancellor Norman Lamont and Sir Denis Thatcher, as well as bemused visitors from overseas at the Institute's privatisation conferences.
The new offering, from the free market think-tank which already has its own range of frisbees, does not call itself whisky but ‘The Spirit of the Invisible Hand’.
It claims to ‘lead you to an end that was no part of your intention’.
The Scottish economist Adam Smith developed the theory that by pursuing our own self-interest we are led by an invisible hand to serve the interests of others.
Diana's exile in two square miles of London
Jane Moore
SHE loves shopping, he hates it.
She loves gossiping with friends over lunch, he would rather be alone with his thoughts.
So you can see there's precious little chance of Prince Charles and Princess Diana experiencing the nightmare that every separated couple dreads — bumping into each other while out and about.
A close look at their London haunts on our map on the right shows the two have little in common apart from their children.
While Diana has built up an active social life within a two-mile radius of Kensington Palace, the Prince rarely ventures into town and prefers to dine with friends at Highgrove.
Any visits he makes to shops are quick and discreet.
As the map shows, they will continue to be — quite literally — worlds apart.
San Lorenzo set raise a glass to one of their own
Chris Hutchins
IF, AS John Major predicted, the nation was saddened by his announcement about the Prince and Princess of Wales's separation, then the exceptions are Diana's social set.
It was business as usual yesterday at her favourite Italian restaurant — San Lorenzo in Knightsbridge — and there wasn't a sad face in the place.
It was not Diana's day to lunch so they gave me her secluded table from which to view the proceedings.
If tables could talk, I imagine this one would have a few tales to tell for it is here she has enjoyed repasts with such gossipy Sloanes as Carolyn Bartholomew, Kate Menzies and Millie Dunne.
Perhaps more significantly, however, it is where she paid for lunch on a number of occasions with James Gilbey, her swooning suitor of The Squidgy Tapes fame.
Although the proceedings are always enlivened by Diana's presence, no true Lorenzo-goer would ever be caught dead owning up to being in awe of her.
Yesterday, serene as ever, Eric Clapton was there lunching with his photographer pal Terry O'Neill.
Apart from O'Neill's remark that it was ‘sad, so sad’(Terry became the Queen's favourite photographer this year), the pair refused to be judgmental.
Like others on first-name terms with the Princess, they know that this is one of her few safe havens.
Situated close to Harrods and just a few doors along Beauchamp Place from Kanga, the dress shop owned by Prince Charles's confidante Lady Tryon, San Lorenzo has been at the centre of much that has happened around Diana this year.
In the Squidgy tapes, the Princess talked fondly of Mara, who has run the restaurant with her husband Lorenzo Berni for more than two decades.
To this day it is the address to which Diana has her private mail directed and has done ever since she suspected Fergie was visiting the Buckingham Palace post room in order to tell Prince Charles who was writing confidential letters to his wife.
Her hair parted at the centre and scraped back in a pony tail, Mara was there as usual, fussing over her regulars, but still the very soul of discretion.
Such worthy clients as the Lords Hanson and White, the John McEnroes, the Roger Moores, Richard Branson, Jack Nicholson and the entire chorus of supermodels, all enjoy being mothered by Mara.
At 58 she may be younger than some of them but she is the ‘mother confessor’ of Beauchamp Place, seeing all, hearing much but relaying nothing.
Mara never talks about Diana and she was not about to make an exception yesterday.
The deal clearly does not work both ways as we learned from the Squidgy tape (a copy of which was handed to me in that very restaurant some weeks before its contents were published).
In response to her suitor's question —‘How is Mara?’ the next queen, if Mr Major is to believed, told Gilbey: ‘She's all right.
No, she's fine.
She can't wait to get back.’
Others were not inclined to be as sensitive as Mara: ‘I say ‘Good for Di’,’ opined the loudest at a table of women.
‘No names, no pack drill, but I know somebody who works for her and she was saying that Diana will be jolly pleased to have a lump sum to spend instead of having to go to him for her money.
‘Apparently, all her bills — including those from this place — went to the Duchy of Cornwall office where Charles would scrutinise them.
Well, she will have her own budget now.
He won't be able to squeeze her any more — financially, of course.’
Everywhere, the Mediterranean-style restaurant was abuzz with talk of ‘HRH’.
A lady in a sage-coloured dress which displayed the name of its maker, Moschino, on the cuffs seemed especially sympathetic.
Diana, it seems, has no critics within the portals of San L's, as the Sloanes call it, and it is little wonder that Prince Charles has never been seen descending its stairs.
‘Yes, we expect to see Diana back here,’ said an advertising executive I encountered.
‘No one will say a thing about her separation.
That's the way it is around here.’
Yes, that's the way it is at San L — even if the partner you've split with is the next king.
Old age pensions
THE old age pension is set to rise by a meagre £1.98, yet average wages are to increase by £4.50 in line with the cost of living.
I estimate the pension is now worth one-fifth of the average wage.
Is there anyone in Government with a fair mind who will press for a favourable review of the state pension?
Lady Thatcher after dinner speech
SO Lady Thatcher is getting £80,000 for an after-dinner speech.
That must be a comforting thought for a family about to be evicted.
Telephone answering machines
TELEPHONE answering machines should be available free of charge from Telecom in view of the extra revenue they generate in doubling the number of calls.
Hindus and Moslems
IT'S tragic to see Hindus and Moslems clashing.
What a peaceful world it would be if religion could be banished completely.
US in Somalia
HOW typical of the US to turn the landing in Somalia into a media show.
They send in advance troops to scout out the dangers then bathe them in the glare from TV arc lamps.
Ludicrous.
Swiss vote gives us hope
THE Swiss vote against joining the European Economic Area will cheer and encourage millions of people here.
People who want to keep their hard-won independence and who fear being betrayed into union with Europe by treacherous politicians.
No doubt the Euro-fanatics will want the Swiss — with the Danes — to vote again.
How strange it is that the Danish ‘No’ vote does not count, while the narrow French ‘Yes’vote does.
And we are not allowed to vote at all, but you can bet we will be expected to foot the bill when the European dream turns into a nightmare.
Swiss vote gives us hope
AT LONG last we have a newspaper that will speak up for a referendum on Maastricht.
In calling for a vote on European union, TODAY is speaking up for what most of us have wanted for a long time.
Heart drug lottery shames our doctors
REFUSING drugs to a person who needs them is a disgrace to the medical profession — but this is exactly what some heart-care units in opt-out hospitals are doing.
It's shocking that hospitals can deny help to older people, taking age into account when deciding who to admit and who to give anti-clotting drugs.
Until now the medical profession has been one British people can be proud of.
But it seems that these profit-hungry hospitals have found a way of practising legalised euthanasia.
I suppose that it's only when you have the financial means that you get the treatment everyone deserves.
Heart drug lottery shames our doctors
I AM appalled that while people from countries like Bosnia can come to Britain for live-saving operations under the NHS, our own over-50s with heart problems are being refused treatment and drugs.
I don't think needy people from other countries should be deprived of treatment, but surely our citizens should come first — especially as they help fund the NHS.
Heart drug lottery shames our doctors
OLD people who need treatment for heart conditions may just be computer statistics to hospital bosses — but think how important they are to their families and of the contribution they have made to this country.
I know we are in the middle of a recession, but surely there is still room for compassion.
Lovely Lumley
JOANNA Lumley is just wonderful as Jennifer Saunders's airhead friend in the hilarious BBC comedy series Absolutely Fabulous.
Not only does her twitchy, alcohol-guzzling character Patsy curl me up in giggles, but her sexy new look means I'm now glued to the box every Thursday night.
Matchbox
FOURTEEN months ago Matchbox announced that repeats of the TV series Thunderbirds had caught them on the hop and they wouldn't be able to supply any tie-in toys for Christmas 1991.
So what happens?
They're caught out again this year.
What a wasted opportunity.
Cliff Richard
CLIFF Richard is intensely annoying.
For ten months of the year we hear nothing of him, then he releases some nauseating, sentimental ditty aimed at grabbing the Christmas Number One spot.
Why don't the artists who consistently produce good music get that reward?
Milestones
BIRTHDAYS: Actress Anna Carteret, 50.
Singer Jermaine Jackson, 38.
ON THIS DAY: In 1894, the first Motor Show opened in Paris, with nine exhibitors.
In 1936, Edward VII abdicated in favour of George VI.
In 1941, the US declared war on Germany and Italy.
Things you didn't know you didn't know
Graeme Donald
READER Ken Jones asks why the naked are described as being ‘in the altogether’.
The answer lies with the drunken roues of the 17th Century.
In London, the social circle of such characters was known as ‘The Altogethery’, as they stuck together in a social mire of their own making.
A permanent state of booze-induced stupor was considered good form by these people and it was not long before ‘to be altogethery’ meant absolutely blotto.
As a result, overtones of totality came to be attached to the word — for example, he's altogether washed up — and the term still denotes absolute nakedness.
As for the supposedly curative hair of the dog, this stems from the ancient belief that the only cure for an infected dog bite was a poultice of milk, bread and fur from the offending animal.
It makes as much sense as treating burns with a blow torch.
TODAY'S Book Of Things You Didn't Know…is now on sale, published by Simon & Schuster for £3.99.
Special Preview
FORD and Nissan will battle each other in the lucrative sports four-wheel drive market next year — with the same vehicle.
Both the Ford Maverick and its so-far-unnamed Nissan twin will be built at Nissan's Barcelona plant in Spain as the result of a unique joint venture launched three years ago.
Sales of 4 x 4 vehicles have continued to boom despite the recession, and both manufacturers are anxious to cash in by marketing differently badged variants.
Offering car-like comfort but true off-road capability with a high ground clearance so it can drive through mud and water up to 18 inches deep, the Maverick is Ford's first European-built sports utility 4 x 4.
There will be two equally impressive body styles available — a three-door, five-seater short wheelbase, and a five-door, seven-seater long wheelbase model.
There is also a choice of two engines — Nissan's 2.4L four-cylinder 12-valve petrol with 124bhp, or a 2.7L four-cylinder turbo-diesel that offers 100bhp.
Both versions of the Maverick have formidable load-carrying and towing abilities, as well as excellent on-road performance that provides both an impressive ride and good handling.
The short wheelbase model can tow up to 2,300kg, and the longer version can pull as much as 2,580kg.
And the Maverick should also be a good performer in the country — especially on hilly terrain with its capability to climb gradients of up to 39 degrees.
Both the Ford and Nissan models should be on the market in time for summer.
But prices will have to be keen if either vehicle is to take on rivals such as Vauxhall's Frontera, which costs from between £11,957 to £16,150.
The thinking car puts safety first
Russell Bray
CRUISING slowly in the rush hour traffic, you look down at the radio to switch stations and — bang — the car in front stops suddenly and you've run into it.
It is the sort of minor collision that happens every day but it could soon be a thing of the past.
Scientists are now working on a computerised driving system which would automatically keep your car a safe distance behind the vehicle in front and over-ride the driver's controls in the event of an impending accident.
The prototype Safe Driving System by Mazda of Japan is designed to help motorists, as well as reducing fuel consumption and air pollution.
At the heart of the system are two inter-linked computers, one assessing the environment outside the car, the other checking the driver's judgment according to the position of the pedals and information from sensors.
In ‘follow’ mode the system matches the pace of the car in front, guided by cameras on the car roof and laser-operated radar to measure speed and distance.
More advanced still is ‘traffic jam’ mode which maintains a safe speed and distance in stop-and-go traffic.
As in ‘follow’ mode, all the driver has to do is steer.
Audio warnings, such as‘distance too close’ and ‘excess speed’, tell of potentially hazardous situations which might not have been noticed.
If the driver does not respond, a back-up system automatically applies the brakes or makes less engine power available.
Encouraging drivers not to use excess speed in urban environments will save fuel and reduce pollution, says Mazda.
‘The system works with the driver and is programmed to ensure the driver remains in control at all times,’ says a Mazda spokesman.
Other facilities include an LCD screen of traffic messages received via a communications antenna from radio stations and road-side beacons, plus a navigation system with road maps and traffic information.
Mazda is confident a production version of SDS could be available within ten years.
The kids' verdict on Home Alone 2
Jane Moore
THEY laughed and they gasped.
At times they threw their hands up to their faces in true Macaulay Culkin style and almost screamed the roof off.
TODAY's sneak preview of Home Alone 2 was, you could say, a howling success.
Our group of five to 12-year-olds pronounced the film ‘brilliant’ and ‘even better than the first’.
The two-hour spectacular took their breath away, even if its plot was not that far removed from the original.
This time our hero Kevin (Culkin) gets on the wrong plane as he and his family set out for a Christmas break in Miami.
He ends up alone in New York.
But Kevin still has his Dad's bag — and credit card — and he checks in at the ritzy Plaza Hotel before embarking on an hilarious, hair-raising adventure when he runs into the same villains — Joe Pesci and Daniel Stern — who he fought off when he was Home Alone.
If you believe our young fans the secret of the film's success — it broke box office records in the US by grossing £25 million in its first five days — is that it shows a mere kid getting the better of two witless adults.
‘It's like Tom and Jerry,’ said 10-year-old Katie O'Connor.
‘Kevin is like Jerry and the two villains are like Tom.
Kevin is smaller, weaker and in great danger from them but he is smarter and quicker.
‘I like the idea of a child being able to take on two adults and win.’
Many children also related to Kevin as the ‘outsider’ in his family.
‘I feel like the Kevin of my family,’ said Joss French, eight.
‘Everyone picks on me and, like Kevin, I get sent to my room all the time until I'm ready to say sorry.
Why should I say sorry when it's always my brother's fault?’
Many mothers at the preview were worried about the level of violence in the film but the children showed remarkable insight by dismissing it as ‘unrealistic’ and therefore acceptable.
‘You knew all along it wasn't real,’ said William Evans, eight.
‘If it was then Kevin would have killed them with the first bricks he threw and that would have been the end of the film.’
But eight-year-old James Kingston admitted that he wouldn't want his younger brother Henry to see the film.
‘It might give him ideas.’
James, a Macaulay Culkin lookalike, wasn't at all sure that he could have coped on his own in New York.
‘The hotel looked good — particularly the room service — but I don't think I'd want to have gone through the other things that happened to Kevin unless I had 50,000 policeman and 20,000 doctors with me to make sure I was okay.’
Then, raising his hands and giving a piercing shriek, he added: ‘Actually, I think I'd rather like the lead role in Home Alone 3.’
Tearaways steal Wild West Show
Sue Heal
MACAULEY Culkin's Kevin may be a dab hand with a booby trap but when it comes down to straightforward, grimy-faced scallywaggery, there are a couple of Irish lads in Into The West who could give him a run for his money.
Snotty-nosed, wild-haired traveller's children Ossie, played by Ciaran Fitzgerald, and Tito (Ruaidhri Conroy) run riot through the peeling tenements of Dublin, begging on the streets and spitting at campfires.
They are outright scoundrels with winning ways who manage to lift a tale of almost unremitting whimsy into a far grittier realm than its script allows.
Written by Jim (My Left Foot) Sheridan, directed by Mike Newell and starring Gabriel Byrne and his real-life wife Ellen Barkin, Into The West's sterling credentials do not wholly transfer to screen.
Byrne plays the young ragamuffins' father, Papa Riley, a former leader of the travellers who went to pieces when his beloved wife died in childbirth and now subsists on cheap whisky and stale fags in a rundown council flat while his boyos fend for themselves.
Their grandfather Traveller Ward (David Kelly) delights in telling the wide-eyed duo gypsy tales and one day presents them with an untamed white horse, which captures their imagination.
But the horse, named Tir na Og, is one hell of a jumper and is stolen by crooked businessman Noel Hartnett — John Kavanagh — and trained for steeplechasing.
Ossie and Tito steal him back and set off for the wild reaches of western Ireland with Byrne, Kelly and their friend Kathleen (Barkin) in hot pursuit.
This tale of personal resolution is saved from saccharine overkill by Byrne's fine, tortured performance, the children's refusal to be cute and an almost lyrical conjunction of the young boys' hidden feelings of neglect and their father's coming to terms with his bereavement.
Into The West is a nice try that doesn't quite come off.
Some violence and bad language.
TRACES OF RED
AS SOON as I see a screen full of Florida palm fronds, broken down clapboard houses and Cadillacs full of heaving, unhappy women, I know we are in for an Erotic Thriller.
Or as in the case of Traces Of Red, a lukewarm slice of daftness that passes muster as a bra advert.
When nookey is in the offing bosoms do not so much swell as burst over the lace like a pair of dumplings rising to the surface of a casserole pot.
The unlikely stud causing all this hormonal activity is Palm Beach cop Jack Dobson — the distinctly unsexy James Belushi struggling in vain to be Michael Douglas — who is having a secret affair with rich, frustrated socialite Ellen Schofield, Lorraine Bracco dripping in diamonds.
There is a serial killer abroad who delights in stabbing Belushi's one-night conquests, smearing them in Yves Saint Laurent Rich Ruby lipstick and then sending him cryptic notes on a wonky word processor.
Belushi, by now a murder victim himself, tells all this in flashback a la Sunset Boulevard.
He also studies various duff keyboards (Jagged Edge) meets Ms Bracco for frenzied sex at dead of tropical night (Body Heat).
Among this lot we have Belushi's married partner Steve Frayn (Tony Goldwyn) who also partakes of Ms Bracco, an ambitious brother running for senate, played by William Russ, and a comatose mother in a wheelchair (Harriet Grinnell) who was apparently not averse to a spot of child sex abuse in years gone by.
Everything about this torpidly told tale rings loud, false and farcical.
Belushi exudes all the erotic charisma of a frozen carp, Bracco looks and acts as if she's just signed up with a Dial a Dime Hostess service and there are various large signposts pointing firmly at The Murderer.
The whole kit and kaboodle is as tense as unravelled knitting and there is a completely unbelievable ‘surprise’ ending tacked onto the end as an obvious afterthought.
Traces Of Red is very bad news indeed.
Lots of sex.
ELENYA
IT IS not a new idea to take an impressionable, imaginative girl and make her the saviour of a man on the run, providing food, warmth and emotional support.
Whistle Down The Wind did it in 1961 and made Hayley Mills a child star.
This slow, luxuriant movie set in rural, wartime Wales has a lonely, emotionally battered schoolgirl named Elenya — Pascale Delafouge Jones — befriending an injured, shot down German pilot, Klaus Behrendt, hiding out in the woods.
Jones, an interesting newcomer with a simmering, highly charged air, is the daughter of an absentee Italian mother, which does not endear her to the xenophobic locals and an unemployed woodsman father, Seiriol Tomos, who disappears and leaves her in the care of his cold, embittered sister Maggie, Sue Jones-Davies giving everyone very beady looks.
The children at school mercilessly bully Elenya, her aunt keeps her skivvying day and night, she yearns for her missing father and her best friend Sidney, a podgily dim Iago Wynn Jones, is eventually forced to abandon her.
All these ingredients make for an outpouring of love and care when she is confronted by a terrified Behrendt one day.
The two main actors create a reflective, needy relationship together made all the more poignant by the airman's total lack of English and Jones's zilch German so that they communicate haltingly and stiltedly, mirroring the route of their hesitant trust.
She brings him food, amateurishly tends his horrendous wound, and he shows her photographs of his home and makes her daisy chains.
This is not as mawkish as it sounds largely due to some fine acting but Elenya is ultimately too slow and lacking in true tension and surprise to make it as special as its juvenile lead.
And of course, it all ends in copious tears.
Nothing disturbing.
CAST LIST
INTO THE WEST
Starring: Ellen Barkin, Gabriel Byrne, Ellen Ruaidhri Conroy
Director: Mike Newell 
Certificate: PG
Time: 102 minutes
TRACES OF RED
Starring: Jim Belushi, Lorraine Bracco, Tony Goldwyn
Director: Andy Wolk
Producer: Mark Gordon
Certificate: 15
Running Time: 104 minutes
ELENYA
Director: Steve Gough 
Certificate: PG
Time: 82 minutes
Top 20 Movies
1(-)
DEATH BECOMES HER: Black comedy with Meryl Streep as a fading star offered the elixir of eternal youth.
Cert: PG
London: Empire Leicester Square, MGM Baker Street, UCI Whiteleys.
National: General release
2(1)
SISTER ACT: Nightclub singer Whoopi Goldberg hides in a convent after witnessing a murder.
Cert: PG
London: Camden Plaza, Notting Hill Coronet, Odeon Kensington.
National:
General release
3(2)
SINGLE WHITE FEMALE: Jennifer Jason Leigh makes life hell for flatmate Bridget Fonda.
Cert: 18
London: MGM Chelsea, UCI Whiteleys.
National: General release
4(3)
LAST OF THE MOHICANS: Rip-roaring yarn with Daniel Day Lewis as the adopted Indian who falls for an English rose.
Cert: 12
National: General release
5(4)
PETER'S FRIENDS: Kenneth Branagh and chums meet for a crisis-ridden yuletide.
Cert: 15
London: Barbican, Lumiere, MGM Chelsea, Tottenham Court Road.
National:
Selected locals
6(6)
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST: Dazzling Disney version of the classic fairytale.
Cert U
National: General release
7(5)
SNEAKERS: Robert Redford leads computer hackers into the world of espionage.
Cert: 12
London: Empire Leicester Square, MGM Trocadero, UCI Whiteleys.
National:
General release
8(8)
STRICTLY BALLROOM: Stunning tale of an unorthodox ballroom dancer.
Cert: PG
London: UCI Whiteleys, Odeon Kensington, MGM Oxford Street.
General:
Selected locals
9(7)
BOOMERANG: Far from New Man Eddie Murphy gets his just desserts when his firm is taken over in this poor star vehicle.
Cert: 15
London: MGM Trocadero, Plaza.
National: General release
10(11)
BLADE RUNNER: Director's cut of sci-fi classic with Harrison Ford tracking down mad replicant Rutger Hauer.
Cert: 15
London: MGM Fulham Rd.
Nat: Selected locals
11(10)
UNLAWFUL ENTRY: Cop Ray Liotta terrorises an unsuspecting couple.
Cert: 18
National: General release
12(9)
TWIN PEAKS — FIRE WALK WITH ME: Prequel to the cult TV series.
Cert: 18
London: Camden Plaza, MGM Tottenham Court Road.
National: Selected locals
13(14)
THE CRYING GAME: Drama of a squaddie kidnapped by the IRA.
Cert:12
London: Curzon Phoenix, MGM Haymarket.
National: Selected locals
14(12)
OF MICE AND MEN: Epic starring John Malkovich as a mentally retarded American living through the Depression.
Cert: PG
London: Curzon Mayfair, MGM Trocadero.
National: Selected locals
15(15)
GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS: Superb tale of the pressures of real-estate salesmen.
With Al Pacino and Jack Lemmon.
Cert: 15
National: General release
16(16)
HUSBANDS AND WIVES: Woody Allen's tale about a middle-aged lecturer who falls for a young student.
Cert: 15
National: Selected locals
17(-)
UNFORGIVEN: Bounty hunter Clint Eastwood comes out of retirement for a last showdown.
Cert: 15
National: General release
18(18)
1492 — CONQUEST OF PARADISE: Another telling of the Columbus tale, with Gerard Depardieu.
Cert: 15
London: Empire Leicester Square, MGM Oxford Street.
National: General release
19(17)
RAPID FIRE: Brandon (son of Bruce) Lee fights his way through an above-average martial arts tale.
Cert: 18
London: MGM Oxford St. National: Selected locals
20(-)
THIS IS MY LIFE: The struggles of a comedienne bringing up her daughters alone.
Cert: 12
London: Chelsea Cinema, MGM Tottenham Court Rd.
National: Selected locals.
Movie Review
Sue Heal
NOT since the heady days of Shirley Temple tapping her dinky way around the globe has a pint-sized child star held the Hollywood moguls in such thrall.
Macaulay Culkin is a 12-year-old, 4ft 6in licence to print money and Home Alone 2: Lost In New York is set to pull in more folding bills than it is possible for the human mind to contemplate.
Once more, as young Kevin McCallister, he is cut loose from the constraints of his frantic, harassed family.
They catch a plane to Florida but Kevin winds up in New York where he is fancy free with his Pop's credit card, eating all the ice cream and pizza the metropolis has to offer.
The plot of Home Alone 2 is the plot of Home Alone 1, with bungling burglars Harry and Marv — Joe Pesci and Daniel Stern — wandering the streets of the Big Apple planning a toy store robbery on Christmas Eve when they just happen to run across Wee Mac, who proceeds to foil their plans again.
Culkin books into the most palatial hotel in the city with a cunning combination of wide-eyed innocence and Machiavellian guile (one of Culkin's strong points) causing chief concierge Tim Curry to smell a scam of considerable proportions.
And sure enough there's Macaulay lying on a massive, draped bed in a room overlooking Central Park watching gangster videos, being spoon-fed ice cream by a subservient flunkey and generally answering to no one.
If I was 12 years old I'd be squealing in the stalls as well.
There is nothing new here but, as the movie's makers will justifiably say, if it ain't broke, why fix it?
So director Chris Columbus unabashedly presents the same jokes, the same situations, the same tearful homilies and the same resolution.
The role of the lonely outsider with an aching heart but crusty exterior is this time taken by Irish actress Brenda Fricker, grimed up to her red eyeballs as a bag lady with a pigeon fetish.
To her Culkin delivers a Buddha-like speech about being true to your heart, nice to animals and the less fortunate, never crossing on a red light etc, etc.
It is this particular scene which will make anyone over the age of 15 want to smack the world's biggest superstar very hard indeed.
Eventually all is set for Culkin, now holed up in his uncle's deserted townhouse, to wire the rooms, set traps on the stairs, gather inflammable materials and treat Pesci and Stern to a far more violent onslaught than was executed in Home Alone 1.
Some say this is merely cartoon aggression but some susceptible kiddies could believe that it's okay to copy such actions because they have no serious effect when Macaulay does them.
That said, Home Alone 2 is a highly professional job, well shot, superbly paced, brilliantly edited and seamlessly stitched together.
‘If Kevin was in England he would be in care by now…’
NAOMI GORDON, 9 — IT WAS a very funny film but I thought that Kevin's family were really very mean to him.
It wasn't surprising to me that he was pleased to get away from them.
They never seem to take any notice of Kevin until he gets lost and in danger.
He probably needs to get lost so often so that his mother will find him and remember to tell him that she loves him.
I LIKED Kevin and I know how he felt at the start of the film.
It is difficult being the younger brother — you always get picked on.
Kevin gets picked on and look what happened to him.
But I don't think I could cope on my own without my mum and dad even if I did have all that money.
I told my friends I was going to the dentist this afternoon because I knew they'd be jealous if they knew I'd seen Home Alone 2 before anyone else.
I LIKED the way this film had exactly the same characters in it as the first one.
There were jokes in this one that you recognised from the original.
Both films also had a message.
In this one the ugly old lady with birds turned out to be his friend.
Kevin was frightened of her at first but she was good and, like him, she was alone with no friends.
It shows you that people aren't always what they seem.
I ENJOYED it most because it made me laugh so much.
The first film was very good but I don't think it was nearly as funny as this one.
But I think I would like anything with Macaulay Culkin in it.
To me he's the best.
I really love the way he says all the time when things start to go wrong: ‘I don't think so.’
I'd be terrified if I found myself alone in London, never mind New York.
Kevin isn't just clever and funny — he's very brave.
THIS was one of the funniest films I've seen this year.
It has been hyped so much that I wasn't sure whether I would like it.
But it turned out to be even better than the ads said.
I loved the bit where Kevin leads them into all those traps.
They were a bit violent but it's only make-believe, like in a cartoon.
I think I could survive on my own in New York if I had a credit card and I found a nice hotel like Kevin.
THE bits in the hotel were best.
They were clever and very funny.
But at the end I thought it got a little bit too silly.
Those two crooks must have been killed and resurrected about seven times when they fell into all Kevin's traps and things.
But I really did like it at the end when he got back with his mother and the rest of the family and they had a lovely Christmas with hundreds of presents.
I THOUGHT it was great, very funny.
The stunts were very good.
In real life though I think robbers might be a bit cleverer than that.
They wouldn't be bothered about chasing a boy like Kevin — they would just grab the stuff they wanted and then run away.
But it wouldn't have been so funny if the robbers weren't as stupid as they were and the film wouldn't have been so good.
I FOUND the plot a bit unbelievable.
Could Kevin's parents really be so careless that they would lose him twice?
If he had been born in England he would have been put in care by now.
And the traps he set for the villains would have killed them.
If two hundred cans of paint and the shelves supporting them fell on top of you, you wouldn't get up — would you?
But it was funny.
THE film made me laugh and I really loved it when Kevin set the traps for the two bad men.
Macaulay Culkin is wonderful — I like him a lot— but I did get frightened at the bit when he slipped over on the ice and the bad men caught up with him.
I'm glad it had a very happy ending but I didn't cry or anything like that even though there were some scary bits.
IT was hilarious.
I laughed out loud and I don't normally.
Now I understand why they paid Macaulay Culkin $3 million — he earned it.
The plot was unbelievable though.
You knew from the start that whatever danger he got into, he would somehow manage to escape.
But that's why children like it.
If Kevin got killed it would be too sad and no children would want to see the film.
Even stars can't help a dull Trelawny shine
Tony Rennell
YOU can crowd a West End production with so many stars that the title is almost lost on the billboards for the weight of names above it, but it is no guarantee of good entertainment.
Trelawny Of The Wells boasts Michael Hordern, Sarah Brightman, Helena Bonham Carter and Jason Connery, but what these glitterati produce is dullness itself.
Perhaps it's the play that's to blame: late Victorian, about clashing cultures and class.
A music hall singing star, Rose Trelawny, tries to marry above her station but she is miserable — a bird in a golden cage.
I couldn't see the point in reviving it — and I wondered whether anyone on stage could, either.
There were flashes of brilliance from Michael Hordern and Kelly Hunter but generally the acting lacked sparkle.
Sarah Brightman's Rose was a bloodless creature — she has to make us believe in the devil-may-care spirit of theatrical folk to show up the stuffiness of the aristocrats.
She didn't.
Equally disappointing is the latest stage adaptation of a Roald Dahl story for children at Christmas.
THE WITCHES (Duke of York) tries hard but the show feels threadbare.
It's not a patch on last year's The BFG.
Nirvana blast way to a metal heaven
James Bennett
SMELL The Glove, Nice'n'Stinky, Break Like The Wind — these are just some of the hilarious works of the spoof heavy metal band whose new book Inside Spinal Tap will fill many a Christmas stocking this year.
It was a great joke while it lasted, but now a humble three-piece band from Seattle has rendered the whole joke redundant.
That band is Nirvana, and if you're one of the 12 million owners of their last album, Nevermind, you'll know that their radical reworking of what was heavy metal into what is now grunge has completely destroyed the old image of the moronic metal band.
Nirvana have a new album out on Monday — and so too does teen heart-throb American rapper Marky Mark.
Compare them both and you realise that what we should be parodying in 1993 is rap.
The book could be called Yo, It's Spinal Rap, and I — Jamie James — will happily write it.
But not before I've listened again to Incesticide (Geffen) by Nirvana.
Rather than a follow-up to Nevermind, it is a prequel which shows how the band got to their current position where rock critics and industry moguls divide music into two categories: pre-Nirvana and post-Nirvana.
The real follow-up comes in the New Year, but meanwhile Incesticide collects together sundry B-sides, live cuts and overmatter, mostly recorded before Nevermind.
Though a little patchy, there is more than enough to keep fans happy and several killer cuts that show Nirvana already distilling the heady brew of metal, punk and pop which was to lead to Smells Like Teen Spirit — the track critics have called the best rock song ever.
Nirvana have made heavy metal intelligent and vital — not words you could ever apply to Marky Mark, a 21-year-old Calvin Klein underwear model, former New Kid On The Block and white boy posing as black rapper.
While Arrested Development's current album shows just how good rap can be, You Gotta Believe (Atlantic) by Marky Mark and The Funky Bunch shows all the traits that so richly deserve ridicule.
First there is the typical rapper indentity crisis.
Like a three-year-old who's just learned to write his own name, Marky Mark repeats his dozens of times.
When he's not telling us his name he's yelling ‘yo’ and other inane rappisms in a suitably sneering tone.
He wears the obligatory half-a-ton of metal round his neck and backwards basebell cap, and the album sleeve even includes the credit Footwear by Adidas — which gives a good idea of the priorities involved here.
There is some good music.
Soulful divas wail to great effect.
A tight hypnotic beat provides the perfect backing.
But every time Marky opens his mouth he blows it.
If it's something funky and soulful you seek, I suggest a trip back to the Seventies.
Long before mediocre crooner Curtis Stiger landed in the middle of the road there was another, greater Curtis.
Curtis Mayfield: A Man Like Curtis (Music Collection) chronicles his career with tracks including Move On Up, Superfly and Pusherman.
Curtis is now confined to a wheelchair after a stage accident in 1990 but this album — great value at £7.99 for CD and £4.99 for cassette — reminds us how good he was.
Best Sellers
THE top-sellers for NES at Virgin Games Centres are:
1
Super Mario Bros
2
Hyper Soccer
3
WWF Steel Cage
4
Home Alone 2
5
Parasol Stars
6
Ferrari
7
Tailspin
8
Spiderman
9
California Games
10
Kickle Cubicle.
Fun Zone Entertainment Today
Amaya Lopez
CORE Design has just added its Christmas offering, Doodlebug, to the list of cutesy, platform Amiga games.
The action takes place in the land of Cartoonia where the beautiful Princess Lady-Bug has been (wait for it) kidnapped.
Doodle, a funny little insect thing, is determined to rescue the fair maiden and sets out with only a set of pencils to his name.
One of the nicest and most original features of the game is that while Doodle can take out the enemy by simply throwing his pencils, he can also use them to draw the bonuses or weapons he needs.
Although Doodlebug breaks no new ground and may not prove challenging enough for hardened players, it's still a neat little platformer.
Score: 8/10
WHILE SNES players are in for a treat with Super Mario Kart, sadly the same cannot be said for NES owners, with their Christmas Mario offering, Mario and Yoshi — a game which takes the form of a puzzle startlingly similar to the classic Tetris.
Mario balances trays while Marioland characters drop from the top of the screen.
You have to rotate the trays and try to catch two of a kind consecutively.
Matching eggshell halves will add an essential ‘Yoshi’ to your score.
Mario and Yoshi may please puzzle addicts, but offers nothing new and doesn't push the NES's capabilities in the slightest.
Given the choice between Super Mario Lane 2 and this, there's no competition unless you're a puzzle freak.
A woeful case of jumping on the Tetris/Columns bandwagon using the most popular Nintendo characters as a lame excuse for a run-of-the-mill game.
Dance
Sam Carlisle
THERE'S always a place for smoochy love songs — and they don't come any smoochier than those of new soul contender Trey Lorenz.
The young gun from South Carolina was discovered by Mariah Carey in a New York recording studio.
Lorenz appeared on both her million-selling albums and dueted on her Number One single, I'll Be There.
And now Mariah returns the compliment by producing six of the 11 tracks on his debut album TREY LORENZ (Epic).
Her protege is one romantic guy.
Tracks include It Only Hurts When It's Love, Baby I'm In Heaven and How Can I Say Goodbye?
The sound isn't the most innovative ever, and the influence of Stevie Wonder and the Jackson 5 is obvious.
But these are competent love songs, carried on the strength of the 23-year-old's powerful and seductive vocals.
Peppered with funky sounds, Bobby Brown-style swing-beat and rock, the album shows that Lorenz is a versatile crooner.
He may have shimmied on to the scene a little late, but watch out for his name on the smoochy compilations for Christmas 1993.
Cheat Spot
YOU can attain unlimited continues in Super Off Road on the SNES if you start a two-player game but then don't use the second player.
FOR infinite lives and ammo in Predator 2 on Amiga, just pause the game and then type in: YOU'RE ONE UGLY MOTHER.
IN Tetris on the NES, if you keep select held down during play, you'll knock up a high score of 10,000 points every time a block lands.
IF you want to start the game on the trickier second quest in The Legend Of Zelda on the NES, just enter Zelda on the name screen instead of your own.
Roseanne Arnold
OUTRAGEOUS US comedienne Roseanne Arnold has been sending poison-pen faxes to critics who panned husband Tom's new TV show.
She threatened journalists Ray Richmond and Matt Roush: ‘My husband will meet you in an alley any time — and beat the hell outta you.’
Unrepentant Roseanne, 40, claimed: ‘At the bottom of the criticism is a feeling that ‘Roseanne is fat — how can anyone lover her.’
And that's why they think Tom's using me.’
Fiddling while Europe burns
THE trouble with the European leaders gathered in Edinburgh is that they won't take No for an answer.
The Danish people politely declined to join the Maastricht venture but that was unacceptable to the other 11 EC partners.
They have cajoled, bullied and threatened yet still don't appear to realise none of that will make the Danes change their mind.
The politicians and bureaucrats who run the EC are determined that the Maastricht Treaty is the way forward whatever any individual nation or its people think.
Any evidence to suggest that this is undesirable, even ridiculous, is ignored.
So it does not matter that the Exchange Rate Mechanism, which is crucial to the treaty, has virtually collapsed.
That is how such an absurd position has been reached in the middle of a horrific recession, with genocide in Yugoslavia and economic collapse threatening in the East.
At the Edinburgh summit the richest, most powerful European nations waste their time desperately seeking for a clever-dick way to con Danish voters in a second referendum.
They are trying to save face for John Major, President Mitterrand and Chancellor Kohl.
Instead, they should be trying to save their nations' economies.
The past year has proved that Maastricht is an irrelevancy.
We don't need that length of time to realise that Edinburgh is, too.
Private joy
THE decision of the Princess of Wales not to attend the wedding today of her sister-in-law, Anne, has been portrayed as a snub.
It is nothing of the sort.
By staying away from Crathie Church, Diana is showing the same decency, dignity and consideration that the nation has come to expect from her.
If she went to the wedding, every eye and camera would be on her.
Almost all the media coverage would be about her and Charles, how far apart they stood, whether they spoke or looked at each other.
Diana does not want that.
She knows this is not her day.
Today belongs to Princess Anne and Commander Laurence.
The good wishes of the nation are with them.
May they live happily ever after.
‘I say, I say’
THE House will wish to know that the decision to separate has no constitutional implications…there is no reason why the Princess of Wales should not be crowned Queen in due course.
John Major
IT is high time that we stopped this charade of swearing allegiance to the Queen and her heirs and successors because we do not know from time to time who they are.
Labour MP Dennis Skinner
EVERYONE tried to dress it up as a love match but it wasn't.
Agony aunt Claire Rayner
IT MUST be one of the saddest announcements made by any Prime Minister in modern times.
Sir Edward Heath
THEY were never really the sort of couple you would put together in a book.
She was a very young 19 and he was a very old 32.
Dame Barbara Cartland
YOU couldn't conceivably have two carriage processions coming from different parts of London to Westminster Abbey for the coronation and then going separate ways.
Tory MP John Bowis
THERE has been nothing amicable about this arrangement.
They have been at each others' throats.
Can Anne and Tim beat royal marriage curse?
Jackie Annesley
WHEN the Princess Royal walks out of Crathie Church today with a handsome new husband on her arm, the Queen will be hoping like any mother that it's the start of a successful and happy marriage.
Her self-proclaimed worst year has seen two separations and one divorce among her four children.
In Anne and Tim, she will be longing for at least one happy couple within the Royal Family.
But will they be able to break the marriage curse that seems to have fallen on the House of Windsor?
Will Anne have more luck the second time round than she did when she married Captain Mark Phillips in 1973?
JACKIE ANNESLEY throws a few statistics at the royal couple along with the confetti.
EVERY year 30,000 single men marry divorced women — that is one in 11 marriages.
Slightly more divorced men, 37,000, marry single women.
MARRIAGES which involve a partner who has been married before are more likely to end in the divorce courts than ones between two people who have never before been up the aisle.
THE number of marriages between a divorcee and someone who is marrying for the first time is on the slide.
It fell from 70,000 in 1980 to 67,000 in 1990.
ONE in two marriages involving a partner who has been married before will end in divorce, according to Relate, the marriage guidance organisation.
This accounts for a quarter of all divorces.
This compares with 37 percent of new marriages which end in divorce.
EVEN though marriage is on the decrease, an increasing proportion of weddings involve the remarriage of at least one partner.
There are now 36 per cent of weddings in that category.
In 16 per cent of weddings, both bride and groom have been married before.
DIVORCE figures for first-time marriages have fallen from 122,890 in 1980 to 113,898 in 1990, but the overall number of divorces has gone up.
It has been increased by the huge numbers of break-ups among couples in which at least one partner has been married before.
COUPLES who are both on their second marriage are a lot more likley to get divorced, with figures having increased 100 per cent from 6,300 in 1980 to 12,848 in 1990.
In marriages in which only one of the partners has been down the aisle before, the number of divorces has jumped 67 per cent since 1980.
IF one partner has not been married before and the other one has, the couple are more likely to go into marriage than a couple where both partners have been married before.
FEWER divorced people are remarrying.
Between the ages of 25 and 29, the annual remarriage rates per 1,000 divorced men was 136 in 1989, down by over 70 per cent from 1971 figure of 503.
For women, the number was down by over 60 per cent to 142 from 364.
In 1971 there were 483,000 divorcees who had not remarried, compared to the 1989 figure of 2.4 million.
A WOMAN who marries at the age of 42 has a better chance of success than when she was 23.
Statistics show the younger a wife is when she marries, the more likely the chance of it all ending in the divorce courts.
IN 1990, 87,555 women married between the ages of 20 and 24, and 71,489 — or 81.6 per cent— divorced after marrying at this age.
In the same year, 19,015 married in the 40-to-44 age range and 2,598 — or 13.6 per cent— divorced after having married in this age group.
SO what are the odds on Anne and Tim staying together 'til death do them part, when all the other Royals have failed?
Statistics alone cannot give the answer.
After all, there is a 100 per cent marriage failure rate for their generation of the House of Windsor.
But they will not have the pressures of other couples in which one is divorced.
They will not have worries over money, housing and difficulties with an ex-partner over the children.
Besides, Anne is recognised as the most level-headed of the Queen's children.
She very rarely puts a foot wrong — and she is not likely to have made the same mistake twice.
Pining for the taste of tradition
Isla Whitcroft
BRITAIN is dreaming of a green Christmas this year for the first time since artificial trees appeared in the shops.
Growers, delighted that sales of real firs are outstripping those of their synthetic rivals, claim that families have turned nostalgic in a seasonal effort to beat the recession blues.
What's more, there's a bewildering choice.
You can buy a tree grown in Denmark, Holland, America, Ireland or Spain.
You can choose a white fir, green fir or blue-green fir and take it home already cut, root-balled or complete with all its roots.
To help you on the trail of that lonesome pine, here is a brief consumer guide to what's what in the world of Christmas trees:
TYPE OF TREE
E NORWAY SPRUCE: A traditional tree with soft, short, bright green needles.
Must be mounted in water.
SCOTS PINE: Has longer needles which are retained for a good length of time.
LODGEPOLE PINE: Similar to Scots Pine but with darker, straighter needles.
NOBLE FIR: Grows in a very regular pattern.
The needles are a dark bluey-green and turn up slightly.
Good needle retention.
WHITE FIR: A native of southwest America with very pale green needles.
BLUE SPRUCE: Very short, sharp needles which should be dusty blue.
Needle retention not very good.
DOUGLAS FIR: Not a true fir.
It has very thin needles and dark grey bark.
Needle retention is reasonable.
HOW THEY COME
CUT TREES: Check the tree is fresh by shaking it.
If you are showered with needles, don't buy it.
Prolong the tree's life by mounting it in water.
BARE ROOTED: This means the trees have been pulled up by their roots and have only a small chance of survival if planted out.
ROOT-BALLED: Such trees have been carefully removed from the earth and stand a good chance of survival if planted out.
Check roots are not dry.
CONTAINER-GROWN: These trees have been grown in pots and are seldom more than three feet tall.
They can be planted out or left to grow in the pot, but will soon need re-potting.
BLOCKED: Cut and mounted in a block of wood, these are convenient but do not last well.
WHAT THEY COST
Expect to pay around £1.80 per foot for a Scots or Norwegian Pine and around £3 for a fir.
Small container-grown or potted trees are about £10, while rooted and root-balled trees are about £3 more than cut trees.
Your tree will last longer if you mount it in water, or use a water spray on the needles.
Keep trees away from radiators and fires.
Someone please turn off the tap
By Jaci Stephen
IT'S hard to avoid an ironic smirk when a Royal Variety Performance fails to deliver the variety and entertainment the royals provide the public with their own private lives.
You also can't help noticing that attempts to drag the Royal Family into the 20th Century have failed as badly as attempts to do the same for this other great British anachronism.
You will undoubtedly see some terrific entertainment when this year's show is screened on TV tonight — most notably from the Bolshoi Ballet, and Michael Crawford's extraordinarily moving rendition of Gethsemane from Jesus Christ Superstar.
But why does this event persist in subjecting us to long rows of tap dancers, a breed of people whose only function in life is to display the disgusting effects of sweat and sequins under neon?
Tap dancers as entertainment falls somewhere between colonic irrigation and embalming.
And if I want to hear inane rat-tat-tats I'll go to the jungle and listen to the crickets.
This kind of ‘variety entertainment’ went out with the Ark.
Too bad the flood subsided.
No wonder Charles and Di split — they ran out of Gold Blend
By Jaci Stephen
THE suspense is at an end.
The months of press intrusion and questions along the lines of ‘Will they?
Won't they?’ have finally reached a conclusion.
Every aspect of their private life has been laid bare.
We are sick of it.
They are sick of it.
But now we know for sure.
The Gold Blend couple will live happily ever after.
After five years of waiting for her neighbour to complete a sentence, the queen of coffee beans finally decided to try out another date — an Italian whose uniqueness lay in his not being able to speak a word of his native language.
You will remember that we met him in the last commercial.
Like his rival, he too had a problem completing his sentences, particularly when in the company of the lady (Sharon Maughan).
The neighbour (Tony Head) liked to flirt with half-sentences like ‘I've run out of co…’, and then let his forehead and eyebrows do the rest of the work.
The Italian allowed for pregnant pauses mid-sentence: ‘Per'aps we might deescuss eet over…deener’.
During these pauses he would leer in the hope that his lady friend would fill in the gaps, thereby allowing him to save his energy for later.
In an untypical display of linguistic diarrhoea, Mr Head's character finally managed several sentences all in one go this week.
Storming into the restaurant where the Italian and Miss Maughan's character were dining, he invented some story about having to keep her away from the paparazzi (which he probably thinks is the coffee you buy in Venice) and whisked her off her feet back to his place.
Then he told her that he loved her.
It was really rather moving.
So how selfish then of Charles and Diana to make the official announcement of their separation in a week when the nation was celebrating the coffee couple's romance.
Not content with ruining Princess Anne's week by upstaging her wedding announcement, they had to go one dramatic step further.
Who knows, Charles and Di might still be together had they followed the path of love the Nescafe way: see each other only 11 times in five years, never take your clothes off during sex, and make sure your tongue spends more time in a cup of coffee than in your partner's mouth.
Whoever said the art of romance was dead?
Breaking up too early
By Jaci Stephen
ONE particularly strange aspect of Charles and Diana's public announcement was their decision to deliver it while their children were still in school.
Would it not have been better for them to wait until the children came home for Christmas?
Then William and Harry would have had the support of their parents during what must undoubtedly be a very traumatic time for them.
As it was, they will have been subjected to the comments, whispers and taunts of other children in school.
It's hard to imagine a more isolated and upsetting set of circumstances in which you are first confronted with the public break-up of your family home.
Perking up too late
By Jaci Stephen
NEIL Kinnock has cut an impressive figure in his numerous TV appearances since losing the election.
In Have I Got News For You he showed himself to be quick, witty and well able to take jokes levelled against himself.
If only Kinnock had been able to show us this side of himself when he was still Leader of the Labour Party, the election might have had a very different result.
Come to think of it, if Major had revealed the side of himself we're now seeing, the result would also have been different.
Now there's a man who has given the term ‘comedian’ a whole new meaning.
Bad deal on the face of it
By Jaci Stephen
THE great showdown between Barbie and Sindy finally comes to court in January, with Barbie's manufacturer Mattel claiming that Hasbro Industries has copied Barbie's face for Sindy.
If this proves to have been the case, the big question is: Why?
Barbie's eyes are probably two of the last pits in Britain.
If boyfriend Ken wants to gaze into their depths, he needs a lift shaft even to get close.
I wouldn't say Barbie's eyes were abnormally big, but in the summer there's a pleasure boat running day-trips around them.
Then what about her teeth?
They haven't stopped smiling for at least two decades, which suggests an extremely bad case of lockjaw.
When Ken wants to give his girlfriend a kiss he first calls in a construction team to clear the way.
If Sindy really feels she needs a face-lift, surely there are better faces she could have lifted.
A MAN was up in court this week on a charge of indecency after having sex with a pig.
What's so unusual about that?
Women have been doing it for years.
Jury's blind justice
By Jaci Stephen
TWO of the jurors who were instrumental in jailing Mike Tyson on a charge of rape have decided they made the wrong decision.
They have allegedly been swayed by news that Tyson's accuser, beauty queen Desiree Washington, is negotiating book and film deals having previously stated that she had no plans to make money out of her experience.
But surely the job of the juror is to assess the credibility of the witness in the box.
In this case, part of that job involved having to assess the claimed ‘innocence’ of Washington.
If they failed to consider any change of heart she may be tempted to make in the future, that is down to their own stupidity and naivete.
It was obvious to the rest of us that this is the path she would take once the heat had blown over — such actions are part and parcel of everyday life in America.
A juror's duty is to make an assessment on evidence available at the time.
These jurors claim new evidence has come to light.
In my opinion, it was there all the time.
A better jury — and certainly a less star-struck one — would have seen it.
Arnold Schwarzenegger
TOUGH-guy Arnold Schwarzenegger has been terminated.
Angry Hollywood residents slapped an 11pm curfew on the flashes and bangs during night-time filming of 45-year-old Arnie's new film The Last Action Hero in the secluded hills.
Protest leader Charles Rosenberg said: ‘We have jobs to go to in the morning — even if he doesn't.
The noise was keeping everyone awake.’
Co-producer Robert Relea hit back: ‘It's not as if we like working nights.’
Whitney Houston
SINGER Whitney Houston has denied her marriage to Bobby Brown was a publicity stunt.
‘I would never marry anyone I didn't love,’ the 29-year-old told critics.
‘We're talking about a lifetime of commitment and I don't think people realise what that entails.
It's beyond what it looks like.
‘Bobby needed to look better in the eye of the public — not to be such a bad boy.
With me he's a good boy,’ she said.
Bill Wyman
ROLLING Stone Bill Wyman has a new live-in lover, only a month after a bitter divorce from Mandy Smith.
Californian Suzanne Accosta, 33, moved in to the rock star's Pounds 600,000 flat in Chelsea, southwest London, four days ago.
And last night Wyman, 56, said: ‘I need her in my life at this time.
She's full of laughs and fun and life.’
He turned to Suzanne, an old friend, during the court battle with Mandy, 22, who finally accepted a £580,000 settlement.
‘To be Miss World to just one man is the greatest prize of all’
Tim Ewbank
SHE was a teenage girl with a fantasy to fulfil.
The dream of being a model in the big city.
For Marjorie Wallace, the dream came true, a thousand times over, when she won the Miss World crown.
But, as she could tell the 1992 contestants lining up today in South Africa's Sun City, it brought her nothing but heartache.
Almost 20 years later, at 38, she is living out a more successful fantasy.
A dream marriage to an artist she adores, in a mountain paradise.
Sitting at peace in the garden of their ranch, high above the Californian resort of Malibu, Marjorie still marvels at the way her life was turned upside down one November night in 1973, when she was just 19.
‘It was really traumatic for me,’ she said.
‘All I'd hoped was maybe to go to Chicago or New York and be a model.
‘But in four months, my life completely changed.
I went from being a local model to Miss Indiana, to Miss USA — and then to Miss World and living in London.
It was a lot to cope with.’
Her whirlwind career included ads for Wella Balsam shampoo, Ultrabrite toothpaste and American Express.
But she also looks back to screaming headlines about a brief, fiery affair with British soccer star George Best, then 26.
To rumours of an affair with singer Tom Jones.
To gossip about diaries in which she allegedly rated her lovers' sexual prowess.
And to a court case in which she accused George Best of stealing her fur coat and jewellery — a case that collapsed after she failed to give evidence.
Scandal led to Majorie being stripped of her Miss World title after 104 eventful days.
Her misery was made far worse two weeks later, when her motor-racing fiance, Peter Revson, 34, was killed in a crash while practising for the South African Grand Prix.
Soon after that, she ended up in hospital after a drug overdose.
Today, those few, frantic months are a world away.
Her only concession to controversy is the huge 12ft by 10ft portrait of her nude, painted by artist Richard Rowley, who she married five years ago after a 10-week romance.
‘I'd always had a fantasy about living with an artist and waking up in the morning and him standing there with a canvas.
And it came true,’ she said.
‘When I was a model, photographers were always asking me to take my clothes off.
Fortunately, I never did.
‘But it was wonderful, in my thirties, to be married to an artist, to be able to take my clothes off for him and be totally free about it.
And all just for the joy of doing it.
‘The moments we shared in making the nude paintings were best of all, and put a smile on my face.
‘There is something about the artist and the model doing something together, a very youthful thing.
‘Suddenly, you are living and playing in a way you haven't since you were a child.
‘After we'd had a nice dinner together, we'd go into Richard's studio and we'd put on music.
He'd get out the camera and I'd pose for him.
When he'd got a shot he liked, we'd go to bed.
And then he'd get up at two in the morning and start painting.
I've taken care of myself over the years: I hope it shows.’
For nearly five years, Marjorie was married to a stockbroker-film producer.
They had a son, Adam, now 12.
‘I was single for five years,’ Marjorie said.
‘Then I asked a girl friend to fix me up with someone.
‘She threw a party so I could meet this man Richard.
It was love at first sight.
We got married 10 weeks later.
All my friends said, ‘Oh, my God!’
‘But it wasn't two teenagers getting married so quickly, it was two grownups, well into their thirties.
‘Then we moved an hour's journey out of Los Angeles, and created this mountain-top Shangri-La.
‘We hardly ever come down.
We stay up here for weeks on end, riding our horses, just having fun.’
Richard is just as happy, living out Marjorie's fantasy.
‘We're a perfect match,’ he said.
‘We're both reclusive.
We've both lived a lot of our lives in the limelight.
‘Our own little world works very nicely for us.’
Marjorie isn't entirely isolated from the real world.
She helps with the business side of her husband's work.
Richard's paintings, and sculptures are highly prized.
In one exhibition, he included his nude paintings of his wife.
‘They didn't sell,’ said Marjorie.
With a bright smile.
A Miss World-class smile.
£1m classic or £15,000 copy — can you tell the difference?
by Desmond Harding
THE sleek sports car races along the deserted road, gathering speed before roaring off into the distance.
The roadside drinkers stare open-mouthed at the sight of the awesome Ford GT40.
For this isn't the Le Mans 24-hour race, which the GT40 once dominated, but the peaceful Bucks countryside.
And the car isn't a lovingly restored original worth up to £1.2 million, but a £15,000 fibre-glass replica that Brian Clemmett had finished building that afternoon in his small workshop near Aylesbury.
‘It was the biggest ego trip I'd ever had.
Seeing all those people coming out of the pub to watch me was fantastic,’ says Brian.
The GT40 is one of a growing number of classic car copies sold in kit form by more than 130 companies.
And not only are the replicas a lot cheaper, but they're almost impossible to tell from the originals.
John Hurst, the managing director of Deon who make a Ferrari Dino replica, has often had his cars mistaken for the real thing by owners of the genuine article.
‘One day I was filling up with petrol when a chap stopped to say he was a member of the Ferrari Owners Club and used to have a car like mine,’ says John.
‘He was gobsmacked when I told him mine was a replica.’
The most popular copy is the Cobra — the original American ‘muscle’ sports car.
More than a dozen firms turn out look-alike Cobras, powered by anything from a reconditioned Ford Sierra engine to a massive Chevrolet V8 capable of over 130mph.
Apart from Cobras, Ferraris and GT40s, there are Lamborghinis, Porsche 911s and the sought-after 1952 Speedsters, and D and E-type Jaguars available.
Replicas use the suspension, engines and gearboxes from wrecks.
The most popular ‘donor car’ is the Ford Cortina, with Jaguar parts favoured for more powerful vehicles.
Kit car replicas arrive as a confusing jigsaw of pieces which have to be bolted together, often in the family garage.
Turning out a well-finished car can take 400 hours of painstaking work.
Britain's kit car industry is the largest in the world, with manufacturers exporting to all corners of the globe.
‘It's all to do with that special buzz.
Some people like building them, some like driving them but most just like to pose,’ says Gerry Hawkridge, who makes Cobra and Ferrari 275 GTB look-alikes.
‘And if it makes them happy, good luck to them.’
Great escapes
SWK
TAKE the children on holiday without charge throughout next summer when you book with Riva's new Kids Free programme.
For every two adults booking a Mediterranean holiday, there is an automatic free child's place on offer.
There's a choice of 32 family hotels, many of which will be operating a Kids Club for youngsters aged between four and 11.
Prices start at £249 per person for a week in Turkey.
Details: 071-724 7911.
TO MARK the 70th anniversary of the discovery of Tutankhamun's Tomb, the Egyptians are opening the site for just this month and January.
A visit to the famous tomb will be part of a special seven-night Nile Cruise on a converted paddle-steamer.
The bargain £299 Somak package will run until January 25 and covers flights, accommodation and excursions.
Details: 081-903 8166.
THERE'S a free pair of skis worth £150 for anyone booking a ski holiday this month with Swiss Travel Service.
The company has 21 top ski resorts in Switzerland with prices starting from £114 per person for seven nights self-catering in Saas Fee.
Details: 0920 463971.
IT'S now possible to tie the knot in 14 different exotic locations in the new Kuoni Weddings brochure.
The company organised more than 1,000 weddings this year in the Caribbean, Seychelles, Mauritius and the popular Far East.
Next year Kuoni will be providing marriage packages in Orlando, Hawaii and Bali.
Details: 0306 744161.
WHEN skiers are not regaling the world with tales of their exploits on the slopes, they are usually bluffing their way through an evening in the pub with their friends.
Studying David Allsop's funny new Bluff Your Way In Skiing (Ravette, £2.50) will provide them with enough ammunition to last a whole season.
It's the perfect gift to tuck into the stocking.
Sweet Bali waters
Heather O'Connor
IN the musical South Pacific, American GIs sung of their pursuit of women on the mythical, tropical island of Bali Hai.
Forty years later, I found some areas of the real island of Bali overrun with drunken Australian footballers carrying on the GI tradition on their end-of-season trips.
If you're after a 6ft blond for a holiday romance the joint resorts of Kuta and Legian in the south are the places to go.
They are the equivalent of Benidorm for Australians and are pretty ugly.
But if, like me, you just want to fall in love with a beautiful island, give Kuta a miss and try the fantastic resorts of Nusa Dua and Sanur.
In South Pacific the character Bloody Mary sings: ‘In your heart you will hear the island call you, come to me, come to me.’
After seeing Bali's multitude of vistas, from dramatic mountains and dense jungles to volcanoes, rice terraces tripping down hillsides and long golden beaches — all in an area 85 miles long and 50 miles wide — I was glad I answered this island's call.
Religion is an integral part of its complex culture, and a complicated array of ceremonies and rituals cover every stage of a person's life, from birth to death.
The number of temples on the only predominantly Hindu island in Indonesia is astonishing.
Every building has a shrine at which offerings must be placed twice a day.
One of the most bizarre things I saw was the lengthy and intricate preparation for the blessing of a new furniture store.
Music, dance and art are integral to the island's culture — and not just for the benefit of tourists.
The Balinese make sure that the traditions they are so proud of will never be lost.
Each village has dancers and musicians to enact musical dramas which have been passed down through the generations.
And if you are lucky enough to stumble upon a village show you will be warmly welcomed and given the best seats in the house — which might mean a patch of ground under the village banyan tree.
A dance called The Sanghyang illustrates Bali's mysticism.
Two female dancers are sent into a trance by the chanting of a 50-strong choir.
Eyes closed, the girls move in perfect synchronisation — even though they are said to be untrained in the intricate pattern of the dance.
When the chanting stops they fall back in a faint.
Blessings from a holy man bring them round.
Balinese life fits itself around the demands of tourism.
Some of the international hotels are enormous but still manage to escape a concrete jungle image with the help of the island's natural beauty, exotic plants and flowers and friendly, courteous staff.
A trip to Lombok, the next island along, gives a taste of what Bali might have been like before tourism.
Some of the villages rarely see tourists and the most humble visitors are treated like VIPs.
From Lombok you can take a boat trip to the Gilies, three small coral-fringed islands that are a paradise for snorklers and divers.
Lombok is a short trip by plane across the Lombok Strait.
It has some Balinese influences but its own culture.
The first international hotel has been built, so get in quick if you want to escape the package tourists.
DEPARTURES
British Airways Holidays (0293 611611) offers 12nts at the Bali Hyatt £1060, plus a 3-day Lombok Interlude at the Sheraton Senggigi, £126 (Jan-March).
Details: Indonesia Embassy, 38 Adams Row, Grosvenor Square, London W1,(071 499 7661).
Take to the nursery slopes
TAKING a child skiing can be hazardous or tremendous fun — and deciding when they're old enough is never easy.
Two TODAY reporters took their children on skiing trips for the first time.
Their reports, contrasting the pros and cons of an early start for children, are featured below.
Meanwhile, if you are considering taking a youngster skiing, here are a few important points to bear in mind:
FOUR years old is generally considered to be a reasonable age for learning to ski.
MAKE sure your child is wearing a hat, glasses or goggles and — most importantly — gloves every time they go out on the slopes.
CHOOSE accommodation close to the slopes, or make sure there's an efficient bus service to the ski lifts.
CHALETS and apartments are less formal than hotels and suit children better.
IF YOU are catering for yourselves and driving to the resort, stock up at a hypermarket before you get there to avoid paying astronomical prices.
SELECT a ski school where the instructors speak English, such as those at Avoriaz, Mayrhofen, Valmorel, Val d'Isere, Meribel or Courcheval.
MAKE sure that beginner slopes are south-facing, as these will be a lot warmer for children.
SEE that your child has everything for ski school: lift pass, ski school tickets, boots, skis, poles and money for a hot drink.
PRE-BOOK creches and kindergartens as they tend to fill up quickly.
REMEMBER that children's skins burn easily, so cover up any exposed area of skin with a high-factor sun cream.
READ The Essential Guide To Skiing With Children by Penny Pershall (Panic, £5.99) before booking.
It's packed with useful information.
The following are tour operators who specialise in ski holidays for families with children:
Ski Espirit (0252 616789); Club Med (071-581 1161); Mark Warner (071-938 3861); Meriski (081-682 3883); Powder Byrne (071-223 0601); Ski Peak (0428 682272); Ski Tal (081-398 9861).
The case for
Jill Thomas
ALL parents of four-year-olds know what strong-minded little monsters they can be — but we decided to risk it anyway with a trip to Val d'Isere.
There were a couple of problems.
Firstly, no other children were staying at our chalet that week and the other guests showed little tolerance.
We decided we would check on this in advance in future.
Secondly, we had the early misfortune of booking Emma for ski lessons with a French ski school whose woman teacher was an ogress.
But when we changed to sessions with Snow Fun, what a difference it made.
By the end of the week, Emma was whizzing down green runs, turning superbly and tackling the lifts with ease.
The creche staff did a fine job of picking her up and delivering her back to our chalet, so by the second week we decided to take her skiing with us.
What a thrill to see her coping so well.
There was no question about the trip's success.
Emma is always asking when we will go back, and our only worry now is that in a few years she will probably be waking us up at dawn on icy mornings, saying: ‘Shall we go down the black run first?’
The case against
Claire Roberts
THE earlier you learn, the better — that was our philosophy when it came to teaching our daughter to ski.
Sadly, reality proved it to be false.
My husband and I had always lamented not learning to ski as young children so we didn't want Jessica, our two-year-old, to miss out too.
What we hadn't bargained for was that she might not want to be the next Franz Klammer.
‘It's too wet and cold,’ was the first thing she said on arrival at Saalbach in Austria.
For a toddler, donning a padded ski suit and three layers of thermals is like putting on a straitjacket.
The attractions of the 180 km of pistes escaped her entirely, but she was mad keen on the 57 ski lifts.
We spent whole mornings just riding up and down in them.
The hotel had much to keep youngsters occupied, but by day three we realised we had made a bad mistake in taking such a young child skiing.
DEPARTURES
Kaleidoscope (0444 247248) 1wk half-board at Hotel Karlshof £412 (Jan), £465 (March) including flights, insurance, ski pass.
Boston break offers reason to be Cheerful
Liz Moore
THE red flashing lights on top of the Old John Hancock Building warn of snow — but that would never stop a Bostonian from turning out to enjoy the Christmas festivities.
Zero temperatures and snow flurries shouldn't put off the winter visitor either because a visit to Boston — whether for Christmas shopping or a New Year break — will leave you glowing.
The city that gave us Cheers certainly knows how to seduce visitors.
Singing carols around the Christmas tree and exploring the cobbled streets takes you back to the era of the Boston Tea Party.
Take in the breath-taking view from the top of the 62-storey new John Hancock Tower and then hop on one of the Old Town Trolleys for a 10-mile tour of heritage sights, shopping areas, museums and attractions.
It's easy to combine sightseeing with shopping and you won't be able to resist some last-minute Christmas bargains as there is no sales tax to pay on purchases under £120.
Faneuil Hall Marketplace and Quincy Market are like London's Covent Garden with street entertainers, food stalls and trendy shops.
Both are close to the harbour waterfront, aquarium and Little Italy.
Downtown Crossing features two department stores: Jordan Marsh, with its sixth-floor enchanted village for children, and Filene's store, famous for its bargain basement.
The pedestrian-only area is close to the heritage trail and Boston Common.
The tastiest way to warm up is with a bowl of Boston's traditional clam chowder with oyster crackers.
DEPARTURES
Northwest Airlines (0345 747800) daily from Gatwick, from £240 return up to March 1993.
Info from Massachusetts Port Authority (071 495 5005).
Discounted family room rates from £50 (0800 891030).
Three-course feast for all
Mark Simpson
WITH no fewer than three courses and a floodlit driving range, Hoebridge in Woking is one of Britain's leading pay-as-you-play golf centres.
Built in the early 1980s to meet spiralling demand in Surrey's golf-crazy commuter heartland, it helped to solve a seemingly impossible problem for many budding golfers.
The problem was that clubs would let you play only if you had a club handicap, but you couldn't get a handicap without playing.
Centres such as Hoebridge were the answer.
The centre caters for all standards.
The 18-hole Maybury course is ideal for beginners, with holes ranging from 72 to 230 yards.
If they survive their first outing on a ‘real course’ and still have the golf bug, they can progress to the 2,294-yard Shey Copse course, a nine-hole mixture of par-3s and medium length par-4s.
But the centre's pride and joy is the 18-hole Hoebridge course, designed by former Ryder Cup captain John Jacobs.
At 6,536 yards, this is no pushover even for experts.
One particularly tricky hole is the 197-yard par-3 16th.
Here you hit uphill to a green guarded by a seven-foot deep bunker.
So you'll need a bucket and spade when you go to Hoebridge, but not a bulging wallet.
With a round costing just £12 on the main course, this is a real golfing bargain.
Golf Director: Tim Powell.
Course Length: Maybury (18 holes) 2,230 yards.
Shey Copse (9 holes) 2,294 yards.
Hoebridge (18 holes) 6,536 yards.
Green fees per round: Maybury £6, Shey Copse £6.75, Hoebridge £12
Telephone: 0483 722611.
Worcester shatters opposition
WELL done, Worcester Royal Porcelain Golf Society — the first company team to join our Hall Of Fame.
They scooped all three national contests for companies in the Ceramic Industries Golf Societies Association.
Club president Gordon Podmore successfully defended the sponsors trophy at Hill Valley Golf Club, Whitchurch, and the four-man team walked off with the main tournament by one Stableford point.
They completed the hat-trick against HR Johnson's team in the association's knockout tournament at Alsager.
Congratulations to team members Gordon, Kevin Gilbert (capt), Darren Richings, Chris Giles, Martin Stephens, Tony Pawley and Mike Braddock.
How drenched was my valley
Adrian Furness
GOLF wasn't a game played much in Wales when I was young — at least not by working-class lads.
But times have changed and it's different now.
I live in Glyn-Neath, West Glamorgan, an old pit village with huge unemployment.
But a few weeks ago our youth rugby team couldn't raise a side because the golf club was holding a junior scratch championship on the same day.
I used to play cricket until about ten years ago, when the A470 was driven through the village pitch.
So I joined Glyn-Neath Golf Club instead.
‘Royal Glyn-Neath’, we call it, although in those days it was only a little nine-hole course.
I'm the club's President for life — great honour, that — and in 1985 we launched the bi-annual Max Boyce Classic to raise money for improvements.
Forty celebrities were invited to take part and every single one turned up, a tremendous turnout for a small village.
But on the day, of course, the heaviest rain in 80 years fell on West Glamorgan.
The greens were soon under six inches of water.
We tried local rules — just add two shots to your score when you land in the water — but in the end we had to abandon the tournament.
It broke my heart.
No one who played that day will ever forget it.
We had 160 golfers coming off the course at once to try to change in the little clubhouse.
One boy, Dai Knoyle, was caddying for the great rugby player Barry John and took him back to his house to change.
He rang his father and said: ‘Guess what.
I've got Barry John in our bath.’
His dad replied: ‘Good boy.
Don't let the water run out — we'll bottle it.’
Afterwards there was a sort of Dunkirk spirit in the clubhouse.
Jasper Carrott and Hale and Pace did impromptu performances — and everyone there pledged to come back in two years' time.
They did, too — and in 1989 and '91 as well.
The Classic has now raised about £60,000 and helped turn Glyn-Neath into a beautiful 18-hole course.
That was one of my most memorable rounds, even if I was only in charge of wellingtons.
The other has to be for the BBC's Pro-Celebrity Golf at Turnberry about five years ago.
I was partnering Sandy Lyle against Lee Trevino and Sean Connery and I was shaking so much with nerves, I couldn't even balance my ball on a little wooden tee at the first.
Trevino tapped me on the shoulder and said: ‘Sure is a hard course, isn't it, Max?’
And this was before I'd even hit a ball!
But what made the round most memorable was my caddie.
Old Willie, they called him.
That first fairway was hump-backed and before I drove, I asked: ‘What's the line, Willie?’
He pointed up the fairway and said: ‘Just hit it at the wee stone marker.’
I drove and would you believe, my ball hit the marker and bounced back.
And Willie admonished me.
‘I told ye to hit at it, I didna' tell ye to hit it,’ he muttered.
In fact I played well, dropping only six shots over the nine holes — the equivalent of playing off 12 handicap, and I'm really 15.6 handicap and rising.
But it was on the greens that Willie came into his own.
At the 13th, a big sloping green, he studied my putt and said: ‘Ah now, it's a canny putt, son, but let me see…yes, hit it straight at the pin.’
At the 17th, a switchback of a green, he said: ‘Let me look at it from this side.
If I were you, I'd hit it straight at the pin.’
At the 18th there were two yards of borrow and I said: ‘How far right, Willie?’
And he said: ‘No, straight at the pin.’
Afterwards I said to him: ‘I appreciate you've caddied for Nicklaus, Palmer, all the greats, Willie, but…’
And he stopped me and said: ‘Son, I saw ye practising, and I've always found with a player of your capabilities it is best to tell them to hit it straight at the pin!’
Sandy and I won, so maybe he was right.
Fried Green Tomatoes At The Whistlestop Cafe
By Steve Howard
THE title Fried Green Tomatoes At The Whistlestop Cafe (Columbia Tristar, PG, out now) may be a bit of an unappetising mouthful but as a movie it is gourmet fare.
For that we can thank a succulent script, meaty characterisations and four central performances that will leave you begging for more.
Rarely has a film given me such a warm glow.
Based on the best-selling novel by Fannie Flagg, it is really two stories in one.
Evelyn Couch — the marvellous Kathy Bates of Misery fame — is a tubby chocolate-addicted housewife whose attempts at domestic bliss are largely ignored by her slob of a husband.
As a result, she unhappily munches more candy bars — and that's how wise old-timer Ninny Threadgood finds her when Evelyn visits a relative at Ninny's retirement home.
Ninny, played with strength and softness by Jessica Tandy — tells her new pal a tale of two girls who grew up together in the racist Deep South of the Thirties.
Beer-swilling tomboy Idgie (Mary Stuart Masterston) and genteel, god-fearing Ruth (Mary Louise Parker) are unlikely pals who eventually open the Whistlestop Cafe.
Their friendship stands the test when Ruth's brutish estranged husband tries to kidnap her baby.
Several days later his car is fished out of the creek.
Has Idgie done him in?
The film tantalises us — and Evelyn, who is hanging on to Ninny's every word — right to the end.
Throughout the story we rejoice as Evelyn, guided by Idgie's example, becomes her own woman.
I'm still pondering it, but this could be my favourite movie of 1992.
THE rich fare of Fried Green Tomatoes needed something vintage to accompany it and I got that from Albert Finney in The Playboys (Warner, 15, out now).
Finney is at his grumpy best as drink-ravaged constable Brendan Hegarty who falls for beautiful, headstrong mum Tara Maguire (Robin Wright), in the Ireland of 1957.
But Hegarty has rivals for this seemingly unobtainable Colleen.
One man (Adrian Dunbar) is so smitten that he commits suicide while the other, travelling player Aidan Quinn, turns all his thespian charm on Tara, much to Hegarty's annoyance.
All this romantic angst is set against a backdrop of rural Irish life and IRA exploits.
The Playboys, written by Shane Connaughton who scripted My Left Foot, is a slow-burner but worth the wait as Finney's emotions are fanned to such a fervour that we suspect he is going to do something regrettable.
NOT since big John Wayne played a Roman centurian who drawled his crucifiction line in The Greatest Story Ever Told have I seen such hilarious mis-casting as we have in Columbus: The Discovery (Braveworld, PG, out now).
Tom Selleck as King Ferdinand of Spain is a real hoot — he can't decide whether to play him as a moody Continental or haughty monarch, so what we get is a cross between Magnum and Don Juan with an accent that hovers between Malibu and Basingstoke.
Be grateful for Tom, though.
His portrayal is the only real entertainment in a right load of old cobblers which has George Corraface as the Genoese explorer who finally gets Queen Isabella (Rachel Ward) to stump up the cash which will allow him to seek an alternative route to the spice-rich Indies.
Instead he stumbles on America, setting up a colony of fornicating drunks who deservedly get their come-uppance at the hands of the Indians they mistreat in the name of Christianity.
Look out for Catherine Zeta Jones as Chris's mistress.
Marlon Brando is in there too — I think.
Christmas On Division Street
By Steve Howard
IN MY book, young Fred Savage of TV's The Wonder Years would knock spots of Macaulay Culkin.
Fred's a delight as a good-hearted youngster who adopts vagrant Hume Cronyn in Christmas On Division Street (Odyssey, £10.99).
INGRAM Entertainment has extended its Year To Remember documentary series to cover the period 1969 to 1991.
Tapes are £10.99 each.
DR WHO In Love?
The only romance the Timelord ever enjoyed was in the 1964 William Hartnell four-parter, The Aztecs.
BBC Video has released a tape (£10.99).
Terrible legacy of the charmer
Penny Wark
MISS E will not talk publicly about the day she accepted a glass of wine from Dr Tom Courtney.
She still feels guilty about it.
There is no reason why she should feel guilty.
She was introduced to him by a friend who spoke of him with admiration.
She was intrigued and, as her meeting with him was social, she found nothing odd about the offer of a drink.
She did not know that it had been spiked with tranquillisers until she woke up some time later.
Dr Courtney was on top of her, attempting to rape her.
Miss E was horrified, and ashamed that she had accepted wine from a man she did not know.
For that reason she has never reported the incident to the police.
Two weeks ago the same Dr Courtney was convicted of raping two women and indecently assaulting two others.
The first victim to give evidence against him, a 26-year-old secretary, was raped after being served spiked champagne at his surgery before they went to a mutual friend's home for dinner.
Dr Courtney was also found guilty of drugging and raping a woman who went to him for advice about work, and indecently assaulting a German student and a 17-year-old when they went to his surgery for part-time jobs.
He was sentenced to seven years imprisonment on each of the rape charges and four years for each of the indecent assaults.
During the trial another seven women approached the police to say that they too were victims of Courtney.
For reasons similar to Miss E, they had not spoken before.
Like the four young women who gave evidence at his trial, and like Miss E, they had been charmed by him.
They found him plausible.
They accepted his assurance that he was a gynaecologist who wanted to help women and that his Harley Street-based Courtney Foundation was doing just that.
When he dropped the name of Princess Diana into conversations — she would soon be the Foundation's patron, he claimed — they took this as further evidence that he was committed to his charity work.
The trial unmasked him as a complete charlatan and, in the words of one detective, ‘as close to being the perfect rapist as you could get’.
As more women approached the police with stories of assault uncannily similar to the incidents described in court, the police began to understand the scale of Dr Courtney's horrific sexual activities.
The only question that remained was exactly how many victims he really had.
‘It is not an exaggeration to assume that as many as 100 women could have been abused by him using his evil methods,’ one detective told TODAY.
‘Many of these women, we believe, have been too frightened or too confused to admit what happened to them.’
Another woman who met Courtney was the singer-songwriter Lynsey de Paul.
He contacted her when he heard of her research into women's self-defence and invited her to his surgery.
She survived unscathed, which she put down to her ability to be assertive.
‘There was something sinister about him,’ she told TODAY.
There is no doubt that Courtney is a dangerous and manipulative liar whose life is geared towards sex.
He charmed his victims, drugged them, assaulted them and felt confident they would either not know what had happened or be too embarrassed to tell.
In most cases he was right.
Consequently Courtney got away with most of his crimes and even when he was brought to trial he was sentenced to a mere seven years in prison.
Because his sentences run concurrently he could be free in two years and will almost certainly be free in a little over four years.
So why was the sentence so light?
Because he was a doctor with a respectable position in society?
Because the women he raped and assaulted were trusting enough to accept one glass of wine from him?
Because he did not use violence?
Yet raping a woman when you have just drugged her senseless is every bit as premeditated as the rapist who hides behind a hedge then jumps on a passing woman.
The rapist who pounces from behind a hedge is an opportunist.
The rapist who wins women's trust and then abuses them is a more sophisticated, devious and frightening operator.
Yesterday MPs backed TODAY's campaign for a review of Courtney's sentence.
‘The Attorney General should look at this case,’ said Billericay MP Teresa Gorman.
‘It is doubly appalling that someone in a professional capacity is involved in this sort of thing.
Generally men sentenced for rape get off very lightly.
I think it is appalling that this man could be out in 3½ years.
‘Rape should carry an automatic life sentence.
If you let them out too soon they are more likely to commit the offence again.’
Coventry South West MP John Butcher said: ‘The increase in the frequency of rape demands harsher sentences.
The legal system is still not reflecting public abhorrence of rape.’
Labour's Home Affairs spokesman Alun Michael added: ‘It is difficult to comment on individual cases but there is a general feeling that some offences are dealt with too leniently.’
Courtney's life of abuse was founded on lies.
He pretended to be a qualified gynaecologist, although he had not passed the relevant professional exams.
His foundation specialised in treating women who were HIV-positive, but he had never published research into Aids.
In court he said he had worked with the renowned Well Woman clinic in Dublin in 1977.
But chief executive Rita Burtenshaw told TODAY: ‘We have checked our records since the clinic began and he was never employed by us.’
Courtney had worked at the Whipps Cross and Charing Cross hospitals in England, at Dublin's University College hospital, in Saudi Arabia and at the Royal Free hospital and medical school, where he was researching a project on caesarian sections.
‘He was given the title of honorary research assistant but articles began appearing in newspapers which described him as a consultant,’ says a doctor who knew him.
‘Many felt he was allowing himself to be misrepresented.’
As a result Courtney was given a ‘formal warning’ by the Hampstead Health Authority.
‘There was genuine concern about the work he was trying to do involving his Foundation,’ says a health authority source.
‘Some of it seemed to cross into the Aids field, which had nothing to do with his brief at the Royal Free.’
During his time with the Royal Free Courtney began publicising his foundation.
During an appearance on the TV show The Time — The Place in 1988, he claimed he had seen ‘some 666 young women who are HIV-positive’.
If his ‘666’ claim — he chose the devil's number — was true he would have treated roughly half the known HIV-positive women in Britain.
At the time the Royal Free was dealing with just three.
Time is running out for sentence appeal
Adrian Lee
THE Court of Appeal has the power to increase Dr Courtney's seven-year sentence if it feels the term imposed at the Old Bailey is ‘unduly lenient’.
But time is running out.
The case must be sent there within 28 days of sentencing, and 14 of those days have already slipped by.
First, the Attorney General Sir Nicholas Lyell, must be persuaded to look at the case.
A victim, member of a victim's family or the Crown Prosecution Service can all bring the matter to his attention.
Or he can act if there is public outcry over a sentence.
Only Sir Nicholas has the power to refer a case to the Court of Appeal's Criminal Division.
The Attorney General would spend hours poring over the evidence before asking the Court of Appeal to look at the Courtney case.
To help him he has a hand-picked team of the country's most experienced prosecutors.
Together, they would compare the evidence from the Courtney trial with other ‘guideline cases’, taking into account any unique aggravating or mitigating circumstances.
If Sir Nicholas and his team of lawyers felt Dr Courtney's sentence was only slightly lenient no action would be taken.
But if they thought there had been a miscarriage of justice Dr Courtney would come under new scrutiny.
Even if Dr Courtney's case went to the Court of Appeal, it would be unlikely to impose the stiffest jail term of life imprisonment.
Appeal courts are expected to show some mercy because the defendant has twice had to face the ordeal of being sentenced.
There is no statutory minimum sentence for rape, but five years is generally the most lenient term.
I believed Courtney was a hero who liked and respected women
Val Sampson
HIS hands shook as he made me coffee.
That should have alerted me to the fact that Dr Tom Courtney was not as he seemed.
At the time, I decided that the slight tremor as he placed two cups on his office desk was due to nervousness at giving his first national magazine interview.
And I was impressed that a Harley Street gynaecologist was prepared to boil his own kettle.
He paid fulsome tribute to his attractive, blonde secretary.
She was working for his charity for a third of what she could earn in the City, he enthused.
Tom Courtney appeared to like and respect women.
More fool me.
In common with perhaps hundreds of other women, I am still wondering just how Tom Courtney conned me.
As it turns out, I was lucky.
He didn't slip drugs into my coffee and rape me, like so many of his other victims.
I only had to deal with a couple of vicious assaults over the telephone when the magazine I was writing for decided he was too dodgy to get involved with and, with mind-boggling nerve, he threatened us with legal action for breach of contract.
Even then, none of us suspected the scale of his misdeeds against the women he claimed he wanted to help.
He was certainly an incredibly clever operator.
Having interviewed my fair share of criminals and oddballs, ranging from murderers to men with silver foil round their heads claiming protection from the moon's beams, I thought I had a well-developed instinct for sensing a nutter when I met one.
Tom Courtney was charming.
In the role of every woman's ideal gynaecologist, he was utterly convincing.
Once you've met one or two less-than-enchanting, patronising individuals, someone who smiles and remembers your name feels like a hero.
During the two occasions on which we talked, he seemed a caring and compassionate doctor blessed with a natural ease and affability, who needed publicity for the £2 million appeal he had launched to raise money to turn his Harley Street office into a well woman centre.
He was specialising, with terrible irony as it turns out, in the treatment of women who had suffered sexual abuse and those who were HIV positive.
He mentioned that he hoped the Princess of Wales would open the refurbished clinic the following year.
During our first informal meeting he spoke chattily of the barrier drawn by other male gynaecologists between their professional response to female patients and their private sexual relationships.
He claimed that the notion of being able to suppress a sexual reaction in the course of work was ridiculous.
At the time his outspokenness seemed like refreshing honesty.
With hindsight it makes him sound like a manipulative sexual deviant.
He talked eloquently about how the NHS failed in its provision for women.
It is only after listening again to my tape-recording of our meeting that I hear him eventually say in his educated, upper-class Dublin accent: ‘Well, over 90 per cent of people who get raped are not injured in that rape.’
Why didn't I pick him up on that?
I can only guess that by then he had so established himself in my mind as a man who was trying to help women that I was no longer objective.
And that's while he was telling me that he wanted his Harley Street centre to offer a rape examination suite.
‘Women who have been raped may very well feel that although they have never reported the matter to the police they need to come and talk,’ he said.
He once broke off a phone call saying the police were waiting to take him on a tour of one of their up-to-date rape suites.
That now seems unlikely — unless he conned someone in the police.
He began our interview by mentioning that he had seen statistics about sexual abuse reported in a recent magazine article.
‘It scared the life out of me,’ he said with apparent sincerity.
His conversation leapt from one sexual subject to another.
Just as the slightest of doubts about him crossed my mind — perhaps during one of his endless lists of the women's sexual problems — he would throw in a sensible remark about the funding of the National Health Service, or the small amount of time GPs can offer patients, and recovered his credibility.
Social workers, he confided, don't like dealing with HIV-positive women.
‘Most social workers are women and they don't want to be threatened, abused or raped.
They don't like mixing with HIV-positive people and drug addicts and their husbands and boyfriends don't like it, so they are encouraged not to get involved.’
Claptrap — or the words of someone on the Aids scene who really knew the score?
He gave me a small, badly-stapled leaflet about The Courtney Foundation.
‘In many ways the needs of persons infected with HIV, or suffering the consequences of drug misuse or sexual abuse, are similar,’ it intones.
‘Shunned and ostracised by society, there is a common need for realisation of self-importance and for rehabilitation.’
The hypocrisy is stunning.
But what fills me with fury is not only the massive betrayal of the women he raped who will probably be traumatised for the rest of their lives.
It is the fact that he has stolen hope from a number of incredibly vulnerable HIV-positive women who turned to him for help.
He introduced me to one simple, trusting soul.
She had a rotten life.
At one stage she had ended up in prison, then she had contracted HIV from a violent husband who was a heroin addict.
So she had left her native Ireland with a new, gentle man and she was expecting a baby.
Dr Courtney, she told me, had said that he would help her in any way he could.
Her eyes were shining with optimism.
I will never forgive him for letting her down.
After 24 hours of freedom I knew no one was going to lock me up again
Margaret Hall
IN 1981 ex-police officer and Playboy bunny girl Lawrencia ‘Bambi’ Bembeneck was jailed for life for the murder of her husband's ex-wife at home in Milwaukee.
It was a charge she fiercely denied.
Eight years later, Bambi escaped and fled to Canada.
In February of this year she was locked up in chains after giving herself up.
Last week, she won her freedom after agreeing not to contest charges of second-degree murder.
Here she speaks for the first time about her ordeal to Margaret Hall.
AFTER 24 hours of freedom, Bambi was in a state of stunned disbelief.
‘I wondered if I was dreaming.
I couldn't shed the fear that it wasn't really happening, that at any minute, some legal snag would get me hauled back to prison.
‘But after the first day on the outside, I started to relax.
I got really excited.
‘I realised no one was going to lock me up again.
I was safe.’
When she returned voluntarily from Canada last February, Bambi was not just put in solitary.
She was kept in handcuffs and leg-irons right to the moment she walked free from Milwaukee jail.
‘Writing letters was near impossible.
So was taking notes during my daily 15 minutes in the library, for the law course I was doing.
‘With your hands chained to your waist, if you drop your pen, you spend five minutes trying to pick it up.
‘Even in the shower, I had the shackles on.
And they raise welts.
‘In prison, you're always in chains.
It's awful.
You're really alienated, isolated.
‘Women in prison get a raw deal just because they are women.
The system is designed to squash them.
‘Most of them are incapable of fighting because of the way the system squeezes all the verve and vigour out of them.
‘They're socialised to be very obsequious.
They need a voice.
I feel very strongly about that.
‘And keeping women in chains is one of the things I'm going to crusade against now I'm free.’
In a book written in jail, Bambi, 32, is bitter about the law that landed her there.
‘I have learned so many things I wish I'd never had to learn.
I learned about the system of justice.
‘It protects its own, cannot bring itself to admit mistakes, so that many of its practitioners seem more concerned with process than justice.
‘So much heartbreak, too much despair, so unnecessary, so many lives broken on the wheel of crude ambition and cover-up.’
Bambi knows that during her trial all those years ago, and at a recent Press conference, she came over as cool, unemotional.
‘I just can't cry on cue.
And I'm very institutionalised.
‘It's not L.A. Law — there's no screaming or hollering.
‘People expect women to be highly emotional.
It's impossible to conform to that.
I'm just not a very histrionic person.
I was a cop, once.
Cops don't cry.
‘I do my crying in private, always have.
I always wanted to look strong for my Mom and Dad.
‘But when I was reunited with them, I'll admit I just broke down and sobbed my head off.’
Now she is free, Bambi is determined to change the way even her supporters view her, as ‘a truly ridiculous’ femme fatale.
‘There are these constant references to me having been a Playboy Bunny, and a pin-up photo taken when I was 18, that ended up as Miss March on a beer calendar.
‘Why do they always have to throw that in?
A lot of people do things when they are 18 that they wouldn't want on their career resume.
‘Also, I really hate being called Bambi.
Admittedly it helped win my freedom, when I escaped and people went around with the slogan, Run, Bambi, Run.
‘But did you know I am an artist?
I've been painting since I was old enough to pick up a brush.
‘I'm competent.
I'm educated.
I'm serious.
I just want people to give me a chance to help others.’
The so-serious Bambi did admit to one bit of frivolity to celebrate her freedom.
Eating chocolates in a bubble bath.
Alone.
With no chains.
Amazing insight into SAS tough guys
THE covert world of the SAS can today be revealed for the first time.
The most feared special forces unit in the world has lifted its blanket of secrecy to give TODAY an exclusive insight.
Six Territorial SAS climbing specialists are involved in the British winter expedition on Everest.
Everyone knows the regiment's image of action men in balaclavas abseiling into terrorist-held embassies, or sabotaging Iraqi tanks behind enemy lines.
But what few people realise is that the SAS has two Territorial Army regiments.
Bankers, bus drivers and road diggers train with full-time SAS soldiers at weekends and on special courses.
There are three SAS regiments, the 22 Regular, 21(V)TA and 23(V)TA, all based in Hereford.
They are run by Directorate Special Forces, which also controls the Special Boat Squadron.
Candidates must complete punishing physical and mental tests to be selected.
The 21 (Volunteer) draws recruits from London, Southern England and South Wales.
The 23 (Volunteer) covers the Midlands, the North and Scotland.
Three-quarters of the men are ex-soldiers, the rest civilians.
Applicants are first interviewed, to weed out the physically weak, violent and unstable.
Then comes pre-selection — eight nights of physical training, followed by full selection.
This involves one night a week in barracks for navigation, medical and weapons training plus nine weekends of swimming tests, nerve-testing exercises on high wires and gruelling marches.
The culmination is the ‘Long Drag’, a 60km yomp with a 45lb pack, rifle and webbing, against the clock.
Five people have died on the test.
‘You just cannot believe how difficult it is,’ said one successful candidate.
Then, men go through a two-week battle camp at secret locations.
Only if they pass this do applicants become ‘badged’— able to wear the famous winged dagger emblem with the motto Who Dares Wins.
One man, in the regiment for 11 years, said: ‘They are a breed apart.
And I don't mean a bunch of Conan the Barbarians, quite often it's more Conan the librarian.’
Training is ongoing.
Squadrons parachute into simulated ‘hostile’ territory.
If caught, they face tough interrogation.
‘I've been hosed down with cold water while standing naked in the snow,’ said one man.
‘They've forced me to sit cross-legged for hours leaning against a wall with my fingertips.’
Knowing that, it's clear why the SAS's other, lesser known, motto is Train Hard, Fight Easy.
Even the Sherpas want us to give up.
We won't
Stephen Farrell
THE weather was terrible.
Winds of 110mph were on the way.
Even the famed Sherpa porters wanted to call a halt to the first British attempt on Everest in winter.
Too windy, they said, dumping five rucksacks of supplies in the snow, well below Base Camp Three, at 24,500ft.
They had a point, I was forced to admit, since I was already suffering from frostbite in the toes.
Lieutenant Colonel Philip Neame, Falklands veteran and leader of the expedition sponsored by TODAY, had a ‘stiff discussion’ with the chief Sherpa.
‘It became a bit of an issue,’ he told me.
‘I rather felt if they weren't going to carry in those conditions, we weren't going to get anywhere — the winds aren't going to get any better.’
Next day, in a classic Boys' Own move, Neame and two other Britons — Jonathan Tinker and Harry Taylor — set the Sherpas an example by trudging off up the mountain, loaded with supplies.
In no time at all, the Sherpas picked up their bags and followed.
Yesterday, the great attempt was hanging in the balance.
Colonel Neame had hoped to make a quick dash to the peak.
But now the 14-man climbing team, mainly Territorial Army men, must sit tight at base camp, praying for a break in the weather.
If the wind drops below 50mph, they will begin the long haul to the 29,000ft summit.
‘The jetstream has come in earlier than expected, and the race to beat it is lost,’ Neame admitted.
‘We are trying to position ourselves to take advantage of the next break in the weather.’
Party rebels
Alison Veness
THIS Christmas, party animals are united in revolt against the deeply dull little black dress — the only successful outfits will be truly outrageous and individual.
Rebel against the party line and the usually dreary office thrash will become a real glam ball.
Flamboyant drop-dead designs vary from risque bare-as-you-dare creations to the latest gold and lurex numbers.
The master of shock frock Fashion Editor tactics is Gianni Versace, whose bondage dresses have set supermodels like Cindy Crawford on fire — and are so distinctive that it's easy for the High Street to copy, so that cage-style dresses are now everywhere.
Leave the shorter cuts in the shops.
A fresher length skims the ankles or low calf, and skirts are sexily split thigh-high.
But gazelles needn't mourn their micro-minis, there's still a way to show off long, shapely legs…with hot pants.
And I mean hot — in the skimpiest, cheekiest black leather or dazzling gold.
Other retro favourites are flares and bell-bottoms, such as all-in-one Barbarella-style pants suits, skimming the body down into gentle flares.
Frivolous frou-frou feathers, spikey mules and a high hairstyle are crucial but the main accessory is attitude — if you're going to wear it, flaunt it.
The Charts
1 (1)
I Will Always Love You Whitney Houston
2 (2)
Heal The World Michael Jackson
3 (3)
Would I Lie To You?
Charles & Eddie
4 (4)
Slam Jam WWF Superstars
5 (9)
Could It Be Magic Take That
6 (10)
Deeper And Deeper Madonna
7 (-)
Phorever People Shamen
8 (11)
In My Defence Freddie Mercury
9 (6)
Tom Traubert's Blues Rod Stewart
10 (13)
Megamix Boney M
11 (8)
Out Of Space Prodigy
12 (7)
I Still Believe In You Cliff Richard
13 (5)
Temptation Heaven 17
14 (16)
If We Hold On Together Diana Ross
15 (12)
Step It Up Stereo MC's
16 (25)
Miami Hit Mix Gloria Estefan
17 (21)
One In Ten 808 State-UB40
18 (14)
Montreux EP Simply Red
19 (-)
Someday Lisa Stansfield
20 (22)
Mrs Robinson Lemonheads
Diana's got it taped as royal spoof hits street
By Tim Satchell
THE Princess of Wales has obtained a copy of the video version of Pallas 2, the spoof soap opera which pokes fun at the Royal Family and which will be shown next week on Channel 4.
Pallas 2 is a sequel to the controversial first series screened last Christmas.
The producer and writers have used genuine royal film and video footage and then added fictional storylines and invented dialogue.
The series will be shown over three nights starting on December 22.
A video tape version has already been released and features some items which have been vetoed by the Channel 4 lawyers.
Kensington Palace contacted the producers to obtain an advance copy for the princess, but was told that the video tape, with the extra material, was already available in High Street, Kensington.
Richard E Grant, the narrator of Pallas 2, tells me: ‘I understand a detective was sent out to get one.’
Actress Kate Robbins, the principal female impressionist for Spitting Image, who for Pallas 2 supplies the voices of the Queen, the Duchess of York and Princess Anne, says: ‘Although it's a pretty naughty affair I think it is being thought of as fun by comparison with what has really happened.
I think members of the Royal Family will be amused despite the reality of the situation.
‘After the first series I heard from somebody who was at Sandringham last Christmas and they said the young Royals really enjoyed it.
In particular I hope my portrayal of the Queen is affectionate.’
20 ft tall origami tree
By Tim Satchell
A 20ft tall origami tree is currently standing in the Roosevelt Hall of New York's Natural History Museum.
Origami is the ancient Japanese art of paper folding.
‘It was lit up by Mayor Dinkins's wife and the Cookie Monster from Sesame Street,’ a museum curator tells me.
‘We estimate the tree is decorated with 15,000 origami models of animals made by hundreds of volunteers.
‘This is the twentieth year we have had a tree.
It started much smaller with just origami insects.
This year we have stars and mobiles, that is models on wire which move with the air current.’
The word origami comes from the Japanese ori (folding) and kami (paper).
Last week in London the Cookie Monster met Norma Major, who was lunching at Piccadilly's Hard Rock Cafe.
Cookie is the American word for biscuit.
And…
By Tim Satchell
THE little boy next door said to his father: ‘Dad, I don't want a bike for Christmas anymore.’
‘Why not, son?’ replied the father.
‘Because I've just found one behind the wardrobe.’
Champagne to Lee Henderson of South Norwood.
Sophia gets right effect
By Tim Satchell
MODEL Sophia Berggren has been telling me about the unusual special effects used for her current Clairol hair colouring advertisement.
Miss Berggren's hair appears to move in time of its own accord as James Brown's Feel Good song plays.
But she says: ‘There was a white background and my hair was put in some white paper rollers.
Men wearing white gloves moved it, but you couldn't see them do it as the bodies were out of shot.’
Married to Mike Edwards, singer in the pop group Jesus Jones, Miss Berggren, 23, comes from Sweden.
She keeps fit by cycling to appointments from her home in Kilburn, north London.
Her commercials include one for Turkish jeans.
‘I am in a truck and this good-looking man wants a lift.
I throw him my jeans with my telephone number written on them.’
Old rope, new look
By Tim Satchell
HESSIAN and rope will be the fashion fabrics for next year.
The glossy magazine Vogue is working on a major fashion cover story in the California deserts where top models Christy Turlington and Linda Evangelista are expected to be photographed in natural coloured clothes and decked with bracelets, necklaces and belts made from coarse ropes.
‘It's not quite sackcloth and ashes but the new look does emphasise natural materials in natural colours,’ says of one of London's senior fashion commentators.
‘Everyone is talking about it and before the pictures come out you can bet all the top designers will be using rope.’
The Princess was desperate.
She begged me to tell her if there was any hope of happiness
Chris Hutchins
Today astrologer Penny Thornton's secret meeting with Diana.
WITH her bags packed ready to walk out on her marriage, Princess Diana sought one last avenue of help.
In desperation she picked up the phone and called astrologer Penny Thornton.
‘Tell me,’ she begged, ‘is there any light at the end of the tunnel?’
That call, to a number supplied by the Duchess of York, persuaded Penny to halt work on a book and agree to help.
‘As soon as I realised Princess Diana was in trouble I put everything to one side,’ she says.
‘Three or four days later I drove to Kensington Palace.’
That afternoon Penny stayed with Diana for more than four hours.
‘It was obvious that her marriage to Prince Charles was in very serious trouble indeed — and that was in 1986,’ she says.
What Penny said persuaded the Princess to unpack her bags and try again.
Penny says a close friend recently asked her to sum up what she thought she'd done for the Princess of Wales.
‘I thought about it and it does go back to those very early days and probably to that first meeting,’ she says.
‘When somebody is in a situation where they feel there is no way out, feel trapped, lost, unloved, helpless, powerless, they are in a definite negative spiral and are getting deeper and deeper into a place where they are more and more frightened and despairing.
‘So the thing that I would say, if I had to give myself a brownie point, would be that I enabled her to see that she could work actively with the situation.
That she wasn't in a powerless position.
And instead of continuing to tell herself ‘I can't get out, I'm trapped, there's nothing I can do’, I told her to reverse that and start thinking ‘Well I can do this, I can do that’.
Working with it, not disappearing under it.
‘Looking at it now, I realise it was from this point that Diana began putting herself behind Relate and Aids charities.
If you are suffering, the best relief comes from helping others with their suffering.
‘Our first talk turned her round from a position of despair to a position of strength and attack.’
That was more than five years ago.
But Penny's advice and counselling was to continue.
Eighteen months ago Diana confided to her: ‘I know what you feel in your heart of hearts, even if you don't say it to me.
But I would never…
I couldn't possibly have a divorce.
‘I couldn't even have a separation because I know what damage that does to the children and I would never, never, never break up the home for their sake.’
Penny says Diana was adamant that she would not split up with Charles.
‘So if it appears that the Princess has contrived to bring her own marriage down then that is not the case at all,’ says Penny.
‘If Diana can be accused of contriving anything then it is to ensure her own survival.’
During the years that Diana consulted Penny, the two women forged a close bond.
‘I'm not saying we became best buddies because we never did,’ says Penny.
‘But it was a very warm connection and I believe she felt she could phone me any time she wished.
‘When you see clients on a professional basis you are connecting at a fairly deep level.
The astrological consultation is a very intimate setting.
‘When somebody is going through a crisis they are opening up to you and a deep bond does develop, more perhaps than you would have with a doctor.
‘I liked Diana very much.
She's very warm and has no sense of ‘I'm a princess so I will keep my distance from you’.
When someone is in great trouble and is very vulnerable, there is no point in them trying to persuade you that they are fine.’
Penny had first analysed the Wales's charts in their wedding year.
She concluded of Diana: ‘On the one hand she might bring a breath of fresh air into her relationship through the sheer force of her personality…on the other hand if her marriage becomes too restrictive she will break out and see new and more exciting horizons.’
It was probably that prediction which persuaded Diana to call in Penny after taking her first overdose.
‘The cross connections between her and Charles were so powerful, it was very make or break,’ says Penny.
‘It was certainly a very fated combination — a destined match, but when you get that it's a fixed reaction to do with planets and the fixed signs.
‘Aquarius, Taurus, Leo and Scorpio figure very strongly in the Royal Family's charts and very strongly in Diana's, so when you get a powerful connection like that with marriage partners it can either be the most sensationally passionate ‘I can't leave you alone for a minute’ or it's ice.
‘Maybe what I perceived in 1981 was the common sense of a man who was 13 years older — Diana was 19.
I reckoned that the marriage could have worked if Diana was 30 and Charles 43.
‘It's a testing point around the age of 29 and I knew Diana would change considerably.
‘I had previously studied Charles's chart and had noted that he has very unrealistic expectations of women.
‘He puts women on pedestals.
They are rather idealised figures.
He's not used to being with women who have pre-menstrual tension or post-natal depression.
‘His own models of feminity have been extraordinary women — the Queen Mother, who never let a feeling come between her and her duty, and the Queen.
She is a mother to the nation before she is a mother to her children, one might say.
‘Charles's unrealistic vision of women was probably going to make the connections in their astrology work to the detriment.
Understanding men and women and relationships as I do, I thought there was more chance of it not working out and the rest is what one might call one's intuition.
‘By 1988 I was updating the book I had been writing when I met Diana.
I then carried this further, looking at Charles's chart.
It was as I got towards the end that I began to look more towards his future.
‘It may be more of an intuitive thing, but I considered at that time that there were shades of Edward VIII about him.
The Duke of Windsor in his chart had Neptune — which on the one hand is a spiritual, artistic and creative but on the other hand is chaos, erosion and sacrifice.
‘It was at the base of his chart, to do with his family, his roots, his line.
Charles has exactly the same thing.
‘I am not saying that Charles is incapable of love, it's just that he has this unreal perception of women.
‘If a woman had said ‘I'm not relating to you’ he would have said ‘Ouch, I'm going out’.
He wasn't brought up to see a woman like that and therefore it was an unholy, appalling state of affairs.
‘Most women need demonstrable affection and, of course, he discovered that Diana was capable of losing her temper, as we all are.’
Penny believes that Diana has always been aware of her own destiny.
‘She came into this life knowing she was going to do something, to be and do something great,’ she says.
‘She knew she was destined for greatness.
Her spirit is infinitely stronger than Charles's and she has a greater sense of her own destiny than he has.
He was born to it, after all.’
When Diana first consulted Penny the princess revealed that she was interested in astrology, but knew very little about it.
‘I think it started her interest in a lot of things and I positively encouraged her later on to explore other things,’ says Penny.
‘She had been reading her stars on a daily basis like everybody does.
Even the Queen reads her stars.’
Drink driving
DESPITE the seasonal campaign against drink-driving, courts still seem oblivious to the seriousness of this offence.
The four-month jail sentence given to Christopher Hart for mowing down nine-year-old Sharon Townsend was a disgrace.
His driving ban will soon pass — her parents' grief never will.
Jobcentre
A SIGN in my local Jobcentre reads: ‘We will retrain you if you are over 18 and under 60.’
As I am 61, does this mean the over-60s cannot be retrained?
If so, why not give us a pension?
Pension bonus
I HAVE just collected my fifth State pension bonus of £10.
Based on inflation over the same period, my £10 is now worth only Pounds 6.50.
How many more years before the bonus cancels itself out?
Sleep
I WAS interested to read that one in five people doesn't sleep well.
I suggest they tire out their bodies as well as their brains by doing more physical work.
Christmas lights
IN an energy-conscious world, is it right for towns to switch on their Christmas lights so many weeks before the big day?
Schools doomed royal love
A MAJOR factor in the demise of royal marriages must surely be the British public school.
Anyone like me who was sent to boarding school at an early age will identify with the personal difficulties of the young royals.
When you learn that love is something you must do without, that close attachments to other human beings is a sign of weakness and that expressions of emotion are deeply shameful, how will you ever manage the openness, honesty and compromise that a close relationship demands?
To survive the unloving environment of boarding school we build thick walls around ourselves and keep love alive by fantasising about the unrealistic relationships.
The reason why ex-boarding school pupils are forever divorcing is that during some of their most formative years love is characterised by distance, not closeness.
Milestones
BIRTHDAYS: Footballer Chris Waddle, 32, Singer Charlie Rich, 58.
ON THIS DAY: In 1861, Prince Albert died and Queen Victoria went into mourning.
In 1911, Roald Amundsen became the first man to reach the South Pole.
In 1918, women over 30 got the vote in Britain.
Let the nation vote on Euro shambles
NOW the European Community mandarins have gone their separate ways after yet another costly weekend of squabbling and arm-twisting, it's time we realised that the nations which form what was once called The Common Market actually have very little in ‘common’ at all.
Certainly their petty wranglings hold little interest for the ‘common’ man in Britain.
Although the conference was just up the road in Edinburgh this time, it might as well have been in Timbuktu for all the relevance it held for must of us.
John Major must secretly have been pleased at the way last week's royal shocker deflected attention from the summit — the rest of us were just pleased to avoid being bored to death by this most tedious of Edinburgh festivals.
The Royals at least belong to ‘us’— but the EC has never captured the national imagination.
All this could be different if only the British people were allowed a real stake in the EC.
It has been said before but we must go on saying it until it happens: call a referundum and give us a vote.
Let the nation vote on Euro shambles
JOHN Major had the perfect bargaining position at Edinburgh but failed to use it.
Instead of allowing Britain to pay an extra £300 million to the EC he should have offered to sell Europe our Royal Family.
They are worth far more than £300 million in entertainment value.
Well played, Dan
WHAT a tragedy it is for tennis that Dan Maskell (right) has gone.
Not only was he a first-class commentator, he was also a true gentleman of the old school who was not afraid to criticise the sport's overpaid prima donnas when they started throwing tantrums and acting up on court.
We'll miss him.
10 and 20 Pound notes
I HAVE both a £10 and a £20 note before me as I write and there is very little difference between them, either in size or colour.
I can foresee many problems arising at busy tills and checkouts over the Christmas period as a result of this, because not everyone pays by cheque or credit card.
Thunderbirds wanted
GREATER love hath no man for his three small grandsons than a 71-year-old friend of ours who sat in his car all night outside a Cardiff toy store to make sure he was first in line for a much-wanted Thunderbirds Tracy Island from Santa.
Things you didn't know you didn't know
Graeme Donald
IN the thinking of the early Church, anyone who married could never be completely devoted to God because they had chosen to pledge part of their love and loyalty to their spouse.
This notion is behind the phrase ‘man of the world’ which today implies sophistication.
But when it arose in the 16th Century, it simply denoted a man who had opted for worldly pleasure by marrying, in contrast to a cleric who stayed celibate.
This old sense of the expression was not confined to men.
In Shakespeare's As You Like It, Touchstone's marriage proposal is accepted by Audrey who reveals her desire to become ‘a woman of the world’.
Clerics became known as ‘men of the cloth’ because many types of cloth and weave were once kept strictly for ecclesiastical vestments.
Putting them to any secular use was considered sacrilege and was punishable by death.
TODAY'S Book Of Things You Didn't Know…is now on sale, published by Simon & Schuster for £3.99.
How you can make money out of hot air
Susan Glass
IMAGINE stepping out of the shower into the caress of a tropical breeze — instead of reaching out for a tatty old bath towel.
If you think that sounds like the sort of luxury only the likes of Joan Collins would have in her bathroom, you'd be wrong.
Inventor Mike Godwin has created Cozydry — the ultimate luxury in bathroom aids.
It is like a standard hot-air hand-dryer but on a much larger scale.
And it is not priced in the luxury category — it costs just £249 plus VAT to install Cozydry in any bathroom.
The revolutionary bathroom appliance is about six feet long with dozens of tiny holes to allow warm air to escape.
This means your whole body is dried quickly and comfortably.
Cozydry is to be marketed as a franchise by leading franchise operators Riverside International, who created Home Choice Video.
‘Cozydry fits into any corner of a bathroom or shower cubicle,’ says company spokesman Chris Bird.
‘And if you have a particularly cold bathroom you can also use it to warm up the room before your shower or bath.’
Once installed, Chris says the machine could not be more simple to use.
‘When you have showered or bathed you touch a sensor pad on the machine and it blows warm air over you.’
Cozydry's instant heat and touch control make it ideal for the infirm.
‘It is very good for old people and sufferers of arthritis who find it difficult to dry themselves with a towel,’ says Chris.
It is also ideal for health clubs and gyms where towels are sometimes damaged in the laundry or taken by guests as souvenirs.
‘This does away with all those problems,’ says Chris.
‘It would also save some of these places a phenomenal amount of money in lost towels.’
At home too — especially if you have a partner who persists in leaving the towels in a soggy heap on the bathroom floor — Cozydry could be a useful investment.
Manchester-based Riverside International is now looking for franchisees to take on Cozydry, which is British Standard approved.
The cost is £16,000 plus VAT for an exclusive territory, and that sum includes £13,000 worth of stock and helpful sales aids.
‘It is ideal for a husband and wife team,’ says Chris.
You can run the whole thing from home and the machines fit easily into most cars.
‘We will give franchisees all the training in selling and fitting them — it takes about 30 minutes to install one — but we find many people are keen on DIY and would want to do their own.’
Riverside is looking for about 50 to 60 franchisees in the next year and they estimate it is possible to earn about £1,500 a week.
The company also has a number of other franchises which they operate throughout Britain, including the pet food delivery company Trophy UK and Clearshield, a product for making glass dirt-proof.
Clearshield was launched in 1986 and as well as being shown on television's Tomorrow's World it won the Prince of Wales award for industrial innovation.
Battling for Britain
OF course TODAY is pleased that the Attorney General is now looking into the sentence given to Dr Thomas Courtney, the multiple rapist.
We will be even more pleased if he refers the case to the Appeal Court and absolutely delighted if Courtney's sentence is increased to life.
Then the man who is believed to have attacked at least 100 women would never again be a threat.
Although the Crown Prosecution Service and Attorney General's office were adopting the usual caution of lawyers yesterday, there can be no doubt that TODAY's demand for the Courtney sentence to be re-examined has led to action.
The speed at which they have moved is commendable, especially as the time in which an appeal can be made is ticking away.
Only 13 days are left.
If Courtney now receives the sentence which his crimes deserve, this newspaper will have scored a victory.
Doubtless there will be no thanks for that and we do not expect any.
But it is worth mentioning at this time, when the Press is under attack as never before.
To listen to the sanctimonious critics in the ‘serious’ papers, on TV and, particularly, in Parliament, you would think that the Press is nothing but a quagmire of evil.
The opposite is true.
It is the job of newspapers to expose evil and press the politicians, police and courts to act.
Too often they ignore misdeeds and then protest when the media points them out.
If the newspapers did not investigate criminals, MPs, businessmen and others, there would be times when no one did.
Yet if the crackdown on the Press which is being demanded goes ahead, journalists would be working with both hands tied behind their backs — as opposed to the one-hand handicap they are forced to suffer at the moment.
We should all be united in wanting a Britain where dangerous criminals are kept out of harm's way, where politicians are honourable and public servants are honest.
We won't get it if the newspapers are gagged.
Green light
DIRE warnings are given of the consequences of taking the necessary measures to make cars more environment-friendly.
It is said that they would increase the cost of petrol by 20p a gallon.
Certainly that would push up inflation and make motoring more expensive for everyone, particularly those who use their cars a lot.
But before the idea is condemned out of hand, let us remember that the price of petrol has just been brought down by 18p a gallon.
So a 20p increase would only put the cost back up to where it was a few days ago.
The price for a cleaner environment is well worth paying and if that price is virtually nil, it is a fantastic bargain.
The anti-green lobby will have to find better reasons for failing to clean up motoring.
If there are any.
Hell's belle
A FRENCHWOMAN has given herself the ultimate facelift in an attempt to create the perfect features.
With the aid of the surgeon's skills, she has tried to make herself a mixture of the great beauties through the ages.
Her features now include Diana's eyes, Venus's chin and the Mona Lisa's forehead.
Of course, it has been done before.
The surgeon who did it then was called Dr Frankenstein.
A happy new year in French beer war
Ian Fletcher
THE shopping aisles at the French hypermarket have been widened and the check-out staff are on full Euro alert.
The British are coming, preparing to invade the Continent armed with open wallets and ready-to-fill shopping bags.
When the European trade bar riers are lifted on January 1 French store owners expect an army of Brits to land — eager to snap up bargain-basement alcohol and cigarettes and ensure the happiest of New Years.
Brewery bosses say that every British couple bringing back the new full drink and tobacco allowance would save almost £1,000 in import duty.
Even after paying for the ferry crossing and a good meal on French soil, they could expect to save more than £800 between them.
French store-owners have anticipated the influx of custom by advertising in UK newspapers to promote their beer and wine buy-in-bulk outlets, 24-hours-a-day opening and easily understood English staff.
While the Chamber of Commerce is busily advertising in UK newspapers it will not be promoting a firm on the Calais industrial estate who are busily buying direct from European breweries and reselling in Britain.
Owner Dave West says he expects to turn over £3 million this year.
The former Essex market trader, who set himself up in France four years ago, said: ‘They don't like the Brits here.
They want their money and they want them out of there.’
But his premises aptly demonstrate the size of his business.
Crates of beer and wine lie at the side of the road, covered with a tarpaulin, a brazier burns and an alsatian dog keeps guard outside a broken down caravan.
Cars draw up, crates of beer are Consumer Correspondentloaded directly into the boot and cash changes hands.
Mr West predicts that January 1 will mean a free for all.
‘It will be mad for the first couple of months.
My view is that visitors could increase by 200 or 300 per cent.
I shall be staying here and I shall fight back just like my old man did at Dunkirk.’
For years British families have revelled in fleeting visits to the Continental sea-ports to make the most of cheap supplies.
But in less than three weeks the stakes will be significantly raised — with enough big-money losers on the British side of the Channel to match the winners of the beer war.
The introduction of the single European market signals the abolition of the current limits on duty-free imports designed for personal use only.
Customs chiefs have set new suggested guideline totals of 10 litres of spirits, 90 litres of wine, 110 litres of beer, 200 cigars and 800 cigarettes.
Using these maximum amounts, one Briton could save about £180 on wine alone.
Another £132 could be saved on beer, £100 on the cigars, £40 on cigarettes and £32 on spirits.
Larger quantities will be regarded as being for commercial purposes, unless buyers can prove otherwise.
But a family planning a wedding reception would be able to claim exemption from import duty.
Bosses of the biggest hyperstores closest to the Continental ferry ports confidently anticipate that sales of goods popular with Britons will soar by up to 30 per cent next year.
Even with the present trade restrictions it is estimated that we spend more than £350 million on liquor abroad every year.
Now that total is set to rocket.
Half a litre of Stella Artois lager is 60p cheaper in France than in the UK, and a bottle of Morgon Beaujolais is just half the price.
And a packet of cigarettes costs £1 less on the Continent than here.
Of course while you're on the Continent, you don't have to restrict yourself to alcohol and tobacco.
The French ports of Boulogne and Calais boast some of the finest cheese shops on the Continent.
And in the Belgian ports of Ostend and Zeebrugge there's an exotic range of chocolates to tempt any shoppers.
The Exchequer fears that it will be the biggest loser in the border battle.
Last year more than 25 million British trippers crossed the Channel, although one in four of them brought back less than their maximum allowance.
The Treasury pocketed more than £11 billion in duty on liquor and tobacco, but now glumly forecasts losses of about £250 million in excise revenue from the Euro shoppers next year.
There may also be good news for those who can't afford the average £70 cross-Channel fare for a car and five adults.
Trade analysts believe that the competition could force prices down in UK off-licences as retail chains fight to keep take-home beer buyers on home ground.
EUROPEAN finance ministers yesterday agreed to let tourists spend more on gifts in the US, Hong Kong and other non-EC countries.
The decision to raise the spending limit from £36 a person to £140 means people can now legally bring in cameras, CD players and jewellery.
NEW ALLOWANCES
10 litres spirits: save £32
90 litres wine: save £180
110 litres beer: save £132
200 cigars: save £100
800 cigarettes: save £40
SAVING: £484.
Bill has no excuses, no matter how Mandy behaved.
She was a child
Isla Whitcroft
TV Psychologist Phillip Hodson's verdict on Wyman.
THERE are very few middle-aged men who have not seen a vision of youthful loveliness and longed to possess it.
Call it yearning, or more realistically call it leching or lusting.
Bill Wyman was no different in that respect to any other man of his age.
The difference with Bill was that he had the power to be able to make his fantasy come true and that he lacked the self control, and the basic decency to say ‘no’ to himself and to Mandy.
I get letters from people who ask me if 14-year-olds are ready to have sex with 20-year-olds, or even if ten-year-olds are ready to have sex with 19-year-olds.
The answer is and must always be no.
They may appear to be sexually aware but they are just not prepared for the physical, emotional or sexual consequences.
When something goes wrong, as it always does, they are in terrible trouble.
Bill Wyman is alleged to have slept with 1,000 women.
He obviously has not learned anything from any of them.
He has not learned how to love properly, how to relate with a woman in a caring sense but, above all, he has not learned how to differentiate between an adolescent who is feeling the first stirring of her hormones and a fully-grown woman who is properly able to make her own emotional and sexual choices.
And Bill Wyman seems to be scared of adults.
What attracted him to Mandy — something he refers to again and again — is her vulnerability, her sweetness, her child-like innocence.
He says he taught her about wildlife, geography and Henry VIII and that she loved to listen.
That was all part of the attraction.
She would listen to him in the way that no adult woman ever would.
She wouldn't question him or argue with him or threaten his authority.
He says he felt as if he knew her from a previous life — of course he did.
He was looking back at his own life, at the daughter he might have had, and she fulfilled that fantasy.
Bill Wyman has a daughter fixation with a capital D, and in his fantasies he saw himself moulding and educating this girl into a beloved daughter.
We are also dealing with a man who has shown a marked inability to ever grow up.
One term for this is paedomorphosis — the retaining of juvenile qualities, and Bill's behaviour points to this syndrome.
The ageing rocker, still bedding women and jet-setting around the world at 56, who is still so desperate for attention that he will tell his story to a newspaper.
Another symptom of paedomorphosis is child-like selfishness and self-absorption, and Bill has shown he has that.
He says that at the beginning of the relationship he wrestled with himself, knowing that he should back off from Mandy.
‘Jesus this could ruin my career.
This could destroy me,’ he said.
Sadly there was no mention of what it could do to a 13-year-old child.
And again when they had been together for two years and he was still seeing other women: ‘They were my protection against these feelings I had for her,’ he said.
‘I knew if I wasn't careful my obsession for her could destroy me.
But she didn't see it that way.
She thought I was being very blase.’
The final pathetic cry comes when he complains about her selling their story to a newspaper.
‘I don't think she realised the seriousness of it.
She was endangering my future, my career and freedom.’
I'm sorry, but I have little sympathy for him.
Look at the facts.
A girl of 13 is wooed by a 47-year-old man and then has a physical relationship with him.
He takes over her life and even her education, continues to sleep with other women and tells the poor girl they can't be seen together in public.
Then he complains when she begins to behave like a very naughty child.
But what else did he think would happen if he played games with the fragile psyche of an adolescent?
He even bleats that she didn't want to have sex with him when they were married.
I would imagine that by that time the still adolescent Mandy was so sexually confused she didn't know what she was doing.
There are no excuses, no matter how badly Mandy behaved.
She was a child, he should have thought about what would happen when she went through the usual adolescent trials.
She should have been rebelling against her parents, not against him.
She should have been trying out her identity on friends around her own age, not in front of the world's media.
Even the fact that she suggested that they get married shows that she was living in a fantasy world.
Youngsters often tell their horrified parents that they are engaged — often several times over — before they are 18.
The difference with Mandy is that her boyfriend was Wyman, a man who had the power to make these fantasies come true — before she had time to understand the implications of them.
Her mother also let her down badly.
If Bill Wyman had been a 47-year-old plumber who seduced her daughter, Patsy Smith would have screamed to the police.
Whether she was star struck, or simply just ambitious for her daughter, Patsy failed in her primary duty of protecting her daughter from a confused and selfish man.
Mandy Smith sacrificed the magic of her childhood to amuse an immature Bill Wyman, and she is now a very ill young woman.
From what I can see Bill Wyman also badly needs help.
He shouldn't be talking to a newspaper.
He should be talking to a shrink.
Phillip Hodson is a psychotherapist with special interests in children's problems.
He is the agony uncle for Going Live, Fast Forward, Newsround, Family Circle and News Of The World.
Steve Martin
FUNNYMAN Steve Martin is fed up with people saying there's something strange about his Hollywood house just because it has no windows at the front.
‘I don't want people looking in my front window,’ says Martin, 47, married to British actress Victoria Tennant, 42.
‘Who does?’
Mickey Rourke
TOUGH-GUY actor and boxer Mickey Rourke caused an uproar when he beat Canadian middleweight Terry Jessmer in a farcical televised bout in Madrid, Spain.
Boxing Federation president Ruben Martinez walked out on ‘this disgrace’.
But Rourke, 42, exited with a smile — and a £115,000 fee.
Kevin Costner
MOVIE heart-throb Kevin Costner has taken over from Arnold Schwarzenegger as Hollywood's most powerful actor, according to a survey.
He claimed top spot with multi-million dollar hits such as JFK.
Schwarzenegger slipped because he didn't make anything in 1992.
Burt Reynolds
BURT REYNOLDS threw a tantrum on the set of his TV show Evening Shade in a row with a woman producer.
He hurled a chair across the set, smashing lamps and vases, then stormed off to his dressing room.
Star Katharine helps to fight water with fire
By Tim Satchell
ACTRESS Katharine Hepburn has been helping efforts to deal with the flooding in Connecticut.
She has given $7,000 (£4,400) towards the cost of a new fire engine, which is housed at the Old Saybrook Fire Station just two miles away from her home in Fenwick off the shore of the Long Island Sound.
The large red fire engine carries the message ‘Thanks K.H.’ emblazoned on its side.
‘The new vehicle has been a Godsend.
They got it just in time.
It has been instrumental in rescuing cats out of trees who might otherwise have starved or drowned,’ a local resident tells me.
In the worst flooding in the States for decades, thousands of homes have been flooded, with New York and New Jersey also badly hit.
It has left more than 130,000 houses and businesses without power.
Miss Hepburn, 85, retired last summer after 60 years as an actress.
Her fabulous career included four Oscar wins, most recently for On Golden Pond in 1981 with Henry Fonda.
Probably her most popular role was playing opposite Humphrey Bogart in the 1951 classic African Queen.
She earned over £1.25 million for her autobiography, Me, published last year.
Earlier this year she offered her endorsement to Ross Perot in his bid for the US Presidency, sending him $1,000 (£600).
However when he temporarily withdrew from the race she switched to Bill Clinton.
Filling the gap
By Tim Satchell
BESPOKE sandwiches — where the customer chooses the bread and the filling, prices from 70p to £1.40 — are now available at Parliament's newest cafe, at 7 Millbank.
‘Five or 10 minutes walk from the House, it is off the beaten track,’ says Tory MP Colin Shepherd, Chairman of the Catering Committee.
‘But the bespoke sandwiching is a popular innovation.’
In the new year, the Catering Committee will choose a name for the new cafe.
Suggestions so far include The Bank, The Outpost, Lineker's and Boothroyd's.
‘How about Gazza's Plaza?’ says Mr Shepherd.
And…
By Tim Satchell
ONE day last week outside Green Park station two men watched a familiar figure emerge into Piccadilly.
‘That's Sir John Harvey Whatisname,’ one said to the other.
‘Jones, actually,’ said Sir John, turning round with a smile.
A labour of Lovejoy
By Tim Satchell
TODAY at the London Hilton the Variety Club will pay tribute to Ian McShane and the cast of television's Lovejoy.
A showbusiness gathering of 400 will honour them and Mr McShane's actress wife Gwen Humble for their work for the club's children's charity.
Other regular cast members from the Lovejoy series will also be at the event.
On Boxing Day, BBC 1 screens a 90-minute Lovejoy special.
January sees the start of a fourth series, and a fifth will be filmed in the spring.
Icing on the cake for Jane
By Tim Satchell
ACTRESS Jane Asher has been given the excellent news that the cakes she designs are to be sold nationwide by Sainsbury's from next month.
Miss Asher's cakes — designs include a bottle of champagne, a Lotus racing car and a Nintendo Game Boy — first went into about 20 stores in the south of England in September.
‘They have been selling very well, so we have now extended them to over 60 stores,’ say Sainsbury's.
‘In January we plan to make them available throughout the country.’
Meanwhile the range has been joined by seasonable designs from Miss Asher, including Santa in a chimney, a snowman and a Christmas pudding.
Prices start at £3.75 for small gift cakes and £6.50 for large party versions.
Miss Asher also runs her own cake shop, which she opened three years ago in Chelsea.
There prices can be up to £1,000.
This month the play in which she was appearing at the Criterion Theatre, Making It Better, ended its run early.
‘I'm sad that it folded, but it's come at a good time,’ she tells me.
‘Now I can concentrate on the Christmas cake rush.
My favourite is a Christmas tree cake.
‘We can do that, with a proper light on top, for £65.’
Ten painful operations to turn me into a picture
Isobelle Gidley
SCALPEL poised, the plastic surgeon sets to work on the patient's face.
But this is no ordinary scene of cosmetic surgery.
For a start, there is an audience, and when the results of the surgeon's work are revealed, they burst into polite applause.
For this is no ordinary patient.
The woman shown on the video screen is dressed as Harlequin and has been fully conscious as the knife cuts into her skin.
Even more bizarre, she has been reciting the works of a French philosopher throughout the operation while a black stripper dances in the background.
The patient in question is French performance artist Orlan.
And she is using the 20th-Century surgeon's art to turn herself into a living version of classical beauties painted by the Old Masters, from Greek goddesses to the Mona Lisa.
Thanks to ten painful and increasingly risky sessions of cosmetic surgery, she now has Diana's eyes, Venus's chin, Psyche's nose and Europa's lips.
She has even had her hairline rounded off to give her Mona Lisa's forehead.
‘This is not about beauty or trying to appear younger,’ says the artist whose first name is Mireille but wants to be known only as Orlan.
‘It is a complete change of image.’
Orlan, 45, is currently showing a video of her last operation as she tours Australia to display herself as a living work of art.
As an artist she maintains that her canvas is her own body, her studio is an operating theatre and her brush a scalpel.
‘I push my life and my art to its limits.
In my view the body is no more than a bag, a costume or a cover and I'm altering it to be more in line with how I see myself.’
Orlan is attempting to mould that ‘costume’ to achieve what she believes is the perfect face — one that copies all the attributes of the goddesses of Greek and Roman mythology as portayed by the world's greatest artists.
While most people would shrink from the thought of all that skin cutting, tugging, implanting, and tightening, Orlan actually insists on staying conscious throughout all her operations, making do with only a local anaesthetic.
‘For some people,’ she explains to her audiences, ‘all this is revolting.
But for others, it is revolutionary.
The skin is something to cover a shape we were born with.
But sometimes the skin doesn't get it right.’
Some time in the future, she says, genetic manipulation will be free of taboos.
‘The Judeo-Christian religion believes that the body should not be touched by anyone.
However in one or two generations it will be possible to change our appearance without affecting relationships, and the sky is not going to drop on us as a result.’
But that time has not yet come and Orlan found that most of the surgeons she approached did not want to get involved with her ideas.
She eventually found one who was also an art collector and paid him for operating on her with her own works of art, most of them created at the Fine Arts School of Dijon where she teaches.
Orlan's artistic endeavour has won the approval of the contemporary art centre in Dijon.
The centre even paid for the first operation — they cost around Pounds 7,000 a time — because her teacher's salary meant she could not afford it herself.
Although Orlan takes her inspirations from the Old Masters she uses state-of-the-art computer imagery to ‘re-design’ her face.
Not content to let surgeons perform unguided, she remains conscious to give instructions and read aloud from books of psychoanalysis.
‘Each operation is difficult to go through, but I'm a strong person,’ she says.
‘I direct everything, and that reassures me.
I organise a ceremony, I have accessories, special decor, a video and a couturier.
‘I am under local anaesthetic so I don't feel anything, but I am lucid and I instruct everyone, including the photographer and the doctor.’
Not surprisingly, her family and friends reacted with horror when she told them what she planned to do.
‘What I am doing breaks all the rules.
My family took it badly.
For the moment, my mother still recognises me but later on I don't know how she'll take it.
My friends have also made it difficult for me, but the world hasn't come to an end.’
Orlan says she trusts the surgeons to do a good job, but recognises the risks involved.
‘Plastic surgery is not a very exact science.
Each surgeon has his own way of doing things and I know something could go wrong.
But if there was a blunder I could cope with it.
‘I am not doing this to provoke.
One has to be very clear-headed to do what I am doing.
I see it as the ultimate gesture.’
Not content with the ten operations she has already had, Orlan is now looking for sponsors for her next operation.
‘A little more work is required on the nose,’ she says.
‘It has to be just a little longer, straighter and perhaps more masculine.’
So far Orlan has confined her interest to artists who painted the human form true to life.
Heaven forbid she should ever be inspired by Picasso.
PRICE OF BEAUTY
Marjorie Wallace
HOW nice that former Miss World Marjorie Wallace has got her life in order.
I remember the scandal surrounding her in the Seventies, when she appeared to be just a naive young girl caught up in the trappings of fame.
She looked so happy in your pictures, and may she stay that way.
London Underground fares
I SEE that London Underground fares are going up on January 3.
Couldn't they have waited a bit longer after the expense of Christmas?
Bank employess
I RECENTLY used a £20 note to pay a £12.12 bill at my bank.
The young teller had to work out my change by writing the equation on a piece of paper.
What happened to the days of bank employees being quick with figures?
Take That
WHY all the excitement over the pop group Take That?
They are nothing more than a British version of New Kids On The Block.
Now, whatever became of them?
Eldorado
TRUE, Eldorado has improved recently.
But it's still light years behind Coronation Street and EastEnders.
History backs King Charles
I SEE no need for all the fuss about whether or not Prince Charles should take the throne if he and Princess Diana ever get divorced.
The main argument seems to be whether he could morally take up the titles of Head of the Church of England and Defender of the Faith.
Perhaps some people aren't aware that the title Defender of the Faith was given to Henry VIII by the Pope in honour of Henry's book praising the Catholic Church.
Henry then renounced the Catholic faith — when the Pope refused him a divorce — and set himself up as Head of the Church of England.
The other argument against Charles appears to be public opinion.
But surely, with so many modern marriages now ending in divorce, the Prince would probably earn public sympathy.
One quick smack can save a child's future
I WAS disturbed by your report of a mother taken to court and convicted of assault after smacking her daughter's bottom with a slipper.
When my two children are very naughty I also smack them, and I use a slipper because it's the softest thing that comes to hand.
Does this make me a criminal?
While I can see that the woman you wrote about may well have deserved what she got — your report says the little girl was badly bruised — I do think we have to be wary of going to extremes.
Cases like this, along with the many reports we read about innocent parents accused by the social services of child abuse, make parents frightened to lay a single finger on their children.
They are too scared to hug them in case that innocent action is misinterpreted, and too scared to smack them when they do wrong in case they are accused of assault.
This can only lead to children growing up without knowing the difference between right and wrong — and ending up in court themselves.
One quick smack can save a child's future
LAST week on a bus I saw a young mother spank her little boy when he said the F-word.
Good for her, I thought.
She then continued talking to her friend in a conversation which was peppered with exactly the same word.
It became quite obvious who really needed spanking.
Michael's magic
HOW right Jaci Stephen was to praise Michael Crawford's appearance in an otherwise dreary Royal Variety Performance.
Ever since he first appeared on TV as Frank Spencer, this fine actor has been delighting audiences — without resorting, like some, to smut or gimmicks.
Isn't it time he became Sir Michael Crawford?
Real Christmas trees
I WAS so pleased to read that people are reverting to real Christmas trees instead of the ghastly, glittering artificial things that have been popular for so long.
Perhaps now we can also replace TV, video and computer games with such old-fashioned delights as charades, bracing walks and conversation.
Cigarette advertising
POSTERS advertising cigarettes are now forced to carry Government health warnings, so why can't this good sense extend to adverts for alcoholic drinks?
It would be an effective way of getting the ‘don't drink and drive’ message across at this time of year.
Milestones
BIRTHDAYS: Novelist Edna O'Brien, 56.
Sixties pop star Dave Clark, 50.
ON THIS DAY: In 1906, the Piccadilly line on the London Underground was officially opened.
In 1961, Nazi leader Adolf Eichmann was sentenced to death for war crimes.
Things you didn't know you didn't know
Graeme Donald
NE'ER cast a clout 'til May be out, runs the old adage.
But it doesn't mean that you should wait until summer before thumping people.
The ‘May’ refers to hawthorn blossom rather than the month, and ‘clout’is derived from the Old English word ‘klut’meaning a piece of cloth, particularly a patch used to mend a garment.
So the complete saying means: don't take off a layer of winter clothing before you see blossom on the bushes (ie before spring has started in earnest).
The use of ‘clout’ meaning a punch on the face probably comes from the red ‘patch’left on the skin by such a blow.
Today we talk of something inferior being ‘not a patch on’ something better.
This is a shortening of ‘not fit to be a patch on’(ie you wouldn't try to mend an expensive item of clothing with an inferior bit of material).
TODAY'S Book Of Things You Didn't Know…is now on sale, published by Simon & Schuster for £3.99.
It's a downhill race for cover
Stephen Ellis
INSURANCE was the furthest thing from Pat Whyte's mind as she edged her way down an Austrian ski slope.
Though an experienced skier, Pat and her friends had got caught in a blizzard and were making their way to shelter when Pat's skis plunged into deep snow.
The next thing Pat knew she was in hospital.
Surgeons had inserted a plate and nine screws into her badly broken leg and she was faced with a bill for £1,950.
Luckily Pat had organised insurance before she left her home in Brighton — unlike 30,000 skiers who will head for the snow this season without adequate cover.
Figures show that out of every 1,000 skiers, 35 are involved in an accident — yet one in ten of us don't bother to take out insurance.
Going on holiday without insurance is always a risk — but with skiing it is particularly unwise.
A spokesman for insurance company Mondial explains: ‘It can cost a lot of money if people have an accident on the piste, which is often a long way from a medical centre.’
Many people believe that the E111 form you can get from the Post Office covers you against any medical treatment you may need abroad, but this is not so.
All it covers is the basic treatment in line with the minimum requirement in the country where you are staying — and that can be very different from what you would expect from the NHS.
That is why you would be foolish not to take out insurance, whether it is the standard cover arranged by a tour operator or a policy which you arrange yourself.
Pat is among an increasing number of people who are making their own arrangements.
She says: ‘When I went to arrange the AA insurance for the car they offered me a policy for us as well and, thank goodness, I decided to take it.’
A spokesman for Home & Overseas — the company which organises the AA insurance Pat bought — stresses the importance of covering everything that could possibly go wrong on a ski holiday.
‘You could lose several hundred pounds if you have booked lessons, hired skis and booked all the passes and do not have cover,’ the spokesman explains.
Pat's insurance covered her hospital bill, ambulances, a nurse to take her home, and refunds on ski passes she could not use.
There is not a huge difference between the costs of the various policies but it is important to check that cover is sufficient.
Medical and legal expenses, public liability and cancellation should all be included at as high a level as possible.
The best policies will also provide transport to another resort if yours has insufficient snow.
Missed departure cover is particularly important because there is more chance of being held up on the way to the airport in winter than in summer.
And make absolutely sure the policy you buy covers you for winter sports and not just travel.
National & Provincial has just expanded cover under its annual travel policy (£75 a person).
The policy now includes 17 days' winter sports insurance free.
And if you take out a policy now you can choose one of three books or an exercise video as a free gift.
The cost of four other policies for 14 days in Europe is £36 (Abbey National), £39 (Home & Overseas), £27.50 (Nat West) and £41.90 (AA).
Credit where it's due
SEVERAL readers have written to Assets querying their credit card interest charges, yet these are mostly correct.
If you don't settle in full, you pay interest on all purchases from the day the transaction reached the company.
Any money paid off is deducted from the oldest transaction remaining on your account.
That's why it is always best to pay in full if you possibly can and get 56 days' interest-free credit.
Be King for a day in Yul's £800 Siamese shirt
Adrian Furness
IF the man in your life is bored with socks, scarves and slippers, how about buying him the ultimate shirt for Christmas?
At around £800, it is not exactly a snip — particularly as it has been worn before.
But it is pure silk encrusted with sequins and it did give Yul Brynner a regal air when he wore it in The King And I in 1956.
The shirt, with a 15½ collar, will feature in Christie's special showbiz sale in South Kensington on Thursday.
‘The shirt is wonderful, and my favourite lot in the sale,’ says Carey Wallace of Christie's.
‘When I estimate prices I look at how important the costume or prop was in the film, and how significant the film was.
Collectors should concentrate on key characters in memorable movies.’
Other showbiz bargains include Arnold Schwarzenegger's jacket from the film Combat (£2,000-£4,000) and Bruce Willis's coat from Die Hard 2 (£500-£700).
Indiana Jones's trousers and matching shirt are on sale at around £1,200, but his famous bullwhip is expected to fetch more than £3,000, the same as Darth Vader's helmet.
Other lots are less macho and include the chiffon dress worn by Rita Hayworth in Pal Joey (£800-£1,000) and Bette Davis's wedding dress from The Old Maid (£600-£800).
Carey admits that many of her price estimates are based on guesswork.
How can you put a price on Kryptonite, for instance?
The crystals made for Superman are down at £800-£1,200 — but, as every film buff knows, they do contain the accumulated knowledge of 28 galaxies.
John Steed's bowler hat from The Avengers is guesstimated at £300-£500, while a Thunderbirds rocket takes off at £1,000-Pounds 1,500 and a selection of monsters from Aliens are £300-£400 each.
‘They are so grotesque I can scarcely bring myself to touch them,’ says Carey.
‘But they are very collectable Christmas presents.’
Pearl Insurance Offer
ONE popular present that's well worth insuring is a new bicycle.
Most contents policies cover a bike while it's at home, but to cover it elsewhere you must get the value specially added to your policy.
Printed left are the next two logos for your TODAY/Pearl free Christmas present insurance validation coupon.
Unit Trusts
MORE and more savers are turning to unit trusts as the best place to tuck away their money now that interest rates at banks and building societies are plunging.
Gavin Grant of the Unit Trust Association says that £37 million worth of new investment has been put into trusts during October.
Unit Trusts are certainly worthwhile, but they are subject to the ups and downs of the stock market and therefore not as safe as savings accounts.
You can gain tax advantages by buying units through a PEP plan, and AXA Equity & Law has just launched a scheme — PEP 2000 Plus — which gives you extra bonuses on top of the tax-free benefit.
These include a one per cent discount for single contributions and a five per cent loyalty bonus for people who hold on for ten years.
AXA has recently won a number of awards for its unit trust performance.
A vacuum in government
MEMBERS of Parliament start their Christmas holiday tomorrow and will return to Westminster on January 11.
That does not mean we will hear nothing from them for the next 25 days.
You can be sure that some will be heard loud and clear complaining about the long Christmas holidays being taken by other people.
It is true that much of the country closes down for too long over this festive period, though there are advantages for industry in doing that and we all deserve a decent break at this time of the year.
But there are not many people who are lucky enough to have the length of holiday enjoyed by MPs.
Even schoolchildren get a week less than they do.
Perhaps we should not be surprised that Parliament is closing down for so long.
After all, MPs had their longest ever summer break this year.
Idleness is obviously habit-forming.
What makes their excessive holidays so wrong is that millions are being forced to take a permanent break from work since they are unemployed.
And many of those who still have jobs get shorter breaks now than they used to as their firms struggle to survive in the recession.
Yet most MPs seem oblivious to what ordinary people are suffering.
Protected by their enormous allowances and comfortable working conditions, they feel free to carry on behaving how they wish.
There is work for them to do.
The economy is still in a terrible mess.
The Maastricht Bill, which will forever change the British way of life, must be fought over.
There are problems with the health service and the education system and there are sure to be some with the new council tax.
If MPs want an easy life, they should make way for people who are willing to work hard for their country.
We expect a lead from Westminster, not a vacuum left at Christmas or any other time of the year by a bunch of freeloaders.
Top gear
IN the days when the British car industry was a joke, one firm more than any was considered to be a laughing stock.
It used to be called Austin-Morris but changed its name to British Leyland and then Rover.
But under that title, it is suddenly prospering.
Not only is it not a joke, it is an example to car firms in this country and abroad.
In the depth of the recession, with the motor industry suffering more than most, Rover is introducing night shifts for the first time in three years.
Its sales have increased dramatically.
Its new models have put the successful ones produced by Ford and Vauxhall in the shade.
This is a remarkable achievement and everyone connected with it should be applauded — those who designed the cars, those who build them and those who run the firm.
They have produced cars which look good and give motorists the reliability they want.
They have ditched the ridiculous old restrictive working practices and are reaping the benefit along with the shareholders of British Aerospace, of which Rover is part.
British success stories are rare enough.
That of Rover is particularly sweet.
Dream ticket
AN eager nation is about to be told how it can win the £1 million jackpot in the new national lottery.
Is such eagerness also being shown in Buckingham Palace?
After all, if the Queen won the jackpot 60 times, it would pay for the Windsor Castle restorations.
But Her Majesty must remember to mark an ‘X’ in the box for no publicity.
Life's a team game
Nicki Pope
FOOTBALLERS are no different from human beings, said a chastened Graham Taylor after last summer's European soccer championship failure.
It now appears that the England manager knew what he was talking about.
Psychologists have studied the personalities of 50 players at three top clubs and discovered what every manager needs to know: what makes a great team player.
Their conclusion has a much wider use, though, than on the soccer field.
It can be applied to any arena in which people need to work together — an office, factory, club or even the Government.
What psychologists George Sik and Stephen Smith found was that the person most needed in a team is older and more caring.
Someone who looks after the youngsters and is co-operative.
Someone like Gary Lineker.
Skilful individuals such as Gazza are very much also-rans, though they do have their uses.
Prime Minister John Major could have saved himself a lot of trouble if he had followed that advice over David Mellor, the former Heritage Minister.
Mr Mellor was a great individualist, always putting on a good performance for the cameras, but he put himself before the Cabinet team.
As a result, the Government nearly slid to an unexpected defeat.
Sik and Smith, of occupational psychologists Saville and Holdsworth, questioned players from three clubs, Sheffield United, Glasgow Celtic and Crystal Palace and found a complete spectrum of personalities from Lineker-level self-control to Gazza-grade tears and tomfoolery.
They found that football managers — and even footballers themselves — think that the most successful players are those who are physically tough and lack imagination.
These are exactly the kind of team players a manager wants.
One told the researchers that one player with flair was an expensive luxury, two was a luxury they couldn't afford.
That, points out Dr Sik, is the traditional British attitude.
Low-key team players rather than flair and arrogance are the British way of doing things.
In a national side, highly-talented players unused to playing together are too busy competing with one another to compete effectively against the other side.
‘This isn't new — it's a problem in the sales departments of many organisations,’ says Dr Sik.
But emotional control can also have its problems.
Stuart Pearce and Chris Waddle may have been chosen to take the vital 1990 World Cup semi-final penalties because they appeared to be just the sort of level-headed British, team players that wouldn't miss.
In reality, they may have been more anxious and worried than they showed.
In the same way, business executives or cabinet ministers may be making a hash of things while giving an outward appearance of calm confidence — Chancellor Norman Lamont springs to mind immediately.
Another parallel between football and industry exposed by the research is the frequent failure of managers to communicate with their players and discover where their strengths lie.
Often they disguise this inability with abuse and contempt.
One manager, who remains nameless, replied to the psychologists' request for information thus: ‘Please feel free to send your questionnaires to me and I will distribute them to the two or three players who can read and write and have an attention span of longer than two minutes.’
Life's all about forgetting (especially Thatcher's resignation)
ASK people what they were doing when President Kennedy was shot almost 30 years ago and many will remember without a moment's hesitation.
But inquire where they were when the news of Margaret Thatcher's resignation as Prime Minister came through and most will gaze at you blankly.
The depressing news for the Iron Lady who ruled Britain for 11 years is that nine out of ten cannot recall the day she quit, according to research revealed yesterday at the British Psychological Society's London conference.
The findings are based on interviews with more than 2,000 people across Britain as part of a major study into everyday memory by psychologists at the London School of Economics.
Researchers expected to find six out of ten people could recall Lady Thatcher's historic resignation moment in vivid detail by retaining a long-lasting ‘flashbulb’ memory.
But they were shocked that just over one in ten could bring the day to mind.
Dr Dan Wright, research officer, says: ‘Our findings contrast very much with a similar but much smaller study in the US which showed that almost 100 per cent of the study remembered exactly what they were doing when Kennedy was killed.’
Fewer than than one in ten people in the British study had a flashbulb memory of what they were doing on the day of the Hillsborough football stadium disaster, according to the study funded by the Economic and Social Research Council.
‘If Mrs Thatcher had resigned out of the blue, then I think more people would be able to remember what they were doing,’ says Dr Wright.
‘As it was the possibility of her resigning was in the papers for about three weeks.’
Dr Wright is about to start another memory challenge for Britons — by asking them their whereabouts on the day the Prince and Princess of Wales's separation was announced.
Life's chocolate flavoured, say women who eat 70 bars a week
IT HAS always been regarded as a guilty but harmless secret shared by thousands of women.
But there's a darker side to chocolate addiction.
Some addicts suffer violent mood swings if they are deprived of their favourite snack food while others pile on the pounds by munching their way through up to 70 bars a week.
Nine out of ten chocoholics are women and four out of ten hide the habit because they believe it interferes with their lives, according to research based on a study of 50 self-confessed addicts.
Many will even disrupt their day to get a nibble of a bar or two, sneaking out of the office or taking a diversion to a shop even if they have more pressing business at hand.
The average chocoholic eats twelve and a half, 60-gram bars a week — three times more than is usual.
But some will get through more than five times that.
Nutritionist Jenny MacDiarmid and chartered psychologist Dr Marion Hetherington, who carried out the study, found that for three out of four the taste, smell and texture of chocolate was irresistible.
More than half admitted their cravings were worst when they were lonely, depressed or under stress, delegates at the British Psychological Society's London conference heard yesterday.
Those questioned were aged from 14 to 83 and were generally more depressed than average.
Two out of three admitted they felt irritable, angry and unhappy when they tried to cut down.
Secret eaters were more likely to be dissatisfied with their bodies, have severe eating disorders and be more concerned about their addiction.
However they did not eat significantly more chocolate or feel greater cravings than eaters who made no secret of their habit.
Researchers concluded that chocolate addiction should be treated seriously but also pointed out that many people who called themselves chocoholics because they had a strong liking for the food were not addicts in the true sense of the word.
Jail not ads will shock car drunks
By Jane Gordon
EVERY Christmas the Government launches a new drink-driving offensive.
This year's £1.3 million advertising campaign features a young girl being resuscitated after a car accident involving a drink driver.
‘Look her in the eye.
Then say a quick drink never hurt anybody,’ says the voice-over.
It's the kind of message that just might, during the season of goodwill, persuade drivers not to drink.
At least it might have done if its launch hadn't been followed two days later by the scandalous sentencing of drink-driver Christopher Hart.
In a scene probably not that different to the one featured in the television ad, Hart knocked down and ultimately killed nine-year-old Sharon Townsend, mistaking the body beneath his wheels for ‘a cardboard box’.
Through a curious loophole in the present law Hart was able to plead guilty to motoring offences that can be dealt with in a magistrates court — and was jailed for only four months.
Had he been charged with the more serious offence of causing death by reckless driving, he would have faced a Crown court and a jail sentence of up to five years.
The Government should realise that, in this cruel world, a severe prison sentence is a greater deterrent to drink driving than any slick advertising campaign.
The real message they need to get across this Christmas is that anyone who drinks, drives and kills as a result will be tried by a judge and jury and severely punished.
I am giving up my throne for the woman I loathe
By Jane Gordon
ALMOST everybody you can mention has had their say about the separation of the Prince and Princess of Wales.
Politicians, pundits and royal watchers have all made public comment on the private life of Charles and Diana.
We've suffered the opinions of Andrew Morton, Penny Thornton, Dennis Skinner, Barbara Cartland and Claire Rayner.
We have even, in the carefully veiled words of Diana's speech at the start of European Drug Prevention Week, heard what the Princess herself feels about separation and divorce.
John Major has had his say, and Buckingham Palace has offered its comments.
But one key figure in this whole drama has remained silent — Prince Charles.
Sooner or later there is little doubt that the reticent Prince of Wales will have to make some kind of statement.
A statement, I'd say, that might not differ much from the one made 56 years ago by his Great Uncle Edward, the late Duke of Windsor.
Because however much we might be reassured by Parliament that Charles's constitutional position will be unaffected by his separation, most of us believe that the Prince will finally have to give up his right to the throne — just as his Great Uncle did in the Abdication of 1936.
And when he does, I can easily imagine Charles making this speech which copies The Duke Of Windsor's apart from the obvious name changes and — crucially — the substitution of ‘love’ for ‘loathe’:
‘A FEW hours ago I discharged my last duty as the heir to the throne and now that I will be succeeded by my son, Prince William, my first words must be to declare my allegiance to him.
This I do with all my heart.
‘You all know the reasons which have impelled me to renounce the Throne.
But I want you to understand that, in making up my mind, I did not forget the country or the Commonwealth which, as Prince of Wales, I have for the last 23 years tried to serve.
‘You must believe me when I tell you that I have found it impossible to carry the heavy burden of responsibility and discharge my duties as the heir to the throne without the help and support of the woman I now loathe.’
Here the prince, like Edward, might pause to add impact to his words, before continuing with his moving speech.
‘And I want you to know that the decision I have made has been mine and mine alone.
This was a thing that I had to judge entirely for myself.
Not something that the press, my mother or my estranged wife had any influence over.
‘It would not have been possible for one to sit upon the throne alongside a woman one no longer loved and lived with.
It would have been unthinkable to have at the head of State a King and Queen who could no longer bear to be with each other.
Nor would it have been constitutionally possible for me to have become head of the Church of England.’
These powerful words might — as they did in 1936 — move the nation to tears.
But at least they would clarify the current situation and offer the Prince a place in history alongside his great uncle.
The two last Princes of Wales — unlucky in love.
Bill can't give no satisfaction
By Jane Gordon
BILL Wyman must be the most deluded man on earth.
In his extraordinary account of his relationship with Mandy Smith he mentions what a wonderful and ‘giving’ lover he has always been.
‘When I make love, I give, I don't take.
I'm only interested in giving.
‘If I make the other person happy then I feel great.
If I get happy in the meantime that's all right too.
That's the way it is for me,’ he says.
How then does he explain to himself why his first wife refused to consummate their marriage for months, and why his second — Mandy whom he first seduced when she was just 14 — should only have agreed to make love to him on four occasions during their marriage?
Irresistible, he ain't.
Right on, children
By Jane Gordon
ALTHOUGH I welcome any move towards a more open society I am a little disturbed by the relentless way in which childhood is being forced to be politically correct.
Hot on the heels of the great American debate on homosexual awareness among five-year-olds comes the news that a forthcoming Jackanory will deal with Aids.
Heavens knows where it will end.
We may soon see a nursery ABC frieze, which goes: A is for Aids, B is for Bondage, C is for Condom, D is for Deviancy, E is for Equality, F is for Feminism, G is for Gender Stereotyping, H is for Haringey, I is for Income Support, J is for Joyriding, K is for karma, L is for Liberalism, M is for Ms., N is for New Age, O is for Outing, P is for Positive Discrimination, Q is for Questioning Authority, R is for Radical, S is for Single Parent, T is for Therapy, U is for Underprivileged, V is for Virtual Reality, W is for Wimmin, X is for Malcolm, Y is for Yoof and Z is for Zen.
Anthony Hopkins
SILENCE Of The Lambs star Anthony Hopkins, above, was back behind bars again yesterday for the opening of an addiction centre at Downview prison in Sutton, Surrey.
Patrick Stewart
STAR Trek star Patrick Stewart was so upset by an episode dealing with torture he studied harrowing tapes of interviews with victims.
Patrick, who plays Jean Luc Picard, wrote to Amnesty International for help with his role.
Kevin Costner
HEART-THROB movie star Kevin Costner couldn't find himself a girlfriend as a teenager because he was too short and shy.
‘It was embarrassing with girls who were all taller than me,’ said the 6ft 1in Dances With Wolves star.
Princess Stephanie
NEW mum Princess Stephanie has denied reports that the people of Monaco are angry with her for having son Louis outside marriage.
‘On the contrary we have received lots of moving letters supporting us and congratulating us.’
How the misery of boarding school wrecked a royal marriage
Isla Whitcroft
HE oozes self-confidence, is well-spoken and has impeccable manners — an archetypal product of the British public school system.
But look deeper and you are likely to discover a man who is emotionally and sexually screwed-up.
The separation of the Prince and Princess of Wales is proof that the repressed, bullying, all-male environment of public schools can create problems with relationships later in life.
That is the view of no less an authority than novelist Barbara Cartland, perhaps the Royals biggest admirer.
Dame Barbara revealed this week how Charles was bullied at Gordonstoun, his tough Scottish boarding school.
The heir to the throne, a shy, sensitive boy, was often held upside down over the lavatory by schoolmates who delighted in pulling the chain.
But unlike the young hero in Tom Brown's Schooldays who stood up to his tormentor Flashman, Charles went straight to the headmaster.
‘The head said he saw no reason why he should interfere,’ says Dame Barbara.
‘The result of this treatment was that Charles grew up needing both affection and assurance.’
Psychotherapist Piers Partridge runs therapy workshops for ex-public schoolboys and is concerned about a system which causes so much emotional damage.
‘I was at prep school and public school and got the message that emotions were frowned upon,’ he says.
‘You learn quickly that to show your feelings — whether anger, fear or sadness — leaves you open to ridicule and it is difficult to shake that habit in later life.
‘If you are bullied and you cry it makes things ten times worse.
If you get angry with your tormentors they delight in making you angrier.
The only way to survive is to shut out your feelings.
‘The result is that when these children grow up they cannot cope with a relationship which demands that they show emotion or feeling.
‘And their classic response when their partner demonstrates emotion is simply to walk away from it.’
According to Andrew Morton in his book Diana: Her True Story, that was exactly Charles's response whenever the Princess of Wales became upset or hysterical.
When Diana allegedly attempted suicide by throwing herself down the stairs at Sandringham, Charles called a doctor and then disappeared, leaving the Queen Mother to comfort his wife.
Dame Barbara offers some light on this incident.
‘Hysteria is something no Englishman can cope with,’ she says.
‘They are educated, as Prince Charles had been, with other boys at a boarding school and they find it impossible to deal with an hysterical woman.
If a woman is having tantrums they shy away.’
The more Diana tried to attract her husband's attention, the more distant he became.
‘When you are at boarding school you are desperately lonely so you fantasise about what a relationship will be like,’ says Piers Partridge.
‘But because you have no concept of how to relate to people on anything other than a superficial level, you have a terrible shock when you get into a situation like marriage and find that it doesn't live up to your fantasies.
‘If there is an argument, or problems with the children, or the wife demands that you are open with her, then an ex-boarder will panic.
He will simply not know how to deal with it.’
Ex-Eton schoolboy Jonathan Barton was bullied but unlike Charles, he knew better than to take his complaint to the headmaster.
‘I quickly learned not to cry and to let them do what they wanted,’ says Jonathan, 32.
‘It got the bullying over with quicker.
‘If I was lonely, I would not have gone to a teacher and said so — he would have told me to pull myself together.
And I can't recall any of us having a close enough friend to confide in.
Emotions weren't considered part of school life.
‘Many of my ex-boarder friends are still not in any permanent relationship.
I don't think they can put up with the traumas it might involve.’
‘Those that do have relationships usually end up with strong and critical women, a reflection of their regimented life as an adolescent.
They feel comfortable with no-nonsense and strict women because that is what they have grown up with,’ says Partridge.
Supporters of boarding schools will argue that they produce confident achievers.
But Partridge argues that this is outoutweighed by the system's disadvantages.
‘It is the ultimate paradox,’ he says.
‘You get young people who appear to be socially confident and assured in the outside world but inside they are remarkably immature and insecure.
‘Social services wouldn't dream of institutionalising a child at six, yet in this country parents do just that by sending many boys of that age to prep school.’
Queen and Diana united by close friend's wedding
By Tim Satchell
THE Queen and the Princess of Wales are to be the guests at Saturday's wedding of the princess's close friend the Hon Harry Herbert when he marries Chica Bevan at Highclere Castle, the seat of his father, the Queen's racing manager the Earl of Carnarvon.
This will be the first private occasion since the Wales's separation announcement that the Queen and the princess have appeared together.
In an official capacity they dined with European leaders at the Edinburgh Summit.
Bloodstock agent Mr Herbert, 33, a former Page of Honour to the Queen, was a dining and theatre-going companion of the 31-year-old princess before she married.
Lord Carnarvon, 68, has been a friend and confidant of the Queen since her single days.
Mr Herbert, the second son of Lord Carnarvon, was educated at Eton and stands 6ft 4in tall.
His early ambition was to be an actor.
He was disappointed not to be offered a place at RADA.
He and the princess still talk about the spaghetti suppers she cooked for him at her flat in Earl's Court.
Unusually, the wedding is taking place at the groom's home rather than that of the bride, whose mother lives in a sizeable mansion outside Newmarket.
Mr Herbert's bride-to-be Miss Bevan, 30 — real name Charlotte Victoria — is the daughter of stockbroker John Bevan, life president of St Moritz Tobogganing Club.
Jimmy's card hitch
By Tim Satchell
JIMMY Young's friends have been intrigued to receive a change of address card announcing that ‘Alicia and Jimmy Young have now moved to Chiswick’.
Could it be that Mr Young and Alicia Padstow, his companion of 15 years, have finally married?
Queries to Mr Young's office drew peals of laughter.
‘If he had got married I'd be the first to know,’ his spokeswoman, Hester Blott, tells me.
Twice-married Mr Young, 67, has in the past said the relationship was strong and he saw no reason to change it.
Miss Padstow, 37, a former BBC researcher, has not previously been married.
Porsches shoot up
By Tim Satchell
THERE is a new surge in demand in the States for Porsche cars after a Carolina woman revealed how the body of her '91 Carrera survived three shots from a. 44 Magnum fired by her ex-husband.
Porsche Cars North America says the woman was sitting in the car with a friend when her ex-husband opened fire.
Two shots hit a cross beam in the driver's door and one skewered the roof and hit a headrest, although a steel plate in the seat saved any injury.
‘Fleet sales have gone up considerably,’ says spokesman Bob Carlson, adding that the Brink's-Mat security firm has just ordered 20 cars.
Windsor In Flames commemorative mug
By Tim Satchell
THE perfect Christmas present for republican tea drinkers — the Windsor In Flames commemorative mug, priced at £3.50.
On one side is a line drawing of the burning castle plus the date of the conflagration.
On the other is a cartoon of the Queen, in tatters, saying: ‘Can you spare us £60 million, guv?’.
The mug is advertised in The Guardian, although the ad was turned down by Time Out listings magazine.
Cheeky Monkeys
By Tim Satchell
THE most fashionable new children's shop in London is Cheeky Monkeys, recently opened in Kensington by Bridget Young and Georgia Hainault.
Miss Young, 24, daughter of James Bond films director Terence Young, tells me: ‘Six months ago my horoscope said it was time to do something for myself workwise, so I phoned Georgia that evening.’
Cheeky Monkeys offers nearly-new designer clothes, a haircutting service, shoes, toys, furniture and a Montessori playgroup.
Miss Young, above, who grew up in the south of France, earned pocket money as an extra in her father's films.
‘I wouldn't have minded being an actress,’ she says, ‘but I'm happy with the shop.’
Hello!
Baby
Jackie Annesley
Glossy magazine's children take TODAY Gushometer test.
THERE was a time when the rich and famous would announce the arrival of a new family member with a discreet notice in The Times.
Now, no sooner is the child in its cot than Hello! magazine is called in to photograph the occasion for the world to see.
Celebrities such as Amanda De Cadenet, whose baby has graced two covers this year, even go as far as to be pictured breastfeeding.
As a marketing ploy, apparently nothing moves Britain's top weekly colour mag off the shelves faster than a besotted star mum cradling a baby.
Aside from a Royal wedding that is — Princess Anne's marriage pushed Princess Stephanie's family shots off the cover this week.
In years to come, the children will be faced with the reality that their first photo session showed them crinkle-faced, bawling, yawning or just bored.
But they will always be cuties to their mums — and Hello! readers.
Here Jackie Annesley takes a look at the magazine's preoccupation with tiny tots and gives some of this year's best examples an ‘ooh, aah’ rating on the TODAY gushometer seen alongside their snapshots.
MARCH 19 ISSUE
NAME:Billie, adopted daughter of Lenny Henry and Dawn French.
PAGES: Half cover, 11 pages, 14 pictures.
Billie smiles in three.
GUSHIEST COMMENT: ‘She's so beautiful…an angel.
It's extraordinary how beautiful she is.’— Dawn French
CUTE QUOTIENT: A smiler with a mop of black hair, wide eyes and chubby cheeks.
PICTURES: Trevor Leighton.
APRIL 11 ISSUE
NAME:Georgia, daughter of Jerry Hall and Mick Jagger.
PAGES: Cover, 12 pages, 20 pictures, none with Dad.
She smiles once.
GUSHIEST COMMENT: ‘I think it's really good for children to be so close to nature and the sound of the sea.’
— Jerry Hall
CUTE QUOTIENT: Potentially pretty with bright blue eyes, a sweet smile and Jagger lips.
PICTURES: Jesus Carrero
JUNE 27 ISSUE
NAME:Renee, daughter of model Rachel Hunter and Rod Stewart.
PAGES: Seven, 10 pictures.
No smiles, Renee was three weeks old.
GUSHIEST COMMENT: ‘I'm besotted with my daughter and my wife.
I haven't even thought about football much.’
— Rod Stewart
CUTE QUOTIENT: Sweet heartshaped lips.
No evidence of Dad's nose.
PICTURES: Justin Thomas
JULY 4 ISSUE
NAME:Atlanta, daughter of Amanda de Cadenet and pop star John Taylor.
PAGES: Cover, plus nine pages, 14 pictures.
Atlanta smiles in just one?
GUSHIEST COMMENT: ‘The greatest thing you can do do when you love somebody is to make another human being.’
— Amanda de Cadenet
CUTE QUOTIENT: Pretty with lively big eyes and a wide mouth.
Looks genuinely happy child.
SEPTEMBER 11 ISSUE
NAME:James, son of actress Patsy Kensit and pop star Jim Kerr.
PAGES: Cover, six pages, seven pictures.
No Dad and no smiles.
GUSHIEST COMMENT: ‘Every day I find myself becoming so relaxed with him, as if he's always been there.’
— Patsy Kensit
CUTE QUOTIENT: Has Mum's wide mouth but looks like his Dad.
PICTURES: Sven Arnstein
OCTOBER 10 ISSUE
NAME:Eliza and Katya, twin girls of the Earl and Countess Spencer.
PAGES: Cover plus 20 pages, 23 pictures.
No smiles.
GUSHIEST COMMENT: ‘We've three daughters who are all wonderful.
In Victoria I have met the girl of my dreams.’
— Earl Spencer
CUTE QUOTIENT: Look exceptionally sweet photographed together.
PICTURES: Jesus Carrero
DECEMBER 19 ISSUE
NAME:Louis, son of Princess Stephanie and Daniel Ducruet.
PAGES: No cover but 10 pages with 12 pictures.
Two-week-old Louis is fast asleep in all of them.
GUSHIEST COMMENT: ‘They are my two men and I love them.
They are the centre of my world.
I'd do anything for them.’
— Princess Stephanie
CUTE QUOTIENT: Difficult to tell yet, but Louis is said to have Stephanie's eyes and Daniel's prominent chin and forehead.
PICTURES: Fabian 
Supermarket Round-up
ICELAND has reduced all turkeys over 10lb by £1 until January 2.
North Atlantic prawns are down £1.69 to £4.29, and breaded scampi is £1.99 for 400g, down £1.
ASDA is selling poinsettias for £2.99, down £1.
Peeled prawns are £2.25, down from £2.95.
Milk Tray chocolates are £3.69 a pound instead of £3.99.
Dry, roasted peanuts are down from £1.09 to 99p.
Loose blue stilton is £1.89 per lb, down from £2.49.
GATEWAY'S Oakleaf sliced Scottish smoked salmon sides are down from £9.49 to £7.99.
Somerfield small prawns are down from Pounds 3.65 to £2.89.
Gordon's Gin is down from £10.49 to Pounds 9.95.
TESCO chicken supreme is down from £1.59 to £1.29.
Frozen cooked and peeled prawns are down to £2.99 from £4.99.
Frozen, party-size tiramisu is on offer at £2.69 from £3.49.
Traditional pork sausages are down from £1.89 to £1.59.
Fresh neck fillet of lamb is reduced by £1 to £2.99 per pound.
AT Sainsbury this week pure orange juice is down from £1.95 to £1.49 for 2 litres.
Fruit cocktail trifle is on offer at 99p, a saving of 30p.
Blue stilton is reduced from £2.49 to £1.99.
Cornish ice-cream is £1 cheaper than normal at £1.95 for 2 litres.
Liebfraumilch is down from £2.49 to £1.99.
Off the Shelf
MARKS & Spencer has some delicious cream toppings laced with alcohol to pour over your mince pies and Christmas puddings.
Choose from whipped cream and wine, or wine coffee and whisky, or chocolate in wine.
You'll find them in the wine sections, priced from £2.49 to Pounds 2.79 for 200ml.
PILLSBURY is launching three new ready-to-bake dough products in time for Christmas — country wheat breadtwists and apple or raspberry turnovers.
A tube of ten breadtwists costs 89p.
Apple and raspberry turnovers are £1.29 for a packet of six.
They are available at major supermarkets.
PLANTERS is introducing three exciting nut alternatives to the traditional festive favourite.
Savoy Crunch peanuts are coated in a crispy shell in smoked bacon or sweet and sour flavours.
Planters Redcoats are extra-large peanuts fried and salted in their skins.
Planters Plantation Mix is a combination of almonds, hazelnuts, peanuts and raisins.
WAITROSE has a varied selection of fruit juice drinks and sweets especialy for children.
The apple, orange, or lemon and lime drinks come in handy foil pouches (200ml) with a straw and cost 89p for a pack of four.
Sweets cost 49p for a 125g bag.
Left Bank in the West End
Sharon Davey
WAITERS dash to and fro replenishing baskets of crusty bread as often as you like — a sure sign of a good French brasserie.
Paintings hang higgledy-piggledy on tastefully yellowing walls, diners balance on slightly rickety chairs and an overflowing cheese trolley is wheeled precariously between tables.
It sounds like a scene from The Left Bank in Paris.
In fact it is Chez Gerard, a little piece of France here in Charlotte Street, London.
The atmosphere is certainly right — but what about the food?
To test it's authenticity I chose a dozen snails in garlic butter to start a dish that I'd only ever eaten in Paris before.
I was disappointed when my snails arrived already out of their shells — part of the pleasure for me is digging them out of their homes- but perhaps this is Chez Gerard's gesture to British sqeamishness.
The snails themselves were as they should be — and the steak tartare was a melt-in-the-mouth savoury experience, served up with a crisp green salad and a mound of frites.
Chez Gerard boasts that it does the best steak frites in town — and judging by the quality of their thin, crispy and piping hot chips, I'd be inclined to believe them.
On the wine waiter's advice we ordered Chateau Rousset 1982/3 Cotes de Bourg (£15.75) a smooth Bordeaux that was gutsy enough to cope with our food.
The dessert trolley (£3.25 per portion) was tempting, but I'd recommend the cheese trolley loaded with all the French cheese you've heard of and more that you haven't.
Choose as many as you like for £3.95.
Chez Gerard — which also has branches in Dover Street W1 and Chancery Lane WC2 — is currently offering a four-course menu for £15.
Chez Gerard, 8 Charlotte Street, London W1. 071 636 4975.
Pick of the plonk and pies
Fiona Beckett
Wines to trot out with the turkey.
CHRISTMAS lunch with its variety of succulent flavours is a food lover's dream.
But when it comes to choosing the wine, it can turn into a nightmare.
Turkey on its own is easy to accommodate but once you have piled on the stuffing, sausages, bacon and cranberry sauce, your poor old wine is struggling to hold its own.
And then there's smoked salmon starters and Christmas pudding and mince pies.
It doesn't end there.
Savoury party snacks, salads, warming casseroles — all constitute a tall order.
My solution is to have a range of bottles to cope with every occasion.
For Christmas Day there's nothing better than a sparkler which will carry you through any first course.
With turkey you can go for red or white but whatever you choose needs to be big and flavoursome.
For the pudding, my own weakness is a small glass of something sweet and much lighter than port which I prefer to save and have on its own or with a mince pie.
I also like to lay in one or two other special bottles for the festive season — a slightly heavier red that will cope with rich roasts or casseroles and a crisp dry white to drink with fish or seafood dishes.
I also get a couple of good standby wines for friends and neighbours who might drop in and a super-cheap bottle or two of red (try the supermarket £1.99 offers) to make some delicious, warming mulled wine.
Here are my top bottles (and boxes) to take you through the holiday:
COTES DU RHONE (Morrisons, £2.99): A gloriously full, juicy, fruity red that is good enough for the turkey and cheap enough for party drinking.
One of the best bargains around.
Alternatives: Sainsbury's Cotes du Rhone currently on special offer at £2.45, or, if you want to show off a bit, Tescos' Chateauneuf du Pape, ultra cheap at £4.99.
CHATEAU LAVERGNE MOULIN 1990 (Asda, £3.35): Really classy, smooth, velvety Bordeaux, the perfect choice if you're having beef for Christmas.
Alternatives: Chateau Le Mounan 1990 (Marks and Spencer, £3.99) or Chateau Clement Termes (£4.59), a bargain from Threshers (also at Wine Rack and Bottoms Up).
DOMAINE SAPT INOUR (Safeway, £3.49): The ultimate Christmas conversation-stopper — a big, deep, dark red Moroccan wine, as exotic and flavoursome as a souk.
Try it with a spicy stew or even a traditional roast.
Alternatives: Two other obscure reds that will impress your friends are Safeway's Romanian Special Reserve Cabernet Sauvignon (£2.69), or Waitrose's fabulous Chilean Vina Carmen Cabernet Sauvignon Gran Seleccion at £3.95.
AUSTRALIAN SHIRAZ/CABERNET and COLOMBARD CHARDONNAY (Marks and Spencer, two litres for £8.99): Two excellent easy-drinking boxed wines, a soft, fruity red and a lively, fresh white.
Ideal, both of which are ideal for the occasional glass and perfect for parties.
Alternatives: Other good party gluggers available from Down Under are Thresher's Tollana Dry White and Red (£2.99), and Tesco's Australian White and Red currently on special offer at £2.69.
SOUTH AFRICAN CHARDONNAY (Sainsbury's, £3.35): A full, smooth, well-rounded white.
Ideal for white turkey.
Alternatives: Tesco's Robertson Chardonnay (£3.99) and ASDA's Chardonnay Vin de Pays D'Oc (£3.49).
SAINSBURY'S CHAIS BAUMIERE SAUVIGNON (Also at Majestic Wine Warehouses, William Low, £3.99-£4.49): A luscious mouthful, good on its own or with salads or party food.
Alternatives: Some of the best Sauvignons around come from New Zealand.
Try Villa Maria Sauvignon Blanc (Waitrose, £4.99) or Stoneleigh Sauvignon Blanc from Thresher, Wine Rack and Bottoms Up (£5.99, also available in half bottles for £3.29).
MOSCATEL DE VALENCIA (Victoria Wine, £3.69): A sweet but not too sickly Spanish white perfect with Christmas pudding.
Alternatives: If you've got a sweet tooth try Victoria's Albiger Hundskopf Siegerrebe Auslese (£5.79 from selected stores) or Waitrose's Erdener Treppchen Riesling Spatlese 1986 (£5.95).
SAINSBURY'S AUSTRALIAN SPARKING WINE (£4.49): Lovely, lively, clean, fruity fizz.
Alternatives: For a more champagne-like taste try Majestic's classy Californian Domaine Chandon Shadow Creek at £5.99 or Waitrose's Cremant de Bourgogne (£6.25).
CHAMPAGNE BILLECART SALMON (Oddbins, £16.99): If you're going to drink the real stuff it might as well be the best.
This is gorgeous.
Alternatives: Victoria Wine's 1983 Vintage Champagne at £15.99 or the luscious Ayala Brut 1985 at £19.55 from selected Asdas.
LOXTON DE-ALCOHOLISED SPARKLING BRUT (Safeway, £3.49): An alcohol-free sparkler to make sure the non-drinkers don't miss out on the fun.
Alternatives: Very little else that's drinkable without any alcohol at all.
Try low-alcohol Bucks Fizz, a delicious mixture of orange juice and sparkling wine.
It's widely available and under £2.
SHERRY (Box): Sherry is ideal with Christmas fare- but not when it's warm and sickly sweet.
Try instead a glass of chilled fino before a meal (perfect with nuts and nibbles) or a glass of well matured Amontillado or Oloroso with your mince pies or Christmas cake.
Safeway does a fabulous range of half bottles for just £3.29 — a bone dry Manzanilla, an old Amontillado, an Old Dry Oloroso and a Mature Cream which tastes like liquid Christmas pudding.
Sainsbury's also has a good selection of halves at £3.49.
Try their Palo Cortado, a nutty old Amontillado.
Even better value if you want a full size bottle is Tesco's award winning Finest Amontillado at £4.39.
Taste Test
HERE are Santa's comments and ratings out of ten.
SELFRIDGES £3.75 for eight (47p each): Very traditional with a nice brown crust and just wonky enough so people can get away with claiming they baked it themselves.
Fruity but not too sweet.
Rating: 9
HARRODS £6.50 for 12 (54p each): Looks home-made.
The delicate butter pastry melts in your mouth.
Filling is packed with fruity bits but a touch oversweet.
Rating: 8
WAITROSE 69p for six (11.5p each): The most home-made looking of all, with nicely browned pastry.
Fine fruit.
The filling has a slightly alcoholic flavour but is spoiled slightly by a little too much sugar on top.
Rating: 7
MR KIPLING 79p for six (13p each): Very jolly-looking pastry holly sprigs cut out on top of each pie.
But after that it's a bit downhill.
Rating: 6
SAINSBURY 69p for six (11.5p each): Looks uncooked, though there is a nice firmness to the pastry.
The filling tastes of currants, which I like.
Rating: 6
ST MICHAEL 99p for six (16p each): The attractive latticework top looks nicely brown and sugary.
Pastry yummy, filling bland.
Rating: 6
LYONS 79p for six (13p each): Oversweet, unattractive, with a funny aftertaste.
Rating: 5
SPAR 79p for six (13p each): The right look but the pastry is very hard.
The whole thing tastes of flour — the pastry is too thick for the amount of filling.
Rather runny inside.
Rating: 5
SAFEWAY 69p for six (11.5p each): Looks bland although the taste is OK — quite spicy and full of cinnamon.
But the pastry is a bit soggy and disintegrates into your beard when you bite into it.
Rating: 5
ASDA 59p for six (10p each): Exactly the same as Safeway's.
Can anyone recommend a good beard shampoo?
Rating: 5
SOMERFIELD (Gateway own brand) 69p for six (11.5p each): These look fine until warmed, then they sag and fall apart.
Tasteless apart from the overwhelming sugar flavour.
Rating: 4
TESCO 69p for six (11.5p each): Yuk.
They look all right but taste bland and the filling turns to runny brown jam once warmed up.
Rating: 3
Santa lifts the pastry lid on 12 of the best
Katy Bravery
WHEN it comes to munching mince pies, there is only one expert in the world robust enough to carry out the definitive taste test — Father Christmas.
From Greenland to Greenwich, he has wrapped his taste buds around millions of them, left by fireplaces with a glass of sherry as some small compensation for the non-union-regulated job of squeezing down a chimney in the dead of winter.
Although rather busy at this time of year, Father Christmas took time off from granting wishes at Selfridges' Rupert Bear grotto in London, to sample a selection of British mince pies.
As it was a blind taste-testing, our famous judge had no idea that, coincidentally, the pie he picked as best for taste and texture was Selfridges' own-brand, hand-baked mince pies.
But at £3.75 for eight (47p each) they certainly should taste delicious — as should the pies which won second-place, Harrods' own-brand at £6.50 for 12 (54p each).
Unless you're in the top league of American Express Gold Card shoppers, these delights might be just a bit too rich for your festive feasting.
Those looking for value for money could find the answer in Waitrose's deep-filled short pastry mince pies.
A box of six costs only 69p (11.5p each).
Santa gave them a highly commendable seven out of ten rating.
Our expert tested the standard mince pies sold by each store, rather than the luxury versions.
These days mince pies can come laced with Grand Marnier, stuffed with Rum Butter or cherries, and in the ‘Royale’ versions, covered with white icing.
A spokeswoman from Asda suggested a thin slice of creamy Wensleydale cheese to turn mince pies into a gourmet treat.
And if calories are a bit of a worry, you can try making a sauce from a dash of rum mixed with some low-fat yoghurt.
If calories are a terminal concern, forget the mince pie altogether — they average about 220 calories each — and just settle for the yoghurt.
For our Father Christmas, however, there is only one acceptable accompaniment to the traditional mince pie — traditional brandy butter.
‘I find by the time I get to the last houses on Christmas Eve, rum custard has congealed into a nasty skin,’ he said.
Home Alone 2
MERCHANDISERS were quick to jump on the popularity of Home Alone 2.
Star Macaulay Culkin will get a cut every time a toy, poster or T-shirt is sold.
It would be a nice idea if some of the money was donated to a children's charity — after all, what can a 12-year-old do with £6 million?
Melanie Griffith
MELANIE Griffith must be insecure to have painful cosmetic surgery to be perfect for husband Don Johnson.
They got back together after a long break so he must have liked her as she was.
Selfridges opening Sunday
HOW nice it was to see Selfridges open on Sunday.
Shops need more business and the working public needs more time to go shopping.
Retirement age
IT'S laughable that the Government wants men and women to retire at 65.
Many 40-year-olds are considered over the hill these days, so what work can the oldies hope to get?
Gary Lineker
GARY Lineker is wrong to have a go at England manager Graham Taylor for dropping him.
Gary didn't play well for England towards the end so he should bow out gracefully.
Make bank Scrooges pay for their greed
THE news that certain banks are to be rapped for delaying interest rate cuts has come far too late for the owners of thousands of small businesses.
These are men and women who have invested years of their lives into various enterprises, only to see their firms hurled on the trash heap by intransigent, arrogant, profit-hungry banks.
Some of these financial institutions will do anything to line their coffers.
If that means throwing hundreds out of work, or depriving families of a few extra pounds by delaying interest rate cuts, then so be it.
Thousands of Britons are facing their bleakest Christmas for years.
If Chancellor Norman Lamont wants to ease their burden he should begin by penalising those uncaring banks which have caused a lot of this misery in the first place.
For a start he could make sure that much more leeway is given to small businesses.
And he could ensure those banks that have delayed interest re-adjustments cough up the entire amount — back-dated.
John Major talks about a People's Charter.
We also need a specific Banks Charter to bring these modern Scrooges into line.
Make bank Scrooges pay for their greed
IN THE old days your bank manager was almost like a family friend, always ready to help out when you were a bit stuck.
Now he's more like judge, jury and executioner rolled into one.
Cliff's edge
THE reader who criticised Cliff Richard for his ‘nauseating’ Christmas records is being unfair.
Far more nauseating are those pop stars who dish up re-mixes of their old hits.
Cliff has produced original material for 30 years, and does lots of work for charity.
What's more, he can actually sing.
Windsor Castle fire
IN all the coverage of the Windsor Castle fire, I haven't found any reference to Public Liability Insurance.
As a self-employed heating engineer I have to have insurance for £1 million to cover possible accidents.
Surely people working on great works of art or National Trust property have a similar policy?
Princess Anne bossed her new husband
READING about how Princess Anne bossed her new husband around on their wedding day made me wonder whether it is time the rules of royal succession were changed.
The Princess Royal would make a much stronger ruler than poor old Prince Charles, whose wife has run rings round him.
Milestones
BIRTHDAYS: American footballer William ‘The Refrigerator’ Perry, 30.
West Indian fast bowler Joel Garner, 40.
ON THIS DAY: In 1653, Oliver Cromwell became Lord Protector.
In 1773, the Boston Tea Party took place.
In 1944, the Battle of the Bulge was fought.
Things you didn't know you didn't know
Graeme Donald
THE Australian bird the cockatoo is not named from any association with the cockerel, but derives from the Malay word ‘kakatuwa’.
This means an older relative, but is also understood to refer to incessant complaining — doubtless an allusion to the bird's raucous call.
As for cockney, this is a corruption of the late medieval ‘cocken-ey’— a cockerel's egg, the nickname for the yolkless eggs laid by young hens.
As a useless item, the name was extended to city dwellers who were of little use when unleashed in the countryside.
By the late 16th Century the term was restricted in use to Londoners, who themselves further confined it to mean those born within earshot of Bow Bells.
Many Cockneys are regarded as ‘cocksure’, which is not — as you might expect — a reference to the confident strutting of a barnyard fowl.
It is possibly a corruption of ‘cog-sure’, as in the sure meshing of gear wheels.
TODAY'S Book Of Things You Didn't Know…is now on sale, published by Simon & Schuster for £3.99.
The last tenant
Stella Bingham
FALLING interest rates could signal the end of the great rental boom that flourished in the unstable property market of the past few years.
Many potential homeowners decided to sit out the recession in rented accommodation, leaving their money in high-earning accounts.
But with interest rates now as low as 6.5 per cent in some cases, buying is becoming a more tempting option.
Central London agents Cluttons estimate that for properties valued under £185,000, it is now cheaper to buy with a 95 per cent mortgate than to rent.
For example, monthly mortgage repayments fixed at 6.5 per cent on a one-bedroom flat in Fulham selling for £78,000 would be £491.10, compared with a rent of £736.67.
Estate agents around the country report renewed interest in buying among renters.
‘More first-time buyers are saying it doesn't make sense to rent,’ says Julian Knops of agents Andrews in Bath.
‘There are so many good fixed-rate mortgages that it's cheaper to buy,’ he says
‘Interest rates are not going to fall much more, and prices for properties under £100,000 have reached rock bottom.’
In Birmingham, Stuart Tullah of Collins Son & Harvey, which has a large rental book says: ‘People faced with taking another 12-month tenancy now are afraid prices may go up in that time.’
In Finchley, north London, Stewart Henry of Winkworth says: ‘It is a good time to buy.
Sales prices have bottomed out.
What used to throw people was interest rates going up and down but fixed-rate mortgages have sorted that out.’
But there is always a hard core of people needing to rent, he says, such as couples testing the market or people who have had their fingers burnt.
‘There is plenty of accommodation to choose from and the days when you were forced to pay lots of money for grotty rentals have gone.’
Jean Notman, lettings manager for Cluttons, says: ‘Companies still prefer to rent.
They don't want to tie up their capital in the long term and then have the delay in selling.
‘We've seen a big rise in unfurnished lettings over the past few months,’ she says.
Although bricks and mortar look like a good investment again, renting gives people more flexibility, especially those who need to move out fast due to a job change.
Another benefit of renting is that landlords take care of maintenance work to your property, which can be very expensive, and you do not have the legal and other fees involved in buying and selling houses.
Guide to the repo bargains
HOME HUNTERS looking for a bargain will find many among the thousands of repossessed properties on the market.
Banks and building societies will repossess and resell over 100,000 homes this year, many of which will be bought for prices well below those of similar properties in the area.
Although this is often because they are in poor condition, many are still an excellent buy.
Now a new publishing venture, Widedyne Ltd, has produced a brochure, The Repossessions Guide, to help you track down repossessed properties through building societies, estate agents and local firms of auctioneers.
The guide also looks at the repossessions market in general and at the costs of buying a house.
Investors should take note of the section covering the Rent Back scheme, which the authors claim yields a return generally above current market rent.
The Repossesions Guide costs £7.50 from Widedyne Ltd, PO2299, London E1 9FL.
Six charged over human torch attack
FOUR men and two women have been charged with the kidnap and attempted murder of human torch victim Suzanne Capper.
The six accused, aged betwen 16 and 28, will appear before Manchester magistrates today.
Suzanne, 16, was stripped naked and set alight after allegedly being kidnapped and held captive for more than a week in a house in Moston, Manchester.
Last night Suzanne was critically ill in intensive care at Withington Hospital.
How to keep safe on the streets
CARS are a safe haven for women but only if all the doors are locked and the windows shut.
CAR PARKS are danger spots at night.
Leave your car in a brightly lit area, have your keys ready and check in the back before you get in.
Avoid PUBLIC TOILETS at night.
If possible use a restaurant or pub lavatory.
UNLIT ROADS with high hedges provide ideal cover for stalkers.
If you must walk alone at night keep a look out for potential ambush spots and cross the road to avoid them.
FOOTBRIDGES and UNDERPASSES can become a prison.
Re-route your journey to avoid them.
Check no one is hanging around before you enter them.
Career mums sold short
TO show that it really cares about working women, the Government has announced that it is to help fund after-school childcare facilities.
How much is it contributing towards that?
The magnificent sum of Pounds 45 million spread over three years.
How much childcare do Ministers think they are going to get for that sort of money?
Actually, they probably believe it is quite a lot.
For the Government in general and the Employment Secretary in particular seem to have little idea about the problems of working women.
That is a harsh criticism since the Employment Secretary is a woman.
Gillian Shephard got her job after complaints that there were no women in John Major's first Cabinet.
But her appointment should not just have been a token.
The Government needs to have at least one member in a key senior position who understands the problems of women, and especially working women.
Mrs Shephard has given no indication that she does.
She seems to live in a comfy old-fashioned world which is far removed from the reality with which most women have to struggle.
To deny mothers the opportunity to pursue a useful career as well as bring up their children is wasting their talents.
That is a disaster not only for them but for the nation, which is robbed of their abilities.
The Government needs not only to help with after-school childcare but to put a proper amount of money into that service.
It should also be helping with care for pre-school children.
There seems no good reason why women who employ someone to help with their youngsters while they are at work should not get tax relief on the wages they pay.
Any other employer would.
That would help better-off working women and provide jobs, too, in childcare.
There should also be more creches and nursery places for mothers who cannot afford individual care for their children.
The Government needs both imagination and determination in dealing with the problems of working mothers.
Unfortunately, Mrs Shephard seems to have neither.
Sunday worst
THE Sunday trading laws always were stupid.
Now they are a mess as well.
The ruling by the European Court that the British law does not break EC rules leaves the whole business in chaos.
It always was going to be a mad situation, though, as long as the Government carried on taking the coward's way out by leaving it to the judges in Luxembourg or the Eurocrats in Brussels to sort things out for them.
The desire for Sunday trading is now obvious.
Supermarkets and stores which open on the seventh day are doing a roaring trade.
As long as no individual is forced to work and no shop is forced to open, it must be right to change the law so people can do their shopping when they wish.
The opponents of Sunday trading have lost the argument and the Government must accept that.
The alternative will be not just that the situation is a mess but that perfectly respectable stores will continue to be forced to break a stupid and outdated law.
Brief affair
A SURVEY reveals that the most common gift of underwear from men to women this Christmas will be French knickers.
There's nothing sexual about it, of course.
They are just demonstrating to their wives and girlfriends what good Europeans they are.
Holy irrelevant
Dominic Midgley
THE Church of England is in crisis.
And if empty pews and soaring divorce rates are not evidence enough of its dwindling authority, one of its most famous figures has just been defrocked.
Cluedo's Reverend Green is to become plain Mr Green to bring one of the country's best-loved board games up to date.
The vicar has got the chop because he is ‘no longer appropriate in the Nineties’, say Yorkshire-based manufacturers Waddingtons.
Instead they feel a thrusting businessman would make a better murder suspect.
The move may seem relatively trivial, but it is a telling comment on the declining position of the Church of England at a time when it least needs it.
Church attendance, despite rallying from a low point in the mid-Eighties, stands at a paltry 2.4 per cent of the population — half a per cent behind the Catholics.
Now an estimated 1,000 traditionalist vicars may break away when the first woman is ordained.
On top of all that Prince Charles, heir to the throne and the man destined to become the Church's supreme governor, has just split up with his wife and divorce looks likely.
In the Thirties the Archbishop of Canterbury, Cosmo Gordon Lang, had such a powerful hand in the affairs of state that he was instrumental in getting Edward VIII to abdicate.
By 1976, however, Prime Minister James Callaghan was telling then incumbent Dr Donald Coggan he was too busy to speak to him.
It's a sobering thought for current Archbishop Dr George Carey as he prepares this year's Christmas message.
With this decline in spiritual and political influence has come an economic slide.
Anglican priests once enjoyed the status of country squires.
They would operate from roomy vicarages with ample grounds and were welcome guests at the highest tables in their parishes.
Today many live on something close to the Church's minimum stipend of £12,200 a year and their accommodation is more likely to be in the council semi mould.
The demise of the Church has gone hand in hand with that of the Royal Family, and there are growing calls for the Church to be ‘disestablished’— severing its traditional link with the monarchy.
‘The Church of England and the monarchy are connected and a crisis in one is mirrored by a crisis in the other,’ says William Oddie, a former Anglican clergyman who converted to Catholicism last year.
‘In the Thirties the Archbishop of Canterbury had a lot to do with the abdication.
A generation ago the Church started retreating on divorce and there was one royal divorce.
This generation has given up completely.
‘The Church of England has been getting more and more liberal on the matter.
Because of the embarrassment of Princess Anne having to go to Gretna Green to get married, it now seems ready to compromise even on that.
‘The morality of the one has determined the morality of the other and the disestablishment of the Church could save the monarchy because it would avoid embarrassment.’
Anglican Bishop Hugh Montefiore is less keen to accept that his church is losing influence.
On Prince Charles's position he says: ‘He has said he won't get divorced.
Anyway we have already had two divorced kings on the throne, Henry VIII and George I. The title is purely honorific.’
He also refuses to accept that the vicar's status in society is on the wane, despite the Cluedo move.
‘The PR people that advise Waddingtons obviously think so,’ he says.
‘But I know of no sociological survey that shows that.
The word parson means personality.
‘They were a personality in the village.
We live in a much more secular society now and the vicar is no longer the local personality.
It's a sign of urbanisation.
‘People no longer live in communities to the same extent.
But if you do live in a village you will almost certainly know your vicar, and the same could be said of inner-city communities.
‘All the social workers come in from their comfortable homes in the suburbs, while the priest actually lives in the parish.
‘I think the vicar's status has changed since Victorian times but not in recent years.
‘In the past century bishops were more likely to be consulted by the government.
‘However, current Education Minister John Patten said he regarded Church schools as making a crucial contribution to education but he hadn't actually consulted them about opting out.’
In fact the rot set in 15 years ago when Dr Coggan asked for a meeting with Jim Callaghan to lobby for the Church to be exempted from a two per cent surcharge on employers' National Insurance contributions.
The reply came back that the PM was ‘too busy’ working on a request for a massive loan from the IMF to meet him.
‘It was seen as a watershed at the time,’ says William Oddie.
And now comes the final indignity — excommunication from Cluedo.
Colonel Mustard survives and so does Miss Scarlett but the Reverend Green, it appears, is old hat.
Waddingtons pleads international standardisation as the reason for the change.
‘Cluedo is played in 70 countries and there are variations,’ says a spokesman.
‘In Switzerland Mrs Peacock is known as Captain Azzuro and in Spain the lounge is a verandah.
‘We're now looking at standardising the whole thing and that could well involve the defrocking of Reverend Green.’
But the vicar's prayers may yet be answered.
Since the news was revealed yesterday Waddingtons' Leeds headquarters has been deluged with calls from anxious Anglicans.
‘The final decision will be made in the New Year and we may bow to public pressure,’ says the spokesman.
If only the solution to the Church's other problems were as straightforward.
Dodger Roger's new Aspect
Ivan Waterman
ACTOR Roger Moore may get a second chance to sing his way to musical stardom in a movie version of Sir Andrew Lloyd Webber's Aspects Of Love.
The former James Bond star got stagefright only weeks before the curtain was due to go up on the original West End show and made a shock exit.
But composer Sir Andrew says Moore is now in the running to play ageing lothario George in the £15 million film, although he is also considering Michael Caine for the part.
‘Roger had everything the role needed.
Charm, personality and wit.
He really is George.
He is still a very serious candidate for the movie,’ says Sir Andrew.
‘But Michael Caine is also a good thought.’
As far as Lloyd Webber is concerned, there is only one contender — his ex-wife Sarah Brightman — to play the part of Rose.
Sarah will no doubt be keen to take the part, but Lloyd Webber has revealed that Roger Moore is not the only actor he has had to talk into a role.
He had to wine and dine Michael Crawford to convince him that he was capable of delivering a virtuoso performance as The Phantom Of The Opera.
‘Eventually I was able to convince Michael that he could sing in the way he now does,’ says Lloyd Webber.
Cynics also believed he was taking a great risk when he cast Jason Donovan and Phillip Schofield in Joseph And The Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat, but both have been great successes.
‘Jason was a lucky choice.
I didn't know whether he could pull it off.
I wasn't sure until after the first preview.
‘Phillip is too studied about his career to take a seriously bad risk.
He pulled it off brilliantly.’
The next Lloyd Webber venture is a musical re-working of the Fifties' Billy Wilder screen classic Sunset Boulevard starring American actress and singer Patti LuPone.
‘Once I heard her start singing the songs I knew it had to be her,’ he says.
And with his track record, you have to believe him.
Breakfast boosts your brain
Nicki Pope
OUR parents always said that a hearty breakfast was good for us.
Now science has finally proved it.
According to Dr David Benton, even a few slices of toast and marmalade help to sharpen the memory.
So if you dash to work unfed, you're more likely to forget that vital mid-morning phone call or dental appointment.
Dr Benton found that in trials, university students who sat tests two hours after breakfast performed Medical Correspondent better than those who started the day on empty stomachs.
More than one in four people leave home in the morning without eating breakfast and many also skip lunch.
They would work more effectively, Dr Benton says, if they all had a bowl of cereal, a slice of toast or a bacon sandwich first thing.
His study compared two sets of students.
Some were given a glucose drink to start their day while others had to make do with a ‘dummy’ drink with no nutritional content.
‘Those who had a breakfast drink had faster recall than those who had nothing,’ he says.
‘The message is very simple.
People who have higher blood glucose have better memories.’
In memory tests involving words, students with increased blood glucose remembered more words than those whose blood glucose levels fell.
But spooning five sugar lumps into your morning coffee won't have a memory-boosting effect.
This just produces a swift blood sugar surge which rapidly declines — a solid breakfast which releases energy slowly is far better.
Dr Benton claims that breakfast is especially important for the elderly.
‘Memory deteriorates as you go through life, sometimes disastrously,’ he says.
‘The marginal improvement you get from breakfast is important.’
A child's bug killed my Dad but I'll make sure that his special Muppet magic lives on
Ivan Waterman
WHEN a rare lung infection ended Jim Henson's life, his son Brian had little time for grief.
The future of his father's multi-million pound Muppet empire rested on his young shoulders.
Two years later, his dedication to keeping the show on the road has paid off with the new £8 million film The Muppet Christmas Carol, which opens in Britain this week starring Michael Caine as Scrooge.
Now Brian has spoken publicly of his father's death.
‘It was a very sad time,’ he says.
‘Dad was fitter than he had ever been.
But the virus that killed him is so lethal that once it's in the lungs it kills one in three of its victims.
‘The trouble was we didn't know until it was too late exactly what had hit him.’
The saddest irony of Jim Henson's death was that, after a lifetime of entertaining youngsters, he died from a rare reaction to the streptococcus virus that normally attacks children in the form of tonsillitis.
His condition deteriorated so rapidly that Brian was unable to reach his father's bedside in New York before he died.
Brian had raced from Devon to Heathrow by helicopter, planning to take a Concorde flight to join his family at the hospital.
But he missed the flight by minutes, and a few hours later his father died.
‘It was very stressful,’ says Brian.
‘But what happened made me resilient.’
Now, with the new movie under his belt, he is proving to be a worthy successor to his father in the business.
But then Jim Henson always planned it that way.
‘We had built up the kind of company my father could leave to go off and direct a film for five months without worrying,’ says Brian.
‘He had spent years building a team he could trust to do anything in his absence.
‘He was always very careful about ‘the company’, making sure we had the right attitude.
Nobody called him Mr Henson.
Nobody calls me Mr Henson either.
It's just not that kind of place.
‘Dad's attitude was that you should treat people the way they treat you, and respect their differences.
‘He also never held a grudge.
It was amazing.
He once had his car stolen.
Now you'd expect somebody who'd had their car stolen to be uptight.
‘But he just kind of strolled into the office and said ‘Well…
I guess they needed it more than I did’.
‘I never saw him lose his temper, either.
Was he saintly?
I suppose so.
He was a very gentle, caring person.
That's the way he will be remembered.’
Brian's childhood memories are of days filled with happiness and laughter.
‘It was magic,’ he says.
‘We would have been travelling players a century ago.
That's the type of people puppeteers are.
We're illusionists.
We create a false reality.
But otherwise, I think I've got a good grip on reality.
I think you have to when a lot of people rely on you.’
These days Brian spends his working life alongside his family and staff at the Muppet workshops in London and Manhattan.
The rest of the time is spent with his wife, British fashion designer Ellis Flyte.
They met 11 years ago and married six months after Jim Henson's death.
‘We had already booked the wedding before my father died,’ says Brian.
‘It was the right time to get married.
It was a good time to be happy.’
Ellis now runs her company from North London while her husband plots the Muppets' next moves.
Next on the agenda is a film of Pinocchio with Godfather director Francis Ford Coppola.
There is also talk of a Muppet version of Sondheim's Into The Woods and a new TV series of Dinosaurs.
American critics have already applauded Brian's efforts, and his mother Jane — co-founder of the Muppets — and sisters Lisa and Cheryl feel he has earned the right to be seen as Jim's natural successor.
Brian himself is modest about his success.
He has his father's long face, hangdog expression and lank fair hair.
And, like Dad, he also gives away as little as possible about himself.
‘I guess I'm like my father,’ he says.
‘It takes a lot to make me angry.
‘I have a good business partner but I still find it hard dealing with this 365 days a year.
I try to take breaks but it's difficult.
‘You always feel the pressure.
Now I know how he must have felt.’
There is no quiet graveside where Brian can pour out his troubles to his father, because Jim was cremated.
There is talk of a monument in New York, but that could be a jokey tableau involving Kermit.
‘Dad wouldn't have wanted a solemn shrine,’ says Brian.
‘We're not that sort of family.’
Lord Archers three night party
THREE nights of Christmas partying at novelist and politician Lord Archer's London home ended last night.
Guests who enjoyed shepherd's pie and mince pies washed down with champagne included Channel Four supremo Michael Grade and dress designer Lindka Cierach, greeted by the host, above.
Composer Andrew Lloyd Webber and wife Madeleine, below, dropped in as did King Constantine of Greece and Lady Thatcher.
Actress Jane Asher and cartoonist Gerald Scarfe, below, also put in an appearance at the penthouse flat which looks over the River Thames to the Palace of Westminster.
Prime Minister John Major was expected to join the revellers on his return from meeting Euro MPs in Strasbourg 
Dannii Minogue
SINGER Dannii Minogue, 21, has fallen for former Home and Away star Julian McMahon.
‘I haven't felt like this in years,’ said Dannii, 21, sister of former Neighbour's star Kylie.
‘When I first got back to Melbourne, I said, ‘Mum, I think I have to become a nun.
It's so difficult to find anyone interesting who I like’.
Then I met Julian.’
Rod Stewart
A GAZZA-style injury has put football mad singer Rod Stewart out of the game for a year.
Rod, 47, pictured with wife Rachel Hunter at last night's Royal Film Performance of Chaplin, needs an operation after tearing ligaments in his right knee during a weekend game.
‘I am going to be in plaster for two months,’ he said.
‘I am heartbroken because football has been my whole life.’
Lingerie by male order
Alison Veness
LINGERIE departments at Christmas are full of bewildered men searching for the perfect gift for their partner.
But much of what they buy ends up being returned or hidden away at the back of a drawer.
Most women don't want to be decked out in bright red suspenders, skimpy bras and G-strings.
They prefer silk, satin or lace underwear in tasteful black or ivory.
Most importantly, it should fit.
Liz Innes, lingerie buyer for Fenwick in Bond Street says: ‘It's vital to check her bra Fashion Editorand brief size.’
Don't be put off by descriptions such as‘underwired’ or ‘structured’.
Far from being unflattering, they add cleavage, volume or support as in the Gossard Wonderbra.
The latest addition to the Gossard collection is a little slip dress.
If you want something plain and simple such as a bra and brief set, go for a luxurious fabric.
Marks & Spencer is offering a flattering lacy bra and deep knickers.
Black and ivory are the safest colours, but if you must buy red then go for a subtle ruby or deep claret.
Dame Barbara stays cool over Steel challenge
By Tim Satchell
THERE is debate in the book world about the advertising slogan: ‘More people read Danielle Steel than any other writer in the world.’
‘We think that's a rather tall claim,’ says a source at Pan Books, which publishes many of the romantic works of Dame Barbara Cartland.
And the Guinness Book of Records states: ‘The top-selling author is currently Dame Barbara Cartland with global sales of over 650 million.’
Earlier this year it was reported that Miss Steel's books had sold ‘more than 100 million’.
Pan Books' spokesman Martin Neild tells me: ‘I wouldn't like to comment officially, because it's so terribly difficult to tell — you've got to take into account overseas sales, borrowings from foreign libraries and so on.’
But at Transworld, which publishes Miss Steel in Bantam hardback and Corgi paperback, marketing director Larry Finlay says: ‘Barbara Cartland's sales date back over years and years and years.
Danielle has been writing for only 12 or so.
I'd say many more people are reading her in 1992 than Barbara Cartland.’
Four-times married Miss Steel, 45, lives in San Francisco.
Her novels include blockbusters such as Daddy and Palomino which were made into TV mini-series.
Maria Morgan, editor of the Guinness Book's literary section, says of the publishers' advertisement: ‘The trouble is that as yet we don't have a category for most widely read author.
Our figures relate to sales.
But I think the claim for Danielle Steel might be plausible because she does feature very, very highly in borrowing from libraries.’
And Dame Barbara herself?
Before sitting down for lunch at Claridge's yesterday, she told me: ‘Darling, I really couldn't care.
I've just broken the record for writing more books than any English author has ever done.
I've finished my 573rd.
I'm starting 574 tomorrow.’
Jose makes Aussies' day
By Tim Satchell
WHILE in London to sing the title role in the first British production of Verdi's Stiffelio, the great tenor Jose Carreras has agreed to take part in the Australia Day Gala Concert.
In return half the proceeds will go to his Leukaemia Foundation.
Carreras will sing arias from Verdi's La Traviata and Donizetti's L'Elisir d'amore, and a duet from Lehar's The Merry Widow with Yvonne Kenny, who opens tomorrow at the Royal Opera House in the title role of Handel's Alcina.
The concert, on January 31 at the Royal Opera House, is organised by the Australian Musical Foundation.
Guests will include the foundation's patron-in-chief, the Prince of Wales, and the Australian High Commissioner Dick Smith.
And…
By Tim Satchell
JAMIE Lee Curtis has a new criterion for granting interviews.
Promoting her new movie Forever Young, she quizzed reporters to see if they had watched the film — and vetoed interviews with those who hadn't.
Raine's Christmas puzzle
By Tim Satchell
WHERE is Raine, Countess Spencer, spending her first Christmas alone since the death of her husband earlier this year?
Her daughter-in-law Victoria, wife of her younger son Rupert Legge, tells me they are expecting Lady Spencer at their home, Hamswell House, near Bath.
‘My mother-in-law is arriving on Christmas Eve and we are all attending midnight service with Bishop Mervyn Stockwood who lives nearby.
On Christmas Day we are having a family lunch,’ she says.
But friends of Countess Spencer say she has told them she is spending the festive season at Mougins in France with her great friend Jacqueline de Ribes.
Viscountess de Ribes, 59, a socialite turned couturier, is the wife of banker Viscount Edmond de Ribes.
For many years she appeared on the list of the world's best-dressed women, and is a frequent visitor to London.
In the 1970s, when she was staying at Claridge's in Mayfair, thieves stole jewellery from her which was valued at more than £200,000.
A mother's Bond
By Tim Satchell
ACTRESS Samantha Bond, left, is expecting her second baby.
It is due next month, just as her actor husband Alexander Hanson, 33, starts rehearsals for the national tour of Andrew Lloyd Webber's Aspects of Love.
The couple married three years ago and have a daughter, Molly.
Miss Bond, 30, known for her roles in ITV's Rumpole Of The Bailey and the BBC's The Ginger Tree, starred with Ralph Fiennes in Monday night's Radio 4 play At Sea On Inya Lake.
But her final role before the birth has been to co-star with Paul Schofield in a two-hander play for Radio 4, Rediscovering Leo, to be broadcast next year.
Anna Bergman and her father
By Tim Satchell
ANNA Bergman has been telling me about her best Christmas present — a reconciliation with her father, Swedish film director Ingmar.
Their estrangement occurred with the publication of Not Daddy's Girl, her angry book about Ingmar, who left her mother Ellen when Anna was two.
‘We will definitely meet in the New Year,’ she says.
My 4.3 loves
Louise Bowen
We find the faces behind sex statistics
YOUNG women like Jo Garcia have had 4.3 loves, according to the latest survey into the nation's sex lives.
That is the average number of sexual partners for women now aged between 25 and 34, say researchers at the University College of London.
Promotions girl Jo, 25, from Blackpool, confirmed she has had four lovers.
The headline-making survey, which questioned 18,876 people, also found that men between the ages of 25-34 say they have enjoyed the attentions of an average 10.3 women.
Women currently aged 45 to 59 said they'd only had 2.6 lovers, while men the same age boasted of 13.6 girlfriends.
Such surveys are, of course, confidential leaving us with a cold set of statistics and meaningless fractions such as .
3 of a lover.
Health Works, however, has gone where no survey has gone before to bring you the faces and physical motivations behind the figures.
Jo Garcia sportingly agreed to flesh out the survey's findings by revealing exactly what she found attractive about her lovers — Chris, Erick, ex-husband Steve, and current partner Geoff — and giving them marks out of ten for looks, manners, eligibility, personality, kissing ability and sexiness.
Here is what she said: CHRIS: ‘My attraction to him was totally physical.
He was one of the best boxers in the school, and a year older than me.
‘We first chatted on a roller skating rink, where he was chosen as the best boy skater, and I was the best girl.
‘Later, I went to watch him sparring in the ring.
His body was immaculate, absolutely superb.
He had very short dark hair, a really cheeky young lad's face and later I found out he was very funny.
We started dating and eventually went out for about three years.
‘His most annoying habit was burping.
He would do it everywhere and it drove me insane.
His most endearing habit?
He didn't have any.
He'd never say those things that women love to hear.
But I suppose we were very young.’
ERICK: ‘I must have been about 18 and he was a DJ in a local nightclub.
‘He asked some girls to go up on stage and give him a kiss, and just for a joke I did.
He was so gorgeous.
He looked like a film star — the picture doesn't really do him justice.
‘The main thing was his big brown eyes.
He was really well tanned, short dark hair, lovely white teeth — and his accent just topped it all.
‘Mon Cheri,’ he'd say, and that was it for me.
‘He took my phone number and I met him again a couple of times.
His mannerisms were lovely — he was always putting his arm around me.
‘He was a snappy dresser too, casual but smart.
I like someone who makes an effort.
‘He went back to France then six months later he arrived at my house on a Harley Davidson, dressed head to toe in leathers.
We went out for a day — and a night — then he disappeared in a cloud of smoke to get the ferry at Dover.
‘He said he had to meet another woman.
That's Frenchmen for you.’
STEVE: ‘Our eyes met across a crowded ice skating rink when I was 18.
I thought he looked like he worked hard for a living — which he did.
He was about 6ft tall with an average build, and very witty.
‘What did I like most?
His wallet!
He owned a haulage company and always had a flashy car and loads of money.
He was very generous, he gave me anything I wanted.
‘But when we got married and I had two children he didn't want me to work any more, and he got very jealous of other men looking at me.
‘His most annoying habit was that he always had to be right.
His most endearing was how loving he was at the start.
‘We were married for 2½ years.
I think I was just too young.’
GEOFF: ‘I was in a bar about six months ago, and had an off-the-shoulder top on.
He came over and kissed my back.
Very cheeky.
But I liked his face straight away so I started chatting.
‘We talked the whole evening — he was hilarious.
And his smell.
Gorgeous, like a caveman, really natural.
His face oozes personality and charm.
He's also quite a tricky dresser and not badly off.
‘I've been seeing him regularly for a few months now.
When it comes to sexiness he's superb, very considerate.
He's also very clever.
‘At 39 he's a bit older than my other boyfriends and past the stage of running around.
His most annoying habit is that he's always on show.
The most endearing is how affectionate and loving he is.’
Where are you now, chaps?
Does your memory square up with Jo's?
Let us know at Health Works, 1 Virginia St, London EC1 9BS.
And if any readers want to reveal their previous loves, send us the details at the above address, with your daytime telephone number.
MET: Roller rink
LOOKS: 8
MANNERS: 8
ELIGIBILITY: 4
PERSONALITY: 9
KISSER: 7
SEXINESS: 9
TOTAL: 45
MET: In a night club
LOOKS: 9.5
MANNERS: 8
ELIGIBILITY: 8
PERSONALITY: 8
KISSER: 8
SEXINESS: 9
TOTAL: 50.5
MET: Ice skating rink
LOOKS: 6
MANNERS: 7
ELIGIBILITY: 9
PERSONALITY: 5
KISSER: 6
SEXINESS: 8
TOTAL: 41
MET: In a bar
LOOKS: 9
MANNERS: 9
ELIGIBILITY: 8
PERSONALITY: 10
KISSER: 10
SEXINESS: 10
TOTAL: 56
Fit Tips
A DOCTOR has solved one of the abiding mysteries of Christmas: the illness suffered by Charles Dickens's character Tiny Tim in A Christmas Carol.
Dr Donald Lewis, paediatric neurologist at the US Naval Hospital in Virginia, says the youngster had distal renal tubular acidosis.
The kidney illness was quite common — if unnamed — in the 19th Century and would explain Tim's single crutch, suggesting one side of his body was more seriously affected.
WOULD you know what to do if your child swallowed cleaning fluid or was knocked unconscious in a fall?
The latest edition of the manual of the St John Ambulance, St Andrew's Ambulance Association and the British Red Cross contains the latest information on how to give first aid in such emergencies.
There are step-by-step instructions and warnings about what not to do.
The first aid manual is published by Dorling and Kindersley, price £7.99.
EXPERTS are questioning the value of home-cholesterol testing kits which have now been on the market for six months.
The leading British medical journal The Lancet says cholesterol's role in the development of heart disease is controversial.
A raised level is just one of many risk factors.
It claims that cholesterol testing is more effective when done by experienced medical staff who can interpret the results, and that the £7.99 kits are difficult to use.
HELP could soon be at hand for Britain's 500,000 stammerers.
The Communications Network, a new organisation set up by businessman Christopher Kilmurry, is planning a series of local courses and longer term support groups.
A four-week pilot course in Cardiff has just been successfully completed.
To find out about courses planned for your area, telephone Christopher Kilmurry on 071-727 9837.
SLEEP experts at Papworth Hospital, Cambridge, have developed a quick cure for chronic snorers, using a laser.
The procedure, which doctors claim has already saved one marriage, is carried out under general anaesthetic.
Patients have a sore throat for a few days but no other side effects.
None of the 20 snorers treated so far has relapsed.
Party Pooped
IT'S the office party season and the next week or so will be spent drinking, eating and dancing to excess.
But what exactly happens to your body during this exhausting festive assault?
We wired up student Liz Gale, 22, from Streatham, with miniature heart and blood-alcohol monitors and went partying.
7.30pm: Heart rate 80 beats per minute, alcohol 0mg per 100 millilitres of blood.
AN hour after eating a bacon, cream cheese and salad sandwich, Liz meets friends in the pub for the traditional pre-party drinks.
She has a vodka with lime and soda.
The sandwich was a good preparation for an evening's drinking as food, especially things rich in proteins and fats, such as cheese, eggs, milk, yoghurt and meat, slow down the effect of alcohol and help prevent an upset stomach.
This is because protein and fat act as a chemical block to alcohol, leading to it being absorbed from the stomach into the bloodstream more slowly.
Highly sugared foods are best avoided as cardohydrate reacts chemically with alcohol speeding up its entry into the blood.
8.35pm: Heart rate 95, alcohol 45.
AFTER three vodkas with lime and soda, Liz arrives at the party.
The alcohol passes into Liz's stomach.
Some is then absorbed into the blood directly through the wall of the stomach but most travels to the small intestine and then enters her bloodstream.
Within two or three minutes, the alcohol reaches Liz's brain, where it affects the walls of individual brain cells slowing the rate at which electrical thought impulses can flash from one cell to another.
Vital messages from the brain to the body slow down and nerves in the heart, sensing something is wrong, react by instructing the heart to pump extra blood to the brain.
As a result, Liz's pulse quickens and her blood pressure rises.
She goes to dance and her heart rate and blood pressure rise further to cope with the extra effort.
9.30pm: Heart rate 125, alcohol 38mg.
LIZ'S numbed brain means her reactions have slowed down, her balance is affected and her perception of time begins to become inaccurate.
Her heart rate has soared as she dances but the alcohol in her blood is gradually falling.
The risk of joints damage increases dramatically during dancing — especially in high heels, which puts between four and five times the normal stress on knees and ankles.
Alcohol is broken down by the chemicals called enzymes in the liver through which blood circulates once every four minutes.
Enzymes convert alcohol into carbon dioxide and water.
This is a slow process normally taking an hour per unit of alcohol.
Liz tops up with another vodka with lime and soda, followed by a can of Tennent's Pilsner which contains about four units or 60mg of alcohol.
10.36pm: Heart rate 91, alcohol 83.
ALCOHOL dehydrates the body by making drinkers pass more urine and by now Liz is feeling these effects, so she visits the bathroom.
It takes about one hour for the alcohol from a drink to reach its peak concentration in the blood.
Although Liz's body is disposing of alcohol at the rate of about one unit a hour, her last drink pushed her over the legal limit for driving of 80mg of alcohol per 100ml of blood.
Alcohol stimulates nerve cells in the brain's appetite centres.
This is the stage when party-goers get peckish.
Tucking into sausages and cheese dips may satisfy the craving but, as the stomach is already full of alcohol, the food no longer inhibits its absorption into the blood.
Instead, the alcohol acts chemically to slow down the digestion of the food.
11.25pm: Heart rate 141, alcohol 68.
LIZ has a kiss and a cuddle with a friend.
This would normally push up her heart rate but with her pulse already racing due to the alcohol, dancing and general party excitement the increase is not as noticeable as normal.
She has a large whisky and ginger and starts to dance again.
The alcohol is now affecting her balance and slowing the brain cells governing learned social behaviour and inhibitions.
She is unaware of this and feels inspired.
The dehydrating effects of alcohol make her thirsty but instead of water, Liz drinks a tumbler of red wine.
The combination of beer, whisky and wine will increase Liz's chances of feeling ill the next day because the tannins in darker drinks, along with flavour enhancers and other chemicals, irritate blood vessels in the brain causing inflammation and pain.
12.27am: Heart rate 83, alcohol 135.
LIZ's heart rate is almost back to normal now she's not dancing.
She's thirsty and drinks two mugs of coffee.
The caffeine gives her numbed brain cells a temporary boost but nothing can increase the speed with which the body disposes of alcohol, and the coffee doesn't make her any more sober.
She says: ‘I'm pretty exhausted and feel a bit giddy and my legs ache.
I don't think I should have mixed the lager, whisky and wine — for a while I felt pretty queasy.’
She has drunk a total of 14 units of alcohol — the recommended weekly intake for a woman.
It will take until 9.45 the next morning for her system to be alcohol-free.
She will probably be awake before that as alcohol disrupts sleep as well as causing dehydration, causing partygoers to wake up with a raging thirst and pounding headache.
Christmas festivities leave your body shell-shocked
Stage 2 of our Cellulite Roadshow diet
Louise Bowen
IT'S time for the second stage of the Roadshow Diet, our ten-week eating and exercise challenge to help you reduce calories and burn off excess fat.
Two visitors to our recent Cellulite Roadshow, Nicholle Wicks and Janine Beddelem, have agreed to be guinea pigs and have already lost pounds.
TV nutritionist Amanda Ursell analysed their diets and adjusted their eating patterns to healthier and lower-calories options.
And top fitness consultant Martica Heaner is putting them through a walking, aerobics and swimming plan.
Such low-intensity exercise is perfect for burning fat.
So join in our diet by doing these kinds of activity for at least 45 minutes three times a week, and watch your fat and calorie intake.
Here we give you another of Martica's Cardio-Sculpting exercises to help you slide easier into those Christmas party outfits.
Already, Nicky is jogging, swimming and going to aerobics classes every week.
Dracula pill will help raise the dead tired
Juliet Ashworth
IT'S 7am and your partner's rearing to start the day.
You're not.
It's 7pm and you can't wait to go out on the town.
Not your partner.
You are an owl-and-lark couple, people whose biological clocks simply don't match.
But that could be about to change.
Scientists have now produced a pill that allows you to reset your body clock to suit your partner or lifestyle.
Insomnia, jet lag, bleary-eyed shift workers and bleak winter moods could all be a thing of the past thanks to a tiny dose of meltonin, dubbed the ‘Dracula’ hormone.
‘We call it that because the body only produces it at night,’ says pioneering researcher Dr Alfred Lewy of the Oregon Health Sciences Uni-versity in America.
We have found that although we are programmed by sunlight, the production of melatonin in our brains tells the body when it is dark.
‘So by giving a person a dose of the hormone it is possible to delay or advance their wake-up time, depending on when we apply it.
‘For instance, we can fool someone into thinking it is bedtime when the sun is still shining outside.’
Melatonin is produced by the pineal gland, a tiny organ buried in the centre of the brain.
As soon as we are exposed to light, production of the hormone abruptly ends.
Dr Lewy is hoping melatonin pills can be used to treat people who suffer from winter depressions by timing the doses to create an illusion of long, summer days in the depth of winter.
The new pill has already been used to regulate the daily rhythms of blind people who cannot respond to the light and dark cues of day and night.
Dr David Klein, a biochemist at the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development in Maryland, says: ‘The totally blind, especially children, can disrupt their entire families.
‘It can be very traumatic so we're hoping to help these people.
‘Then there are those who work in manufacturing, in police forces or hospitals who suffer because they are constantly functioning below par.’
If field trials are successful the Dracula hormone pill could be on the market by 1996.
Exercises to get you in shape
HERE is another of Martica Heaner's tips for home exercises to get you in shape.
This week she has devised the Oblique Crunch, to strengthen abdominal muscles.
Do 15-20 each side every other day.
POSITION ONE: With your right leg straight in the air and your left knee bent, bring right hand behind head and left hand behind right knee.
Press abdomen into the floor.
POSITION TWO: As you exhale, use your left hand to pull your left shoulder towards your right thigh.
Your oblique abdominal muscle will contract as rib cage rotates.
Hold when your left shoulder is closest to the thigh and then inhale, release and lower.
Repeat on the other side.
POSITION ONE: Ensure the right leg is straight
POSITION TWO: Bring left shoulder forward
French farmers
I AM disgusted that French farmers, protesting about Gatt, threw stones and insults at Britons landing in Calais.
It was a different story on June 6, 1944, when British soldiers landed.
Among them was my father, who died in action on that day.
The French should be reminded what we lost to free them from oppression.
Tony Doyle
WELL done on your article about British cyclist Tony Doyle riding the six-day races on the Continent.
It's a shame this exciting sport isn't covered by TV here.
EC membership
THE Government views its EC membership in trading terms only, meaning the ideals and social benefits are denied us.
Dyno-Rod
THE firm Dyno-Rod is to be congratulated for advertising service charges.
Electricians, TV repairers and the like should now do likewise to put rogues out of business.
If Princess Diana gave Christmas message
IF the royals stage a smear campaign against Diana, they should consider how many people would tune in if Di broadcast her own Christmas Day ‘message’ on TV.
Mums know best medicine
I WISH to congratulate Mrs Stoneman who defied doctors on the treatment they prescribed for her son Daniel.
A mother always knows best where her children are concerned and there is too much interference at state level regarding bringing up children.
It is quality of life that counts, not quantity.
It is time society acknowledged the importance of motherhood and all the responsibility this entails, even to making decisions on the suitability of medical treatment.
Doctors are not infallible when a child's peace and happiness are at stake.
Mums know best medicine
WE have had a Children's Charter, which gave the go-ahead for every type of mischief available, so what about a Parents' Charter?
At present, parents can be held responsible for the misdemeanors of their children, yet they are not allowed to chastise their children for fear of reprisals from the courts.
Milestones
BIRTHDAYS: Singer Tommy Steele, 56.
TV mogul Kerry Packer, 55.
ON THIS DAY: In 1903, the Wright Brothers made their first flight in the Kitty Hawk.
In 1973, Arab guerrillas hijacked a West German airliner, leading to 31 deaths.
Under-age sex can damage your health
IT IS legally and morally appalling that Bill Wyman seduced Mandy Smith when she was 14.
Even if a girl of that age looks like a woman, emotionally she is not one.
My main concern, however, is for Mandy's health as a result of this teenage sexual experience.
All the medical research over the past ten years has linked early sex with the onset of cervical cancer, a potential killer.
If any good has come out of the Mandy's story, it is the barrage of publicity it has provided on under-age sex.
There are good reasons — nothing to do with prudishness — why the age of consent has been set at 16, and the risk of cancer only adds to the dangers of Aids and unwanted pregnancies.
Perhaps now teenagers — brainwashed as they have been by teen magazines, TV programmes and pop stars who all glamorise sex — will understand why it is so much wiser to wait.
And perhaps men like Bill Wyman will learn the meaning of the word restraint.
If he hoped for public sympathy from his revelations about the affair and marriage, he was very wrong.
Under-age sex can damage your health
LIKE Mandy Smith, I lost my virginity at 14.
Unlike her I was raped.
It has taken me 30 years to come to terms with my own guilt, which I now know to be unjustified, and with my anger.
Kelly's courage
THE story of Kelly Good, the 11-year-old girl who planned her own funeral when her heart and lung transplant failed, moved me to tears.
I know her instructions included the order ‘Don't let anybody cry’ but I know she would forgive me.
Her courage in the face of death is an example to us all.
Car seat belts
I QUITE agree with the tough £500 fine being proposed if parents fail to make sure their children have their safety belts on.
I've often seen toddlers jumping about in the back of cars ahead of me.
Any move which can save young lives while teaching irresponsible parents a lesson is fine by me.
Gay love lessons
THE answer to your article ‘Do five-year-olds need lessons in gay love?’ is a sensible ‘no’.
An individual's sexuality is their own affair and they will come to terms with it when they are ready to.
Things you didn't know you didn't know
Graeme Donald
THE birds merrily slaughtered for the feast each Christmas have no connection with the country Turkey — they originated in Africa.
The first turkeys were shipped to Europe in the 17th Century when ‘Turkish’ was a blanket term for anything which came from or through Arab lands.
For instance‘Turkish baths’ properly should be described as Islamic baths since they have no special link with Turkey.
The most amazing thing about the turkey — except that even curry powder cannot improve the taste of its meat — is the bird's awesome stupidity.
It is common for them to drown in heavy rain because they stand gazing skyward with their beaks open to see where the rain is coming from.
In 1987, 18,000 turkeys trampled each other to death in Corning, California, after a farmer's tractor blew a tyre within earshot.
TODAY'S Book Of Things You Didn't Know…is now on sale, published by Simon & Schuster for £3.99.
Dear Santa, we're dreaming of a well-read Christmas
GONE are the days when giving a child a book was seen as a somewhat unimaginative Christmas present.
Now the choice is so wide and the packaging so attractive that most children are delighted.
And parents also benefit from the much-needed peace and quiet a really gripping book can provide.
Here The Bookseller's JENNIFER TAYLOR chooses some Christmas bestseller front-runners for children of all ages: AN instantly appealing book for younger children is Nick Butterworth's After The Storm (HarperCollins £8.99), a follow-up to last year's hugely successful One Snowy Night.
Percy the park-keeper rescues the animals when their old oak tree is blown down in a storm, and the new house he builds for them is presented in a fold-away poster at the end of the book.
It is also available, for £9.99, with a tape read by Richard Briers.
Another winner for younger children is Penguin Small by Mick Inkpen (Hodder, £6.99).
It tells of the last penguin to leave the North Pole, left behind because he is afraid of swimming.
A snowman, some polar bears and a friendly whale all help him get to the South Pole — with many fold-out pages en route.
Inkpen's last book, Threadbear was a great success, and is available this year in paperback (Picture Knight £3.99).
Monster-loving children will enjoy My Favourite Monsters by Vincent James (Hazar £7.99) where friendly beasts inhabit a child's bedroom.
For readers of about ten, try James Gurney's Dinotopia (Dorling Kindersley £15).
It's written as a diary of a professor and his son lost on an expedition overseas in the 1860s.
The story — accompanied by more than 150 colour paintings — of how they find a land where humans and dinosaurs live in harmony is an imaginative and interesting read, although adults may baulk at the price.
One anthology for older children stands out: Terry Jones keeps up an unflagging pace of invention in his Fantastic Stories (Pavilion Pounds 12.99)— a rich mix of magic and nonsense, illustrated with usual panache by Michael Foreman.
Another great piece of illustration features in a book for younger readers, Who's That Banging on The Ceiling?
(Walker, £7.99).
The book is held sideways so that the goings-on on each floor of this noisy block of flats can be shown.
The boldly stylised and appealing Can You Find Me? by Donald Smith (Tango Books £7.99) is a hide-and-seek game book with a difference.
Flaps conceal hiding places — obvious and not so obvious — and a detachable child's figure can be moved around so the game can be played over and over.
Also fun is Wendy Madgwick's Animaze!
(Ragged Bears, £8.95) featuring 12 nature mazes.
Salmon have to find a safe way upstream past bears, and monkeys have to get to the fruit without waking the jaguars.
Green parents will like Babette Cole's Supermoo!
(BBC, £7.99).
The bovine heroine has connections with Cowpeace International, and deals with a huge treacle slick at sea.
The holograms on every spread of Ghost Train (Orchard, £9.99) are genuinely spooky, and with its amusing story Stephon Wyllie stands a chance of being one of the top sellers this Christmas, along with new editions of former top-sellers such as Roald Dahl's The Giraffe and The Pelly And Me (Cape £8.99).
The Great Euro Job Hunt
Louise Bowen
How to find work across the Channel.
IF YOU want to find work overseas as a newly-fledged EC national, the advice is not ‘on yer bike’ but ‘on the ferry’.
For the best way to job-hunt in Europe is by going to the country of your choice for a few weeks and signing up with several private employment agencies.
Although some European jobs are advertised here, there are not enough for travel-hungry Brits.
Last year the Department of Employment had 34,000 inquiries about work abroad, compared with 25,000 in 1990.
If you can't go abroad yet, just go into your local JobCentre and ask for a computer search of overseas vacancies.
Although all EC countries are afflicted by unemployment, you may still find vacancies for nurses in Germany, TV engineers in Portugal or clerks in the European Parliament in Brussels.
Next year the Department of Employment plans to introduce a more sophisticated central data bank to list job vacancies throughout Europe.
In the meantime, if you are prepared to travel hopefully, here is a brief guide to where to look in all the EC countries.
You don't need a work permit for any of the member states, but the ability to speak the language fairly well is usually demanded:
FRANCE: EC nationals can use the equivalent of our JobCentres — the Agence Nationale Pour L'Emploi (ANPE).
Private agencies usually cover temporary work only.
To register you will need a French social security number, for which you should apply to the local Caisse d'Assurance Maladie.
Minitel — a computer database that can be rented by any telephone subscriber through France's telecommunications agency, ACT — offers thousands of vacancies, and you can advertise yourself.
GERMANY: Their JobCentres are called Arbeitsamt (AB).
To find the nearest branch look in their Yellow Pages, Gelbe Seiten.
There are few private agencies, but Adia, Manpower and Interim can be found in larger cities.
HOLLAND: The Dutch version of a JobCentre is the Arbeidsbureau (AB).
Find them in the Yellow Pages — Gouden Gids in Dutch.
Private agencies deal with temporary work for a maximum six months.
These are called Uitzendbureaux, and the Yellow Pages will list many.
Also look in Saturday papers for vacancies, especially Der Telegraaf and Het Algemeen Dagblad.
SPAIN: Work is found here in the Government's Oficina de Empleo.
They are the only employment and recruitment agency allowed to operate in Spain for permanent work.
Staff can help with jobfinding, vocational training or setting up your own business.
ITALY: You may need a worker's registration card — check at the local town hall where you live.
Look for jobs at the Ufficio di Collocamenta Manodopera (UCM).
In Rome, Bologna and Milan there is an English edition of Yellow Pages which lists English-speaking businesses in the area, and in Rome there are two English-language papers with job ads: Wanted In Rome and Metropolitan.
GREECE: Look in the phone book for your local office of the Organisimos Apasholisseos Ergatikou Dynamikou (OAED).
The few private agencies allowed to operate are called, charmingly, Idiotika Grafia Apasholisis.
The English paper Athens News also carries vacancies.
DENMARK: Danish JobCentres, Arbejdsformidling (AF) can be found in the telephone book or De Gule Sider (Yellow Pages).
Private agencies deal with temporary and permanent employment and are called Vikarbureauer.
The best paper for job vacancies is the Sunday issue of Berlingske Tidende.
PORTUGAL: Look for local branches of Centro do Emprego in the phone book or Paginas Amarelas (Yellow Pages).
Most private agencies are based in Lisbon and Oporto and are divided into temporary specialists (Pessoal Temporario) or recruitment agencies (Pessoal Recrutamento e Seleccao).
English language papers such as Anglo-Portuguese News (APN), Portugal Post and Algarve News also advertise vacancies.
BELGIUM: Belgium's three official languages — Dutch, French and German — can make life difficult for foreigners.
But as Belgian employees are given extensive rights after being with a company for 12 months, many employers prefer to employ a high number of temporary staff, which may include foreigners.
LUXEMBOURG: Sign up with the local JobCentre equivalent, l'Administration de l'Emploi, whose branches are listed in the phone book.
Private agencies are listed under Agences de Travail in Ligne Bleue (Yellow Pages).
Act now to create jobs
LIKE a runaway juggernaut with no brakes to slow its headlong rush, unemployment keeps rising remorselessly.
The latest jobless figures show that even if the Chancellor's attempts to revive the economy are working, too many of the British people still are not.
The green shoots of recovery may now be twitching but it will be a long time before the unemployment figures level off.
The most pessimistic forecast is that they won't do that until 1996, by which time there would be more than four million out of work.
It is true that the Government has responded to many of the demands to change its economic policy, though it was forced into many of the U-turns.
Following the withdrawal from the European Exchange Rate Mechanism, it slashed interest rates, allowed the value of Sterling to fall and put the accent of public spending on providing jobs.
But there cannot be complacency in Downing Street or satisfaction in the country as long as the unemployment figures continue to rise so sharply.
TODAY does not believe in merely telling the Government that something must be done without being able to suggest positive moves.
And we accept that there is no magic wand which can be waved to provide a million jobs overnight.
Yet there is more which the Government could do without too great an increase in public borrowing or putting up taxes.
There is still £6 billion from the sale of council homes locked away that could be released to give a boost to the construction industry.
Huge capital schemes, given an amber light in the Autumn Statement, could get the green light straight away.
There could be yet another cut in interest rates and positive help to home-buyers to get the vital housing market moving.
What is crucial for the Government is not only to help provide jobs but to be seen to want to be doing that.
It cannot just point smugly to the late-flowering green shoots of recovery and wait for economic summer to arrive.
Labour in vain IF the Labour leader, John Smith, needs a ‘social justice commission’ to tell him what is wrong with Britain, he is no leader at all.
After the 1987 election, Labour went through a contorted ‘consultation’ to find out what it should think.
What the voters thought about that they made perfectly clear in this year's election.
Commissions and inquiries are rarely more than a device to allow politicians to put off taking decisions.
Labour's latest one is more ridiculous than most.
Mr Smith says it is not a party inquiry, even though most of its members have strong Labour connections.
The only question is whether they will tell the Labour leader what he wants to hear or whether he does not even know what he believes about the state of Britain after 13 years of Tory rule.
The country is crying out for leadership and all Mr Smith has to offer is a talking-shop for academics and political has-beens.
Generation gap
THE Prince of Wales says he really valued his chats with the Queen Mother and his late uncle, Lord Mountbatten.
How comforting it is to know that Charles can communicate so well with people who are 40 or 50 years older than himself.
Mind you, it would be more comforting if he could do the same with those who are a dozen years younger than he is.
Getting away with murder
Penny Wark
How killers can walk free in vigilante Britain.
YOU are at home when a man bursts in brandishing a knife.
He lunges at you so you grab a knife and plunge it into his chest.
The next day he dies from his injury.
Should you be judged guilty of murder?
Or are you innocent because you acted in self defence?
This was the dilemma that faced a British jury this week when Norman Waller was tried for the murder of Terry Malone.
The jury cleared him, deciding that Mr Waller had acted in self defence.
British law is clear that if a person causes an injury in this way rather than in retaliation, they can be found not guilty.
But Mr Waller's case and many others — some featured on the right — also opens the debate around a citizen's right to take the law into their own hands.
In choosing not to call the police but to take action himself, Mr Waller was following an escalating practice in Britain.
We may not yet be a vigilante state but there is no doubt that more people feel compelled to mete out their own justice rather than entrust it to the police and courts.
Roger Ede, Secretary of the Law Society's Criminal Law Committee, believes there is a growing gulf between police and public.
‘Juries are sympathetic towards people who have been provoked and who are defending their property and go over the top,’ he says.
‘The public wants to see those who have committed crimes punished in a visible way.
‘The criminal justice system has limited finances for taking people to court and locking them up, and there is a growing feeling among the public that neither the courts nor prison actually achieve anything.
Now the gap is being bridged by people taking the law into their own hands.’
The problem is exacerbated by the Criminal Justice Act 1991 which seeks to persuade courts to punish people within the community rather than in prison and therefore save money.
As a result the public sees people apparently getting away with serious crimes.
American law follows English common law.
But American juries are urged to ignore their moral reaction to vigilante cases and reach verdicts according to the facts.
If concessions are made, it is through lighter sentences.
The most famous American vigilante case is that of Bernhard Goetz, who was accosted by four youths on a New York subway train.
One of them demanded $5.
Goetz pulled out a gun and fired, injuring one.
He was cleared of attempted murder and assault but sentenced to a year in prison for possessing a gun illegally.
A subsequent Gallup poll showed that 57 per cent of the people polled supported his actions.
Everyone wants to see justice done.
Now it seems that makes them sympathetic to those who — quite literally — get away with murder.
CASE 1: FURIOUS BUSINESSMAN
NORMAN Waller was cleared of murder this week after he admitted stabbing to death a man he believed was trying to break into his neighbour's car.
Mr Waller was ‘at the end of his tether’ after his business and property was plagued by burglars and vandals.
His car had been damaged at least six times and he'd moved his double glazing factory because of three attempted robberies.
When he saw a gang trying to break into a car in Gateshead he and a neighbour chased the youths.
They claimed that when they were surrounded by the gang they acted in self defence.
Mr Waller lashed out with a chisel, stabbing Terry Malone in the chest.
Mr Malone died from his wounds five days later.
‘They were like a pack converging on me and I was terrified,’ Mr Waller told the court.
CASE 2: HAVE-A-GO BARMAID
BARMAID Saskia Hobson shot and wounded two of three armed raiders who broke into her pub and threatened to kill the landlord.
Miss Hobson, who was born in South Africa, had been trained to use guns in her home town of Johannesburg.
She fired the gun at the raiders from just four feet away when she went to help the threatened landlord at Knebworth, Hertfordshire, in December 1990.
Her shots tore off one man's ear and wounded another man in the buttocks as he fled from the pub.
A report on the shooting was sent to the Crown Prosecution Service, but it decided not to take any action against Miss Hobson.
‘If you are in a situation where you are in immediate fear of your life, you may take whatever defensive measures are necessary,’ said a senior detective.
CASE 3: CORNERED COLLECTOR
ERIC Butler, a charity worker, fought back with his swordstick when a mugger tried to strangle him on the London Underground in 1987.
He was convicted of carrying an offensive weapon and got a 28-day suspended sentence and £200 fine.
The Appeal Court quashed the suspended sentence but raised his fine to £300.
Lord Lane, the Lord Chief Justice, described the case's circumstances as ‘wholly exceptional’ and said it was only when Mr Butler was driven into a corner that he drew the sword in self defence.
Mr Butler had been taking a collection-box home when he was attacked on the Tube, kicked in the face, kneed in the stomach, had his head banged against a door and almost strangled.
He drew the sword and stabbed his attacker, Martin Day, who was later jailed for 18 months.
CASE 4: GUN SHOP DEFENDER
GUN shop assistant Peter Lamb shot dead an armed robber who threatened to blast his boss with a sawn-off shotgun.
The raider, Colin Budd, was attempting to steal weapons at Ward and Company in Colchester, Essex last July.
He held a shotgun at Mr Lamb's throat and when he wheeled around and took aim at the shop's owner, Mr Lamb grabbed a pistol from under the counter and fired once.
The shot hit the raider in the upper chest and killed him instantly.
At the inquest into Mr Budd's death, Mr Lamb said he only intended to wound.
‘I shot the guy to disarm him,’ said Mr Lamb.
The coroner recorded a verdict of lawful killing.
No charges were brought against Mr Lamb, who was judged to have acted in self-defence.
Press button A for a happy ending
James Roberts
DID you yearn for Humphrey Bogart to fly away with Ingrid Bergman at the end of Casablanca?
Or for ET to stay on Earth?
Or perhaps you secretly hoped Rocky would get knocked out before he made any sequels.
A new concept in movie-making is now giving cinemagoers the chance to decide how the plot should develop as they are watching.
The revolutionary 20-minute movie ‘I'm Your Man’ is the first of this new generation of ‘interactive’films to be released.
Using a hand-held control device with three buttons, audiences can register their choice of 68 plot lines, determine the fates of the leading characters and decide how the film should end.
‘For 85 years movies have told people to sit down, be quiet and watch,’ says Bob Bejan, 32, who developed the idea with partner Bill Franzblau, 38.
‘This is the first one that says, ‘Don't just sit there’.’
The film premiered in New York this week, at a specially adapted Manhattan cinema.
Bejan greeted the 75 audience members and told them not to hold back — and they didn't, loudly voicing their preferences.
The creators describe the film as a ‘boy-meets-girl story that gets a little wacky’.
It stars A Whitney Brown of the US satirical show Saturday Night Live, and soap opera actress Colleen Quinn.
The audience's verdict was encouraging: ‘I thought it was great,’ said Jeff Markowitz, 31.
‘It was fun to be able to get involved in the story and change the ending.’
More US cinemas are being adapted to screen interactive films.
Al Jolson's famous words in the first talkie, The Jazz Singer, were: ‘You ain't heard nothing yet.’
Bejan's message for Nineties audiences might well be: ‘You ain't seen nothing yet.’
The Forgotten Hostage
Fergus Kelly in New York
A year after escaping Beirut hell, Joseph Cicippio is jobless, broke and dejected.
A YEAR ago a gaunt Joseph Cicippio walked gingerly down aircraft steps to a hero's welcome on American soil.
Five years after being kidnapped in Beirut the last of the US hostages had finally come home.
The whole country celebrated.
In Philadelphia the skyline was emblazoned with the words ‘Welcome home Joe Cicippio’ picked out in lights on the skyscrapers — and President George Bush led the welcome.
After 1,908 days of terror Joe was looking forward to living a normal life and getting back to work as a senior administrator with the American University.
But now he is The Forgotten Hostage.
The university has dumped him.
His wife spent all their savings on paying ransom demands.
And, at 62, Joe has still not found a new job.
Yet still he has found the will — and the money — to fly 40 Lebanese orphans to America for Christmas.
Their joy will allow Joe to forget his disillusionment for a while at least.
‘I had no doubt that I would be going back to the university,’ he says from his home in Princeton, New Jersey.
‘I had planned where I was going to live and what projects I was going to be involved in.’
The loss of income is a particularly hard blow for Joe because his Lebanese-born wife Elham was duped three times during his captivity into paying ransom money for his safe return.
‘I don't blame her at all.
I would have done exactly the same thing in her shoes,’ says Joe.
‘But when I was released, it meant we were starting from scratch.
‘The university gave me some nice dinners and said ‘don't worry about coming back to work.
It will take you four or five months to get your life back in order’.
When that time came, there was no job.’
Joe's contract had been renewed during each year of his captivity but that didn't happen this year.
Now he worries about whether he will ever work again.
‘They say my duties were back on campus in Beirut and obviously I can't go back there,’ he says.
Elham, whom he met on a Beirut blind date, and for whom he converted to Islam, is more blunt.
‘It has hurt him more than anything else since his release.
‘We later found out that the university had hired ten people in New York to raise funds to re-build the Beirut campus.
Who could be more ideal than Joe to do that?’
Joe does earn some money on the after-dinner speaking circuit, and has addressed an assortment of lawyers, writers and bankers since his release.
But the payments he gets barely cover his expenses.
A book about his Beirut experience, called Suspended In Time, is due out next year.
But Joe Cicippio is not a big-name ex-hostage.
He cannot hope to match the advances which the likes of Waite, McCarthy and Terry Anderson could command.
What inspires him at the moment is the once-in-a-lifetime trip to the US that he has organised for 40 Lebanese orphans.
He and Elham have worked round-the-clock to raise the $100,000 needed for the children's fares, accommodation, clothing and food.
It will include a tour of the White House, arranged with the help of President Bush — whom Joe now counts as a personal friend — and visits to New York, Disneyland, Universal Studios in Hollywood, and finally the New Year's Day Parade in the Pasadena Rose Bowl, California.
It was at last year's parade that Elham gave him the idea when she said: ‘I wish I could enjoy what I am experiencing here, but back in my mind there are too many innocent children left with no hopes and no future.
The only sin they committed was being born in a country at war.’
Joe will meet the children halfway at Heathrow and escort them to America.
He has no plans to get in touch with Terry Waite while over here.
‘One of the first memos I received after my release, when I was in Germany, was a one-line note ‘Welcome Home — Terry’.
‘That was the only time I had contact with him.
‘My wife tears the hell out of Terry Waite.
When I was held hostage she went to see him, and she had hoped that this would be a private, quiet meeting.
‘But when she arrived Terry had all the Press there waiting to see her.
My wife was very disturbed about that.’
Just before Joe's own kidnap he discovered that Waite was in danger.
‘I heard from friends of mine that Hezbollah had lost faith in him, that he was talking to and seeing too many people.
‘Had I known this man would come back to Lebanon, I would have called and said: ‘Don't come back to this country.’
He must have known there was bad feeling.’
There's no sign of the frailty Joe showed showed on his return last year.
He has put on 4½ stone, and at 13 stone admits he is now overweight.
But the memory of September 12, 1986 is not so easy to rub out.
He was seized outside his home on the Beirut campus by three gunmen.
‘One said: ‘Are you Mr Cicippio?’
I was just about to say ‘yes’ when they grabbed me and I saw they all had guns.
‘I knew that they weren't students and I began to resist but one of them hit me over the head with a gun.
They told me not to move my head or they would blow it off.’
Over the next five years he was moved about 20 times.
In 1989, when the Israelis seized Hezbollah cleric Sheikh Abdel-Karim Obeid, Joe's captors announced they would execute him if Obeid was not released.
Unknown to Joe, another group had already killed a captured American soldier in retaliation.
‘One morning they woke me up, told me to wash my face, and led me blindfolded into a room with a TV camera.
‘They said ‘we want you to read this statement into that TV camera’ and that was when I found out I was going to be hanged.’
Certain he would be killed, Joe recorded a poignant farewell message to Elham.
It said: ‘Goodbye, my love.
If you don't hear my voice and see my face again I want you to look after yourself.
Don't be sad…and always remember me.’
Joe recalls: ‘When it was all over they took me back to the room, chained me up, and that was the very last I ever heard of it.
‘But all that day and the next few days I was waiting for someone to come in.
That was a difficult time.’
Holiday Brit dies in jet ski tragedy
A YOUNG council worker, who quit his job to see the world with his fiancee, died in a boating accident yesterday.
Martin Sinclair, 30, was killed instantly when his jet ski crashed into a speedboat on the Caribbean island of Antigua.
He gave up his job with Exeter social services department in May to travel with girlfriend Claire Soper before their planned wedding next September.
Do they know it's Christmas?
Helen Renshaw
GAUDY, tasteless or downright boring, the latest crop of celebrity Christmas cards is everything but religious.
Christ's message of peace and goodwill to all men has been well and truly eclipsed by today's stars.
There is no baby Jesus, no three wise men and not an angel in sight on the cards sent out by these famous names.
Even Santa Claus — in the shape of former England captain Bobby Moore — can only manage the substitute's spot on the England soccer team's bench.
At least Jeffrey Archer has sent out charity cards instead of last year's queasy portrait of his fragrant wife Mary dressed as a choirboy.
Here Helen Renshaw selects cards from people who should have followed his example.
Black and white Christmas for TV stars Richard Madeley and Judy Finnigan.
A rejuvenated Barbara Cartland with characters from her slushy novels.
Movie director Michael Winner's card — Lia Williams in a sequence from his new film, Dirty Weekend — displays his twin passions of movies and younger women.
Tramp nightclub owner Johnny Gold lives out a housewives' fantasy in the arms of the exotic Chippendale hunks on his camp Christmas card.
Christmas has definitely gone to the dogs — at least in novelist Jilly Cooper's latest bedroom scene.
So tacky in tartan, scarlet and gold — do we mean Derek and Ellen Jameson?
We surely do.
Westwood ho, ho, ho — a flamboyant offering from fashion queen Vivienne.
A grand view of Horse Guards Parade — oh well it's better than a view of John and Norma Major.
Graham Taylor is hoping that Santa won't give away any goals to England's World Cup opponents — or he might be given the sack.
Milla Jovovich
ACTRESS Milla Jovovich puts her best footwear forward at the premiere of Sir Richard Attenborough's film Chaplin.
She was joined by leading actor Robert Downey Jnr and wife Debbie in Leicester Square, London.
Tori Spelling
ACTRESS Tori Spelling, daughter of film boss Aaron, knows who loves her — Nick Savalas, son of Kojak star Telly.
Lesley-Anne Down
ACTRESS Lesley-Anne Down is planning more than a kiss under the mistletoe this Christmas.
Lesley-Anne, 38, who jetted into Heathrow yesterday from Los Angeles with husband Don Fauntleroy, wants to start a family.
‘We are going to practise to make sure we know what we are doing,’ she said.
‘It will be a wonderful Christmas.’
George Michael
FAME is blocking heart-throb George Michael's road to romance.
The 29-year-old singer, who has set up his own charity The Platinum Trust since opting out of the limelight two years ago, told Best magazine:
‘Everyone stares at you but not because they're attracted to you.’
Michael Jackson
MICHAEL Jackson, 34, is to receive the top Silver Entertainer award in Hollywood next month for his contribution to pop music.
‘He has surpassed himself again and again, almost beyond belief,’ said the National Association for the Advancement of Coloured People.
Paul McCartney
EX-Beatle Paul McCartney, 50, may sign an exclusive multi-million pound deal with US network ABC to film his current tour.
The contract would promote his new song Coming Up and attract new TV viewers.
‘We are in discussions,’ said an ABC spokesman.
Sonia
CHART-topper Sonia, 21, thinks the eight short-listed songs for the Eurovision Song Contest are all ‘fabulous’.
The Liverpool star, who will represent Britain in the May contest, said: ‘I might even put some of them on my new album.’
Robin Williams
FUNNYMAN Robin Williams, 41, will find his next film role a real drag.
He dresses up as a woman to play a nanny working for a yuppie in Mrs Doutfire.
The big raids
THE world's biggest bank robbery was a haul now worth around £3,000 million from the Reichsbank following Germany's collapse in 1945.
In May 1990, treasury bills and certificates of deposit worth Pounds 292 million were stolen from a money-broker's messenger in the City of London.
A raid on the Knightsbridge Safety Deposit Centre, London, in July 1987 netted more than £30 million and in November 1983 gold bullion worth £26 million was taken in the Brink's-Mat robbery at Heathrow.
Terence Stamp has written his first novel
By Tim Satchell
TERENCE Stamp has written his first novel, The Night, to be published in February.
The East End-born actor, above, already has three volumes of autobiography to his credit — Stamp Album, Coming Attractions and Double Feature.
The novel has a contemporary setting and is about people who meet for an extraordinary dinner party.
‘It is a wonderful, very black, very witty book,’ Orion publisher Caroline Michel tells me.
‘The characters are brilliantly drawn.
He thought about the plot for a year or two, but when he sat down to write it late last year, it came very quickly.’
Mr Stamp, 54, is in Los Angeles where he recently finished shooting The Real McCoy, co-starring Kim Bassinger and Val Kilmer.
Archer books in to history with new mega-deal
By Tim Satchell
JEFFREY Archer is to sign one of the biggest deals in British publishing history for more than £3 million a year.
For an estimated £10 million, he is to sign his UK rights to Harper Collins for the next three years.
They also publish the works of Barbara Taylor Bradford, Tom Clancy, Sidney Sheldon and Fay Weldon.
A senior publishing figure says: ‘It is an amazing deal.
But then Archer is probably the one author who is capable of justifying those figures.’
Yesterday Lord Archer was not available for comment.
He wrote his first book — Not A Penny More, Not A Penny Less — as a means of recovery after losing a fortune in an unwise business deal.
The former Tory MP who this week made his maiden speech in the House of Lords, plays a conciliatory role within the Conservative Party as a close friend of both Margaret Thatcher and John Major.
He has already signed a three-year deal with Harper Collins in the United States for around £11 million.
‘Jeffrey has huge energy and puts a tremendous amount into his books and promoting them,’ says a rival, who was an under-bidder for the deal.
RUSSIAN troops are being beefed up with Bovril Cubes (dried beef extract.
Today sees a second order being flown out to the military base at Kaliningrad.
The first order of 3,000 units (72 boxes in a unit, 12 cubes in a box) left CPC's Burton upon Trent factory a week ago.
‘This is the first time we have exported Bovril cubes anywhere,’ a spokesman tells me.
And…
By Tim Satchell
THINK of a number between one and ten.
Don't tell me.
Now multiply it by nine.
If the number is more than one digit, add them together.
Now take away five.
Assuming A is one, B is two and so on, think of the letter that corresponds to the number.
Think of a country starting with that letter.
Now think of an animal starting with the second letter of that country.
What colour is the animal?
You are now thinking of a grey elephant in Denmark.
Love on record
By Tim Satchell
SINGER Maryen Cairns, 26, today marries record company boss Keith Coldwell-Turner, 32, in Sydney, Australia.
The wedding is being conducted in the garden of her family home by her father, the Very Rev David Cairns.
She says: ‘We emigrated to Australia when I was eight but I returned to England seven years ago to write songs and met Keith.’
The couple are to honeymoon on Lord Howe Island, a wildlife sanctuary off Sydney.
Miss Cairns, who sang on the latest Fish album, recently released her first album Picture Within on her husband's Progress record label.
Brian died the perfect husband.
Then I opened his wallet and discovered his secret double life
Jackie Annesley
Widow tells how a trail of clues led to marriage heartbreak.
IF you were looking for a local Pillar of Society, you did not need to seek further than Brian Courtenay.
When he died of a heart attack at the age of 60, the church was packed with friends and admirers.
Friends from the council he had once served on.
Friends from the Conservative Party committee he had chaired.
Friends from the masonic lodge whose Master he had been.
And they were not mourning just a businessman, political figure and brother mason.
They were grieving for the end of one of life's great love matches.
‘You were the perfect couple,’ the vicar told Brian's widow, Jean.
She thought so, too.
But today, 61-year-old Jean knows the bitter truth.
For years before he died, one day in May last year, the ultra-respectable Brian Courtenay had a mistress on the side.
And he had been spending a fortune, perhaps as much as £300,000, on her.
He had even lent the other woman his wife's blue ball gown.
‘Just recently I got the gown out to lend to a neighbour,’ Jean says.
‘I found it had been cheaply dry-cleaned. he had obviously lent it to her.’
Not much surprises Jean Courtenay any more about her husband.
The man she shared her bed with, the man she cooked for, the man she loved for decades, has turned into someone completely unrecognisable.
A trickster who constantly committed adultery — and then left her facing a mountain of debt.
Little did Jean realise it, as she prepared to set off to church at Caterham, Surrey, for the funeral of her lifetime partner and soulmate, but the first clue to his free-spending secret life had plopped through the letterbox that very morning.
It was a summons for £6,800.
An unpaid bill on his last Volvo car.
Brian had been forced to give up his catering-equipment business, Albrite Trading, through bad health, and become a humble taxi driver.
‘When I opened the letter and saw the summons,’ Jean says, ‘I thought, ‘Oh, the poor devil — I'll have to just simply pay off the money owed, and then no-one will ever have to know about this’.’
So she went to the funeral service, and listened to the tributes —‘everyone thought he was the sun, the moon and the stars’.
And in the evening, after the wake, when the last guests had made their respectful way home, Jean mustered the courage to do what had to be done.
To go through all her husband's personal belongings sent back from the hospital where he died.
Sitting alone and still grieving, in the one-bedroom bungalow, she did something she had never done in all her 38 years of married life.
She looked inside her husband's wallet…
Money?
Just £6.27.
But there were receipts, too.
Receipts from Anderton & Sons, estate agents, to do with renting a luxury apartment at Limpsfield Chart, 11 miles away.
One was for an initial payment of £2,053.27.
And there was another receipt for a smaller amount.
Luxury apartment, just a short drive from home?
Why on earth would he have had such a thing?
Her head swam.
There was also a card for the Caravan Club of Great Britain, which was another, though seemingly much smaller, puzzle.
And there was a letter.
A love letter, written in stilted, childlike writing.
‘Thank you for everything you do for me,’ it said.
‘I don't deserve any of your gifts but I really do appreciate them…
Griselda.’
‘My mouth went dry,’ Jean says.
‘I couldn't move.
I developed cramp from my neck to the tip of my toes.
I was paralysed.
‘When I had to go to the bathroom, I had to crawl there on my stomach.’
Nothing could have prepared a loyal, loving wife for such shocks.
The couple had met as teenagers at an evening class in 1949, at Penge.
Soon afterwards, Brian, in the middle of his national Service, was sent to Germany for six months.
‘He wrote almost every day,’ Jean recalls.
Once home, Brian got a job as a market gardener and asked Jean to marry him.
He had only been out with on other girl in his life.
Jean, at 21, had only had one other boyfriend.
‘Yes,’ she said.
After a three-year engagement, in March, 1953, they were wed, at Penge.
A few months later, Brian joined the police force as a dog handler.
For the next 13 years he served in the Met.
After that came a stint in the ambulance service, while Jean worked for a catering business.
Then came his big chance.
Jean's boss decided to bring him into the business as a sales director.
Jean could not have children, but all their friends agreed they were very much in love.
They were keen Conservative Party supporters, led a busy social life and became keen ice skaters.
In the 1960s they won the Junior Ice Dance Championships at Streatham.
Brian became a freemason and in time was master of his lodge.
By the early 1980s, he had set up his own company, Albrite.
Jean was his co-director.
Brian rarely took holidays, but most years Jean went off to such exotic spots as the Maldive Islands, the Seychelles or St Lucia.
But in 1984, she broke her leg.
While in hospital for that, she broke an arm as well.
That mean she could no longer counter-sign company cheques.
Soon, she resigned as a director.
Looking back, Jean believes that is around the time Brian's feelings for her changed.
For months, she could not get around while her husband was constantly on the road, doing his sales rounds.
But he was always sure to be back home in time for dinner every night.
‘And he always slept in our bed,’ Jean says.
Yet by March the next year, Brian Courtenay had set up his mistress in the luxury love nest that would help to empty the family coffers.
He had plenty of cover stories for his secret affair.
For many years, he had been on the local council.
There were so many evening meetings to attend…
Jean never questioned where her public-spirited husband was really going.
Why should she?
He was also chairman of the local Conservative Party committee.
More meetings involved, there.
And as a business, politician and freemason, it was only natural to go off to the golf course on a Sunday.
Jean was so utterly trusting, she never even wondered what Brian got up to while she and a woman neighbour were away on their annual fortnight holidays abroad.
Only his death, and the telltale evidence he left behind, would reveal what a sham of a marriage it was.
The morning after the funeral, Jean started trying to fathom the mysteries posed by the contents of Brian's wallet.
She phoned Andertons estate agency.
Yes, they said, her husband had indeed rented the apartment, from March 1985 to September 1989.
At a staggering £385 a week rent.
Altogether he had paid out nearly £90,000 for it.
‘Perhaps he was using it as an office,’ the agent suggested, kindly.
‘An office!’
Jean says, with a bitter smile.
‘Brian's spending spree with the other woman probably amounted to between £200,000 and £300,000,’ she says.
She found a £4,000 Barclays Bank debt, a £3,700 Access credit-card bill, a £6,000 accountant's bill and a mountain of unpaid household bills.
Much of the money owed was Brian's personal debt that his widow is not liable for.
But they had a joint bank mortgage on the bungalow.
And that makes her responsible for debts to the bank.
Jean had looked forward to a comfortable retirement after a lifetime of work.
Now she is left with a weekly pension of £71.60, plus Pounds 72 a month interest from her savings.
Until he died, Jean had never had cause to doubt her husband's faithfulness.
As her suspicion grew, at first, she felt too humiliated to mention what she had discovered.
But several days after she opened the wallet, her brother arrived from Norfolk.
He helped her go through Brian's car.
In the locked glove compartment they found a £3,137.33 Access bill.
A mail-order form for Escada perfume.
And a letter in her husband's writing — a draft love note to an unnamed woman.
‘You are all I have in this world,’ it said.
As she stared, dumbfounded, at that treacherous note, Jean just wanted to die.
She knows, now, who was the mystery woman in her husband's other life — not, as it turns out, the Griselda who once wrote to him.
Clues in Brian's car did not end with the love note.
There was a receipt for £66 for drop earrings and insurance certificates for a Pounds 600 Rolex watch and an £800 eternity ring.
‘I've never had an eternity ring,’ says Jean.
Fingering wedding rings, she adds: ‘These are my mother's.
‘I took mine off, the day I found out who his mistress really was…’
Duke of Marlborough
THE Duke of Marlborough has no excuse for not going to see his baby grandson.
The bond between them might help to heal old family conflicts.
Shakespearian curses
LEARNING Shakespearian curses may help make the Bard's work accessible to prisoners, but I doubt we'll hear much Elizabethan abuse from them.
Prisoners have an older vocabulary of swear-words to choose from — Anglo-Saxon.
Screen comedy
HAS anyone told BBC TV that all screen comedy is not immortal?
The Good Life and The Two Ronnies were OK in their day but seem hopelessly dated now.
German language to replace English
SO linguists on the Continent reckon German will replace English as a common language?
Not a hope.
They're just jealous of our success.
Youth is not so innocent
AT the age of 14 I was having my first sexual relationship — with a married man who was also a father-to-be.
I was the same age as Mandy Smith, Bill Wyman's ex-wife, when their affair started.
And although it may be bad for a girl of that age to have sex, I can honestly say that it does not appear to have caused me any lasting harm, either emotionally or physically.
I knew what I was doing and knew that it was wrong — but when you're 14, everything you want to do is wrong.
I am glad of my early sexual experiences.
Whether the men used me or not, I now have a better understanding of relationships and what I want from them.
But I have no intention of using my past experiences to further my financial comfort.
I would rather be the creator of my own success.
Women must be alert to society's dangers
CONGRATULATIONS to TODAY for prompting the AttorneyGeneral to have another look at the case of Harley Street rapist Dr Tom Courtney.
When are the courts going to realise that the public wants sentences that fit the crimes?
This particularly applies in the case of professionals such as doctors and teachers who we ought to be able to trust.
However, women will have to be more alert in future in view of the growing violence against them and increase in sexual attacks.
While no one invites these attacks, we have to learn to be a little suspicious of everyone's motives these days.
It's sad to have to be so cynical but if the price of safety is walking around with your eyes lowered and avoiding potentially dangerous situations, such as lifts home with near strangers, it has to be done.
Women must be alert to society's dangers
IT has always been tough being a woman, but never quite as hard as now.
We thought liberation would lead to more freedom but many of us are too scared to go out alone in daylight let alone after dark these days.
If we wear sexy clothes we're ‘asking for it’.
And even a visit to the doctor can be a threat.
Where will it all end?
Now I think I know why Moslems wrap their women in black from head to toe.
In her prime
I THOUGHT Pam Francis's attack on Helen Mirren's performance in Prime Suspect 2 was totally unfounded.
The first episode had all my friends and colleagues eagerly waiting for the conclusion.
Prime Suspect is very 1992, very ‘happening’.
I really do think Pam has got her views mixed up.
Religion banished
YOUR correspondent suggests our world would be more peaceful if religion was banished.
But the way to peace lies in truly following Jesus.
Those Communist regimes which tried to ban religion were known for their cruelty.
The real cause of war and strife is not religion, but man's inhumanity to man.
Sell Windsor Castle to the Japanese
INSTEAD of wasting money on fixing Windsor Castle, let's sell it to the Japanese and use the proceeds to save St Bart's.
The hospital does more for Britons in a week than Windsor does in a decade.
And let's face it, the Royals will not be sleeping on the streets.
Milestones
BIRTHDAYS: Film director Steven Spielberg, 45.
Rolling Stone Keith Richards, 49.
ON THIS DAY: In 1865, slavery was abolished in the US.
In 1969, Britain abolished the death penalty for murder.
In 1979, Stanley Barrett broke the sound barrier on land.
Things you didn't know you didn't know
Graeme Donald
THESE days ‘carol’ means only the festive song heard at this time of year, but originally it denoted a dance.
Indeed the term also doubled as a verb meaning to leap about and carouse.
Next the dancers took to singing while wandering about, but by the 14th Century they had opted to stand still and simply sing, which brought ‘carol’ to its present meaning.
The term is ultimately derived from the Greek ‘khoros’, a dance, the modern ‘chorus’ arriving because the dancers in Greek theatre sang out the repetitive bits and encouraged the audience to join in.
Even ‘orchestra’ is an allied term.
Greek theatres had a depressed area in front of the stage for dancers who leapt about during and between acts and scenery changes.
Named from the Greek ‘orkheisthai’, to dance, this area later accommodated the musicians.
TODAY'S Book Of Things You Didn't Know…is now on sale, published by Simon & Schuster for £3.99.
Charlie has last laugh on Sir Dickie
Sue Heal
NICE people don't make good biopics.
They can't quite bring themselves to wield the scalpel to maximum effect.
Dickie ‘Darling’ Attenborough is a lovely bloke who has produced with Chaplin a professional but overlong and formulaic exercise in hagiography which lets The Little Tramp off the hook at every turn.
I have never found the sight of a grown man in a false moustache pretending to walk into lamp-posts remotely funny, and even less amusing is the story of a miserly workaholic who couldn't keep his hands off under-age girls.
Charlie Chaplin was without doubt a major figure during Hollywood's inception, a star who stoutly refused to play ball with Senator Joe McCarthy's communist witch-hunt in the dark days of the Fifties.
He was born in abject poverty with a family history of madness, yet grew up to take the world by storm.
But he was also a complex, highly secretive individual whose inner workings and motivations are profoundly glossed over in this film.
This is due in part, I suspect, to Sir Richard having secured the unprecedented co-operation of the Chaplin family.
Daughter Geraldine even plays her own grandmother — the poor, mad Hannah.
If we don't have an incisive, illuminating movie, what do we have instead?
A very fine, possibly Oscar-winning central performance from Robert Downey Jr, who imbues the essentially unsympathetic Chaplin with a sharp comic touch while showing how the clown distanced himself from family and friends.
He also gives us a measured degree of self doubt mixed with evasiveness and a realistic progression from a young, ambitious eager beaver on the music hall circuit to a very old man languishing with his memories in Switzerland.
But Attenborough's film uses the hackneyed cop-out of Chaplin looking back over his life with the editor of his biography (Anthony Hopkins).
They start with his poverty-stricken beginnings in turn-of-the-century Lambeth — all cliched, flat-capped urchins and ‘wotcha, cock’— running straight through to Chaplin's ambivalent acceptance of a special Oscar in 1972 at the age of 83.
Chaplin showed a remarkable self-confidence in his own talents from an early age and this was amply exploited by his elder brother Sidney, played by Paul Rhys.
It was Sidney who introduced Charlie to loud, cigar-chomping music hall impresario Fred Karno (John Thaw).
Chaplin was a huge success, fell in love with a 16-year-old chorus girl called Hetty (Moira Kelly) who, in one of those dewy-eyed moments that Attenborough is unfortunately prey to, also plays Chaplin's fourth wife Oona, the love of his life.
The movie attempts to take off when Chaplin receives the call to an embryonic Hollywood and is asked to join the new studio of Mack Sennett (Dan Aykroyd) where he quickly attains superstar status.
The Little Tramp is born as Downey and Rhys strike fearsomely tough deals.
They soon form their own production company while Chaplin mixes with Tinseltown's glitterati, including Kevin Kline as a suitably swashbuckling Douglas Fairbanks.
But Charlie also sets out on a series of scandalous liaisons and unfortunate marriages with very young girls.
It is with Chaplin's personal life that Attenborough sloshes around the whitewash like a demented house-painter.
The star's penchant for nymphet flesh is a matter of record yet the actresses chosen to portray these girls are all individuals who don't look a day under 25.
Even the young Milla Jovovich has a wordly, knowing air and Deborah Maria Moore and Nancy Travis appear positively long in the tooth.
In short, nothing is ever Charlie's fault.
Chaplin was certainly a humanitarian with strong socialist leanings at a time when to appear even remotely pink was begging for trouble.
When he is eventually hounded out of America and into exile by J Edgar Hoover (Kevin Dunn) it is an ignominious end to his career.
Attenborough's Chaplin is another of Dickie's broad strokes through history, filled with a multitude of characters and sets, colour and costumes.
But we are given such a huge sweep from birth to incipient death that the movie never draws breath long enough to give us any depth or conflict.
Worst of all we are given no true insights into the man or the legend which saw the production of more than 75 films and made a poor boy from Lambeth the most famous and feted individual in the world.
Some sex.
THE MUPPET CHRISTMAS CAROL
I OFTEN feel a touch like Ebenezer Scrooge myself at this time of year when fairies, goblins, elves and rosy-cheeked brats skip and flit across the silver screen.
I like my Christmas trimmings with a pinch of bile.
So, thankfully, does Henson Productions.
They have wheeled out Miss Piggy and Co in the studio limo to give us Dickens's Christmas Carol starring a suitably dyspepsic Michael Caine as the dreaded Scrooge.
This movie is simply enormous fun, and despite the fact it's treading down a well-worn Yuletide path with no major surprises it manages to invest an old tale with great oomph, humour and enough of a jaundiced eye to avoid the sucrose trap.
Since Jim Henson's sudden, untimely death his son Brian has taken over the company reins and continues the great tradition by trundling out Kermit as Bob Cratchit, Miss Piggy as Emily Cratchit, Fozzie Bear as Fozziwig, Rizzo The Rat as Himself and The Great Gonzo as narrator Mr Dickens.
This is a snowflaked Victorian set full of carol singers, the dreadful poor, the idle rich and Mr Caine resolutely refusing to recognise the festivities until the Ghosts of Christmas Past, Present and Future prick his dormant conscience.
Henson has done a lovely job of placing his famous characters in the novel's context while never letting us forget that this is meant to be a huge extravaganza.
It bounces along wonderfully, with Caine obviously having a whale of a time, and is ideal kiddies' Christmas fare.
Children's film.
MO' MONEY
THERE'S not much seasonal goodwill floating about in Mo' Money, a violent, sexist, avaricious little offering from black actor Damon Wayans, who co-starred with Bruce Willis in that violent, sexist epic The Last Boy Scout.
This time Wayans, a pleasing enough individual with a huge, flashing smile, attempts to carry a movie on his own.
His chosen vehicle is this great lather of a part-comedy, part-thriller, part exercise in rappin' and blasphemin' which lurches about before collapsing face down in its own vomit.
Wayans is Johnny Stewart, a Chicago wide boy from the wrong side of the tracks who ekes a living by executing scams on unsuspecting white folks with his hyper-active bro Seymour, one Marlon Wayans.
Joe Santos, Hollywood's eternal also-ran policeman, is there as Lt Raymond Walsh, whose late partner at the precinct was Wayans' hero father.
Santos preaches the virtues of working legitimately for a crust and our hero merely sneers until he spies the seductive posterior of Amber Evans (Stacey Dash), follows her into her swanky office and obtains a job in the mailroom despite having a criminal record to rival Al Capone.
If it was this easy, thought I, what was all the moaning in the first reel about?
Wayans gets ensconsed in the bowels of the Dynasty Credit Card Company and one of his jobs is to dispose of people's old cards.
But he can't resist going on a teensy-weensy shopping spree with Marlon, which involves going into a jewellers, pretending to be gay and, to divert inquiries, sneezing copiously over an assistant who is terrified they are transmitting Aids.
What a hoot, eh?
The boys' antics are mere chicken feed to the Dynasty company, whose security chief Keith Heading (a glowering John Diehl) has a far bigger fraud on the boil involving stolen cards, dead colleagues and warehouses full of gleaming Porsches.
Half-way through the movie Ms Dash switches on the mental light bulb and asks her suitor how he can afford to buy her diamond rings on a mailboy's salary.
But the plot has more holes than an OAP's hairnet, and the supercilious Ms Dash thoroughly deserves the pig-ignorant Mr Wayans, I strongly advise brother Marlon not to give up the day job and I sincerely hope I am indisposed should they decide to foist Mo' Money 2 on us.
Violent and offensive.
COOL WORLD
OH dear and now we have a poor man's Roger Rabbit scenario with a spot of bump, grind and white trash in stockings from Kim Basinger.
She is both the voice of cartoon character Holli Would (geddit?) and her actual incarnation once she springs from the pen of cartoonist Jack Deebs (Gabriel Byrne).
Cool World also stars the ever-sulky, strongly quiffed Brad Pitt as Detective Frank Harris, who finds himself entering into the bizarre, mesmeric universe created by Deebs as a solace from his own troubled existence.
Basically this is real-life persons meeting cartoon folks, courtesy of Ralph ‘Fritz The Cat’ Bakshi.
But it is so poorly executed, muddled in its narrative and just plain old-fashioned dull that the screening I went to was soon humming with critical snores.
Byrne looks embarrassed to be in it — and it is indeed a sore waste of his undoubted talents — while Basinger as usual goes for the lowest common, and I mean common, denominator.
Mr Pitt had better cheer up soon or his career will sink without trace, and throughout the whole film you can see the joins.
It is ultra dreary in the extreme.
Lots of sexual innuendo.
THE PRINCESS AND THE GOBLIN
THIS is a straight-up-and-down, no-nonsense, old-fashioned fairy tale, drawn with utter professionalism and possessing great charm.
The voices of, among others, Joss Ackland, Claire Bloom, Roy Kinnear and Rik Mayall give us a tale of pretty Princess Irene whose father the King goes off on business.
She blunders into a magical forest, meets Curdie the miner's son and together they encounter lots of gambolling hobgoblins who are planning to flood the kingdom for their own fiendish ends.
This is traditional children's Christmas holiday fare and those of you with sprogs still naive enough to appreciate it could do worse than plonk them in front of this when they start the equally traditional post-present grizzling.
Children's cartoon.
CAST LIST
CHAPLIN
Starring: Robert Downey Jr, Dan Aykroyd, Geraldine Chaplin, Anthony Hopkins
Director: Richard Attenborough
Producer: Mario Kassar
Certificate: 12
Time: 140 mins
THE MUPPET CHRISTMAS CAROL
Starring: Michael Caine
Director: Brian Henson
Producer: Martin Baker
Certificate: U
Time: 90 mins
MO' MONEY
Starring: Damon Wayans, Joe Santos, Marlon Wayans, Stacey Dash
Director: Peter MacDonald
Producer: Michael Rachmil
Certificate: 15
Time: 90 mins
COOL WORLD
Starring: Gabriel Byrne, Brad Pitt, Kim Basinger
Director: Ralph Bakshi
Producer: Frank Mancuso Jr
Certificate: 12
Time: 102 mins
THE PRINCESS AND THE GOBLIN
Voices: Joss Ackland, Rik Mayall, Claire Bloom
Director/Producer: Jozsef Gemes
Certificate: U
Time: 78 mins.
First Night
Tony Rennell and Ivan Waterman
GOOD theatre draws you, body and soul, into the on-stage illusion — and the effect is unforgettable.
So it is with two new West End shows.
CAROUSEL (National Theatre), Rodgers and Hammerstein's musical, is no funfair ride.
There is depth and purpose in this blighted love story.
Quiet Julie Jordan falls for Billy, a bully and a braggart.
He can't make her happy because he doesn't know what happiness is.
The tragedy unfolds through wonderful music — from the tentative If I Loved You to the final tear-jerker You'll Never Walk Alone.
Everything about this production is right, from the casting of Joanna Riding and Michael Hayden, proud and passionate as the star-crossed lovers, to Patricia Routledge in fine voice for June Is Bustin' Out All Over, to the choreography and chorus — both inspired and exciting.
The clever and convincing sets flow with cinematic ease from factory to fairground, to New England seashore and even to Heaven.
Brilliant staging is also the key to CYRANO DE BERGERAC (Theatre Royal, Haymarket)— that and a remarkable performance by Robert Lindsay (aka Citizen Smith).
When he roars in from the back of the auditorium, swinging on to the stage from a box, you know that this is the start of something very good.
Cyrano is a fighter, a poet, a thinker.
He has everything a swashbuckling hero needs — except good looks.
And that means he doesn't get a look in with the beautiful Roxane.
He is reduced to wooing her with honeyed words on behalf of his handsome but tongue-tied young friend.
Sad and funny, aggressive and sensitive, Lindsay mixes and matches all the conflicts in this great character.
Tony Rennell
MIRROR, mirror on the wall, who wears the tightest tights of all?
Step forward former Brookside star Stifyn Parri as Prince Charming in SNOW WHITE AND THE SEVEN DWARFS (Richmond Theatre).
But most eyes were on ex-EastEnder Anita Dobson as the Red Queen.
She was tops on the hissometer, although she was constantly upstaged by madcap Derek Griffiths.
He had all the gags and knew how to deliver them.
Hans Christian Andersen's THE SNOW QUEEN (The Young Vic) didn't quite tug the heart strings, but there were some lovely touches from Jane Maud as the wicked temptress, and narrator Haydn Forde.
Ivan Waterman.
Top 20 Films
1(-)
HOME ALONE 2: LOST IN NEW YORK: Macaulay Culkin is cut loose from his parents once again in this highly-polished sequel.
Cert: PG London: MGM Oxford Street, Odeon West End, UCI Whiteleys
National: General Release.
2(1)
DEATH BECOMES HER: Meryl Streep and Goldie Hawn find the elixir of eternal life.
Great effects.
Cert: PG
London: Empire Leicester Square, MGM Baker Street, UCI Whiteleys
National: General Release
3(2)
SISTER ACT: Farce starring Whoopi Goldberg as a singer who hides in a convent after witnessing a murder.
Cert: PG 
National: General Release
4(3)
SINGLE WHITE FEMALE: Stylish thriller with Jennifer Jason Leigh as the flatmate from hell.
Cert: 18
London: MGM Chelsea, Odeon West End, UCI Whiteleys
National: General Release
5(5)
PETER'S FRIENDS: Self-indulgent drama.
Cert: 15 
National: Selected Locals
6(4)
LAST OF THE MOHICANS: All-action yarn of the year with Daniel Day Lewis as the native who falls for English rose Madeline Stowe.
Cert: 12
National: General Release
7(6)
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST: Dazzling Disney animation.
Cert: U
National: General Release
8(7)
SNEAKERS: Computer hackers enter the world of espionage in this comedy-drama.
Cert: 12
London: Empire Leicester Square, MGM Trocadero, UCI Whiteleys
National: General Release
9(8)
STRICTLY BALLROOM: Great Australian dance film.
Cert: PG London: UCI Whiteleys, Odeon Kensington, MGM Oxford Street
General: Selected Locals
10(10)
BLADE RUNNER: Director's cut of the sci-fi classic.
Cert: 15 London: Gate Cinema, MGM Fulham Road
National: Selected Locals
11(9)
BOOMERANG: Faithless adman Eddie Murphy gets his come-uppance.
Cert: 15 
National: General Release
12(13)
THE CRYING GAME: Drama about an IRA man guarding a kidnapped soldier.
Cert: 12 
National: Selected Locals
13(11)
UNLAWFUL ENTRY: Retread of Fatal Attraction ground with Ray Liotta as the obsessive maniac.
Cert: 18
National: General Release
14(12)
TWIN PEAKS: FIRE WALK WITH ME: Prequel to the cult TV series.
Cert: 18
London: Camden Plaza, MGM Tottenham Court Rd
National: Selected Locals
15(-)
INTO THE WEST: Two travelling children chase around on a stolen white stallion.
Cert: PG
London: Odeon Haymarket
National: Selected Locals
16(16)
HUSBANDS AND WIVES: Woody Allen's vivid tale about a lecturer who falls for a student.
Cert: 15
National: Selected Locals
17(15)
GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS: Superb look at the world of real estate sales.
Cert: 15
National: General Release
18(14)
OF MICE AND MEN: Epic starring John Malkovich as a mentally-retarded American in the Thirties.
Cert: PG 
National: Selected Locals
19(-)
TRACES OF RED: Cop James Belushi has an affair with a rich socialite in this flawed erotic thriller.
Cert: 15
London: MGM Oxford Street, MGM Panton Street
National: Selected Locals
20(17)
UNFORGIVEN: Clint East-wood's highly-acclaimed film about an old bounty hunter's last showdown.
Cert: 15
National: General Release
Your Movie Verdict
NO matter what the critics write it is you the public who decide whether a movie is a hit or a flop.
ET went to Manchester to find out your views on HOME ALONE II and BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.
Brian Wilding, 29, a driver, from Gatley, Manchester was impressed with Home Alone II: ‘I thought the film was excellent.
It had me in stitches a lot of the time and definitely wasn't just for the kids.’
Eleven-year-old Kelly Wilding, also from Gatley, said: ‘I really enjoyed the film from start to finish.
It was just as good as the first Home Alone.
Macaulay Culkin is very sweet and full of mischief.
I can't wait for Home Alone III.’
Her sister Joanne, nine, enjoyed the movie just as much.
‘I especially liked the bit where Macaulay Culkin got covered in paint, and I cried at the end when he said he wanted his mummy for Christmas,’ she said.
Fifteen-year-old Peter Graham, from West Gorton, Manchester, thought Beauty And The Beast was superb.
‘I loved the drawings, they were so realistic.
I had already read the book but the film matched up to it in every way,’ he said.
Simon Etheridge, 11, also from West Gorton, agreed.
‘It didn't feel like you were watching a cartoon — it was so lifelike,’ he said.
‘The beast was terrifying at first but after a while you realised he was a big softie underneath.
It was very sad when he died.’
The very best E.T.gifts
James Bennett
IN THE old days it was so simple.
For little Susie you bought Donny Osmond.
Big brother was happy with any group that had long hair.
And for Mum it had to be Tom or Englebert.
But this Christmas I know of one 11-year-old who has asked Santa for a copy of The Beatles' Sergeant Pepper — and a mum who loves Techno.
Tastes range wider these days, and there's so much music available that it can be confusing.
But the record shop remains a great place to do a large part of your Christmas shopping, and with a little imagination you can find great gifts without resorting to the obvious Greatest Hits albums or the record token cop-out.
Here are some ideas to get you started:
UNDER 12s: Junior may well have asked Santa for Madonna's Erotica (WEA).
But if you don't want your six-year-old trilling along with songs about bondage, a safer alternative is Kylie's Greatest Hits (PWL) featuring 22 splendidly simple singalong tunes.
Another safe bet are current teen sensations Take That who dominated the Smash Hits awards with their album Take That And Party (RCA).
OLDER TEENS AND STUDENTS: First establish whether he or she prefers Indie or dance.
If it's dance, there are dozens of compilations to choose from, but for value for money I'd recommend Hard Fax II (Columbia).
With 28 tracks on a single disc, it runs for 77 minutes — the longest single CD I've seen yet.
If Indie — introverted left-field guitar-based music — is preferred, any of the following may please:
Blind (Parlophone) by The Sundays, It's A Shame About Ray (EastWest) by The Lemonheads and Copper Blue (Creation) by Sugar.
And if your young rebel likes dance and Indie, you can't go wrong with Primal Scream's fusion of both on Screamadelica (Creation) which won this year's Mercury Music Prize.
THIRTYSOMETHINGS AND UP: Let them relive their hippie days with Something In The Air (Columbia), a superb compilation of 40 Sixties songs from Traffic, Jethro Tull, The Byrds, The Kinks, The Small Faces and many more.
For would-be cowboys and girls there's no better gift than The Ultimate Country Collection (Sony) which has 40 tracks covering the history of country from the Fifties to the Nineties.
Already voted Best Album Of The Year in several polls is REM's Automatic For The People which offers the very best in adult-oriented rock.
Top of the Christmas crooners is Frank Sinatra with The Definitive Anthology (WEA), a double CD from a forthcoming mini-series chronicling his life and career.
Beyond the double CD lies the expensive realm of boxed sets which can be ideal for major presents.
At around £30, the 4-CD set From The Top (A&M) by The Carpenters is a good buy, featuring 67 tracks spanning their entire career and including 20 that have never been released before.
And if you're prepared to part with over £100, Shine On (EMI) by Pink Floyd will make someone very happy with its 8-CD journey through the band's career.
Finally a practical present.
Any CD owner knows that they aren't as indestructible as once claimed.
Now the makers of the Bundee CD3 Repair System — available in hi-fi shops and by mail order on 0895 436078 — say it will restore even discs scratched all over with steel wool.
Video Games
Amaya Lopez
VIDEO games are sure to be high on the gift list of many people — young and old — this Christmas.
Here's our list of the best of the console, hand-held and PC games.
CONSOLES STREETFIGHTER 2 (SNES, £64.99): The celebrated Capcom coin-op makes it on to the SNES with more head-to-head action than Lennox Lewis could handle.
A must for beat 'em up fans.
SUPERMARIO WORLD (SNES, £44.99): The Brooklyn plumber in his first outing on the SNES.
This time he's brought along adorable dinosaur Yoshi.
ZELDA III (SNES, £39.99): The game that caused riots in Japan on release day.
It's an enormous role-playing fantasy adventure boasting brilliant graphics and playability.
SONIC 2 (Mega Drive/Master System, £29.99): The blue hedgehog is back, with friend Tails the fox.
It's faster and more polished than the original.
PRINCE OF PERSIA (Master System, £29.99): This wonderful conversion of the Broderbund classic is a delight.
HAND-HELDS SUPER MARIO LAND 2 (GB, £29.99): Mario is back in a fab sequel, pitched against the evil Wario.
It's bigger, better and more varied than the original.
LEMMINGS (GG, £27.99): This classic save 'em up has finally reached Game Gear.
Your task is to guide the creatures to safety.
Top conversion.
PRINCE OF PERSIA (GB £24.99 and GG £27.99): Again top marks for the excellent hand-held conversion of this outstanding game.
SUPER KICK OFF (GG, £24.99): Frantic footy action in top mini-vision.
It's another first-rate conversion that works a treat on the Game Gear.
PCs
INDIANA JONES AND THE FATE OF ATLANTIS, £37.99: Excellent Lucasfilm graphic adventure with you as Indy pitting your wits against the Nazis.
MONKEY ISLAND 2- LECHUCK'S REVENGE, £35.99: The return of weedy pirate Guybrush Threepwood and arch enemy LeChuck.
It's spectacular.
ULTIMA UNDERWORLD, £39.99: Enthralling role-playing game that heralds a new age of fantasy adventure.
Amaya is a correspondent for Sega Zone magazine.
The very best E.T.
gifts
Steve Howard
EVERY home should have a video library.
It only needs to be a couple of shelves but think of all the thrills, spills and adventures you can pack into that space.
Christmas is an ideal time to build up the collection by treating your nearest and dearest to video gifts they can enjoy all year round.
Here's a list of this year's best video stocking fillers.
Happy viewing.
FAMILY EDWARD SCISSORHANDS, one of 1992's most entertaining videos, is the bittersweet tale of artificially created boy (Johnny Depp) with scissors as fingers who joins your average American household.
(FoxVideo, Pounds 10.99).
In the jaunty Stephen Spielberg hit Hook, Captain Hook shares Edward's problem to a degree, but he's a nasty piece of work played by Dustin Hoffman.
Robin Williams is a grown-up Peter Pan who returns to Never Never Land when Hook kidnaps his children.
(Columbia Tristar, Pounds 10.99).
The Caped Crusader is back too.
This time our hero (Michael Keaton) deals with the villainous Penguin in Batman Returns.
(Warner, Pounds 13.99).
Michelle Pfeiffer causes mischief as Catwoman in this special-effects spectacular.
Big Arnie Schwarzenegger would probably prefer to tackle the Penguin than the army of infant terrors he faces in Kindergarten Cop.
(CIC, £12.99).
But it's great fun watching these little monsters give undercover cop Arnie the run-around.
MUM FATAL ATTRACTION has been re-edited by director Adrian Lyne, who has restored its original ending and several discarded scenes in Fatal Attraction: The Director's Cut.
(CIC, £12.99).
The superb women's road movie Thelma And Louise is about two pals who cock a snoot at men in general during an impromptu crime odyssey.
(Warner, £10.99).
Tom Berenger is an amnesia-suffering crash victim who suspects he has murdered someone in the stylish thriller Shattered.
His wife, played by Greta Scacchi, has a few secrets of her own.
(Columbia Tristar, Pounds 10.99).
If mum's thoughts are turning to summer holidays and bathing suits she might appreciate The Cellulite Diet which has tips on tackling any extra pounds.
(VVL, £10.99).
DAD HERE comes Arnie again, this time on the robotic rampage in a gift-set of The Terminator and Terminator 2.
A booklet and documentary about the making of the second film is included (Polygram, £29.99).
Continuing the action theme, Bruce Willis stars as tough cop Jon McClane in the double-tape set of Die Hard 1 and 2.
(Fox Video, £19.99).
If Dad is a war movie buff you could treat him to the classic Bridge Over The River Kwai.
(Columbia Tristar, £10.99).
For football fans there is Danny Baker's hilarious Own Goals And Gaffes.
(VVL, Pounds 10.99).
TEENS THUNDERBIRDS are definitely the go.
The Sixties puppet series is a massive hit again and 16 tapes covering the entire 32-episode series are available.
(Polygram, £9.99 each).
Kevin Costner's Dances With Wolves is a deeply moving tale about how the white man mistreated American Indians.
(Polygram, £12.99).
Or catch a slice of merry old England — American accents and all — in the entertaining Robin Hood: Prince Of Thieves, also starring Costner.
(Warner £12.99).
KIDS THEY'RE cooky, spooky and smashing fun.
Gomez, Thing, Uncle Fester and Co enjoy a ghouls' night out in the big-budget movie The Addams Family.
(Columbia Tristar, £10.99).
Grumpy cat Garfield actually gets into the Christmas spirit with his ‘master’ Jon and dopey dog Odie in the delightful Garfield's Christmas.
(MIA, £8.99).
On a more serious note, the dangers to the environment are highlighted in an entertaining way in the animated adventure Fern Gully: The Last Rainforest.
(Fox Video £12.99).
And Christmas wouldn't be the same without animator Raymond Briggs's classic, The Snowman (Polygram, Pounds 9.99).
Father Christmas, another Briggs' favourite, is also available (Polygram, £9.99).
Jaguar is first past the post
IF you can't entice enough customers into the showroom, tempt them through the letterbox.
That's the thinking behind Jaguar's new direct mailing drive, which aims to win buyers for its improved 1993 models from top-range rivals Mercedes and BMW.
Large, glossy Jaguar handbooks are being sent to 50,000 potential customers culled from executive credit card directories and lists of owners of other luxury cars.
Models in the Jaguar range, which starts at £25,500, have a three-year warranty and offer alarms and protective driver's-side airbags as standard.
GOOD news for Volkswagen buyers: on January 1, VW intends to buy its UK distributor, VAG (UK), from Lonrho Plc for £124m.
As the company wants to increase the number of cars it sells in the UK rather than maximise profits, that is likely to mean price cuts.
S-Coupe overtakes rivals
A RECESSION is the time to find bargains if you know where to look.
Hyundai's S-Coupe has always come at a bargain price — but until now it lacked the performance to match its sporty looks.
That has changed with a new 1.5-litre 114bhp turbo-charged model for £10,999.
It's Hyundai's fastest car yet, with a top speed of 121mph and a three-year unlimited mileage warranty.
It's more than an equal for pricier rivals like the £14,350 Honda CRX and the Vauxhall Calibre at £14,421.
The non-turbo 87bhp model for those not wanting so much performance, is £9,999.
Standard fittings include power steering, electric front windows and door mirrors, four-speaker stereo cassette, tinted glass, tilt-adjustable steering column, car alarm and engine immobiliser.
An interior ‘panic button’ allows occupants to draw attention in case of attack.
On the open road the 87bhp car needs plenty of revs but the engine doesn't become unpleasant, and ride comfort is good.
Sports car drivers might prefer less body roll when cornering.
So smooth is the power delivery of the turbo that many drivers might think it a conventional engine.
Acceleration to 60mph takes 9.2 seconds for the turbo and 11.3 seconds for the non-turbo, which has a top speed of 111mph.
Stiffer suspension control helps the handling on the faster car and gives the driver more control.
Seats are comfortable and supportive and there is a reasonable amount of room in the rear seats.
Official fuel figures vary, from 22mpg around town for the automatic transmission model to 45mpg at 56mph for the turbo.
Hyundai's declared intention to make world-class cars with craftsmanship will make even Japan Inc. look over its shoulder.
Keep cool and out of danger
Russell Bray
IT'S bitterly cold outside so you leap into the driver's seat and switch the heating on full.
What a relief to be cocooned in warmth — and what a danger.
Research by Volvo shows that drivers become far less alert at even slightly raised temperatures, making potentially fatal driving errors much more likely.
The Swedish giant fitted 83 cars with computers which simulated motoring problems by lighting dashboard warning lights, changing speedo and other readings, causing strange noises and even showing blue flashing lights in the rear-view mirror.
Drivers of the test cars were told to drive around a small town and tap a pedal each time they spotted a ‘problem’ signal.
The drivers of cars with an interior temperature of 27C missed 50 per cent more signals in the first half-hour than those with cars at 21C.
After an hour, the number of missed signals had almost doubled and reaction times were also much slower for the warm drivers.
In hazardous winter driving conditions, that could easily mean the difference between life and death.
The results shocked Volvo scientists as much as anyone.
Project manager Fredrik Norin said: ‘Passenger compartment temperatures of 27C are often selected in winter.
The road safety consequences shouldn't be ignored.’
The Volvo team believes the missed signals and slow reactions were caused not by drowsiness but by ‘heat stress’ which affects a driver's concentration, particularly in crowded city traffic.
Surprisingly, the adverse effects appeared to be worse for younger drivers and worse for men than women.
As more accidents are caused by driver error than by equipment failure, the test results are a powerful argument for fitting all cars with automatic climate control as standard.
In the meantime, if you want to stay alert, buy a stick-on thermometer from an accessory shop and keep the temperature below 20C except for short periods when warming the car.
Tunnel vision hits Bart's
LONDON Transport has banned Bart's Hospital from plastering the Tube network with ‘Save Our Hospital’ posters.
Why?
Because the tube bosses deem the posters political.
It is true that St Bartholemew's Hospital is threatened by the Government health policy which wants to invest in community care at the expense of some London hospitals.
But that does not mean its survival or closure is only a political issue.
The reason Bart's has so many supporters campaigning to save it is because its work is superb.
It has a worldwide reputation as a centre of excellence and provides first class specialist care for patients from throughout the country who regard it and its staff with affection and gratitude.
That is not a matter of politics.
That is a matter of saving the lives of thousands of people who suffer from rare diseases.
True grit
MICHAEL Watson will never take on a world title fight again.
But 15 months after his last appearance in the ring he still takes pride in being called a boxer.
This is a fitting word for the man who is alive because of his fighting spirit.
When he collapsed with brain damage during the world super-middleweight title fight he could so easily have died.
Instead he has fought his condition with the gritty determination of the prize fighter he is.
Just as he once battled for supreme fitness, he has poured his energy into learning to speak again.
His next goal is to walk and we can be sure that the same strength of character will make him achieve that.
Credit note
THE campaigners who took their seasonal message to the banks yesterday were doing them a favour.
The big four would do well to discover that helping their customers is better business than trampling on them.
‘I say, I say’
I WAS continually rebuffed.
We didn't consummate the marriage for two weeks and only then because she was pressurised into it.
Bill Wyman on marriage to Mandy Smith HAVEN'T you run out of film yet?
Prince Charles to photographers THEY should have known he needed someone more experienced.
To hell with being a virgin.
That was the least important consideration.
Royal insider on Diana WHEN I first got back to Melbourne I said: ‘Mum, I think I have to become a nun.
It's so difficult to find anyone interesting who I like.’
Singer Dannii Minogue on men I DON'T mind which one they go for because I think they are all fabulous.
Singer Sonia on the short list for the Eurovision Song Contest I THINK that the public gets cross when people try to frighten them and they will just say: ‘Stuff it, I'm going shopping.’
Bill Melly, Oxford Street Trader's Association THIS is the best way to spend Christmas, ever.
US Marine Captain Sean Moore in Somalia BRITAIN is going to recover sharply.
Interest rates will fall to five per cent shortly.
The upturn will be noticeable from late spring and early summer.
Economist Sir Alan Walters, who predicted the break-up of the ERM
Every driver's nightmare
Kevin Eason
Motoring writer Kevin Eason tells of how he nearly became a fatal accident statistic.
AT LEAST my mum was proud of me.
On the day when it really mattered, my underwear was clean.
‘You never know when you might have an accident,’ she used to say, ‘so you should always be prepared’.
Not that the state of my underwear was of crucial importance the day I became part of Britain's road accident statistics.
No one mentioned it was essential training as a motoring correspondent to have a car crash, but it happened to me in the same gruesome circumstances that confront hundreds of motorists every week.
On that Friday morning three weeks ago, I was little more than an irritant to dozens of drivers caught in a traffic jam as police cars and ambulances blocked their way to work or school.
The intense moments of pain and fear that gripped me were too remote to be understood by anyone who has not been through a similar experience.
I know because I have spent almost four years pontificating about safety and car accidents.
The statistics roll off the word processor so easily: 4,500 killed annually, more than 56,000 seriously injured, the cost of a fatal road accident £680,000 in providing emergency services, doctors, nurses and ancillary staff.
It took just a split second to find out the hard way about the pain and disruption so many families in this country go through every year.
This year I have probably driven 40 cars, from Fiats to Ferraris, more than 50,000 miles.
I even drove the Jaguar XJ220, the world's fastest production car, on the race track at speeds up to 180mph, all without mishap.
Last month, I went to Australia to drive the new Mitsubishi Sigma estate 2,000 miles on dirt tracks and outback roads.
Then, after flying back to Heathrow, I stepped off the plane and ten miles from my front door on the drive home, I had a head-on crash.
Having the collision was the easy part.
That took a few blurred seconds on the A423 between Southam and Banbury.
Possible legal action means I cannot describe the details, but I was the front-seat passenger who had seconds to utter an expletive before the impact.
The next thing I remember was seeing the face of a policeman above his yellow emergency jacket, who was reassuring me: I was all right.
Who was he kidding?
Everything hurt.
I could hear my wife, Sharon, in the driver's seat of our Peugeot 405 but I could not see her because my eyes were clouded with blood.
I remember paramedics getting her out of the car, but I could not get out of my seat because my legs were trapped under the dashboard.
Time was suspended and the police heard my life story at least twice with patience and good humour in the 80 minutes it took to cut my right leg free from the car.
In the ambulance, I just wanted to know the damage.
I knew most of me hurt, but was not sure which bits might cause lasting problems.
I've watched Casualty on TV often enough, so I knew what to expect at the hospital: lots of furrowed brows and swishing cubicle curtains.
The full damage report revealed a deep gash over the left eye, a broken nose, and fractured sternum, ribs and right foot.
My wife, meanwhile, was in the next cubicle with a fractured sternum and collarbone.
There was one more serious casualty.
I knew from the moment I saw my squashed, bloated foot and my ankle that my trousers would have to be cut off.
But those boxer shorts were Calvin Klein and nearly new.
I refused to let the nurse wield her scissors on them and put myself through gyrations of a one-legged contortionist to get them off whole.
It was a waste of time, they were so bloodstained they went to the bin anyway.
I was not to know it then, but once the worst of the operation and shock was over, hospital was the best bit of this accident.
Nice people in uniforms took care of my every whim.
When I got home, a week later, wobbling about on crutches, I was to confront the grinding realities of being involved in a car crash.
The first letter I opened was not a sympathy card but a £40 bill from Warwickshire ambulance service for the use of two of its vehicles.
Sharon had gone to hospital an hour before me, so we travelled in separate ambulances.
If I had known there was a charge for each, I would have made her wait.
And there have been forms, forms and more forms to fill in, from insurance companies, from the police, and from hospitals.
And lots of appointments to keep with solicitors, doctors and physiotherapists, appointments which I will be keeping for weeks and months.
Then there is the frustration of being disabled by injury, hopping about on crutches and trying to avoid the painful bits of my body.
When my wife and I chose our Peugeot 405 it was for its comfort, performance and interior space.
Now, when I look at the pictures of the car after the crash, with the passenger-side floor sill and roof crumpled and distorted and my seat moved forward — which helped trap me in the car — I wonder whether we chose the car on the correct criteria.
When I asked my wife what car she wants to replace the Peugeot, she said ‘the safest one’.
Until I can afford a new pair of designer boxer shorts, I will go along with that.
Banks' cards are marked
Geraint Jones
BRITAIN'S big four banks received a heartfelt Christmas message from customers yesterday — you're no better than Dickens's Scrooge.
Led by a forlorn figure dressed in Victorian night cap and gown, dozens of unhappy protesters braved heavy rain to tour the banks' London headquarters with their own yuletide messages.
They delivered their derogatory cards in turn to NatWest, Midlands, Lloyds and Barclays, and then let their feelings known with specially adapted carols such as: ‘Jingle tills, jingle tills, jingle all the way/Oh what fun it is to be a High Street bank these days, /Pulling money out, putting receivers in/ Winding business up, with an evil grin.’
A new version of another old favourite was: ‘Rudolph the red-faced banker, /Made a very big mistake, /Tried to screw all his clients, /Something they refused to take.’
The Scrooged By My Bank Day was organised by SAFE — Struggle Against Financial Exploitation.
‘This protest is our way of pointing out to banks that they are playing with people's livelihoods, not just money,’ says Andrew Donovan of SAFE.
‘Many of the victims cannot afford to celebrate Christmas because of the actions of the banks.
‘This is the harsh truth behind the banks' glossy and expensive advertising campaigns.’
Why not cut the Mustard?
By Jaci Stephen
WADDINGTON Games's proposal to axe Reverend Green from the board game Cluedo is a bad one.
The Reverend is no more dated than the stereotypical class snob Colonel Mustard or the proverbial scarlet woman, Miss Scarlet.
And in thinking of replacing the reverend with a ‘thrusting businessman’, which Waddington believe ‘is more than suitable for the 1990s’, they have shown themselves to be even more out of tune with modern times.
I mean, a ‘thrusting businessman’— in the Nineties?
Ten years ago, perhaps.
But in 1992, the only thrusting we can expect of a businessman is that which propels him from a very high building on to the recession-hit pavement below.
In any case, why not a businesswoman?
Miss Scarlet is a whore, and Mrs White and Mrs Peacock unambitious bores.
But look at the men — a colonel (Mustard), a professor (Plum) and the Reverend Green.
What the game really needs is a career woman — or, at least, one whose idea of a good day's work isn't in the ballroom with Colonel Mustard and a candlestick.
FOLLOWING the announcement of Jonathan Powell's resignation, the post of Controller of BBC1 has been advertised.
The Controller, states the ad, will be ‘responsible for all editorial, commissioning, scheduling, transmission and budgetary management of the channel’.
I think that's a euphemism for ‘Axe Eldorado’.
Marriage isn't child's play
By Jaci Stephen
I WENT to school with someone named Wyman.
She wasn't much liked.
Every time she walked by, children would rush to far corners of the playground shouting ‘Agh!
Get away from her!
You'll be Wymanised!’
I never knew what they meant until I read Bill Wyman's story about his failed marriage to child bride Mandy Smith.
To be Wymanised is to be overcome by a feeling of nausea when an excess of Wyman is forced upon you.
And in Bill's case, even a little is too much by half.
The real mystery about his story is not why two wives refused to make love to him, but how he stopped talking about himself long enough to invite them to bed in the first place.
His sorry tale is one long whinge about his own suffering — his lack of sex, his loneliness, his sleeplessness.
In short, his ego.
He chose a child as his lover because it fed that ego; he lost her because he never cottoned on to the fact that children are children, no matter how grown-up they might appear.
Bill's story has finally convinced me of one thing — the nature of Mandy Smith's ‘mystery illness’.
Agh!
She's been Wymanised.
Charity card robins are just silly little beggars
By Jaci Stephen
IF charities are concerned because sales of their Christmas cards are down on previous years, they have only themselves to blame.
While the rest of the card world attempts to move on by using humour or Snoopy dogs to sell us the festive season, charity Christmas cards remain as old-fashioned, tedious and unimaginative as they have always been.
I currently have a box of 40 on my desk and, even forgetting the off-white interiors and envelopes, these have to be the worst cards this side of Bethlehem.
Let's take the animals.
Naturally, there is the proverbial robin — well, robins to be precise.
There's the ‘I'm so fat I could be a turkey’ type of robin; the ‘Isn't there more to life than standing on this stupid twig’robin; and, the special favourite, the robin with the ‘How come the cattle always get to go in the stable?’look.
Add to these two schizophrenic cats, two bears with what look like severe cases of acne, and several reindeer who are just asking to end up on the wrong side of a roast dinner.
What exactly is the point of sending these absurd pictures to people year after year?
They aren't cheap to buy or send, and they clutter up the house.
Then there's the added stress of cards arriving from people to whom you've forgotten to send one.
That invariably means having to buy another box of silly cards from which you will use only three.
Charities would be better off encouraging people not to send cards at all, and instead post the money they save straight off to the begging bowl of their choice.
Either that or find a robin who looks as if he has a purpose in life.
THE manager of Birmingham's Bull Ring Shopping centre has banned children from sitting on Santa's knee, claiming that the gesture could be open to misinterpretation.
Quite right, too.
For too long this dirty old man in red has been adopting the friendly old buffer guise to get his kicks from young and innocent children.
I was never convinced by all that ‘Would you like to sit on my knee?’ nonsense.
In a word, Santa, no.
Keep your antlers to yourself and gimme my present.
Jackanory
By Jaci Stephen
GOOD afternoon, children.
This is the BBC, and we'd like to welcome you to a new series of Jackanory, which this year promises to bring you stories about subjects such as homosexuality and Aids.
Won't that be fun?
One exciting story we have lined up is called Two Weeks With The Queen, about a boy who comes to England to ask the Queen for help for his dying brother.
But do you know what happens when he's in England?
He meets a young homosexual whose partner is dying of Aids.
You see, children, this is all part of a BBC plan which you will come to know as CISSI (the Corporation's Intention to deal Sensitively with Serious Issues).
Put away your Lego and Sindy dolls, this is what they call Real Life.
Boring, innit?
Police see fare play all round
By Jaci Stephen
THE police tend to get an unfavourable press, though in my experience they have never been anything less than kind, helpful and efficient when I've needed them most.
One such moment was Thursday night, when a mini-cab firm quoted me the price of a fare home, and the driver (after taking a circuitous route around London) tried to charge me well over the odds.
I left him the fare I had been quoted, but he pursued me and stopped me entering my flat.
He then became aggressive, demanding that I re-enter the cab while he called the police.
Fortunately, my yells had already alerted the neighbours, who called the police on my behalf.
So, to the Hampstead officers who arrived so quickly on the scene, to my neighbours, and to the Black Cab driver (I'm afraid I failed to take his number) who protected me, many thanks.
To Black Cab drivers reading this with a told-you-so expression, I really had spent half an hour trying to flag one down!
And to mini-cab drivers everywhere — have a rotten Christmas.
Eighteen great gifts
Steve Newell
WITH golfers in the family there are always plenty of Christmas gift options, but why not try something a little different this year?
A packet of tees, box of balls or a golf glove are all useful, but tend to be regarded as the ‘socks and underpants’ of golfing presents — necessary, but unimaginative items.
To help you choose something more exciting for the budding Nick Faldo or Laura Davies in your family, STEVE NEWELL has plotted an 18-gift course from expensive luxuries to handy stocking fillers:
1
Ease the strain with a lightweight powered trolley to ferry their bag.
The PowaKaddy Classic costs £429 from pro shops, and sports and department stores.
2
A little brain tee-ser for your golfer — a mini-compendium, golf ball-shaped quiz book that contains a fascinating selection of golfing trivia.
It's £3.95 by Hi-Marketing (071-738 7751).
3
Gold-plated, hallmarked solid silver cuff-links with a hand-enamelled image of a golfer are £49.95 from Golf In The Making (0932 228420).
4
Windstopper sweaters keep the wind out and warmth in for all-weather golfers.
They cost £100 by Pro Quip from golf pro shops.
5
Cute and practical animal club-head covers start from £13, and the money helps the English Ladies Association Trust.
From Zig-Zag (0202-884372) and pro shops.
6
Help improve their game with some of the sport's leading teaching professionals on the Golf World Instruction Video, £11.50 from Golf World (071-538 1031).
7
Fine tune his or her on-green performance with one of the new Edge Putters from the Ben Hogan Company.
They cost about £60 from pro shops, and all good sport and department stores.
8
For female golfers try a delicate gold-plated solid silver brooch from Golf In The Making (0932 228420).
Choose from a bunny brooch set with emeralds (£44.95), a golf club with a cultured pearl ball (Pounds 24.95), a hand-enamelled golf bag disc (£39.95), a hand-painted bone china rose (£29.95) or a small golf bag (£34.95).
9
Easy-tee not only hammers the tee into the ground, but regulates its height.
Only £7.50 (0245 322571).
10
Soaked golfers can dry their shoes overnight on a convenient low-wattage, electronically-heated rack that is gentle enough to dry leather without making it crack.
It's £39.99 from Lionhart Leisure (0235 550555).
11
Join them in a toast to a successful round with a crystal pint tankard, etched with a golfer on one side.
It's £47 by Royal Doulton Crystal and available from department stores and Lawleys.
12
Here's two ideal stocking fillers — a book on golfing side-bets and wagers (£4.99) or a beautifully bound personal golfing record book (£6.99).
Both from Books On Golf (081-669 1114).
13
For the ultimate in inspiration try Rextar golf balls — the brand used by Nick Faldo — at £27.50 a dozen from most pro shops.
14
For golfers who believe the joys of the course and delights of the table go hand-in-hand, there's the Gourmet Golf Guide by Iain Crawford (£7.99, Lochar Publishing) from good book shops.
15
Let the Jack Nicklaus Golf and Course Design, Signature Edition computer game improve their handicap.
They can play any course against up to 72 computer golfers — £39.99 by Accolade from Virgin, HMV, Boots and W H Smith.
16
For the armchair golfer there's the definitive guide to great links golf, with photos from the game's most respected photographer Brian Morgan — the Classic Golf Links Of Great Britain And Ireland by Donald Steel (£25, Chapmans).
17
Let them watch the Masters in action and re-live Fred Couples' thrilling victory earlier this year on the Augusta Masters video from The Video Collection (£10.99).
18
Golfers can store their clubs in the latest in luxury — multi-coloured golf bags from Sun Mountain Sports (0622-820519) for £70.
Great Escapes
Sarah Whitfield King
LOW-COST European weekend breaks are being offered by British Airways Holidays.
The two-night packages include scheduled flights and breakfast.
Weekend prices are: Bruges £99, Paris £89, and Nice £129.
Details: 0293 615353.
CORNISH cottages can be booked during the Christmas and New Year period — with a 40 per cent reduction — from Blakes.
The properties, which sleep four people, are based at Rosecraddoc Manor, set in 38 acres of woodlands near Liskeard.
The manor has a sauna, solarium and whirlpool spa.
Prices for one week start at £270 per cottage.
Details: 0603 783221.
A SPECIAL week's skiing for single people is being organised by Snowtime.
The break will be in the Trois Vallees, in the French Alps, from January 9 to January 16.
Each person will be allocated a double room with a private balcony in the chalet-style hotel.
Prices range from £405 to £425, depending on the standard of the room, and includes breakfast, homemade tea and dinner.
Details: 071-433 3336.
TRAVELLERS planning to see the United States by coach will be pleased to hear that Greyhound is not raising the prices of its Ameripass and Canada Pass during 1993.
The four-day Ameripass costs £50, and the seven, 15, and 30-day passes cost £85, £125 and £170 respectively.
All the coaches have air-conditioning, reclining seats and tinted windows.
And the firm operates a strict no-smoking policy on it coaches.
Details: 0342 317317.
TRENDY snowboarders now have a one-kilometre ski slope reserved exclusively for them at Nassfeld in Carinthia, southern Austria.
There are obstacles on the course as well as a jump-and-turn area.
Details: 071-629 6124.
BRITAIN'S birdwatchers now have their first guide to specialist holidays geared to their hobby.
The guide is available free in January's copy of the monthly magazine Birdwatch.
It gives details of holidays ranging from short breaks in Cumbria to trips to the Antarctic.
Wild dogs and Englishmen
Jim Soar
THE western sky was glowing pink when we spotted him, a tiny shadow trotting across the darkening savannah.
Our driver gave a cry and swung off in pursuit, the jeep bouncing over rough ground until the headlights reflected a pair of amber eyes, then another and another.
Soon we were surrounded by furious, yelping wild dogs.
The cause of their rage was soon apparent.
From a clump of bushes came snarls and howls as the pack fought a losing battle against three hyena which had stolen their freshly-killed impala.
Wild dogs are rare, even in the remotest regions of Africa and if we needed final proof that anything can happen on safari in Botswana, there it was.
But our ten-day trip provided many other vivid memories — of lighting palm-branches to ward off elephants, flashing torch beams at an inquisitive hippo and feeding scraps to a mongoose.
For over a week, buffalo and lion evaded us.
Then on our last morning, on the banks of the Chobe river, we were surrounded by a herd of a thousand Cape buffalo.
On the way back, we found a lioness basking under a tree not ten yards from our open-sided truck.
We were in no danger, although as first-time visitors to southern Africa we could be forgiven a slight tremble on the camera shutter.
By that time we knew which creatures were most dangerous — the evil-tempered hippos, the unpredictable lone buffalo and the silent crocodiles.
The thrill of spotting wildlife in its natural habitat is what keeps the tour operators in business.
But with more accessible countries such as Kenya offering cheaper deals, bigger hotels and big game galore, why choose Botswana?
One reason is safety.
Poverty is widespread in this former British protectorate but nobody is starving and the people themselves, the Batswana, are shyly welcoming.
Then there is the wildlife.
We saw dozens of animal and reptile species at close range including elephant, warthog, wildebeest, zebra, monitor lizards and a dozen types of antelope.
But all this does not come cheap.
Botswana has no foreign debt and a stable currency — the pula (about three to the Pounds)— and its tourism policy can be summed up as high cost, low volume.
Accommodation in the Okavango delta in the north east and Chobe national park in the north west is strictly limited and likely to remain so.
The Okavango is truly unique — miles of swampland fed by clear, fast-flowing rivers which never reach the sea.
Exploring it means either walking or travelling by mokoro, a shallow punt in which you are poled along reedy channels and across carpets of water-lilies by tireless guides.
If you need a drink, dip a mug over the side — the water is disease-free.
If you fancy a swim, that's up to you.
Some guides and camp managers claim to know safe swimming spots, others say the crocodiles know them too.
Accommodation in the camps — on an ascending scale of comfort — ranges from small tents for the backpacking brigade to large tents-under-thatch, reed huts and timber-framed lodges which provide an all inclusive package for the well-heeled.
One excursion not to be missed, time and money permitting, is a short flight across the Zimbabwean border to Victoria Falls.
One glimpse of the world's most spectacular waterfall makes up for the tiresome form-filling in baking customs halls which any African border crossing entails — neither Botswana nor Zimbabwe are suitable for those who wilt quickly in the heat or can't stomach light aircraft.
But if you want an unforgettable holiday in the real Africa, Botswana should be top of your list.
DEPARTURES Flight Bookers (tel: 071-757 2002) flights to Botswana via South Africa, £699.
Okavango Tours & Safaris (tel: 081-341 9442) 7nts safari £1,120, flights extra.
Further informtion: Botswana Tourism Development Unit, Private Bag 0047, Gaborone, Botswana.
Seals bring warm glow to icescape
David White
DEEP in the frozen wastes of Canada I felt near to tears as I watched a fluffy baby seal gaze adoringly into its mother's eyes.
Just a few years ago these beautiful creatures faced being clubbed to death by hunters, but thanks to pressure from wildlife organisations, they have been spared.
Now tourists can walk among the seal herd and cuddle and feed the wide-eyed charmers.
In early March, thousands of Harp seal mothers gather on the North Canadian ice-fields to give birth.
For the next three weeks or so they wean their babies on the frozen sea of the Gulf of St Lawrence.
Visitors stay on the French-speaking Magdallen Islands in excellent hotel accommodation and take helicopter trips out to the Gulf to see the seals.
With experienced guides, you can stroll among the seals and even feed some of the babies while their mothers go for a swim under the ice.
When you land on the icescape you can imagine how the first men on the moon felt.
Even the previous day's visitors could not have landed on the same spot as you because the ice, and the herd, move many miles each night.
This is my fifth visit to the seal herd as photographer to the International Fund For Animal Welfare for the duration of Sealwatch, as the trip is named.
The Sealwatch holiday has many more adventures apart from visiting the seals.
From your hotel on the Magdallen Islands, you can enjoy daily programmes which include wildlife and photography seminars, beginners' snowshoeing and cross-country skiing.
Don't forget to pack your thermal underwear.
Temperatures out on the ice can vary from zero to -40C — but watching the seals will soon warm your heart.
DEPARTURES Faraway Traveller (Old Manor Hse, High St, Mayfield, E Sussex, 0435 873666) 6-day B&B Sealwatch packages from Feb 28-Mar 15 from Pounds 1300, including flights to Halifax, hotels and 2 dinners.
More information: Sealwatch '93, International Fund for Animal Welfare, Tubwell Hse, New Rd, Crowborough, E Sussex (0892 663374).
Tourism Canada, Trafalgar Sq, London SW1 (071-258 6346).
Ski Report
Peter Fenton
FREEZING snow whipped our faces as we peered nervously down the slope.
Tackling a black run in a blizzard was a worry, but when you only have a long weekend you can't hang around for the sun to shine.
The up-side was that two days of heavy snow made skiing conditions around the Christmas-card town of Kitzbuhel, in the Austrian Alps, nearer to perfect than any of us had dared hope in the middle of December.
There was a decent covering of snow on the three main slopes — Kitzbuheler Horn, Kirchberg and the famous Hahnenkamm.
The second day was clearer, and on the third the sun shone.
With the pistes almost empty, it was a skier's dream.
Despite Kitzbuhel's chic reputation and expensive shops, there are plenty of good, cheap restaurants — a three-course meal with wine for under £15 — and lively bars.
There are free buses to ferry you from hotel to cable-car stations and the town has a warm, friendly atmosphere.
Alternatives to skiing include a leisure pool, curling and skating on the nearby lake, indoor tennis and sleigh rides.
The last chart of 1992
1 (1)
I Will Always Love You Whitney Houston
2 (2)
Heal The World Michael Jackson
3 (3)
Would I Lie To You Charles & Eddie
4 (5)
Could It Be Magic Take That
5 (7)
Phorever People Shamen
6 (4)
Slam Jam WWF Superstars
7 (10)
Boney M Megamix Boney M
8 (16)
Miami Hit Mix Gloria Estefan
9 (9)
Tom Traubert's Blues Rod Stewart
10 (6)
Deeper And Deeper Madonna
11 (19)
Someday (I'm Coming Back) Lisa Stansfield
12 (14)
If We Hold On Together Diana Ross
13 (8)
In My Defence Freddie Mercury
14 (11)
Out Of Space Prodigy
15 (18)
Montreaux EP Simply Red
16 (12)
I Still Believe In You Cliff Richard
17 (15)
Step It Up Stereo MC's
18 (13)
Temptation Heaven 17
19 (-)
Drift Away Michael Bolton
20 (20)
Mrs Robinson Lemonheads
Home truths on benefits
TREVOR Deaves has been commendably open about the DSS's kind offer to pay his £1,833 a week mortgage.
He lost his job and did not go begging to the DSS and when he earned a massive salary he paid massive taxes, he reasons.
He also makes the point that as someone who is not earning and who is unable to sell his house, his circumstances are not unlike those of many other people.
They are on a different scale though.
His house is a mansion set in 66 acres.
It is not the only roof over his head — in fact he has never lived in it.
There is something very disturbing about a benefit system which will prop up Mr Deaves until he gets back on his business feet, yet is reluctant to help people who are literally out on the streets.
Many hard working people have lost their homes because they have lost their jobs or because their businesses have gone bust.
For them Pounds 400 a week was good money.
Mr Deaves earned £400,000 a year.
We do not condemn him for having being successful, but we do condemn a social security system which is prepared to help Mr Deaves indefinitely when other struggling families who do not meet the DSS's criteria are thrown out of modest homes.
‘The welfare system is supposed to cut across class,’ one DSS source said.
If that is true, why does someone with a lavish lifestyle have a right to have that maintained while families who have defaulted on £20,000 mortgages have their homes repossessed?
A system which favours people who are good at looking after themselves is not a just one.
The solution is simple.
When the DSS pays mortgages it should take an equivalent stake in the mortgaged property.
Then when Mr Deaves's fortunes turn around and he sells his house, he can pay back the taxpayers' money.
Bad breaks
LAST week we protested about the 25-day Christmas break being taken by Members of Parliament.
By any standards 25 days is excessive.
It is sheer indulgence, particularly for people who often protest about heavy workloads.
And if any MP does not have a heavy workload, he or she should have.
The circumstances of many other workers are very different.
Many companies which are taking long breaks over Christmas and New Year are doing so because their order books are thin or even empty.
The idea of a 16-day break may sound like bliss but it is actually a sign of dire economic times.
For some other companies it is uneconomic to open for just a few days between bank holidays.
But the question we must ask is why so many British workers are getting a two-week break when other European workers are making do with just three days' holiday.
If offices are not manned, companies can not pick up business.
Without wishing to sound like Scrooge, we trust that all the decisions to take long holidays are based on sound business sense.
Just because our MPs give themselves a three-and-a-half week break doesn't mean we can all benefit from copying them.
Jingle belle
IF you ever lost track of time you would know it was Christmas from the barrage of sickly singles pumped out to cash in on the season of goodwill.
How refreshing it is that this year's number one is Whitney Houston's I Will Always Love You.
A real love song is infinitely more appropriate for Christmas than a trashy song cooked up as a commercial gimmick.
We are all human and sometimes we make mistakes…
Penny Wark
The Christmas speech the Queen should be making this year.
AT 3pm on Friday the Queen will deliver her Christmas message to Britain and the Commonwealth.
That text is still secret but this is the speech TODAY believes she should make.
OVER the 40 years I have talked to you at Christmas I have often spoken of the role Britain plays throughout the world.
I have given thanks for the brave and selfless work done by many British men and women who face dangerous circumstances every day.
Once again this year their contributions deserve to be applauded.
Britain has always taken a stand against bullies and tyrants to ensure that we can live in a safe world and I pray that our resolution to do this will remain undiminished.
This year, however, Britain has been faced by a tyrant much closer to home.
It is called the recession and it has blighted the lives of thousands of people who want no more than to earn an honest living and take pride in bringing up their families.
Every parent wants to offer their children a positive vision of the future.
They want to give them the confidence to grow into caring and hard-working adults who will grasp opportunities and take their responsibilities seriously.
That is particularly difficult in a recession when the future looks bleak for everyone.
The mood of the whole country has changed to reflect that.
Many thousands of people face the daily struggle of trying to look forward with hope when they do not have a job.
No one with any wisdom or common sense still takes their job for granted.
They understand that everything must be fought for and earned, from the next meal or mortgage payment to respect from neighbours, friends and families.
As many people face painful changes in their circumstances, this sense of uncertainty has affected my own job.
I have become aware that many of my subjects are re-assessing the role of the monarchy.
I have been criticised for being a distant figure who lives in a style of luxury that Britain cannot afford.
I have been criticised for doing a job that is irrelevant in a society in which so many are struggling.
There has also been criticism of members of my family for behaviour which was judged to be unseemly for people whose responsibility is to set a good example.
Listening to those criticisms has taught me a salutary and humbling lesson.
There is no reason why my family should be immune from problems.
We are, after all, ordinary people, albeit born to live in extraordinary circumstances.
This year I have been immensely saddened by the separation of the Prince and Princess of Wales, and of the Duke and Duchess of York.
There have been times when I felt that our family was disintegrating, and while I know that more than one in three marriages fails, that does not make watching your own children admit their unhappiness any easier for them or for you.
As I watched the fire at Windsor Castle it seemed as if the very foundations of our family were crumbling.
In fact the aftermath of that fire, when so many people expressed resentment about the funding of the repairs, made me feel that they were.
All of this has made me understand that it is time for change, and I want to explain how I believe I can continue to serve Britain.
I was brought up to work hard for my country.
From a very young age I learned that my duty was the single most important factor in my life and that everything I did must be dedicated to it.
Throughout my life I have done my best to carry out that duty.
This year has been the most difficult and disturbing of my 40-year reign, but it has brought home to me that I must do everything I can to continue to carry out that duty.
I hope my decision to pay tax will help you understand that I accept I must be accountable to those I serve.
I also hope that by paying tax I will be seen as what I am — a hardworking woman with a contribution to make to the moral and practical well-being of the country.
I have no right to be seen as a figurehead, I must continue to earn that.
But I ask you to accept that we are all human and that sometimes we make mistakes.
My family has set some poor standards but I hope that the breakdown of three of my children's marriages will be seen as what it is, an honest admission of failure and a hope that a happier future lies in separate lives.
As always, my family is devoted to carrying out its duty.
I am anxious that my grandsons, Prince William and Prince Harry, should grow up in as happy and stable an environment as possible because they represent not just my family's future, but a continuation of a tradition which has bound the British people together for centuries.
Our goal will always be to serve the people of Britain in a positive and practical way.
I know that I can do that at home and abroad by continuing to represent the country.
Britain does have a future as part of the EC but I want it to be prosperous again in its own right.
My aim is to see a strong and united country in which people work together with common aims.
Two weeks ago my family celebrated the marriage of my daughter Anne, the Princess Royal.
We prayed that her new happiness would mark a turning point for our family as we work together to re-build a sense of stability.
We must all believe in the future and strive harder to carry out our responsibilities.
I have tried to be honest today.
I am not the only person who has had a tumultuous year, and I am immensley proud of the way the British face their problems and so often succeed despite them.
We must remember that we are a great nation and that we have great spirit.
I pray that this spirit will pull us through these difficult times.
May God bless you.
School's out for Dahl's BFG
Tracey Kandohla
THE Cheshire Cat has vanquished the Big Friendly Giant in the classroom battleground of English literature.
Education bosses have edited favourite children's author Roald Dahl out of their proposed guide to recommended reading in schools.
Alice In Wonderland author Lewis Carroll and Rudyard Kipling are among the traditional writers making a comeback in a move designed to improve standards of grammar, punctuation and spelling among primary and secondary school children.
But the omission of Dahl for younger readers has been criticised by Amanda Conquy, who administers the late author's literary estate.
‘It's a shame Roald isn't there,’ she says.
‘His books are rated as classics.
He is what the children vote for every time.’
Although the titles on the list will not be compulsory reading they will be the most definitive guide yet.
According to age, they include:
AGED 5-7: Maurice Sendak's classic Where The Wild Things Are is joined by Shirley Hughes's gentle morality tale Dogger.
AGED 7-11: Fantasy and imagination figure strongly with Carroll's Alice's Adventures In Wonderland and J M Barrie's Peter Pan though there is still room for simple fun with the Just William stories of Richmal Crompton.
Kipling's The Jungle Book is also included.
AGED 11-14: Old fashioned adventure returns with R L Stevenson's Treasure Island and Mark Twain's Tom Sawyer.
Orwell's political allegory Animal Farm and Stan Barstow's Joby add a more modern flavour.
AGED 14-16: Traditional classics such as Eliot's Silas Marner, Hardy's The Mayor Of Casterbridge and Jane Austen's Pride And Prejudice set the tone here, though there is still room for William Golding's classic Lord Of The Flies.
Farewell in 1992
Jane Moore and Fergus Kelly
IT was a year that claimed the lives of two of Britain's greatest comedians, a film femme-fatale and the father of the Princess of Wales.
The threat of Aids was once again highlighted in the deaths of two critically acclaimed actors and Britain's last hangman finally met his own end.
According to obituary writers, an unusually large number of famous people died in 1992.
Here we remember a selection of them.
ENTERTAINERS
Marlene Dietrich: May 6, aged 90: German-born Thirties movie legend, who died a recluse in Paris.
Denholm Elliott: Oct 6, aged 70: Prolific character actor, star of Alfie and Trading Places, who died of Aids.
Frankie Howerd: April 19, aged 71: ‘Titter Ye Not’ master of sexual innuendo and star of Up Pompeii, who died just as he was enjoying a big comeback.
Benny Hill: April 21, aged 67: Known worldwide as a comic great, he died of a heart attack watching television.
Bob Todd: Oct 21, aged 70.
Hill's sidekick and veteran of countless stage and TV comedies.
Paul Ryan: Nov 29, aged 44: Sixties pop star who had hits with twin brother Barry including Eloise and I Love Her.
Died of lung cancer.
Robert Morley: June 3, aged 84: Stage and screen actor, ranging from The African Queen to Around the World In 80 Days, as well as playwright and author.
He once refused a knighthood.
Anthony Perkins: Sept 12, aged 60: Never to be forgotten for his chilling portrayal of Norman Bates in Pyscho movies.
Struck down by Aids.
Hal Roach: Nov 2, aged 100: Movie director who launched screen greats Laurel and Hardy and Harold Lloyd.
Sir Kenneth Macmillan: Oct 30, aged 62: Principal choreographer to the Royal Ballet.
Dr Magnus Pyke: Oct 19, aged 83: TV egghead who brought science to the masses.
Mary Wells: July 26, aged 49: First great female star of Motown, who made her name in 1964 with the hit My Guy.
Francis Bacon: April 28, aged 82:Artist who left £11 million to John Edwards, his companion for 15 years.
LITERATURE AND MEDIA
Isaac Asimov: April 6, aged 72: Best-selling science fiction author and winner of the prestigious Hugo and Nebula awards.
Alex Haley: Feb 10, aged 70: Author of Roots which became a blockbuster TV series.
Elizabeth David: May 22, aged 78: The doyenne of English cookery writers.
Bill Naughton: Jan 8, aged 81: Irish-born novelist, best-known for writing Alfie, the film which made Michael Caine a star.
Debbie Raymond: Nov 5, aged 36.
Editor-in-chief of the eight soft porn magazines owned by her father Paul.
Died of cocaine overdose.
LORDS AND LADIES
Earl Spencer: March 29, aged 68: The Princess of Wales's father.
Didn't live to see his daughter's marriage break-up.
Marquess of Bath: June 30, aged 87: First stately home owner to open his house to the public — Longleat in 1949.
Viscountess ‘Bubbles’ Rothermere: Aug 12, aged 63: Nicknamed for her penchant for champagne, ex-actress turned high society party-thrower.
Lord Cheshire: July 31, aged 74: Second World War flying ace, awarded the VC, who set up the Cheshire Foundation Home.
SPORT
Dan Maskell: Dec 10, aged 84: Wimbledon will never be the same without the voice of tennis.
Kitty Godfree: June 19, aged 96: Twice Wimbledon Ladies Singles' champion in the Twenties and Olympic gold medal winner.
Raymond Brooks-Ward: Aug 22, aged 62: BBC showjumping commentator for 30 years.
Alexander Dubcek: Nov 7, aged 70: Led the 1968 Prague Spring Reforms in Czechoslovakia.
Petra Kelly: Oct 12, aged 44: Founder of the German Green Party who died with her lover in a suicide pact.
Willy Brandt: Oct 8, aged 78: The Chancellor of West Germany from 1969 to 74.
Sunnie Mann: Nov 30, aged 79: Wife of Beirut hostage Jackie Mann who campaigned relentlessly for his release.
Died of lung cancer.
Lord Havers: April 1, aged 69: Led for the crown in the cases of the Birmingham Six and the Guildford Four and was made Attorney-General in 1979 until 1987.
Jim Garrison: Oct 21, aged 71: New Orleans District Attorney, whose conspiracy theory concerning the assassination of John F Kennedy formed the basis of the script for film JFK.
Giovanni Falcone: May 23, aged 53: Italian prosecutor and scourge of the Mafia killed by a car-bomb.
William Rees-Davies: Jan 8, aged 75: An MP whose habit of sweeping through the Commons corridors in a black cloak earned him the nickname Dracula.
Albert Pierrepoint: July 10, aged 87: Britain's chief hangman from 1946 to 1956, he executed 450 people including Ruth Ellis, Derek Bentley and John ‘Acid Bath’ Haigh.
INSTITUTIONS
Superman: Nov 17, aged 54: Killed horribly after a six-week punch-up with arch-villain Doomsday.
But the Man of Steel may yet return.
‘We don't know what death does to someone from the planet Krypton,’ a DC Comics spokesman says.
Punch Magazine: April 8, aged 150: The satirical publication had been ill for many years with circulation falling to 33,000.
Aldershot Football Club: March 23, aged 66: Left debts of £1.2 million.
Nabila Khashoggi wedding
AT this time of year it's not unusual to see the odd pumpkin turn into a coach.
But try wearing one then getting into your carriage and it's a different matter.
Just ask Nabila Khashoggi, 29, daughter of Adnan, one of the richest men in the world.
She chose the multicolour puffball creation for her London wedding to computer programmer Danny Daggenhurst who she met and fell in love with a year ago.
All went well until she tried to climb into a taxi after the reception at the exclusive Dorchester Club following a quiet ceremony for family and a few friends at Chelsea Register Office.
For once it was probably the driver giving the tip — choose another fashion designer.
Paula Abdul
SINGER Paula Abdul, left, lost out when she couldn't hit the same key as Frank Sinatra.
Rival Cyndi Lauper stepped in to sing a duet for a Christmas album and recorded the track first time with no rehearsal.
Freddie Mercury tribute
A TRIBUTE album to Aids victim singer Freddie Mercury has caused outrage.
His old group Queen refused to work on it and former girlfriend, Mary Austin, said: ‘It is cashing in on his memory.’
Billy Ray Cyrus
COUNTRY singer Billy Ray Cyrus returned to his home in Nashville, Tennessee, from his European tour to find fans had installed a gym.
Stocking fillers
Alison Veness, Fashion Editor
LEGS have become women's best kept secret in the Nineties with long, lean skirts and dresses dominating the High Street.
But hosiery companies are fighting back this Christmas with some flamboyant stockings and tights designed to liven up the festive party season.
Heather Watts, buying and merchandising controller for High Street chain Sock Shop says ‘We've been affected by the shift in hemlines and women are now buying sheers rather than opaques.
However, printed opaques are still walking out of the shops this Christmas.’
It isn't only the novelty Three Wise Men or Snowflake designs which are selling: ‘Many women are looking for a luxury buy to finish off a party outfit and the opaque hold-ups by Italian designer Paulo Cavali are best sellers,’ says Heather.
The designer behind the revival of patterned tights is Christian Lacroix, with his signature clashing colours and distinctive prints.
The most glamorous are in gold and silver — the perfect foil for swingy tunics and skinny-rib sweaters.
Marks & Spencer has a more subtle version in metallic and black thread.
That was the year that was
By Tim Satchell
HERE'S your chance to test your memory with our Quiz of the Year.
Below are listed 16 questions based on stories that have appeared in The Insider over the past 12 months.
Informative, revealing, funny, they add up to a comprehensive picture of a momentous year.
Answers below.
1.
In January I announced that a chat show host's spouse was to appear in EastEnders.
Was the new star: A Jane Goldman B Bob Geldof C Lizzie Power?
2.
Also in January I reported that the Queen had decided to give up the bottle.
Was the name of her former hair colouring: A dark beaver B chocolate kiss C coconut brown?
3.
Again in January I revealed that press tycoon Conrad Black was to marry.
Was his fiancee: A Barbara Carrera B Barbara Amiel C Barbara Bush?
4.
In February I reported that Sue Lawley's contract with Granada was in dispute.
Had they been paying her: A £1 million a year B Pounds 200,000 a year C £350,000 for three years?
5.
In March I predicted the winner of the 1992 Booker Prize.
Was the winner: A Andrew Morton's Diana: Her True Story B Barry Unsworth's Sacred Hunger C Barbara Cartland's Love in the Ruins?
6.
Also in March I announced that Dr David Owen was to give his endorsement to one of the parties in the general election.
Was the party: A Social Democrats B Conservative Party C Natural Law Party?
7.
In April I reported that Lady Helen Windsor had made her wedding list with the Wedding List Company.
Did she want: A cheese board and cover (£7.25) B marble rolling pin (£6.95) C garden table (Pounds 150)?
8.
I also reported that Tom Bower, biographer of Robert Maxwell, had a new biography deal.
Was his new subject: A Roland ‘Tiny’ Rowland B Harold Wilson C Conrad Black?
9.
In June I wrote that John Major was to meet the singer of one of his Desert Island Discs.
Was the singer: A Diana Ross (The Happening) B June Bronhill (The Holy City) C Frank Sinatra (The Best Is Yet To Come)?
10.
I also announced that Robert Lindsay would soon be appearing on the London stage in the title role of a classic story.
Was the role: A Cyrano de Bergerac B Hamlet C The Scarlet Pimpernel?
11.
In August I revealed that Prime Minister's son James Major had a £3-an-hour holiday job.
Was it as: A shelf-packer at Tesco B stable hand C assistant gardener?
12.
Also in August I said that A Year In Provence author Peter Mayle was looking for a house outside France.
Is the new house in: A Morocco B St Lucia C California?
13.
In September I wrote that a new painting of former Prime Minister Lady Thatcher was being unveiled on TV.
Was the artist: A Henry Mee B Charles de Laszlo C Abdul El Meknassi?
14.
In October I reported that British designer Carolyn Quartermaine had landed a top assignment with an internationally known New York-based designer.
Was her job with: A Mercedes Lauren B Donna Karan C Paloma Picasso?
15.
I also reported that the Duchess of York's sister had a new job.
Was it: A shelf-packer at Tesco B stable hand C assistant gardener?
16.
In November I wrote that actress Miranda Richardson was heading for Hollywood.
Which movie made her NAME:John A Dance With A Stranger B Passport to Pimlico C Secret Ceremony?
Do you know which Lisa married a top chef?
IT was in July that I announced Leeds-born superchef Marco-Pierre White was to marry his second wife, beautiful 19-year-old London model Lisa Butcher, after a whirlwind courtship.
Which of the pictures, above, is that of Miss Butcher?
ANSWERS:
1.
C — wife of Michael Aspel (A — wife of Jonathan Ross; B — husband of Paula Yates); 2.
B chocolate kiss; 3.
B Barbara Amiel; 4.
C Pounds 350,000 for three years; 5.
B Barry Unsworth's Sacred Hunger; 6.
B Conservative Party; 7.
A cheese board and cover, B marble rolling pin and C garden table; 8.
A Roland ‘Tiny’ Rowland; 9.
C Frank Sinatra (The Best Is Yet To Come); 10.
A Cyrano de Bergerac, and C The Scarlet Pimpernel; 11.
A shelf-packer at Tesco; 12.
C California; 13.
A Henry Mee; 14.
B Donna Karan; 15.
B stable hand; 16.
A Dance With A Stranger.
PICTURE QUESTION:
Lisa Butcher is in the centre photograph (left is Lisa B; right Liza Minelli).
Today!
Isla Whitcroft
Today takes you into the home of 24-year-old postal worker Brian Smith and his girlfriend Kerrie Browne.
LAST Christmas the Smith family were living in temporary accommodation.
This year Brian, Kerrie and baby Chloe will celebrate the festive season in their new family home — a council flat — just off London's Harrow Road.
Brian, you and Kerrie have been in temporary accommodation since January 1991.
When you were finally given this flat in February this year, you must have been over the moon.
Brian: ‘We were at first.
Although it was small and seemed damp, we were told work would soon be done to bring it up to an acceptable level.’
Kerrie: ‘I was very happy.
I had been saving up to buy a cooker and fridge and Brian's mum and dad gave us some of the furniture.
I am still paying off the sofa which came from a catalogue.
I was determined to make it into a lovely home.’
So what has gone wrong?
B: ‘For about nine months we have had a succession of builders, surveyors and decorators trooping in and out.
A rain waterpipe burst and water was coming in through the kitchen ceiling.
They took so long to repair the pipe that the ceiling was black and bits of plaster were falling off.
The damp was creeping into the living room.
You can see where they've painted over it.’
K: ‘I am disappointed because although I bought a freezer there is only one power point in the kitchen so we can't use it — an extension lead would be dangerous with Chloe toddling about.
Also the food cupboard is on the wall which is very damp.
Even tins rust.’
B: ‘We have to shop for food every other day.
That is expensive and takes up a good part of our income.’
Brian, how do you feel about living in such a small flat and one that has no bath?
B: ‘I feel as though I'm not doing my duty as a father.
Kerrie and I both work — I'm a Post Office driver and she is a telephonist for an advertising company — yet we still can't afford to rent privately or get a mortgage.’
K: ‘He has tried his best to get us a decent place but sometimes it feels as though we're beating our heads against a brick wall.’
You and Brian have been through a lot, living in different emergency housing places.
How have you two stayed together?
K: ‘A lot of it is determination not to be beaten by the system.
I know I have a good man.
He doesn't drink or smoke and is a wonderful father.
We have had terrible times.
When I was heavily pregnant we lived in one room that was infested with red ants.
I used to sit on the floor crying but Brian always pulled me out of it.’
B: ‘I honestly believe Chloe has kept us together.
We love her so much.
It is impossible to imagine life without her.’
Brian, how do you feel about fatherhood?
B: ‘I love it.
She's the best little person in the world.
I love to bathe her in the kitchen sink and play with her.’
K: ‘He is a great dad.
He babysits if I want to go out and is so patient with Chloe.’
How did you two meet?
K: ‘We knew about each other for a while.
He didn't like me at first.
I was 16 and he was 21 and far too grown up — and he had a car.
B: ‘I thought she was far too cocky but then I changed my mind and I pursued her with a vengeance.’
What was your first date?
K: ‘He took me for a pizza and we got on brilliantly from then.’
B:(Laughing)‘Did we?’
Kerrie, your mum looks after Chloe when you are at work so you must look forward to being with her at night.
K: ‘The evenings are a very special time but I can't take Chloe to the park because there is a hostel for down-and-outs by it and they sit on the park benches drinking and shouting abuse.
So she plays in the backyard.’
Brian, you have been troubled by bad health.
Have things improved recently?
B: ‘No, it is getting worse.
I had asthma as a lad and also developed an ulcer when I was about 16.
Since we moved here the asthma has got worse.
I often wake up with my eyes and face swollen.
Chloe seems to have inherited it and the pair of us are wheezing all night long.’
K: ‘It is frightening when he has an attack.
Now Chloe is the same.
I hate bathing her in the sink because the kitchen is draughty, especially since a chunk of the wall fell out a few weeks ago.’
Can't you wash her in the shower instead?
K: ‘No, she is just too small and I don't have enough hands to keep her safe and use the shower head as well.’
Your flat being so small, it must at least be warm.
B: ‘Not really.
We have one Economy 7 heater in use and that is in the hallway.
Some others were fitted a few months ago but they haven't been wired up to the Economy meter and we daren't use them because we wouldn't be able to afford the bills.’
It must be a great blessing to have Chloe's grandparents living nearby.
K: ‘It is, because we don't have room for a washing machine and they let us take the laundry to them.’
Most of your belongings are stacked up in the hall and the bedroom.
Why is that?
K: There is no storage space anywhere.
The bedroom has Chloe's cot, our bed, a chest of drawers and there is no room for anything else.
We have to keep everything in bin liners.’
Do you plan to get married?
B: ‘That would be wonderful but I think we will be saving up for a long time.
I was hoping to buy her a ring for Christmas but we just couldn't afford it.’
How do you see your future together working out?
B: ‘I am worried about my job because it looks as if we are going to be privatised soon and there may be redundancies.
But most of all, I am determined to get my family a decent place to live.’
K: ‘We would really like to move back to the area where we were brought up.
But unless we have another child we have been told that we will be in this place until she is 13.
But most of all I just want Chloe to have the chance to be a healthy little girl.
She is a joy — she deserves that at the very least.’
With acknowledgement to HELLO! magazine.
Pensioners savings
LIKE many pensioners I am seeing my savings dwindle with falling interest rates.
If the Government won't boost pensions, can't it help with gas bills and the like?
Sir John Harvey-Jones
SIR John Harvey-Jones knows his business but I can't stomach the self-righteous attitude of some managers who have taken their companies to the brink of disaster.
Fergie's bash
AS A taxpayer I was appalled to read that Fergie hosted a £15,000 bash at Buckingham Palace.
That money could have gone to so many good causes.
NHS and older patients
THE letter complaining about greedy NHS hospitals ignoring older patients was unfair.
I was hospitalised for angina and my care was excellent.
Help keep Britain afloat
I WAS amazed to read that the Government is spending £2.5 million to provide new factories and warehouses in Liverpool to offset the closure of the Camell Laird shipyard.
May I ask who is going to occupy these buildings?
In Wales many such buildings erected by the Welsh Development Authority are lying empty.
Large passenger liners are being built by nearly every maritime nation, and some of these ships are for British owners.
It would make more sense to build the ships in this country and use those millions to subsidise the industry.
Other countries have no scruples about subsidies when it comes to keeping workers employed and preserving their skills.
There was an uprising over the mine closures but closing a shipyard passes almost without comment.
Major's sell-out puts zoo animals in peril
LAST year Britain tabled a directive at the Maastricht Treaty negotiations which offered much-needed protection to zoo and farm animals in the EC.
I am sickened to now learn that the Government has acquiesced to the other EC leaders on this issue at the Edinburgh Summit and that, for the sake of subsidiarity, this directive has been dropped.
While uneasy about the more dubious aspects of the Treaty, I had hoped that the miserable imprisonment of zoo animals and the wretched conditions of livestock (particularly live exports) would be things of the past once the Treaty was ratified.
It is disgraceful that when paper mountains of directives exist for the size and shape of fruit and vegetables, the Government has so casually signed away the plight of millions of defenceless creatures.
Major's sell-out puts zoo animals in peril
HAVING just struggled through a copy of the Maastricht Treaty I can only scratch my head that anyone would wish to sign it.
It is such an amateurish effort that it is little wonder the Government has tried to ensure that it is not widely available.
It resembles a schoolboy's notes which have been scattered in the wind and hastily gathered together again with some pages missing and others out of sequence.
Cuckoo waltz
EVERY time I hear Rod Stewart ‘singing’ Waltzing Matilda I have the urge to heave my TV or radio out the window.
If this load of old rubbish is aired in Australia where the song is regarded as a national anthem, then God help Rod.
Salman Rushdie would seem safe by comparison.
Prince of Wales and the young
YOUR claim that the Prince of Wales cannot communicate with young people is untrue.
Through The Prince's Trust and other charities, he has done more to improve their quality of life, particularly the disadvantaged, than almost any other public figure.
Milestones
BIRTHDAYS: Tennis star Chris Evert, 38.
Actress Jane Fonda, 55.
ON THIS DAY: In 1620, the Pilgrim Fathers landed at Plymouth Rock, America.
In 1846, anaesthetics were first used in Britain.
In 1946, 1,068 people died during an earthquake in Japan.
Things you didn't know you didn't know
Graeme Donald
PEOPLE did not begin to wish each other‘Merry Christmas’ until the late 1700s/early 1800s.
The original meaning of the word ‘merry’ is fitting and appropriate — for example a judge might well have proclaimed: ‘Tis merry that he hangs for murder.’
By the time of Robin Hood the term meant something more akin to pleasing and tranquil — hence Merry England.
Talking of Hood and his Merry Men, here lies yet another misconception, for the last word is not ‘men’ as in ‘man’but a corruption of ‘meinie’, which denoted an entourage or household — those who did the ‘menial’jobs.
Each year, the carol ‘God rest ye merry, gentlemen’ is sung with the wrong inflection — the comma should always come after ‘merry’.
The line means: ‘May God grant you peace of mind, gentlemen’, not: ‘May God grant you happy chaps a rest from your revels.’
TODAY'S Book Of Things You Didn't Know…is now on sale, published by Simon & Schuster for £3.99.
Key to perfect home brew is in the bag
James Roberts
THE one thing guaranteed to dampen your enthusiasm for home brewing was the uncertainty of it all.
How many people have carefully bottled their beer only to be woken in the middle of the night by the sound of exploding corks?
Now at last the answer is in the bag.
The very latest in home brew kits is basically a bag already primed with the necessary ingredients to make 20 pints of foaming bitter (or lager or cider).
All you do is add water and leave it for a month.
Ironically, it's the simplicity that has been a major headache for distributors Oak Marketing.
Shoppers cannot believe that the process is so straightforward.
To counteract this, Oak has devised a new method of marketing Brewking and are looking for agents to distrubute the bags nationwide.
‘It is difficult to explain how simple it is, you have to see it,’ says company marketing consultant Blair Smillie.
‘You fill it with water and two days later it is rock hard with the fermentation, but a special valve regulates the process.
Then three to four weeks later you press a button on a tap just like a wine box and out comes the lager or bitter or whatever.’
The Brewking bags retail at £11.49 — that's 20 pints at about 57p a pint — and there is no boiling, adding sugar, letting buckets stand or bottling the beer.
Internationally patented, Brewking is free of chemicals and sold widely in Europe, particularly in Germany where the nation's drinkers won't drink anything but the purest beer.
‘Our factory in Scotland has been going for 15 years’ says Smillie.
‘We bought the malt extract arm of the Distillers Group which has been making malt for 100 years.
‘They have made malt for Kelloggs, for breweries and for chemists.
‘The factory makes malt for us 24 hours a day using the pure Scottish water in the lake which is next door to the Drambuie factory.’
Oak Marketing realised the solution to selling Brewking was to take it direct to the people and explain its process face to face.
‘We have yet to find a man who doesn't love it,’ says Smillie.
‘We do a cider sack and while most of our beers are about 4% we also do a Porters which is 6% proof.’
There are 112 postal areas in the UK and Oak Marketing already has 22 of those areas covered.
They are looking for another 90 agents nationwide.
People who are interested pay £2,500 which they then exchange for stock and an exclusive area.
They are given full company training and taught how to market Brewking.
They are also fully provided with leaflets and order forms.
‘The idea was developed by four brewers who got together and devised the system for brewing beer in a container’ says Smillie.
‘This is basically an idiots guide for making your own beer.’
Me & My TV
Graham Bridgstock
PEOPLE send me the funniest letters.
‘Dear Judith,’ one viewer wrote.
‘Could you settle an argument?
When you were on TV the other night, were you watching us?’
I said: ‘Actually, no.
But it makes me wonder what you were doing if you were worried I was watching!’
It's always interesting to find out what people watch on TV.
The Princess of Wales once told me that her husband had been watching the Miss World contest, which quite surprised me.
I could have understood Prince Charles watching something about the environment, but not that.
Still, it was nice to know that he had.
We have four TV sets — three at our home in North London, and one at our holiday villa down on the Algarve in Portugal.
As a rule I'm away five months of the year making Wish You Were Here…?
(Thames, Mondays at 7pm) and I really miss Coronation Street.
But there are a lot of Street addicts around who are happy to bring me up to date with the story when I get back.
In fact I was born in Manchester and Violet Carson (alias Ena Sharples) was the first person I introduced on TV when I was 20.
She was playing the piano on Children's Hour when the BBC studios opened there in 1956.
They wanted their own announcer, a local girl, not one from London, and as I'd been presenting it on radio since I was 13, they asked me to try my hand on television.
This is my 19th series of Wish You Were Here…? and I've seen television all over the world, yet I still think ours is the best.
Take the news, which I miss terribly when I'm away.
ITN's Trevor McDonald is excellent.
Then there's Casualty, The House Of Eliott, The Bill, not to mention Civvies, which was fantastic.
I only hope Lynda La Plante is doing a sequel.
My husband, former sports commentator Neil Durden-Smith, usually has the radio on in the mornings at home, so if I'm ever staying at a hotel in Britain, I enjoy breakfast TV.
Broadcasting has always played a big part in our lives, and still does.
My sister Sandra is head of BBC radio publicity.
Our son Mark, 24, is a researcher at Pebble Mill in Birmingham, and I met Neil through the Beeb.
That was 27 years ago.
I was doing a radio series called Holiday Hour, he was producing Pick Of The Week.
Luckily we have much the same tastes in television.
For example, A Question Of Sport.
I hate to miss the battle between Bill Beaumont and Ian Botham, and I always want Bill to win.
They're so competitive.
OK, they might smile at the end of the game and say: ‘Oh, well done!’
But you know they're really spitting.
We both love George Baker as Wexford, and John Thaw as Morse.
He's so sexy.
Oh, he's gorgeous.
I feel sorry for Morse.
I'd like him to fall in love and get married.
Seeing him sitting there alone with his music and his drink I sometimes think: Oh dear, what a waste!
Me & My Food
Yvonne Swann
ALTHOUGH I'm not a vegetarian, I love all the food they eat.
My favourite dish is a pile of vegetables on brown rice with soya sauce and a sprinkling of parmesan cheese.
I don't eat a huge amount because at 5ft 2in every extra pound really shows — so I have one main meal a day.
My breakfast is muesli with nuts and raisins, or two Weetabix three-quarters covered with skimmed milk, microwaved and stirred into a mush then covered with sugar.
Life becomes crazy when I'm recording Birds Of A Feather so I tend to organise working lunches and sit down in a restaurant to get my fuel.
I like grilled sole.
And I'm mad about jacket potatoes with lots of butter, but no cheese.
I've given it up because I used to be a cheesaholic.
Fruit is another favourite, especially kiwis.
If I don't find someone to share my business lunch, I might have some cottage cheese, Ryvita or an apple.
All I can say in these hectic times is thank goodness for Marks & Spencer's prepared meals.
My cooking for friends and family is really cheap, cheerful and quick with things like wholemeal spaghetti.
I also make wonderful creamy scrambled eggs and gooey-centred omelettes.
I can't think of a better meal than an omelette with salad and French bread.
I can't find fulfilment in peeling carrots, and I don't thrill to the sound of the supermarket trolley — except in New York where I'm bewitched by the all-night delis.
They are like nowhere else on earth and inspire me to try new things.
That's great because at home, when I go to Sainsbury, I find my hands reach out for the same products every week.
Me & my TV
Graham Bridgstock
MOTHER had a wonderful phrase if she felt something on That Was The Week That Was was too outspoken or perhaps a little too daring.
‘People in Beccles,’ she would say, ‘weren't too sure about that sketch.’
‘People in Beccles’ were really her codewords for ‘we’or ‘I’.
Sometimes she would use them on a Sunday morning and I would say: ‘Well, you can't have talked to that many people in Beccles since last night.’
She was also mightily relieved when I gave up wearing sweaters on TV-am and reverted to jacket and tie.
To her, it was somehow disrespectful to talk to Cabinet ministers in a sweater.
But my great joy is that my parents both lived long enough to see me established on television.
Father was a Methodist minister and we didn't have a TV set at home until I was 18.
I guess they couldn't afford one on his church salary.
Instead, I would go across the road to Mr and Mrs Hall's on a Saturday night and watch Benny Hill one week and Dave King the next.
It was there I first saw the Face To Face programmes, too, little realising John Freeman would one day become my greatest influence as an interviewer.
As a Methodist minister, Father was a performer of a very special sort, and in a way I guess I just swapped congregations for audiences.
He was also a gifted ad-libber in his sermons, and good ad-libs are one of the vital ingredients in Through The Keyhole (ITV, Friday, 7pm).
This is our sixth series and I'm just as intrigued by other people's homes as any viewer.
To do my kind of job on TV you have to be born with an insatiable curiosity about what really makes people tick.
Father supported the Lord's Day Observance Society and there were no newspapers in the house on Sunday.
If I wanted to check the football results I had to go across the road to read Mrs Stewart's Sunday Pictorial.
Naturally, father knew, but turned a blind eye.
However, there wasn't a TV ban on the Sabbath.
Mind you, with all the services we had to go to, there wasn't much time for it either.
These days, we have ten sets altogether — four at our house in London, four at our place in Hampshire, and two at my apartment in New York.
The Krypton Factor is a particular favourite with the children — Miles, eight, Wilfred, seven, and George, five.
Miles and Wilfred are both pretty expert at setting the video timers, which is just as well because I'm no technical genius.
Originally, my wife Carina was concerned about the visual effect of satellite TV.
But, when she was down in the country, I had a BSkyB dish installed in London and it took her 24 hours to find it.
And then she suggested we get one in the country as well.
Of course, I'm biased because my American series, Talking With David Frost, is shown on BSkyB.
Carina's not interested in sport, but she loves the news and she watches Casualty every week.
If that's on at the same time as soccer, we'll have two sets going.
The news is also terrific for giving the boys a window on the world.
They're much better informed than I was at their age.
When they were younger, one of them said: ‘Daddy, I saw you on television this morning.
Did you see me?’
Now they will surprise me with a question about a House of Commons debate or what's going on in America.
Once we had a little girl staying when Frost On Sunday was on and she asked Miles: ‘Are there two Davids?’
He said: ‘No.
Daddy just comes down before we get up.
He has a hammer, bangs a hole in the back of the set, and climbs in.’
Her poor mother was terrified she might start experimenting with a hammer herself when she got home.
We try to ration their viewing.
They go to bed at 7.30pm or 8pm.
But if Liverpool are playing in a big match, we let them stay up until the end.
My favourite programmes?
Well, Melvyn Bragg does a superb job with the South Bank Show.
And I've always thought Terry Wogan's wit was much under-rated.
I also see Spitting Image, yes, though I've always felt their puppet of me was rather like Richard Nixon.
I did only one series of interviews with him and I don't think it rubbed off on me to that extent.
And I miss The Two Ronnies.
That's bias again, because my company, Paradine, produced their early series.
Satirist became a vogue word when TWTWTW was on.
Instead, I had a number of letters from parents saying: ‘My son wants to be a satirist when he grows up.
What should he do?’
My reply was always the same: ‘Just read the papers and it will come naturally.’
However, the notion that it was a profession in its own right and there was a three-year course you could take rather amused me.
You have to be prepared for anything on TV.
Take the time I was interviewing the world's greatest talking bird on The David Frost Show in New York.
His trainer, a very pushy guy, kept saying: ‘One hundred phrases at his command, David!
Ask him any questions you like and he'll answer.’
So I said: ‘If you will just be quiet for a moment, I'll have a go.’
And for five minutes I quizzed this wretched bird without getting a single chirp out of it.
Finally, I had to say, ‘Of course, this is the world's greatest feathered mime artiste.
‘This is the Marcel Marceau of talking birds…’
Dolly's $1m Love affair
Jackie Annesley
AS Whitney Houston celebrates her third week at the top of the charts on both sides of the Atlantic, another singer is rubbing her hands with glee.
For although Whitney's voice features on the single I Will Always Love You, it is country star Dolly Parton who is reaping the big rewards.
The smash hit from the soundtrack of The Bodyguard was written by Dolly, who had Number One hits with it in the States in 1974 and 1982.
This time round, it will earn her more than half a million pounds.
So far, the single has made almost £3 million in sales around the world, says Arista Records boss Clive Davis.
And people keep on buying it.
‘It's going to stay number one for a very long time,’ says Michael Ellis of the influential American music magazine Billboard.
‘It's far ahead of all the other records in terms of sales and airplay.’
Despite their different interpretations of the song — the new version is a smoochy ballad, while the old one was pure country — Dolly was so impressed with Whitney's version that she plans to use it in her stage show.
‘The song's about change and separation and love and I guess that's why it's still a favourite after nearly 20 years,’ says Dolly.