

Morley memories
Tony Roche
MORLEY will dig deep into both memory and experience when they travel to Courage League First Division outfit West Hartlepool in the Pilkington Cup fourth round on January 23.
The memory for the Second Division club will be of their historic 10-9 triumph over West Hartlepool last year, a victory secured with a last- minute try that ensured their promotion from the Courage League Division Three alongside their immediate rivals.
The experience against those rivals will be provided by former England captain and club captain John Orwin who said: ‘We know each other very well and frankly we would have preferred to come out of the hat first.
‘But I know from experience that in cup ties current status counts for little its a question of what you do on the day.
The last time the clubs met in this competition West Hartlepool won 22-6 but that was six years ago.
Perhaps we can put that right in January.’
The south west's survivors after Bath, Gloucester and Bristol's elimination are Redruth and Exeter, who were paired together.
Division three Redruth have never been in the last 16 and the Cornish crowd will have an early chance to make a big-match noise before their customary bid for a county final place.
Draw: West Hartlepool v Morley; Nottingham v Leicester; Waterloo v Orrell; Harlequins v Wakefield; Redruth v Exeter; Northampton v Newcastle Gosforth; Rugby v Moseley; Wasps v Saracens.
Matches to be play Jan 23.
Elliott to sue
CHELSEA defender Paul Elliott is to sue Dean Saunders and Liverpool over the tackle that left him with a severe knee injury.
Elliott has instructed a London solicitor to seek substantial compensation in a writ issued against Saunders, now playing for Aston Villa, and his former club.
The Chelsea player damaged cruciate ligaments in the game and faces more surgery before he can return to action.
Boss James
LEIGHTON JAMES, the former Bradford coach and Welsh international, yesterday took his first steps on the managerial ladder when he was named as the new boss of Beazer Homes Premier Division strugglers Weymouth.
Souness alert
Des Kelly
LIVERPOOL prepared themselves for a backlash from Crystal Palace tonight after their weekend walkover.
Palace were thrashed 5-0 in the League at Anfield, but Graeme Souness has warned against complacency in their fourth round Coca-Cola Cup clash.
‘They won't want to come here and get whacked again, so we have to be ready,’ said Souness.
Roker boss issues plea
John Wardle
MALCOLM CROSBY yesterday called for a halt to the head-hunting season at Sunderland.
Crosby reacted after Steve Coppell had become the latest name to be linked with the Roker Park job.
Crosby said: ‘I just wish people would let us get on with it.
I find it strange that a new name is mentioned despite the fact that we've just won two away games.
But it doesn't worry me.
I don't mind talk about others getting the job when I'm the man who has got it.
‘It has become a way of life for me here — but it must be unsettling to the players.
‘They have to be wondering what they've got to do to put a lid on the rumours.’
Crosby, battling on with only a one-year-contract and persistent speculation about his future, reckons the only way to silence the gossips is by climbing into the promotion frame.
‘It would be stupid to rule out promotion because there is a long way to go and we are now looking a decent team,’ he said.
‘All we have to do is get results and prove people wrong.
We have been written off all season, but we must keep believing.’
Crosby got a boost yesterday when influential midfielder Gary Owers was given an X-ray all-clear on an ankle injury.
And Coppell himself gave the Roker manager further cause for relief when he stamped out speculation that he may quit Palace.
The 37-year-old former England winger vowed he would see out the remaining 18 months of his contract, saying: Coppell, 37, dismissed reports that he is wanted by Sunderland as he prepared to take his side back to Anfield where they crashed 5-0 on Saturday.
The former England winger said: ‘As someone who has spouted on over the years about contracts, I am not about to walk out on my one with Crystal Palace.
‘There is a lot of work to do at Selhurst Park and I would like to be around to do it.
At this moment I'm committed to seeing out my contract.’
Haunting
Palace have won just once in the Premier League all season and could not be in worse shape to face Liverpool tonight in the Coca-Cola Cup as they attempt to exorcise the haunting memory of their 9-0 Anfield thrashing in 1989.
But chairman Ron Noades reacted angrily to reports that his allegedly deteriorating relationship with his manager had tempted Coppell to look elsewhere.
Noades said: ‘It's all absolute rubbish.
I don't even know if there is any interest from Sunderland.’
Noades also denied reports that he is chasing Sheffield United manager Dave Bassett, Noades' manager when he was chairman at Wimbledon.
But he did indicate that his eight-year relationship with Coppell had become strained by Palace's nose-diving fortunes.
Noades said: ‘There's enough pressure on us as it is, being second-bottom of the Premier League, without people trying to split up a long-standing partnership.
‘Our partnership is personal to us, whether it's good or bad.
Partnerships go through phases.’
Play it again, Joe
OLDHAM manager Joe Royle is banking on a repeat performance to see off Cambridge in the Coca-Cola Cup at the Abbey Stadium tonight.
The Latics couldn't have had a better boost than Saturday's four-goal demolition of Middlesbrough and Royle said: ‘That was our best show this season.
If we can do it again we should be OK.’
But Royle warned: ‘We have had Cambridge watched a couple of times and they are an honest, hard-working side.
‘Things might not be going too well in the League for them — but strange things have happened in Cup matches.’
Ambrose treble rocks Aussies
Mike Allan
OPENER David Boon hit a five-hour century yesterday as Australia struggled on the fourth day of the first Test against the West Indies in Brisbane.
At stumps, Australia were 266-6, a lead of 188 after their first-innings 293 and the West Indies' 371.
But the Aussies were rocked by West Indies paceman Curtly Ambrose, who took 3-3 off 11 balls in the final overs of the day.
He had Mark Waugh caught on 60 and then trapped Damien Martyn (15) and Greg Matthews (0) leg before to finish the day with 4-46 from 23 overs.
Boon took advantage of a second life when on six in the opening minutes as Carl Hooper spilled an easy chance off Ambrose.
He went on to hit 13 fours in his 5hr 45min innings of 111, being caught off Ian Bishop by Keith Arthurton at mid-off.
Before that, Mark Taylor struck 34 until snicking paceman Courtney Walsh to keeper David Williams.
Then Boon and Steve Waugh put on 50, when the latter edged Ambrose to Williams to make it 114-2.
Waugh's twin brother, Mark, then shared a stand of 110 in 111 minutes with Boon.
Meanwhile, the second Test between South Africa and India ended in a tame draw in Johannesburg.
Set 318 to win, India finished on 141-4.
South African fast bowler Allan Donald dismissed Ajay Jadeja for 43 and Sachin Tendulkar for one in 10 balls just before tea.
But Sanjay Manjrekar (32no) and Praveen Amre (35no) saw India to safety.
South African all-rounder David Callaghan, 27, who missed most of last season fighting cancer, has been included in the squad for the first four of the seven one-day internationals against India.
Gower booked for tour of India
DAVID GOWER will tour India after all — as part of Sky Sports' commentary team.
The satellite television company yesterday announced it has secured the exclusive rights to live coverage of England's three Tests and six one-day internationals this winter.
The deal marks the first time a Test match will be shown live, in full, from the sub-continent.
Gower, controversially omitted from the England tour party, will join commentators Geoff Boycott, Sunil Gavaskar, Henry Blofeld and Sky frontman Charles Colvile.
Sky, partly owned by News International, which publishes TODAY, plan more than 150 hours of live coverage.
Meanwhile, MCC rebels opposed to Gower's exclusion from the tour tonight meet club officials at Lord's.
Rebel leader Dennis Oliver has presented a petition to MCC calling on the club's members to discuss a motion of no confidence in England's selectors.
Thin on the Ground
Jonathan Ramsden
GOLD CUP hero Cool Ground heads a small but select field for Saturday's Rehearsal Chase at Chepstow.
Toby Balding's star faces last year's top novice Miinnehoma, Run For Free and Bonanza Boy — all trained by Martin Pipe — in the £25,000 race, won 12 months ago by Carvill's Hill.
Clerk of the course Rodger Farrant described the turnout for the race as a ‘disaster’ and hit out at racehorse owners.
‘Owners complain about low prize money but there is no point in our executive putting up £25,000 with prize money down to fourth for a non-sponsored race if they won't support it.
We get bigger fields for sellers and claimers.’
Since its inception in 1981 the largest field for the Rehearsal has been six but its winners have included Bregawn in 1982 and Burrough Hill Lad in 1985.
Toby Balding has confirmed Cool Ground as a definite starter.
He also holds an engagement at Sandown on Friday but will only travel to Esher in the event of Chepstow — where it continues to rain heavily — being abandoned.
At Sandown, Martin Pipe's Valfinet has been installed evens favourite for the William Hill Handicap Hurdle, while Uncle Ernie, a last fence faller at Huntingdon a week ago, will bid for compensation in the Mitsubishi Shogun Tingle Creek Trophy.
This afternoon's meeting at Leicester was abandoned yesterday due to waterlogging.
Clerk of the course Nick Lees said: ‘It has been raining heavily all day and we had no option but to abandon the meeting.’
Scrap new laws, raps Carling
Tony Roche
WILL CARLING has thrown his immense influence as England captain behind the growing dissatisfaction with rugby's controversial new ruck and maul law.
Carling, one of the highest profile players in the world, advised last night: ‘Scrap this and let's get round the table.’
Carling believes: ‘It is wrong for people who no longer play to enforce changes on those who do.
‘I believe we should approach such crucial matters collectively rather than wake up one morning and discover your game has changed.
‘We should get six top international players and a number of international referees and sit down with the law-makers so that all points of view are aired.’
The law changes, in general, are proving successful and popular.
But one of two new rulings deemed experimental for one season, is dividing the rugby world.
Faster
Simply, if a team take the ball into contact and the referee decides it has become unplayable or the situation has become stationary, the defending side get the scrum put-in.
Advocates — who include England manager Geoff Cooke, Australia manager John Breen and French coach Pierre Berbizier — insist this particular law encourages quick ball presentation, players to stay on their feet and faster, more open rugby.
Opponents insist the law is having the opposite effect, encouraging new ways of killing the ball in contact situations and increasing the amount of kicking from hands.
They include Wallaby coach Bob Dwyer, who said: ‘It has turned the game into basketball.
‘There was nothing wrong with the law as it stood, but plenty wrong with those who abused it.
‘You don't need to change the face of rugby, simply the attitude of certain participants.
Under any laws your attitude is what matters, how you want to play the game.
‘We won the World Cup under the old laws and have done OK during the change.
But I don't like it.’
Carling, England's most successful captain, agrees.
‘I do not like the law change because it puts greater pressure on referees, who now have more power than ever.
‘So much in a game depends on how each individual interprets this law.
‘The idea was to open the game up, but in fact it has increased the amount of kicking from the hand and that is counter-productive.
‘Nobody wants to play chess on a rugby pitch, but this change has also changed the face of the game.
‘You can no longer sustain pressure, no longer achieve a desired field position through such pressure.
‘Instead we see a defending, retreating side rewarded with possession if they can stop the attacking side with the ball and prevent that ball from emerging.
‘There exists a very fine line between a situation where the ball cannot emerge and one where every effort is being made to present ball, but the opposition do everything possible to prevent that presentation.’
For once, Carling and his traditional sniping partner David Campese are in agreement.
Australia's world record try-scorer backed up Carling when he said: ‘If all referees agreed on what is and is not within the laws, then we would not need to keep tinkering with them.
‘We need to get player representation involved when such changes are in the air because, frankly, I saw nothing wrong with the old laws — just the way some countries played them.’
The problem law comes up for review in April, a piece of news that increased Carling's alarm.
‘Oh terrific!
So we spend a season trying to adjust — a tough job in particular for the senior players who have spent up to 20 years operating a certain way — and then find it may all change again weeks before the British Lions fly down to New Zealand.
‘I am not opposed to change and most have been successful.
But I do believe it is time to include the people who play rugby in decisions on how they should play rugby.’
The great divide
Ray French
HIGHFIELD chairman Geoff Fletcher last night called for the Rugby League's board of directors to resign after proposals to return to two divisions next season.
In a package to be put before the clubs, the League's governing body are proposing to increase the First Division from 14 to 16 teams.
Only one team will be relegated at the end of this season, with three sides being promoted.
This will create a 19-team Second Division, which will be reduced to 16 the following season when the three clubs finishing bottom will be relegated to the Alliance League.
But Fletcher said: ‘It is pathetic.
If this is the only decision they can come up with, they should resign en bloc.
‘Some of them seem content to sit in the Royal Box at Wembley and shake hands.
They should get out into the real world.
We need more clubs, not less.’
The three teams relegated to the Alliance League will be guaranteed cash hand-outs from central funds for at least the next three years.
They will also be given automatic entry to the Silk Cut Challenge Cup and the Regal Trophy competitions.
It is only two years since the League turned to a three-division format.
Audley boost
Tony Roche
AUDLEY LUMSDEN lines up on Oxford University's right wing against Cambridge next Tuesday haunted by the chilling words he heard on a March Saturday in 1989.
‘You could be dead and you will certainly never play rugby again,’ was one doctor's diagnosis after Lumsden had broken his neck playing for Bath.
After fighting back from that injury the unlucky England B player broke his ankle in the Dubai Sevens two weeks before last year's Varsity match.
He said: ‘I lost three years of international chances but now I want to help Oxford win.’
Ton-up Rice grabs record
David Tossell
AMERICAN sports fans tend not to believe the evidence of their own eyes until they can be shown a corroborating statistic.
Those who have seen the San Francisco 49ers' Jerry Rice perform over the past eight years have been tempted to call him the most dangerous wide receiver in NFL history.
Now they can quote the numbers to prove it.
Rice, 6ft 2in of speed and elegance, on Sunday hauled in the touchdown catch he needed to equal the all-time record of 100, held by former Seattle Seahawk Steve Largent.
But while Largent took 200 games to reach three figures, Rice managed it in only his 120th match, a 20-14 win against the Philadelphia Eagles.
‘It was really special,’ said Rice of his 22-yard catch from Steve Young.
‘Steve gave me the opportunity to make a big play early and I did it.’
George Seifert, the 49ers coach, his team safely in the play-offs at 10-2, insisted: ‘Jerry's the best.
The moment he makes a great catch it surprises you, but then you think: Gee, that's what he does.’
Largent's records for most catches and most receiving yards have already been eclipsed this year by Washington's Art Monk and Buffalo's James Lofton.
But 30-year-old Rice has time in hand to erase both marks — then there really will be no doubt about who is the greatest.
Largent says: ‘If Jerry Rice is not the best, he's one of them.’
Rice is a perfectionist when it comes to his art, which he practised as a child in Mississippi by catching bricks thrown at him by his brothers, sometimes four at a time.
Natural
‘People think I am a natural, but everything I've achieved I've worked at,’ says the man who was the league's MVP in 1987 and the Super Bowl MVP the following season.
Joe Montana, who has helped on 55 of Rice's touchdowns, explains: ‘When you are in trouble Jerry comes running.
You know he's around and you know he'll find a way to get open.’
Doctors fear New York Jets defensive lineman Dennis Byrd will never walk again after breaking his neck in a collision with a team-mate during a 23-7 loss to the Kansas City Chiefs.
Jets coach Bruce Coslet said: ‘Dennis's injury makes you reflect on what's important and what's not.’
RESULTS: Atlanta 34, New England 0; Pittsburgh 21, Cincinnati 9; Cleveland 27, Chicago 14; Green Bay 19, Tampa Bay 14; New Orleans 24, Miami 13; Kansas City 23, NY Jets 7; Washington 41, Phoenix 3; Indianapolis 16, Buffalo 13 (OT); Minnesota 31, LA Rams 17; San Francisco 20, Philadelphia 14; San Diego 27, LA Raiders 3.
Miller £1m Barnet bid
FORMER Tottenham defender Paul Miller yesterday revealed he is helping the consortium bidding to buy-out Barnet chairman Stan Flashman for £1 million.
Miller, now a financial consultant, confirmed the deal would involve buying the whole club.
Headley signs
KENT yesterday signed 22-year-old Middlesex pace bowler Dean Headley on a two-year contract.
Headley took more than 50 wickets in two seasons at Middlesex after making his first-class debut for the county in 1991.
UEFA boost
UEFA yesterday confirmed the 1996 European Championship finals in England will involve a record 16 nations, making it a three-week competition.
‘We are more than happy with the decision,’ said FA spokesman David Bloomfield.
Lancs profit
LANCASHIRE CCC made a profit of almost £69,000, despite a disastrous 1992 season.
Match receipts slumped by £89,000 compared to 1991, but profits were boosted by staging two Simply Red rock concerts.
Chelsea deal
DEFENDER David Lee yesterday committed himself to Chelsea until 1996.
The 23-year-old has been on a weekly contract since last season, but emerged as a leading figure following the injury to Paul Elliott.
Aussie blow
AUSTRALIA'S world No 4 Chris Robertson, who played in the British Open final at Wembley in April, has been forced to quit squash at the age of 27 with an arthritic hip.
Scu shows sense
NOWHERE, with the possible exception of the Palace of Westminster, is the whisper factory more prolific and damaging to careers than in racing.
Whispers in racing spread faster than a stable fire.
And one can only put the sudden drying-up of mounts for champion jockey Peter Scudamore down to whispers about him reaching an age when he's beginning to wonder what's on the other side of the racing fence.
Scudamore himself helped fuel the rumours when he said: ‘Obviously I am a little more selective about mounts — I don't want to ride everything or anything.
I want to ride as much as I can, but I want to try to be sensible at the same time.
‘I am in the latter part of my career, not the beginning.’
By definition, racing is not a sport in which you can quit when you're ahead of the game.
But anytime the brilliant 34-year-old Scudamore, eight-times champion jockey and the most successful jump rider in history, decides to leave the sport, he can do so with honour.
Lennox is cashing in principles
Roy Collins
LENNOX LEWIS and Frank Maloney are apparently the last two people this side of Jupiter to realise that when it comes to world heavyweight boxing titles, possession is 10 tenths of the law.
If their naivety is to be believed, they're in for more painful disillusionment when someone can bear to break the news to them that the tooth fairy doesn't exist and that the singing Madonna is no virgin.
Lewis and Maloney so played up their own virginal roles during negotiations for a fight with world heavyweight champion Riddick Bowe, that you wonder whether, in the words of Muhammad Ali, these boys ain't as dumb as they look.
Wonder hardens towards conviction when you realise what Lewis and his manager achieved, simply by terminating those negotiations on ‘a point of principle.’
As a result, Lewis was able to announce triumphant plans to get rich by fighting fat old George Foreman, whom Maloney ridiculed as an opponent for Bowe, to push for the split of the titles and still claim the high moral ground, which in heavyweight boxing, is about as firm as quicksand.
Credible
But let's have a look, as they say in a certain quiz show, at what he turned down.
He turned down £1.5 million to fight someone even less credible than Foreman in April, a guaranteed £5.5m to take on Bowe for the undisputed crown next summer, an opportunity to win the titles in the ring and the star prize, a chance to fulfil his avowed lifetime ambition.
Lewis was perfectly correct, even politically correct, to insist that Bowe had reneged on a pledge to fight him first.
But has there ever been a happier compromise than the one offered in New York?
Even the WBC, the governing body that insist they'll now give their title to Lewis, would have been been appeased by such a compromise.
They've accommodated far more bizarre ones in the past.
Lewis, though, pushing apparent naivety to incredulous proportions, said: ‘I couldn't let the WBC down by allowing Bowe to duck out of the commitment he made.
Principles, in my opinion, are more important than cash.’
He perhaps meant to say ‘principals’ because the decisions that were taken, or rather not taken, in New York had everything to do with cash.
Having played on his position as the injured party, Lewis has achieved a result that, even if he's truly aggrieved, suits both he and Bowe.
A chance to make a lot of fast, easy cash before finally facing each other as multi-millionaire champions.
Lewis is as pleasant a man as there is in heavyweight boxing and he has every right to make as much money as he can, as quickly as he can.
His right to insist on receiving Bowe's WBC title as promised can't be denied, either.
But having rejected a compromise which, for boxing, was about as good as it gets, he can't continue claiming innocence if it leads to the heavyweight division again disintegrating into chaos.
Point of order
Roy Collins
JIM WATT'S reputation as a TV commentator has been rightly earned as much for his honest appraisals of boxers as well as his technical expertise.
On Saturday, though, Watt's comments on Chris Eubank's latest bore left a disturbing impression of a man who'd received instructions by his ITV masters not to forget that they had a product to sell.
Even when the dissatisfied chants of fans were clearly audible from this potato's couch, Watt insisted that they'd got their money's worth from Eubank's great display.
A TV screen is a dangerous medium through which to judge any sport, particularly boxing.
But the scorecards overwhelmingly supported my assessment that it was one-sided tedium.
One only hopes that Watt was influenced by the excited voices around him at ringside rather than the babble in his headset.
You're a marked man, Gazza
Rob Shepherd
GARY LINEKER last night warned Paul Gascoigne that he will now become a prime target for the hatchet men of Italy.
By scoring Lazio's crucial, late equaliser in their 1-1 derby draw against Roma, Gascoigne has truly arrived in Italian football.
But as a consequence, he will now face the sort of brutal attention reserved for the most lauded players in Serie A — the sort of stern treatment Lineker himself encountered and overcame in his successful time in Spain with Barcelona.
Lineker, who was in Rome's Olympic stadium to witness the Gascoigne heroics, said: ‘Gazza will now become a marked man in every game he plays.
He told me that the match on Sunday was the first time he had been properly man marked since playing in Italy.
‘But he must expect that every week now.
‘Opponents will think: ‘If we can stop Gazza, we can stop the entire team’.
‘He has got a big name already but it's going to get even bigger in Italy.
‘It's a difficult thing to cope with but if you can, you become an improved player, particularly when you go back and play for your country.’
Although Gascoigne found it difficult to escape the attentions of Walter Bonacina until he produced his headed goal four minutes from the end, he did not lose his temper.
Lineker said: ‘I was particularly impressed with Gazza's self-control.
The atmosphere of big games in Italy or Spain is far more intense than in England.
‘A lot of players, including Gazza, found the game passed them by at times.
But, despite getting kicked and punched, he handled himself very well.’
Lineker added: ‘It was great that he got that goal so late in the game, to produce a vital result for his side.
Timing
‘His timing was impeccable, and he ended up the hero but you set your own standards and once they are high you have got to keep up with them.
The danger is if you slip a little, then people jump at you.
‘It will be tough for him but from what I've seen, he has it in him to cope.’
Gascoigne, though, does have a problem — his Lazio team are not a good side.
Unless they show a dramatic change in form, they could face a struggle for the rest of the season.
Giorgio Chinaglia, the Welsh-born centre-forward who became a Lazio hero in the 1970s, and subsequently once owned the club, pointed out: ‘I am very worried for the side.
They have spent £35 million on players but they are not a good team.
‘Gazza has won the fans' hearts and even if he hadn't scored that late goal — and although they would have turned against the side — I don't think would have turned against him.
‘They recognise he puts his all into every game and they like that.
‘But the same cannot be said for the rest.
Thomas Doll, who was the number one player last season, is very disappointing at the moment.
‘Maybe he's had his nose put out of joint by Gazza and that could be a reason.
Certainly, I would not like to be in Dino Zoff's shoes at the moment.’
Paul is panned
PAUL GASCOIGNE saved the day for Lazio with a late equaliser against rivals Roma on Sunday.
But Italy's sports journalists gave a unanimous thumbs down to the show put on by the British player they have dubbed ‘Gazza di Gateshead’.
Gascoigne's header just four minutes from time — his first league goal since he joined Lazio this season — was a rare moment of inspiration in an otherwise dull display, they said.
La Gazzetta dello Sport, Italy's leading sports paper, gave Gascoigne a mere 5½ out of 10 for his efforts under a headline loosely translated as: ‘Gazza-show: Same old tears and same old jokes.’
In a column dedicated to Gascoigne, Rome's major sports newspaper the Corriere dello Sport, declared that the British footballer was without doubt ‘a player of great class and considerable personality.’
But until the moment he scored the equalising goal, the article claimed, ‘if someone had held a referendum to find the worst player on the field, Gascoigne would have deserved a large chunk of the votes — or maybe all of them.’
Kelly fuming
Ben Bacon
KINGSTONIAN boss Chris Kelly let rip with his famous lip last night in an astonishing attack on the Football Association.
Kelly is furious that Peterborough have been ordered to replay their FA Cup match with his non-League side on Friday at London Road behind closed doors.
A three-man committee ruled the 9-1 result of the first-round replay was ‘significantly influenced’ when Kinstonian keeper Adrian Blake was hit by a missile.
Kelly said: ‘I must be the only manager in the country who is cheesed off that his side are still in the FA Cup.
‘The FA have staggered me with their incompetence.
THEY have brought the game into disrepute.
‘The result should have stood and then the FA should have decided what action to take against Peterborough.
‘I've got part-time players and three or four are going to find it extremely difficult to get time off work.
There's a recession on.’
Johnson plea
CAMBRIDGE caretaker-manager Gary Johnson takes his team into tonight's home Coca-Cola Cup clash with Premier League Oldham, still unsure of his future at The Abbey Stadium.
Johnson, who has presided over eight matches since Cambridge dismissed controversial manager John Beck, said: ‘I know for a fact the players and the fans are behind me.
I just wish the club would make a decision.’
Top Gunners are warned
Ben Bacon
ARSENAL manager George Graham last night told his strikers they have only 90 minutes left to prove themselves — or else.
Graham issued his warning on the eve of tonight's Coca-Cola Cup replay with Derby at Highbury.
And he's prepared to make ‘harsh decisions ‘to ensure he gets the return he wants in time for Saturday's League match against Southampton at The Dell.
Ian Wright, Paul Merson and Anders Limpar are in his sights and he's not afriad to take tough action to get Arsenal back on the winning track after successive defeats by Leeds and Manchester United.
Graham said: ‘We've got to get back to what we were doing before when we had a 10-match unbeaten run.
‘It's all about consistency, but you only achieve that with hard work.
‘The last two performances have been very uncharacteristic of us.
We have players of world-class like Wright, Limpar and Merson but they know they have to keep putting in the work-rate.
‘I'm not particularly worried if players don't score, but you just can't stroll around.
I know we are capable of bouncing back.‘
He added: ‘Derby gave us plenty of problems when we drew there, but we stood up to them and worked for a result.
The 1-1 draw at the Baseball Ground was a tough encounter with six players going into the book.
The game also allowed the long-running feud between Limpar and Derby midfield player Mark Pembridge to continue.
Hospital
Early last season, Limpar was sent off for hitting Pembridge, then at Luton, and the pair clashed again at Kenilworth Road when Pembridge put him in hospital after a clash which went unpunished.
Pembridge said last night: ‘I don't know what the background is — all I know is he elbowed me for no reason at Highbury.
‘He was sent off for thumping me, then I broke his jaw.’
Like Graham, Derby manager Arthur Cox is promising a shake-up.
His side have stumbled recently at home but have won their last seven away games.
Coventry are ready to put skipper Stewart Robson up for sale at £750,000.
They need to keep their bankers happy by reducing a £3 million-plus debt in the next few months — and Robson, in who Leeds are already showing an interest, will become their most disposable asset.
Manager Bobby Gould will resist the temptation to sell either of his strikers, Kevin Gallacher and Peter Ndlovu, both rated in the £2m-plus bracket.
Coppell vows to stay
Adrian Holloway
STEVE COPPELL last night tried to stamp out speculation that he may quit Crystal Palace by vowing that he would see out the remaining 18 months of his contract.
Coppell, 37, dismissed reports that he is wanted by Sunderland as he prepared to take his side back to Liverpool tonight in the Coca-Cola Cup, after losing there 5-0 in the League on Saturday.
He said: ‘As someone who has spouted on over the years about contracts, I am not about to walk out on my one with Crystal Palace.’
Francis is sticking to his guns
Duncan McKenzie
TREVOR FRANCIS spent the whole of his playing career at the highest level and is now making it clear he's not going to drop those standards as a manager.
Last week, Francis sent out the strongest possible signal that he won't settle for second best at Sheffield Wednesday.
Hillsborough fans must have been surprised and delighted at the no-nonsense way their manager told Manchester United to get lost as they attempted to sign David Hirst.
Francis made it clear Wednesday weren't interested, even at £4 million or more, which is a new experience for Wednesday supporters accustomed to seeing their best players sold to more ambitious clubs.
But Wednesday are no longer a nursery club.
Francis is changing all that.
He's been the manager for 18 months, and in that time has bought their first £1m player, followed it with other seven-figure signings, and taken the club into Europe.
That, and his handling of the Hirst approach, proves he wants to take Wednesday right to the top.
With big crowds and a superb stadium, there's no reason why he shouldn't.
Critical
Right now, though, he faces the most critical time in his managerial career.
First he has to beat his former club, QPR, tomorrow night in the Coca-Cola Cup — a competition that can take Wednesday back into the UEFA Cup.
Secondly, he must make sure Hirst knuckles down and gets his feet back on the ground.
The striker will be having mixed thoughts now.
Even though he is staying at Wednesday, half his attention is sure to be elsewhere following all the recent transfer talk.
Francis has got to try to get Hirst back to business quickly, and the player himself should realise that this dream of glory can become reality under the guidance of Francis.
It's no mean feat to keep a player like Hirst at a time when big clubs try to sign every class player that emerges.
It's another indication that Francis means to continue the Hillsborough revolution started by Ron Atkinson — he changed the thinking in the boardroom, and now Wednesday are as ambitious as anyone in the Premier League.
Taking over from Big Ron, Francis has become an accomplished manager after his experience at QPR.
Even before he started at Rangers, Brian Clough had written him off as being ‘too nice’ for the job.
Then the problems emerged, with the players objecting to Sampdoria being brought to west London in the form of pasta diets and double training.
Francis wasn't wrong, but change is regarded with suspicion, nowhere more than in football.
He was right to try to improve the English game, but he tried to change too much too quickly.
A little bit here and a little bit there, and the players would have taken to it.
But when it was rammed down their throats it became a battle, and the manager lost.
Pedigree
Francis still likes the Lasagne and Tagliatelle approach, but he's doing it less forcefully now.
His first act was to sign Chris Woods for £1.2m, and since then he has added Chris Waddle for £1m, Mark Bright, Nigel Jemson and Paul Warhust, each for a little less, and Chris Bart-Williams at the age of 17 for nearly £400,000.
If you include Hirst, he has seven current internationals in the squad, and another two or three former internationals — this is a club of pedigree players.
Francis will desperately want to win tomorrow, and now most of the severe injuries are cleared up, he will be looking for better results.
I believe he'll get them, and — Hirst take note — it's a question of when, not if, Francis wins his first trophy.
Giant step
Graham Fisher
MANCHESTER UNITED manager Alex Ferguson staunchly backed his temperamental superstar Eric Cantona last night and claimed: ‘This man can become a giant at Old Trafford.’
Ferguson brushed aside what he called ‘innuendo and criticism’ and made it clear he regarded the acquisition of the French striker as a huge stepping stone towards winning the title.
Within minutes of Cantona signing for United last week, sources at Leeds revealed that he had twice asked for a move, and stormed out of Elland Road only days before his £1.2 million transfer.
But Ferguson said: ‘I'm not the slightest bit worried about peripheral things off the field.
Class
‘What matters is that I have signed a class international player who can score goals, a player who could become a giant at Old Trafford.
‘Eric will put bums on seats, and he'll get bums off their seats when he starts playing.
‘I'm not looking for problems or confrontations off the field.
Eric will realise what a great club he has joined.’
Yesterday, the maverick from Marseilles, on a three-and-a-half-year contract, told the French newspaper L'Equipe: ‘I need excitement and a new challenge every six or 12 months.’
But even that failed to disturb Ferguson's philosophy.
‘We'll see about that,’ he said.
‘If Eric helps us to win the Championship in his first six months, then great.’
Ferguson and his squad are in Portugal preparing for tonight's prestige friendly against Benfica in Lisbon's Stadium of Light — where an expected 70,000 crowd will see Cantona make his debut in a United shirt.
Nearer home, however, the crackle of claim and counter-claim was still criss-crossing the Channel last night.
In his French interview, Cantona said of his time at Leeds: ‘I had become boss of the team, and manager Howard Wilkinson told me so.
‘In a way, I was the leader with 11 goals and eight assists.
‘I treated everyone at Leeds with my performances.
If I hadn't, Manchester United would never have made an offer for me.
‘Leeds sold me because maybe they needed the money to strengthen their defence.’
Cantona had a getting-to-know-you session on the golf course with the rest of the United party at the weekend, then went into his first work-out with them at Estoril's ground yesterday.
Ferguson confirmed that he will play the full 90 minutes against Benfica, half with Mark Hughes, and half with Brian McClair, though not necessarily in that order.
The outcome will help to shape United's side for Sunday's Manchester derby at Old Trafford.
Ferguson added: ‘I have no preconception about which particular strikers will go best together, and haven't given it a lot of thought yet.
‘But given that Bryan Robson is fit, there is only one possible change in the side which has pulled off two excellent wins — and that's Eric Cantona.’
Robson is a doubt for tonight's game after taking a kick on the calf in Saturday's 1-0 victory at Arsenal.
However Fergie reassembles his attack, there will be no exit for the unlucky one.
Newcastle boss Kevin Keegan has made a renewed inquiry for Hughes, but Ferguson says: ‘What's the point in signing a striker to sell a striker?
Honour
‘We now have a competitive edge up front, and we are not selling any top players.’
Tonight's showpiece, in honour of the 51-year-old former Benfica ace, Eusebio, will be United's first visit to the Stadium of Light since their legendary 5-1 European Cup quarter-final win in 1966, when George Best scored twice and became El Beatle.
Eusebio played that night, and again when United beat Benfica at Wembley two years later to lift the European Cup and enshrine a friendship between the two clubs which still leaves its mark in Lisbon.
United have not won the title in 25 years since, and though there might be a spiritual and timely link between a player of Cantona's style and those noble Reds of old, it is Eusebio, the Black Panther, who takes centre stage tonight.
Ferguson said: ‘He was a wonderful player and a gentleman, typical of the mid-60s when there were so many great performers.
‘I'll never forget that day Portugal went 3-0 down to North Korea in the '66 World Cup, and he pulled them round single-handed with four goals.
‘It will be a smashing night for him.’
CANTONA'S RECORD
Nov 83: AUXERRE.
First game.
Nov 85-June 86: MARTIGUES (on loan).
July 86-June 88: AUXERRE.
Star performances for French U-21 team attracted home town-club.
July 88-Feb 89: MARSEILLE.
Sold by Marseille chairman Bernard Tapie after bust-up at a charity match when he threw his shirt at the referee.
Feb 89-June 89: BORDEAUX.
July 89-July 90: MONTPELLIER.
Bought to team up with U-21 partner Paille.
July 90-June 91: MARSEILLE.
Return of coach Raymond Goethalls instead of Franz Beckenbauer signalled his departure.
July 91-Dec 91: NIMES.
Banned for month after throwing ball at referee's head.
Disciplinary committee doubled ban, he called them a ‘bunch of idiots’ and announced his retirement.
Feb 92-Nov 92: LEEDS.
Joined Elland Road side after first training with Sheffield Wednesday.
Nov 92: MANCHESTER UNITED.
Hate mob turf out Bond
David Harrison
SHREWSBURY manager John Bond has been forced by a Burnley hate mob to stay away from his side's FA Cup tie at Turf Moor on Saturday.
Following discussions between Bond, the Shrewsbury board and Burnley police, Bond has agreed to stay at home rather than attend the match and provoke violent scenes on the terraces.
Bond is still despised by Burnley supporters who blame him for the club's demise after his season in charge eight years ago.
He has received a card with drawings of gangsters on it and threats of a ‘warm welcome’ if he turns up for the second-round tie.
Bond said: ‘I'd have been happy to attend the game but have been advised by others not to.
I am big enough to take the stick.
It is really too pathetic for words.
‘Now I will have to sit at home with my fingers crossed and hope we get the right result.’
Burnley police insisted they could have guaranteed Bond's safety.
Superintendent Clive Fothergill said: ‘We would have taken appropriate measures to ensure he could have come and gone like any other team manager.’
Bond took over at Turf Moor shortly after Burnley had been relegated to the old Third Division.
The club slipped into the Fourth the season after he left and were almost relegated from the Football League.
Pay day for fans
Graham Otway
ANGRY cricket fans could win a £350,000 pay-out after last summer's rain fiasco in the Edgbaston Test against Pakistan…if they act quickly.
Yesterday a Birmingham small claims court ordered Warwickshire, the ground authority, to repay the full admission price to five England supporters who felt cheated after only two balls were bowled on the second day of the first Test.
TCCB officials are to appeal, but the decision could could open the floodgates to other spectators among the 18,000 sell-out crowd who paid £358,000 to watch.
Cap call for Peter
By Ray French
SALFORD'S former England rugby union star, Peter Williams, has been drafted into the Welsh rugby league squad to face France on December 13 in Perpignan.
The ex-Orrell player, who won two Great Britain caps against France three seasons ago, qualifies for Wales because his father, Roy, played for Llanelli before signing for Wigan.
But Wales' hopes of victory are looking shaky as coach Clive Griffiths faces a horrific injury list.
He revealed: ‘We really can't take any more injuries.
We are cut right to the bone.’
Meanwhile, Hull KR are ready to listen to offers for Wales international David Bishop, who is threatening to retire after the match with France.
Blake body blow
GOALKEEPER Adrian Blake will be missing from Kingstonian's FA Cup rematch against Peterborough on Friday afternoon because of work commitments.
Blake was poleaxed after being struck by a missile thrown from the crowd in their 9-1 defeat by Posh last Wednesday — the incident which forced the FA to replay the match.
And Blake admitted: ‘Obviously I would love to play, but I run my own business and Friday is the busiest day of the week.
‘I run a menswear shop and already have clients who have made appointments.
‘I'm not allowed to say too much about the FA decision, but it does seem a silly time to play the game.
‘A lot of our lads are self-employed and might not be able to make it.’
Kingstonian secretary Billy McNully added: ‘The FA have loaded the odds against us.
‘We were happy to replay the tie during the evening, but this way we will be without at least three or four players.
The irony is that Blake is fit to play, his convalescence helped by a stream of get-well wishes — many from Peterborough fans.
Trev shows fighting spirit
David Alexander
TREVOR FRANCIS broke a three-year silence yesterday to talk about the scar left by his controversial sacking by Queens Park Rangers.
In his first experience of management Francis imposed continental discipline, diet and training at Loftus Road — and paid for it with his job when some of the players rebelled.
There was uproar well beyond the confines of the club, with questions even raised in the House of Commons about his management decisions.
And, on the eve of their cup tie with QPR, the Sheffield Wednesday player-manager spoke about his damaged pride for the first time.
The man who, up to then, had experienced 18 years as a player at the highest level revealed how the sack made him determined to prove he had not suddenly become second rate.
‘At the time I left I was regarded by everyone as a failure,’ he said.
‘The way I left was very, very frustrating and a lot of my friends concluded that it would finish me forever in management.
But I knew I had something to offer and that's why I wanted to come back and be a manager again.
Failure
‘I didn't know how good I could be and still don't know that.
But I wanted to try to put it right in the eyes of every football follower in the country, and rectify the idea that I was a 100 per cent failure like everyone thought I was.
‘Friends close to me probably saw what was written about me and the criticism I took from every angle.
They assumed that, after a career as a player that was a rewarding one despite a few hiccups, I wouldn't have the stomach to come back in.’
Francis insisted that taking Wednesday into Europe this season, after leading them to third place behind Leeds and Manchester United in April, was his career high point — despite scoring the winner in a European Cup final.
‘Taking them into Europe gave me more satisfaction than anything I've done in my career,’ he said.
As a player, you're only concerned about what you do as an individual, but as a manager you're concerned for the whole team,’ he said.
‘As a player-manager it is a double contribution.’
The 38-year-old now enjoys hero status as a manager among Hillsborough fans — more so than he ever did as a player elsewhere.
And he confessed that his success was partly due to learning a harsh lesson at QPR.
‘Getting the sack did not really affect my confidence.
I was very disappointed but never bitter in any way.
‘But I am a very determined type of person, a fighter.
I had to fight through my career against setbacks like major injuries.
I had shown determination to come back then when I had been written off.
‘What the sack did was make me very determined that next time round that I'd do a better job.
I don't want to detail the mistakes I made and quite clearly I have done things quite differently the second time around — otherwise, I'd probably have been out of a job again at Sheffield Wednesday.
‘If I went to manage a team on the continent I would still do exactly the same things I did at QPR.
I worked abroad as a player for five years and watched and learned from various managers.
‘What I did was try to bring my experience in Italy to English football and some of the players appreciated what I was doing and enjoyed working with me.
Unfortunately, some of them, but not all.
‘I came in for a lot of criticism but I know in my heart that the good things I did there were very conveniently swept under the carpet at the time.’
Francis took Andy Sinton and David Bardsley to QPR and gave Les Ferdinand his first-team debut, but he said: ‘I don't want to try to collect Brownie points for what QPR are doing now.
Gerry Francis has done a fantastic job.
‘But what I did there wasn't all bad.
I think I got one or two things right’.
Mojo pleads for chance
Des Kelly
MO JOHNSTON last night pleaded for the chance to prove he can solve Everton's goal-scoring crisis, writes Des Kelly.
The former Rangers striker has been recalled to the squad to face in-form Chelsea in the Coca-Cola Cup tonight and is set to appear for the first time in two months.
Goodison Park manager Howard Kendall desperately needs his £1.5 million signing to bring in some firepower with 10 blank sheets coming in the Mersey club's past 21 League and Cup games.
Johnston said: ‘It has not gone anywhere near as well as I expected at Everton.
It's the kind of situation I have never experienced before.
‘But I still believe I can do it here.
I have two years on my contract and I'm not about to go anywhere else.’
Johnston has only started four games this season — although he has hit the target twice.
‘Strikers need a run in the side,’ he said.
‘It's all about getting a chance.
If it comes I'll take it because I still feel I can score goals.’
Magpies hit back at Miller
John Wardle
NEWCASTLE No 2 Terry McDermott yesterday hit back in an angry war of words with Aberdeen boss Willie Miller.
Miller had told the Geordies to keep their hands off £2 million-rated Eoin Jess after claims that the striker was Kevin Keegan's top transfer target.
But McDermott fumed: ‘We haven't even had our eyes on Jess, never mind our hands.
‘It's shocking the way we are being used by some clubs to further their own ends.
We are sick of it.’
Contract
Keegan, meanwhile, is ready to offer a new contract to Czech keeper Pavel Srnicek, who came off the transfer list last month.
He has impressed as stand-in for the injured Tommy Wright.
Keegan said: ‘If I sold him, I would only have to spend at least the same amount on a replacement.’
Former Welsh international Leighton James yesterday rejected the manager's job at non-League Weymouth for ‘personal reasons.’
Former Sunderland boss Len Ashurst has temporarily taken over as consultant manager of the Beazer Homes League club.
Stop this soap opera
Mike Walters and Ben Bacon
HOWARD WILKINSON last night slammed Third Division Barnet for bringing football into disrepute as Barry Fry was sacked again — this time for real.
Leeds boss Wilkinson, chairman of the influential League Managers' Association, said Fry's dismissal was the latest episode of ‘soap opera ablutions’ to blight the Underhill club.
He also condemned controversial Barnet chairman Stan Flashman's war of words with Fry as ‘public mud-slinging which reflects no credit on sport.’
Wilkinson added: ‘It brings football into disrepute and washing dirty linen in public does nothing for the game.
‘When sport is trying to come to terms with economic reality, I can think of one area in the business which will say as a result of this that they cannot associate themselves with it — sponsorship.
‘From the outside, you could be forgiven for thinking this whole episode will become very messy.’
Fry was sacked for riling Flashman once too often, but he could be back by Christmas if a business consortium takeover bid is successful.
Former Tottenham defender Paul Miller, now a financial consultant, is heading the group attempting a £1 million buy-out and talks were ‘at an advanced stage’ last night.
Miller admitted: ‘Barry has done a magnificent job and in the interests of the team we would want someone of his calibre back in charge as soon as possible.’
Angry Fry vowed to take Barnet to an industrial tribunal for unfair dismissal — promising that the story of his stormy relationship with Flashman would ‘all come out in the wash.’
As a symbol of his undying affinity to Barnet, Fry promised to watch this Saturday's match at Halifax from the terraces — despite Flashman banning him from the club.
Other acts of defiance are planned against Flashman.
Rebel supporters from the Barnet Supporters' Association called for a boycott of all matches.
Club secretary Bryan Ayres confirmed that the Underhill switchboard had been jammed by fans ringing in to voice their displeasure at Fry's sacking.
The players called for the intervention of the players' union and the Football League, who last week fined Barnet £50,000 for financial irregularities at a hearing marred by Flashman's scuffles with photographers.
Flashman, who was advised to resign by Fry last week, said: ‘There will be no coming back from this.
Barry has gone too far this time.
‘Barry Fry is finished at Barnet FC as long as I'm chairman.
He has broken all the rules of managership.
‘How can a manager, who's a worker, tell the owner of the club to resign?
It was only a matter of time before Barry hanged himself — and unfortunately he did.
Sad
‘It's unfortunate and very sad, and nobody is sadder than me.
But when a manager starts saying in the Press that I and my wife should resign, it has gone too far.’
Flashman may go ahead and appoint Fry's successor without awaiting the conclusion of his talks with the consortium.
Among the leading candidates is former England defender Graham Roberts, player-manager at Diadora League neighbours Enfield.
Former Southend manager David Webb is another name being linked with the post.
Last night, Barnet assistant manager Eddie Stein turned down Flashman's offer of Fry's job on a full-time basis, although he will do it temporarily until the New Year, when the offer might be made again.
Stein said: ‘I may have no money and no authority but I have got my principles.
‘I think Stan expected me to grab it with both hands and when I declined, he just sat there and couldn't believe it.
‘There was no way I was going to jump into Barry's shoes.
I like to think that the players and fans know I wouldn't do soemthing that.
At least, my conscience is clear.
‘My answer would have been different if Barry had upped and left to another club, but not the way it happened.’
Eric's super show suits Fergie
Graham Fisher in Lisbon
ALEX FERGUSON saluted a blank but bold debut by his £1.2 million new boy Eric Cantona in Lisbon's Stadium of Light last night.
But the Manchester United manager refused to say what role the controversial Frenchman will play in Sunday's Manchester derby at Old Trafford.
Cantona was high class and the best of a drab United bunch in the prestige friendly, in honour of Eusebio, against the Eagles of Benfica, who won with a late goal from Rui Costa.
Ferguson said: ‘Eric showed just how capable he is.
He did a find job despite the slow pace of the game which did not suit his style.
Adapt
‘We definitely played differently from Leeds and it's only a question of him getting used to us and our ways.
‘That won't take him long.
Good players instinctively adapt to each other.
‘Eric has good feet and a keen eye for goal and he'll do well for us.’
As planned, Cantona played the full 90 minutes with Brian McClair and Mark Hughes as different partners in each half.
Neither pairing produced conclusive evidence, such was the low key nature of United's approach.
Ferguson refused to say which twosome he would go for.
‘Let me think first’ he quipped.
‘I'll leave any decisions until Sunday.
I don't see why I should help City with their planning.’
Booked
Cantona had one chance in the game when his shot hit a defender.
He was booked early in the second half for a clattering foul on Abel.
Ferguson said: ‘That was a bit surprising.
It was a very sporting occasion and I reckon the ref could have let that pass.’
Lee Sharpe was withdrawn from the squad with a calf strain, but is expected to be fit for Sunday's conflict.
Ferguson added: ‘Benfica deserved to win.
It was a pleasure to be here and take part in Eusebio's big night.’
Lewis in title lift
LENNOX LEWIS may still be given the chance of a dream world title fight after all.
A new offer for him to challenge the world heavyweight champion, American Ruddick Bowe, is reportedly being thrashed out.
Last night Bowe's manager, Rock Newman, revealed a new deal was in the pipeline.
In an interview on American television, Newman said: ‘The man Bowe wants to fight next is Lennox Lewis.
He turned down an offer last week but I'm going to make him a little better offer next week.’
Deluge strikes again
RAIN is threatening to wipe out more meetings later this week.
The wet weather has already caused the abandonment of several fixtures, including today's card at Ludlow.
This afternoon's meeting at Huntingdon hangs in the balance after passing an inspection yesterday.
Clerk of the Course Hugo Bevan said: ‘We could just about have raced today.
No further inspection is planned unless there is a deterioration in the weather.’
Friday's card at Hereford is already in doubt.
Desert Orchid is beginning to ‘look like a normal horse again’, a week after after a life-threatening operation.
‘He's very bright and happy and we're delighted with him,’ said vet Andy Bathe.
Desert Orchid had 10 feet of intestine removed after suffering a twisted gut and severe colic.
Gait's Christmas date
Jonathan Ramsden
CHAMPION Hurdler Royal Gait should be back in action before the New Year.
Trainer James Fanshawe is considering the Christmas Hurdle at Kempton on December 27 or the Bookmakers' Hurdle at Leopardstown two days later.
Sheikh Mohammed's nine-year-old has a history of leg trouble and has been absent since his Cheltenham triumph in March.
Just 10 days before the Champion Royal Gait threw a splint — a minor leg injury similar to that sustained by Rodrigo de Triano before he won the Champion Stakes.
‘Royal Gait ran with the injury in the Champion Hurdle and we didn't want to take any chances with him after that,’ said Fanshawe.
‘He's not suffered any leg problems since then and I wanted to run him at Newcastle but he was a little flat in November.
He's fine now and I'm perfectly happy with him.
‘I don't know where he will go after his race at Christmas — I just want to take one race at a time — but the main target is the Champion Hurdle again.’
Sheikh Mohammed, Britain's leading Flat owner, may be doubly represented in the Christmas Hurdle as his 1990 title holder Kribensis is on course for the race.
The Kempton feature is also the target for Martin Pipe's Granville Again, who was well below his best when beaten by Morley Street in a muddling race at Cheltenham last month.
Ladbroke's latest Champion Hurdle betting: 4-1 Granville Again, 5-1 Morley Street, 6-1 Royal Gait, 8-1 Mighty Mogul, 10-1 Oh So Risky & Vintage Crop, 12-1 Destriero, 16-1 Gran Alba, Staunch Friend & Kribensis, 20-1 Muse & Halkopous.
Aussie pair face rap
Mike Allan
AUSTRALIAN captain Allan Border and fast bowler Merv Hughes were reported by umpires for dissent during the last day of the drawn First Test against the West Indies in Brisbane yesterday.
Hughes exchanged words with umpire Steve Randell after a confident appeal against Richie Richardson was turned down when he was on 47.
The West Indies captain went on to make a match-saving 66.
Later, Border exchanged words with Randell.
The two were reported under the new International Cricket Council code of conduct.
A hearing was held after close of play but ICC referee Raman Subba Row's verdict will not be made public until Wednesday.
He can fine a player up to 75 per cent of his match fee or suspend him for up to three Test matches.
Border said he was unaware of any reports but believed the umpires would be ‘over-reacting’ if any were made.
Tough for Wakefield
Ray French
Widnes 16 Wakefield 10
JULIAN O'NEILL's 62nd minute try denied Trinity their first victory at Naughton Park for 16 years.
Darkness fell on the ground seconds before kick-off when a floodlight failure delayed proceedings for 40 minutes.
Then Trinity, inspired by two tries from outstanding scrum-half Geoff Bagnall, roared into a 10-6 half-time lead.
But John Devereux raced in for two tries to keep Widnes in the game before O'Neill scampered through score the winner.
Wasps warned
Tony Roche
SARACENS, fighting for their Courage First Division lives, drew the Pilkington Cup fourth round short straw when sent to League leaders Wasps.
But the underdogs in this north London derby believe their third round victory over Bristol on Saturday, is the omen that can turn about their season.
A club spokesman said: ‘It was a win over an in-form side that has given the whole team great hope and we will go to Wasps with nothing to lose.’
Favourites Harlequins face Wakefield, who visit London again after their 25-22 victory at Richmond on Saturday.
Draw: West Hartlepool v Morley; Nottingham v Leicester; Waterloo v Orrell; Harlequins v Wakefield; Redruth v Exeter; Northampton v Newcastle Gosforth; Rugby v Moseley; Wasps v Saracens.
Matches to be played January 23.
Hendry TV switch-off
WORLD snooker champion Stephen Hendry is boycotting the BBC Sports Personality of the Year programme later this month — because the Scottish star feels the network treats his sport like ‘second-class citizens.’
Murphy's law
GERRY MURPHY is to replace Ciaran Fitzgerald as Ireland's national rugby union coach.
Murphy was assistant to Fitzgerald, who quit after their defeat by Australia in October.
Lawro quits
MARK LAWRENSON, the former Liverpool and Republic of Ireland defender, yesterday quit as a player at Diadora Premier League leaders Chesham United due to work commitments.
Wright stuff
JOHN WRIGHT hit an unbeaten 38 to became the first New Zealander to score 5,000 Test runs as he steered the Kiwis towards a draw against Sri Lanka in Colombo yesterday.
It's not over until the Fat Man sings
Mike Walters
BARRY FRY wants to put Stan Flashman through the wringer by forcing the man dubbed ‘Fat Stan’ to account for yesterday's decision to sack him as Barnet manager before an industrial tribunal.
Fry, dismissed by the 20-stone ticket-broker for the third time yesterday, won't be kissing and making up this time…he'll sue for wrongful dismissal.
And he said last night: ‘It could be the first all-ticket tribunal!
But first I shall be consulting my solicitors, the League Managers' Association and suing the club for unfair dismissal, without a shadow of doubt.
‘It will make great listening at an industrial tribunal.
Everything will come out in the wash, and Flashman will deserve it all.’
Fry feared the worst when he arrived for training yesterday morning to find his wife had called him three times already.
Mrs Kirstine Fry had suffered the misfortune to open a registered letter from the increasingly unpopular Flashman, dismissing her husband and outlining six reasons why he had to go.
Fry said his farewells to the players who regarded him as a father figure before heading for home in Bedford a devastated man.
Brave
And he had to put on a brave face as he manned the tombola stall at a primary school Christmas bazaar where his children Adam, seven, and five-year-old Amber were among the revellers.
Last night, Fry systemically ridiculed the letter with which Flashman signalled the end of his seven-year reign at Underhill.
‘Flashman is a complete and utter s**t,’ raged 47-year-old Fry.
‘To say I am absolutely gutted is a total understatement — but if he thinks this is the end of the matter, he's got another shock coming.
‘When I arrived for training this morning, my wife had been on three times and I thought something had happened to my little girl, who was in hospital over the weekend.
‘She told me there was this letter from Stan, questioning my loyalty to Barnet and my commitment to the club.
Anyone who knows me will tell you those are the last things I'm lacking.
‘He gave six reasons why I was getting the push, and they're all crap.
‘The first was a kit deal with DMF I'm alleged to have signed without any authority from the club, which is a lie — and he knows it.
‘The second alleged that I took the players off to Henlow Grange for four days before the Cup-tie with Charlton last season without his say-so…although we did exactly the same thing for the previous round.
‘Numbers three and four concerned talking to the press and media, in particular my defiance of a directive banning me and the players from speaking to reporters.
He had no right to impose such a ban.
‘He reckoned I had been part of a consortium which spoke to two clubs and accused me of acting secretly — but I told him.
‘And the last accused me of giving away privileged information about the club, which is more rubbish.
‘Flashman's behaviour has been too pathetic for words.’
It's not over until the Fat Man sings
Ben Bacon
AT LEAST Barnet players could always turn to Barry Fry, but now he's gone, they are prepared to follow him out of the club in a mass exodus.
Too often, words such as‘stunned’ and ‘shocked’are flippantly used to describe players feelings.
But they rang true yesterday when Fry broke the news about his departure at the club's north London training ground.
To all of them, Fry is Barnet, and without him there, few will have good reason to stay at Underhill, particularly as they alleged publicly for the first time yesterday that chairman Stan Flashman had physically threatened them.
No wonder then, that in the statement read out by goalkeeper Gary Phillips, they beseeched the players' union, the Football League and the FA to protect them from the man who has virtually become a tyrant.
Turmoil
They believe Flashman wants to destroy everything Fry has achieved, and they even suspected his sacking after a Flashman interview on Barnet's Clubcall service last week.
Phillips bravely read out the statement he had hastily helped David Howell prepare after training.
He said: ‘Anyone connected to Barnet would know how much Barry Fry loves the club and is the one person who has kept it together.
‘The reason that Barnet are currently second in the League, and playing attractive and entertaining football must be credited to Barry Fry's dedication, enthusiasm, loyalty and commitment all round!
‘It has been increasingly difficult against a background of constant intervention, disgraceful behaviour and turmoil created by Stan Flashman, who seems intent on destroying everything that has been achieved by Barry Fry at Barnet FC.’
Phillips added: ‘The players and staff are 100 per cent behind Barry Fry and find it difficult to see a future for themselves and the club without him.
‘We agree with Barry that, not only for the good of Barnet FC but for football in general, action needs to be taken now or the players and the supporters will be the losers.
‘We appeal to football followers, the PFA, the Football League and the Football Association to take our pleas seriously as we feel vulnerable and are unsure as to what options are available to us.’
Later Phillips said: ‘I hope he's back, but this is the first time he's received official notification of being sacked.
Barry will bounce back — I just hope it's with Barnet.
‘If Barry was reinstated, it would be the best thing that could happen to us.’
Another player, who did not wish to be named, said: ‘We love the club, but Barry is the linch-pin.
He was Mr Barnet.
I'd say most of the 25 players now want to leave.
We can't strike because we'd be breaking our contracts, but I'm sure not many want to stay.’
Assistant manager Edwin Stein was also a player under Fry and knows him better than most.
Stein, who took training yesterday, said: ‘Stan intimated on Clubcall last week that somebody would be leaving and it wouldn't be a popular decision.
Morale
‘He said the reason the person was going was because he had a big mouth.
We put two and two together and came up with Barry.
‘The atmosphere is very bad, morale is so low.
Barry has been the lifeblood for so long.’
Brendan Batson, assistant secretary of the PFA, urged Barnet players to reveal the verbal and physical threats Flashman is alleged to have made to them.
Batson said: ‘We will act on their behalf as they know we always will and also involve the Football League.’
Blake floored by shop duty
GOALKEEPER Adrian Blake will be missing from Kingstonian's FA Cup rematch against Peterborough on Friday afternoon because of work commitments.
Blake was poleaxed after being struck by a missile thrown from the crowd in their 9-1 defeat by Posh last Wednesday — the incident which forced the FA to replay the match.
And Blake admitted: ‘Obviously I would love to play, but I run my own business and Friday is the busiest day of the week.
‘I run a menswear shop and already have clients who have made appointments.
‘I'm not allowed to say too much about the FA decision, but it does seem a silly time to play the game.
‘A lot of our lads are self-employed and might not be able to make it.’
Kingstonian secretary Billy McNully added: ‘The FA have loaded the odds against us.
‘We were happy to replay the tie during the evening, but this way we will be without at least three or four players.
We are certainly not happy with what the FA have done.’
The irony is that Blake is fit to play, his convalescence helped by a stream of get-well wishes — many from Peterborough fans.
Cantona in class of his own
Graham Fisher
Benfica 1 Man Utd 0
MANCHESTER UNITED manager Alex Ferguson saluted a blank but bold debut from £1.2 million new boy Eric Cantona in Lisbon's Stadium of Light last night.
But he refused to say what role the controversial Frenchman will play in Sunday's Manchester derby at Old Trafford.
Cantona was high class and the best of a drab United bunch in the prestige friendly, in honour of Eusebio, against Benfica, who won with a late goal from Rui Costa.
And Ferguson said: ‘Eric showed just how capable he is.
He did a fine job despite the slow pace of the game, which did not suit his style.
‘We definitely played differently from Leeds and it's only a question of him getting used to us and our ways.
‘That won't take him long.
Good players instinctively adapt to each other.
Eric has good feet and a keen eye for goal and he'll do well for us.’
As planned, Cantona played the full 90 minutes with Brian McClair and Mark Hughes as different partners in each half.
Neither pairing produced conclusive evidence, such was the low-key nature of United's approach — and Ferguson refused to say which twosome he would go for.
‘Let me think first,’ he quipped.
‘I'll leave any decisions until Sunday.
I don't see why I should help City's planning.’
Cantona looked a class act with some brilliant distribution, a lively mind and excellent control.
He was United's best player by some margin on the night.
His one chance came just before half-time when a defender's shins blocked his shot.
Fergie may well have bought a cut diamond at cut price but how he fits in remains a poser.
Winger Andrei Kanchelskis must still be struggling with his English — he gave the impression he hadn't heard the news.
Twice Cantona stole into position at the far post waiting in vain for crosses.
Then the Frenchman made his first telling touch after 12 minutes.
McClair clearly on the same wavelength, swept on to a perfect forward pass and shot narrowly wide.
The match proceeded at a pace not much sharper than a cast of world veterans had produced earlier — including United's own Bobby Charlton, who popped home a goal to show his heirs how to do it.
Benfica's Sergei Yuran, one of 20 internationals on the pitch for this prestige friendly — 10 each side, representing nine countries — missed a glorious chance early on and a couple of shots from Alexander Mostovoi had Peter Schmeichel scrambling to save.
But with half an hour gone the poor quality of United's final ball had left Cantona stranded and still looking for a chance to put some flesh on Ferguson's bold predictions.
Some of his work outside the box, though, was a delight.
Another splendidly flighted pass found McClair in the danger zone, but not for the first time the Scot's control was wayward.
A goal looked on when he linked well with Kanchelskis, but the shot cannoned off a defender.
That concluded a half which was bad news for the candidacy of McClair to partner his volatile new colleague.
Ironically McClair stayed on after the break, taking a deeper role in the absence of Bryan Robson and Ryan Giggs.
Up front it was Hughes' turn to see if he was compatible, but it was full-back Paul Parker who nearly opened the door with a deep raking cross that skimmed Cantona's dark locks.
There was still an amiable air to the action but Cantona showed his commitment when he crashed into substitute Abel and earned a yellow card.
But Benfica continued to dominate.
Pacheco came close with a dipping shot that beat the heroic Schmeichel but cleared the angle, then Costa had similar misfortune.
It was no surprise when Costa fired the Eagles of Benfica to victory nine minutes from time after Kennedy's shot had been beaten out by Schmeichel.
Johnson the giantkiller in sweat
Tony Kell
Cambridge United 1, Oldham Athletic 0
CAMBRIDGE caretaker manager Gary Johnson was unable to take a full part in his side's celebrations last night.
He was still on tenterhooks waiting for his directors' decision about the manager's job.
Despite the well-deserved victory against the Premier League outfit, Cambridge chairman Reg Smart said that nothing would be announced for at least another 24 hours.
Johnson revealed: ‘It was a great result for Cambridge and I hope it helped my position, but all I can do now is wait and see.
‘I feel very pleased after changing our style for this match and seeing it work so well against a Premier League team.
Adapted
‘Oldham have scored 27 goals, the best record in the Premier League.
‘But we limited them to just a couple of chances.
That has to be quite an achievement.’
Oldham manager Joe Royle would make no comment, but his centre forward Graeme Sharp said: ‘Cambridge adapted better to the windy conditions and could have had a goal or two more.’
The only goal of the match came on the stroke of half-time from 18-year-old Gary Rowett.
The teenager from the Isle of Wight beat the visiting defenders to a centre from Paul Raynor and sent a glancing header into the top left-hand corner.
And Cambridge almost wrapped up the game in the first few minutes of the second half but were denied by Oldham goalkeeper John Keeley, who pulled off an excellent save to push away a curling, 20-yard Chris Leadbetter free-kick, then fingertipped a header from Mick Heathcote on to the crossbar.
Cambridge dominated the game and should have gone further ahead in the 76th minute when John Francis broke free, only to blaze high over the bar from the edge of the box.
And five minutes later Rowett was inches wide of a second goal.
Oldham did not threaten until a minute from time when Ian Olney looked as though he had equalised.
But Cambridge keeper John Vaughan somehow stretched to get a hand to the ball on the goal-line.
The win took Cambridge to the quarter-finals of the competition for the first time in their history, following their recent proud FA Cup record of reaching the quarter-finals each year from 1988-1990.
Trev's torment
David Alexander
TREVOR FRANCIS broke a three-year silence yesterday to talk about the scar left by his controversial sacking at QPR.
In his first experience of management, the Sheffield Wednesday manager imposed continental discipline, diet and training at Loftus Road — and paid for it with his job when some of the players rebelled.
‘At the time I left I was regarded by everyone as a failure,’ said Francis on the eve of the Coca-Cola Cup tie with Rangers.
‘The way I left wasvery, very frustrating and a lot of my friends concluded that it would finish me forever in management.
‘But I knew at the time that I felt I had something to offer and that's why I wanted to come back and be a manager again.
‘I didn't know how good I could be and still don't know that.
‘But I wanted to try to put it right in the eyes of every football follower in the country, and rectify the idea that I was a 100 per cent failure, which is what everyone thought I was.’
By George, that's better
Rob Shepherd
Arsenal 2, Derby County 1
IAN WRIGHT proved a point to manager George Graham at Highbury last night as he led Arsenal to victory in their delayed third round replay against First Division Derby.
Wright, full of vigour and invention, was the motivating force as the Gunners made their way into the next round, where they must travel to Scarborough two days before Christmas.
After Saturday's home defeat by Manchester United, Graham, who lambasted his forwards at Leeds the previous week, singled out Wright for special criticism.
He suggested the striker was lacking in desire, suggesting he had gone missing during the game against United, and saying he had not been the same since playing for England against Turkey a fortnight ago.
Wright, who prides himself on being a fierce competitor, was not impressed by the manager's outburst — but answered the criticism in the best way possible, by scoring Arsenal's first goal and then keeping them going as Derby fought their way back into the game.
Stung
And Graham acknowledged: ‘He accepted what was said, and got on with the job.
That is the sign of a good professional.’
Wright conceded he had been stung by what Graham had to say, and was obviously pleased with his performance last night.
Wright said: ‘I recognised that, in the previous two games, I had not been at my best.
I wasn't playing well for the rest of the team, and that is one of my strengths, because even when I'm not scoring I know I can contribute.
‘He reminded me about it in the dressing room before the game, and if it's said you're not playing with enough desire you've just got to swallow it and do the best you can.
‘That's what I went out to do, and I'm just glad it went right.’
Indeed, if Wright was hiding last night, it was only as camouflage and he emphatically answered Graham as early as the sixth minute.
As Derby defender Simon Coleman and goalkeeper Steve Sutton dithered over David Seaman's wind-assisted punt Wright, lurking in the background, pounced.
He bravely nipped in between the two players and showed a delicate touch to loft the ball over Sutton's body for his 11th goal of the season.
That gave Arsenal the initiative and within seven minutes they went further ahead.
Again they were helped by defensive indecision, this time between Coleman and Craig Short as they attempted to deal with a Seaman clearance.
Kevin Campbell took full advantage.
Wright remained a constant threat to the Derby defence, but after those early aberrations they managed to tighten up.
In the 20th minute, Wright might have finished the game as a contest.
Mark Flatts, a 20-year-old midfielder making an impressive full debut, robbed Sutton as he dribbled out of the penalty area and the ball fell to Wright 20 yards out but at the most acute of angles.
Wright still managed an accurate shot but, unfortunately for him, it grazed the near post and rolled harmlessly across goal.
Lucky
Derby edged their way back into the game, and a minute before half-time pulled a goal back when Tommy Johnson won a penalty, converted by Mark Pembridge.
Sutton was lucky to escape a red card when he handled a Campbell shot outside his area as Derby maintained their revival.
But any hopes they had of forcing extra time ended when Andy Comyn shot wide with the goal at his mercy.
Reds reprieve ‘unlikely’
Des Kelly
LIVERPOOL'S hopes of a Cup Winners' Cup recall were virtually dismissed by UEFA last night.
Europe's ruling body described reports that Spartak Moscow could be expelled as an ‘exaggeration’ and a recall as ‘extremely remote’.
It had been suggested that the Russians' use of an ineligible player, Mikhail Rusayev, during the first and second rounds could open the door for the English club's return, in the manner of Leeds' dramatic European Cup reprieve.
But Rene Eberle, the head of UEFA'S disciplinary committee, said: ‘You cannot compare the Leeds case with this.
Stuttgart's expulsion was different.
They fielded one foreigner too many — that is more serious.
‘This looks like a mistake by the Russian Football Association — not the club.
A fine appears to be the most likely course of action.’
Oldenburg, a Second Division side from eastern Germany, complained that they still retained the registration of Rusayev.
Palace in cup storm
Des Kelly
Liverpool 1 Crystal Palace 1
GRAEME SOUNESS angrily claimed he would quit football if the tactics used by Crystal Palace last night ever prevail in the English game.
The Liverpool manager was seething with rage after his defender David Burrows was carried off in this Coca-Cola Cup tie with a severe knee injury that will keep him out for at least three months.
Although Mike Marsh rescued the Anfield side from a shock fourth-round defeat with a late penalty, cancelling out Chris Coleman's opener, this did nothing to calm Souness.
Struggling to control his anger, he stormed: ‘If that's what football is all about I will look for another job.
‘I'm very disappointed because the game is different to what I saw out there tonight.
That's not how I understand football.
‘We expected a physical game and we certainly got one.
Obviously I've got to be extremely careful about what I say concerning the referee.
‘But I am allowed to say I was deeply disappointed, because he let things go on which I've never seen before in my time back in England.
‘Burrows will be out for at least three months with detached, possibly torn knee ligaments and he may have cartilige damage as well.
David is in plaster tonight and could need surgery.’
After hearing Souness's outburst, Palace manager Steve Coppell replied sarcastically: ‘Maybe we'll have to come here and lose 5-0 every week.
We were hard, but I don't think we were dirty.’
The London side arrived at Anfield fresh from their weekend drubbing and burdened by more problems on and off the field.
Behind the scenes, there is evidence of a rift between Coppell and chairman Ron Noades, who publicly aired his dismay at the club's current plight — just one win in 17 League games.
The squad is also reported to have been ordered to take a 10 per cent wage cut to cover falling gates.
Last night, Palace were forced to give debuts to 17-year-old George Ndah and 21-year-old Rob Bowry, who joined Gareth Southgate and Simon Osborn in a midfield with a collective weekly wage of just £790.
Disaster
But after their meek collapse at the weekend, Palace made it clear from the start that they would not fold again with some juddering tackles.
Only four minutes had elapsed when Paul Stewart, used in an emergency striker's role in place of Israeli Ronny Rosenthal, was chopped from behind by Eric Young — the kind of treatment that enraged Souness.
And full-back Burrows collapsed in agony after an uncompromising, eighth-minute challenge from Southgate.
No foul was given by referee Brian Hill, but Burrows was carried off.
Palace spurned numerous chances before Coleman headed in Southgate's cross at the near post after 56 minutes.
But Liverpool equalised as Ndah's full debut ended in disaster.
He was ruled to have brought down Rob Jones and Marsh blasted in the 77th minute penalty.
Expect no quarter to be given when the sides meet again at Selhurst Park in a fortnight.
Wilko raps soap opera at Barnet
Mike Walters and Ben Bacon
LEEDS boss Howard Wilkinson last night slammed Third Division Barnet for bringing football into disrepute as Barry Fry was sacked again — this time for real.
Wilkinson, chairman of the influential League Managers' Association, said Fry's dismissal was the latest episode of ‘soap opera ablutions’ to blight the Underhill club.
He also condemned controversial Barnet chairman Stan Flashman's war of words with Fry as ‘public mud-slinging which reflects no credit on sport.’
Wilkinson added: ‘It brings football into disrepute and washing dirty linen in public does nothing for the game.
‘When sport is trying to come to terms with economic reality, I can think of one area in the business which will say as a result of this that they cannot associate themselves with it — sponsorship.
‘From the outside, you could be forgiven for thinking this whole episode will become very messy.’
Fry was sacked for riling Flashman once too often, but he could be back by Christmas if a business consortium takeover bid is successful.
Talks
Former Tottenham defender Paul Miller, now a financial consultant, is heading the group attempting a £1 million buy-out and talks were ‘at an advanced stage’ last night.
Miller admitted: ‘Barry has done a magnificent job and in the interests of the team we would want someone of his calibre back in charge as soon as possible.’
Angry Fry vowed to take Barnet to an industrial tribunal for unfair dismissal — promising that the story of his stormy relationship with Flashman would ‘all come out in the wash.’
Fry promised to watch this Saturday's match at Halifax from the terraces — despite Flashman banning him from the club.
Other acts of defiance against Flashman include.
Rebel supporters from the Barnet Supporters' Association called for a boycott of all matches.
Club secretary Bryan Ayres confirmed the Underhill switchboard had been jammed by fans, angry at Fry's sacking.
Players called for intervention by the players' union and the Football League, who last week fined Barnet £50,000 for financial irregularities as Flashman fought with photographers.
Flashman, who was advised to resign by Fry last week, said: ‘There will be no coming back from this.
Barry has gone too far this time.
Barry Fry is finished at Barnet FC as long as I'm chairman.
He has broken all the rules of managership.
‘How can a manager, who's a worker, tell the owner of the club to resign?
It was only a matter of time before Barry hanged himself — and unfortunately he did.’
Rejected
Flashman may appoint Fry's successor without waiting to conclude his talks with the consortium.
Among leading candidates are ex-England defender Graham Roberts, player-manager at Diadora League Enfield, and former Southend boss David Webb.
Last night, Barnet assistant manager Eddie Stein rejected Flashman's offer of Fry's job on a full-time basis, although he will do it until the New Year, when the offer might be repeated.
Stein said: ‘I may have no money and no authority but I have my principles.
I think Stan expected me to grab it with both hands.
When I declined, he just sat there and couldn't believe it.
‘There was no way I was going to jump into Barry's shoes.
I like to think that the players and fans know I wouldn't do soemthing that.
At least, my conscience is clear.’
Barnet Supporters' Association secretary Liz Ashfield has called a special meeting tomorrow,(thurs), which Flashman has been invited to attend.
She said: ‘I shall be calling for a boycott — Barry Fry is Barnet, not Stan Flashman.’
Rebels win Gower vote
Giles Smith
MCC REBELS, furious at the non-selection of David Gower for this winter's tour of India, last night forced the famous club into a humiliating and expensive special general meeting to pass a vote of no confidence in the England Test selectors.
And afterwards Dennis Oliver, the man who led the protest, challenged the selectors, including Ted Dexter and Graham Gooch, to resign if the motion was passed.
He said: ‘I am confident the motion will be resoundingly passed.’
MCC bosses had hoped to deflect the rebels from insisting on the meeting, which will cost £17,000 and may well have to be held at a huge venue like Westminster Hall, by offering to pass on their views on the Gower affair to the selectors and the TCCB in an unprecedented letter of protest.
But when the rebels, crammed into a fiery and heated meeting in Lord's' hallowed Long Room heard that president Dennis Silk was not prepared to put the full weight of the MCC behind the protest letter, the meeting voted overwhelmingly by 108-3 to force the authorities to call the full meeting.
Last night's vote and the subsequent meeting, to be held some time next month, is bound to re-fuel the huge controversy that resulted from Gower's non-selection behind South African rebel Mike Gatting.
Oliver said: ‘If this resolution is passed, the selectors should resign en-bloc.
Never again will be they allowed to ride rough-shod over the wishes of English cricket-lovers.’
MCC secretary John Stephenson said: ‘Personally, I wish this meeting didn't have to take place.’
Gower, who will be going to India as a commentator for BSkyB and could find himself being called up in case of injury, said: ‘It's a boost to one's morale to know people care.’
But there was no comment from Dexter or from the TCCB.
In practice, the moves are highly unlikely to change the decision on Gower.
By the time the full meeting of all 17,000 MCC members is held, the England team will already be in India.
But it will be quite unprecedented if the full weight and majesty of the famous MCC club is thrown behind an official protest to the selectors and they will almost certainly have to consider their positions.
Murphy's Star choice
By Henry Rix
DECLAN MURPHY will partner Bradbury Star rather than stablemate Deep Sensation in the King George on Boxing Day.
The Irishman had the choice of the two horses in Ascot's H & T Walker Chase last month, and successfully opted for Deep Sensation.
But this time trainer Josh Gifford has apparently made up Murphy's mind for him for Saturday's Kempton showpiece.
‘Richard Dunwoody has confirmed his availability for Deep Sensation and he will ride that one with Declan on Bradbury Star,’ said Gifford.
‘I haven't spoken to Declan, but unless anything untoward happens that is the plan,’ he added.
The latest going bulletin from Kempton favours Bradbury Star, with the going now changed to good to soft from soft.
Clerk of the course Michael Webster said yesterday: ‘It's dried out quite a lot in the last 24 hours.
‘We seem to be moving into a period of high pressure with clear but cold weather.
If I was forced to bet on it, I would say it will be good or good to soft on the day.’
Doubts surfaced yesterday over the participation of Royal Athlete in Saturday's big race.
Ladbrokes had quoted Jenny Pitman's gelding, who has been off the course for over two and a half years, at 33-1 but have now scratched him from their list.
Mrs Pitman has also made no firm decision regarding The Illywhacker.
French raider The Fellow is now best-priced at even money favourite with Coral and William Hill.
King Nick is just at start of long reign
By Bill Blighton
GREG NORMAN, grappling last night with a second mauling by Nick Faldo, believes the world No 1's dominance has just begun.
Faldo proved himself golf's supreme master by snatching the Johnnie Walker World Championship in a play-off with the giant Australian.
Two years ago, Norman's confidence was shredded after being ruthlessly torn apart by Faldo's desire to win the 1990 Open at St Andrews.
It was 28 months before the Great White Shark won a tournament.
Now, just as Norman thought he had rekindled his old flame with a closing 63 at Montego Bay that would have floored anyone but Faldo, he must recover his wits again.
Norman feels he can learn from the Open champion.
He confessed: ‘I want to be in the last tee-off time every week with Nick Faldo.
He is good, so very good in all departments of the game.’
Norman, whose scintillating final round wiped out a five-shot deficit, added: ‘He is great to play with because he goes about his business in his own way.
He realises now that a five-shot lead is no guarantee of success.
He will learn from that and it will make him an even better player.
Faldo will stay at the top.’
The pressure of his 10-year domination of the US circuit got to Norman but he is adamant the same fate will not befall Faldo.
He said: ‘Faldo has the heat on him every time he goes out there and that is the hardest part of the game.
Everyone always wants to knock a man off the top — I know, I was that man.
But Faldo handles it all so well, he is so strong mentally.’
Faldo sank a four-yard birdie putt on the last green and watched Norman miss from three feet, before celebrating his sixth win of the year at the first sudden-death hole.
‘It has been a hell of a year for me,’ said Faldo, whose Pounds 348,000 cheque lifted his 1992 winnings to a record £1.5 million.
‘I am going away with a nice feeling.
The best players in the world have been here this week and it leaves me on a high note.’
Faldo has suffered a final round jinx this year and it would have finished in disaster had Norman's putt fallen.
But golf is a game of courage and that separates Faldo from the rest.
He led the Open at Muirfield by four shots and eventually came from two down with four holes to play to beat John Cook.
A similar lead was wiped out in the Irish Open — but Faldo won a play-off.
Faldo conceded the French and Belgian Opens when victory seemed a formality and he bristled when I questioned these fallibilities during his march to triumph in the European Open at Sunningdale.
Faldo thrust both forearms forward and insisted: ‘I have blood running through my veins like everyone else.
I am human, I am not a machine.’
He is right — the more times a golfer is in contention, the more often he will lose.
That applies to most but not Faldo.
His record reads: won six, lost two.
And he did everything right against Norman on Sunday, scoring a 68 on one of the world's toughest courses.
But he was helpless as the Australian threw seven birdies at him.
Faldo summed it up: ‘I was not afraid at being caught by Greg.
‘I was playing well and making chances.
I just tried to keep going.’
Many other top-ranked players, including Norman, would have buckled under such pressure but that statement epitomises the courage of the man.
World beater
NICK FALDO finished top of the 1992 Sony world golf rankings by a huge margin after his play-off victory over Australia's Greg Norman in the Johnnie Walker World Championship in Montego Bay, Jamaica.
Jason bid to beat ban
JASON LIVINGSTON'S future in athletics will be revealed tomorrow after a last-ditch bid to clear his name in front of leading British officials.
He faces a four-year ban after failing a drugs test at the Barcelona Olympics.
Marco KO
MARCO VAN BASTEN, AC Milan's European Footballer of the Year, yesterday had an operation in a Swiss clinic to clean the cartilage in his right ankle and is likely to be out of action for about three months.
Cool Khan
WORLD champion Jansher Khan will meet Australian Chris Dittmar in the final of the Qatar international squash tournament after crushing Rodney Martin 13-15, 15-12, 15-5, 15-3 yesterday.
Fighting back
FRANCIS AMPOFO, who has waited a year to reclaim the British flyweight title, tonight challenges Scotland's James Drummond in London.
Ampofo, 25, won and lost the title last year.
Speedie stays
DAVID SPEEDIE has boosted Birmingham by extending his loan spell for a third month.
The Southampton striker was expected to reject the chance to stay with the First Division strugglers.
Battling Border
AUSTRALIAN captain Allan Border struck an impressive 71 not out yesterday as Queensland's four-day match against Pakistan appeared headed for a draw.
Batty's heat treatment
LEEDS UNITED are turning on the heat to ensure David Batty makes a Christmas comeback.
Elland Road's under-soil heating has been switched on to beat the frost and give Batty his first game since suffering a hairline ankle fracture in October.
Without Batty, Leeds have lost six of their last eight matches, and if he comes through tomorrow's reserve team clash with Newcastle, he can expect a recall at Blackburn on Saturday.
Batty said: ‘It's been murder sitting out the last eight games.
But I can kick the ball without pain now and tackling is no problem, so I am ready.’
If Kipling had stood on the Kop
Roy Collins
BEHIND many a football club dressing room door, you'll find a copy of Rudyard Kipling's ‘If’ pinned up, the poem that talks of ‘meeting with triumph and disaster and treating those two imposters just the same’.
The poem, which many sports people have adopted as a sort of anthem, also advises on ‘keeping one's head while all around are losing theirs’, of not giving way to hate or dealing in lies.
If a copy of ‘If’ ever existed at Anfield, however, it was probably long ago used as loo paper, judging by the bad-tempered reaction of manager Graeme Souness to defeat.
Souness was at his most ludicrous after Saturday's 5-1 defeat at Coventry, claiming that the referee was entirely at fault and that his team was the one that deserved to score five.
He's not alone, of course, in blaming everyone but himself and his team.
A week earlier, Arsenal's George Graham blamed a referee for his side's defeat and indiscipline and Manchester United's Alex Ferguson has blamed other teams for trying too hard!
In such a climate, the ‘If’ poem seems a little outdated for the modern manager.
So here, with apologies to Rudyard Kipling, is a more apt version:
If you can curse the referee and linesmen
If you can shout and bawl above the rest
If you can tell big porkies on the telly
And swear your outside right is Georgie Best
If you can spend 12 million quid a season
And still not win the League or FA Cup
If you can find a hundred thousand reasons
For why your team is always getting stuffed
If you can turn your back when players brawl
Yet say teams shouldn't win at any cost
If you can waste your money on a charm school
Just to learn the way to say ‘get lost’
If you can wear 500lbs of jewellery
If you can drink champagne from plastic mugs
If you can stand the dressing room tomfoolery
If you think that Vinnie Jones is not a thug
If you can tell the board the team is ailing
‘Another £15 mill should put it right’
If you can spend the cash on 14 front men
Then tell the boys they've got to keep it tight
If you can blame your team when they are losing
But talk about your tactics when they win
If you can sack a player who's been boozing
If you can tell him next week he's back in
If you can meet with TV's Des and Elton
And treat those two imposters just the same
If you can face the cameras when the heat's on
And tell that bloody Elton he's a pain
If you can talk for hours in the boot room
About the classic game of kick and run
If you can tell old Clough he's going down soon
Then surely you're a manager, my son
Graham Taylor
Roy Collins
ENGLAND manager Graham Taylor baffled fans with his team selections and tactical changes in last summer's European Championship in Sweden.
Now he has revealed the mistakes that led to England's early departure from the tournament, though fans might not find themselves a lot the wiser.
First, says Taylor, he should have sent on Aston Villa winger Tony Daley for the last 20 minutes against France.
Daley, he believes, would have helped England beat France and then Taylor wouldn't have had to pull Gary Lineker off against Sweden.
Eh?
While you're working that one out, you might like to know that the other things Taylor regrets were the way he handled two television interviews.
Er, that's it…
Bruno needs to look sharp
Roy Collins
LENNOX LEWIS may be protesting too much about wanting to fight Riddick Bowe immediately for the undisputed world heavyweight title.
But at least Lewis is a fighting man who is eager to climb over the top of the trenches and go into battle to earn his rights.
That, though, does not seem to be the Frank Bruno way.
As much as he talks of being driven by sporting ambition, his actions continually suggest a more cynical approach to the richest prize in sport.
Bruno did, after all, stay out of the ring for almost two years while waiting to meet Mike Tyson.
And it could be argued that had he fought during that time, he might have honed the ring sharpness to capitalise on the moment he rocked Tyson in the opening round.
We'll never know, of course.
But surely that thought should worry Bruno as he prepares for his moment of destiny.
If he really wants to ensure that ring-rustiness doesn't get him this time and given his limited comeback action, wouldn't he seek more serious preparatory work than dressing up as Santa Claus, albeit for charity?
Dons eye a bargain
By Ben Bacon
WIMBLEDON have invited Swedish international striker Kennet Andersson for a trial which could lead to a shock move.
Although the Dons have to sell to survive in the Premier League, they have been alerted they could get £1m-rated Andersson — he scored against Germany in the European Championship semi-finals — for nothing.
Andersson, who also interests Nottingham Forest and Sunderland, is currently in a pay dispute with his Belgian club Mechelen.
He could be granted a free transfer by FIFA when they adjudicate within a fortnight.
Pressing matter
KEVIN PRESSMAN last night revealed that he still wants to leave Sheffield Wednesday — even though he has just signed a new three-and-a-half year contract.
Pressman, understudy to Wednesday's England keeper Chris Woods, looks certain to quit Hillsborough anyway when his present deal expires next summer.
And even the lucrative extension offered by boss Trevor Francis has not changed his thinking.
‘I've signed it because I have my family to think about but, to be honest, I still want to leave,’ insisted the England Under-21 international.
‘Trevor has told me he's prepared to sell if the right offer comes along.’
Quinn is striking right note with Gould
Duncan McKenzie
HE'S no ball player and certainly not one of the game's better athletes, but you just can't argue with his goalscoring record over the years.
Mick Quinn doesn't have to say too much in his own defence apart from pointing to an average of 20 goals a season for 13 years, and 13 in 10 starts since August.
It makes people wonder why he's only had one season at top level, never been bought by a successful club, and why Kevin Keegan is letting him move on to Coventry now.
Football's littered with cases like this, of goalscorers made available because ‘the manager doesn't fancy them’.
Look at Tony Cottee at Everton, Dean Saunders at Liverpool and Nigel Jemson at Nottingham Forest in the last couple of years.
It boils down to a personality clash, or that the striker simply isn't the type the manager wants — which is what's happened in Quinn's case.
The move is good both for him and Coventry because he's joining a manager who believes in him and understands the mechanics of his game.
Bobby Gould was the same sort of striker.
He had no great ability, apart from sticking the ball in the back of the net, either.
Finished
Quinn has joined a boss who wants him and likes him, and if that's not there the player will never produce the goods.
It happened to me as a player at Everton with Gordon Lee 15 years ago.
When he was appointed manager I was finished — and we hadn't even met.
The same thing had already happened with Malcolm Macdonald at Newcastle when Lee was manager there.
Lee built a fair side for Newcastle — but he didn't want Supermac in it, even though he scored 25 goals a season and was a hero to the fans.
The same thing has happened at Newcastle now, where Keegan's put together a good side full of players who all contribute in making goals and taking them — the kind of player he was himself.
Quinn's not that sort — he'll score 20 without contributing a lot more and that's simply not what Keegan wants.
So much so that Newcastle are now ready to pay a lot of money for a striker, ‘a Newcastle type’ in Keegan's words, as a replacement.
Keegan's not wrong to sell because you either do one of two things with this type of striker, build a side around him or just sit him on the bench for use in emergencies.
Gould will fashion everything around Quinn, seeing him as the guy who can top the scoring charts and lift the whole team.
It could be the key to success because Coventry have free-running young players who can more than compensate for Quinn's lack of mobility.
In my view, it's the right decision, one taken by Johnny King at Tranmere when he bought John Aldridge for peanuts.
King made the rest of his team play for Aldridge and was rewarded with 40 goals last season, and probably the same this time.
I believe Howard Kendall at Everton would be much better off playing Cottee and making the rest of the players give the little striker what he wants.
The ball over the top, the low firm crosses driven in so that he can pick up the pieces.
Do that and you're guaranteed 20-plus goals.
Kendall has dismissed him, but Everton might be better off re-educating the others to give him the service he thrives on.
That's what Quinn will get at Coventry and, injuries apart, there's nothing more certain he'll keep firing them in.
People say the hardest job in the game is putting the ball in the net, but that's not true.
The hardest part is getting into the right positions to do that.
There's no question Quinn — and Cottee, Aldridge and the rest — are masters of the art and if I had one in my club, he'd be the first name on the sheet.
Big gamble for Wigan
By Ray French
WIGAN are poised to take a Championship gamble in an effort to avoid a big backlog of games.
The treble rugby league champions, League winners for the past three years, are planning to rearrange a home match with Bradford Northern for February 7 — and provide a team for the World Sevens in Sydney at the same time.
Chairman Jack Robinson has promised: ‘As long we we can stay relatively injury-free, I'm confident we'll be able to provide good sides for them both.’
Yesterday's Regal Trophy semi-final draw, which pitted Wigan at home to Hull and the winners of Bradford Northern or Widnes against Castleford, triggered off more chaos.
Wigan's clash will be staged first on January 2, meaning they and Hull, who are also Challenge Cup preliminary round rivals, have to cancel games either side of that date.
To complicate matters, the two teams must also arrange a new date for their League meeting that was postponed in October.
‘We have just got to accept the situation, which is the result of being a successful side,’ said Robinson.
Bradford have been ordered by the Rugby League to get their outstanding third round tie against Widnes played by a week today at the latest.
Castleford, winners of their last eight games, will visit the victors in the second semi on Saturday January 9, for a place in the January 23 final.
Meanwhile, Widnes ace Jonathan Davies is set for a New Year comeback.
The Welsh skipper, who underwent surgery on November 10 to cure a hernia problem, has his sights set on a January 4 return against St Helens in an Alliance League fixture.
Armstrong cheer
By Tony Roche
GARY ARMSTRONG will take another giant step towards reviving his Scotland career when he lines up for the Barbarians at Leicester on December 28.
The Jed-Forest scrum-half was recognised as the best in Britain before a knee ligament injury in a club match on January 11 threatened to end his playing days.
‘The knee went just a week before Scotland's game against England and I cannot remember feeling more depressed,’ said Armstrong.
‘But I followed orders, did all the work to build up the muscles and feel great.
I have played a full set of District Championship games and now it's a question of getting sharper.’
The side contains three debutants, Cambridge University No 8 and captain Eric Peters, Australian centre Lloyd Walker and Moseley forward Steve Lloyd.
Meanwhile, Wales will not know the countries they must meet in the qualifying stage of the 1995 World Cup until next month.
‘We are in the process of drawing up the seedings and groupings of the various qualifying rounds,’ said tournament director Brian Skirrow.
Damon's a demon
DAMON HILL beat off a string of top Formula One drivers, including new Williams-Renault team-mate Alain Prost, to record the fastest time in testing at France's Signes circuit.
Hill, signed by Frank Williams to replace world champion Nigel Mansell, clocked one minute 4.20 seconds, heading Prost by 0.10sec.
Meanwhile, three-times world champion Ayrton Senna drove an IndyCar for the first time but is unlikely to follow in Nigel Mansell's footsteps.
Senna drove a Chevrolet 1992 car in Phoenix on Sunday as a guest of fellow Brazilian and twice Formula One champion Emerson Fittipaldi.
Roy is Keane on big
By David Harrison
ROY KEANE will insist on a double escape route from Nottingham Forest before this week accepting a big pay rise.
The Irishman will stay at the City Ground until the summer of 1995 unless Forest are relegated.
He also wants the right to talk to any clubs who make an acceptable bid during his contract.
The 21-year-old midfielder is set to sign a two-year extension guaranteeing him £500,000 in wages and signing on bonuses.
This will push his weekly income to around £3,000 — an increase of more than £2,000.
But £3 million-plus rated Keane is unlikely to see out the full term of his new deal because of contract stipulations.
In the first instance, Forest's hopes of Premier League survival this season are looking increasingly thin.
And Arsenal, Blackburn, Manchester United, Liverpool and Aston Villa have all expressed interest, along with Spanish giants Real Madrid and Seville.
Italian clubs are sure to join a stampede that could push Keane's fee beyond £4m.
Forest want an answer from Keane by the end of this week and he has asked for an extra couple of days to iron out the finer details.
He said: ‘Financially, it's an incredible deal.
‘But I want a bit more time to think things over.
I rushed into my last contract and don't want to do the same again.’
Clough will consider it a much needed morale booster if he can get Keane's signature on the new deal, even though the battle to keep him at the City Ground is far from being won.
Graham is told he can boost squad
By Ben Bacon
ARSENAL manager George Graham has been given the green light to go on a Christmas spending spree.
With the Gunners fading alarmingly in their pursuit of the Championship, chairman Peter Hill-Wood has told Graham he has only to knock on his door to be handed virtually an open cheque book.
Arsenal picked up their first point in five games against Middlesbrough on Saturday and they face the prospect of a humiliating Coca-Cola Cup exit at Third Division Scarborough tomorrow.
Angry and frustrated Gunners fans cannot understand why Graham has not jumped into the transfer market.
And although Hill-Wood assures them the cash is there, he insists there will be no panic buying.
Talent
He said: ‘Money's available to George, but there's no point in him rushing out and spending it for the hell of it.
That's not going to achieve anything.
‘There's not a terrific amount of talent around anyway.
There's no set figure as to how much he can spend.
‘We have never really picked a figure, but if he wanted a certain player who was just over the amount we had in mind, we would let him have it.’
Hill-Wood remains philosphical about the club's disappointing run —‘you have good spells and bad spells’— and is certainly more optimistic about the club's chances of winning major honours this season than he was at a similar stage last year.
But the Gunners could be out of their first competition by tomorrow.
Last January's shock FA Cup exit against Wrexham acts as a sharp reminder that they can take nothing for granted at Scarborough.
Midfielder David Hillier admitted: ‘It's going to be difficult — it will be their Cup final — but we have learned our lesson.
‘We shall be treating them like a Premier League side.’
Going for broke
Interview by Graham Otway
EMBUREY is back in the England fold, on top of his game but on the bottom shelf at the bank.
Starting today, in the first of our three-part exclusive series, he explains where the money from two pirate tours of South Africa and a Middlesex benefit has gone.
WHEN people digest the high living styles of star England cricketers like David Gower and Ian Botham, the inference is that I must be well off too, having played alongside them for so many years.
They look at the two good pay days from rebel tours to South Africa and also my benefit with Middlesex in 1986.
But the harsh reality is that if I hadn't been picked by England for the tour to India, I would have struggled to make ends meet this winter — I don't know what I would have done.
All the money I have earned over the years has gone — in some cases I don't why or where — but the fact is that at the age of 40, I have no savings.
And with the job situation generally still getting worse, I shall probably have to keep on playing until the recession ends.
It has hit the south-east harder than any recession before and the days when firms would recruit cricketers without any skill are long gone.
We have to take our place in the queue along with everyone else.
Rebel
Lots of figures were bandied about when news of the first rebel tour broke in 1982 — some newspapers suggested we were on around Pounds 40,000 a man but that was just speculation.
In fact, some of the players got as little as £10,000, others £15,000, others £25,000 — it depended on how much they were able to negotiate for themselves.
I was somewhere in the middle.
Of course, 10 years ago it was quite a lot of money but all it enabled me to do was move out of a flat in London, put a deposit down on a house and start a family.
After that tour, Western Province employed both myself and Graham Gooch for two winters, which partially made up for the fees we lost by not being able to tour with England during the three-year Test ban.
But I was not rolling in it.
My first big chance to put money in the bank came in 1986 when Middlesex awarded me a benefit, which was meant to make sure that I could have a start in the world outside cricket once I retired.
Times were not so hard for businesses then and I was grateful when a year of events raised £107,000.
But within three years all that had gone as well.
My wife Suzie and I spent some of the cash having an extension put on our house in Willesden and it was also around that time that our children started at private school.
We had always said if they had the chance of a private eduction they should have it.
I wanted the girls to have an opportunity that I never had as a child.
A lot of money has gone into their schooling but as my financial situation has deteriorated we have had to consider take them out of private education and sending them to state school.
I know in the recession of lot of parents have been forced to do just that, but it was always going to be a last resort and thankfully this winter's tour means they can stay on where they are.
Worse
Nothing could have been worse for us than the children having to suffer and, thankfully, so far they have not had to.
But, all along, our main aim was to plan for the future.
We had often talked about emigrating to Australia.
Suzie comes from Melbourne, so it would be just like going home for her.
And I had spent a total of three winters playing Grade cricket in the city and found that I really liked the place and the people.
As the benefit money came in we sent a lot of it out to Suzie's parents — we thought that if we found something we wanted to buy out there and did choose to emigrate, having the money out there in the first place would make it all that much easier.
For two years my father-in-law shuffled the money around various building societies, chasing the best interest rates, which at times were around the 20 per cent mark.
Then one day in the summer of 1989 — around the time that I had signed a contract to go on the second rebel tour of South Africa — I got a call from Australia that came as a bombshell.
My father-in-law had moved the money into the Pyramid Building Society in Melbourne, which was offering the best interest rates available at the time, and it had gone bust.
Crash
Rather like the BCCI crash here in England, I learned the hard way that organisations offering the highest return on investments also carried the highest risk, though I had thought building societies were safe from such problems.
Since that crash, there has been a public outcry in Australia and the authorities have offered Pyramid investors some non-interest bearing five-year government bonds.
But even when it's all worked out I will have lost £60,000, with no hope of getting it back.
I had already made up my mind to join the South African tour when it happened, so it was fortuitous in a way.
But even though the players on the 1990 tour were paid a basic £83,000 over two years, that has gone as well.
The taxman had his slice, I carried out further improvements on the house and, of course, I had to provide for Suzie and the children, Chloe and Clare, for two winters, with no other work.
If anything, we were too extravagant in the late 1980s when money was rolling in — we took everything for granted.
We spent beyond our means when I was playing Test cricket before and earning good money.
I felt it was a nice earner all the time and now, in hindsight, I wish we hadn't frittered the money away so easily.
We should have been putting money by for a rainy day because that rainy day came.
Now that I am back on the England scene, my cash flow has picked up again but, at the age of 40, I know there's a time limit left on my playing career.
In some ways I envy what has happened to Paul Downton who, while he was with Middlesex, spent a couple of winters with James Capel, the City stockbrokers.
When his unfortunate eye injury forced him to quit the game early in 1991, he had learned his trade and was offered a full-time job.
I'd like to spend a couple of winters in sports PR and marketing, while my name is still on people's minds before I retire.
But with companies everywhere cutting back on staff, opportunities are pretty scarce.
What firm is going to take on an untrained man in his forties at a time when it is being forced to lay off people who have been with their business for years?
I shall just have to play on and ride out the recession and I feel I still have three good years left in me at the top.
The main problem to prevent me playing on for too many years to come will be the competition from younger players at Middlesex.
Obviously, Phil Tufnell has made rapid progress to fill the void left by Phil Edmonds but coming up behind is Paul Weekes.
Not only is he a tremendous prospect as an off-spinner, he averaged 38 last season, so he's a useful middle-order batsman, too.
It wouldn't be fair for such a player — who could do much for the balance of the side as a genuine all-rounder — to be held back just because there was an ageing geriatric hanging around, trying to prolong his playing days.
Mathie row
By John Wardle
NEWCASTLE manager Kevin Keegan was yesterday accused of leaving striker target Alex Mathie in limbo.
Morton manager Allan McGraw even threatened to call off the Pounds 250,000 deal for the 21-year-old goalscorer.
‘Newcastle were supposed to contact me over the weekend, but I haven't heard anything,’ rapped McGraw.
‘They know that Alex wants to join them.
It's unfair on the lad.
He feels as though he's in limbo.
‘If it's not sorted out this week I will pull the plug.’
However, Keegan's No 2, Terry McDermott, hinted that the move could be sorted out in the next few days.
‘We haven't spoken to the player yet, but we are not anticipating any problems,’ he said.
‘We have basically agreed a fee and he wants to come.’
Meanwhile, the youngster shoved out by Ryan Giggs at Manchester United is poised for a big future with Sunderland.
That's the view of Roker boss Malcolm Crosby following another impressive display from 18-year-old Michael Gray at Luton.
Gray, once on schoolboy forms at Old Trafford, has made an impact since making his full debut for Sunderland last month.
And Crosby said: ‘If he looks after himself he has a great chance.
He has ability and a good attitude.’
Chris cracker
Mike Walters
Norwich 0, Ipswich 2.
CHRIS KIWOMYA turned the tables on Premier League leaders Norwich at Carrow Road last night.
Kiwomya's 12th goal of the season sent City tumbling towards their second successive defeat, with full-back Neil Thompson delivering the knockout punch two minutes from time.
Their goals switched the spotlight back on the Ipswich title challenge as they moved to within seven points of their rivals and had their odds halved from 50-1 to 25-1.
The last time these two met, Ipswich won 2-0 and sent Norwich hurtling towards relegation.
Whether or not this setback represents an equally mortal blow to the Canaries' title hopes remains to be seen, but manager Mike Walker was not amused.
Gloom
He said: ‘Until they scored, there wasn't a problem for us.
My biggest disappointment is that we ended up playing ‘route one’ football in the last 20 minutes.
We abandoned our principles.
‘I'm sure the fans will take this defeat more to heart than me, but it's only three points down the drain.
‘We are still four points clear at the top, so it's not all doom and gloom, though I suppose there will be more people saying we've gone again now.
‘But it will be a good test of the players' mettle.
We will soon find out if we deserve to be where we are.’
After Thompson's killer blow, Ipswich midfielder Jason Dozzell performed a celebratory jig on the pitch with a fan believed to be his brother.
Dozzell captured the festive mood by accepting the fan's gift of a blue Santa hat, which he concealed beneath his jersey until the final whistle.
Dozzell said: ‘I thought about wearing it for the last few minutes, but I didn't think it would go down too well.
‘Besides, the job was done by then — Norwich seemed to run out of ideas and our defence snuffed them out.’
With Norwich top of the table and Ipswich beaten only twice all season, the so-called big clubs were in no position to dismiss this game as an irrelevant provincial squabble.
City had most of the possession in the opening 45 minutes, but they lost skipper Ian Butterworth with a rib injury at the interval.
And though Walker was able to call upon the versatility of substitute Rob Newman, City were still reorganising when Ipswich snatched the lead six minutes into the second half.
Well-drilled in all departments, they chose their first corner to demonstrate their prowess at set-pieces.
With almost regimental precision, Thompson's corner was touched on by Dozzell at the near post for Kiwomya to guide home his header from close range.
It was almost a carbon copy of Kiwomya's matchwinner in last week's Coca-Cola Cup encounter with Aston Villa — the bookies' favourites to overhaul Norwich for the Championship.
Almost immediately, Walker responded by withdrawing the ineffective Darren Beckford for Chris Sutton, Beckford registering his disappointment by tearing off his shirt and disappearing straight down the tunnel.
Sutton's introduction coincided with City's desertion of their accomplished passing game.
They threw bodies forward in an increasingly desperate pursuit of the equaliser, but Thompson's fierce angled drive settled the issue.
Kenny targets QPR duo
By Des Kelly
KENNY DALGLISH has made an astonishing attempt to bring Queens Park Rangers duo Les Ferdinand and Andy Sinton to Blackburn Rovers.
Backed by Rovers' mega-rich owner Jack Walker, manager Dalglish has approached his QPR counterpart Gerry Francis with an audacious ‘name-your-price’ offer for the two players.
QPR have told Dalglish to postpone his spending spree until the spring as they try to recover their bright Premier League start and launch a concerted FA Cup challenge.
However, Rangers do not expect their stalling tactics to deter Rovers, and they will be unable to refuse a £4m offer unless they are poised to claim honours of their own.
Dalglish has already splashed out an incredible £12m in an effort to further the club's European ambitions.
But the news that Dalglish is prepared for another big-name auction will dismay his former Liverpool team-mate Graeme Souness, as he makes his own bid for Ferdinand.
In an effort to recoup some of his huge outlay, Dalglish last night attempted to squeeze £250,000 out of Portsmouth for midfielder Steve Agnew.
But Rovers blocked the deal after Pompey asked to keep Agnew on loan for another month.
Pakistan veto Tom
By Giles Smith
ANGLO-Pakistani cricketing relations were strained again last night after the Pakistanis formally objected to Tom Graveney — the match referee for their Test series in the West Indies, writes Giles Smith.
The latest flare-up between the two countries — following last summer's ball-tampering claims and counter-claims — is a direct result of Graveney's remarks following the infamous Mike Gatting-Shakoor Rana row in 1987, when he said: ‘They have been cheating us for 37 years and it is just getting worse and worse.’
Last night Graveney confirmed that he'd made the allegation but was ‘obviously very disappointed’ at the bid to veto him by the Pakistan Board.
‘It is a decision that has to be made by the International Cricket Council and, under their rules, I am basically not allowed to say anything,’ he said.
‘But I am very disappointed as I was looking forward to going to the West Indies and seeing what promised to be a great series.’
Graveney explained that his comments in 1987 had been about events during the 1951 England tour of Pakistan.
‘Obviously they have very long memories but I am not going to get involved in any more comments,’ added the former Gloucester, Worcester and England batsman and BBC commentator.
The Pakistan Board's bid to stop his appointment came in a fax to the ICC saying it was ‘not a judicious selection.’
Calling for either former Indian captain Sunil who had faxed the Pakistanis ‘asking whether there is any official objection’ was consulting with council chairman, Sir Colin Cowdrey before making a decision.
Stephenson had told the Pakistanis that Graveney's remarks were a ‘throwaway line’ and had never been meant seriously.
Plot of gold
Richard Smith
THE tiny hamlet on the Yorkshire Moors would make the perfect setting for a Sherlock Holmes mystery.
All the right ingredients are there — from the swirling mist and the pounding of horses' hooves to the small group huddled round a table in the kitchen at Foulrice Farm.
Among them is Peter Beaumont, who is busy hatching a plot which could pay spectacular rewards.
Almost every trainer with a string of 20 horses shares the same ultimate ambition — to win the Cheltenham Gold Cup.
But for 58-year-old Beaumont it's no idle fantasy.
His stable star Jodami looks an ideal candidate for National Hunt's most important chasing prize.
Charismatic
Bookies make the strapping seven-year-old gelding a 14-1 shot to provide the former point-to-point trainer with an incredible family triumph in the third week of March.
Beaumont bought Jodami cheaply in Ireland for Yorkshire businessman John Yeadon after the horse had been broken in at the Curragh as a four-year-old.
Jodami had never been cantered but he looked like a strong old fashioned chaser,’ said the trainer.
‘We knew from the start that he was something special.’
‘His first race was a bumper at Ayr and he won at 33-1.
We fancied him, we really did.’
Soon, Jodami was being hailed a future champion after a series of bold displays as a novice stamped him the most charismatic chaser in the North.
So far, last month's Hennessy Gold Cup runner-up boasts a very creditable nine victories from 17 races, but the sternest tests are still to come.
Until top jockey Mark Dwyer was handed the plum ride on Jodami this season, the trainer's daughter Anthea and her husband Patrick Farrell had partnered him in all his races.
‘Jodami is certainly the best we have ever had here,’ said Anthea, 30, the yard's assistant trainer.
‘He has an enormous appetite.
As soon as his manger is empty he carries it around in his teeth asking for more.
‘He always loves going to the races.
He preens himself in the parade ring and believes everyone is there purely to watch him.’
Anthea became the first woman jockey to beat the male professionals over the Grand National fences on J J Henry, who is now the Beaumont stable hack.
During her riding career she has suffered nine broken collar bones and rode a winner at Market Rasen last season just three weeks after breaking her leg.
But those painful memories are erased by thoughts of future glory as Jodami whisks Anthea across the moorland gallops.
Jodami's next appearance will be in the Rowland Meyrick Handicap Chase at Wetherby on Boxing Day.
Then he will probably have two more races before the Gold Cup.
The form book insists Jodami will need to improve by more than a stone if he is to trouble The Fellow.
But Patrick Farrell, who began his riding career with champion trainer Michael Dickinson, believes his hero can make the grade.
He is a dream to ride — absolutely brilliant,’ said 29-year-old Farrell.
His nickname is Crash but thankfully he has never done that.
‘He was pig fat when he came back into training after the summer and he will improve from the Hennessy.
‘What's more, both the Gold Cup trip and the Cheltenham course will prove ideal for him.’
Everyone mucks in at the Stearsby yard, which doubles as a sheep and arable farm.
Trainer Beaumont drives the horse-box to the races, wife Margaret is stable secretary, and the oats and hay are all home grown by son Stuart.
There have been just three winners for the stable to cheer home so far this season.
But each morning, when the entire team warm their hands on steaming mugs of tea in the kitchen at Foulrice Farm, spirits will be lifted by thoughts of a date with destiny on March 18.
Gait's mystery return
Jonathan Ramsden
CHAMPION Hurdler Royal Gait makes his long awaited return next week but trainer James Fanshawe is unsure if it will be in England or Ireland.
The nine-year-old, not seen out since winning at Cheltenham in March, is entered for Kempton's £50,000 Bonusprint Christmas Hurdle on Monday and the Pounds IR25,000 Bookmakers' Hurdle at Leopardstown the following day.
The Kempton race looks far stronger with Granville Again, Mighty Mogul and Oh So Risky all likely runners.
Fanshawe said: ‘The Irish race does look easier, but I'm not leaning towards one or the other.
‘I want to think about it and will probably make my mind up in the next day or two.’
Martin Pipe has declared a powerful team for Monday's Coral Welsh National, a race he has won three times in the last four years.
Pipe's Run For Free is 5-2 favourite with the sponsors to follow-up the brilliant success of Carvill's Hill 12 months ago.
But there could be a major shake-up in the market if stablemate Miinnehoma is allowed to take his chance.
Pipe is also considering the King George VI Chase on Boxing Day for the nine-year-old and is unlikely to make a firm decision until later this week.
SIS accepted ‘substantial’ libel damages in the High Court yesterday over the Channel 4 programme ‘Against The Odds’shown in December 1990, which claimed the company was involved in a conspiracy with major bookmakers to manipulate starting prices.
Boxing Day frost threat
Frost is threatening to severely disrupt the busy Boxing Day programme.
Five of the eight courses scheduled to stage fixtures — Wetherby, Sedgefield, Market Rasen, Huntingdon and Wolverhampton — gave pessimistic bulletins yesterday.
However, Kempton, Newton Abbot and Wincanton report no problems.
Golden boys sweat it out
Michael Wale
THERE was Barcelona gold hero Jonny Searle lifting weights with the best.
But on his feet were a pair of elastic-sided City boots.
A kid had thrown one of his trainers into the Thames while he was out sculling.
Somehow that incident sums up the Corinthian surroundings of British rowing — the sport that won Great Britain two Olympic gold medals last summer.
The Searles, more than even Redgrave and Pinsent, became the heroes of millions of armchair TV viewers as they came from nowhere to win the coxed pairs in the last three strokes of the race.
Trials
Yet last Saturday they were to be found in Henley, rowing in trials together with up to a hundred other hopefuls from all over Britain.
‘We didn't do very well,’ admits Greg Searle.
‘It's like a kick up the arse.’
Jonny added: ‘There won't be any big decisions as a result.
It's just a winter assessment.
‘A lot of big names weren't even there.
But since we've won in Barcelona, we've had to go around a lot to dinners and appearing on television shows like A Question of Sport and Blue Peter.
All good things, but it takes time away from you.
Now Christmas has come we can really get down to it.’
The brothers are dissimilar.
Jonny, 23, is three years older than Greg.
Jonny's the one with the blond corkscrew hairstyle.
He weighs in at 13-and-a-half stone and is 6ft 4in tall.
He is at law school, laid back and jokey.
In contrast, Greg has a short-back-and-sides haircut, is 6ft 5½in, 15 stone and is studying estate management — spending time at present with a firm of chartered surveyors near Oxford Street.
He arrived for Monday night's training session at the Hammersmith HQ of the Amateur Rowing Association in formal city clothes with black overcoat.
Straight off the rush-hour tube!
How many other gold medallists in the world travel by public transport?
Inside the weight room a tape blared out the music of The Doors to remove the tedium of the hour-and-a-half session spent lifting, pushing and battling with weights.
The brothers' vests are soon soaked in sweat.
Jonny takes swigs from a water bottle and times his work with an alarm clock.
I wonder why they do all this in Christmas week?
After all, they've won Olympic gold and they don't get a penny for all this training six days a week.
Greg says:
‘No I don't do it for the money really.
I do it for the thrill of winning something, like in Barcelona.
It's easy to say that when you're 20 and you've never needed much money.
Once you have to make sacrifices in your job and you have responsibilities then things might be different.’
Training
Their current training programme means two nights a week in the gym, one night running six miles, two outings a day at the weekend in their single sculls, a 6.30am outing once a week as part of a national squad eight then two more sculling outings have to be fitted in during the weekdays.
Jonny says: ‘Rowing is the sort of sport that, if you're tall enough and weigh enough, you can get pretty good at it — if you're willing to put all the hours into training.
I was no good at rugby so I took up rowing.
I train for the pain.
Actually, the pain is there all the time even when you're training in a boat.
So when it comes to a race like the Olympic final it's no different.
That's why, with three strokes to go, I knew we'd win.’
All this winter training is to prepare them to win more gold at next August's World Championships.
But the race on their mind at the moment is the Christmas eights at their own rowing club at Molesey.
Greg explains: ‘They were cancelled last Sunday because of the bad conditions.
I hope they're going to be rowed on Boxing Day.
All the club members put their names in a hat and each eight is drawn out, so you don't know who you will race with or against.
It's great fun.’
And for some veteran or novice rower, they'll be able to go home and say they've just rowed with an Olympic gold medallist.
In which sport, apart from rowing, could you do that?
Bosses crazy, warns Monie
Ray French
WIGAN boss John Monie has warned British rugby league: ‘Get your act together or you'll never be world champions.’
The Aussie, who leaves at the end of this season to head the Auckland assault on Australia's Winfield Cup competition, insists playing standards have improved dramatically in his time.
But he believes Great Britain coach Mal Reilly's hopes could be undermined by the League's proposed divisional and cup structure.
Monie, who has led Wigan to a record three consecutive Challenge Cup and Championship triumphs, said: ‘The proposal to play County Cup matches pre-season and increase the First Division to 16 clubs is crazy.
‘A player like Denis Betts, who played 46 matches last season, needs a rest or he will be burned out.
In Australia, players have four to five months off in the summer to prepare and they also play far less games.’
Beef
Monie, who has also coached Sydney side Parramatta to Grand Final glory, has produced the best of British beef in Wigan forwards Kelvin Skerrett, Andy Platt, Betts and Phil Clarke.
He insists standards, attitude and skills, at and away from Central Park, have risen dramatically since his arrival four years ago.
‘There has been a dramatic improvement in the quality of teams and players in the First Division.
St Helens are a very good side, so are Castleford.
‘Britain produces great attacking qualities in its players.
Lads like Saints' Gary Connolly and Alan Hunte have matured tremendously and have great potential.
‘And, thanks to the referees and coaches, there is now a better discipline within the game.
But I just hope Rugby League bosses will help the rest of the British talent by giving them the right set-up in which to play and train.’
John woe
JOHN DEVEREUX'S hopes of a summer stint with Australian club Manly have been dashed.
The Sydney side, coached by former Wigan boss Graham Lowe, have pulled out of a move to sign the 26-year-old Widnes and Great Britain centre on a short-term contract.
Devereux said: ‘Widnes didn't really want me to go and there were problems with insurance guarantees.
‘I'm very disappointed because I've been out of work since returning from the tour last summer and this contract meant security for my family.’
Drug label unfair, blasts Christie
Tony Roche
OLYMPIC champion Linford Christie yesterday blasted critics who label athletics as Britain's most drug-troubled sport.
On the day that British Athletic Federation officials were deliberating the fate of disgraced European indoor 60 metres champion Jason Livingston, sent home from the Barcelona Games when traces of Methandianone were found in a drugs sample, British team captain Christie hit out after a London awards ceremony.
‘Our achievements have put the ‘Great’ back in Britain,’he said.
‘Yet every time drugs are mentioned it's about athletics and that gives the impression that it's all about track and field competitors.
‘The truth is that we get hammered because we are the sport trying to clean up our act and, therefore, our work becomes high profile.
‘Other British sports are much worse off than athletics but are they doing as much as we are to put things right?
‘There will always be problems of this kind because you will always have the bad as well as the good in the world.
What matters is how you deal with such problems and athletics is tackling drugs head-on.’
Christie, who stormed to the 100 metres title in 9.96 seconds, was even quicker to condemn the authorities for allowing the drugs saga to reach the Olympics.
He added: ‘What happened in Barcelona was not an Olympic problem.
It should never have reached that stage where competitors got there under such circumstances.
Questions ought to be asked, not of me, not of other athletes, but of the powers higher up.’
Christie, at 32, the oldest Briton to win Olympic track gold, was voted Male Track Athlete of the Year at the Vauxhall British Athletics Awards, and immediately dismissed talk of his age as a ‘problem in other people's minds.
If you think this year was good, wait and see when I'm 33.
‘I've looked after myself and made some sacrifices.
Now the Americans will come to the World Championships in Stuttgart to beat me and if that is pressure then I'm content.
‘I want to defend my European and Commonwealth titles and win the World Championships because every time we are successful, more youngsters take up the sport.
Athletics is the most successful sport in Britain and we should spend more time talking about that.’
Sally Gunnell, only the fifth British woman athlete to win an Olympic title, collected the Female Track Athlete award for her memorable 400 metres hurdle triumph in 53.23 seconds, while Tessa Sanderson was rewarded for her record fifth Olympics with the award for top Female Field Event Athlete.
Steve Smith, who won gold at the World Junior Championships in Seoul, beat off the challenge of Olympic bronze medallist Steve Backley to claim the award as Male Field Athlete of the Year.
And a new category, Vauxhall Team Performance of the Year, went to the all-conquering Junior World 4x100 metres relay champions, Jamie Baulch, Darren Campbell, Allyn Condon and Jason Fergus.
Brush up on the vital statistics
Mark Russell
ONE of the best football statistical books to appear this year is The European Football Yearbook (Sports Projects Ltd, £19.95).
Country by country, this superb book covers all last season's League and Cup results and squad members.
Each country's international year is reviewed.
Essential reading.
Mountaineer Chris Bonington teamed up with Robin Knox-Johnston to write Sea, Ice and Rock (Hodder and Stroughton, £15.99).
Britain's best known climber and sailor have combined their skills to produce a superb book of sailing and climbing above the Arctic Circle.
Lavishly photographed.
The Guinness Rugby Union Fact Book (Guinness Publishing, £12.99) is a comprehensive volume of facts, records, results and statistics.
This really is a must for any rugby fan.
Comedian Tom O'Connor plays off a handicap of 10 but his Christmas offering From The Wood to the Tees (Robson, £10.95) comes up to scratch.
It is full of amusing anecdotes and also contains useful tips from pro-am partners such as Lee Trevino, Sandy Lyle and Jose Maria Olazabal.
By far the best coffee table book is Golf Courses of the PGA European Tour (Aurum, £25.00).
Peter Doberiner and Gordon Richardson provide the text for a lavishly illustrated tour of the courses played by the professionals.
The American Football Fact Book (Guinness, £11.99).
Plenty of information here, with potted histories of all the NFL teams, a look at past Super Bowls and a records section.
Useful book for new fans.
It takes a special book to warrant a £100 price-tag.
Luckily, prospective purchasers of Guy Edwards' Sponsorship and the World of Motor Racing (Hazleton Publishing) could recoup their outlay if they put his experience to good use.
The cash-finding guru of the world of motorsport reveals everything struggling drivers need to know.
But this beautifully illustrated book also provides a wonderful series of anecdotes from Edwards' life in motor racing.
Ampofo victory
FRANCIS AMPOFO mixed his punches successfully to regained the British flyweight title in London last night with a points win over Scotland's James Drummond.
The 25-year-old Ghanaian-born Bethnal Green fighter twice floored Drummond to secure a 118½-116 decision from referee Adrian Morgan and claim the crown vacated by new European champion Robbie Regan.
Ampofo was being outboxed, but then amazingly put his opponent down in the third and fifth rounds.
The new champion, who lost the title to Regan a year ago, said: ‘I thought the scoring was about right.
I tried to finish him off, but he kept holding.’
Armin in ski success
AUSTRIA'S Armin Assinger yesterday clocked 1min 45.60sec to score a shock super-giant slalom win in front of his home crowd at Bad Kleinkircheim.
Marc Girardelli finished 13th to regain the overall Cup lead.
Brighton rocked
EUROPE'S richest indoor women's tennis tournament in Brighton is in danger of collapsing after Midland Bank yesterday withdrew their sponsorship.
King Asif
ASIF MUJTABA scored 125, his second unbeaten century of the match, to steer Pakistan to 291-5 and a five-wicket win over Queensland in Brisbane.
Bates call-up
ENGLAND'S Steve Bates and Ian Hunter have replaced Scots Gary Armstrong and Tony Stanger in the Barbarians side to play Leicester on Monday.
Halifax blow
ROGER MILLWARD last night resigned as coach of Halifax by mutual agreement with the club.
A caretaker boss is expected to be named today.
Dozzell backs Town surge
Tony Kell
IPSWICH'S Jason Dozzell is convinced his side can join Norwich in a two-pronged East Anglian title challenge — and they have the ideal chance to stake their Premier League claim over Christmas.
Confidence is soaring at Portman Road after the 2-0 derby win over leaders Norwich on Monday allowed Ipswich to leapfrog Arsenal and move within seven points of the Canaries.
And Ipswich travel to Highbury on Boxing Day, followed by a visit from high-flying Blackburn as they attempt to launch their own counter-offensive.
‘It is vital for us to have a good Christmas,’ said 25-year-old Dozzell.
‘We will need to keep a run going until Easter and, if we can do that, you never know what we might achieve.’
Threat
In their first season back in the top flight, John Lyall's smooth-passing outfit have proved the most difficult side to beat, with only two defeats in 20 matches.
‘Our defenders completely snuffed out the threat from Norwich's Mark Robins and Darren Beckford and that speaks volumes for us,’ added Dozzell.
But Norwich boss Mike Walker laughed off suggestions of a Carrow Road crisis.
‘People will be saying we have gone now,’ he said.
‘We were looking forward to going seven points clear for Christmas but four will do for me at this stage.’
Swede and soured
Interview by Ben Bacon
ARSENAL manager George Graham was last night urged to start playing Anders Limpar regularly or risk finishing a second successive season without a trophy.
The warning came from former Liverpool defender Glenn Hysen, who knows Limpar's strengths after playing alongside the enigmatic winger many times for Sweden.
Hysen, who captained his country and Liverpool, is now a commentator for Swedish television and cannot understand Graham continually ignoring Limpar's match-winning ability.
The last straw for Hysen came against Middlesbrough on Saturday when Limpar, who lost his place to 20-year-old Mark Flatts, was not even on the substitutes' bench.
Limpar has completed just three matches this season for the Gunners, whose Coca-Cola Cup match at Scarborough tonight has been postponed.
And Hysen believes long-standing differences between the winger and Graham could be the reason.
Hysen, who won a Championship medal at Anfield, said last night: ‘Anders is such a good footballer, I cannot believe he's not playing, particularly in a side that's struggling.
‘And everyone in Sweden feels the same.
It may have been different if Arsenal were top of the table but they're not.
They have taken just one point from their last five games.
‘I know George Graham wants hard-working players who are consistent.
‘Anders is not in that category but he has other things to offer.
‘It takes every sort of player to make a team.
‘Anders has the ability to decide a match with one display of his skills.
‘He's a very technical player, who is likely to have one very good game, followed by a not so good one.
‘Whenever he plays for Arsenal, there always seems to be so much pressure on him.
‘It's as if he knows one bad performance will result in him being dropped by Graham.
That cannot help him.
‘Limpar could play for Arsenal again the way he plays for the national team if only Graham had more faith in him.
‘He should give him a run of five or six matches to show what he can do.
‘When Limpar has a poor game for Sweden, he knows he will get picked for the next match so it does not affect him.
‘From Arsenal's point of view, it's good to have many players to choose from but Anders cannot be happy sitting on the bench or up in the stands.
He's there to play football.’
Hysen's opinion is objective.
Don't forget he accused Limpar of being a cheat after one Arsenal-Liverpool clash at Highbury.
Nevertheless, Hysen, in his last season with Second Division Gais in Gothenburg before retiring for full-time TV work, believes Limpar, 27, can help rescue a season that has gone badly wrong for Arsenal and Graham.
Hysen, Swedish TV's equivalent of former Anfield team-mate Alan Hansen, said: ‘Limpar is the sort of player who can turn Arsenal's season around.
‘He must get his chance to show what he can do — and he must get it over a number of games, not just one or two like he did against Leeds and Manchester United.’
He added: ‘However, I think there must be something between the pair we don't know about.
‘I know Limpar has strange attitudes sometimes and that's probably why Graham gets irritated by him.
Sometimes he doesn't know what to do…like whether to play for Sweden or stay with Arsenal.
‘But the fact is, he is a superb player and he should be playing for Arsenal.’
Arsenal face two tough Cup trips in four days after last night's postponement.
The game has been switched to January 6, straight after the FA Cup tie against Conference giantkillers Yeovil.
Scarborough were disappointed that a deep frost on their ground — named, ironically, after frozen food manufacturers McCain denied them the chance to face Arsenal.
Everton out to land Hodge
Des Kelly
LEEDS UNITED'S Steve Hodge was last night lined up for a Pounds 700,000 move to Everton.
Goodison Park manager Howard Kendall has turned to Elland Road's surplus England international in an attempt to inject some goalscoring potential to his midfield.
Manchester City have been tracking the 30-year-old since the summer, but Everton could provide the perfect escape route.
Hodge, who joined Leeds from Nottingham Forest in a £900,000 deal, has had a frustrating time this season.
He has started just two matches so far, having been pushed down the pecking order by the arrival of £2 million David Rocastle from Arsenal.
Kendall cannot rely on the likes of Barry Horne, who has not scored since the first day of the season, and youngster Billy Kenny to ease the burden on his goal-shy strikers.
Blow
Everton will need to sell to raise the cash, but Arsenal have already made an approach for their £2m defender Martin Keown and that deal could hold the key.
Meanwhile, Leeds chairman Leslie Silver last night blamed a king-sized European Cup hangover for the champions' wrecked title defence.
With all hope of a second successive title gone, Silver revealed the huge psychological blow still being felt from the European Cup defeat by Rangers.
Multi-millionaire Silver, who ploughed part of his self-made fortune into hauling Leeds back to the pinnacle of the English game, is convinced manager Howard Wilkinson can spark another revival.
But he said: ‘The psychological effect our early European Cup exit has had on the club cannot be under-estimated.
‘It has affected morale from the boardroom to the laundry room and our results are still suffering.
‘The same thing happened to Arsenal last season after Benfica knocked them out, of the European Cup, but they came with a late run and it's up to us to do the same.
‘We've just got to get our heads up in the second half of the season and go all out to qualify for Europe again.’
Cash is available for Wilkinson to spend, and Silver added: ‘It has always been our policy to back the manager if he feels the team needs strengthening, but we are not looking to sign players just for the sake of it.
‘We are due to take the Norwegian striker Frank Strandli from IK Start when problems over a work permit are sorted out, there are some promising young players coming through and we should have key men David Batty and Mel Sterland back after injury soon.’
Silver added: ‘We've also got a 17,000 capacity stand under construction as part of plans to make Elland Road a 40,000 all-seater stadium, so it's not all doom and gloom.’
Batty and Sterland play in tonight's continue their fitness build up in the reserve game against Newcastle, tonight Wed and if they come through will be considered for the Boxing Day game at Blackburn.
Coventry Kop loss
COVENTRY are taking legal advice over seeking compensation from the police.
The club believe they lost £10-15,000 in gate money for last Saturday's match against Liverpool because West Midlands Police issued a press statement warning supporters who did not have tickets to stay away from the Highfield Road ground.
But the match had not been designated all-ticket.
Give MoJo a chance, says Ally
Des Kelly
EVERTON manager Howard Kendall was last night urged to bring his £1.5 million striker Mo Johnston back from the cold or run the risk of relegation.
The advice comes from Europe's most prolific centre-forward, Ally McCoist, a former partner and friend of the Goodison Park player during their time at Rangers.
After a brief moment of goalscoring glory in the Mersey derby earlier this month, Johnston's career has plummeted again with Kendall dumping him s expensive Scottish signing in the reserves.
Despite this latest setback, Golden Boot holder McCoist is certain MoJo is best qualified to get Everton's stuttering attack working.
He said: ‘Mo is the sharpest, most dangerous goalscorer I have ever played alongside.
I'd like to say he's a better finisher than me, but of course that would be a lie!
‘He's obviously had his problems at Everton, but with help he'll pull through.
We certainly know each other very well — well enough for me to know when he's feeling himself and when he is not.
‘I watched him play against Liverpool and he scored a fine goal and did not look far short of his true form.’
But to get the best out of his investment, McCoist believes Kendall should encourage his man with a consistent run in the side rather than undermining his confidence with reserve-team football.
‘Mo is the type of character who needs an arm around his shoulder from time to time and a wee pat on the back to keep him going.
Maybe that's what he should be getting now at Everton.
‘He was a joy to partner at Rangers and also with Scotland.
He worked for the team and scored far more than he missed.
‘He is obviously having his problems right now, but believe me, anyone who writes him off does so at their peril.’
Kendall axed Johnston after accusing his players of possessing a big-time mentality and failing to scrap for vital Premier League points in the less-glamourous matches.
But the Scot has only just recovered from a mystery virus and insists he needs to be involved for some 10 matches before he is back to his best.
Rebel
Despite this snub, Johnston has been careful to avoid a public row at Goodison.
The 29-year-old has constantly been dogged by controversy and has earned himself something of a rebel tag.
His international career was killed off by Andy Roxburgh after one too many fall-outs with the Scotland chief and his Ibrox spell was tarnished when a pre-season trip was cut short after a clash with former manager Graeme Souness.
McCoist insists this reputation is undeserved: ‘Mo isn't a bad guy, he's a bit daft at times, but there is no bad streak in him.
Anyone at Ibrox will tell you that.’
Butcher wants to stay
John Wardle
TERRY BUTCHER has not ruled out the possibility of staying in football with Sunderland.
Former England skipper Butcher, 34 next week, has a contract to the end of the season at Roker Park.
‘I've got an open mind on my future but I would love to stay on,’ confessed Butcher, who has conquered fears that he may be forced into premature retirement through knee trouble.
‘At my age it's not as though I'm going to be snapped up at any other club.
‘They are a great bunch of lads at Sunderland and I haven't got it in my mind to pack up.
But I don't want to tempt fate.’
Butcher thought his career was over when he left Coventry last season, but he has been outstanding since joining the Wearsiders.
Manager Malcolm Crosby said: ‘Terry is one of the best professionals I've ever had the pleasure to work with.
‘He's not a flash Harry or a cheat and if he doesn't think another year is on the cards he will tell me straight.’
Meanwhile, First Division Cambridge United yesterday signed Watford striker Steve Butler, 30, for an undisclosed fee.
Saints blow
SOUTHAMPTON suffered a double blow yesterday when they discovered Terry Hurlock and Iain Dowie are to be banned for two matches.
Striker Dowie and hard-man Hurlock each passed the 20 disciplinary point mark at Everton last week.
Their punishment is a two-match ban which means they miss the FA Cup third round match at Nottingham Forest on January 3 and Leeds the following Saturday.
Saints are hoping former England striker Kerry Dixon and captain Glenn Cockerill will be fit to replace them.
Manager Ian Branfoot said: ‘This is a blow to us.
They have both been playing so well for us in recent weeks but we will have to reorganise and cope without them.’
Meanwhile, Saints yesterday sold winger David Lee to Second Division Bolton in a £200,000 deal.
Kharin cleared
CHELSEA'S Russian recruit Dmitri Kharin could be in Premier League action before the New Year.
The ex-CSKA Moscow goalkeeper is set to make his debut for the reserves against Oxford tonight.
Chelsea managing director Colin Hutchinson confirmed: ‘We have received his international clearance and he should make his debut for the reserves.’
Kharin cost Chelsea £200,000, with up to £200,000 being paid to CSKA based on appearances.
And manager Ian Porterfield must decide how quickly to bring him into the first team, though it will be tough to drop Kevin Hitchcock.
Mansfield on market
STRUGGLING Second Division Mansfield are up for sale.
Parent company Abacus Municipal Holdings are ready to relinquish their involvement as soon as a buyer can be found.
Geoffrey Hall, managing director of both Abacus and the club said that the club's immediate future, however, was not in jeopardy.
But he added that unless a buyer could be found for the debt-ridden club, which made a £700,000 loss last year, they could join the dubious ranks of former Football League clubs.
Captain obstinate
Interview by Graham Otway
THERE are few firmer friendships in cricket anywhere in the world than that between John Emburey and Graham Gooch.
Here, in the second instalment of our exclusive three-part series, the Middlesex spinner gives us a revealing insight into just what makes his England captain tick, both on and off the field.
AFTER a two-and-a-half-year lull I fully expect my great friendship with Graham Gooch to be back in full swing on the tour to India.
We haven't seen much of each other while he's been busy as England's captain and I have served my South African Test ban.
But now that is behind me and we are touring together again it won't be long before the old nicknames ‘Mork and Mindy’ or ‘Tweedledee and Tweedledum’or ‘Pinky and Perky’surface again.
Ever since we first played together for London Schools and roomed together on a tour to East Africa we have been very close.
And the fact that I will be playing under him as captain on an England tour for the first time will not stop me having dinner and drinking with him most nights.
But I expect no favours from Graham when it comes to team selection and I know they won't be offered.
He'll tell me if I am not bowling well enough to make the Test side, or if he thinks Phil Tufnell will be best suited if we need only one spinner.
But, as on most other trips together overseas, once it comes to relaxing we'll do most of it together.
Closest
We were perhaps closest in the two winters immediately after the first rebel tour to South Africa in 1982, when we both signed to play for Western Province while serving our Test bans.
The times spent in Cape Town were certainly among the happiest highlights of my cricketing travels.
With our wives we were each given a flat in blocks opposite each other.
That, I remember, caused humorous embarrassment one evening when Graham, sipping a beer on his balcony, spotted through frosted glass Suzie and I taking a shower together.
There were some wonderful memories, too.
On the three mornings each week when we weren't due to train, Graham and I would get up in the cool sun of early morning at seven and play either golf or tennis.
At first we also ran a lot together, but that came to an abrupt halt on one particular morning when twice within a couple of 100 yards I had to stop, complaining of chest pains.
Graham refused to run with me after that and in India, as he builds up for his first attempt at the London Marathon next year, he can find some other mug to tramp the streets of Delhi or Bombay with him.
Our golf and tennis battles were fiercely competitive, but we relaxed later on most days by taking Brenda and Suzie into the countryside for barbecues, Graham was in his element building a fire and griddling the steaks.
He insisted on doing the cooking and I was happy just to eat the food.
If those winters caused me any anxiety it was only in the nets where Graham and I, as the two overseas professionals in a team of mainly part-timers with jobs to do in midweek, spent a lot of time practising together.
Over the years, at first in our second XI games and later in Championship clashes between Middlesex and Essex, I had always enjoyed a fair degree of success bowling to him.
But facing me in the nets for two winters, he got to know my bowling inside out and by the end of our stay in Cape Town he was hammering me all around the practice area.
Therefore, I suppose I should claim some credit for Graham currently being one of the best batsmen against spin in the world.
He is not quite as good as Mike Gatting, who works the ball all along the ground on both sides of the wicket, but Graham now has no fear of stepping down the track to any spinner and planting the ball firmly over long-on.
If Graham has one irritating trait it is his obstinacy.
The public got a very early taste of it in the late 1970s when he was invited to play in the World International single wicket competition at The Oval.
I was one of the bowlers asked to provide the cannon fodder to the big international batting stars on what was meant to be a fun day out.
But it suddenly hit the headlines when Graham was pitted against Clive Lloyd.
Having overtaken Clive's score, he declared knowing that if he lost his wicket in the remaining two of his 10 overs he would have 10 runs deducted.
Slog
Graham brought proceedings to a standstill, arguing that he was within his rights to declare even though the rules stated he had to bat for the full 10 overs.
He clearly wasn't happy when forced to go back out to bat and complete the 10 overs, losing his wicket twice having a slog and losing the match.
But it is that same obstinacy or, put another way, determination to win, that has not only made him a successful captain, but also into one of the most feared batsmen in the world.
He decided it was time he improved his Test record in 1989 when England were mauled at home by the Australians and he lost his wicket several times to Terry Alderman.
He even asked to be dropped for the fifth Test.
A couple of years earlier, when I was having a bad patch and went to him for a reassuring chat, he had told me not to worry about it.
Since I was the best spinner of my type in the world, eventually it would all come right.
At the height of his troubles we had a similar conversation…only the boot was on the other foot and I just used the same words back to him.
After that Aussie series Graham worked furiously on his technique in the Caribbean and returned to tear the Indians apart the following summer.
Highlighted by his 333 at Lord's, his Test average shot up from 36.90 to more than 40 — no mean achievement as he had already played more than 130 Test innings.
He has maintained that form and given that 40-plus is reckoned to be the minimum Test average for a truly great player, he should eventually retire — who knows when — with the record he wants.
His success as a captain comes from the same streak in his character.
On the 1986 West Indies tour, when he was just there as a batsman, we had one particular discussion with Bob Willis at a beach bar in Antigua.
Graham was adamant he would never take the England captain's job because of all the hassles involved.
For the little extra pay, Graham queried whether the extra work on the field, at official functions and, not least of all, dealing with incessant media inquiries, was worth it.
Praise
Six years on, the job almost seems to fit him like a glove.
That's because he has worked closely with Micky Stewart and now Keith Fletcher to make sure the team runs along his lines.
Graham is the first to hand out praise when it's due, and when he voices his displeasure, the player concerned is left totally in the picture about the captain's requirements.
He has no time for players who are not totally honest with him or with their approach to the game.
And he, as much as anyone, appreciates the amount of pre-tour preparation available to the team thanks to the Whittingdale plan.
In fact, I think he would pick a player of lesser ability if he knew he would be prepared to give 100 per cent all the time.
Graham puts winning and team spirit before anything else.
He still retains his sense of humour, though it might not show on TV when he's urging extra effort from his players.
But that's only because he has learned to leave the jokes in the dressing room.
Graveney has himself to blame — Stephenson
Giles Smith
TOM GRAVENEY bowed to the ‘inevitable’ last night as the International Cricket Council dropped him as official referee for Pakistan's trip to the Caribbean next year.
Pakistan objected to his remarks about ‘cheating’, made at the height of the Mike Gatting/Shakoor Rana affair five years ago and ICC secretary Colonel John Stephenson said: ‘I'm afraid Tom pressed the self-destruction button by making those comments.
It is a shame but he must be asked to stand down.’
Stephenson admitted that the appointment might have been a mistake.
He added: ‘We were not aware of the reported remarks and Tom is a really lovely guy.
If we had been aware of the remarks, I suppose it might have been better not to have made the appointment.’
But he blamed Graveney for the furore: ‘It was not the ICC who put him in this position but Tom himself.
He has shot himself in the arm.
‘Because he would have had such a responsible job, he had to have the absolute backing of both countries and he clearly did not and would have been in an impossible position.
‘I am very sorry for Tom, he is very upset.
We will be looking for another assignment for him but it looks unlikely until next winter.’
Graveney said: ‘I am desperately disappointed.
But once it happened, I suppose it was inevitable.’
A replacement will be announced in the next few days, while it has emerged that Donald Carr, who once as England captain poured a bucket of water over a Pakistani umpire, was proposed as referee for the recent Pakistan-Sri Lanka series — and like Graveney, was not surprisingly rejected.
Dropped Jones has a rethink
Mike Allan
DEAN JONES fears his Test career may be over and he may quit Australian cricket.
Yesterday he left out of the second Test against the West Indies his second humiliation of the winter after being 12th man for the first Test.
And after a lucrative summer with Durham this year when he earned more than if he had represented Australia in all Tests and one-day internationals in 1992, he might be tempted to finish his career in England.
Jones, married with an 18 month-old daughter, was adamant last night that he wants to regain his Test spot, but admitted he felt trapped financially.
He's already been denied £4,000 in not facing the Windies, and said from his Melbourne home last night: ‘The selectors have put me in the position where I have to work out what is right for my family and me.’
Financially, and for security, the English scene has a bit more going for us at the moment.
‘It's tough, but the writing was on the wall once I was 12th man.
‘I really haven't had a chance to press my claims and I sincerely believe I am pushing uphill to get back into the side for a long time.’
‘I am devastated.
The upsetting thing is that I am not going to get any real Sheffield Shield cricket to get back into enough form to earn a Test before this summer is over.’
Captain Allan Border said: ‘Obviously I feel a bit sorry for Jonesy because he's been in the side for a long time.
But, knowing him, he'll fight back.’
Border, too, it is rumoured, is nearing the end of his career and could easily survive at great profit in the county scene having also tasted life in England with Essex.
Jones, meanwhile, plays his next Sheffield Shield match for Victoria against Tasmania on New Year's Eve, hoping to improve on scores of nine, 14 and one this season.
Replaced
He has been replaced in the squad for the Test, beginning in Melbourne on Boxing Day, by Shane Warne, while left-arm paceman Bruce Reid was not considered because of a shoulder injury.
His place goes to Mike Whitney.
Former Worcestershire captain Phil Neale is to replace Mike Procter as Northamptonshire's Director of Cricket.
Neale, 38, has agreed a three-year contract and takes up his duties on March 1.
The post became vacant when Procter became South Africa's full-time team manager.
MCC get tough
Graham Otway
A CUNNING scheme to drive ball-doctoring bowlers out of cricket will be unveiled by the MCC early in the New Year.
The experimental law will include a phrase to counter the excuse offered by many bowlers when their actions are questioned.
They will have to ask permission from the match umpires before they can use their fingers to scratch mud from the surface of the ball.
The game's official lawmakers are preparing the new legislation, to be presented to the ICC, following last summer's controversy surrounding Pakistan's Wasim Akram and Waqar Younis.
The law, which covers all levels of cricket, will also specifically ban bowlers from lifting the seam on a ball.
It is hoped the law will be in place in time for next summer's Ashes series.
Explaining the proposals, MCC secretary Col John Stephenson said: ‘We have had to cater for all cricket, so it may not seem to be as tough as some people have been demanding.
‘We didn't think, for instance, it should be necessary for umpires to inspect the ball every over in all levels of cricket — that would only waste time.
‘Playing conditions can be adopted by any cricketing authority at any level to introduce ball inspections or tough penalties.’
Gazza sparks exodus
Ben Bacon
PAUL GASCOIGNE'S stunning success with Lazio will ensure a mass exodus of the Premier League's brightest stars to Italy next summer.
Already a list has been drawn up by Italian clubs who intend to buy British following Gazza's incredible impact.
The England international's wonder strike against Pescara earlier this month has just been voted goal of the season so far by top TV station RAI and earned him £9,000, which he has donated to a charity helping Brazilian schoolchildren.
The influential Italian daily sports newspaper, Corriere dello Sport, has just published a list of 50 players worldwide who have become targets for the ‘money-no-object’ brigade of Italian clubs, all of whom are keen to cash in on Gazza's magic.
The detailed and well-researched Most Wanted list includes EIGHT of the Premier League's dynamic performers.
More worrying for English clubs is the likelihood of the Italian league, currently on its traditional Christmas break, allowing teams to play four foreigners instead of three from next season.
The eight men, and there are one or two surprises, being monitored by the Italians are:
Ian Wright, Kevin Campbell (Arsenal).
Rob Jones, Steve McManaman, Jamie Redknapp (Liverpool).
Alan Shearer (Blackburn).
Nick Barmby (Spurs).
Ryan Giggs (Manchester United).
Giggs, United's 19-year-old wonderkid, has already been singled out by AC Milan as their top British target.
Following Gazza's first league goal for Lazio in the derby match against Roma, and his unforgettable second against Pescara on December 6, he has become a sensation in Italy.
And the success of David Platt at Bari and Juventus, and Des Walker at Sampdoria has convinced clubs that British players are no longer risks after the failure of players such as Ian Rush and Luther Blissett.
‘Gazza has opened the floodgates for British players’ is how the headline accompanying Corriere dello Sport's article roughly translates.
Gazza himself, delighted with winning the best goal of the season at the halfway mark of the Italian season, promises more of the same in the return against Roma.
He said: ‘I want to score two goals in the next game with Roma, including one like the one I got against Pescara.’
Gazza's team-mate Signori came second in the competition, for his goal against Inter Milan, while AC Milan's Marco Van Basten was third.
Keegan boost
John Wardle
KEVIN KEEGAN'S reward for taking Newcastle into the Premier League will be the offer of a lucrative five-year contract.
Chairman Sir John Hall made that pledge yesterday and the deal could be worth £1 million to Keegan.
Hall said: ‘We must get up this season and I believe we will.
It's all that matters.
‘The second we are there, I will offer Kevin a five-year contract.
He has surprised me.
I am a business man and I knew how marketable he was.
But what he and his No 2 Terry McDermott have achieved is a miracle.’
The only situation that would force the Newcastle supremo into a rethink is if Keegan is offered the England job.
‘Then I would have to think again,’ he confessed.
‘Some things go beyond a football club and that is the only one I would consider.’
Bank's net loss
EUROPE'S richest indoor women's tennis tournament in Brighton is in danger of collapsing after Midland Bank yesterday withdrew their sponsorship.
Midland Bank have sponsored the tournament at the Brighton Centre for five of its 15 years and have contributed £1.5m in prize money.
Steffi Graf has won it for six of the last seven years, picking up a cheque for around £45,000 for her latest victory in October.
Alan Furniss, Midland's manager of sponsorship and donations, said: ‘The people who look after our sponsorship policy have decided we should be spending money on community-based acti-vities.’
Troy tops
TROY AIKMAN threw for three touchdowns as the Dallas Cowboys wrapped up the NFC East title with a 41-17 NFL rout of the Atlanta Falcons.
Jansher joy
PAKISTAN'S Jansher Khan, the No 1 seed, won the Qatar squash title yesterday with a 15-9, 14-15, 12-15, 15-6, 15-11 win over Australian Chris Dittmar.
Welsh sights on Lloyd
STEVE LLOYD, Moseley's giant Uruguayan-born second row forward, is to be watched by Wales rugby union scout Terry Cobner when he plays for the Barbarians against Leicester on Boxing Day.
Lloyd, 6ft 6in tall and weighing in at more than 18 stone, was born in Montevideo but is eligible for Wales through his parents.
Fashanu to quit
JUSTIN FASHANU, player and assistant manager of Third Division Torquay, is quitting football at the end of the season to concentrate on a career in broadcasting.
The 30-year-old striker said: ‘I will finish the season, then start looking for TV work outside sport.’
Wigan blast
WIGAN boss John Monie yesterday blasted rugby league title rivals St Helens for refusing to switch Sunday's clash from Knowsley Road to Central Park, which has undersoil heating.
He said: ‘Surely it would make sense just to get the game played.’
England switch
ENGLAND'S cricket tour of India, which begins next month, will now start in Lucknow after recent riots forced the opening match against the Board President's XI to be switched from Kanpur.
Agar's job
HALIFAX rugby league club yesterday appointed former Featherstone boss Alan Agar as caretaker-coach.
He replaces Roger Millward, who was sacked on Tuesday following the club's slump in form.
Tour debut
ZIMBABWE'S debut Test tour as a first-class cricket nation will be to India, it was announced yesterday.
They will play a one-off Test and three one-day internationals between March 10-25.
Safety first for Mansell
NIGEL MANSELL'S new Indycar — the safest ever thanks to stringent new regulations — was unveiled by makers Lola yesterday.
The Formula One world champion test drives it for the first time in Phoenix on January 4 and will find his sleek, high-speed T93 series chassis also longer, bigger, heavier and cheaper than any previous IndyCar or championship-winning Canon Williams Renault FW14.
It has cost just $400,000 — 10 times cheaper than a front-running Grand Prix car — and can withstand Incredibly, they are also reckoned to be stronger and safer.
This is because they are built to withstandconstant crashes on the high-speed ovals which host five of the 17 rounds of the 1993 Championship series.
New rules mean IndyCar must be big enough to allow the driver to tuck his knees up into his chest inside the survival cell if there is a major crash.
Lola's IndyCar designer Bruce Ashmore, pictured right with the new car, said: ‘It is completely wrong for anyone to think of IndyCars as death traps.
Nigel will be just as safe in IndyCar racing as he has been in Formula One, if not safer.’
Mansell makes his IndyCar racing debut at Surfers' Paradise on the Australia Gold Coast in Australia on March 21.
Meanwhile, Ferrari's Formula One hopes were hit last night circuit made a stuttering start on Wednesday when the Italian team unveiled when their new car was crippled by engine trouble.
The Italian team's French driver Jean Alesi posed for photographers in the new model but was unable to demonstrate the lightweight 644-B's abilities at the car's unveiling as it had broken down on Tuesday before it could be taken on a test run.
That's the end of my life
By David Harrison
JASON LIVINGSTON last night was still protesting his innocence after being kicked out of athletics for four years and banned from the Olympics for life.
The maximum penalties for failing a drugs test were imposed by the British Athletic Federation and British Olympic Association following a disciplinary commission earlier this week.
The European indoor champion is still deciding whether to lodge an appeal but maintains the stance of innocence he has taken since being sent home in disgrace from Barcelona on the eve of the Olympic Games.
Livingston, known as Baby Ben for his admiration of the self-confessed drug-taker Ben Johnson, said: ‘I suppose you could say that's the end of my life.
But whatever happens they are not going to break me as a man.
‘I've always said it and I will say it again, that drug takers are cheats and should be banned from the sport.
I did not take any banned substance and will continue to try and clear my name and resume my athletics career which was just beginning to flourish.’
Livingston was just starting to challenge Linford Christie as Britain's number one sprinter when he received a knock on the door at the Olympic village.
Medal
He was crowned European indoor champion in Genoa early in the year and went to Barcelona believing he could reach the 100 metres final and challenge for a medal.
Now Livingston appears to be fighting a losing cause, especially since he is relying on a scientific defence rather than a claim the BAF testing procedure was suspect.
But he has yet to explain publicly how traces of the drug Methandianone were found in a urine sample taken on July 15.
It has been suggested that he has claimed to have absorbed the banned substance through eating meat but one observer claimed cryptically yesterday: ‘He would have to eat three cows a day for that to be the case.’
Livingston is also reported to have recruited a Norweigan dietary expert at a cost of £6,000 to provide evidence of his innocence but the expert is alleged to have disappeared with the money.
Livingston became the third British athlete after pole vaulter Jeff Gutteridge and shot-putter Neal Brunning to be banned for failing a drugs test.
Although his suspension will end in July 1996, before the start of the Atlanta Olympics, he will not be allowed to compete.
He is the third victim of a new life-ban ruling imposed by the British Olympic Association.
‘We brought in this new rule in March following representations from athletes, that any competitor banned for taking drugs would never again compete for Britain at the Olympics,’ spokeswoman Caroline Searle said.
Livingston can also appeal against that Olympic ban and he will be discussing that option with his advisers over the next 21 days.
They are trying to obtain documentary evidence which was witheld from the diciplinary hearing by the BAF.
A spokesman for his advisers alleged that ‘certain analytical information was suppressed on the basis that it was not deemed relevant’.
The statement added: ‘Jason's scientific advisers do not concur with this view and therefore a formal request will be made during the next few days for this non-disclosed information.
‘While the outcome was predicted by some sources, Jason is nevertheless extremely upset by the decision announced today.
‘He is still angry at the two-week delay which occurred between the day he was tested and the way the results were announced in such a public manner.’
Fight
If Livingston decides to take the matter to court, like banned American Butch Reynolds, the case will be vigorously fought by the BAF who have become world leaders in the anti-drugs crusade.
Spokesman Tony Ward said the BAF were ‘sad for Jason Livingston,’ but added: ‘We have carried out the right procedures and we would fight any court case to the bitter end to defend our position.’
‘We are sad for Jason Livingston.
We are always sad when a young international athlete finds himself in this situation.’
Ward believes the campaign against drug cheats must be run worldwide by the Amateur Athletics Federation and the International Olympic Committee, the two bodies with the financial clout to carry out random testing.
Ward said: ‘We are absolutely sure that athletes are taking substances for which there is no adequate test.
That is part of the continuing war against drug abuse.
He said: ‘The pendulum swung rapidly in 1988 when Ben Johnson was caught in favour of those chasing the drug users.
Now it has gone back towards the middle and as of this moment, drug abuse worldwide is worse than ever.’
White can return for England
By Graham Fisher
MANCHESTER CITY'S explosive marksman David White has not seen the last of an England shirt.
That was the emphatic prediction of Maine Road boss Peter Reid yesterday despite White's scant return of only two goals in the 16 games since his bleak debut for England.
Reid said: ‘Look at David's total at the end of the season and he'll be up there with the best.
He is on nine, which isn't bad at all, and his goal ratio since he first came into the side has been excellent.
You can't take barren spells in isolation.’
White began the season in a blaze of glory.
Seven goals in as many games caught Graham Taylor's eye but it all went wrong with a missed chance early in his England debut against Spain in September.
He was brought off before the end of a rare defeat and the emotional scars were apparent for weeks after that.
Reid admitted: ‘That hurt him and it got to the stage where he wasn't getting in there to take chances.
We had a heart-to-heart about it.
‘There's no concern now.
David is making chances every game.
They are not going in at the moment but that doesn't worry me because he is a smashing lad doing the right things again.
‘I'm certain he will play for England again and put that first experience behind him.’
White, 25, recovered his touch briefly with goals against Everton and Leed.
But a blank run of five games since has contributed to City's disappointing fall to mid-table, out of the title race and unable to spend on team strengthening.
He will be looking to hit the goal trail on Boxing Day when City have a chance to recover ground against Sheffield United.
Meanwhile, Southampton midfielder Terry Hurlock yesterday received some New Year cheer when he was cleared to play in the televised FA Cup tie against Nottingham Forest on January 3.
It was feared Hurlock would be suspended for the Cup match, and also the Premier League game against Leeds on January 9, after being booked at Everton last Saturday.
But Saints yesterday confirmed that the booking took Hurlock's disciplinary points tally to 20, one short of an automatic two-match ban.
Ndlovu sits out
BRILLIANT Zimbabwean Peter Ndlovu jetted in from helping his country beat Egypt in the World Cup to find his Coventry place under threat.
The 19-year-old striker scored in Zimbabwe's 2-l victory last weekend, but while he was away Coventry thrashed Liverpool 5-l.
Now City's manager Bobby Gould is hinting that he will keep an unchanged team for Saturday's all-ticket match against Aston Villa.
Gould said: ‘Players pick themselves and players drop themselves.’
This means that Ndlovu is likely to miss the Villa clash.
Steve Ogrizovic, Coventry's long-serving goalkeeper, is also likely to be out.
He underwent a manipulative operation on his neck yesterday and is not expected to be fit.
The Coventry manager's son Jonathan, who made his debut against Liverpool as Ogrizovic's deputy, will hold on to the No 1 jersey.
Meanwhile, Coventry have brought in hot-air blowers in a bid to thaw out their frozen Highfield Road pitch in time for the Boxing Day Midlands derby match.
Ward's double blow
KEVIN WARD has been banned for both of St Helens' two big holiday attractions.
The Great Britain forward, sent off for tripping Mike Ford in Saturday's Regal Trophy defeat by Castleford, presented video evidence to yesterday's Rugby League disciplinary committee, but it failed to save him from a two-match ban.
He misses Sunday's game against Wigan and the New Year's Day clash with Widnes.
Clubs asked for early warning
FOOTBALL clubs have been urged to make early inspections if there is any doubt about their matches to prevent clubs and fans setting off unnecessarily.
For instance, Barnet have to go to Scarborough, with fans due to begin the trek at 6am for an 11am kick-off.
Scarborough have arranged a 12.30pm Christmas Day inspection.
League chief Ian Cotton said: ‘Clubs will want to give games every chance but we also feel that they should take into account their opponents.’
From pupil to rival
By Graham Otway
FIRST Phil Tufnell was John Emburey's pupil, then his county rival before emerging as a Test star in his own right during his older colleague's Test ban for joining the rebel tour to South Africa.
Today, in the final part of our exclusive series, Emburey analyses his rivalry and friendship with his fellow Middlesex spinner.
I HAVE happily helped Phil Tufnell develop his career from his earliest days on the staff at Middlesex through to his current position as England's first choice spinner.
But things are about to change.
From the moment the England plane lands in Delhi next week at the start of the Indian tour, my county team-mate and one-time pupil will become my international rival.
Now that my South African ban has been lifted, I want to reclaim the No 1 spot I gave up in 1989 and it will be interesting to see how Tuffers reacts to the challenge.
He might have spotted something slightly different in my attitude last summer because the timing of the ICC decision to reprieve us rebels virtually coincided with Tuffers' return to the Middlesex side after recovering from his stomach operation.
Claims
In the previous two seasons, while I was serving my ban, both Mike Gatting and I had sometimes gone out of our way to push Tuffers in county matches at my expense.
If a pitch was turning more at one end than the other, we would offer it to Tuffers to enhance his chances of getting wickets to push his Test claims.
But in August, as the selectors were putting together their plans for the winter, I started saying to Gatt: ‘Why the bloody hell has he got that end, I want it.’
And that's how it's going to be this winter.
I have got to try to outbowl him in the early matches because there is a good chance we may go into the Tests with only one spinner.
I am not expecting the Test wickets to turn a lot — they didn't on the tour there in 1981-82 — and the current Indian attack is based more around pace than spin.
But my rivalry with Tuffers will be purely professional because there is no personal animosity between us.
Although I am 40 and from a different age group, I actually enjoy his company in the dressing room.
A lot of people think of him mooching around sullenly, but he's got a very dry wit and also has great ability as a mimic.
He has had the players in stitches over the past few weeks when we have relaxed after our training sessions at Lilleshall by having a game of pool.
He does a wonderful Alex Higgins impression, mincing around the table, puffing on a fag and slamming shots at the pockets.
As a bowler at Middlesex, Tuffers has a great tradition to live up to.
Peak
The county has given England an almost unbroken supply of good spinners since Fred Titmus made his Test debut against Australia in 1955.
And although, at 25, he's still got a lot to learn — I don't think I reached my peak until I was 31 — he has the potential to dominate the England spin attack for the next 10 years or more.
Tuffers is the third left-arm spinner I have played alongside during my career.
There was ‘Deadly’ Derek Underwood, who was quick through the air, turned the ball and had marvellous control.
Phil Edmonds had the most perfect bowling action, probably only matched by the great Bishen Bedi, and one you would gladly try to teach to any youngster.
He used his height to loop the ball well, turned it and bowled agressively.
As partners at Middlesex we tried to steal Test matches off each other when England were only playing one spinner, and it made us into better bowlers.
Now there is Tuffers, and he has not earned the nickname ‘The Artful Dodger’ for nothing.
His great skill is to be able to hold the ball back without changing his action.
Many spinners cannot deliver a slower ball without it being obvious, yet he can get quality batsmen charging up and down the pitch trying to pick the pace and flight.
The one thing Phil is still learning is how to cope when batsmen get after him on a good pitch.
Mike Gatting has tried to help him, sometimes by being brutal.
Sometimes when Tuffers has been hit for four, he has immediately asked for a fielder to be moved to plug the gap.
Gatt simply replies: ‘Just get on with it, I am not setting a field for bad balls.’
Trying to knock Tuffers off his England perch in India is not going to be easy.
Favours
With his record of four five-wicket hauls in 10 Tests, he has proved he is a matchwinner.
I can't expect any favours from Graham Gooch in that direction.
He might be my best friend but he will treat me the same as any other player and will only pick me for a Test if I am bowling well.
But I hope Graham will look at my bowling this winter in a different light to the way it has been in the past by England.
One of the main reasons why I joined the 1990 rebel tour to South Africa was my disappointment with the way I had been used as an England spinner in the previous couple of years.
Too often I was asked to bowl defensively, brought into the attack to stop the flood of runs when batsmen were giving us a caning.
With defensive fields I would fire the ball in, and if I finally achieved a breakthrough I would be taken out of the attack.
Then the other bowlers, brought back feeling fresh, would be given the chance to force a collapse.
Being used like that accounted for my poor figures for England between 1986 and 1989 — I went through one series against Pakistan playing in four Tests without getting a wicket.
My confidence suffered so much that I failed to reach the 50-wicket mark in three successive County Championship campaigns with Middlesex.
Perhaps I needed a break from the England side.
Most players would probably benefit from the occasional rest, but regulars in the team never want to be left out.
But just playing county cricket for two-and-a-half years revived my appetite and confidence.
My 81 first class wickets last summer proved the point.
Being picked ahead of Ian Salisbury this winter — at my age and after the South African affair — has attracted a lot of criticism, some of which has hurt.
I feel I am bowling well enough to play for England again, though Ian probably was a bit unlucky.
He bowled well on his debut at Lord's and was unlucky to play his second Test at Old Trafford, which is such a good batting wicket these days.
He was also unfortunate that when he really got among the wickets in county cricket in September, taking 23 in Sussex's final two matches of the season, the touring party had already been picked.
It only goes to show that compared to the mid-80s, when there was just Eddie Hemmings and I battling for an England place, there is now much tougher competition at the top.
I have come back to the international scene with a fierce rival in Phil Tufnell, with Ian Salisbury breathing down our necks and Hampshire's young Sean Udal making great strides every season.
It makes the coming three months in India and Sri Lanka one of the toughest challenges of my career.
Eddie's eyes on change
By Tony Kell
WINGER Eddie McGoldrick, the joint top goalscorer at Crystal Palace, has told boss Steve Coppell he prefers playing in defence.
Palace go in search of their fifth consecutive win on Boxing Day in the Selhurst Park clash against tenants Wimbledon, with McGoldrick unconvinced about his role on the wing.
McGoldrick, a revelation as emergency sweeper for Palace in impressive wins over Liverpool and Leeds, would readily swap his wide duties for a permanent place at the back.
It is of little consolation to out-of-pocket Palace chairman Ron Noades, who recently paid McGoldrick a £10,000 bonus for reaching seven League goals this season.
McGoldrick said: ‘I play where I'm told, but I do not class myself as a natural winger.
I am happier playing at the back.
I played there early in my career at Northampton and it suits my style.
‘Most wingers have a special trick or two.
I am more of a hard-working midfielder and regard sweeper as my best position.’
The previously shot-shy winger — three League goals in four seasons — had a special goals clause inserted in his new contract at the start of the season.
And Noades, who ordered a 10 per cent wage cut for Palace office staff this month, never dreamed he would be obliged to pay up.
McGoldrick said: ‘The chairman can be blunt and the target was his way of getting at me about my goalscoring record.
‘The offer was made almost tongue-in-cheek.
He was confident he would not have to pay up and even told me, ‘You will never score that many goals’.
I have never been prolific and worked hard on that side of my game.’
Keegan's goal now AC Milan
By John Wardle
KEVIN KEEGAN last night outlined his long-term vision for Newcastle.
‘I want us to become the AC Milan of English football,’ said the Geordies boss.
‘We are one of the few clubs that could maintain a big staff and keep everybody happy.
Nothing has happened since I came here 10 months ago to make me change my mind that this is the biggest club left in Britain.
‘By that, I mean the biggest club left to realise its potential.’
Chairman Sir John Hall will unveil plans shortly for a 38,000-plus all-seater stadium at St James' Park, to be completed by 1996.
‘We are going to rival Sunderland for the right to stage the European Championships,’ he said.
Meanwhile, Keegan is happy that Newcastle are going out of 1992 on a high after a roller-coaster 12 months on Tyneside.
‘I would love to have a crystal ball and see where we will be next Christmas.
It has got to be the Premier League,’ he added.
The Newcastle boss also revealed why he sold goal machine Mick Quinn to Coventry for a cut-price £250,000 and that he had received mail questioning his decision to sell.
‘I have had letters from fans asking if I would think again.
But I have no doubts it was the right move for Newcastle and the right move for Mick.
‘The way we play didn't suit him any more.
I am short of cover up front but we had to look to the future.’
And on the promotion challenge, he added: ‘I've got a lot of sensible players here but the moment they think the job has been done, we'll be in trouble.
‘We are in the market for players but whoever we sign will have to earn the right to be in the team.’
Clough to gamble on American
By David Harrison
BRIAN CLOUGH last night made a shock £300,000 move for an untried American to solve his goalkeeping crisis.
The Nottingham Forest manager has wasted no time in moving for Olympic keeper Brad Freidle after Mark Crossley cost his side two crucial survival points against Wimbledon on Sunday.
Although Freidle needs a work permit before he can make his Forest debut, a first team place is there for the taking following Crossley's continuing loss of form.
The 21-year-old American, signed from Dallas Sidekicks, has played just one practice match and had a couple of training sessions with Forest.
But he has impressed Clough and his coaching staff.
Assistant manager Ron Fenton said: ‘We like what we've seen.
He is confident, brave and agile, and from what we can gather he is rated the best in America.
‘Clough has not decided whether to retain Crossley for Saturday's game against QPR, but he will be under pressure to give Andrew Marriott a chance until Freidle's work permit is granted.’
Meanwhile, bookmakers William Hill now make Forest odds-on favourites for relegation, but champions Leeds are not far behind at only 5-1.
Sick Mark is axed
By Des Kelly
MARK WRIGHT was last night ruthlessly axed by Liverpool manager Graeme Souness after revealing he had climbed from his sick-bed to help the club.
Anfield's £2.2 million star has been dropped for the televised Boxing Day clash with Oldham and his turbulent, 18-month Merseyside career looks beyond rescue.
Souness, enraged by the humiliating 5-1 defeat at Coventry on Saturday, lashed his players for their ‘Sunday League’ defending and confirmed that Wright would be the victim of a re-shuffle.
But the 29-year-old centre-half explained how he had been the victim of his own eagerness to be involved in the Kop cause, despite a virus problem.
Wright said: ‘After the victory over Blackburn a couple of weeks ago, I picked up some kind of flu bug.
I had to spend three days in bed and didn't really kick a ball in the build-up to the Highfield Road game.
I was asked to turn out at Coventry and I agreed because I'm a professional player and that's my job — but I wasn't feeling 100 per cent.
‘Perhaps, in retrospect, I shouldn't have gone out there because I didn't do myself any favours.
‘Now I've been told that I've lost my place and I'm very disappointed.’
Wright was the first of Souness's multi-million pound recruits back in the summer of 1991, but his fortunes took a savage nosedive in September after a string of poor Liverpool results against Aston Villa, Chesterfield and Wimbledon.
Within the space of one miserable week, he lost his first-team spot, the captaincy and his England place.
Wright battled back into the senior side and scored in the Mersey derby defeat at Everton — but only after filling in for injured Steve Nicol and David Burrows.
However, the arrival of £600,000 Norwegian full-back Stig Inge Bjornbye has now cut that lifeline and Wright is now set to follow his friend and former Derby colleague Dean Saunders out of the Anfield exit.
Arsenal and Leeds have both been linked with the Italian World Cup hero but Liverpool must now prepare to take a significant loss on their investment if they want to offload him.
Souness might have singled out Wright for the chop but he was in no mood to spare his team-mates from criticism.
He stormed: ‘I am looking for a dramatic improvement in our defending.
‘Some of it has been Sunday League stuff — and that is with due respect to anyone in the Sunday League.
Conceded
‘The way we conceded goals at Coventry was very hard to take and I'm looking for us to bounce back as quickly as possible.
‘If we had shown any form at all outside Anfield we would be up amongst the leaders.
‘Getting results away from home and in Europe has been a hallmark of Liverpool sides throughout the years.’
Ian Rush is likely to lead the attack, despite speculation that his place was under threat but £2.3m Paul Stewart could be relegated to the bench.
Banned Jason hits back
David Harrison
DISGRACED sprinter Jason Livingston last night insisted he had been used as a scapegoat by British athletics officials.
Livingston, who has vowed to clear his name after British athletics chiefs banned him for four years for drugs cheating, said: ‘I am being imprisoned for something I haven't done.
‘I half-expected it because the Federation wasn't going to admit to making a mistake, because after the Butch Reynolds case it would have been too expensive for them.’
He was banished from last summer's Olympics after a drugs test showed traces of the banned steroid Methandianone.
Grin and bear it with Gazza
TOY BOY…
Paul Gascoigne turns in another dazzling performance, this time as Santa Claus, as he gets into the festive spirit to wish all TODAY readers a very merry Christmas.
Fiennes fayre
SIR Ranulph Fiennes, on a trek to the South Pole, plans Christmas dinner of hot shepherd's pie tomorrow — in temperatures of -30C.
They'll bounce back, says Carey
By Liz Moore
THE Royal Family will bounce back from their ‘terrible year’, the Archbishop of Canterbury said yesterday.
Despite marriage break-ups and criticism over lifestyle and finances, the family has the spirit to endure and to win back public support, said Dr George Carey.
The Archbishop, who has close contacts with the royals, insisted on BBC TV: ‘They are in very good heart.’
‘The Royal Family are no different from any other family going through the strains of marriage break-up.
We all pity any family that goes through that.
‘The Church must stand alongside every family like that — not actually put the Royal Family on a pedestal and expect impossible things of them.’
His confidence in the Queen's ability to ‘bounce back’ seems to be borne out in surveys, with 10 per cent more people than a year ago naming her as their favourite royal.
Just like any other family
THE Royal Family spent yesterday preparing for the Christmas festivities much like any other family.
The Queen and Prince Philip spent the day at Sandringham in Norfolk relaxing.
Princess Diana did some last minute Christmas shopping in London with sons Prince William, 10, and eight-year-old Prince Harry.
They then said goodbye to their mother at Kensington Palace and travelled to Sandringham.
Diana will go to her family home of Althorp, Northants, today to be with her brother Charles and his wife and children.
Tonight she will attend the midnight mass in the tiny church in Great Brington.
Prince Charles spent yesterday on ‘private duties’ before driving to join his mother.
The Duchess of York settled into a nine-bedroom farmhouse on the estate where she will stay throughout the holiday.
Don't miss out
BE sure to catch up with our bumper Boxing Day Racing Special on Saturday.
Don't miss our in-depth look at French ace The Fellow, who defends his crown against rising stars Bradbury Star and Tipping Tim in the King George at Kempton.
Plus latest news on the big race, updated racecards, latest riding arrangements, non-runners and betting news.
All at TODAY Racing would like to wish you a happy Christmas and a very profitable 1993.
Miinne is late switch
MARTIN PIPE thought long and hard yesterday before withdrawing Miinnehoma from Saturday's King George VI Chase.
The champion trainer waited until minutes before the declaration deadline before deciding that he would instead go for Monday's Coral Welsh National.
Worries over Miinnehoma's ability to act on Kempton's right-handed track strongly influenced Pipe.
‘It's a difficult decision, but the Welsh National is the preferred race,’ he said.
Miinnehoma has been introduced into the sponsors' list at 4-1, with stablemate Run For Free eased to 11-4 (from 9-4).
Dessie's got it made!
WHILE Britain suffered in sub-zero temperatures yesterday, Desert Orchid kept warm in his special headgear, surrounded by Christmas cards from his many fans.
The nation's favourite racehorse, four times a winner of Kempton's King George VI Chase and on the mend following an operation for a twisted gut, looks to have found the most sensible place to spend the Christmas break with several Boxing Day racecards under threat from heavy frosts.
Kempton is a fairly safe bet to proceed, as are Wincanton and Newton Abbot in the south, but prospects for Wetherby, Sedgefield and Market Rasen depend on a rise in temperature.
The fixtures at Wolverhampton and Huntingdon are reported to be very much in the balance.
Snookered
Steve Acteson
BARRY HEARN made millions out of— and for — snooker and has subsequently spent mi His rivals pretend to loath him, some actually do, and his enthusiasm for his players, boxers and loadsamoney schemes can appear OTT.
But Hearn, fiercely loyal to his Matchroom family, is an astute and clever businessman with a lust for life — and hard cash.
Here, talking exclusively to Steve Acteson, Hearn has come clean to laugh at his disasters and the worst decisions of his career.
A RIGHT ROYAL COCK-UP
IN the middle 80s, snooker was booming and I was doing my best to cash-in on selling it around the world.
There were some pretty unlikely fresh venues for this once working class game and some unusual new fans — such as Prince Albert of Monaco.
I went down to Monte Carlo to set up a tournament and was privileged to be granted a meeting with the sports-mad Prince at the Palace.
I was sitting there loving it until I uttered the most embarrassing words of my life.
‘Tell me Barry,’ said Prince Albert.
‘Why is it snooker has never taken off in America?’
‘Easy,’ I replied, ‘You see, the things about the Americans is that they've absolutely no CLAAAARSE.’
‘Interesting you should say that, Barry,’ he murmured.
‘My mother was American.’
PUT DOWN BY ONE LINE
THE 1987 heavyweight fight betwen Joe Bugner and Frank Bruno at Spurs was my first big promotion and to say I was wet behind the ears is an insult to water.
Everything had gone brilliantly, we had 30,000 people there, the show was making loadsamoney and everybody was in a good mood, especially Joe Bugner who was getting £250,000 quid.
Anyway, muggins here went into his dresing room just before the fight and gushed: ‘Joe, it's my first big show, and you've been a professional in every sense of the word.
As a novice in the game, I want to thank you from the bottom of my heart.’
I said if he beat Bruno, I would pay him a king's ransom to come back and fight Mike Tyson in London.
He thanked me too, saying I'd been very fair and was paying him royally, but then he added, in that high-pitched voice of his: ‘One thing though.
I'll do my best out there — but if he hurts me I'm going down.’
MY GREAT DECISIONS
I'VE always said I'm into snooker and boxing, but not even money would tempt me into managing players from any other sport.
Looking back, there have been occasions when I might have had a bit more foresight, particularly when this chap rang me from Newcastle one day raving about this brilliant young footballer he wanted me to look after.
I told him: ‘I'm not interested in footballers, they don't make very much money and, anyway, there's no real future in the game.’
But at least I noted the player's name — it was Paul Gascoigne.
A TOUCH OF CLASS
STEVE DAVIS won the world title for the first time in 1981 and the following year we went back to Sheffield to show the world what a class act we were.
We took over the entire eighth floor of the Grosvenor House Hotel, had a suite each, turned one bedroom into a VIP lounge, another into a Space Invaders arcade for Davis and yet another into a private cinema for Tony Meo to watch Rocky films.
We got incredible press over that, the BBC sent round the cameras, the Press went mad over it — we were the absolute business.
And we got plenty more attention, too, when Davis went out into the Crucible Theatre arena as world champion for the first time and promptly got slaughtered 10-1 by a complete unknown by the name of Tony Knowles.
AN AMAZING INVOICE
WE get thousands of pieces of paperwork from all over the world at the Matchroom: fan mail, bills and God knows what else.
But one invoice stands alone.
It was from the Toronto Golf Club in 1985 and headed
Invoice to you from Alex Higgins and Jimmy White:
To two rounds of golf — free of charge
To hire of two sets of clubs — free of charge
To hire of two golf buggeys — free of charge
To hire of two pairs of golf shoes — free of charge
To two packs of cards — free of charge
To bar bill for the afternoon — $787 Canadian
Evans' tactical switch
CARDIFF coaching organiser Alex Evans will be keeping his cards close to his chest today (Sat) when his side meet Pontypridd in the annual Boxing Day clash at the Arms Park.
The clubs will meet again in a Heineken League First Division fixture at Sardis Road in seven days and Evans has no intention of allowing the opposition a sneak preview of his table-toppers' talents.
Only two of the side that walloped Maesteg in the SWALEC Cup last week have been included — full-back Paul Armstrong and wing Steve Ford.
Contract
Evans has decided not to consider the nine players who are involved in the East Wales v West Wales match on Monday and has named seven of his Under-21 players.
He will let Cardiff know before the end of the month if he will accept their offer of a new contract, after completely rejuvenating the Arms Park side in his five months in charge.
Pontypridd's main concern is the fitness of outside-half Neil Jenkins, who turned out for his club in a home friendly against Penarth on Tuesday — only his second game in seven weeks because of an ankle injury.
Smith on his guard
Scott McMunn
RANGERS manager Walter Smith refuses to take winning this season's Premier League title for granted — despite his side cruising at the top.
Rangers are four points clear of Aberdeen and also have a game in hand over the Dons.
They are six points ahead of Old Firm rivals Celtic.
But Smith said bluntly: ‘The League race is only at the half-way stage and there is still a long way to go.’
Smith has just completed a very successful 1992 campaign, winning all the domestic honours plus a £5 million European bonus by reaching the final stages of the European Cup.
Meanwhile, the situation could not be more different for Celtic boss Liam Brady, in his first full season as manager.
It has been a year of controversy for Brady as the club has still to decide on whether to move to a new home at Cambuslang or remain at Celtic Park.
Shareholders are unhappy with the way things are going.
The club sacked chief executive Terry Cassidy and the Bank of Scotland is taking over the Celtic ground as a security to cover their £5 m overdraft.
A familiar spirit
Julian Bedford
FRANCOIS Doumen, whose face and whose horses are both becoming more and more familiar to the British racing fan, returns to Kempton today in an unfamiliar role, that of trainer of the big race favourite.
Of course, Doumen has sent out many a favourite from his Chantilly yard during his career, but so far the British punters have either totally ignored his cross-Channel raiders or found one or two homegrown contenders to prefer.
Not this time.
The public, who have often neglected him in the past, have made The Fellow a short price favourite for this afternoon's King George in the expectation that the French raider will win his second successive Boxing Day showpiece.
One year ago, The Fellow arrived at Kempton as a 10-1 shot for the King George, a distant fifth choice in the betting behind Desert Orchid and the young pretender Remittance Man.
History now relates how that race proved one too many for Dessie and half a mile too far for Remittance Man, but to The Fellow fell the spoils of victory and the crown of Europe's champion chaser.
For Doumen's six-year-old had already won most of France's top chasing honours including the big one, the Grand Steeplechase de Paris, and had all but beaten the best of the British at Cheltenham back in March 1991 when only the nose of Garrison Savannah denied him in the Gold Cup.
This year, however, The Fellow has not enjoyed a triumphal procession through his races and returns to Kempton with something to prove.
Last March he suffered a second agonising defeat in the Gold Cup when Cool Ground proved just too good, and he then lost his French crown when the ground at Auteuil for this July's Grand Steeplechase came up unsuitably soft and he could only struggle round in eighth place.
This Autumn two victories in smaller races at Auteuil — one over timber, the other over the larger obstacles — readied him for a trip to Newbury for the Hennessy, his first outing in handicap company in Britain.
Top weight and soft ground proved his undoing but he ran an absolute cracker to finish third to Sibton Abbey.
That performance was enough for the bookmakers to make The Fellow favourite for this afternoon's big one.
The punters, who have by now learned what is good for them, have not been opposing him.
Win or lose, both Doumen and The Fellow will be back at Cheltenham again in March.
Only one horse, Mandarin, has won both the Gold Cup and the ‘Grand Steep’ as it is affectionately known.
Doumen would love to become the first French trainer to accomplish that remarkable double.
And in The Fellow he may have the horse to do just that.
Only three survive frost
Colin Cooper
ONLY three Boxing day meetings have escaped the big freeze.
Kempton, Newton Abbot and Wincanton keep the industry moving on what is traditionally one of the busiest days of the year.
Wetherby, Huntingdon and Market Rasen were all called off on Thursday and the casualty list lengthened yesterday with the abandonments of Sedgefield and Wolverhampton.
Fears that Wincanton would join the list were allayed by a morning inspection.
A thaw has set in and clerk of the course Ian Renton reports racing will definitely go ahead.
No problems are anticipated for Kempton's televised meeting, which features the King George VI Chase, or at Newton Abbot, while prospects are apparently good for the Coral Welsh National at Chepstow on Monday.
Passage to India is Taylor-made
Giles Smith
FOR a man who must have thought his career was over six years ago when rejected by Derbyshire, Paul Taylor's passage to India is indeed a rags-to-riches miracle.
The story of how the 28-year-old left-arm paceman returned to county cricket after two years languishing in the minor counties with Staffordshire is remarkable enough.
For, after less than 20 wickets in four lean years with Derbyshire, Taylor was part of the Staffordshire team that came to Northampton in the first round of the 1990 NatWest Cup to be plundered by Allan Lamb and company for the record total of 360-2.
Northampton chief executive, Steve Coverdale, takes up the story: ‘Paul, like all the Staffordshire bowlers, had some pretty horrendous figures.
His were about 0-95 in 12 overs as our boys ran amok.
‘But in his last over, he had the guts to bowl really fast and he should have had Allan Lamb caught three times but each time their 'keeper dropped it.
‘At the time we were very short on quick bowling, and decided to take a real gamble and offer him a place on our staff.
In a way, it wasn't a gamble as he was relatively young at 26, and it wasn't going to cost us a great deal.
But it turned out to be the right decision.’
Actually, it was an inspired gamble — in his first, albeit injury-hit, season in 1991 Taylor took 54 wickets and last year he grabbed 67 in Northants' championship chase and suddenly Ted Dexter and the England selectors were knocking on the door.
The rest, as they say, is history as the 6ft 2in lad from Ashby-de-la-Zouch prepares for Monday's flight with the England team to Delhi.
Strange
‘Yes, I suppose it does seem a bit strange,’ said Taylor.
‘But once Northants had given me a chance, I did think I had the talent.
‘When I started taking those wickets last summer, I began did begin to think I had a chance of representing my country but, to be truthful, I didn't think it could be more than the England A side.
‘When I heard I had been chosen for the full squad, it was a bit of a shock, but it really was a dream come true.’
A key ingredient in his rise from a minor counties' also-ran to England strike bowler was a brief coaching session with the Dennis Lillee.
Two winters ago, as Taylor tried desperately to revive his career, he spent a winter in the Aussie outback playing for a little-known team called North Kalgoorlie.
‘Dennis had played a seasson for Northants and I got the opportunity to go and see him in Perth,’ he explained.
‘I only had a couple of hours with him, but it made a tremendous difference.
‘He straightened one or two things out in my action, worked on my technique a bit, but the most important thing he taught me was to concentrate on every single delivery as if it were he most important in your life.
‘I started to look at things a bit differently after that, and it certainly seems to have worked for me.’
Now Taylor is looking forward to forcing himself into the England pace attack alongside the likes of Chris Lewis, Devon Malcolm and Phil DeFreitas.
Taylor has been helped a great deal in the six weeks of preparation for the tour by England's last great left-arm fast-bowler, John ‘J.K.’ Lever and the team's new top bowling coach, Geoff Arnold.
‘J.K. has been a great help — he knows so much about left-arm swing bowling and about playing in India.
His experience will, I hope, really help.’
Effort
At 13 and a bit stone, Taylor is one of the biggest men in the squad and found the Lilleshall pre-tour training schedule a bit of an effort.
‘The strenuous training came as a bit of a shock at first.
But they soon knocked me into shape.
‘Fitness if often a psychological thing — if you think fit, you will be fit, and that's how I am feeling at the moment.’
With that sort of confidence, you get the feeling Taylor will continue his meteoric rise to the top and come home one of the heroes of India.
His county boss, Coverdale, certainly hopes so.
‘Paul grabbed his chance with us.
Now it's up to him to grab it with England.’
Border on the brink
Graham Otway
ALLAN BORDER returned to the Australian team in Melbourne earlier today knowing he is on probation for next summer's Ashes series in England.
Border regained the Aussie captaincy from opening batsman Mark Taylor after a fortnight's lay-off with a hamstring injury.
But as he took the field in the second Test against the West Indies, all eyes were on his behaviour.
I understand that Border, 37, was within one phone call of losing his job when umpire Steve Randell reported him along with fast bowler Merv Hughes for dissent in the first Test at Brisbane earlier this month.
A two match suspension was in the mind of English match referee Raman Subba Row.
But after a call to ICC chairman Sir Colin Cowdrey he settled on an £850 fine.
Subba Row realised that if he banned Border then the Australian Board would be left in no choice but to dismiss their captain.
But since that narrow escape Border has also upset manager Bobby Simpson with his public criticism of player-preparation before a nine-wicket one-day defeat at the hands of the West Indies in Perth earlier this month.
Border emerged from that verbal fracas with a flea in his ear from Australian officials, but their patience is said to be wearing thin.
At the age of 37 — old by Australian standards — Border accepts that he is nearing the end of his career but he is desparate to prolong it for two reasons.
He would dearly like to hand over the captaincy at the end of next August after having retained the Ashes on his fifth tour to England.
Before then he also hopes to score the extra 241 runs he still needs to overtake Sunil Gavaskar's all-time Test record of 10,122.
Joynt's mission
St HELENS forward Chris Joynt goes into tomorrow's rugby league derby with Wigan determined to stake his international claims.
Joynt, intent on ousting Wigan's Phil Clarke as heir to the Great Britain No 13 jersey when Ellery Hanley steps down, said: ‘Phil is my main rival.
I must have a good game against him.’
Taste for claret as fans hit the road
Steve Bott
DAWN breaks on Boxing Day in Burnley and groups of bleary-eyed individuals sporting garish claret and blue garb gather on street corners.
Not for them the traditional lunchtime saunter down to the pub, then off to the match with their mates.
For they are Burnley fans.
And despite the fact their team is in a division that includes local rivals such as Bolton, Preston, Blackpool, Stockport and Wigan, the vagaries of the Football League's fixtures computer means they face a 576-mile round trip to Brighton to see their idols play today.
It means getting up in the early hours to be ready to board a coach at around 6.30am that will transport them to the South Coast, then bring them back again, arriving home at around midnight.
Not most people's idea of enjoyment, especially on Boxing Day.
But for these hardy souls supporting Burnley isn't merely a pastime, it's more a way of life.
Take 80-year-old Herman Wood, for instance.
He's been travelling up and down the country for over a quarter of a century watching the Clarets and he wouldn't dream of being anywhere else but on the coach to Brighton on Boxing Day.
‘I'll definitely be going,’ he declared.
‘The first away game I went to was Northampton in the mid-Sixties when Burnley were in the First Division.
I haven't missed many since then.
‘I wouldn't like to guess how many miles I've travelled watching them, but anyway, I'm on my own now so it's a day out for me.’
Domestic problems don't arise when the Rayners want to go to a game — the whole family go along for the ride.
That's dad Mike, mum Gill and their four children — 18-year-old Natasha, Dominic (17), Simon (12) and 11-year-old Melissa.
‘The cost of taking everybody certainly does mount up, but we are all dead keen and we usually go to all the matches home and away,’ said Gill.
‘We went to every match last season and only illness stops us going to a game.
Natasha is at university in Bradford now, but she comes home every weekend to go to the games with us.’
Burnley are renowned for their large travelling support, often boosting their hosts' gates to the highest of the season, and Supporters' Club secretary Dave Spencer, who is responsible for organising the coaches, reckons there could be as many as 3,000 Burnley fans at the game.
‘Apart from the coaches we are taking, the club has chartered a plane and then there will be those making their own way in private or hired cars, mini-buses and vans,’ said Dave.
‘I don't know whether Brighton will have room for us all,’ he added.
Fash glad to be back
Mike Walters
WHILE the Queen was addressing the Commonwealth yesterday, President Fash was preparing his seasonal message for his somewhat smaller band of subjects at Wimbledon.
Dons president John Fashanu has suffered his own autumnus horribilis, and his recovery from a hip injury hasn't come a moment too soon for manager Joe Kinnear.
Fashanu, included in the squad for today's boxing day clash with Wimbledon's Selhurst Park landlords, Crystal Palace, last night promised to lead from the front in the club's fight against relegation.
He said: ‘I couldn't bear the thought of us going down with me as club captain and president.
‘It would be a case of last one out, turn off the lights.
Relegation is a swear word at Wimbledon because we know it would threaten our existence.
‘None of us would want to drop down a division, so we would have to close down the shop and go back to our day jobs.’
Fortunately for 30-year-old Fash, there is no shortage of those.
An astute businessman and virtual workaholic, he has his finger in more proverbial puddings than Little Jack Horner.
For a start, there's his burgeoning empire in designer clothes.
More than 10 per cent of the turnover is in the African branch of his business and he makes regular flying visits to Nigeria.
And there's his increasingly high profile on TV programmes such as The Gladiators, On the Line and Good Sports.
Priority
That lot would keep most mortals occupied round the clock.
But he added: ‘First and foremost, I'm a professional footballer and I make sure everyone knows that.
Wimbledon pay my wages and my commitment to them takes top priority.
‘Joe knows that when I don't train with the lads I do extra training on my own.
‘I've been learning the ancient Japanese martial art of san tu dang for about 10 years now and that helps me keep my weight constant.
‘When I was told to rest all week and just turn up and play on the Saturday, I felt sluggish and lethargic, so I make sure I do the required hours every week.
‘My heart is in the club more than ever.
While I've been injured I've missed them and they've missed me.
‘I scored 20 goals in each of the last three seasons, but teams like Wimbledon can't afford to just go out and replace their top scorer at the drop of a hat.
‘We would have to win £4m on the pools before doing that.
Someone else has had to step in and fill my position — and it has shown in our results.
‘The only blessing about my absence from the side recently is that owner Sam Hammam has not had to pay me my goal bonuses!’
Fash's packed schedule — he often holds business meetings well into the small hours and averages just five hours sleep a night — has not affected the common touch which makes him such a popular figure at Wimbledon.
Ever the great ambassador, he has been touring children's hospitals to deliver Christmas presents this week — although Fash has no intention of extending his charity to Palace today or Chelsea on Bank Holiday Monday.
Steve Coppell's men have already sewn the seeds of recovery with a hat-trick of wins against Queens Park Rangers, Liverpool and Leeds — but they won't cause Fashanu even more sleepless nights.
Normal
‘Palace are strong and fit, but when you have mixed with Gladiators you tend not to be intimidated by physique or intensity,’ he said.
‘Some of those Gladiators are really serious guys.
They eat four baby chickens and a whole loaf of brown bread for lunch.
‘But they are really just normal, everyday folk who happen to have monster diets — every day is like a Christmas pig-out for them.’
Ipswich are backed by big fan Bobby
Ben Bacon
FORMER England manager Bobby Robson last night gave Ipswich his official seal of approval.
Robson, who established his managerial reputation at Portman Road, could not be happier with his ex-club's success under John Lyall and Mick McGiven.
Unbeaten in 11 games, Ipswich currently lie sixth and today travel to seventh-placed Arsenal.
Said Robson: ‘I'm delighted they are doing so well and, like many people, have been surprised by their great position.
‘They look organised with a good defence, and are playing with a great deal of confidence.’
Meanwhile, the FA could revoke striker Bontcho Guentchev's work permit.
Title
An enquiry has been ordered into the Bulgarian international's background after Ipswich were told he had played 12 games for his country.
Other sources now insist he only has one cap.
Gunners boss George Graham yesterday insisted Arsenal are still in the title hunt, saying: ‘We have the players and the talent to win the Championship.
We've got the staff — now we must find the desire.’
Premier League favourites Aston Villa are under Doctor's orders.
The Midlands club are giving a two-week trial next month to South Africa's top player, Doctor Kumalo, a midfielder with Kaiser Chiefs.
Leeds defender Tony Dorigo last night delivered a defiant message to Championship pretenders Blackburn and Norwich.
Warned Dorigo: ‘We haven't lost faith in our ability and if we can beat Blackburn and Norwich, it will give us the best possible launching pad for the second half of the season.’
But Norwich boss Mike Walker insists his Premier League leaders cannot be written off — despite defeats against Manchester United and Ipswich.
‘We've enjoyed our stay at the top and we want to stay there.
‘You don't write players off after a couple of defeats,’ he said.
Manchester United skipper Bryan Robson was also in defiant mood yesterday, declaring: ‘I believe we are the best team in the Premier League.’
Robson, only 50-50 for today's big clash with Sheffield Wednesday, believes there is now a blend of craft and experience at Old Trafford that no other challengers can match.
‘Of the other teams in the race, Villa are perhaps the best,’ he said.
Southampton striker Kerry Dixon returns to Chelsea today to receive a presentation to mark his 191 goals for his old club.
But Dixon, who spent nine years at Stamford Bridge, may have to settle for a place on the subs' bench as he continues his return from a back injury.
‘Once the whistle goes I will be wanting us to beat Chelsea,’ he said.
Spurs midfielder Andy Gray has joined First Division Swindon on a month's loan.
Keegan's warning
John Wardle
KEVIN KEEGAN has dangled an international carrot in front of his Newcastle players as they prepare to face Wolves' ex-England man Steve Bull today.
Keegan said: ‘I've got players here capable of playing for England.
‘But I reckon they'll have to get into the Premier League before they get the chance.
In the eyes of the FA it seems that anybody playing outside the top flight is no good.
‘I remember Trevor Brooking doing it for England when he was playing in the Second Division.
‘But these days if you're not in the Premier League you don't even merit a look.
I think it's wrong.
I've got seven English players in my team including lads like Gavin Peacock and Lee Clark and I've told them they've got to get up there to earn recognition.’
Keegan believes the same applies to Bull.
He said: ‘The only way he'll get back in the England setup is by getting promotion.’
Magic in their feet
Mike Walters
ERIC CANTONA bears a striking resemblance to the baubles on your Christmas tree — glossy, fragile and in need of careful handling.
Cantona's Gallic temperament baffled Sheffield Wednesday manager Trevor Francis, exhausted Howard Wilkinson's patience at Leeds and will now test Alex Ferguson's man-management skills to the full at Old Trafford.
Ferguson's first dividend from the £1.2 million he gambled on the unpredictable Frenchman came in the shape of Manchester United's equaliser at Chelsea last week.
But United's trip to Hillsborough today will provide Fergie with a more revealing test of Cantona's mettle, because Wednesday fans are unlikely to have forgiven or forgotten his walkout on the Owls 11 months ago.
It was Francis who gave Cantona his foothold in English football by bringing him to Sheffield for a one-week trial last January.
Severe weather forced Francis to assess his strengths on all weather pitches, and when the Wednesday boss requested an extension of the trial period, Cantona took umbrage and defected to Leeds.
Conflict
Francis said: ‘I couldn't be held responsible for the weather.
It was as if he took the frost and snow personally.’
This will be Cantona's first visit to Hillsborough since he snubbed Wednesday, and his reception will be far removed from the hero worship of Elland Road or Old Trafford.Fergie will need all his powers of communication to prevent him being French fried in the face of hostility he is unlikely to have encountered before.
Some of Eric Le Red's former managers in France sent Ferguson a few tips, via TODAY, on handling his fickle Frenchman.
Guy Roux, the Auxerre coach who gave Liverpool a UEFA Cup fright last season, said: ‘Ferguson must talk to him — every day.
Not as his manager, nor as his father-figure, but as a friend.
‘Cantona is a sensitive man who needs to be told he is doing well, even if he can do better.
‘He has this so-called reputation of the enfant terrible, but reputations can be the making of players as much as their undoing.
‘It all depends on how the reputation is harnessed.
If there is no understanding or compromise, there will be conflict.
‘Did I have any problems with Cantona?
Yes, but only a few minor ones.
And show me a 20-year-old who has no growing up to do.
If I had to give Ferguson advice about bringing the best out of him, I would need only one word — dialogue.’
Gerard Gili was Cantona's coach at Marseille, and he gave a revealing insight into his bust-up with Wilkinson at Leeds.
He said: ‘Cantona is a logical thinker.
He reckons that, if he is a club's top scorer, he deserves to be in the side.
‘There may be a perfectly good reason why he shouldn't be selected, but logic to him suggests otherwise.
I always tried to understand the man and I never had any problems with him.
Not one.
‘If he says he needs a fresh challenge every six to 12 months, as he did when he left Leeds, he is only expressing the natural motivation every top sportsman requires.
‘Manchester United have not taken on a troublemaker or an enfant terrible— they have bought a personality and a man capable of magic in his boots.’
Ego
Gili is perhaps being charitable in forgetting Cantona's fit of pique at a charity match against Torpedo Moscow four years ago.
Eric's ego was bruised when the crowd jeered a wayward shot and he tore off his shirt in disgust.
And that volcanic streak was responsible for his rash announcement last December to retire after he was sent off and banned for four games at his last French club, Nimes.
Nimes president Michel Mezy said: encapsulated the managerial dilemma facing Ferguson when he said: ‘Eric is a bright, intelligent man who can be difficult to handle.
That is his nature.
When things go wrong, he does get upset and his temperament is fragile.’
The bauble, you might say, is in Fergie's court.
Today's Changes
Arsenal v Ipswich
Arsenal weakened by suspension of Tony Adams, with Paul Merson (ankle) and Steve Bould (groin) both doubtful.
Ipswich may recall Phil Whelan to use John Wark as sweeper.
Last Season: No corresponding fixture.
Blackburn v Leeds
Rovers winger Stuart Ripley has shaken off ankle injury, while Leeds have doubts over Mel Sterland and Scott Sellars.
Last Season: No corresponding fixture.
Chelsea v Southampton
Chelsea striker Mick Harford is struggling with a calf strain, while Southampton could be without centre-back Ken Monkou (hamstring).
Last Season: Chelsea 1, Southampton 1; Southampton 1, Chelsea 0.
Coventry City v A Villa
Coventry likely to be unchanged after beating Liverpool.
Villa give Dalian Atkinson fitness test on a stomach strain.
Cyrille Regis stands by.
Last Season: City 1, Villa 0; Villa 2, City 0.
C Palace v Wimbledon
Palace manager Steve Coppell sticks by his resurgent young squad, while Wimbledon hope Warren Barton can return after a long absence.
Last Season: Palace 3, Wimbledon 2; Wimbledon 1, Palace 1.
Everton v Middlesbrough
Everton striker Tony Cottee's comeback is off after a reaction to his troublesome Achilles tendon.
Boro expect to be unchanged.
Last Season: No corresponding fixture.
Man City v Sheff Utd
Peter Reid has ruled himself out, allowing Garry Flitcroft a chance against United.
He also considers recalling Mike Sheron.
Carl Bradshaw starts for United, but Brian Gayle is out after knee surgery.
Last Season: City 3, Utd 2; Utd 4, City 2.
Norwich v Tottenham
Norwich could again be without midfielder Ian Crook (calf strain), and Ian Butterworth is struggling with a rib injury.
Rob Newman and Gary Megson stand by.
Spurs wait on a fitness test on Nayim.
Last Season: Norwich 0, Spurs 1; Spurs 3, Norwich 0.
Nottm Forest v QPR
Forest hope to have Stuart Pearce fit after a shin injury.
Under-fire Mel Crossley continues in goal.
Rangers expect to be unchanged.
Last Season: Forest 1, QPR 1; QPR 0, Forest 2.
Oldham v Liverpool
Oldham still without suspended Neil Pointon, but Ian Marshall, Neil McDonald and Nick Henry all fit again.
Liverpool wait on fitness tests on Steve Nicol and Steve McManaman.
Last Season: Oldham 2, Liverpool 3; Liverpool 2, Oldham 1.
Sheff Wed v Man Utd
United welcome back Ryan Giggs, but Bryan Robson remains only 50-50.
Wednesday's Peter Shirtliff could return after hamstring injury.
Last season: Wed 3, Utd 2; Utd 1, Wed 1.
Hirst's knocking on door of Number 10
David Alexander
A LOT of strikers would give a golden boot to be experiencing the sort of trouble David Hirst is having at the moment.
Nine goals from the 16 games would not seem a problem for most front men, but Sheffield Wednesday's master finisher insists that a goal is overdue.
And, for all sorts of reasons, Hillsborough today would be the perfect time to hit number ten.
Hirst may well be fired up for the job against Manchester United, whose £3.5 million bid by fax was turned down amid some acrimony last month by Wednesday manager Trevor Francis.
Alex Ferguson's awkward attempt to steal the hero of the Hillsborough terraces infuriated Francis, and guarantees an interesting reception for United today.
Hirst admitted he was slightly disturbed by the bid at the time, but now says: ‘The fact that we're playing Manchester United means nothing special to me, nothing at all.
It's just a question of us getting three points, that's all that matters.’
But his hunger to score will make it no easier for Fergie's defenders this afternoon.
He added: ‘My scoring record isn't too bad this season but I've got too long without a goal and I need one bacly.
I need to feel I'm back on the rails.’
Hirst is in a double hurry after a frustrating season of injury, suspension, and upset.
The 24-year-old was hoping to be a regular England choice, but instead finds himself making up for lost time.
That's why he wants a goal urgently, and, besides, he has a point to prove — he wants to show United they were right!
‘I'm used to getting a goal every two-and-a-half games, so going four or more without one makes you take a good look at yourself,’ he says.
‘I just like scoring goals, so four games is just too long for me.
I'm getting into the right positions, but I've got to start finishing them off.’
Power
Francis is concerned about Wednesday wasting chances and the problems that has created, but expects Hirst to start solving them.
‘With a player like David, you know he'll have a quiet spell, and then hit a hat-trick,’ he says.
‘I've become accustomed to this with him.
I've seen it before, it's part of his make-up.’
Hirst has missed 11 games with an ankle injury, and played when short of fitness, but his pace and power have still made an impression this season.
Francis believes he could become Alan Shearer's partner in the England side, and rated him highly enough to agree a new, four-year contract in the summer worth £4,000 a week.
That's why Francis was so angry when United, after receiving a firm ‘no sale’ answer to all their inquiries, faxed their offer to Hillsborough.
‘That won't be the end.
I'm not naive, I know others will make more be back with more bids because he's such a top -class goal scorer,’ says the manager, who has just signed a contract keeping him at Hillsborough for the same time as Hirst.
Despite his success and high earnings, Hirst's feet have stayed firmly in the mining community which has always been his home.
Despite driving a £30,000 Mercedes — cars, as well as goals, are his obsession — he still lives in a mining village near Barnsley with his parents.
His four sisters live nearby.
But Hirst is also very different from the teenager signed from Barnsley for £200,000 by Howard Wilkinson, overawed by the move, size of Sheffield Wednesday, and so unfamiliar with professional routine that he ordered a plate of bacon butties for his pre-match meal.
Now he is confident and ambitious, looking to add to his three caps, the quicker the better.
German Mark
Ben Bacon
NORWICH striker Mark Robins is a shock £2 million target for German champions Stuttgart.
Robins has jumped to the head of Stuttgart's hit list after helping Norwich top the Premier League following his summer move from Manchester United for £800,000.
The former England Under-21 international, 23 last Tuesday, has been intrumental in the Norfolk club's surprise position at the top of the table with his 12 goals, arguably making him the buy of the season.
Stuttgart, beaten by Leeds in the European Cup earlier this season, have closely monitored his progress at Carrow Road and have had him watched on several occasions.
I understand general manager Dieter Hoeness, who has videos of him of him playing, has already flown to Britain to see him play.
Hoeness has recently made discreet enquiries about Robins, in action against Tottenham today, and believes he could prise him away from Carrow Road, where he is on a four-year contract, providing the terms were right.
Hit
Robins turned down a summer move to Dynamo Dresden before moving to Norwich from Old Trafford where he scored 11 goals in 48 League appearances.
Norwich would be loathed to sell a player who has become such a huge hit with Carrow Road fans after instilling genuine belief that the club could win the Championship.
But Norwich, now a 10-1 title shot after Monday's derby defeat by Ipswich, have a history of being a ‘selling club’ and may find such an instant and profitable reward on their £800,000 investment too good to resist.
Stuttgart currently lie seventh in the Bundesliga and are keen to boost their forward power to ensure European qualification following the debacle against Leeds at Elland Road when they inadvertently played four foreign players.
England's crackers
LANCASHIRE'S prolific run-scorer Neil Fairbrother (left) and Middlesex's exciting young spinner Phil Tufnell get into the Christmas spirit before joining up with the rest of their England colleagues who fly off on Monday for the winter tour to India.
Croker dies
TED CROKER, who helped bring football into the modern era, died yesterday aged 68.
Croker, a former FA secretary, is credited with bringing a new commercial outlook to the sport, boosting the FA's annual turnover from £1.5 million to £9m before retiring in 1988.
He had a brief career as a professional footballer, making eight appearances for Charlton in the early 1950s.
He became football's top administrator in 1973, and was made a CBE on his retirement.
He leaves a wife, Cathy, three children and seven grandchildren.
BaaBaas lose Hunter
By Barry Lucas
IAN HUNTER will be glad to see the back of 1992 after his third fitness problem of the season has forced him to miss another showpiece match.
Influenza, on top of two previous leg injuries, means he misses the Barbarians' festive extravaganza at Leicester today.
The Northampton wing began the autumn by withdrawing from the England team to play Leicester with a knee injury that needed surgery.
At least by the time he received a freak, soccer-kickabout leg injury last month that forced him to miss the Test against South Africa, he had enjoyed a double-try England debut against Canada.
Hunter is due to travel to Lanzarote on New Year's Eve for warm weather training, along with other Barbarians selections Steve Bates, John Olver, Jeff Probyn and Tim Rodber.
Harvey Thorneycroft, Hunter's Northampton colleague, replaces him at Leicester, and there is a change on the other wing caused by the withdrawal of French centre Franck Mesnel with a twisted knee.
Jean-Baptiste Lafond moves from wing to centre and his brother Jean-Marc returns to Leicester for a second successive fraternal link in the fixture.
A few years ago this game was used in evidence for a players' international quality, but there is so much serious, competitive rugby now that a post-Christmas frolic is not rated in assessing credentials.
Leicester's promising front row of Graham Rowntree, Richard Cockerill and Baron Garforth will relish testing themselves against the experienced Mark Linnett, Olver and Probyn.
Welsh rivals on trial
By Barry Lucas
THE battle for the coveted Welsh outside-half jersey hots up today when Neil Jenkins and Adrian Davies clash in the showdown between East and West Wales at Cardiff Arms Park.
Injury has ruled out the current incumbent at No 10, Llanelli's Colin Stephens, leaving his two biggest rivals the chance to impress selectors.
For Jenkins, who ousted Stephens last season only to lose his job through suspension and injury this winter, it will be a return to the big time after only one game in the past month.
Davies has helped Cardiff to the top of the Heineken League First Division with some commanding displays and deadly goalkicking, and gets his chance in the West Wales line-up owing to Stephens's knee injury.
‘It's a chance to play rather than sit on the replacements bench and I'm always glad of that,’ said Davies.
‘The Welsh outside-half position is still up for grabs,’ Davies said.
‘No one has made it his own and that's why the sleectors have chosen three of us for the training trip to Lanzarote.
‘I was told I had to play well week-in, week-out in the League to further my chances of getting back into the international side and it has been good to play in a successful side at Cardiff.’
But Davies, who was picked ahead of Jenkins in Australia last year, believes too much attention is being focused on the outside-half berth.
‘Too much pressure is being put on us just because of the tradition of the Welsh No 10 jersey,’ he said.
‘Why should there be so much hassle over one position when there are so many other good players fighting for places in the centre and back row?
‘One player isn't going to make a team and international rugby is more about team planning and preparation these days than it was in the days of the great Welsh outside halves.’
The West back line will be without four original selections — British Lions Ieuan Evans and Robert Jones, Welsh centre Scott Gibbs and Stephens.
East Wales bring in Howard Stone for Newport flanker Glenn George.
Pipe's in no Rush
MARTIN PIPE was last night refusing to get carried away about the Gold Cup prospects of Rushing Wild.
The giant chaser put up an exciting performance on his debut for the champion trainer, romping home by 12 lengths from favourite Fit For Firing at Wincanton on Saturday.
Rushing Wild, successful in six out of eight points, has already had experience of Cheltenham, having sauntered away with the Foxhunters Chase last March by 25 lengths.
Bookmakers Ladbrokes and Coral were mightily impressed by the Wincanton victory, slashing Rushing Wild's Gold Cup price to 20-1 (from 33s and 40s respectively).
But Pipe said: ‘The Gold Cup is a long way away and we'll just have to see what happens in the meantime.’
Prospects improve
RACING looks set to resume normal service this week after a rise in temperatures around the country.
Wetherby, one of five Boxing Day casualties, passed an inspection yesterday morning and is hopeful of staging today's fixture.
There will be a precautionary inspection at 7.15am.
Wolverhampton will also inspect at 8am today but are expecting to go ahead, while there are no problems reported for the day's other cards.
Flown away
By Henry Rix
12.45:THE Martin Pipe-trained Elite Reg will be a warm order after chalking up his hat-trick in a Doncaster handicap.
However, he is not certain to be suited by this stiffer test of stamina, and anyway has plenty to find with newcomer PURITAN on Flat form.
This thorough stayer, bought out of Guy Harwood's yard for 25,000 guineas, was a decent staying handicapper on the Flat and will be very hard to beat if reproducing that kind of form over hurdles.
My Senor is not certain to get the trip, and Landed Gentry cannot beat Elite Reg on Warwick form.
1.15:WONDER MAN is a most exciting chasing prospect and I will be surprised if he is beaten this afternoon.
The former high class hurdler has not come off the bridle to record two effortless chasing victories and, although this is his stiffest task to date over fences, he should have little difficulty in completing the hat-trick.
Phils Pride was very much inferior over hurdles and will have to settle for the runner-up spot.
1.45:THE progressive northern-trained Rifle Range absolutely bolted up by seven lengths from Roscoe Harvey at Haydock last time.
But he is 9lb higher today and is not worth backing at around 2-1.
I prefer ELFAST.
He needed the run when not disgraced in a valuable handicap last time, and is well in on just a 5lb higher mark than when impressively landing the Mildmay Of Flete at the Cheltenham Festival in March.
Tinryland was terribly disappointing on his seasonal debut at Newbury, but he would have a great each-way chance if reproducing last season's form.
2.20:THIS is a fascinating Champion Hurdle trial.
Current Cheltenham second favourite Mighty Mogul is likely to head the market here but, in a race that could be slowly run in the absence of an obvious front-runner, he is worth opposing.
I fancy FLOWN, on offer at a generous 9-1 with Hills.
Nicky Henderson's gelding has hated the testing surface on his two runs this season, but is top class on decent ground as he proved when hacking up from Halkopous at the Festival.
I have run out of excuses for Granville Again.
2.50:DAVID Nicholson pulled off a tremendous training performance when Duntree won at Cheltenham after two years off the track.
But Duntree will struggle over this shorter trip, and I prefer EASTSHAW, 11-1 with Hills.
He remains reasonably treated when considering his easy success at Ludlow last season, and it is interesting that trainer Tim Forster makes him his banker for the Christmas period.
The leniently-treated Sooner Still ran well at Doncaster a couple of weeks ago, but is often let down by his jumping.
Fellow's revenge mission
Jonathan Ramsden
KING GEORGE hero The Fellow is now as short as 7-4 (from 3-1) with Coral to land his first Gold Cup at Cheltenham in March.
Ladbrokes and Hills offer a more generous 9-4 about the French star, who will be trying to make amends for agonising short head defeats in the last two Gold Cups.
Trainer Francois Doumen said last night: ‘The challenge is to bring him back for Gold Cup day in the same shape he was for Kempton.
It will not be easy.
‘I'm almost sure he will not race again before, but we will enter him for the Hennessy Gold Cup in Ireland.’
TV Guide
By Jonathan Ramsden
12.55:THIS race has cut up quite badly and it will be a major surprise if LORD RELIC does not collect.
Martin Pipe's New Zealand-bred put up a useful effort to beat Mad Thyme on his debut at Uttoxeter and has nothing of that calibre to deal with here.
1.25:ALTHOUGH unbeaten in both his starts over timber, there is still a serious doubt over Flat miler Bold Boss's ability to stay a stiff two miles.
Major Bugler was just about the best of these on the level — winning a competitive handicap at Ascot in October.
He proved his stamina when bolting up at Newbury, but I just prefer TOP SPIN, who would have benefitted from a stronger gallop when chasing home Dare To Dream in a decent race at Lingfield.
Mohana has been shrewdly placed by Martin Pipe to win six races, but this is much her stiffest task to date.
2.00:THE participation of Chatam ensures that half of these are carrying more weight than they were originally alloted.
This obviously works in the favour of RUN FOR FREE, who already looked a worthy favourite judged on his 12-length demolition of stable companion Miinnehoma here three weeks ago.
The latter, beaten again since by Captain Dibble at Ascot, would appear to have little hope of reversing the form on 3lb worse terms.
Out-and-out stayer Belmount Captain, unsuited by the slow early gallop at Ascot last time, looks best of the remainder.
2.35:STAUNCH FRIEND had his Champion Hurdle hopes dented when comfortably beaten by Mighty Mogul at Newbury.
Nevertheless, that is top class form and with at least 2st in hand over his two rivals, he should not be beaten.
Champions suffer day of disaster
By Ray French
St Helens 41, Wigan 6.
SUPER St Helens yesterday sent champions Wigan crashing to their heaviest League defeat in 20 years.
And, before a bumper 17,495 holiday crowd, serious injuries added to Wigan woes before Saturday's Regal Trophy semi-final against Hull.
Winger Martin Offiah will be out for a month with a dislocated shoulder, Test stars Andy Platt and Dean Bell have suspected broken right hands, Denis Betts has a hip injury and Great Britain prop Kelvin Skerrett was dismissed by referee Robin Whitfield for a foul on Jarrod McCracken.
Wigan had no answer to Saints' seven-try blitz.
A third-minute try and conversion by ex-All Black Frano Botica seemed par for the course as Wigan, unbeaten by any British club in 16 outings and seeking a record fourth consecutive Championship, opened in fine style.
But then skipper Shane Cooper began to mastermind Saints' destruction from scrum-half and two-try winger Alan Hunte opened his account with the 100th touchdown of his career in the 11th minute.
Second rower Sonny Nickle, after good work by Kiwis George Mann and Cooper, tapped the ball to himself to plunge over for a try.
Hunte's second touchdown in the 23rd minute followed a defence-splitting run from full-back by David Lyon and, nine minutes later, loose forward Chris Joynt took advantage of a searing midfield break by stand-off Tea Ropati and a clever pass from hooker Bernard Dwyer to add to weary Wigan's misery.
Centre Paul Loughlin added the third of his six goals and a 39th-minute penalty to give Saints a deserved 24-6 half-time lead.
Charge
Wigan's hopes of a heroic fightback were shattered two minutes after the break when Lyon, a £90,000 buy from Warrington, latched on to Gus O'Donnell's grubber kick to score at the corner.
And then Skerrett was shown the red card and Platt was sin-binned along with Saints' Nickle after a flare-up.
Even the 58th-minute sin-binning of Mann failed to halt Saints' charge.
Nickle raced in for his second try and Ropati compounded Wigan's agony with the seventh and final touchdown beneath the posts.
Saints are now level on points with Wigan at the top of Division One and coach Mike McClennan beamed: ‘Shane Cooper was the catalyst of the win but this was a real team effort.
The Championship is now wide open but, like any great fighter, Wigan will surely bounce back.’
Wigan boss John Monie said: ‘There are no complaints from us.
They just had one of those days when everything came off for them.
They beat us all over the park.’
Rich reward for Leeds
Leeds 40, Castleford 12.
BIG-SPENDERS Leeds handed their long-suffering fans Christmas presents they couldn't have bargained for with a seven-try romp against Championship chasers Castleford, writes Ray French.
Despite losing winger Carl Gibson with a broken left leg in the 16th minute, Leeds boss Doug Laughton saw his million-pound outlay in the past 15 months reap rich reward.
But midfield maestro Andy Gregory who, along with half-back partner Garry Schofield and man-of-the-match James Lowes, masterminded the unexpected rout, insisted: ‘We've never had a problem scoring tries.
Our problem this season has been stopping them.
In too many matches we've sprung a leak.
‘Doug Laughton has flogged us all week on the tackle patterns.
It's been a really hard Christmas studying videos and pounding into those patterns.
But it was all worth it.’
Redskin reprieve
David Tossell
REIGNING Super Bowl champions the Washington Redskins had their hopes of successfully defending their crown kept alive last night when the Green Bay Packers were hammered 27-7 by the Minnesota Vikings.
The Packers, needing a win to keep the Redskins out of the play-offs, took an early lead, but Vikings quarter-back Sean Salisbury threw two touchdown passes to end their dream.
Washington were left to sweat on the Packers' result when Vince Evans' three-yard touchdown pass to Tim Brown with 13 seconds left gave the Los Angeles Raiders a shock 21-20 victory.
Kansas City booked a play-off place with a 42-20 win over the Denver Broncos, converting two John Elway interceptions and a fumble into touchdowns.
Bloem to make debut
OLDHAM are to give a debut to South African winger Jamie Bloem against Rochdale at Watersheddings on Tuesday.
The former Western Province union star has played for South Africa in two rugby league internationals against Russia.
Wright stuff
NEW ZEALAND have recalled 38-year-old left-hander John Wright for next week's one-off cricket Test against Pakistan in Hamilton.
Top show
WREXHAM'S 1-0 victory at Crewe on Saturday has been picked as the Barclays Performance of the Week.
A local boys club will collect the £650 prize.
King pin
GOLFER Terry Penrose drove his ball in Wales — and got a hole-in-one in England on the fourth hole at Llanymynech, which straddles the border.
Aussie assault
PACEMAN Merv Hughes blasted away the West Indies top order to put Australia in a commanding position at stumps on the second day of the second Test in Melbourne.
Hughes removed Desmond Haynes, Phil Simmons and Richie Richardson in the last session, leaving them struggling at 62-3.
His spell capped a great day for the Aussies after captain Allan Border (110) and Mark Waugh (112) had steered them to 395 in their first innings.
HANSIE CRONJE (75no) and Andrew Hudson (52) helped South Africa reach 163-3 in reply to India's total of 212 on the second day of the third Test in Port Elizabeth.
Testing times
By Graham Otway
TO be thankful for small mercies will be a vital ingredient of England's hopes of success on the three-month tour to India and Sri Lanka.
The rigorous and meticulously planned six weeks of preparation at Lilleshall before Christmas has readied Graham Gooch's men, who leave from Gatwick at lunchtime today, for the on-field battles.
But no film or lecture can prepare for the culture shock that awaits the new tourists to the sub-continent when they arrive early tomorrow in Delhi.
An all-pervading smog of dust and dung fires clogs the lungs in most cities, all food is a lottery and western-style entertainment is hard to find.
Poverty
But unlike the millions of Indians who live in hopeless poverty, England's highly paid cricketers will have the best accommodation and hospitality available.
Gooch's men must accept their lot and get on with a job for which they are being paid around £20,000 a man.
If they start to moan at long, boring nights of inactivity, the bottom could quickly fall out of a tour that in cricketing terms has all the ingredients of being a huge success.
Given the recent records of the two teams, England should start favourites to repeat the 2-1 triumph of David Gower's men in 1984-85.
England's 16-man squad is well balanced to cope with an itinerary that includes three Tests and six one-day internationals, as well as the Sri Lankan leg in March.
And it has the edge on experience against an Indian side, playing their first full Test series at home for four years.
The ability of Robin Smith and Alec Stewart to plunder second-rate fast bowling and the brilliance of Mike Gatting and Gooch against spin should decimate the Indian attack.
Kapil Dev is past his prime, Manoj Prabhakar usually only produces one good spell a Test and leg-spinner Anil Kumble rarely turns the ball past the outside edge.
And while the Indian batting, laced with the talents of Mohammad Azharuddin, Sachin Tendulkar and Sanjay Manjrekar, looks strong on potential, poor form on the tour to South Africa may prompt changes.
The guile of Phil Tufnell and the experience of John Emburey gives England a clear advantage in the spin department and the pace of Phil DeFreitas, Devon Malcolm and Chris Lewis should exploit any life in the pitches.
Paul Taylor's left-arm pace could be valuable at Calcutta, where the ball tends to swing, but for him to play in the first Test after barely a month of his first trip overseas would be a gamble.
England will probably be happy to settle for a draw at Eden Gardens and force the pace in the second Test in Madras.
Graeme Fowler and Gatting each scored double centuries in the sweltering heat of the Chepauk Stadium to set up England's victory in 1985.
The third Test is in Bombay's Wankhede Stadium, making it somewhat irrelevant that England's last two visits there ended in defeat.
Both times it was the opening Test of the series and lack of preparation could be blamed in 1981 and disturbing political problems off the field four years later.
Chaotic
England batted badly in both games but this time the players should be at their tour peak.
If England perform at their best, the likeliest outcome is a 2-0 victory, with wins at Madras and Bombay.
But any suggestion of confidence in the players' ability to perform on the field must be tempered by worries over their ability to handle life off it.
A vital ingredient on any trip to the sub-continent is morale — coping with Delhi belly, waiting for room service that never arrives and queueing for hours in chaotic airport terminals.
A team that regards itself as hard done by and dreams of crayfish lunches at Doyles in Sydney or windsurfing in the Caribbean can be sunk without trace.
And it is a concern that England's unhappy 1981-82 tour was captained by Keith Fletcher, now the manager, and contained Gooch, now the captain.
Gooch was so disillusioned by his last full tour to India that he barely unpacked his bags at home in Essex at the end of it before joining the first rebel tour to South Africa.
Gooch has been known to carry a long face on his sleeve and he may well appreciate the strength of Gatting.
A veteran of two full tours and a World Cup on the sub-continent, Gatting will ferret out a game of cards, take any chance to fit in a round of golf and stay cheery at the endless list of official functions, where diarrhoea of the verbal, rather than physical, kind causes discomfort.
Kinnear furious
Des Kelly
C Palace 2, Wimbledon 0.
ROGER JOSEPH was mysteriously absent from the dressing room as manager Joe Kinnear delivered a scathing attack on his players.
The rest of the Dons were locked behind closed doors for 45 minutes as an inquest was held into this dismal defeat against their Selhurst Park landlords.
But it was shrewd of Joseph to go temporarily AWOL, absent-without-leave, for he would have been an undoubted target for the flak being hurled by an angry Kinnear.
Earlier, the full-back, apparently incensed at being called off just three minutes into the second half, turned away from the bench and sprinted straight down the tunnel.
He eluded Kinnear for a full hour after the whistle, but when he finally turned up, he no doubt got an earful like the rest.
Kinnear said: ‘Some of the players need their backsides kicked.
We lost that game because of individual errors.
‘The first half was the worst we've ever had since I've been at the club.
We were abysmal and it was a real kick in the teeth.
‘The players here have jobs to do — and they're not doing them.
Joseph had a simple clearance to make for Palace's first goal and Segers should have held the cross that led to the second — I could have caught it myself.’
Chris Coleman opened the scoring in the third minute and Geoff Thomas continued his rehabilitation after eight months of injury problems with a 40th-minute volley.
Johnson is happy
Brentford 2, Derby 1.
DERBY striker Tommy Johnson wasn't too worried after the Rams' run of seven successive away wins ended at Brentford.
‘We played well enough to have won,’ he said.
‘We gave away two stupid goals but still would have got something from the game if we had taken the chances we created.’
Johnson added: ‘Arthur Cox was happy with our performance.
Now we have to bounce back against Portsmouth.’
In-form Brentford gained their seventh win in eight games thanks to a 40th-minute strike from Joe Allon and an own-goal two minutes later from Derby's Dutch full-back Richard Goulooze.
But the Bees could pay a heavy price for victory, with Billy Manuel and Simon Ratcliffe both facing late fitness tests before today's clash with Notts County.
Norwich prepared for fight to finish
By Mike Walters
Norwich 0, Spurs 0.
NORWICH CITY'S leadership of the Premier League has been given more last rites than Eldorado, and they were fortunate not to come unstuck against El Tel.
Terry Venables and Tottenham can claim a tactical and moral victory from this master class of artistic approach work and penalty box profligacy.
Spurs, smothering the important supply line between City's full-backs and wide men with a five-man midfield blanket, spurned the game's best chances.
But they can look forward to 1993 with renewed optimism after conceding 81 goals in 50 senior matches during the past 12 months of instability and transition.
For Norwich, without a goal since December 5, this third successive blank gave more ammunition to those who haughtily dismiss their title challenge as a peasants' revolt from the shires.
But three factors suggest their stumbling Christmas represents a pit stop rather than the wheels coming off altogether.
Firstly, they must have some backbone to sustain pole position after more than three months without a clean sheet — Boxing Day was Bryan Gunn's first since September 19.
Second, the ‘crisis’ of 270 minutes without a goal doesn't stop them being the Premier League's joint top scorers with 34.
And as midfielder Ian Crook, who gave a fine passing display against his old team says, the clubs most fancied to topple the Canaries — Villa, Manchester United, and Blackburn — have yet to visit Carrow Road.
Crook added: ‘People might be saying this is the beginning of the end of our challenge, but There's such a lot more to come from us.
‘We will go to Leeds, the defending champions, feeling confident, instead of just hoping for the best — and that's a measure of how far we've come.
‘In 1988-89, we led the table until February, but we were less experienced then, and every week at the top was a bonus for us.
And to be honest, after the dreadful way we finished last season, we would have settled for being fifth from bottom right now.
‘But Teams who used to come here expecting to win are happy to contain us these days, and that's a huge compliment to Norwich.’
MoM: Gary Mabbutt, Tottenham:(Gave Canaries the bird)
Sharpe rise in fortunes
By David Alexander
Sheff W 3, Man Utd 3.
ERIC CANTONA may be the key to the title, but somebody still has to turn it — and United have found just the man.
Cantona and his colleagues should hand their Boxing Day bonus to Lee Sharpe, who could finally unlock the door to the Championship after 26 years.
United's Frenchman milked the applause after his tap-in equaliser ended the excitement, but the red army hailed the wrong player at the end — it was Sharpe they should have saluted.
After 18 months of illness and injury the 21-year-old flyer looks back to his best.
Crosses from Sharpe set up all three goals after United were, astonishingly, three down.
He created two other simple chances and missed two himself.
Forced
‘I can't believe what's happened today, but I have to say it was the best 45 minutes I've had since coming back,’ he smiled.
That was generously confirmed by his marker, Wednesday right-back Roland Nilsson.
Nilsson forced Sharpe into switching inside to do much of his damage until late on when injury made him struggle — and the winger went past to create two goals.
‘You have to be impressed.
He's very quick and difficult to hold,’ said Nilsson.
‘When they played him in, it was hard.’
Sharpe, with just one cap, looks ready to be an England wide-man again, making two for Brian McClair and the third for Cantona in the space of 16 minutes.
United were three down to David Hirst, Mark Bright and John Sheridan after 61 minutes.
It was enthralling entertainment prompted by United's need to gamble and attack in the second half.
‘We kept making chances, and at half time were told not to panic and start wellying everything forward,’ said Sharpe.
‘Sooner or later we had to start hitting the back of the net.
When you're down like that you just have to keep getting the ball into the box and that's what I did.
I kept piling in crosses and luckily the lads got on the end of them.’
United's fighting spirit was as impressive as their attacking.
‘It was a question of attitude.
We had to keep our nerve and keep playing,’ Sharpe added.
Cantona claimed the equaliser to disprove accusations that he's no more than a ball-juggling circus act.
‘It shows I can score from close range,’ he said.
‘It was an opportunist's goal.’
Wednesday were shattered at giving up a three-goal lead at home but their plan to expose right-back Paul Parker's size by getting Hirst to attack him in the air paid off with two goals — plus one for the striker himself.
‘There was nothing special about it for me,’ said Hirst, the subject of a £3.5 million bid by United.
‘I love scoring and I just wanted one today, and to win.’
That didn't happen, but Hirst did set up one of the great matches of the season — and he would have won it but for a superb Peter Schmeichel save at 3-2.
MoM: Sharpe (Lethal).
Ally a doubt
Scott McMunn
RANGERS could be without Ally McCoist for next weekend's Old Firm clash with Celtic.
McCoist, who has a phenomenal 34 goals already this season, is undergoing treatment after picking up a calf muscle injury at Dundee on Saturday.
Manager Walter Smith said: ‘We must wait until Tuesday to see how he is progressing.
His injured foot has been strapped up.’
McCoist scored before his injury and Mark Hateley then added two more as Rangers beat Dundee 3-0 to extend their unbeaten run to 28 games.
Dundee manager Simon Stainrod admitted: ‘On this form, Rangers could reach the final of the European Cup.’
Le Saux sorry but still faces axe
By Adrian Holloway
Chelsea 1, Soton 1.
CHELSEA bad boy Graeme Le Saux last night apologised for his shirty protest after being taken off at Stamford Bridge.
But it probably won't be enough to save the young winger from being axed for today's game against Wimbledon.
Le Saux responded to being substituted 11 minutes from time by throwing down his jersey.
Last night Le Saux said: ‘I want to apologise to the fans because I obviously regret what I did.
‘It was heat-of-the-moment stuff but it's been building up over a little while.
I thought I was doing a good enough job against Southampton to stay on.
‘I hurled my shirt down because I was so angry — I felt cheated.
I just want to be treated honestly and know if I am part of Chelsea's plans.’
If Le Saux is dropped today, midfielder Eddie Newton may continue to play up front.
Newton grabbed a late equaliser after being thrown into the forward line, adding to the double strike he notched in similar circumstances earlier this month.
Newton said: ‘I'm really chuffed because this is the third goal I've scored in half an hour as a striker this season.
It was a big relief because everyone could see we should have won it.’
Boss Ian Porterfield hinted he now sees Newton as a partner for the hapless Robert Fleck.
‘I'd have no qualms about playing Eddie as a striker for 90 minutes,’ he said.
‘I took Fleck off and that didn't work so I took Le Saux off, put Eddie up front and he got a vital goal — and it's the second time he's done that for us.’
Porterfield is set to alter his five-man midfield for today's visit to Selhurst Park, with Le Saux most likely to be dropped after hurling his shirt into the dugout when substituted.
Chelsea fans applauded Le Saux off the pitch but the cheers turned to boos as he stormed off.
Chelsea have not lost in nine games, but after a third consecutive League draw skipper Andy Townsend said: ‘We did miss Mick Harford up front.
‘We lacked penetration and it was very hard for Fleck being the lone striker, with five of us in midfield.’
Saints took an early lead when much-maligned Ian Dowie, who is steadily winning Saints fans over, hit his seventh goal of the season.
MoM: Newton (Flair and pace).
Guy is puzzled
Ptsmth 4, Bristol R 1.
PORTSMOUTH striker Guy Whittingham took his tally for the season to 27 and then said: ‘I don't know why bigger clubs have not come in for me.’
Whittingham's four-goal blast confirmed his reputation as the most lethal striker outside the Premier League.
But Pompey have not had to fend off a serious inquiry about him for two years.
The striker said: ‘I have no idea what happends next but if something came up I would have to consider it.’
And manager Jim Smith said: ‘Guy is a much better player than he was last year.
His scoring record speaks for itself.
I suppose there is not the sort of money around that we would want.’
Kelly proves worth
By John Wardle
Newcastle 2, Wolves 1.
WOLVES paid a high price for their failure to come up with cash for David Kelly last season.
The striker almost moved from Leicester to Molineux before former Newcastle boss Ossie Ardiles snapped him up.
‘I could have gone to Wolves,’ Kelly admitted.
‘I would have signed if they had offered me a few bob more.’
It would have been money well spent by Wolves, who were beaten by two goals from the in-form striker after taking the lead through Paul Cook.
Kevin Keegan was happy to inherit Kelly when he took over at United.
‘He has run a million miles for us this season and will run another million,’ he said.
That admiration won't prevent Keegan signing at least one more goalscorer, with QPR's Les Ferdinand the latest in his sights.
Keegan said: ‘Obviously there may be some truth in it, but it hasn't come out from this end.
‘If the right player becomes available, we won't lose him for the sake of an extra penny.’
Kelly relishes the prospect of a fight for his place.
‘It doesn't bother me,’ he said.
‘If the boy's good, we'll be delighted to see him here, but he must get me out of the side.’
It needed a superb 65th winner from Kelly to clinch victory against a Wolves side who must halt their recent slide against Bristol City today.
Dicks blow
Charlton 1, West Ham 1.
JULIAN DICKS was hero and villan as West Ham's poor disciplinary record suffered again.
Dicks, already sent off twice this season, opened the scoring in the 10th minute but was later booked, along with Martin Allen.
The Hammers have had five players sent off this season already — Dicks and Allen have both served suspensions — but manager Billy Bonds said: ‘I'm trying hard to improve discipline here.
‘But it was Dicks' first booking in half a dozen games.’
John Bumstead earned Charlton a draw with a late equaliser.
And his quality show earned the praise of manager Steve Gritt, who said: ‘That is the best all-round performance I've seen from him and for the second game in succession he's earned us a draw.’
Shearer boosts Rovers
Graham Fisher
ALAN SHEARER looks certain to shake off the leg injury that cut short his two-goal display against Leeds on Boxing Day.
The Premier League's leading scorer underwent immediate treatment after clocking up his 22nd goal of the season for Blackburn, who face Ipswich today.
and was then boarded the team coach set for a quiet weekend before today's clash at Ipswich Town.
Shearer got a kick on the knee, but boss Kenny Dalgish reported: ‘It doesn't look serious.’
Blackburn were the only top six team to win on Saturday, fuelling renewed conviction that they can pull off a remarkable Championship coup.
Confident
Leeds boss Howard Wilkinson whose own title defence is in tatters, admitted: ‘There are eight or so teams up there, but there is no indication that any of them are putting together the kind of run that looks ominous ‘Blackburn showed the sort of confidence against us that comes from the feeling that you have got a chance.
And confident people make the best bets.’
Crystal Palace aim for a sixth successive win when they meet Middlesbrough.
But the Eagles will be without midfielder Gareth Southgate, who has broken a bone in his right foot.
QPR, who should have played Forest on Saturday, entertain Everton, who give a late fitness test to defender Martin Keown.
He missed the 2-2 draw with Boro because of an upset stomach.
and reserve Iain Jenkins is standing-by.
Birmingham City's chairman Samesh Kumar is to be voted off the club's board of directors at an extraordinary general meeting next month.
Kumar has retained his position at St Andrew's despite the club being put up for sale last month after his business empire went into receivership.
The Receiver, Leonard Curtis and Partners, control the Kumar's 84 per cent stake in the club and will be able to vote Kumar and his two broters, Ramesh and Bimal, off the club's board at the EGM on January 25.
The Kumars' have so far refused to relinquish their posts,
But Birmingham secretary Alan Jones said: ‘We have been instructed by the receiver to call an EGM with the resolution that the Kumar brothers be removed from their office as directors.’
United backed
MANCHESTER United have emerged as the bookies' clear favourites to lift the Premier League title.
William Hill have trimmed Alex Ferguson's side from 9-4 to 2-1 following their fightback to earn a 3-3 at Sheffield Wednesday on Saturday.
Previous joint favourites Aston Villa have drifted from 9-4 to 3-1.
William Hill then offer 5-1 Blackburn, 13-2 Arsenal, 8-1 Liverpool, 10-1 Norwich, 16-1 Chelsea, 25-1 Ipswich and 50-1 Coventry.
McAllister in winter warning
By Graham Fisher
BYLINE:Blackburn 3, Leeds 1.
CHAMPIONS Leeds take on Premier League leaders Norwich today with a warning from captain Gary McAllister ringing in their ears: ‘I hope nobody is thinking we are too good to go down.’
After Leeds slipped towards the relegation zone with a 3-1 defeat at Blackburn on Saturday, McAllister forecast: ‘It is going to be a long hard winter.
‘Alarm bells are not ringing but I hope nobody thinks we're too good to go down.
‘But we have it in us to work a way out.
There is nobody here who can't wake up in the morning and look at himself in the mirror.’
Ironically, with the return of Mel Sterland and David Batty from injury, Leeds fielded a cast almost identical to the marauders of a year ago.
But there are flaws in the fabric now and Blackburn exploited them as well as anyone.
An unlikely assassin was left-winger Jason Wilcox, a youth team star while Dalglish was still gnashing his teeth at Anfield.
Now, at 21, he is a rare survivor of Kenny's £13 million invasion.
Wilcox twice sprung a cumbersome Leeds offside trap to score himself and make another for Alan Shearer.
Then he skinned the rusty Sterland and found Shearer again for the England striker's 22nd of the season.
Shearer, denied a hat-trick when John Lukic diverted another stunning volley, acknowledged the service.
‘All credit to Jason,’ he said.
‘He has been threatening to do that all season and this was his best performance to date.’
Dalglish was equally generous.
He said: ‘There has been a lot of talk about the players we have brought in.
‘Jason was here when I came, proving that it's not what a player costs but what he does that counts.’
MoM: Wilcox (No-cost class).
Quinn's way ahead
By David Harrison
Coventry City 3, Aston Villa 0.
MICK QUINN, whose explosion of goals has blown the Premier League wide open, threatens to turn the title race into a demolition derby.
The 30-year-old Coventry striker took his total to 10 in six matches since his £250,000 move from Newcastle with another double to sabotage Villa's Championship charge.
The Sky Blues' lethal weapon, who gunned down Liverpool a week earlier, has his sights on more targets at the top of the table.
Today, Coventry take on Manchester United, the clear 2-1 Premier League favourites, at Old Trafford.
Belief
Two of their next three League games are also against title contenders — Norwich and Blackburn Rovers — and Quinn is in the mood to cause further devastation.
But Coventry do not just see themselves as killjoys.
Quinn's goals have instilled a renewed belief that they will be involved in the title run-in.
‘We can have a big say in what happens at the top of the table,’ said Quinn.
‘No-one wants to talk about Coventry.
‘After we stuck five past Liverpool, everyone concentrated on their problems.
Now I suppose it'll be all about what went wrong with Villa.
That's all right with us — let them ignore us.
‘But the way that we are playing, not too many teams will fancy taking us on.
We have nothing to fear from anyone and look forward to every game.
‘This is the best all-round team I have ever played in.
We are creating chances all the time and I've always believed if I get my fair share, I'll score goals at any level.
‘I know I won't keep doing it at this rate but while I'm on this streak I'll take full advantage of it.’
Quinn's predatory skills outshone the player who cost 10 times more, Dean Saunders, who enjoyed the same sort of start when he moved to Villa from Liverpool.
Enjoy
But now the £2.5 million Welshman has only one goal from eight matches and Villa's form has nosedived correspondingly.
Villa had no answer to the three-goal burst in seven minutes which confirmed Coventry's control of the match, skipper Robert Rosario adding to Quinn's two.
‘People keep taking shots at Coventry, Norwich and Blackburn but we are still up there,’ said Rosario.
‘Why shouldn't we be?
‘Why shouldn't the people of Coventry enjoy their football and support a winning team that can finish in the top six at least?’
MoM: Quinn (Pure dynamite).
Cole blasts critics
Tony Kell
BRISTOL CITY striker Andy Cole yesterday denied that he has been holding back since the club rejected a £600,000 offer from Nottingham Forest.
The 21-year-old Nottingham-born Cole, signed from Arsenal for Pounds 500,000 in the summer, faces Wolves today hoping to improve on his tally of three goals in the past nine games.
‘The Ashton Gate boo-boys are beginning to have a go at me and it doesn't help,’ said Cole.
‘There is no need for them to slaughter me.
I am trying my best even if my biggest dream is to play in the Premier League.
‘The transfer talk did get to me, I admit, and for a time I didn't know whether I was going or coming.
Cope
‘If Brian Clough is still interested in me he will want to know if I cope as well during a bad spell as I did when I was enjoying a purple patch and scored 11 goals in 14 games earlier in the season.’
Arsenal will receive 30 per cent of any fee if City sell him on.
Meanwhile, Premier League leading scorer Alan Shearer looks certain to shake off the leg injury that cut short his two-goal display against Leeds on Boxing Day in time for Blackburn's visist to Ipswich today.
The £3.3 million goal-scoring machine got a kick on the knee after clocking up his 22nd goal of the season.
But he had immediate treatment, and manager Kenny Dalgish reported: ‘It doesn't look serious.’
Blackburn were the only top-six team to record a victory on Saturday and will be looking to further advance their Championship claims.
White is hot
By Graham Fisher
DAVID WHITE'S explosive return to scoring form threatens to increase the agony at Anfield today for Liverpool boss Graeme Souness.
Souness, anxious to forget last week's 5-1 hiding at Coventry, would have chosen anyone but White as an adversary this afternoon.
Last season, the Manchester City winger scored four in two games against Liverpool and his touched returned on cue with a double against Sheffield United on Boxing Day.
White said: ‘I have very fond memories of Liverpool last year.’
Defeat for either of the mid-table sides could spell expulsion from the fringes of a pack contesting the most open title fight for years.
Cash-strapped City boss Peter Reid, who dismissed talk of bringing Paul Stewart back to Maine Road from Anfield, insisted: ‘This is a vitally important game for both clubs.’
City could be without defender Andy Hill, who strained a groin on Saturday.
David Brightwell, younger of the two brothers, stands by.
Graham's Gunners lack vital firepower
By Ben Bacon
Arsenal 0, Ipswich Town 0.
GEORGE GRAHAM says he loves facts, but he can't take any satisfaction from the ones his Arsenal team have been producing lately.
They say statistics can be manipulated to give any impression, but whichever way you look at the Gunners, the facts of Highbury life make glum reading.
Perhaps even more disturbing than just the two points they have earned in six games, is the one goal they have scored in those matches.
from a similar number of matches.
Ian Wright, Alan Smith and Kevin Campbell are generally reckoned to be the most potent strike force in the Premier League.
But this season their combined artillery has hardly made an explosive impact.
Dire
Wright, of course, has contributed much more than his fair share, scoring virtually half of Arsenal's entire league haul with his tally of 11.
Campbell, though, has hit only one league goal since the opening day of the season, while Smith, through injury and non-selection, has managed just a couple.
Manager Graham freely admits he could never have imagined this threesome getting just one goal between them from six games.
These sort of facts are hardly likely to give Graham any festive cheer, but he can find some solace by taking a swift glance at last season's results.
At roughly the same stage, Arsenal also went through a dire spell with a similar sequence of only one goal from six outings.
But then they found a rich seam of form, thanks to renewed goal power, which narrowly failed to earn European qualification.
However, during that poor run which ultimately cost them the title, they were knocked out of the FA Cup by lowly Wrexham, and that must act as a warning in neon lights for their trip to non-League Yeovil.
Wright, Smith and Campbell were all guilty of misses against Ipswich, who side that regrettably lacked any ambition and contributed nothing in terms of entertainment to a poor contest.
Ipswich team manager Mick McGiven has successfully created a side to match his own personality — dull.
Graham's problems were made worse by the booking of central defender Steve Bould, who now faces suspension.
But Graham knows his dilemma lies up front with his side's lack of goals.
Attitude
He said: ‘Strikers thrive on confidence and if Campbell had scored when he was clean through, he probably would have grown another six inches.
‘There's no point feeling sorry for yourself when you are lacking in confidence.
That is just what you mustn't do.
‘If the fans see you working with the right attitude, they'll get behind you.
I'll make sure their heads don't get on their chests.
‘You only win things when you do what you think is right.
We'll put it right where we think it matters, on the training field and we'll keep playing with the philosophy of working, training and competing.’
MoM: Clive Baker, Ipswich:(Two stunning saves)
Tel threat to Durie
By Mike Walters
GORDON DURIE'S troubled season at Tottenham reached its watershed last night as Spurs chief executive Terry Venables warned: ‘We only want players who want to play for us.’
Scottish international Durie was axed for the Boxing Day draw at Norwich because he wasn't ‘in the right frame of mind’.
The £2.2 million striker was cleared two weeks ago by a Football Association appeal panel of feigning injury in a clash with Coventry defender Andy Pearce.
But Durie still feels uncomfortable at the club who backed him to the hilt in wiping out the damaging ‘cheat’ slur.
If Durie does not start in today's home game with Premier League bottom club Nottingham Forest, Spurs may sell him.
Scottish champions Rangers are still keen on 27-year-old Durie who has scored just 10 League goals in 47 appearances at Spurs.
Venables warned last night: ‘Tottenham is a very big club and we only want players who want to play for Tottenham.
‘By his own admission, Gordon was not in the right frame of mind to play at Norwich.
He came to us and told us so — and when a player does that, you have to leave him out.
He said he was not enjoying his football.
I don't know if it's a hangover from the FA hearing or if it's a number of other things.
‘When he feels all right to play again, I'm sure he will return.’
If Spurs decide to cash in on Durie, they will want at least their money back 16 months after paying a club record fee to lure him from Chelsea.
And Venables already has a shortlist of possible replacements, including Bolton's Andy Walker, a revelation at Burnden Park since moving from Celtic.
Souness in £6m Anfield sale
Tony Kell
GRAEME SOUNESS is planning an Anfield clear-out with £6 million worth of talent being allowed to leave Liverpool.
Topping the list of expensive discards are Mark Wright, Paul Stewart and Michael Thomas, with veteran goalkeeper Bruce Grobbelaar and Hungarian midfielder Istvan Kozma also up for grabs.
Wright cost Liverpool £2.2m when he joined from Derby 18 months ago, Stewart was bought for £2.1m from Spurs and Thomas came from Arsenal for £1.5m.
But Souness must sell before delving back into the transfer market to continue his rebuilding programme and will have to accept cut-price offers for the big trio.
All of them have been at the centre of proposed part-exchange deals Souness was trying to set up this season to capture Nottingham Forest midfielder Roy Keane and QPR striker Les Ferdinand.
All change
By Ben Bacon and David Harrison
ARSENAL and Aston Villa are planning dramatic changes for their clash tonight as managers George Graham and Ron Atkinson desperately seek to beef up their stuttering title challenges.
Graham was unhappy that his forwards again failed to convert a succession of chances against Ipswich on Saturday, and said: ‘Maybe I'll have to leave one or two skilful players out, because at the end of the day you have to win games.’
And a big revamp is threatened by an angry Atkinson in the Villa line-up after their 3-0 hammering at Coventry.
Defender Bryan Small, midfielder Garry Parker and striker Cyrille Regis are all in line for the chop.
Graham said: ‘I changed it against Ipswich and left three forwards up front to add more firepower.
I keep on changing it hoping to spark something off, but sometimes it's not ability but competitive spirit that gets you results.
‘I would like to play four in attack with two on the wing.
It's great in theory, but in practice it sometimes doesn't work.
‘We had our chances.
Ipswich must have gone in at half-time thinking ‘this IS Christmas’.
If they're not going to score now they never will.’
Striker Kevin Campbell looks the most likely to drop out as Arsenal ponder a run of six games which have brought them just two points and one goal.
On the face of it this may seem a strange tactic for a side who, on paper, possess probably the most lethal front-line in the Premier League, but Graham, still likely to be without ankle-injury victim Paul Merson, is seeking to restore stability to stop the slump.
In a furious outburst after their match at Highfield Road, Atkinson described Villa's performance as ‘the worst since I took over’.
Atkinson fumed: And he was scathing in his condemnation.
‘At least we were consistent.
We were useless at the back, useless in midfield and crap up front.
‘Don't talk to me about the title.
If we carry on playing like that, we've more chance of being relegated.’
Worried
Skipper Kevin Richardson admitted: ‘After a performance like that, no-one can be sure of their place in the team.
‘Quite a few players have got to be worried and I include myself among them.
If the gaffer decides to make changes, we know he's got a good back-up squad.
We've all got to be looking over our shoulders.
‘As far as the Arsenal game is concerned, we cannot slip any lower.
We can only improve on the Coventry display and that's what we have to do.
‘If we can put it across Arsenal, we'll put a big gap between them and ourselves.
This is a real test of character for us.
We have to show how good we are.’
Arsenal's goalless home draw with negative Ipswich illustrated how badly their confidence has been affected by their strikers' failure to convert of the strikers to manufacture enough scoring chances — and Graham looks ready to go back to basics.
He said: ‘We have dominated our last two games and come out with only a couple of points.
We badly need something to spark us off again, because we know we have the ability at the club.
What we need is consistency.
‘It has got to a stage where I am not looking ahead to what might happen in a few weeks or a few months.
‘The priority is just to get a victory under our belts again.
‘I know some people are saying we will hit somebody for five or six goals sooner or later, but I'd rather we had a nice, successful run of 1-0 wins than just a one-off.’
Irish sighs
IRISH rugby union's tale of woe continued as they threw away a commanding 13-0 lead in their A international against Scotland at Lansdowne Road to lose 22-13.
Crosby cheer
Sunderland 2, Grimsby 0.
SUNDERLAND manager Malcolm Crosby is lining up a late assault on the promotion play-off places in the New Year.
Crosby's side were relegation candidates only a month ago and the Roker boss was everybody's tip for the axe.
But they have now lost only one of their last six games.
It was a sweet way for Crosby to celebrate the end of his first year in the Sunderland hot seat.
He said: ‘I feel I'm in credit.
I would have liked to have done better in the League this season, but I can see light at the end of the tunnel now.
‘We are closing the gap on the top teams and look as good as anybody.’
Crosby gambled by dropping Peter Davenport to allow striker Don Goodman to partner David Rush.
Goodman and Rush responded with the goals that gave Sunderland a deserved success.
High praise
Graham Fisher
MANCHESTER UNITED served notice on their rivals that they are on course for the Championship with a magnificent 5-0 slaughter of Coventry at Old Trafford yesterday.
Alex Ferguson's title favourites moved into second place, just three points behind Norwich and look a generous bet at their new odds of 7-4.
It was a display which earned high praise, not least from Coventry boss Bobby Gould.
Choking back his disappointment after his own team's splendid wins against Liverpool and Aston Villa, he said: ‘I've got to be humble and say we were beaten by a very good side.
‘Some of their football was a delight to behold.
They know when to knock it to the corners, when to play it short, when to feed the strikers and they do it all with the highest quality.
‘Our pedestal was kicked from under our feet today.
I reckon I'm about £60 million and six years behind Alex Ferguson.’
Winger Lee Sharpe scored the first goal of his memorable comeback and said: ‘I don't think I've ever played in a better team perform-ance.
Strong
‘You can't help but do well with players in-form like that all around you.
‘The dressing room was buzzing when we came off.
We couldn't get over how well we played.’
Sharpe, who missed large chunks of last season and this through injury and illness: ‘I was desperate to notch up my first goal.
I will feel easier in my own mind from now on.’
He added: ‘The lads have learned from last season.
I don't think we'll make the same mistakes again.’
After watching the execution — shared by five marksmen — and hearing the tributes, United boss Ferguson made no title pledges.
‘It was a fantastic performance,’ he said.
‘But after last season there are no promises of anything.
‘We will keep our feet on the ground and keep passing the ball.
I will say this: we have players of real character who will not let us down.
They are young enough and strong enough to handle the months ahead.’
Craig blasts Windies
AUSTRALIAN paceman Craig McDermott grabbed four wickets in seven overs to leave the West Indies reeling in the second Test at Melbourne yesterday.
McDermott finished with 4-66, while fellow fast bowler Merv Hughes took 3-51.
Richie Richardson's side slumped to 233 all out — 162 runs short of Australia's first innings total of 395 — after starting the third day on 62-3.
And although Phil Simmons earned his first Test wicket by bowling David Boon just before stumps, the home side were still in control with an overall lead of 188.
For the Windies, much depended on overnight pair Brian Lara and Keith Arthurton and they did not disappoint.
The pair added 106 for the fourth wicket with Arthurton crafting a watchful 71 and Lara reaching 52.
But from 139-3 the tourists lost their last seven wickets for 94.
Left-hander Jimmy Adams was the last man out for a defiant 47.
The West Indies will hope their pace bowlers can dismiss the Australians cheaply today to have any chance of a positive result.
Back breaker
Tony Roche
Leicester 41, Barbarians 23
EVER since Geoff Cooke told Neil Back that he was too small to play for England, the Leicester flanker has reached for the stars — and flattened most of them.
Five Nations regulars Gavin Hastings, Craig Chalmers, Tim Rodber and Jean Baptiste Lafond were among Back's victims yesterday as rampant Leicester gave the multi-talented Barbarians a stuffing of festive proportions.
Out-gunned 11 caps to three, Tigers ended a run of defeats in this annual frolic with a five-try triumph, topped off with a typical Baa-Baas' style try, started in front of their own posts and finished by Tony Underwood behind the posts at the other end.
Back will not be on the England squad plane to Lanzarote on Thursday morning, and a number of experienced internationals will be relieved.
But the 5ft 9ins open-side is bitter his pace and all-action game seem destined to take his ambitions no further than the England B side, for whom he excelled in New Zealand this summer.
Back was outstanding for the Midlands against South West two weeks ago and tore into the Barbarians like a wolf at a flock of sheep.
It was significant that the man Cooke feared Back would not be able to handle at Twickenham next month, French flanker Laurent Cabannes, was another of his victims in front of a capacity 16,000 crowd.
Leicester coaching director Tony Russ is adamant Back is the man for England's future.
‘Neil gave the perfect demonstration of loose forward play under the new laws,’ said Russ.
‘In the tackle and in the loose he was quite superb and England's manager seems convinced we need a big number seven in the national side, yet that seems to suggest he is concerned with just one defensive aspect.
‘Certainly, Cabannes did superbly at the back of the lineout today but he was a regular target and in all other areas I gave Back the edge.
He will not give up his quest for a full cap.’
Beaten in the last two annual fixtures, a hard-nosed Leicester were 17-3 ahead at half-time with tries by John Liley, John Wells and Rory Underwood.
With such quality in their ranks the Baa-Baas refused to be humiliated even when Darren Garforth thundered over to make it 24-3.
Jean Marc Lafond, younger brother of the French international, scored the first of two tries in the 53rd minute before Darren Grewcock stole in under the nose of Steve Bates to make it 31-8.
But the Barbarians' fightback, with tries from Harvey Thorneycroft and young Lafond, was quickly snuffed by the best try of the afternoon, from Leicester.
NEIL JENKINS landed a penalty five minutes from time to produce a 21-21 deadlock in the inaugural challenge match between East and West Wales at Cardiff Arms Park.
Aqib banned after umpire cheat slur
Mike Allan
PAKISTAN fast bowler Aqib Javed was suspended for one match yesterday after being found guilty of dissent during the second one-day international against New Zealand in Napier.
Kiwi captain Martin Crowe said Aqib had sworn at umpire Brian Aldridge and accused him of being a cheat.
‘I was astonished to hear what Aqib Javed said to Brian Aldridge.
What he said was disgraceful,’ Crowe added.
Aqib, fined last summer after a bust-up with English umpire Roy Palmer, is the first player suspended under the International Cricket Council's new code of conduct.
The problem arose when a ball from Aqib lifted sharply and lobbed off batsman Andrew Jones's glove to be caught at slip.
Aldridge, however, signalled a no-ball, ruling that the ball flew above the permitted height under the series rules.
Aqib, 20, visibly upset by the decision, appeared to exchange words with the umpire and took some time before continuing his over.
Match referee Peter Burge subsequently received a report on the incident from Aldridge, who umpired the World Cup final between Pakistan and England in Melbourne.
Aqib, team captain Javed Miandad and Pakistani manager Naushad Ali attended the disciplinary hearing, which lasted 75 minutes.
Two players were called as witnesses — Crowe, the non-striker, and Pakistan's Rameez Raja, who was fielding nearby.
Aqib is ruled out of tomorrow's (WED) decisive one-day game in Auckland — the series is now level at 1-1 — but can return for the solitary Test of the Pakistan tour, starting at Hamilton on Saturday.
In a rain-interrupted game, Pakistan collapsed to 138-8 in their alloted 42 overs, Salim Malik (39) the only batsman to top 20.
Crowe, with an unbeaten and classy 47, was Man of the Match as the Kiwis won by six wickets.
Deadly Donald
ALLAN DONALD and Brett Schultz yesterday tore through India's batting to leave South Africa on the brink of their first Test victory for 22 years.
India were reduced to 71-6 in their second innings, a lead of just eight runs by the close of the third day in the third Test at Port Elizabeth.
Donald followed up his first innings 5-55 with 3-28.
Schultz took 2-8.
Earlier, Hansie Cronje (135) hit his maiden Test century in South Africa's 275.
Gary's Rovers boost
Ray French
Wakefield 10, Hull KR 17
GARY CHATFIELD'S 77th-minute solo try handed Trinity their first home defeat in three months and eased Rovers' relegation worries.
And Rovers coach George Fairburn revealed: ‘Gary seems to grow in confidence the more he plays.
‘He has been in and out of the side since signing as an amateur three years ago but in the past couple of weeks has taken the game by the scruff of the neck.’
Chatfield's ball-handling and kicking skills saw Rovers race to an 11-0 lead in the opening 25 minutes as he set up tries for Aussie centre David Liddiard and second rower Andy Thompson.
Trinity hit back with a 34th-minute try from David Jones and substitute Paul Round charged over for another touchdown on the hour.
But Chatfield had the final say to clinch victory.
Doing the business
Roy Collins, Chief Sports Writer
IF there was one occasion that summed up sporting attitudes in l992, it was Carl Lewis's bizarre attempt to set an Olympic record for the greatest number of journalists asphyxiated at a single press conference.
To a man, of course, we'd have considered it an enormous privilege to have met our maker while in the presence of a man who, as the greatest Olympian, is something of a sporting god.
But the only reason the Lewis conference in Barcelona was held in a tiny sweat box rather than the air-conditioned Olympic press centre was because his Japanese sponsors would not have been able to advertise at the latter venue.
The purpose of the conference also had nothing to do with Lewis's fitness, form or prospects of Olympic gold.
It was simply so he could say a few nice words about the latest wonder shoe to roll off the Japanese production line.
Such were sport's priorities in the year the Olympics played host to more multi-millionaires than an OPEC conference, and the Premier League opened its greedy doors for business.
Business being the operative word.
Golfers are now demanding Olympic medals in place of monthly medals.
And who can deny them on the grounds of professionalism, when the five rings of the Olympic movement is in danger of becoming a three-ring circus?
Ludicrous
Tennis players are already counting their net gains and the ludicrous American Dream Team earned millions from annihilating all the basketball opposition in Barcelona.
Refusing even to mix with the amateur plebs in the Olympic Village, the Dream Team's Charles Barkley explained: ‘Custer didn't eat with the Indians.’
There was never a hope of George Custer's men being struck by a burning arrow from the likes of China or Spain, but sport does have a delicious habit of tripping up those propelled on wings of greed and pomposity.
We witnessed a magnificent Olympic example in the women's 400 metres hurdles when American fashion plates Sandra Farmer-Patrick and Janeene Vickers, fingers painted, outfits slashed at the midriff and bobs in their hair like French maids, were run into oblivion by Britain's plain Sally Gunnell.
So deep was the contrast between Gunnell and her rivals that her victory seemed a more significant moment than even Linford Christie's unblinking run to 100m gold.
If Gunnell herself has cashed in, she's not been so blatant or obviously motivated by the financial side as other athletes.
Russian pole vaulter Sergei Bubka felt the corrective lash for his pretension on one of the strangest evenings on the mesmerising Montjuic hill where the Games were held.
He spent so much time preening and posing and intimidating rivals and refusing to enter the competition before the bar became a danger to low-flying aircraft that he failed to clear a height.
It was one of the most humiliating defeats in Olympic history, if not the most scandalous, since Bubka was rumoured to have been emasculated by the absence of his usual appearance money.
Denmark, the country that likes to say no, ruffled more than a few egos when they said yes to becoming European Championship substitutes and drew with England in their opening game before going on to win the trophy.
‘All we are saying…is give us a goal,’ sang England fans after another goalless draw against France.
And they got their wish — one goal against Sweden in a 2-1 defeat that ended their Championship.
It inspired the sports headline of the year:’ Swedes 2, Turnips 1.’
Scotland couldn't manage more than a tweak of the giants' noses, but showed that there's still such a thing as going down with honour.
It was appreciated by fans who sang ‘Always Look On The Bright Side Of Life’ while their team was being knocked out by Germany.
Mockery
Monica Seles, the only person from the former Yugoslavia whose name doesn't evoke instant sympathy, was reduced to blessed silence when losing to Steffi Graf in the Wimbledon ladies' final.
Miss Seles, constantly pursued by pressmen carrying gruntometers during one of the silliest fortnights of the year, matched their idiocy by claiming that going gruntless cost her victory against Graf.
To complete the feeling that we had dreamed up the whole of this year's Wimbledon, Andre Agassi took the men's title with a back court display that made a mockery of the only seed that really counts there — the grass seed.
In 1991, the middle Sunday, normally a day of rest, became famous for creating the most unique atmosphere of the Championships.
This year, which must prove that we dreamed it up, it was the THIRD Monday which saw the longest queues of all — to see John McEnroe and Michael Stich win the final set of the men's doubles.
Even Nigel Mansell and Nick Faldo, supreme winners that they were, managed to singe themselves while burning up the home straight.
Faldo demeaned himself more than his intended targets with an ungracious speech after again conquering Muirfield.
the most trying of all the Open courses.
Mansell managed to negotiate himself out of the best car in Formula One, despite winning the world championship for the first time.
That must rank as a greater own goal than any in football.
After Mansell's, the safest seats in sport going into annus horribilis appeared to be the saddles of Pat Eddery and Peter Scudamore, champion jockeys of the Flat and National Hunt respectively.
Eddery has since lost his title to Michael Roberts, the first South African jockey to win it, and Scudamore is finding it hard to close the growing daylight between himself and leader Richard Dunwoody.
If that's not bad enough, Peter Niven and young Irishman Adrian Maguire are impertinently breathing down his collar bone.
Chaos
If Scudamore's spirits are still strong, that wasn't the case on Cheltenham Gold Cup day, when he was crushed by the defeat of Carvill's Hill.
The horse was wrecked mentally and physically long before the final, crushing hill.
The sight of it crossing the line in barely a walk was one of the saddest of the year.
England's double Grand Slam rugby team brilliantly repelled any thoughts of it being the year of the underdog, a thought that found encouragement only in the opening half of their first match against Scotland.
After that, England were a team apart.
The Premier League got off to a wonderful start as far as its detractors were concerned when Arsenal lost 4-2 at home to Norwich, a side still stubbornly refusing to go back to what is considered their rightful place near the bottom of the League.
Though they've slipped up lately, there is still hope that the Premier League will end up in the hands of the sort of club that the likes of Arsenal, Everton and Manchester United were trying to exclude in the first place.
Malcolm Crosby of Sunderland almost became the first caretaker manager to win the FA Cup until Liverpool doused them with reality.
Twenty four hours earlier, Liverpool manager Graeme Souness had been discharged from hospital after a heart bypass.
Referees and opponents who have crossed Souness during this dreadful Anfield season swear he must have had a humour and charisma bypass at the same time.
World heavyweight boxing ends the year much as it started this year and almost every other year — in total chaos.
Riddick Bowe's World Boxing Council belt ended up in the trash can, Mike Tyson ended up in the can, and Lennox Lewis became Britain's first world heavyweight champion without even hitting anyone.
Frank Bruno, after only three fights since quitting pantomime, is apparently lined up to fight both champions.
England football manager Graham Taylor at least managed to enjoy Christmas after the team got their first points in their World Cup qualifying group.
Decline
This was mainly due to Gazza, whose return to fitness and international football was one of the most heartening stories of l992.
The most depressing is the decline of Nottingham Forest, a side that like Spurs, Manchester United, West Ham and Chelsea in the past, look like discovering that being ‘too good to go down’ is one of soccer's enduring myths.
Bills double trouble lets in Dolphins
David Tossell
THE Buffalo Bills ended the NFL's regular season with their hopes of a third successive Super Bowl trip in tatters after a humiliating 27-3 defeat at the Houston Oilers.
Not only did the Bills fail to get the win which would have won them the AFC East division and secured home advantage throughout the play-offs, but finished the game with quarterback Jim Kelly nursing a knee ligament injury.
Buffalo will know in the next couple of days whether Kelly will be fit to face Houston again in the first round of the play-offs next weekend.
The Oilers, meanwhile, were boosted by the return of Warren Moon after a broken arm.
He completed five of nine passes, including a touchdown.
The Miami Dolphins snatched the AFC East when Pete Stoyanovich landed a 35-yard field goal in overtime to beat the New England Patriots 16-13.
Miami, who tied the game inside the final three minutes after Bobby Humphrey's one-yard touchdown run, gave coach Don Shula the 300th win of his career.
Denver Broncos coach Dan Reeves paid for his team's failure to reach the play-offs last night when he was sacked, less than 24 hours after their 42-20 loss to the Kansas City Chiefs.
Reeves had been in the job for 12 years, leading the Broncos to three Super Bowl appearances.
The San Diego Chargers overcame the loss of quarterback Stan Humphries with a separated left shoulder to beat Seattle Seahawks 31-14 and clinch the AFC West division.
Pittsburgh Steelers earned a first round bye with a 23-13 defeat of the Cleveland Browns, running back Barry Foster topping 100 yards for a record-equalling 12th time.
Dallas Cowboys' Emmitt Smith pipped Foster to retain his NFL rushing title with 131 yards in a 27-14 win against Chicago Bears.
RESULTS: Pittsburgh 23, Cleveland 13; Kansas City 42, Denver 20; Minnesota 27, Green Bay 7; Indianapolis 21, Cincinnati 17; Miami 16, New England 13 (OT); Philadelphia 20, New York Giants 10; LA Rams 38, Atlanta 27; Dallas 27, Chicago 14; San Diego 31, Seattle 14; Tampa Bay 7, Phoenix 3; Houston 27, Buffalo 3.
PLAY-OFFS: NFC: Wasington at Minnesota (Sat); Philadelphia at New Orleans (Sun).
Byes: San Francisco, Dallas.
AFC: Kansas City at San Diego (Sat); Houston at Buffalo (Sun).
Byes: Miami, Pittsburgh.
Petra quits the slopes
AUSTRIA'S three-time World Cup winner and Olympic skiing champion Petra Kronberger, 23, yesterday shocked the sport with the announcement of her retirement.
She said she had lost her motivation.
Fox in hunt
DERYCK FOX is fit for Bradford Northern's Regal Trophy quarter-final tonight against Widnes.
The Great Britain half-back has been out for a month with strained stomach muscles.
Deadly Den
WORLD No 1 Dennis Priestley reached the last 64 of the British Open darts last night but former world champions Bob Anderson and Keith Deller both lost in the third round.
Stepping down
HUDDERSFIELD chairman Keith Longbottom yesterday quit the struggling Second Division club after last week's embarrassing home defeat to Chester.
ICC chief
AUSTRALIAN David Richards is expected to be named the first full-time chief executive of the International Cricket Council in February.
Mighty impressive
Henry Rix
MIGHTY MOGUL yesterday cruised through his toughest test to date with a tremendously impressive victory in the Christmas Hurdle at Kempton.
The David Nicholson-trained gelding emerged as 3-1 clear favourite with Ladbrokes for the Champion Hurdle following his five-length defeat of Flown, with Martin Pipe's Granville Again well beaten back in third.
‘He did it like a decent horse, and is still improving,’ said Nicholson, whose career is on the crest of a wave at present.
Mighty Mogul only broke his duck at Towcester in January, but has not stopped improving and has now won five times from five starts following a close-season transfer from Jenny Pitman's yard.
Nicholson had feared that his hurdling star might be tapped for speed on faster ground than he likes and around this sharpish track, but Mighty Mogul passed this major test with flying colours.
Ladbrokes latest Champion betting: 3-1 Mighty Mogul, 4-1 Halkopous, 10-1 Vintage Crop, Royal Gait, 12-1 Granville Again.
Meanwhile, Martin Pipe's Run For Free is now 7-1 second favourite for the Cheltenham Gold Cup with Coral after his brilliant all-the-way eight-length win in the Welsh National at Chepstow.
Run For Free did his best to eject Mark Perrett seven from home, but apart from that he put up a superb display of jumping.
‘I thought I was a goner, Lady Luck was with me,’ said Perrett.
‘The horse has a long neck, and that helped me get back in the saddle,’ he added.
Run For Free and stable companion Chatam will now prepare for Cheltenham by contesting the Hennessy Gold Cup at Leopardstown in February.
Frost bites
HEAVY frost is threatening today's meetings.
Early-morning inspections have been called at Ayr and Plumpton, and frost is forecast for the day's other card at Stratford.
Tomorrow's meeting at Carlisle, where the track is currently frozen, is most unlikely to go ahead.
Coral Welsh Grand National
SMASHING records comes easy to champion trainer Martin Pipe, but this was extra special.
He topped off a magnificent 602-1 Chepstow five-timer yesterday by saddling the first four horses home in the Coral Welsh National.
Run For Free led the charge in the £35,000 stamina test, and the Pipe supporting cast mopped up the minor prizes.
He won with Claxton Greene, Lord Relic, Side of Hill and The Black Monk.
Royal Gait returns
REIGNING Champion hurdler Royal Gait prepares for the defence of his crown when he makes his eagerly awaited seasonal debut in Ireland today.
Sheikh Mohammed's nine-year-old travels to Leopardstown to contest the £25,000 Bookmakers Hurdle — his first race since beating Oh So Risky at the Festival.
Royal Gait, the first novice to win the Champion since 1956, was rested after Cheltenham when he was found to have aggravated a splint in his near-fore but he is fully fit again.
‘He is looking really well but obviously lacks a recent run and will be conceding weight to the whole field,’ said trainer James Fanshawe.
The Newmarket trainer had favoured yesterday's Christmas Hurdle at Kempton for Royal Gait's comeback, but the Irish alternative is the softer option.
Bonds draw anger
BILLY BONDS hit out at his West Ham side after they threw away a 2-0 lead in a 2-2 draw with Luton at Upton Park.
The Hammers manager stormed: ‘We went to sleep after our second goal.
That was very unprofessional and we paid for it.’
Luton scored a controversial 70th-minute equaliser with West Ham complaining that John Dreyer's header had not crossed the line.
West Ham took the lead through a 51st minute penalty from Julian Dicks.
Tim Breacker added a second 13 minutes later with a 25-yarder.
However, Luton replied almost immediately through Ceri Hughes.
Oxford hammered runaway First Division leaders Newcastle 4-2 after scoring two goals in the opening eight minutes.
Fierce
John Durnin and Nick Cusack gave Oxford a superb start but an unstoppable 25-yard volley from Liam O'Brien put Newcastle back in contention.
A Jim Magilton penalty made it 3-1 although Lee Clark pulled Newcastle to 3-2.
But Magilton wrapped it up with a fierce free-kick.
Tranmere missed a chance to make up ground at the top crashing 3-1 against Barnsley.
David Currie gave Barnsley a flying start, scoring after 31 seconds, and Andy Rammell added their second.
Tranmere's John Aldridge then blazed a 50th minute penalty over the top, but Steve Mungall headed one back 11 minutes later.
Neil Redfearn made sure eight minutes from time.
Millwall cruised to a 2-0 win over Leicester.
Jamie Moralee scored the first after 25 minutes and set-up Jon Goodman for the second.
Nev day of shame
Steve Acteson
Queens Park Rangers 4, Everton 2
FURIOUS Howard Kendall stormed out of Loftus Road tight-lipped last night after a double sending-off which helped plunge his troubled side deeper into the relegation mire.
England winger Andy Sinton bagged a glorious hat-trick but goalkeeper Neville Southall's deliberate handball after 19 minutes saw him receive the first red card.
Then Paul Rideout's cynical backheel at Darren Peacock's head on the stroke of half-time left the Merseysiders with only nine men in the second half.
But Everton manager Kendall would say nothing about either incident, except to snap a cynical and curt ‘Happy New Year’ as he headed into the night.
Rideout faces a three-match ban after catching Peacock right in front of referee Gerald Ashby, who earlier applied the letter of the law when Southall instinctively grabbed a backpass straight at his midriff whilestanding a yard outside his area.
The Welsh international clutched his head in his hands fearing the worst — and it happened.
He trudged wearily off to a generous standing ovation and a sympathy from QPR manager Gerry Francis.
‘It is just one of those things,’ said Francis.
‘I knew if my keeper had done that he would have been off, too — it's the law of the land these days.’
But Francis had no message of goodwill for Rideout, snapping: ‘What he did was very silly indeed, especially right in front of the referee.’
Despite their double handicap, Everton pulled themselves back to 3-2 with two Stuart Barlow goals before Sinton completed his treble two minutes from time, and Francis added: ‘At 3-0 my players thought they'd won it.
Their attitude was very disappointing.
‘We should have had seven or eight but I think my lads' New Year resolution is to turn my hair completely grey — we simply must find some consistency.’
Gutsy
Southall's departure forced Kendall to take off winger Robert Warzycha and send on gutsy substitute Australian keeper Jason Kearton for a dazzling debut — never mind the scoreline.
His first touch was to turn David Bardsley's rasping free-kick, which followed Southall's dismissal, round a post.
But after brilliantly turning away Simon Barker's 23rd-minute header, Kearton had no chance as Sinton followed up.
After Rideout's dismissal, Everton were under siege as Gary Penrice and Sinton appeared to have opened the floodgates — which Les Ferdinand promptly shut again by blasting over from two yards.
Ludicrously, Rangers believed they had the game already well won.
And First they became casual and then totally ineffective as Everton stormed back — stringing 12 passes together at one stage as Rangers simply stood and watched.
The masterful substitution of Barlow for Peter Beagrie paid rich dividends for Kendall as the replacement single-handedly dismantled the Rangers defence to score in the 62nd and 72 minutes.
Crazily, it was Rangers who were then holding on — but Sinton finally secured the points they barely deserved with his third.
Rush blasts back
Des Kelly
Liverpool 1, Man C 1
LIVERPOOL'S Ian Rush hit a scorching riposte to the critics claiming he is past his best with a stunning equaliser.
The Welsh striker, under pressure after a recent barren run, ended 1992 in style by lashing home a ferocious second half volley to deny Manchester City their first Anfield triumph in a decade.
It was Rush's 287th goal in a record-breaking career and few can have been better, cancelling out Niall Quinn's opener and leaving this fixture locked in stalemate for the third successive season.
Even rival City manager Peter Reid masked his disappointment to pay tribute to the spectacular strike.
‘To see a goal like that is worth the entrance fee alone.
It was a goal of real quality from a high quality player,’ he said.
‘But I am not really happy.
My players were a different class and we deserved the three points.
‘If we had stuck away some of the chances we had in the first half then we'd have won it.’
Wonderkid Barmby is star of the show
Ben Bacon
Spurs 2, Nottm F 1:
NICK BARMBY began this year virtually cleaning Gordon Durie's boots.
He ended it as the kid who can fill them.
Barmby, just 18, was unknown 12 months ago but yesterday confirmed his thrilling potential by helping destroy Brian Clough's beleaguered Nottingham Forest.
And watching from the stands was Durie, appropriately dressed in black.
The Scottish international has been dropped because he's not in the right frame of mind.
But he must have endured more mental turmoil as his rookie replacement lit up White Hart Lane.
Barmby, a chunky Yorkshireman from Hull, gave Spurs a 36th-minute lead with a superb volley and then created captain Gary Mabbutt's winner five minutes from time.
His all-round display delighted coach Doug Livermore, who rates the little striker one of the most exciting and explosive talents in football.
Livermore said: ‘He's a clever footballer who has made tremendous strides, bearing in mind he's only 18.
He's a good listener, who learns very quickly, brings others into the game and he links the whole team together.
Lethal
‘He had the chance to join every top club in the country, but thankfully he chose Spurs.’
Barmby was in the same England youth team as Ryan Giggs before the Manchester United winger decided he was a Welshman.
And there is no disputing what the Spurs forward is about — scoring goals.
Forest, who knocked Spurs out of the Coca-Cola Cup, have not lost at White Hart Lane for seven years and perhaps a draw would have been a fair result.
But when you're bottom of the Premier League little seems to be fair.
Forest had chances to win, a traditionally exciting game, but Kingsley Black missed a series of opportunities before being substituted in the second half.
The result was particularly tough on midfielder Roy Keane.
Often his powerful runs ended with cynical tackles just outside the area.
Spurs's first-half pressure was rewarded when Barmby grabbed his third goal of the season after a move between Vinny Samways and former Forest striker Teddy Sheringham.
The ball found its way to Barmby, whose lethal strike gave keeper Mark Crossley no chance.
Forest created a succession of chances after the break as Tottenham struggled to contain Keane, who shot wide after being put through by Neil Webb in the 50th minute.
Then Scot Gemmill rifled in the inevitable equaliser from 20 yards.
It looked as though Forest had done enough to earn a valuable point when Barmby picked up a loose ball in the area and crossed for Mabbutt to score.
Last year, this fixture was marred by Nigel Clough's sending-off, and there was more animosity when Forest captain Stuart Pearce had an ugly confrontation with Iceland international Gudni Bergsson on the sidelines.
Blame it on Bowen
David Alexander
Leeds 0, Norwich 0
NORWICH need to find their touch in front of goal or their Premier League lead might not last much longer than the New Year celebrations.
The long-time front runners have now gone four games without a goal, and their misery was prolonged yesterday as they missed from the penalty spot.
But Mark Bowen's miss did not deflate manager Mike Walker, who proudly leads his side into the final 20 games with a three-point lead.
‘It's only justice we go into the New Year on top,’ he said.
‘We are the best side so far — we've got the points to prove it.’
Norwich were handed the perfect chance to end their goalless spell after just nine minutes following Mel Sterland's challenge on Ruel Fox, but Bowen sent his spot kick wide to the right.
It was his second consecutive penalty miss and Norwich's third out of four this season, and Walker said afterwards the Welsh international would not be given the job in future.
‘The penalty miss cost us the game,’ Walker said.
‘But you have to give credit to Mark and the others.
It didn't knock them and they kept on playing.
‘Performances like this prove we are not as flimsy as people think.’
Platt woe
DAVID PLATT has been forced to put off his comeback from a knee injury.
The England midfield player, who had surgery on the injury last month, was hoping to return for his Italian club Juventus against Parma on Sunday.
But doctors said yesterday the knee was still inflamed and ordered Platt to rest for several days.
He could now return for the Sampdoria clash on January 10.
Hirst is back in groove
Southampton 1 Sheffield Wed 2
TREVOR FRANCIS believes David Hirst is ready for another call from Graham Taylor after a stunning goal ended Southampton's resistance yesterday.
Hirst's thundering 25-yarder in the 63rd minute earned Wednesday only their second away win of the season and banished the memory of losing a three goal lead to Manchester United at the weekend.
And manager Francis said: ‘Hirst is now back at his best.
Over Christmas he has got all his old sharpness back and is now showing England form again.’
Pressure
Francis added: ‘I was concerned the United match would have a psychological effect, but my players' reaction was superb.’
Southampton were a goal down after 11 minutes, when Hirst was bundled over by Ken Monkou, and John Sheridan's penalty went in via the post.
Wednesday survived some fearsome pressure until Hirst's strike provided enough breathing space to ensure Monkou's 79th-minute reply was no more than a consolation goal.
Saints boss Ian Branfoot said: ‘Our best two displays of the season have been against Chelsea and Sheffield Wednesday this holiday weekend, and all we have to show for them is one point.’
Five-star job for Fergie
Graham Fisher
Manchester United 5, Coventry City 0
UNITED destroyed Coventry's festive celebrations with a sumptuous feast of attacking football.
The Premier League's form team, impressive conquerors of Liverpool and Aston Villa, were left breathless as a capacity 36,025 crowd — the best at Old Trafford this season — watched United's relentless assaults.
The sheer gulf between the sides spoke volumes.
Coventry hotshot Mick Quinn arrived on a streak of 10 goals from six games but never got a sniff of the target.
And United's biggest win of the season could have been twice the size.
There was not a weakness to be seen and no-one at the game would back against them ending a 26-year wait for the Championship.
The afternoon was full of towering performances right through the team but none bossed the action with more grandeur than Paul Ince, described as ‘a colossus’ by Coventry boss Bobby Gould.
Beauty
There was no chasing the game this time.
United set off as they finished at Hillsborough on Boxing Day, like executioners seeking instant judgment.
Ryan Giggs scored his third of the season after just six minutes, and it was a beauty.
Eric Cantona, crisp as the winter air, twice figured in the move, freeing Ince on the left and nodding the midfielder's cross into the danger area.
But the finish belonged to Giggs.
As a poor headed clearance from Phillip Babb fell to him, the Welsh teenager snapped it under control and sent a glorious curler inside Jonathan Gould's far post.
Mark Hughes scented blood.
United's leading scorer was in rampant mood and was twice kept out by superb saves from Gould.
In all, Hughes missed four clear chances but he was not to be denied and his 11th goal of the season came after 41 minutes.
It was another move of pure silk as the ball went from Brian McClair to Giggs to Cantona.
The Frenchman delivered a perfect final ball that left Hughes with no excuse this time — and he didn't need one as his shot rifled past the Coventry manager's son.
We had seen nothing of Coventry nor were we due to.
Their midfield was sparse and offered scant support to the speedy wide men.
Only when Zimbabwean Peter Ndlovu, Coventry's exciting striker who had been kept out by their recent resurgence in form, came on as substitute after the break was there occasional menace.
But that dissolved in a United goal glut.
Lee Hurst had just delivered City's first shot on target when Cantona scored United's third from the penalty spot after 65 minutes, his third in three matches.
Paul Parker had confused Babb into handball after another electrifying break down the right.
Giggs and Lee Sharpe were in full cry now, slicing Coventry apart time and again.
Sharpe put two efforts wide before he got on the score sheet for the first time this season, courtesy of Cantona, after 77 minutes.
Giggs, feeling his ankle knock, came off — as did Steve Bruce with a recurring thigh strain — but the mayhem went on.
Fittingly it was full-back Denis Irwin, always an eager ally in attack, who thumped home a fifth with a blistering first-time drive from 15 yards.
Dalglish despair
Julie Tunney
Ipswich 2, Blackburn 1:
KENNY DALGLISH last night laid into his defence which threw away his hopes of closing the gap on Premier League leaders Norwich.
Rovers, without the injured Alan Shearer, went ahead through Roy Wegerle only to have their day spoiled by goals from Bontcho Guentchev and Chris Kiwomya.
The Ipswich equaliser came following a disputed corner, but Dalglish's fury was directed at his own defence rather than the match official.
‘If the referee gives a corner and you don't agree with it, you still have to defend it,’ he said.
‘And we have got to defend better than that.’
Wegerle gave Rovers the lead in the 72nd minute when the Ipswich defence gave him time and space to drive home from the edge of the area.
Mistake
But with 11 minutes remaining, Steve Whitton set up Guentchev who opened his Ipswich scoring account with a splendid overhead kick.
Disaster struck for Rovers just two minutes later as a mistake by keeper Bobby Mimms handed Ipswich the points.
Mimms went for a cross he was never going to reach, Jason Dozzell helped it on to Kiwomya, and the in-form striker calmly lobbed home the winner past the despairing lunge of Nicky Marker.
Fleck's a flop
Mike Walters
Wimbledon 0 Chelsea 0
BAD play stopped light as the Selhurst Park floodlights blew a fuse and Robert Fleck blew the chance to shoot Chelsea into the title race.
The 17-minute delay after 71 minutes of this numbing exposure of Chelsea as credible Championship challengers merely prolonged the suffering of their 9,000 travelling fans.
They ran out of patience with £2.1 million record signing Fleck, who has just three goals all season, and sang ‘What a load of rubbish’.
It says a lot for the quality of the football when Vinnie Jones, inevitably booked against his old club for backchat after 29 minutes, looks the best player on view.
But Chelsea boss Ian Porterfield defended Fleck, saying: ‘We've got to stick by him and give him the confidence to bring a change of luck.’
Big Ron cheered by Villa revival
Rob Shepherd
Aston Villa 1, Arsenal 0
RON ATKINSON had cause to offer belated seasonal goodwill to his fellow men last night as Aston Villa re-asserted their Championship challenge with a victory more emphatic than the margin of a Dean Saunders penalty suggests.
On Boxing Day, Atkinson was full of humbug towards his players.
Embarrassed 3-0 at Coventry, Atkinson fiercely lambasted his team.
He described them as ‘useless in defence, useless in midfield and crap up front’.
To hammer home the point, he denied his players from having a late Christmas dinner by taking them straight back to the club's training ground.
The stern words and punishment seemed to have the desired effect.
In all departments last night, Villa looked a more than useful side.
Dropped
With Cyrille Regis and Brian Small dropped, being replaced by Dwight Yorke and Steve Froggatt, Villa again looked a side capable of sustaining a challenge at the top of the table.
For Arsenal, on the other hand, it seemed to be the night which confirmed their fall from grace as the Premier League's early season favourites.
This was their ninth defeat of the season and their seventh game without a win — a run which has produced just two points and a solitary goal.
Though only 10 points adrift of leaders Norwich, such is their current lack of shape and direction, they have surely blown it.
It is remarkable to recall that they topped the table at the start of November.
But given their approach at Villa Park last night, they don't deserve to be in contention.
Instead of looking to overcome their current problems with a bold outlook, George Graham opted for an approach which utterly lacked ambition.
With Tony Adams suspended, he drafted in David O'Leary for his first game of the season alongside Andy Linighan and Steve Bould in the centre of a five-man defence.
It certainlt was not a sweeper system.
Consequently, an under-manned and unimaginative midfield was over-run, leaving forwards Ian Wright, Alan Smith and Kevin Campbell starved of service.
Only when Graham begrudgingly replaced the ineffective David Hillier with substitute Anders Limpar in the 67th minute was there a hint that Arsenal might create something.
By then, however, Villa shouldn't have needed to worry, or breathe a sigh of relief in the final minute when goalkeeper Nigel Spink pulled off a fine save from Wright.
Villa had always been in command, but a combination of poor finishing and fine goalkeeping by David Seaman prevented them taking full advantage.
Ray Houghton and Earl Barrett both squandered chances in the opening five minutes.
And when Saunders was sent clear in the 40th minute, Seaman saved at point-blank range on the edge of his area.
It seemed it might be one of those nights when frustration would creep in and undermine Villa's supremacy.
But deep into first-half stoppage time, O'Leary's outstretched leg caught Yorke in full flight.
There was little debate about the penalty, which Saunders converted comfortably for his first goal in nine matches.
Ray Parlour, having been caught heavily by former Gunner Kevin Richardson, did not return for the second half.
But the decision to use the inexperienced Mark Flatts instead of Limpar, particularly with Paul Merson out injured, appeared to be a mistake.
If Graham is searching for reasons why Arsenal have lost their way, surely it has something to do with his reluctance to use his most gifted players.
However, Graham was right in saying the scoreline hid the fact it was a comprehensive defeat.
Despite lacking the cutting edge, Villa continued to create openings throughout the second half.
They might be short of one or two quality players, but in such a yo-yo season Villa have as good a chance as any, particularly if Dalian Atkinson returns from injury to give them the sort of finishing power they lacked last night.
Smash-hit Simon
Middlesbrough 0 Crystal Palace 1
SIMON OSBORN smashed in the goal that shot Crystal Palace to their sixth straight win — and grabbed the spotlight from young Craig Hignett into the bargain.
Osborn fired home the 63rd minute winner against the run of play after Nigel Martyn had kept Middlesbrough at bay with a string of England-class saves.
Nobody suffered more than Hignett — looking more and more a Premier League thoroughbred, despite only six games in the top flight following his £500,000 transfer last month.
Hignett, two-goal hero at Everton on Boxing Day, outshone another Crewe old boy, midfield international Geoff Thomas.
But he couldn't get the better of Martyn, who turned one goal-bound shot from the 22-year-old onto the post minutes before Osborn jumped in to stun the 21,123 crowd with only his second goal of the season.
An Eddie McGoldrick free-kick was only half cleared and Osborn produced a superb finish from 20 yards to maintain the Londoners' recent revival.
Palace had Andy Thorn stretchered off with concussion, but he was given the all-clear after X-rays.
Guy so deadly
Derby Co 2 Portsmouth 4
DERBY were made to pay for a sloppy display of defending as Guy Whittingham scored after seven and 50 minutes to take his season's tally to 29.
Derby twice equalised through Tommy Johnson and Paul Kitson.
But Alan McLoughlin's double secured the points for Pompey, whose manager Jim Smith said: ‘We battled well and had luck when we needed it.’
We've lost it
David Harrison
ARSENAL boss George Graham last night blasted his multi-million pound stars for squandering the qualities which made them giants of English football.
Graham's team, beaten by a Dean Saunders penalty for Aston Villa, have slipped 10 points behind League leaders Norwich and virtually out of the title race.
And although the margin of defeat at Villa Park was slender, Graham labelled his team as ‘an easy touch’ after a performance which leaves them with just two points from their last seven games and now a 10-1 title bet.
Graham said: ‘I was more disappointed with the performance than the result.
It was only the second time this season we've been comprehensively beaten.
Leeds was the other one.
‘We were by far the second best.
David Seaman was excellent for us, saving so many one-against-ones otherwise the defeat would have been much heavier.
‘We have got to get the old Arsenal habits back again and become hard to beat and competitive all over the pitch.
It's got to be done very, very quickly.
Slump
‘There has been an unfortunate combination of injuries and suspensions and our better players not performing as they can.
‘We are falling away from what made us a good side.
We were easy to play against tonight.’
We were poor in the first half and slightly better in the second.
But it was very cavalier stuff — it had to be’.
Arsenal's slump since they took over the Premier League leadership on November 7 has been startling, but Graham admitted: ‘I don't even think about winning the title.
‘The only thing I'm thinking of is to get that desire back into the side.
I'll get them back to working harder again.
We are always better when our backs are up against the wall and under criticism.
I hope those talented players will do it for us.
‘We are good enough to be in the top three, but our talented players have to work harder individually and as a unit.’
Meanwhile, Villa moved up into third place, level on points with Manchester United and three points adrift of Norwich.
Manager Ron Atkinson, who criticised his players after their 3-0 defeat at Coventry on Saturday, said: ‘Going into the New Year in level second place is something we'll settle for.
‘I thought the result was never in any danger.
We showed a lot of character and with the way we played.had the courage to go out and play and not just belt the ball up field.’
Saunders, whose penalty winner was his first league goal in almost two months, revealed he had been put on the spot by colleague Ray Houghton.
The £2.5 million striker said: ‘Ray was on penalties but said he didn't fancy it.
He looked at me and asked me to take it.
I didn't really fancy it myself but decided to give it a go.’
Pearce in flare-up
Ben Bacon
ENGLAND captain Stuart Pearce was at the centre of an amazing touchline bust-up yesterday with Spurs substitute Gudni Bergsson.
Tottenham coach Ray Clemence and physio Dave Butler dragged their man away.
With three minutes to go, Bergsson was warming up and held on to a ball that went out of play.
Pearce, wanting to take a quick throw-in, grabbed the ball and pushed him on the cinder track surrounding the pitch.
Bergsson reacted angrily, pushing his head against Pearce's and then grabbing the controversial full-back by the throat.
Birmingham referee Mike Reed and a linesman stepped in and when Bergsson went on he was warned he would be sent off immediately if the feud continued.
Bergsson said: ‘He was in a hurry to take the throw but I was in not such a hurry to give him the ball.
I handed him it in my slow Icelandic way and he bumped me about.
‘He game me a bit of a shoulder into the body which flew me a bit and got me rather p—.
‘I squared up to him but only on the spur of the moment.
We had a nice stare at each other and gave the fans a bit of excitement.
‘These things happen when players are geared up.
‘I showed some aggression, and so did he.
If you're the captain of England, or any team, you can show your frustration if you're losing a game to a late goal like the one we had just scored.
‘As I was about to come on the ref told me, ‘I'll be watching you closely.
If you do anything of that sort to get a reaction, I will give you your marching orders’.’
Pearce played down the incident, which came just after Gary Mabbutt's winner in Spurs' 2-1 triumph, saying: ‘It was nothing.’
Meanwhile, Gordon Durie reacted angrily to Tottenham's claims that he doesn't want to play for them.
‘That's absolute rubbish,’ he said.
‘I don't think I'm being treated fairly and I want to know what the hell is going on.’
Royal Gait return on ice
By Henry Rix
THE eagerly-awaited reappearance of Champion hurdler Royal Gait has been delayed 24 hours until this afternoon due to the abandonment of yesterday's meeting at Leopardstown.
Despite passing a 7am inspection, conditions deteriorated and the Irish track was later declared unraceable.
Yesterday's card will be staged in full today and Royal Gait, not seen out since winning at the Festival in March, is due to contest the Bookmakers Hurdle (1.40).
The form of Royal Gait's narrow defeat of Oh So Risky in the Champion will make him a very short price today, but he should not be opposed despite a lengthy lay-off.
James Fanshawe's nine-year-old is in a different class to today's six rivals.
Irish-trained Crowded House is likely to fill the runner-up spot.
He finished second to Duke Of Monmouth in the Triumph Hurdle at Cheltenham in March, and will be spot on after finishing fifth on the Flat in the Leopardstown November Handicap.
Jodami back in action
By Henry Rix
HENNESSY Gold Cup runner-up Jodami is likely to return to Newbury to contest the £10,000 Mandarin Chase on Saturday.
Trainer Peter Beaumont is keen to get a run into the seven-year-old who has been off the track since narrowly going down to 40-1 shock winner Sibton Abbey last month.
Jodami was due to contest the Rowland Meyrick Chase at Wetherby on Boxing Day but the meeting was abandoned.
‘I am hoping he will run on Saturday.
That is the race I favour but there are other options at Haydock next week,’ said Beaumont.
‘He has come on nicely since the Hennessy and has been working well but he could do with a run this week,’ he added.
Beaumont is encouraged by recent results that support his belief that he has a real Gold Cup contender in Jodami, currently 8-1 for the chasing crown.
He finished three lengths behind Monday's Welsh National winner Run For Free first time out at Haydock when conceding five pounds, and was six lengths in front of The Fellow in the Hennessy, receiving 25lb from the subsequent King George winner.
There is an outside chance that all three could clash in the Hennessy Gold Cup at Leopardstown on February 14.
Gee Armytage was yesterday bracing herself for another spell on the sidelines as she recovers from a back injury sustained in the Coral Welsh National.
She crushed a vertebra in a seventh fence fall from Merry Master at Chepstow, and is likely to be out of action until February.
Frost ruins fixtures
BRITISH racing remains in the grip of a cold snap that wiped out yesterday's programme and threatens to cause similar damage to the remainder of the week's fixtures.
Seven meetings have been called off in the last two days, including all three of yesterday's cards plus three scheduled for today at Carlisle, Taunton and Warwick.
Only Fontwell survived but the course must pass a 7.30am inspection if it is to avoid becoming the 27th casualty of the season.
Clerk of the Course Cliff Griggs said: ‘It is 50-50 at the moment and there is more frost forecast.’
The prospects for later in the week are not encouraging.
There will be inspections today at Folkestone (12 noon) and Catterick (2pm) for tomorrow.
Frost is also threatening tomorrow's other fixtures at Cheltenham and Leicester.
Cheltenham Clerk of the Course Philip Arkwright said racing would not have been possible yesterday.
Tomorrow's Lingfield Flat all-weather meeting is the only card expected to go ahead before Friday.
Hill insists he'll climb back
By Tony Roche
AS England's most capped and successful scrum-half, Richard Hill could be forgiven for swapping his boots for a pair of slippers and gazing with fond memories at a trophy cabinet bulging with evidence of a career full of top honours.
All the same, the 31-year-old Bath half-back, first-choice up to and including the World Cup Final against Australia 13 months ago, has lost his place on the bench to Steve Bates of Wasps and on the plane that tomorrow flies the England squad to Lanzarote.
But Hill is a fighter, a man who knows all about the inner trauma of rejection and who overcame the stigma of being stripped of the England captaincy and banned.
‘Some players might recognise the signs and start to wind down,’ said Hill, ‘but I am not one of them.
‘I believe I have two more years of top-class rugby in me and I want them to include a return to the England team.’
Targets
As his former team-mates undergo a torturous five days of fitness testing abroad, Hill will relax with his family before embarking on ‘two months of hard work on my own.
‘I am capable of setting myself targets and I know I have the self-discipline to attain them.
‘Right now I am off the international scene.
‘The selectors have made their decisions concerning the squad and nobody is going to knock on my door again unless I recapture the form that made me No 1.
‘I admit I am not playing that well at the moment but I don't think either Dewi Morris or Steve Bates are pulling up trees either.
I've been written off and battled back before and I am determined to do so again.’
The supreme irony for Hill was being part of the first South West team to win the ADT Divisional Championship two weeks ago.
‘A competition designed to replace the old final trial and one which is supposed to produce the national squad,’ he said.
‘So here I am, a Divisional champion yet out in the cold.
It was bad enough being frustrated on the bench while Dewi took over as first choice but at least you are involved every day.
‘This is much harder to handle but I know what is required because I have been here before.’
Hill's rapid rise after his international debut against South Africa in 1984 coincided with the development of Bath as the most accomplished club side in England.
When appointed national captain in 1987, Hill made the mistake of trying to inspire a fire and brimstone reign, unleashing all of his ultra competitive traits in the dressing room and on the pitch.
‘If I'd known then what I learned since I would not have lost the job or my place but I simply had some growing up to do.
‘I was so anxious for England to succeed and thought my aggressive approach would help.’
Brawl The pot boiled over against Wales at Cardiff Arms Park that same year in a brawl of a game that resulted in bans for Gareth Chilcott, Graham Dawe, Wade Dooley and Hill, who was blamed for failing to exercise his captaincy correctly.
Hill's ban ended in time for the 1987 World Cup but Bristol's Richard Harding, who replaced him for the final Five Nations match — a stirring victory over Scotland — was first-choice in Australia and Hill's last game for two years was against the United States.
A long exile ended in 1989 when England manager Geoff Cooke, no longer able to ignore Hill's superb form for all-conquering Bath, brought him back for the game against Fiji at Twickenham.
And that sparked a run that ended with cap No 29 when the Wallabies won the World Cup 12-6.
Hill was a key part of the 1991 Grand Slam team but admitted: ‘Dewi won the shirt last season and did a terrific job as the lads won the Slam for a second successive year.
‘But now we all start over again.
Maybe people will look at the squad, see I'm out of it and assume my best days are over.
We'll see.’
Clement target
TONY CLEMENT is back tonight with his eyes on reclaiming the full-back role for Wales in the Five Nations Championship.
Swansea's Clement will train for the first time since being sidelined for more than six weeks with a stress fracture of the shin.
The 25-year-old's last game was against South Wales Police on November 14, with Cardiff's Mike Rayer taking over when Wales met Australia.
Former Australian captain Nick Farr-Jones rated Rayer ‘the best full-back in the world’.
Clement admitted: ‘I might be up against it to play against England on February 6.
‘I need two or three good club games under my belt first and if I do well in those I hope they will include me in the team again.’
He added: ‘Everyone is looking at the British Lions tour and it would be nice if Wales had two full-backs in the party.’
Swansea coach Mike Ruddock will decide after tonight's training session whether to risk Clement against Maestag on Saturday in the Heineken League.
One player definitely missing this weekend is Llanelli and Wales B scrum-half and captain Rupert Moon, who injured his collarbone in the East Wales v West Wales match in Cardiff on Monday.
But Moon still hopes to be fit for the Wales squad that leaves for a week of warm-weather training in Lanzorote on Tuesday.
Refs a joke
I FEEL it is time that someone spoke out about our appalling refereeing standards.
I witnessed the Coventry versus Ipswich match recently.
All too often supposedly top officials turn highly entertaining games into a farce with over-the-top bookings.
I have seen 13 Premier League games this season and only one was officiated with any degree of competence.
We need professional people in charge.
If nothing is done, the game will degenerate into absurdity — and one of those hooligans we are looking to stamp out may take out his frustrations on the officials.
Strip job
SO Lennox Lewis has been crowned this country's first heavyweight champion for almost a century.
But if Lewis wants to wear the WBC crown with pride, he must set himself aside from Riddick Bowe's yellow-bellied tactics.
Bowe was stripped of his title for refusing to meet Lewis in the ring.
If Lewis now refuses to fight Tony Tucker first, as the WBC want him to, he should also lose his crown.
Negative
I HAVE always had the highest regard for Rugby League's board of directors — until their recent decision to restore the two-division set-up.
At a time when football — our so-called national game — has finally been sold out by its organisers to big-money TV, rugby league should be attempting to woo its support.
We are witnessing a totally negative step by reducing the number of clubs — which will undoubtedly result in a drop-off in support.
No holding the grapple
By David Tossell
REMEMBER when wrestling meant Mick McManus, Big Daddy and the wonderfully dead-pan Kent Walton greeting ITV's Saturday afternoon viewers with the words, ‘Good afternoon, grapple fans’?
The days when the Royal Brothers and Jackie Pallo plied their trade in exotic venues like Brent Town Hall and WWF stood for the World Wildlife Fund, not the World Wrestling Federation.
If you thought that era had been long since killed off by the replacement of British wrestling on our screens by the outrageous comic-book exploits of the Americans, you would be horribly wrong.
While old ladies continue to brandish their handbags and umbrellas at the likes of Giant Haystacks in leisure centres and town halls, the arrival of WWF in national consciousness means they are outnumbered at ringside by the Nintendo generation.
Brian Dixon's All-Star Wrestling stages 10 shows a week and has 150 full-time and 220 part-time wrestlers on its books.
Dixon reports: ‘In the last 12 months, there has been a 30 per cent rise in the number of fans from the younger age group attending our shows.
And we have geared our bills to the kind of thing they are used to.
‘The old six five-minute rounds and best of three falls has gone, it is now time limit matches with one fall to decide.’
Baddy
Mick McManus, Britain's version of a WWF-style baddy back in the 1960s and '70s, admits: ‘I thought that the popularity of the American shows might have an adverse effect.
‘It has surprised me how the British scene has kept up.
It is very healthy.
‘There is much more of a cross-section at the shows now.
You get everyone from the cloth cap brigade to the colonel from Tunbridge Wells.’
McManus, magazine columnist and tireless campaigner for the return of domestic wrestling to television, feels the British scene should be looking to achieve a balance between the trans-Atlantic styles.
‘British wrestlers are becoming more flamboyant — people expect it,’ he says.
‘The attraction of wrestling with the six-year-olds is that they can relate to the characters.
‘They watch Masters of the Universe and Superman on TV and these guys in their outrageous costumes are like those cartoons.
‘There is a lesson to be learned in American wrestling's presentation.
They do a great production job.
‘But I would prefer the British scene to keep the accent on the wrestling — a combination of the American flair for the hype and the traditional good British wrestling moves.’
Suddenly there is a new generation of wrestlers eager to enter the world of grunt and groan — so much so that the New Year will see Dixon open a wrestling school in Birmingham.
Dixon explains: ‘In the past, new wrestlers have come from wrestling families.
‘Now I get loads and loads of letters from teenagers looking for a career in the sport.
We have written back to about 200 of them offering them the chance to attend the gymnasium.’
The success of the British Bulldog, Davey Boy Smith, in the WWF means that up-and-coming wrestlers have dreams beyond joining Giant Haystacks, Skull Murphy, Fit Finlay and Kendo Nagasaki at the top of British bills.
McManus confirms: ‘The goal for any ambitious wrestler is America, the rewards there are much greater.’
But the old master doubts there will be a steady stream of wrestlers heading Stateside.
‘The Americans like to keep things to themselves.
They are a bit insular in that respect,’ he says.
Revenue
Which perhaps opens the door for TV companies over here to step in and make stars once more out of top domestic wrestlers.
Says McManus: ‘Television would offer extra revenue plus a shop window for the sport.
I see no reason why it shouldn't be successful.
We do a terrific job.’
And Dixon insists: ‘There were six million viewers when wrestling went off our screens (in 1988).
Now there would be 18 million.
‘The popularity of American wrestling has shown there is a market.’
Regal Fox steals show
Ray French
Bradford N 21, Widnes 10.
DERYCK FOX helped himself to 13 points with a try, four goals and a drop goal to take the man of the match award and send Widnes crashing out of the Regal Trophy.
The tiny Great Britain scrum half, returning from a five-week absence after suffering a severe stomach muscle strain, guided Bradford to their seventh Trophy semi-final and a date with Castleford at Odsal on January 9.
Following his seventh-minute penalty goal, it was the lively Fox's probing kick to the corner which set up Karl Fairbank to put Kiwi centre Darrall Shelford over for a try.
Cheeky
Fox added the conversion and it was his perfectly judged grubber kick to the corner which allowed winger Tony Marchant to pounce and score.
Widnes substitute Emosi Koloto scattered a couple of Northern defenders as he went over for a try in the 39th minute.
Centre Andy Currier landed a penalty goal and outstanding Welsh wing John Devereux added Widnes' second try in the 72nd minute.
But Fox sealed Bradford's victory with two more goals, a drop goal and a cheeky try when he ducked beneath half the Widnes pack.
Leeds coach Doug Laughton last night denied he was set to swoop for Widnes's former Welsh union star Jonathan Davies.
Former Widnes boss Laughton, who first tempted the ex-Llanelli half-back to switch codes four years ago, said: ‘I have not been in touch with Widnes about Jonathan Davies and it has never been discussed by our board.’
Hero Montana
By David Tossell
JOE MONTANA, possibly the greatest quarterback of all time, is back.
Now he's the greatest back-up quarterback of all time.
Coming on as a second-half substitute after two years out with an elbow injury, Montana led the San Francisco 49ers to three scores in the fourth quarter to clinch a 24-6 victory over the Detroit Lions.
Entering the game to a standing ovation, 36-year-old Montana brought the crowd to its feet again with touchdown passes of nine yards to Brent Jones and eight yards to Amp Lee.
‘I didn't think I'd be so nervous,’ said Montana, who finished with 15 completions in 21 attempts for 126 yards.
‘I was being too cautious at first.
Once I settled down, I got a lot more confident.
Rusty
‘It's been a while, so I figured I'd be rusty.
I just didn't want to make a big mistake.’
Coach George Seifert will retain Steve Young, the NFL's top-rated quarterback, as the starter for the play-offs, but Montana seems certain to take the No 2 spot from Steve Bono.
However, it could have been Montana's last appearance for the team he has led to four Super Bowl triumphs — unless Young is injured.
He is unwilling to accept a long-term back-up role and is likely to be traded during the off-season.
Graf vow
WIMBLEDON champion Steffi Graf is considering quitting tennis in five years.
‘I am just not the type to keep playing tennis at 28 or 29,’ the 23-year-old revealed yesterday.
‘I have already been in this murderous rhythm for 10 years.’
Graf wants to travel more and change her career before she's too old.
Priestley is on target
DENNIS PRIESTLEY, the world's No 1 darts player, yesterday won his 11th title of the year, beating Dave Askew of Redhill in two straight sets in the British Open in London.
Priestley received £3,000 and is now eyeing the £30,000 first prize at the Embassy World Championship.
Croker tribute
THE Football Association are to request that players of all clubs competing in the third round of the FA Cup this weekend should wear black armbands in memory of former secretary Ted Croker, who died at the age of 68 on Christmas Day.
Super Herol
FORMER British middleweight champion Herol Graham moves up to super middleweight to fight Midlands area champion Carlos Christie in Manchester on January 25.
Accola on ice
PAUL ACCOLA, Switzerland's alpine skiing world champion, will miss the Championships in Japan in February after surgery on his left knee, which he injured in training.
Leeds deny Davies bid
By Ray French
LEEDS rugby league coach Doug Laughton last night denied he was set to swoop for Widnes's former Welsh union star Jonathan Davies.
Laughton, the former Widnes boss who first tempted the ex-Llanelli half-back star to switch codes for a record £250,000 fee four years ago, said: ‘I have not been in touch with Widnes about Jonathan Davies and it has never been discussed by our board.
‘The first person I would phone should I wish to sign Davies would be the Widnes chairman Jim Mills and I have never done so.’
Linked
And Widnes general manager Frank Myler, insisted that no club had been in contact regarding a possible move by Davies from Naughton Park.
He insisted: ‘As far as we are concerned we have had no approach from anyone about Davies and we do not wish him to move elsewhere.’
And Laughton is keen to add 30-year-old Davies to his squad ahead of the January 11 Silk Cut Challenge Cup deadline.
Laughton had been linked with Davies, Well aware of Widnes' financial problems and the crippling costs of maintaining Davies' who recently signed a three-year £80,000-per-season contract with cash-strapped Widnes.
But Leeds are desperate for a Silk Cut Challenge Cup run in the New Year.
And the loss of international utility back Carl Gibson for the season — he broke a leg and dislocated his ankle in the Boxing Day clash with Castleford — would create an immediate opening for the Welsh wizard.
Meanwhile, giant Hull prop Ian Marlow is out of Saturday's Regal Trophy semi-final match with Wigan and could be joined by at least five other pack colleagues.
Along with Marlow, the strong-running front row, who is out for four to six weeks after suffering rib cartilage damage against Sheffield Eagles last Sunday, forwards Andy Dannatt, Russ Walker (groin strains), Jon Sharpe (virus), and talented teenage loose forward Dean Busby (badly bruised hand) are all doubtful.
Schofield to miss out
GREAT BRITAIN rugby league skipper Garry Schofield will not be playing in Australia next summer.
Schofield, who had threatened legal action to force Leeds to allow him to play for Manly in the close season, revealed: ‘Manly have withdrawn their offer in view of the problems.’
Wessels the hero
SOUTH AFRICAN captain Kepler Wessels yesterday led his team to their first Test victory since 1970.
Wessels hit an unbeaten 95 as South Africa, playing their first full series after two decades of international isolation, comfortably won the third Test against India in Cape Town by nine wickets.
The skipper was supported by opener Andrew Hudson, who scored 33 before being caught by Indian captain Mohammad Azharuddin.
But while South Africa cruised home with a day to spare to go 1-0 up in the four-match series, it was more of a struggle than they expected after India began the fourth day at 71-6, just eight runs ahead.
Kapil Dev hit 129 to give the tourists hope and, while Wessels snuffed that out, the match was only seven minutes from going into the fifth day.
The tension led to India's Manoj Prabhakar being fined £25 — 10 per cent of his match fee — by referee Mike Smith.
Prabhakar was reported by umpire Wilf Diedrichs for dissent after his dismissal in the day's first session.
Prabhakar was the first of four victims on the day for pace bowler Allan Donald, who took 7-84 in the innings and finished with his best Test figures of 12-139.
Donald was in full cry but he came up against a rejuvenated Kapil Dev.
The veteran all-rounder produced his best innings for more than two years, being last out for 129 as India were dismissed for 215 in mid-afternoon.
Windies woe
WEST INDIES, set an unlikely victory target of 359 in the second Test in Melbourne, finished the fourth day struggling to avoid defeat after losing opener Desmond Haynes.
They were 32-1 at the close after bowling Australia out for 196 in their second innings.
The Australians were bowled out shortly after tea.
Then, with 13 overs to go to the close, paceman Merv Hughes forced Haynes to edge a catch to wicketkeeper Ian Healy.
That made the West Indies 9-1, but captain Richie Richardson (12 not out) and Phil Simmons (14 not out) guided them to stumps without further mishap.
They now need 327 runs to win on a dry wicket which is cracking and causing the occasional erratic bounce.
Australia were painstakingly slow in building their second innings total, opener Mark Taylor taking four hours and 11 minutes to score 42.
Top scorer, with an unbeaten 67, was 21-year-old Damien Martyn, playing in only his second Test.
He raised the pace near the end to punish the tiring Windies attack.
Martin was supported by tailenders Hughes, who made 15 in 55 minutes, and Mike Whitney, who equalled his best Test score of 13 before being run out to end the Australian innings.
Paceman Ian Bishop claimed the wickets of Steve Waugh, Taylor and captain Allan Border to finish with 3-545 off 20 overs.
Curtly Ambrose, Courtney Walsh and medium pacer Phil Simmons each took two wickets.
Howzat for openers
Graham Otway reports from Delhi
UTTER shock over Graham Gooch's marital crisis, combined with the prospect of travel chaos, yesterday set England's winter tour off on completely the wrong footing.
Day one in Delhi should have been a gentle, relaxed affair lounging around the hotel pool recovering from jetlag after a 5am arrival from London.
Instead, the siege mentality towards the accompanying press party, that has wrecked morale on previous tours, notably the 1986 trip to the West Indies, has set in again with a vengeance.
Eight years ago on the sub-continent, England's last full tour kicked off with Mrs Gandhi's assassination, but any thoughts that the current visit might start peacefully have been shattered.
England have flown straight into an off-the-field mystery surrounding their skipper, a strike by local airline pilots and a beer shortage.
There is still the continued tension between local Hindus and Muslims which could explode into more violence at any time.
And the start of the first tour match against the Ranji Trophy champions at nearby Faridabad on Sunday seems a distant oasis of calm.
Earlier this week I warned that poor tour morale was the only likely threat to England's chances of beating an inept Indian Test side, but now misgivings have become reality.
And for their inspirational captain and star batsman to see himself so early as a lonely figure of torment, when England will need his strengths in the weeks to come, does not bode well.
Most of the current crop of England players cannot help Gooch.
They know him only as a highly efficient and exacting captain.
Rising stars like Phil Tufnell, Chris Lewis and Graeme Hick have never shared a dressing room with him purely as a team-mate, getting to know him on equal terms.
They respect him for his deeds on the cricket field but can never hope to pierce the armour-plated shell around a deeply private and older man.
Silence
Their sense of shock stemmed from the timing of the announcement and the sudden exposure to controversy on tour.
Their silence on the issue stems from ignorance of the inner man and his family, and a fear that anyone speaking out of turn would be showing disloyalty to their captain.
Established players like David Gower have learned to their cost that crossing Gooch can have a deadly effect on an England career.
And, barely 24 hours after leaving London, with places to be won in four Tests and eight one-day internationals over the next 12 weeks, no one was prepared to break ranks.
Gooch has two close friends with him in India — cricket manager Keith Fletcher, who was has been a father figure throughout his career in Essex, and John Emburey, a soulmate since they played schoolboy cricket together in East London in the early 70s.
Neither had any inkling of Gooch's worries as he reported for two days pre-tour training at Lilleshall in each of the weeks leading up to Christmas.
Nor were they able to shed any light on the problem.
There have been no sightings or reports of a third person involved.
Instead, it was suggested the couple, who married in their early 20s, had simply grown up and grown apart.
Brenda Gooch, staying at home to raise three daughters, stubbornly refuses the help of an au pair or nanny in her husband's absence.
Graham Gooch, touring the world as a triumphant cricketing skipper, cashed in on his fame with highly-paid personal appearances in his spare time.
Yesterday, while the rest of the England players had a late brunch, Gooch broke the news to Emburey in a deeply private chat.
Gooch spoke to Fletcher, who has known the couple throughout their marriage, in his hotel room yesterday morning, and the manager said later in a brief written statement: ‘I was very saddened when Graham told me.
The problem is very much a private one and I hope Graham will now be left alone to get on with leading the team on this tour.’
That was Gooch's main intention when he left Gatwick on Monday, thinking only his closest family knew of the marriage breakdown.
Being a 110 per cent cricketer he wanted to leave his problems 5,000 miles away in England and bury his attentions in the game that has won him glory.
Harder
Whether he can still achieve that goal will be very much down to the obstinacy and determination for which he is famous.
Gooch has never been a person to dwell on the past.
A close friend said last night: ‘The agony for Graham will have been coming to a decision with Brenda.
‘Now that has been reached, he will only want to get on with the future.’
To distance himself from his domestic woes it can be expected Gooch will drive himself and his players even harder than usual in training the next few days.
He'll be running, batting in the nets and passing on tips to youngsters is an area in which he thrives and excels.
There were times when Gooch publicly made it clear that he put his home life before cricket.
He refused to join Mike Gatting's Ashes tour to Australia in 1986-87, saying he did not wish to spend four months away from his family.
In 1991, after thrashing 259 off Middlesex at Chelmsford to clinch the Championship, he refused to give a press conference, saying he had promised to take Brenda shopping.
Last night, England manager Bob Bennett said Gooch still intends to return home early and miss the two-week end-of-tour trip to Sri lanka where Alec Stewart will captain England.
It had always been assumed that Gooch wanted to spend time with his family before the new home season begins in April.
Maybe he expects to be house hunting.
For the next two months, however, he must devote himself to his team and the signs are that the passage through India will be anything but smooth.
A 19-day strike by Indian Airlines pilots is starting to cause chaos on the sub-continent with no signs of management acceding to a list of 14 demands.
The Indian Government has imported several Russian pilots along with their Tupolev correctaircraft and a skeleton service is operating between the major cities.
In the coming weeks the The England party is due to visit outposts such as Cuttack, Jampshedpu and Ahmedabad which may only be reached by tortuous train journeys of up to 15 hours, some requiring overnight travel between games.
And the signs are the journeys will made without liquid refreshment.
Tour sponsors Tetley Bitter have been unable to persuade customs to allow supplies in for the players.
Indian tours have never been simple affairs and after barely 24 hours the current one is shaping up like its predecessors.
Bedi tipping England
BISHEN BEDI yesterday claimed that England will beat India easily during the forthcoming Test series if the home team do not make major changes.
‘It will be a disaster if the current team is maintained,’ said the former India captain, whose left-arm spin mesmerised batsmen around the world for over a decade.
The Indians have performed poorly on their tour of South Africa, where they lost the third Test after flopping 5-2 in the one-day series.
Bedi believes India should concentrate on spin and forget hopes of a ‘mediocre’ pace attack making any dent in the England batting, saying: ‘Kapil Dev is an exception, but you cannot expect a one-man army to win for you all the time.’
Bedi said India should think about introducing a better batting line-up.
‘The day has come when India should go for new faces and not go on trying with the old ones, who have failed us miserably,’ he said.
‘If these changes are not made, it will be a cakewalk for Gooch's men.’
Wilko in New Year battle cry
By David Alexander
HOWARD WILKINSON promised yesterday that the New Year will bring in the old Leeds United.
‘Things are improving again — and now we have the FA Cup to aim for,’ said the Elland Road boss.
The champions have become fallen heroes, lying just four points away from a relegation place with a record that parallels this stage of the season a decade ago when they last went down.
But Wilkinson dismissed all talk of lingering disaster.
‘We may be 16th now, but we won't be there for much longer,’ he said.
‘We have to start collecting points and I'm convinced we'll do that.’
On Saturday, Leeds are at home to Charlton in the FA Cup — their only path to glory still open.
Pleased
‘It's our aim now, and I hope we can do well,’ said Wilkinson, encouraged by Monday's confident show against Premier League leaders Norwich.
‘We've got to go for it.
If we start the New Year in the same way as we finished it, I'll be well pleased.
‘It's something to build on.
It was a good performance and we were difficult to beat.
Now the Cup offers us a chance of success.’
With David Batty back in midfield and Mel Sterland at right-back, Wilkinson has the option of picking the side that won the title.
‘I'm pleased with both.
They give us something, and you could see that against Norwich,’ he added.
‘It wasn't a hang-on or hang-in performance and it bears out what I say about an improvement here.’
Hill laid low
Graham Fisher
MANCHESTER CITY are expected to lose the services of centre half Andy Hill for several weeks after hospital tests last night on his troublesome groin.
Hill has ended his last three games in agony since he first suffered the muscle strain at Ipswich earlier this month.
The likeliest outcome is a hernia operation and Hill's enforced absence, starting with Saturday's FA Cup-tie against Reading.
Hill, bought as a full-back for £200,000 from Bury, but a successful implant to central defence said yesterday: ‘I don't think I can carry on any longer.
The injury has got worse and if I continue playing it won't get any better.’
City boss Peter Reid saluted Hill's heroic performances against Aston Villa, Sheffield United and Liverpool despite the pain.
He said: ‘I cannot speak too highly of Andy's courage.
He was magnificent again at Anfield and I personally thanked him after the game for what he had done.’
Dutch defender Michel Vonk is another long-term Maine Road casualty, which leaves Reid with only David Brightwell to promote.
Spend, Spend, spend
By Ben Bacon
ARSENAL fans have suffered in silence as their title hopes have been sent crashing by a run of just two points from seven games.
TODAY reporter BEN BACON went to the Highbury area yesterday to give those fans a platform to express their opinions about the alarming decline.
ANGRY, frustrated and disillusioned Arsenal fans yesterday borrowed a line from pools winner Viv Nicholson and urged manager George Graham to spend, spend, spend.
And they all agree the priority must be a top quality midfield player if the Gunners are to rescue a season which has gone disastrously wrong since being hammered 3-0 by champions Leeds in November.
The man they want is Nottingham Forest's dynamic Irishman Roy Keane.
Not only are Arsenal losing, but they are failing to score — just one goal from seven games — and it's beginning to have an effect on fans who have been accustomed to rolling with the good times.
Another FA Cup shock at Yeovil this Saturday is no longer just a dream.
Graham has already complained in his programme notes about the lack of support at Highbury — yesterday the fans hit back.
And they can all pinpoint the day it all went wrong for Arsenal: July 22, 1992 — the day David Rocastle was allowed to join Leeds.
Malcolm Davis from Golders Green has been a fan for 40 years.
He's a shareholder and a season ticket holder, but he's so annoyed by recent events he's already considering not bothering to renew his pass for next season.
Suffered
He said: ‘I pay £1,300 a year to watch Arsenal, and I'm thinking seriously of stopping.
I suffered six years of mediocrity under Terry Neill, and I'm not going to put up with it again.
‘The buck stops with George Graham.
He should have built on the team which won the title in 1991, and bought quality players.
It's glaringly obvious we need a midfield player.
‘John Jensen is just a workhorse, like David Hillier.
The ball control is absymal.
We'd be better off with Rocastle and Mickey Thomas than what we've got now.
‘The title is out of the question, it's a hopeless cause, and it's too late into the season for any new player to make a difference.
However, I would like to see Roy Keane at Highbury.’
Mr Davis's brother Richard, also a season ticket holder and shareholder, agrees.
He said: ‘We need two experienced midfielders.
Selling Rocastle was a big mistake.
‘Hillier and Ray Parlour are good, but they are not quite ready.
An experienced international should be playing in midfield.’
Paul Milsome, from Ruislip in Middlesex, has been an Arsenal fan for 25 years and remains optimistic that Graham's renowned iron-will can rescue them.
He said: ‘It's never too late for the title.
I was sorry to see Rocky go and I would like him back.
‘I can't put my finger on what's gone wrong.
The goals have just dried up.
We created lots of chances against Ipswich last Saturday, but just couldn't put them away.
‘I'd like the club to sign Roy Keane from Forest.
He's young, quick and can score goals.’
Milsome's father, Arthur, saw his first Arsenal match in 1945.
He blames the disappearance of the North Bank for part of the club's slump and also thinks an expensive midfield acquisition is a must.
He wants Chelsea captain Andy Townsend, a long-term Graham target, at Highbury.
Chris Parrott is ideally placed to speak with some authority on the club.
Not only has he been a season ticket holder for 15 years, he's also the landlord of The Gunners pub and is used to having his ear bent by supporters.
Problems
Mr Parrott, who has a Gunners tatoo on his right forearm, said: ‘My Sunday League side has been doing better than Arsenal.
‘The basic problems stem from selling Rocastle.
I think the club wanted to bring Geoff Thomas in from Crystal Palace, but when that fell through, they were left short.
‘We need a midfield general.
In the past, we have had the likes of Liam Brady and Charlie George who could pick out players from 40 yards.
‘Roy Keane at Forest would be ideal, but I don't think he's a realistic target, I think he'll go abroad.
Arsenal should go back in for Thomas.
He's a good, strong player who'd give us some bite and score goals.
‘I know we have John Jensen, but he's not a matchwinner.
He's a blueprint for Brian Talbot.
I also like Sheffield Wednesday's Chris Bart-Williams — he'd do a great job.
‘We also need a defender to replace Steve Bould, who's getting on.
Portmouth's Andy Awford fits the bill.
‘And we haven't been helped by all the bookings.
However, I still think we can win the Championship.
I'm optimistic — a pessimist could never support Arsenal!’
Pat Kennedy and Gordon Brailsford, regulars at the Arsenal Tavern, have supported the club for a combined 80 years and believe a swoop for Wimbledon pair Robbie Earle and Warren Barton is the answer.
Mr Kennedy said: ‘We could get them for £4 million.
One man who can go tomorrow is Anders Limpar — anyone who puts country before club should not play for Arsenal.
‘George Graham is not going anywhere, though.
He will always be the right manager for the job.
It's only a matter of time before we give some team a damn good hiding.’
David Welsh from Islington believes the club needs two players, and is convinced someone like Nigel Clough at Nottingham Forest could provide the subtle touch the side is missing.
‘Clough could be the answer,’ he said.
‘He's a great player who can provide the skill that's been lacking.’
One man hoping for a turnaround in Arsenal fortunes is the landlord of the Arsenal Tavern, John Moynihan.
He said: ‘When Arsenal are winning, the pub is packed.
When they lose, takings are down by 50 per cent.
Groan
‘Fans just go straight home instead of coming in for a drink.
They have been having a moan and a groan recently.
But when they win, everything's rosy.’
But the question is how much longer can Arsenal continue to be the dregs, before they are the toast of the town again?
Roll out the barrel, George.
Arsenal's England full-back Lee Dixon made a successful comeback in the reserve team's 1-0 defeat by Luton yesterday, playing his first game since sustaining a knee injury more than three weeks ago.
Dixon said: ‘The knee held up well and I should be fit for selection against Yeovil on Saturday.’
Boss backs Nev
Des Kelly
HOWARD KENDALL last night cleared Neville Southall of blame after his controversial sending-off at QPR and accused referee Gerald Ashby of over-reacting.
The Everton manager revealed he would not fine the Welsh goalkeeper after his dismissal for deliberate handball, but fellow red-card victim Paul Rideout faces a financial reprimand.
Kendall said: ‘My sympathies are with Neville.
A booking would have been sufficient punishment.
‘The referee at the time said Southall was denying a goalscoring opportunity.
Well, that is his interpretation of it but my defender, Dave Watson, was goal-side of their player, Les Ferdinand.
‘Neville should not have been outside his area but his reaction was instinctive, not pre-meditated.’
Rideout will receive a three-match ban for violent conduct and Kendall is considering internal discipline.
Bonus for Redknapp
WEST HAM assistant manager Harry Redknapp was handed a Pounds 100,000 ex gratia payment when he left Bournemouth after nine years as manager, club accounts have revealed.
Redknapp, who resigned as Bournemouth boss shortly before moving to Upton Park, will be paid the sum over two years by the financially crippled Cherries, who are £2.6 million in the red.
Club financial director Ken Gardiner said the payment was a reward for Redknapp's dealings in the transfer market.
Gooch can come home
By Mike Walters
GRAHAM GOOCH will be allowed home from England's tour of India to sort out his troubled marriage if he wishes.
In an unprecedented move, I understand Lord's officials are prepared to let the England captain exploit gaps in the tour itinerary.
He will be able to return on compassionate leave — particularly if it helps to focus his mind on the Test series.
As the cricket world reeled at yesterday's shock news that Gooch's 16-year marriage to wife Brenda has broken up, Test and county chiefs expressed their amazement — and drew up contingency plans.
Peter Edwards, Gooch's general manager at Essex, said: ‘I'm staggered.
Graham's devotion to his family has always been such that he drives home every night from Test matches in London rather than stay in the team hotel.
‘I saw both of them at club functions in the run-up to Christmas, and there was no hint of this.’
Gooch is due to fly home from the sub-continent after the last one-day international against India on March 5, handing over the captaincy to Alec Stewart for the Sri Lankan leg of the tour.
TCCB chief executive Alan Smith said last night: ‘Graham has flown out to India to do a job.
I'm sure he's going to carry on showing the same brand of outstanding leadership he has shown with England for some years.’
Smith was as surprised as anyone to learn of the marriage problems.
‘There is no reason why I should have been told,’ he said.
‘It is entirely a personal matter and one for Graham to deal with as he thinks best.’
But Lord's will treat sympathetically any request by Gooch to England's tour managers Bob Bennett and Keith Fletcher for a mid-tour sabbatical.
Gooch need not miss more than one day of competitive cricket if, for instance, he returns to London between the three-day game with an Indian Board President's XI and the opening one-day international which takes place in Ahmedabad on January 16.
Smith added: ‘If the management wish to refer an issue to the England committee, all they have to do is pick up the phone.’
Ironically, Gooch said in July this year that India would be his last trip with England ‘because I don't want to miss my daughters growing up’.
He agreed to one last tour only after lengthy soul-searching at home.
On Gooch's ill-fated Ashes tour of Australia two years ago, batsman Robin Smith was refused permission to make a 25,000-mile round trip home to be with his wife at the birth of their son, Harrison.
But the England committee fear Gooch's domestic upheaval could be a more damaging distraction in India to his pursuit of his 100th Test cap and 100th first-class century.
He currently has 99 of each.
Gooch will be 40 in July and has always indicated that he would bow out of Test cricket at the end of this year.
Taylor faces a revolt
Rob Shepherd
ENGLAND manager Graham Taylor is faces up to the most important year of his career, already bracing himself for a row which could undermine his World Cup plans.
Just as the embers of his flare-up with former captain Gary Lineker have begun to die, Taylor is heading for a bust-up with the country's top clubs.
England are committed to a three-game summer tour in America, where Taylor wants to fine-tune his squad for the 1994 World Cup finals.
But managers of top clubs like Arsenal, Manchester United and Liverpool are unhappy their players will be forced to end a long, gruelling season with a tough tour.
I understand several are ready to take on Taylor and attempt to stop some of their stars travelling on a trip where England will play a tournament against the USA, Brazil and Germany.
Even though a proposed fourth game against Canada has been dropped — presumably as a gesture of appeasement — The tour runs from June 5-19, deep into the summer break — and George Graham, Alex Ferguson, Graeme Souness and others believe their clubs should not be put at a disadvantage at the start of the following season.
They feel their top players will return for the new season without sufficient rest — particularly as, immediately prior to the tour, England play two World Cup qualifiers in Poland (May 29) and Norway (June 2).
But Taylor will insist on independent medical evidence if any selected players are withdrawn.
He says: ‘It has to be the most important year of my life.
Just imagine the flak flying about if we have bad results.
So we must look to do well in the States.’
Ultimate revenge
By David Harrison
PAUL McGRATH is lining up the ultimate act of revenge against former boss Alex Ferguson — by snatching the title away from the Manchester United manager.
The classy Irish defender can already picture the season building to a climax with Aston Villa and United slugging it out for the Championship.
And his perfect ending would be for Villa to become the first winners of the Premier League and break United's hearts for the second successive season in a title run-in.
McGrath said: ‘If I had a New Year's wish, it would be for us and Manchester United to battle it out in a two-horse race for the Championship — and for us to win it for a lot of reasons.’
The veteran Eire international is careful not to be drawn into a new slanging match with Ferguson — but one of those reasons must be to show the United manager that he is not a crippled has-been, better equipped propping up a bar than shoring up a defence at football's highest level.
When he sold him to Villa for £450,000 in 1988, Ferguson made no secret of the fact that he was delighted to see him go.
Fined
He left no-one in any doubt that the player's off-field activities as much as his suspect knees forced his exit from Old Trafford.
There has been acrimony between the two men ever since.
McGrath was fined £8,500 by the Football Association three years ago for a newspaper article attack on Ferguson, who responded with his own condemnation of the defender in his autobiography earlier this year.
Since he was shown the door by United, McGrath has confounded medical opinion — and Ferguson's — and become widely regarded as one of the world's outstanding centre-backs with his displays.
The softly-spoken Irishman is driven by a desire to prolong his career for as long as possible, having been offered and refused a big financial inducement by United to quit because of his knee problems.
The thought of winning a Championship medal also helps him to endure the pain he still suffers, though both Ron Atkinson and Graham Taylor — the latter signed him for Villa — have learned to nurse him through the week and preserve his talents for match-days.
‘I have been a runner-up at United and again since coming to Villa, but it's always been my dream to win the big one,’ said McGrath.
‘United have emerged as favourites now and that suits me fine, as long as we are up there challenging them at the end of the season.
‘Of course I'm not discounting the rest.
There are still a lot of good teams up there capable of winning the title.
But the ball is in our court.
I just have that feeling, as I have done all season, that honours could be coming Villa's way if we continue to play powerful, punishing football.
‘Even the gaffer has been saying that we have a half-decent team.
I just hope that by the end of the campaign, big Ron announces that we are a decent team.
‘When I look around the rest of the title contenders, I see nothing to fear — but that doesn't mean we should underestimate any rivals.’
A 3-0 thrashing suffered by Villa at Coventry on Saturday is now being seen as the turning point in their Championship drive.
After a public haranguing from Atkinson at Highfield Road, the manager adopted a ploy which would have had Ferguson spluttering into his orange juice.
The Villa boss, who has his own obsession to win the title after being sacked by United for failing to land the coveted prize, took his Villa players out for a post-Christmas celebration.
Atkinson said: ‘We tried to forget about what happened at Coventry and put it out of our minds as quickly as we could.
Then we all went out for a drink.
‘There wasn't much point in sitting down and going over and over again into what went wrong at Coventry.
‘There was so much wrong anyway with the performance it would have been difficult to know where to start.’
But the jolt to his players' system kick-started them back into life and Monday's 1-0 victory over Arsenal has lifted them level with United and three points behind leaders Norwich.
McGrath said: ‘It could have done us a lot of good to have been beaten so heavily at Coventry.
To have just lost and not been so dreadful might not have had the same impact.
‘But because we were so bad it woke us all up.
Then the Arsenal match gave us a chance to restore some pride — and I think we have done that.’
Lads in waiting
David Harrison
ASTON VILLA manager Ron Atkinson is ready to rely on his young lions to sustain the team towards the Premier League title.
The Villa boss has spent £10 million on assembling his Championship challengers — but the bargain buys and home-grown talent could now hold the key.
Youngsters Dwight Yorke and Stephen Froggatt returned against Arsenal on Monday to help revitalise Villa's flagging challenge and Atkinson is holding several more in reserve to throw into the Championship skirmish.
Utility player Neil Cox, defender Ugo Ehiogu, goalkeeper Mark Bosnich and the German duo of Mattias Breitkreutz and Stephan Benlich are all itching for the chance to make their mark.
Atkinson admitted: ‘If we are going to sustain a challenge for the title, there will be opportunities for the younger players.
‘Basically we are an experienced team, but the youngsters are going to play a crucial role in trying to keep us up there.’
‘When you move towards the back half of the season, the risk of picking up injuries are that much greater.
We will have to rely more and more on the back-up squad to keep us going.
‘Quite a few of them were given a chance last season and although they haven't had much of an opportunity this time, I haven't forgotten them because of their importance to the squad.’
Yorke, signed from Trinidad and Tobago for £40,000, scored 17 goals for Atkinson last season and has finally had a look-in during the current campaign.
Atkinson said: ‘He has not had the best of seasons so far and probably felt he was being frozen out, but He came back and had his best game for us against Arsenal.’
‘That delighted me, and so did the performance of Froggatt, who has had only one five-a-side game in the last 10 weeks because of a knee injury.
He came back to do a smashing job.’
Atkinson is also looking to a February return for England winger Tony Daley, out of action since undergoing a cartilage operation three months ago.
Villa believe his comeback could help swing the title pendulum their way.
Fergie puts Giggs on right track
By Graham Fisher
THE youthful resentment that threatened to put a break on the wing wizardry of Ryan Giggs is fading rapidly thanks to some wise counsel from Manchester United boss Alex Ferguson.
Fergie's policy of physical protection for his Welsh teenager is well documented.
This season — a vital chapter in his progress — has required a more psychological approach.
Giggs had begun to brood.
For a start, opponents he had skinned last season were wiser men second time around and less prone to be dismantled by the quickest feet in the Premier League.
Next, he began to wonder why the best he could hope for in a Welsh shirt was the occasional entrance as substitute.
And thirdly, he was shifted unceremoniously to the right wing, unfamiliar territory, to make way when Lee Sharpe was restored to health.
Thrilling
Now Giggs is quickly coming to terms with the facts of life.
The evidence was abundant in United's thrilling 5-0 slaughter of in-form Coventry.
He scored his first goal since his switch to starboard and proceeded to give vastly experienced full-back Kenny Sansom a rugged afternoon.
Yesterday, Ferguson said: ‘I think it was a question of convincing Ryan that he could operate on the right.
He has the talent to play anywhere, and he is gradually accepting the situation.
‘He still cuts instinctively inside to his left.
But once he is used to it, he will trust his right, which he did often enough against Coventry.’
Giggs hit the heights despite feeling an ankle knock that forced his retirement 12 minutes from the end on Monday and will probably keep him out of next week's FA Cup tie against Wigan or Bury.
Everything is falling into place for United's winter push towards their first title in 26 years.
The wingers are on song, new boy Eric Cantona is scoring goals, and England's Paul Ince has found some compelling form in midfield.
Ferguson is even able to shed the disappointment of skipper Bryan Robson's absenteeism thanks to Brian McClair.
McClair survived a dismal autumn — dropped by Scotland, dropped by Ferguson and then everybody's favourite to make way for Cantona.
Now he is Ince's midfield sidekick, and Ferguson says: ‘It's not a bad combination at all.
Robson is a loss, no question, but we could not have better compensation than Brian McClair.’
Lawrence is ready to wield axe
By John Wardle
ANGRY Middlesbrough manager Lennie Lawrence yesterday delivered a bleak New Year message to some of his team.
With Boro plummeting down the Premier League table, Lawrence warned: ‘One or two will have to go, and new players will have to come in.’
Monday's defeat by Crystal Palace leaves Boro with only two wins from their last 17 games, and Lawrence is determined to get tough to put his club back on the rails.
He said: ‘I haven't had the remotest enquiry for any of my players, whether on the list or not, but that doesn't surprise me.
‘It's a cold, hard world out there, and one or two people are going to find out just how hard in the not-too-distant future.
‘That performance against Palace worries me more than anything I have seen so far this season.
I wonder if players are listening to the lessons because they are certainly not learning them.
Desperate
‘If this is what we are capable of, it's going to be a worrying time.
It's one step forward and two steps back.’
Lawrence is desperate to get injured players like skipper Alan Kernaghan back into action and threatens to swing the axe for Sunday's FA Cup clash with Chelsea.
Meanwhile, Kevin Keegan delivered his half-term report at Newcastle, declaring: ‘We are bang on course for the Premier League.’
But Keegan warned his players not to let standards slip following the controversial 4-2 defeat at Oxford on Monday.
And he is still expected to step up his ambitious attempt to land QPR striker Les Ferdinand and complete his plans for a return to the big time.
Rangers are waiting for Keegan to come back with an improved offer after rejecting a staggering £3.3m bid, and Keegan could offer transfer-listed Franz Carr as the makeweight in a new player-cash deal.
The runaway First Division leaders are 12 points clear of their nearest rivals, but after Monday's defeat, Keegan warned: ‘We mustn't let standards dip.
That's one lesson we have to learn.
‘There are no easy games and we have to perform in the same manner that has taken us where we are today.’
Newcastle's Benny Kristensen last night hit back at claims that he missed out on a £150,000 move to Bristol City because of knee trouble.
‘That's rubbish,’ said the Danish defender.
‘I think it's just an excuse.
I don't want other prospective buyers to think I'm not fit, because I am.
There is nothing wrong with my knee.’
City directors are understood to have pulled out for financial reasons.
Grim Graham
Mike Walters
GEORGE GRAHAM last night reluctantly accepted the role of Public Enemy No 1 as Arsenal turned to cup competitions as the salvation for their crumbling season.
The Gunners' Premier League challenge is virtually a write-off after the Bank Holiday Monday defeat at Aston Villa made it seven games without a win.
Now they face non-League Yeovil in Saturday's FA Cup third-round tie and a Coca-Cola Cup trip to Scarborough four days later.
If they slip up, Graham will almost certainly spend heavily at the January sales.
He admitted: ‘The next two cup games are very important for us.
Against both Yeovil and Scarborough we are prepared to accept a David and Goliath situation in which everyone is pulling for little David.’
But Graham added: ‘I will not be panic buying.
We have just got to get the old Arsenal habits back.’
Forest duo on mend
NOTTINGHAM FOREST duo Gary Charles and Terry Wilson today take their first steps back from lengthy injuries.
England full-back Charles and Scottish Under-21 international Wilson, who have made only a handful of appearances between them this season, play for the reserves against Sheffield Wednesday.
Charles has struggled with knee trouble while Wilson has been plagued by Achilles tendon and hamstring problems.
Holmes admits injury cover-up
Frank Ward
FORMER heavyweight champion Larry Holmes last night revealed he earned a shot at the world title after fighting with a detached retina.
‘I got a detached retina in my right eye three weeks before I fought Ray Mercer,’ veteran Holmes admitted.
‘I kept it quiet.
I could see partially out of the right eye.’
In February, 43-year-old Holmes scored a shock 12-round points victory over Mercer in Atlantic City, New Jersey to earn a title shot against Evander Holyfield, recently deposed as world champion by Riddick Bowe.
‘I went into hospital immediately after the Mercer fight and had an operation,’ Holmes said.
Holmes's aide Dick Lovell said: ‘We whisked him in and out under the cover of darkness.’
Larry Hazzard Snr, athletic commissioner for New Jersey, said: ‘I don't know anything about it, I don't recall anything.
In order for a fighter to fight in the state of New Jersey, he has to have a thorough medical examination, so it's hard for me to say.’
On Tuesday night in Biloxi, Missouri, Holmes will fight Everett ‘Big Foot’ Martin in a Bill Lyons, chairman of the Mississippi athletic commission, confirmed: ‘Since the fight with Holyfield, his eye has completely healed.
He is in excellent physical condition.’
Cold snap continues
EXETER's meeting tomorrow offers the main hope of a resumption to jumps racing as freezing conditions continue to cause havoc around the country.
The third blank day of National Hunt racing was guaranteed yesterday when this afternoon's meetings at Cheltenham, Catterick, Folkestone and Leicester all conceded defeat to the frost.
Lingfield keeps the show on the road today, staging an all-weather Flat fixture.
Inspections will be held at Cheltenham (noon), Catterick and Leicester (2pm) and Windsor (2.30pm) to determine prospects for tomorrow.
But prospects for Exeter are described as ‘excellent.’
Cheltenham's New Year's Day card features the valuable ASW Handicap Chase and Clerk Philip Arkwright does not believe it is a lost cause.
‘It would not need to improve much to enable the meeting to go ahead,’ he said.
Gait tragedy
Henry Rix
REIGNING Champion Hurdler Royal Gait died of a heart attack yesterday after finishing fourth in the Bookmakers Hurdle at Leopardstown in Ireland.
In his first race since landing a memorable victory at the Cheltenham Festival in March, Royal Gait collapsed under jockey Graham McCourt moments after crossing the winning line.
The nine-year-old, owned by Sheikh Mohammed and trained by James Fanshawe, had been well placed to deliver his challenge approaching the final flight, but faded to finish just over six lengths behind the winner Novello Allegro.
‘It's a devastating blow for the stable and the owner,’ said Fanshawe.
‘Royal Gait gave me the best day of my racing career at Cheltenham last March,’ he added.
McCourt said Royal Gait was cruising turning into the home straight, but began to lose his action just before the final flight.
‘At first I thought he had just blown up or even broken down.
‘But as soon as we got to the line I realised he was going to keel over with me and I just hopped off in time.
It's a real shame.’
Jim Lenehan, assistant manager at the Sheikh's Kildangan Stud, confirmed that Royal Gait suffered a massive heart attack, and added: ‘The sad part is that Graham said he had felt as good as ever as they came to the final flight.’
Royal Gait's career had been remarkably eventful, and his controversial disqualification from the 1988 Ascot Gold Cup is still the subject of fierce debate.
Sold as a two-year-old at the Doncaster Sales to race in Spain, he won a number of races in that country — where he had seven trainers — before making his mark internationally when winning the Prix du Cadran in France as a four-year-old.
He then moved to France to join John Fellows, ‘winning’ the Ascot Gold Cup in a canter only to have the race taken away from him when jockey Cash Asmussen was found guilty of careless riding.
Royal Gait's Flat career was then plagued with leg trouble and he was eventually sent to stud only to come back into training three years later.
He returned to racecourse action for his hurdling debut at Kempton a year ago, and progressed to win his next three outings, culminating in a narrow victory from Oh So Risky at Cheltenham, where he became the first novice to win the Champion Hurdle since Doorknocker in 1956.
Coral's revised Champion Hurdle betting: 5-2 Mighty Mogul, 4-1 Halkopous, 10-1 Destriero, Granville Again, Vintage Crop, 12-1 bar.
Lewis injury worry
WALES flanker Emyr Lewis, out of action since aggravating a shoulder injury last month, could struggle to be fit for the Five Nations match against England in Cardiff on February 6.
Wales team manager Rob Norster is determined to give Llanelli's Lewis as much time as possible to prove his fitness.
But with the warm-weather training trip to Lanzarote starting on January 5, time is already running out.
Last night, Llanelli coach Gareth Jenkins, who is also a Welsh selector, admitted: ‘It could be that Emyr will not go to Lanzorote.
‘We cannot yet say when he will play again, or even if an operation will be necessary.’
Lewis spent nearly two weeks in a rehabilitation clinic in Oxford, and Jenkins added: ‘We shall look at a full report from the centre, and I shall speak to the Llanelli club doctor.’
Mighty Marcus
FORMER England B scrum-half Marcus Hannaford has recovered from a fractured cheekbone he suffered during Gloucester's controversial League match with Saracens six weeks ago.
Hannaford has been named in Gloucester's team to meet Moseley at Kingsholm on Saturday.
He had been expected to be out of the game for at least two months after suffering concussion and a broken eye socket from a punch, but has made a remarkable recovery.
Gloucester are giving a first team debut to new winger Mark Nicholson.
England's ace in the pack
Tony Roche
STEVE OJOMOH flies to Lanzarote with the England squad this week sensing he is fated to play for the country that tried to deport him.
The 22-year-old Bath back-row forward's astonishing winding road to glory has taken more twists than a roller-coaster, the most recent providing ample proof ‘that somebody up there has decided I am going to make it’.
As England manager Geoff Cooke was naming his 30-strong squad for the five-day excursion to fitness-testing agony, the oblivious Ojomoh was packing for a Christmas holiday with his family in Nigeria.
Selected
‘I can't get a regular game for Bath's first team so it never occurred to me that I might be selected,’ he revealed.
Ojomoh caught the London train to buy an air ticket, unaware that his phone was jangling in its cradle.
‘I bought the local paper at Bath Station and the Evening Standard at Paddington just to see how many of my team-mates had been named, but there was no mention of the squad,’ he added.
‘I had to fight for a place on a packed plane and, after much pleading, they finally knocked someone off their list.
‘All that remained was to kill a few hours in town, so I went to visit an old friend.
‘Imagine where my chin landed when I turned on his TV, called up Ceefax and saw my name on the screen.’
Ojomoh quickly converted his ticket to a 12-month option and raced home.
‘With Andy Robinson captain and John Hall back to his best, it is hard to break into the Bath side on either flank,’ he added.
‘But my form for the South West in the Divisionals must have been better than I thought.
‘Next season I will opt for the openside and stick to it.
I've been too versatile for my own good.’
It is something akin to a miracle that Ojomoh is still in England, never mind the national squad.
It has been an uphill battle ever since his father sent a tearful 11-year-old from the security of his Benin City home to board at West Buckland public school in Devon.
‘My father ordered me to study hard, avoid sport and, under no circumstances, play rugby.
‘He was adamant about rugby because he thought it was too physical for me.
Thanks dad!’
Impressed
Ojomoh, a superbly gifted all-round athlete, soon impressed his games master and, at 13, was sneaked into the rugby XV.
‘I was track-running and playing rugby, yet my father never received one sports report from school,’ he said.
And the conspiracy continued ‘until I played for England Schools and rang my father in dread to tell him.
I expected blue murder but, to my delight, he was very proud.’
The next problem was far more serious.
Ojomoh, by now the South West England Under-21 decathlon champion, developed into a formidable rugby forward and had just joined Bath in 1989 when a letter from the Home Office threatened to wreck his life.
‘I was told I had 14 days to leave the country because my visa had expired.
I had a visitors' visa, renewed annually but I simply forgot and let it go for two months.
‘Suddenly I went from ex-public schoolboy to illegal immigrant and when I did re-apply I was refused and told to get out.’
Enter the clout of English rugby.
Bath approached the Rugby Union, who in turn contacted the then Environment Minister Chris Patten.
It transpired that Ojomoh's family owned a house in Clapham.
Letters and phone calls later, the Home Office relented.
‘I'll never forget that it was the RFU who got behind me when I was in trouble.
It would be a great way to repay them if I made the England side and contributed to its success.’
When Ojomoh boards that plane on December 31 he steps into a new world, the elite strata of an elite sport — not bad for a lad who never saw a rugby ball until he was 13, can't get a first team game and came close to being escorted to a plane by police.
Monie's player plea
Ray French
WIGAN coach John Monie last night pleaded with Rugby League bosses to help save their players' careers.
The Aussie boss faces a crippling injury crisis for Saturday's Regal Trophy semi-final against Hull.
And he appealed to council members, due to vote on a new divisional cup structure next week, to protect the game's best players.
He said: ‘Whoever arranges fixture schedules whereby a club like Wigan have to play around eight matches in a month must be mad.
‘The best players are literally on their knees from playing too much rugby.’
Wigan prop Kelvin Skerrett will miss the tie after being banned for five matches last night while Hull second row Steve McNamara received a four-match suspension.
Barrett setback
PAT BARRETT yesterday announced he has pulled out of his world welterweight title fight with Belfast-based Crisanto Espana, scheduled for late February.
Barrett, who has recently scored two impressive first round stoppage victories in Italy, decided he needs more experience in the welterweight division and feels he made a mistake in challenging Manning Galloway too soon for the WBO welterweight crown last July.
A former British and European light-welterweight champion, Barrett has now asked the British Boxing Board of Control to name him as challenger to Gary Jacobs for the British welterweight championship and Ludovic Proto for the European title before he considers a second world title.
Lennox crowning
LENNOX LEWIS will receive his WBC belt at a charity gala night in London's West End on January 14.
WBC president Jose Sulaiman is to present Lewis with the belt which arch-rival Riddick Bowe rejected earlier this month.
Regan blow
ROBBIE REGAN'S first defence of his European flyweight title, against Londoner Danny Porter, was yesterday postponed because of an ankle injury the champion suffered in training.
Top billing
ENGLAND have two squash players in the world's top seven for the first time in more than a decade.
Peter Marshall moves up one place to No 6 and Chris Walker climbs three places to No 7.
Handley sacked
RAY HANDLEY was fired as coach of the New York Giants yesterday after failing to lead the two-time NFL Super Bowl champions to the play-offs for two successive seasons.
Bunkered by the fame game
Steve Acteson
THE rise of John Daly was straight out of Boy's Own; the fall owed more to the Valley of the Dolls.
It has taken real courage for the 26-year-old Good 'ol Boy from Dardanelle, Arkansas, to admit his alcohol dependency to the world, turn his back on tournament golf for now and reach for help instead of his enormous metal driver.
And despite their reservations over his image — indeed his whole lifestyle — he can expect total support from the archly-conservative US Tour when he has dried himself out at the Hazelton Clinic, near Minneapolis.
As Tour Commissionaer Deane Beman said last night: ‘We all wish John the best in solving what is clearly a difficult situation for him and his family and we hope that a successful rehabilitation will lead to a return to the tour.’
Rebel
But Daly has had the big finger pointed at him before, for excessive drinking, for allegedly smashing up hotel rooms on the minor tours, for his whole attitude.
Daly could rival George Foreman for burger consumption and allegedly, the entire Australian cricket team, for swilling beer.
His hairstyle, baggy clothes and non-comformist attitude made him a rebel without a cause, a punk whose greatest claim to fame was his ability to drive a golf ball further than the average par four.
Daly achieved instant super-stardom when, as ninth reserve and without a caddie, he got into the 1991 US PGA Championship at the last minute, and played like a God for four days on a course he'd never previously seen to win it.
The big-hitting Sam Snead once remarked: ‘You drive for show but you putt for dough,’ but try telling that to the fans who flocked to Daly's banner in numbers unseen since ‘Arnie's Army’.
They came almost in ignorance of an often sublime short game — the big attraction was to see him smash a golf ball further than anyone else in the world and their adulation proved his undoing.
Daly was unfit for stardom by upbringing, by nature — he couldn't handle it.
You don't have to be a psychoanalyst to divine the cry for help behind such statements as: ‘I'd like to find out how Jack Nicklaus handled all this when he was young'
And was there was a hint of desperation when he told TODAY'S Bill Blighton last April: ‘My life has become a soap opera, a long-running saga but I'm not going to be the clone the US Tour want.
‘They don't like my moustache and my long hair, they get at me whenever they can but I am not going to change.
I work hard and play hard, that's my style.
‘The US Tour want me to conform, to be lily-white like Jack Nicklaus but I am not him — I am John Daly.’
Daly is a human roller-coaster; last of the four-day survivors at last summer's Open because he could not handle the tight approaches, first again six weeks later when he shot 67, 66, 67, 66 to grab the $144,000 first prize at New York's BC Open.
Who else but Daly could be humble enough to offer to withdraw from the 1993 US Ryder Cup team if his team-mates don't want him, and get fined for fast play, officials deciding he was in contempt by completing the second round of the TPD Championship in just over two hours.
Crazy
There was also the crazy lifestyle, in particular, with Bettye Fulford, the woman he became disengaged to when he learned she was 39 not 29 and who served a parternity order on him at this year's US Masters.
Daly's answer: he married her.
Unhappily, at Christmas he also allegedly threw her against a wall during a row over another woman at a party at their home in Castle Rock, Colorado, was charged with assault and is now was arrested, charged with third degree assault and released on $1,000 bail.
That incident appears to be behind the decision by golf's ‘Wild Thing’ to clean up his act, and he said last night: ‘I will check into an alcohol rehabilitation unit and return to tournament play only when I am comfortable my life is in order.’
FACTFILE
Born: 28.5.1966 at Sacramento, California.
Reared: Dardanelle, Arkansas
Lives: Castle Rock, Colorado, with wife Betty and baby daughter Shynah Hale.
First played: Aged seven.
Amateur record: All-American (Uni of Arkansas), Missouri and Arkansas champion.
Turned pro 1987.
Failures to win US Tour card: One.
US Tour victories: US PGA August 1991, BC Championship, September 1992.
Earnings: 1991 $387,455. 1992 $574,783.
Height: 5ft 11ins.
Weight: 12 st 5lbs.
Reynolds slams IAAF
BUTCH REYNOLDS, the world 400m record holder, yesterday accused the International Amateur Athletic Federation of being ‘vindictive and anti-American’ over his two-year ban for alleged use of steroids.
Earlier this month, a US District Court in Columbus awarded Reynolds £18 million compensation and said there was a ‘substantial likelihood that the report of Reynolds's drug use was not only false, but that it was disseminated with malice.’
And Reynolds said that the fight to clear his name had made him a stronger person.
‘I consider myself a much better and more focused person.
I feel like I got back my reputation by fighting to prove my innocence.
‘The IAAF are very vindictive,’ he added.
‘I first thought they made a mistake with the test but later I thought it was more anti-American.’
A feast of golf
BSkyB yesterday announced it will screen live 40 US PGA tournaments on the Sky Sports channel next year.
Coverage of the American golf tour will begin on January 8 with the Tournament of Champions in Carlsbad, California.
The presenter will be David Livingstone with expert analysis from Tony Jacklin and Ken Brown.
Sam Chisholm, chief executive of Sky, which is partly owned by TODAY publishers News International, said: ‘The new deal will bring all the biggest stars of world golf to Sky Sports, making it arguably the very best sports channel in the world.’
A BBC spokesman said the BSkyB deal will not prevent them continuing their live coverage of the final two days of both the US Open and US PGA would continue.
Captains in torment
Graham Otway in Delhi
ENGLAND'S cricketers found a tranquil haven here yesterday in which to run through their early tour practice routine.
But for skipper Graham Gooch, a search for inner peace after the turmoil of his marriage rift was shattered in minutes.
Ambling into the nets, he had barely taken guard when he suffered the one embarrassment all England batsmen fear on overseas tours.
Pankanj Maitrey, a 23-year-old left-arm spinner called in from local cricket to help out with nets, skipped to the crease and, with his first ball, knocked back Gooch's stumps.
With jetlag causing most of the tourists to complain of two sleepless nights since landing on the sub-continent, Gooch's manager and mentor Keith Fletcher was quick to offer an excuse.
‘Graham did struggle — I think he was still on the aircraft, none of us has slept well.
But he will get it right with a bit more work over the next couple of days.’
Maitrey, too, offered Gooch consolation, saying: ‘The ball was turning in that net for anyone who bowled.
But it's nice to get out one of the world's master batsmen.’
Gooch, still wary of any contact with the press, offered no explaination, but proceded to react in a manner which suggests he has decided upon the antidote to troubles at home and troubles with the bat.
For the rest of a sunny but refreshingly cool Delhi day he buried himself in batting practice with a vigour that would have sapped any man without his phenomenal stamina.
After a bat against the spinners, he moved into the faster net to face the English pacemen.
And once his allotted time was up, he drifted into a side net for 30 minutes of ‘throw downs’ to work on his timing.
A coach back to the team's hotel gave him enough time for a shower and snack lunch before going back to work — more throw downs, a second net against the quicks, and a burst of fielding practice before dusk set in.
All around him, the other England players gradually acclimatised to their new surroundings, pleasantly suprised by the facilities laid on by the Indian authorities.
Apart from the noisy inconvenience of the odd low-flying jet, the Palam Air Force ground offers some of the best practice facilities on the sub-continent.
Ideal
And with military police on hand to keep out the hordes of autograph hunters that will dog the tourists' every footstep over the next 10 weeks, there were no interruptions.
With only four days to go before Sunday's opening three-day game against Bombay, the Ranji Trophy Chamions, the batsmen welcomed the practice.
Vice-captain Alec Stewart said: ‘Practising indoors at Lilleshall before Christmas was ideal for getting the feel of bat on ball, but it's always different outside.
‘The wickets haven't got as much pace, and the light is different.
It takes time to adjust.’
That was clear as a succession of batsmen joined Gooch in the ignominy of having their stumps knocked over.
But three more days at Palam should cure the problem.
The time, however, is too short for Robin Smith to fully recover from the cracked toe he received from a Chris Lewis yorker at Lilleshall.
The Hampshire powerhouse risked little by taking his first tentative net against the spinners late yesterday afternoon.
But it is too soon for him to face the likes of Devon Malcolm, and Fletcher said the tour selectors would not consider him for the pipe opener in Faridabad.
Critics are ganging up on Azharuddin
Graham Otway
THE knives are being sharpened to greet Indian captain Mohammad Azharuddin and his players when they arrive home from South Africa.
Yesterday, former Test skipper Sunil Gavaskar joined the growing clamour for changes before the three Test series against England.
Following India's nine wicket defeat in Port Elizabeth, Gavaskar slated Azharuddin's team in his column in the Times of India.
He accused his country's batsmen of playing ‘shots as if they were at a gunfight in the old Wild West’.
And he added: ‘The bat was thrown about with an abandon that was strangely absent from their efforts in the one-dayers.’
And calling for changes before the start of the England series Gavaskar said: ‘The Indian team looks mentally jaded and tired.
‘It would be better to rest them (if you do not want to call it dropping them) and hope that the rest from the pressures and tensions of international cricket will make them eager to come back and perform as one expects them.’
Gavaskar's outburst is sure to carry weight since the chairman of Indian selectors, Gundappa Viswanath, is his brother-in-law.
And using Azharuddin, who burst on to the Test scene with three centuries against the 1984-85 England side, as a scapegoat will not be hard to justify.
In the past year India have only managed four draws and three defeats under his leadership in Test cricket and only six wins in 21 limited over games.
Gifted The mantle of captaincy has never really settled on Azharuddin's shoulders for while he remains a gifted and wristy batsmen, he is a shy, sensitive person.
A Muslim from a poor family in Hyderabad, he does not fit in with the Bombay set.
His vulnerability was typified before Christmas when paceman Manoj Prabhakar attacked Azharuddin.
He said: ‘Azar has been a meek captain, rarely letting the team know his idea.’
The problem facing the Indian Board, which met to discuss the crisis earlier this week, is who to name as a replacement.
Kapil Dev would be the people's choice but when he was captain in the mid-80s, his bowling, on which India rely heavily, deteriorated.
Ravi Shastri has been tried before but was unable to unite the team behind him and Sachin Tendulkar, 20, is far too young to be destroyed by politics.
Aussie Warne is the wrecker
SHANE WARNE yesterday spun Australia to a crushing 139-run victory over the West Indies in Melbourne — and then admitted he had surprised even himself.
The 23-year-old, playing only his fifth Test, finished with a career-best 7-52 from 23.2 overs as the tourists, chasing 359 for victory, were dismissed for 219 despite a maiden Test century by opener Phil Simmons (110).
Warne's spin, biting into a crumbling wicket, put Australia 1-0 ahead in the five-Test series after the drawn first match in Brisbane.
He became the first Australian leg-spinner since Bill O'Reilly against South Africa in 1936-37 to claim five wickets in an innings at the MCG.
And after his heroics, Warne said: ‘It would have to be close to the best I've ever bowled.
Doubts
‘I've had doubts that I could play at this level but I've had great support from everyone.’
The last nine West Indian wickets fell for 76 in little more than two hours with Warne grabbing 7-21 from his final 14.4 overs.
But, despite capitulating to the spinner himself, Windies skipper Richie Richardson said: ‘You've got to give him credit to him because he got the result but he's not a threat really.
I don't think any of our batsmen are afraid of him.’
Captain Martin Crowe scored an unbeaten 57 as New Zealand cruised to a six-wicket win over Pakistan in the third one-day international at Auckland.
Pakistan scored a paltry 139 all out in 47.4 overs and the Kiwis then charged to 140-4 with 7.2 overs to spare.
Ferdinand priced out of market
John Wardle
NEWCASTLE will not be held to ransom in the chase for QPR's Pounds 5 million man Les Ferdinand.
The Geordies pulled out of the race yesterday after Rangers placed the staggering price tag on their 26-year-old striker.
The First Division front runners made an alleged £3.3m cash move for Ferdinand before Christmas.
But their big-money approach was rejected, and the indications now are that they won't be back.
Manager Kevin Keegan accepts the deal is dead and is switching his sights elsewhere in the hunt for the final piece of his St James' Park jigsaw.
Genuine
Millionaire supremo Sir John Hall has gone on record to insist the bid was genuine, but that Newcastle are unlikely to pursue their interest.
He said: ‘We put a very fair bid on the table, and I don't want to get involved in an auction.
‘A principle I have always applied in the property business is that you put in a bid that you think something is worth, and you don't go above it.’
The Ferdinand approach confirms that Newcastle mean business in the transfer market after being linked with strikers of the calibre of Alan Shearer, Mark Hughes and Gary Lineker.
Keegan's club is building for the future on the back of 30,000 gates every home match, but the Newcastle boss refuses to discuss transfer targets and wouldn't comment on the Ferdinand situation yesterday.
Meanwhile, unknown Graham Kavanagh could be tossed in at the deep end for Middlesbrough's FA Cup clash with Chelsea on Sunday.
The 18-year-old midfielder is in line for his Cup debut in place of Cup-tied Craig Hignett.
Newman blow for Norwich
Mike Walters
NORWICH were stunned last night by the news that crocked utility player Rob Newman will be out for two months.
Newman yesterday cleared Leeds striker Lee Chapman of any blame for the freak injury.
Newman has broken his left ankle, although the extent of the damage was not apparent until more than 24 hours after Monday's goalless draw at Elland Road.
Norwich manager Mike Walker insisted that Newman's enforced lay-off would not force him into the transfer market.
But he admitted: ‘It is a crashing diappointment for Rob because he had only just come back into the side — and his return coincided with two successive clean sheets.’
And Newman revealed: ‘Lee came in high but there was nothing malicious about it.
‘He caught me on my right thigh, my left foot came down and I did the splits.
The foot turned outwards and that was that.
‘I didn't realise at the time what had happened.
It was the thigh which hurt but as the night went on, the ankle got worse.’
Clough setback
David Harrison
BRIAN CLOUGH is facing a transfer showdown with players union chief Gordon Taylor over Nottingham Forest's new goalkeeper Brad Freidle.
The 21-year-old, signed from Dallas Sidekicks last week for Pounds 300,000, still needs a work permit before he can make a full debut in English football.
But because Freidle has played only for the US Olympic team and not their full international side, Taylor's union are likely to object.
Taylor said: ‘Freidle wouldn't meet the criteria for a work permit if he hasn't played for the full international side of a country that doesn't have a high standard of football.
‘I would hope a club of the stature of Nottingham Forest might have been more willing to look at the domestic market if they wanted a young keeper.’
Thomas on Cup standby
Des Kelly
MICHAEL THOMAS will be handed the chance to set his Liverpool career back on the rails this weekend.
The former Arsenal midfielder has been hit by a succession of injuries since his £1.5 million move to Merseyside and recent speculation has centred on his Anfield future.
But Thomas has been lined up for a return in Sunday's FA Cup third round tie at Bolton Wanderers.
Liverpool boss Graeme Souness was said to be willing to use the 25-year-old Londoner as bait for Queens Park Rangers', coveted striker Les Ferdinand.
Troubles
But last night Souness insisted: ‘Michael has had his troubles since he came to the club.
I brought him here thinking he would be an integral part of my plans but injuries have prevented that.
‘But I still feel he has all the attributes of a top midfield player and the potential is there for him to be the best in the country.’
Meanwhile, Liverpool striker Ronny Rosenthal was in the European League select side that was beaten 4-2 by Italian champions AC Milan in a charity match in Milan yesterday.
Harry's handout
BOURNEMOUTH gave Harry Redknapp a £100,000 golden handshake when he left the club because they thought he was quitting football, it was revealed yesterday.
But three weeks after leaving, Redknapp joined West Ham.
Bournemouth chairman Norman Hayward said: ‘When Harry told us he was finished with football, we took it at face value.’
Meanwhile, Bournemouth were yesterday prevented from signing new players by the Football League because they owe Tottenham Pounds 11,250.
Bournemouth signed Jamie Redknapp from Spurs in a deal which meant they paid them 15 per cent of any future transfer deals.
Liverpool recently paid Bournemouth £75,000 after Jamie's 25th first-team match for them and Spurs want their cut.
Blades woe
CHRIS KAMARA is set to be priced out of a move to Sheffield United.
Luton are likely to insist on recouping the £135,000 they paid Leeds for the veteran midfielder, even though Kamara turned 35 on Christmas Day.
But United manager Dave Bassett said: ‘It's against my principles to pay money for someone of Chris's age.’
Big Mal ready to aim for stars one last time
Roy Collins
MALCOLM ALLISON'S return to English football with penniless Bristol Rovers could hardly be termed a last ride on the gravy train.
In any case, Allison, who discovered the joys of off-licence products and credit card abuse before Norman Lamont was knee high to the Mace, has spilled most of the gravy that has come his way in a life that has brought a different kind of riches.
In terms of his career, Bristol Rovers' FA Cup tie at Aston Villa on Saturday is Allison's last ride on a footballing roller coaster that has delivered him to gravity-defying heights and suicidal lows.
Less generous critics might say it's his last tilt at a windmill.
‘I love the big occasions,’ said Big Mal, which is a bit like a polar bear saying it loves snow.
‘I got so used to winning them.’
Huckster
The fedora hat that adorned Allison's head like a halo during Crystal Palace's improbable run to the l976 FA Cup semi-finals has since been auctioned for charity.
But he still demonstrates fluency in the language of the huckster.
He said mischievously of Saturday's rival manager Ron Atkinson: ‘Despite his spells with West Brom, Manchester United, Sheffield Wednesday and now Villa, he's still waiting for his first League Championship.
I won mine with Manchester City back in 1968.
‘Strangely, this is my first match against one of Ron's team.
Fortunately for him, he was always in a lower division to me.’
The pair haven't spoken since Allison last season told Atkinson there wasn't a coach at Villa Park who knew how to kick a ball.
He recalled: ‘Ron turned to me and said: ‘I can’, then walked away.’
Allison and Atkinson are two of only seven managers on duty this weekend who have led a team out at Wembley in the FA Cup final.
Allison's big day was in 1969, a year after City captured the title.
The magic faded after City's triumphs the following year in the League Cup and European Cup Winners' Cup, which perhaps explains his admission: ‘Sometimes, I have a terrible impatience for the old glory days.’
He has hitched his wagon to more stars than a Romany king yet he'd have put down lifelong roots at first love Manchester City, and not just because a ground called Maine Road was bound to be his spiritual home.
Allison had three spells at City, returning to them after apparently unbreachable rifts like Richard Burton and Elizabeth Taylor.
Like many consumed by a powerful love, he has been searching since not so much for a replacement as an alternative.
Struggled
Crystal Palace came closest, particularly during the FA Cup run of 1976 when they emulated Norwich, Port Vale and York in reaching the semi-finals as a Third Division side.
‘We struggled in the early rounds against Walton and Hersham, Millwall and Scarborough,’ recalled Allison.
‘But then we pulled off great wins at Leeds, Chelsea and Roker Park.’
As the impossible dream drew closer, Allison began to bait rival fans by walking along the touchline in his fedora and making outrageous Muhammad Ali-style pre-match predictions.
Fiona Richmond, who used to perform sexual test drives for men for one of Paul Raymond's raunchy magazines, shared a bath with the Palace players.
More crucially, Terry Venables shared the dressing room with Allison.
After Palace reached the semi-finals, Allison was reported to be in line for the job as American team manager during a summer contest against England.
‘I would only go if I could take Terry,’ he said.
‘In a month, I could teach the Americans more than they have learned in the history of their game.’
Mention of the FA Cup can bring the glow back to Allison's eyes.
It also reminds him of possibly his darkest day in the game.
January 5, 1980.
Fourth Division Halifax beat Manchester City 1-0 in the third round, a defeat from which Allison never really recovered.
His team just escaped relegation from Division One but after a disastrous run at the start of the following season, he left Maine Road for the last time.
Messiah
Since then, he has travelled some of football's more pot-holed highways, including short spells at non-League Fisher Athletic and in the Middle East just as the Gulf War began.
He accepts he's now more a mess-clearer than Messiah, saying: ‘Clubs only call me in when they're in a desperate situation.’
He has already brought a little magic into the lives of Bristol Rovers' fans, who could see nothing to look forward to but relegation from Division One.
They're the latest to share an Allison dream.
He said: ‘When I came here a month ago, they didn't have any confidence.
Now, they know they have ability and on their day they can be a very good team.
The way we played when beating Leicester at Filbert, we would have been a match for any side, including Villa.’
Big Ron will be confident of victory but would sleep easier if Big Mal wasn't on the opposition bench.
And Allison, as always, is sure he's the Big Man walking with the angels.
He said: ‘The whole country will be looking for the result and most of them will be hoping the underdogs do well.
I don't think we're going to disappoint them.’
Fit-again Don can cultivate Blues' dream
Ben Bacon
DURING a memorable career, most of Don Howe's wildest dreams have come true.
He coached Arsenal to the Double, helped guide England to the semi-finals of the World Cup and is acknowledged as one of the supreme tacticians in European football.
Today though, at the age of 57, and with just hours before the New Year, he has a more simple wish.
‘I just want good health, so I can work again at Chelsea every day,’ he says.
Howe, who underwent heart by-pass surgery four-and-a-half years ago, is speaking publicly for the first time since entering hospital earlier this month with a mystery chest complaint.
He still doesn't know the exact reason for the problem that kept him in care for a week — more tests are planned at the end of next month — and which has prevented him from going back to Stamford Bridge, where his coaching has transformed the fortunes of London's Cinderella club.
Nevertheless, he aims to return to work on Tuesday — 48 hours after Chelsea play Middlesbrough in the FA Cup — in tandem once more with manager Ian Porterfield, providing he gets the go-ahead from his doctor.
Last night, he said: ‘It has been frustrating.
Ian's there by himself and I want to be alongside him but can't do anything about it.
If I'm ill, I'm ill.
I have to do what I'm told.
If I was 40, I may have said ‘I'm all right’ and gone back but not now.
‘On matchdays, my home looks like Dixons because I'm surrounded by radios.
I've also got the TV on, so I can watch Ceefax.
‘Thankfully, I'm feeling 100 per cent now.
I can't wait to get started again, having virtually missed the whole of December.
If anything, it has even more justified my decision to leave Coventry where I was manager and join Chelsea — I certainly could not have been away for a month if I'd stayed at Highfield Road.
The problem started for me at the end of a tough week when we played Leeds on the Sunday, then Everton in the Coca-Cola Cup on the Wednesday and Tottenham on Saturday.
We got wringing wet that week and on the Sunday after the Spurs match, I just felt ill.
‘I thought ‘what the hell have I got here?’
Had I still got something wrong with my heart, even though I've never felt better since my by-pass operation.
I went straight away to Watford General Hospital because they know all about me.
By Sunday evening, though, I was getting back to myself and expected to be let out in a day or two but they kept me in for the week, giving me tests, including an electrocardiogram.’
Howe, now relaxing at his Hertfordshire home, has been missed.
Chelsea have yet to win a League game in his absence, taking four points from a possible 12.
Porterfield has already gone on record by saying the former England coach has easily proved to be his best signing.
The players also have only praise for the man and his methods.
His acknowledgement is thoroughly deserved considering how the ex-Arsenal and Coventry boss has transferred his passion for the game into a Chelsea side, which is a delightful mixture of kids like Eddie Newton and Frank Sinclair and mature professionals such as Andy Townsend and Mick Harford.
It's an exciting blend that could end the club's 21-year wait for a major trophy this season.
Chelsea currently lie sixth in the Premier League, are quarter-finalists in the Coca-Cola Cup and start their FA Cup campaign at Ayresome Park on Sunday.
Howe said: ‘The kids have been exciting to work with.
They rightly deserve the publicity they've been getting and the pats on the back.
Eddie Newton has slotted in well alongside Andy Townsend and Frank Sinclair and David Lee have formed a good partnership in defence.
‘But they are are fortunate to have four experienced professionals around them in Andy Townsend, Mick Harford, Mal Donaghy and Dennis Wise, who's made half our goals.
I've told them to study them, watch how they approach games, conduct themselves and train.
‘For example, Harford is an exceptional trainer.
He never looks to have a rest and at the end of the day when we've come in, he's still out there practising.’
Conviction
Already Chelsea fans are talking with conviction about the club winning the championship for only the second time in its history.
It's a debate Howe understandably does does not want to enter into but he has noticed a similarity between the current team and the Arsenal side he coached to the Double 21 years ago — coincidentally, the same season the Blues won their last major honour, the Cup Winners' Cup.
Howe said: ‘Seventy-five per cent of that Arsenal team came through the ranks and the percentage is the same at Chelsea now.
It does help because they have a feel for the club.
‘I've always said our Double success came out of failure.
Sometimes you have to fail to become a winner and we did with League Cup final defeats to Leeds and Swindon.
The players took knocks but didn't let it affect them.’
Like Chelsea, Howe has suffered adversity but good times are surely just around the corner in the New Year.
‘We've got a bloody good chance,’ is Howe's optimistic forecast.
United red-hot with the bookies
Barry Lucas
MANCHESTER United are being backed to win £1 million for punters, as a rush of money yesterday saw their odds shorten to 6-4 for the Premier League title.
United's defeat of Coventry City on Monday has sparked one of the biggest betting surges on the Championship for years.
Their recent odds have been slashed from 5-2 to 7-4 and then 6-4 yesterday.
And Neil Cross, credit manager of Demmy Betting in Manchester, said yesterday: ‘There has been a steady weight of money since United lost 1-0 to Wimbledon on October 31 when they were pushed out to 10-1.
‘Now, since the Coventry result this week, they have been backed at short odds to win further hundreds of thousands of pounds.’
Last season, United lost the title after being such odds-on favourites in March that bookmakers refused to take any more bets.
Taylor peace offering
Rob Shepherd
GRAHAM TAYLOR has pulled England out of an international against Canada this summer in an attempt to appease Premier League managers.
Several top managers are unhappy that England are committed to a three-match tournament in the United States this summer.
And some are ready to challenge England's demand for total release of all players who are selected.
But in an attempt to dilute a revolt, Taylor has cancelled plans for a fourth match against Canada.
An FA source revealed last night: ‘Graham Taylor feels another game would be asking too much of the players.
He will now use some of the spare days on tour to let them have a bit of a rest.’
But it may not be enough for clubs with their own tours.
Manchester United, for example, are due to play in Singapore, while Liverpool have a trip to Cyprus.
Strachan scores a New Year winner
David Alexander and Mike Walters
GORDON STRACHAN can add an OBE to his 1992 souvenirs, which include a League Championship medal.
The Leeds captain's glorious year is crowned today when he receives the award in the New Year Honours list.
And Britain's golden girl at the Barcelona Olympics, farmer's daughter Sally Gunnell, is rewarded for her thrilling 400m hurdles win with the MBE.
Strachan and Gunnell head a clutch of sporting stars decorated for service with distinction and achievement.
Also awarded the OBE are former England cricket team manager Micky Stewart and ex-Scotland rugby union captain David Sole, a British Lions prop forward.
Chris Boardman, who won gold in Barcelona in the men's 4,000m pursuit cycling on his Lotus bike, swimmers Nick Gillingham and Sharron Davies and rowers Matthew Pinsent, Jonny and Greg Searle plus their cox Garry Herbert, are awarded the MBE.
Sean Kerly, one of Britain's hockey gold medallists in Seoul four years ago, who bowed out of international competition in Barcelona, also gets the MBE.
Strachan said: ‘It came as a big surprise when I was told six weeks ago my name was being put forward.
‘It's a great personal honour but I regard it as an honour for the club and the city of Leeds as well.’
Strachan, 35, feared his career might be finished when he underwent back surgery last summer.
But it proved a complete success and he is keeping out £2m David Rocastle, who was bought to replace him.
‘It won't make me a better player,’ added Strachan, ‘but it's always nice to get a pat on the back.’
Pride
Leeds manager Howard Wilkinson added: ‘I'm not surprised — in fact I would have been disappointed if he hadn't received something.’
Stewart, who managed England's Test side for six years and steered them to successive World Cup finals, said: ‘When I was brought up during the war, serving Queen and country meant a lot to my generation.
‘I would have managed England for nothing because there is no greater pride than serving your country.’
Boardman said: ‘It's the icing on the cake at the end of an historic year.’
David Coleman, the BBC commentator and Question of Sport host, added to the sporting flavour of the honours by winning an OBE.
Britain's paralympic champions are also recognised, with MBEs for wheelchair athlete Tanni Grey, partially-sighted swimmer Chris Holmes, Timothy Marshall and Denise Smith.
Gunners go for Des
David Harrison
ARSENAL are ready to make a £1.5 million move to bring Des Walker home from his brief exile in Italy.
But the Gunners will have to compete with his former club Nottingham Forest and big-spending Blackburn Rovers.
There is a rapidly-growing belief in Italy that Sampdoria are ready to part company with England defender Walker because he has not lived up to expectations since joining them last summer.
Although he is happy with his lifestyle and a wages and bonuses package which earns him £30,000 a week, Walker's evasive attitude and reluctance to project himself through the media has not endeared him to the locals.
The former Forest star has also looked uncomfortable on the field.
The Italians place great emphasis on the ability to pass the ball and build from the back, but these attributes are not among Walker's strong points.
However, he would be a perfect recruit for Arsenal, whose season has ground to a halt since they led the Premier League in early November.
Someone with Walker's pace and knowhow would be a prize addition to a defence which has not been at its ruthless best during the Gunners' recent barren run.
To link Walker with skipper Tony Adams would also continue a partnership which has looked sound and secure in the last two England internationals.
Arsenal are believed to be watching the situation closely and are set to make their move as soon as Sampdoria give them the signal.
But Forest, who only let Walker go in the first place because he had a release clause in his contract, will also be in the hunt.
They are thought to have an option on Walker, but it is unlikely that the relegation-haunted Midlands club will succeed in tempting him back if they are in danger of dropping out of the Premier League.
Both Arsenal and Forest would struggle to match even half the wages he is earning in Italy and would be reluctant to smash their rigid pay structures.
But because his value is limited to £1.5 million — another stipulation in the contract which first allowed him to move to Sampdoria — there is room for additional bonuses and signing on payments to be made available to him.
If it came to a straight cash contest, Blackburn can leave the rest standing.
An experienced central defender remains one of Kenny Dalglish's priorities, and Walker would fit the bill more than adequately if the Rovers boss felt the need to reinforce his side's challenge for Championship honours.
Clubs set to cash in
Rob Shepherd
THE Premier League is offering a staggering £9 million to clubs in success-related bonuses in its first season.
As the title race enters the New Year, a unique cash-for-places scheme can be revealed.
Norwich are chasing their first title as well as £770,000, the highest pay-out to champions.
Even the bottom club, presently Nottingham Forest, will receive some of the big share-out, part of BSkyB's £50m-a-year deal with the FA Premier League.
Last season, Leeds received £100,000 from sponsors Barclays for winning the First Division.
The rest of the kitty will be divided among the other 21 clubs on a sliding scale in units of £35,000.
The runners-up will get £735,000, third-placed £700,000.
The spread of prizemoney will help maintain interest until the end of the season.
Premier League chief executive Rick Parry said last night: ‘Clubs who might be involved in the relegation battle now have the incentive of earning extra cash by moving up a place, even if they go down.
‘Those who might be safe would be still looking to win games in the last few weeks to improve their position.’
Big Cardiff signing
CARDIFF rugby club have made the biggest signing in their history.
Twenty-one year old Derwyn Jones, at 6ft 10ins and 18½ stone the biggest forward in Wales, has joined them from Llanelli.
Wait for it
GARY JOHNSON must wait until tomorrow Friday to find whether he will be Cambridge United's new manager.
In charge on a caretaker basis since the October sacking of John Beck, Johnson had hoped his side's Coca-Cola Cup defeat of Premier League Oldham on Tuesday would have seen him appointed on a permanent basis.
A decision was expected yesterday but, in a brief statement, chairman Reg Smart said: ‘We are giving everything a lot of consideration.
‘It is not something to be rushed and we will not be in a position to make any announcement until towards the end of the week.’
Johnson commented: ‘Obviously I hope the cup victory over Oldham will have helped my chances, but there's no hint so far of what might be happening.’
Brock chance
KEVIN BROCK is keeping his fingers crossed that Newcastle's reserve match at Aston Villa tonight isn't a victim of the weather, writes John Wardle.
Brock, transfer-listed by Kevin Keegan, returns after three weeks out with back trouble.
‘It's a chance to show people what I can do,’ said the midfielder.
‘It has been a difficult year because I haven't been able to get into the side.’
We will not be moved, Eric
Graham Fisher
ERIC CANTONA will have to kick his heels on the Manchester United sidelines if Mark Hughes and Brian McClair have their way.
They Old Trafford's senior strikers are in no mood to budge for the £1.2 million Frenchman, who showed his pedigree on Eusebio's big night in Lisbon this week.
Ironically, both current marksmen have scored twice in a spurt of two wins after the long, lean spell that forced manager Alex Ferguson into the transfer market.
McClair said yesterday: ‘I have been playing reasonably well.
I welcome the competition that Eric provides and that can only be a good thing for the club.
But I'll be out to make sure I stay in the side.’
Hughes was equally emphatic, saying: ‘I think the two of us have clicked well together recently.
Eric is obviously a good player, but I am in the job and I don't intend to give it up without a fight.’
Ferguson stayed tight-lipped over the role that awaits Cantona in Sunday's Manchester derby at Old Trafford.
But after the goalless and inconclusive work-out against Benfica, the odds are he will be on the bench.
United's record goalscorer and now director, Bobby Charlton, believes Cantona will prove both a boon and a bargain.
Charlton, still glowing from his goal for a World Veteran XI in the Stadium of Light, watched Cantona's performance closely and said: ‘Eric is a very strong player with a good touch and awareness.
‘He has that particular continental style but it won't take him long to gel.
In an era when £3m appears to be the going rate for a striker, he could prove a real snip at a third of that price.
‘The lad has a history of moving on in the game.
At 26 he has already been at eight clubs, and if Howard Wilkinson couldn't stop his itchy feet people will ask, what chance have we got?
‘And some may be worried about taking on a player with his record.
But the only thing any manager really worries about is getting his players to turn up to train and play.’
Charlton is convinced Old Trafford is the stage to harness Cantona's talents and tame the gypsy in him.
Popular
He added: ‘I know Eric's departure from Leeds has caused a furore amongst the fans.
Without any disrespect to them, we appreciate that Howard Wilkinson isn't the sort of a manager to make that decision without a lot of thought.
‘But if the lad has been any sort of problem in the past I still believe United will get the best out of him and put an end to his wandering.
‘I believe he will settle in well and prove just as popular with our fans.’
‘Leeds are big but not as big as Manchester United.
I think he'll enjoy himself here.
With the city bidding for the Olympics there is a real buzz about the place that he will appreciate.’
All Cantona would say as he headed off for a quick trip to Paris before preparing for Sunday's derby clash was: ‘I enjoyed my debut.’
Saints look at Aussie
by Tony Kell
SOUTHAMPTON are lining up Australian international goalkeeper John Filan to replace unsettled former Celtic star Ian Andrews.
Filan, 22, is having trials at The Dell as manager Ian Branfoot searches for someone to take over from Andrews — granted his request for a transfer this week.
Filan, who carries an Irish passport, has been working at Saints with former England goalkeeping coach Mike Kelly after failing to impress Lou Macari during a week's trial at Stoke.
Sense
Branfoot said: ‘It makes sense to check out possible replacements because Ian Andrews has indicated he wants to leave.
If he wants to go, I cannot stop him.’
Andrews cost Saints £200,000 when he joined from Celtic three years ago but has been restricted to just five appearances as understudy to Tim Flowers and now wants to return to his native Midlands.
Agnew move poser
STEVE AGNEW'S cut-price move from Blackburn to Portsmouth could be ruined by his reluctance to move south.
Pompey manager Jim Smith and Blackburn's Kenny Dalglish have already agreed a £300,000 fee and Agnew is on a month's loan at Fratton Park.
Dalglish's predecessor Don Mackay paid Barnsley £700,000 for him but since Dalglish arrived Agnew has been frozen out.
Agnew, however, is not certain that he wants to uproot his family — even if it gives him a chance to resurrect his career.
He said: ‘Coming down for a month is not the same as a permanent move.
If it comes down to that, I would need to think it over.
‘My wife and I are both from Yorkshire and I have spent my whole career up in the north.’
Agnew has made two appearances for Pompey and Smith said: ‘He has shown glimpses of real quality.’
Leroy's call-up
BRISTOL CITY have agreed to release striker Leroy Rosenior for international duty after he received an amazing call-up from Sierra Leone, where his parents come from.
Alpha Saracouu, Sierra Leone's High Commissioner in the UK, and team manager Major Kargbo made the trip to Ashton Gate to inquire about Rosenior, who once played for England schoolboys.
He is now certain to get a full international debut in Sierra Leone's African Nations Cup match against Togo on January 9.
‘I've been out to Sierra Leone two or three times,’ said Rosenior.
‘My parents still have a home out there.’
It's a bit like Barbados, only nicer.’
Leeds plan cash splash
LEEDS manager Howard Wilkinson is ready to splash the money from the sale of Eric Cantona on a defender.
Wilkinson has made inquiries for three full-backs without success.
Manchester United refused to part with Dennis Irwin or Paul Parker, and Manchester City have made it clear they want to keep Ian Brightwell.
But Wilkinson denies he has made a £1.5 m bid for Arsenal right-back Lee Dixon and centre-half Steve Bould.
‘It's not true, I don't know where these stories come from,’ he said.
Everton's Martin Keown is available, but probably out of the Leeds price range at the moment.
And there has been no sign of a renewed bid for Malmo's Swedish international Patrick Andersson, who walked out of Elland Road after refusing terms two weeks ago.
But the Leeds manager is almost certainly on the point of making a move — and the priority is the right-back position that has been a problem all season because of the absence of Mel Sterland.
Ankle ligament damage has kept Sterland out since the end of last season and another setback means he may not return for weeks.
Wilkinson is desperate to sort out the problem and has the cash.
He may also be prepared to part with midfield man Steve Hodge as part of a deal.
Out of the European Cup and the Coca-Cola Cup, he wants to strengthen the side quickly to rescue a season that is fading fast.
The champions are 15 points behind leaders Norwich and without an away win in the Premier League — and they need the finance from European football next season.
Meanwhile, Leeds have released 19-year-old trialist striker Deion Vernon.
Bjornbye deal hits hold-up
by Des Kelly
LIVERPOOL are sweating on a work permit for Norwegian Stig Inge Bjornbye as they anxiously wait to hear if defender David Burrows will play again this season.
Anfield manager Graeme Souness must obtain Foreign Office clearance before he can draft in the £600,000 Scandinavian international to replace his latest casualty.
Liverpool have been holding on since November 9 for news of the left-sided 22-year-old while government officials check to see if there are any objections from the FA or Players' Union.
‘The delay is part of the normal process, but I hope we can move things along,’ said Souness.
Burrows is out for three months after being stretchered off in Tuesday night's Coca-Cola Cup clash with Crystal Palace.
The diagnosis could worsen if specialists decide he needs surgery on knee ligament or cartilage damage.
Paul Stewart is also having treatment on a knee injury picked up in the same match and is fighting to be fit for Monday's Merseyside derby.
Small plans a new start
by Tony Kell
SMALL, West Ham's forgotten striker, has set himself a New Year deadline to force his way back into Billy Bonds's plans.
The popular centre-forward, recently recovered from a back injury, has been forced to watch new Hammers strike partners Clive Allen and Trevor Morley from the sidelines.
And while he's full of admiration for the dynamic duo — who have bagged 25 goals between them this season — he is also aiming to steal their glory.
‘It's been a very frustrating time for me,’ admitted Small, who was an instant hit at Upton Park after signing from Brighton.
Fitter
‘Every time I play I feel fitter and it's up to me to put things in order.
‘By the New Year I'll be raring to go and can tell the manager ‘Look, I need a game’.
‘At the moment, Clive and Trevor have got a good pattern going and I don't think playing three strikers figures in the manager's plans.’
Small has played three reserve games since returning from injury and knows make or break time will come within the next month.
‘I've got to prove to the boss it's worth having a go on me,’ he said.
Kelly faces rap over FA attack
by Ben Bacon
KINGSTONIAN manager Chris Kelly could face a charge of bringing the game into disrepute over his outrageous comments this week.
I understand the Football Association are monitoring his outburts closely and could be forced to act if they continue.
Earlier this week, Kelly accused the FA of bringing the game into disrepute by ordering his non-League club to replay their FA Cup first round match with Peterborough behind closed doors tomorrow.
The replay was ordered by the FA after K's goalkeeper Adrian Blake was felled by a coin thrown from the crowd during Peterborough's 9-1 replay win last Wednesday.
But Kelly, who fears the 2pm kick-off will seriously threaten the chances of his part-timers, was back on the rampage yesterday.
‘It was an absolutely ridiculous decision,’ said Kelly, who has maintained all along that there should not have been a re-match.
‘They are trying to humiliate and belittle us.
If we were to win, it would be the most unpopular victory in the history of the Cup.
‘Why they are not playing it on the Saturday, I don't know.
They say that the police have not got the resources — but this game is going to be behind closed doors.’
Because of difficulties with his squad getting time off work, Kelly fears he could be without as many as five players.
Keeper Blake is fit and will play, but skipper Adie Cowler, veteran of Woking's Cup runs of the last two years, will have to dash up to Peterborough on Friday after completing a morning at his interior design business.
Gordon set for action in a flash
by Scott McMunn
DALE GORDON is only a fringe player at Ibrox but he reckons he's the envy of almost every top footballer in England.
The £1.2 million former Norwich star can't hold down a first-team spot with Scottish champs Rangers.
And he prepares for the axe every time boss Walter Smith names a European Cup squad.
But he'd rather be an Ibrox sub than a top team star with any side south of the border.
He said: ‘There is not one club in Britain that can be compared to this one — the trouble is people in England just don't realise that.
‘Manchester United is the biggest club down south, with the best stadium and the biggest pool of players.
But it doesn't really come close to Rangers.
‘While United are a very big team in British terms, Rangers are one of Europe's elite and one of the biggest clubs on the continent.
‘I think if you asked most players in England if they'd like to swap places with me they'd be jumping over the top of each other to do it.
‘People ask me if it's embarrassing to be missing from the Rangers side when England is focused on our big European nights.
‘The simple answer is no.
I missed out on the two games against Lyngby and the first leg against Leeds.
Then the gaffer thinks of a tactical plan for Elland Road and I'm in from the start.
‘Even though I then missed the Marseille game I know Walter will play me when needed.’
But it still hurts when Gordon sits out the big Euro nights.
And, as Rangers prepare for next week's clash with CSKA Moscow in Bochum, he said: ‘It is unbelievably hard and frustrating to sit through games like these.
‘The sweat starts on the day of the game when the gaffer tells us his plans.
He will let us know at lunchtime which foreigners will feature.
‘If you're not involved you're free to do what you want.
I think the gaffer likes us to stay with the boys and be part of the build-up.
I feel part of the team that way.
‘But just knowing that Walter is likely to change things around for the next big game is enough to keep me going.’
Smith has three days to fix an injury-wrecked squad and a waterlogged pitch.
Five internationals are in doubt for Dundee United's visit on Saturday — Gary Steven, Stuart McCall, Dave McPherson, Richard Gough and Ally McCoist.
And while they are on the treatment table, Ibrox will also receive intensive therapy to ensure the game proceeds.
Knighton threatens walk-out
by Barry Lucas
PROPERTY millionaire Michael Knighton, who took over cash-starved Carlisle in the summer, is threatening to quit the club if ambitious plans for a super stadium and leisure complex are blocked.
And he warns that Carlisle, losing up to £10,000 a week, will fold without the scheme.
Knighton met residents living near 19-acre Brunton Park after unveiling plans for a 30,000 all-seater stadium, hotel, multiplex cinema, restaurant and tropical plant and butterfly kingdom.
During a stormy meeting at the club, objectors claimed their house values would fall and greenfield views would be obliterated.
Knighton, whose bid to take over Manchester United failed in a blaze of publicity three years ago, said: ‘Carlisle United will not survive without a development of some kind and I will not stay here subsidising the club.’
He said the multi-million pound development could create 250 jobs.
Carlisle, in 12th place, have the second-highest average home gates in the Third Division at more than 4,000 but need 11,000 to survive on income from gate receipts alone.
Boro test for Dane
by John Wardle
DANISH under-21 international Soren Andersen will play for Middlesbrough next week, hoping to secure a permanent move to the Ayresome Park club.
The Aarhus striker, on a week's trial at Boro, will be in the reserve team to face Everton.
Manager Lennie Lawrence said: ‘The game will give us a decent idea of what he is like.’
Lawrence expects to be without half a dozen key players for Saturday's home game against Blackburn.
‘We are in a terrible state through injuries,’ admitted the Boro boss.
‘There is no common denominator — it's just the pace of the game nowadays.’
Skipper Alan Kernaghan and Jimmy Phillips are definitely out, while John Hendrie, Curtis Fleming, Craig Hignett and Willie Falconer are all doubtful.
Vinnie on hold
VINNIE JONES has won a seven-day stay of execution from the Football Association.
The Wimbledon midfield player should have decided by yesterday whether to appeal against his record £20,000 fine for his part in the video ‘Soccer's Hard Men’.
Jones, however, has asked for another week to consider his position, and FA spokesman David Bloomfield said: ‘We have acceded to his request.’
Originally, Jones intimated that he would not be contesting last month's decision, which also brought him a six-month ban, suspended for three years.
Wimbledon chairman Sam Hammam, however, said that the fine was too harsh.
£4.5m Cup bid doomed
by Graham Otway
ENGLAND tomorrow will unveil a lavish £4.5 million plan to stage cricket's sixth World Cup that is already doomed to failure.
I understand that a rival bid from India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka to jointly stage the competition is worth £300,000 more and will prove more attractive when the world's cricketing nations meet in London in early February.
Yesterday, sealed bids from England and the sub-continent were opened by ICC officials in the presence of lawyers at Lord's, and both English and Indian administrators intend to issue statements tomorrow outlining their bids.
But already the Indians and the Pakistanis, who staged the fourth World Cup in 1987, are looking hot favourites to win the two-horse race.
The key issue is the amount of money the host nations are prepared to pay competing countries.
I believe England have trumped the Indians with a bid of about £300,000 to each of the nine major Test playing nations.
But they need the vote of every one of those nine at the ICC meeting in the New Year to win the right to stage the World Cup.
Otherwise, the issue will be put to a vote which also includes the world's 20 smaller cricketing nations who currently lack Test status.
In that direction I understand the Indians, Pakistanis and Sri Lankans have offered a total of about £1 million more to help pay for cricket in developing countries.
Furthermore, the sub-continent is also prepared to pay about £50,000 more than England towards the cost of the ICC trophy — the qualifying competition run among the smaller nations to decide which three teams will compete in the World Cup proper.
Although on a straightforward vote the smaller associate members of the ICC hold 20 votes compared to the two each held by the nine Test nations, England have not given up hope completely.
I understand that their proposal document — to be sent to all the cricketing nations within the next week — contains a personal message of support from the country's biggest cricketing fan, the Prime Minister John Major.
‘A great deal of time and trouble has been spent in preparing our submission and we are very pleased with it,’ said Test and County Cricket Board chief executive Alan Smith.
‘We have explained how we would run the competition if it is awarded to us and proposed June 1995 as the ideal date.
‘I think it all adds up to an impressive document.’
Furthermore, ICC chairman Sir Colin Cowdrey is known to be in favour of the World Cup returning to England, where it was first staged in 1975, 1979 and 1983, on a rotational basis.
But since the general feeling within the ICC is that cash rather than rotation counts for more, England could end up losing out.
A special meeting of the International Cricket Council has been arranged for February 2 to discuss World Cup arrangements, but a final decision might be delayed until the annual summer gathering.
THE TCCB are to take legal advice on Tuesday's court ruling over ‘rainy day’ refunds.
Birmingham County Court ordered that five spectators be repaid the price of their tickets, plus costs, for a day's ‘play’ between England and Pakistan at Edgbaston last summer when only two balls were bowled.
Showdown
John Wardle
Coppell Roker link has Crosby in rage.
ANGRY Malcolm Crosby is ready for a showdown with his chairman Bob Murray at Roker Park.
The relationship may have reached breaking point following the disclosure that Sunderland approached Steve Coppell at Crystal Palace over Crosby's job as manager.
Crosby has maintained his dignity despite a constant catalogue of names linked with the post, A catalogue of names have been linked with the job in the past, but Crosby blew his top after learning of the Coppell approach.
He is determined to have a clear-the-air meeting with Murray this weekend and snapped yesterday: ‘I have to get to the bottom of this mess.
Angry
‘I was angry and upset to read that somebody connected with the club had been in contact with Steve Coppell.
‘I have been very patient, but this whole business is out of order.
It has made me question what chance I have got.
‘It has flattened everybody here — including the players.
And coming after two away wins we must wonder what more we have to do.
‘The only way to get to the bottom of it is to confront the chairman.
It is the first time I have asked to know what is going on.’
Crosby took charge after leading Sunderland to the FA Cup final last May and was given a one-year contract.
after leading Sunderland to the FA Cup final last May.But he appears to have been on borrowed time ever since.
Sunderland have also been linked with an approach for Sheffield United boss Dave Bassett.
Palace chairman Ron Noades confirmed Sunderland's move for Coppell, saying: ‘Steve was asked two weeks ago whether he was interested in the Sunderland position and he has informed me of this approach.’
Murray declined to comment, insisting: ‘If I respond it will only fuel the speculation.’
Francis has last laugh as Owls turn on the style
David Alexander
Sheffield Wednesday 4, Queens Park Rangers 0
TREVOR FRANCIS'S celebration can of Coke must have tasted just a little sweeter last night.
Sheffield Wednesday's player-manager watched his side claim a place in the last eight of the Coca-Cola Cup by destroying the club that sacked him in controversial circumstances.
Francis watched a champagne performance from his players as they destroyed QPR, who sacked Francis three years ago this month.
Mark Bright and David Hirst struck in the first half, with Carlton Palmer and Roland Nilsson adding two more to kill off Rangers.
And with John Harkes and Chris Waddle hitting the bar and John Sheridan striking the post, Wednesday could almost have doubled their score.
QPR hardly made a chance and were given an even bigger mauling by boss Gerry Francis afterwards, who fumed: ‘This is the first time we have conceded four since we were last here 15 months ago.
It's the worst performance by a mile since I came here.
‘A lot of our fans travelled here and I would like to apologise to them.
It's not what I expect and not what I want.
‘You can say I'm not pleased by a long long way.’
Wednesday certainly like this competition after scoring five against Hartlepool and seven against Leicester in previous rounds.
Francis has an unbeaten record against QPR since the sacking and he said: ‘I'm very pleased with that, it was a very good performance.
‘We're unbeaten in eight games but we haven't been able to win them and the players were saying beforehand that we were going to give someone a good hiding.
Superb
‘We've warranted better results and when the first one went in you could see the confidence.
Some of our football was delightful.’
Palmer won the man-of-the-match award after a superb performance, setting up the first two goals and scoring the third.
His running tore QPR to shreds and he took a Waddle ball after 30 minutes to go down the left and set up Bright for a virtual tap in, his eighth goal in 14 games.
Two minutes later, he created the chance for Hirst's ninth goal in 13 games.
Then Palmer made it three himself, stepping in as QPR failed to get the ball away.
Nilsson added the fourth four minutes from time.
Flashman hit by tax raid
by Ben Bacon
STAN FLASHMAN'S world at Barnet fell apart yesterday following a massive swoop by tax officials.
A 12-man team from the Inland Revenue raided Flashman's Totteridge mansion and the club's ground, then conducted lengthy in-dividual interviews with the players at Barnet's Edgware training ground.
Players were grilled about methods of payments in an exercise lasting over two hours.
It was an extraordinary development in an extraordinary saga and striker Gary Bull said: ‘This has taken us all by surprise, although nothing comes as a shock at Barnet anymore.
‘Eight or ten men came to the training ground as we finished at about 12am and they wanted statements from all of us.
They wanted to know how the money is being paid, about payslips in general, and the wage structure at Underhill.
‘They were there for a good couple of hours and when I left at around 2.00pm they were still interviewing players in the spare dressing rooms.’
The same officials raided Flashman's home and three went to the club's ground and demanded vital documents from secretary Bryan Ayres.
They gave him a document authorising a raid and left with books, gate books and players' contracts.
Ayres rang Flashman's wife to inform them what was going on and was told that their house was also being investigated.
Last month, Barnet were found guilty of financial irregularities by the Football League and were ordered to pay a fine of £50,000, which they said they were going to appeal against.
That's clever
by Des Kelly
Everton 2, Chelsea 2
GRAHAM STUART completed a storming second-half fightback from Chelsea with a dramatic late equaliser last night.
The England Under-21 midfielder, a talented graduate of the FA School of Excellence, steered a clever header past Neville Southall 13 minutes from time to rob Everton of a much-needed Coca-Cola Cup boost.
The sides must battle again for a quarter-final place on December 16, but the odds are now stacked against Howard Kendall's men after the way they lost their grip on this fiercely-contested fourth-round tie.
Saviour Stuart said: ‘We deserved a draw in the end, but in the first half we struggled and weren't at the races.
‘We had difficulty coping at first, but we adapted after half-time.
And I'd have shot myself if we lost because I'd wasted a good chance just before the goal.’
Chelsea manager Ian Porterfield added: ‘I'm very pleased with my side tonight.
We are in a terrific run, and 10 out of 10 to each of them.
Bleak
‘We came here the Saturday before last and won in the League, now we're pleased to be taking them back to the Bridge this time.
We could even have pinched it in the end.’
Any analysis of Everton's season prior to this match provided bleak reading, with a paltry two home victories.
indeed, Mo Johnston, recalled for the first time in two months, was the only Everton player in the starting line-up who had managed a goal in front of the Goodison public.
But Kendall's men made light of any suggestion of a crisis with an irresistible first-half display.
Just 12 minutes had gone when Stuart Barlow pierced the Chelsea offside trap and chipped a perfect centre to Peter Beardsley.
The magical imp lost his marker and guided a far post header past Hitchcock, but Everton's celebrations were cut short by David Lee's admirable goal-line clearance.
Beardsley was not to be outdone, however, and the former England international produced a sensational goal to break the deadlock after 25 minutes.
Positioned some 30 yards from goal, the former Liverpool star unleashed an incredible thunderbolt which the bemused Hitchcock could only watch as it speared into the top corner.
But Chelsea are a formidible side right now and they battled back on terms when the imposing Mick Harford got the final touch to a Wise scissor kick.
Everton bounced back when Barlow smashed a stunning volley from the edge of the penalty box.
It was his first senior goal and one to remember.
With Graeme Le Saux moving into a five-man midfield, Chelsea took command after the break.
And when Stuart nodded in Wise's free-kick, it was no more than the Londoners deserved.
‘We made it easy for them,’ said Kendall afterwards.
‘We had rushes of blood where we committed offences in dangerous positions.’
Lyric Fantasy is sold
by Henry Rix
LYRIC FANTASY, one of the fastest two-year-old fillies of the modern era, was last night sold for 340,000 guineas at public auction.
She was bought for a consortium of Arabs and will stay in training next season.
But there was no indication whether she will remain with Richard Hannon.
Bloodstock agent Paul Shanahan, who made the successful bid, said: ‘She will run next year but I don't know where she'll go.
‘I had a figure to go to and I'm delighted to get her at the price.’
Lyric Fantasy, brilliant winner of the Queen Mary Stakes at Royal Ascot in June, later became the first two-year-old filly to win the all-aged Nunthorpe Stakes.
It is a rarity for a horse of Lyric Fantasy's ability to be offered for public sale, and the Park Paddocks' arena at Newmarket was packed as she came into the ring.
But with the current depressed state of bloodstock trading there was little prospect of any records being broken.
Previous owner Lord Carnarvon, racing manager of the Queen, bought Lyric Fantasy for just 12,500 guineas and was quite satisfied with his decision to sell.
‘The price is about right.
The auctioneer did very well,’ Carnarvon said.
Private Enterprise
by Richard Smith
Ferdie finds fame after years in background.
THE trainer who made a living as the ghostly architect of big race success has finally etched his own name in the record books.
Sibton Abbey's shock win in the Hennessy has thrust 44-year-old Ferdie Murphy into the limelight as the key member of National Hunt's most unusual team.
The Irish farmer's son has spent six years as private trainer to wealthy businessman Geoff Hubbard, 74, who used to own 25 companies including an airline.
Now Mr Hubbard's 250-acre estate at 16th century Worlingworth Hall in Suffolk plays host to a string of 25 racehorses.
Extinct
His huge investment has been made despite poor prize-money and high overheads which have made private trainers almost extinct.
But the heavy clay gallops near Woodbridge are proving an ideal training ground for young chasers.
‘Mr Hubbard is a true English gentleman and the horses are his babies — he always insists on them being treated very gently,’ said Murphy.
‘Basically I'm paid a salary and given complete control over training his horses.
‘For Mr Hubbard its a hobby which costs him a lot of money.
We would have to win £100,000 a year to make the yard viable — and that would not include buying new horses.’
This season Murphy has already sent out 12 winners while his boss is often left to drive the horse-box and saddle up in the parade ring.
Murphy began his career as an apprentice with Vincent O'Brien's younger brother Phonsie before he became stable jockey for top Irish trainer Paddy Mullins.
After riding more than 100 winners, Murphy became private trainer for the Durkan family in Dublin — sending out Anaglogs Daughter to win at the Cheltenham Festival in l980.
Gee-A has added to the roll of honour with victories at the Festival and Aintree since Murphy teamed up with Hubbard.
But because of his private trainer status Sibton Abbey's win on Saturday marked the first time Murphy's name had been credited as trainer of a big race winner.
‘I love horses and it was a marvellous thrill,’ said Murphy.
‘The time I spent with the O'Brien's was a great education.
The secret was in their attention to detail — everything from the feed to the ventilation in the lorry had to be right.
‘I'm feeding our horses the same mash the O'Brien's used to win Gold Cups, Grand Nationals and the Derby.’
Ambitious
Now the stable's ambitious plans for Sibton Abbey include the Irish version of the Hennessy Gold Cup at Leopardstown and the Whitbread Gold Cup at Sandown.
‘The Hennessy was no fluke and he has obviously been under-rated but he does need soft ground,’ said Murphy.
The Irishman also predicts a big future for rising star Brandeston who was injured in the Mackeson last month, and is hoping Cuddy Dale will soon be back in training for next year's National.
One day he would like to make a name for himself as a public trainer — but that is some way in the future.
‘Mr Hubbard has made a big commitment to me and I'd like to produce the goods for him first,’ he said.
Rain threat continues
RAIN continued to play havoc with the week's fixtures yesterday, claiming four meetings and threatening to hit more.
It has virtually wiped out today's programme, and tomorrow's meetings, Hereford (course yesterday.
But Nottingham clerk of the course Charlie Moore is optimistic that his meeting tomorrow can go ahead.
‘There are no problems envisaged at the moment,’ he said.
However, further rain could threaten Sandown, due to begin its two-day meeting tomorrow.
The going has changed to soft, heavy in places, and showers are forecast.
‘We will see what happens in the next 24 hours.
We could just about race at the moment,’ said clerk of the course Nick Cheyne.
The weekend prospects are also gloomy with conditions at both Chepstow and Wetherby now heavy.
Saturday's other meeting at Towcester hinges on a 3pm inspection today.
Rodger Farrant, clerk of the course at Chepstow, said: ‘The course is coping well.
If there is no more rain I would be hopeful,’ said.
Logan leads way
COURSE Correspondent Phil Logan was in tremendous form again yesterday with a 25-1 nap and next best double at Southwell.
His nap East Barns (12-1), also selected by Henry Rix, and next best African Chimes (evens) were just two of his five winners at the all-weather track, which also included Island Blade (8-1).
Top Shot followers were rewarded when Bow Handy Man (13-2) won at Catterick.
Jopanini, second favourite for Saturday's William Hill Hurdle at Sandown, has been confirmed a definite starter by Nicky Henderson.
Home sweet home for Cardiff
CARDIFF, who last won the Welsh Cup in 1987, had a lucky double in the newly named SWALEC Cup yesterday when they were drawn at home in rounds four and five.
If they beat First Division Maesteg at the Arms Park on December 19, Cardiff will face the winner of Narberth and St Peter's.
The new group format was also kind to holders Llanelli, who entertain either St Albans or Bridgend Athletic — both junior clubs.
Victory will see them travel, but only to face either Kenfig Hill or Kidwelly.
In their two previous clashes with Kenfig, Llanelli romped to a 47-3 victory in 1981 and 33-12 in 1990.
Elite battle to beat the drop
Tony Roche
AS the curtain comes down on Courage League rugby for 1992, the game's elite are gearing themselves for the biggest dog-fight since the competition's inception six years ago.
Panic has set in as the league's Draconian restructuring unfolds with four clubs relegated from Division One and seven from Division Two.
This season's programme resumes on January 9 and already some of the biggest clubs in English rugby are fighting for their top-class lives.
Next season will see four national divisions of 10 clubs and the introduction of home and away fixtures for the first time.
‘It's just madness,’ said England captain Will Carling.
‘We are already pushed to complete a season if the weather is good.
‘This will mean 18 League games instead of 12, and, for the top club players, around 34 first-class matches.’
Wasps, top of the table with a 100 per cent record, admit they have yet to play to their full potential.
England prop Jeff Probyn revealed: ‘Nobody in the side is shining so far, but everyone is pulling in the same direction.
‘But in reality it is daft to talk in terms of the title yet.
Let's say we probably have enough points to ensure staying up.’
Down at Gloucester, runners-up in 1989 and 1990, fear haunts the corridors of a expensively transformed Kingsholm.
Dumped out of the Pilkington Cup last Saturday and sweating on four points, coach Keith Richardson admitted: ‘This is a desperate time for the club, one where we have lost 12 players before the season started and too many games for comfort.
‘It's going to be a real test of character to ensure we stay up because relegation is unthinkable for a club of this status just when the league is expanding.’
And Carling added: ‘Every game now is a pressure game at this level, increasing the risk of injuries and wear and tear.’
England's £4.5m World Cup bid doomed
Graham Otway
ENGLAND tomorrow unveil a lavish £4.5 million plan to stage cricket's sixth World Cup — but it is already doomed to failure.
I understand that a rival bid from India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka to jointly stage the competition is worth £300,000 more and will prove more attractive when the world's cricketing nations meet in London in early February.
Yesterday, sealed bids from England and the sub-continent were opened by ICC officials and English and Indian administrators intend to issue statements tomorrow outline their bids tomorrow.
But already the Indians and the Pakistanis, who staged the fourth World Cup in 1987, are hot favourites to win the two-horse race.
The key issue is the amount of money the host nations are prepared to pay competing countries.
I believe England have trumped the Indians with a bid of about Pounds 300,000 to each of the nine major Test-playing nations.
But they need all nine votes at the ICC meeting in the New Year to win the right to stage it.
Otherwise, the issue will be put to a vote which also includes 20 smaller nations who lack Test status.
In that direction I understand the Indians, Pakistanis and Sri Lankans have offered a total of about £1 million more to help pay for cricket in developing countries.
However, ICC chairman Sir Colin Cowdrey is known to be in favour of the competition returning to England, where it was first staged in 1975, 1979 and 1983.
THE TCCB will take legal advice on Tuesday's court ruling that five spectators be repaid the price of their tickets, plus costs, for a day's ‘play’ between England and Pakistan at Edgbaston when only two balls were bowled.
Dexter rejects call to resign
Giles Smith
DEFIANT Ted Dexter last night flatly rejected calls for his resignation over the David Gower affair.
As Gower changed tactics to support the continuation of the campaign by MCC rebels to force a vote of no confidence in the selectors, Dexter declared: ‘I will not resign.
I am responsible to the TCCB, not the MCC.
‘When and if the TCCB tell me to resign or change things, then I will resign or change things.
Until then I stay.’
And the chairman of selectors, whose decision to pick South African rebel Mike Gatting instead of Gower for the winter tour of India sparked a storm of protest, warned: ‘These people may have won the first battle, but they are approaching a lee shore and there are plenty of rocks on that shore.
The protest will flounder on those rocks.
They won't win the war.’
Defiant
But Dennis Oliver, the man leading the MCC rebels in their bid to get the vote of no confidence at next month's meeting of all 17,500 MCC members was equally defiant, saying: ‘We are going ahead full steam with our campaign, and if we win the vote I would expect Dexter and the selectors to resign.’
Mr Oliver and his fellow rebel leaders were yesterday already planning a strong letter urging a yes vote to be sent to all MCC members, who include the Prime Minister and well-known celebrities like Gary Lineker, Harold Pinter and Tim Rice.
‘We am looking for a very substantial majority.
They must listen to the voice of the MCC,’ he said.
But Dexter countered: ‘Even if they get their vote, they are only one vote in 20 on the TCCB.’
(The other votes come from the first class counties.)
‘There would have to be similar moves from the counties and I don't think that is very likely.
I am the TCCB's lackey, and I act only when they order me.’
But, as the war of words hotted up, Mr Oliver, a Kent member whose side have no players in the England party, hit back.
‘They told us we should make our protest through the counties,’ he said.
‘But that is a ridiculous argument because it would look like sour grapes as none of our county players were selected.
The MCC don't have players for selection as such, so it's the only way we can honourably make our protest.’
And the 66-year-old London financier had harsh words also for the MCC hierarchy who are complaining about the £17,000 cost of organising the special general meeting, pushed through by Tuesday's 108-3 vote at Lord's.
‘The MCC made a profit of £568,000 last year, it had administrative expenses of £2.2 million which included Pounds 47,000 spent on ‘hospitality’— now they begrudge us the paltry sum of Pounds 17,000 for a worthy cause for the good of cricket.
And anyway it's our money,’ he said.
Meanwhile, Gower, who will be in India this winter commentating for BSkyB, last night changed his position on the protest, saying: ‘I had hoped they might drop this before it got to the full meeting.
I thought the point had been made.
Principle
‘But they obviously see it as an important matter of principle, so I ought not to stand in their way.’
A crucial factor in how the vote goes will depend on what recommendation the MCC Committee makes to the members in the postal ballot — on three previous occasions when members have forced protest votes in the past, the committee's recommendations have always won overwhelming backing.
But Mr Oliver asked: ‘What recommendation are they going to make?
Are they really likely to recommend a vote of confidence in the selectors in the present climate?
I hardly think that is very likely.
‘It will be very interesting to see what they come up with, particularly after they offered at Tuesday's meeting to write a very strong letter of protest to the TCCB.’
It does seem quite possible that an unprecedented vote of no confidence in the selectors will become the official policy of the MCC, the most famous club in the game.
And although that won't suddenly get Gower reinstated in the England team, it would send shock waves through the previously sedate world of English cricket.
It could even put a question mark over the future of England captain and selector Graham Gooch, whose fitness and discipline regime have become a hallmark of the current side, and which Gower has had some difficulty fitting in with.
Border is fined
ALLAN BORDER has been fined £850 for showing dissent during the dramatic final overs of Australia's first Test against the West Indies on Monday.
The fine, imposed by International Cricket Council match referee Raman Subba Row, is the biggest since the code of conduct was introduced a year ago.
Aussie skipper Border and pace bowler Merv Hughes, who was fined Pounds 185, appealed vigorously for lbw decisions as tail-enders Ian Bishop and Courtney Walsh held out for a draw in Brisbane.
After a meeting with umpires Steve Randell and Terry Prue, Subba Row said in a statement that he expected all players to adhere to proper standards of behaviour.
Border did not attend the meeting and no details of the umpires' objections were published.
The maximum penalty allowed is a fine of three-quarters of the player's match fee and suspension for three Tests.
Hastings in charge
GAVIN HASTINGS was yesterday appointed Scotland rugby union captain in succession to David Sole, who has retired.
The 30-year-old British Lions full-back faces a tough first season in charge as the 1990 Grand Slam winners begin a rebuilding programme.
Morris deal
JOHN MORRIS, Derbyshire's 28-year-old vice-captain, has ended speculation about his cricketing future by signing a two-year extension to his contract which will keep him at the Recreation Ground until 1996.
Faldo tops
NICK FALDO is 7-2 favourite to win the Million Dollar Challenge, which begins in Sun City today.
Also in the 10-man field are defending champion Bernhard Langer, Ian Woosnam and Jose Maria Olazabal.
Maclean shock
SCOT Mark Maclean upset second seed Rodney Martin 8-15, 11-15, 15-13, 17-16, 17-15 in the Pakistan squash Open in Karachi.
He now meets England's Simon Park in the quarter-finals.
Salford grab Tyrer
Ray French
AMBITIOUS Salford yesterday finally tempted Orrell rugby union star Gary Tyrer to sign a three-year deal to switch codes.
The Ireland Under-21 full-back joins former Orrell players, Great Britain centre Peter Williams and John Gilfillan, at The Willows.
And he is the second to leave the crack Lancashire club this season after ex-England B half-back Martin Strett last week signed a three-year contract for Oldham.
Tyrer said: ‘I played rugby league until I was 17 years old and even played for Wigan Under-11s at Wembley, where I kicked six goals.
‘I think Salford are ambitious, have done a lot of team-building in recent seasons and are determined to succeed.’
Salford chairman John Wilkinson added: ‘Our scouts have watched Gary for some time.
He is a top goalkicker, has a good turn of speed and is an excellent all-round performer.
I am delighted to have finally got him.’
Second Division promotion contenders Rochdale Hornets and Featherstone Rovers have agreed to a swap deal between Hornets' £90,000 transfer-listed centre, Darren Abram, and Rovers' £100,000-rated prop, Leo Casey.
League clubs yesterday gave their general approval to reverting back to a two-division competition.
But they have asked the board of directors to review the conditions of demotion and promotion from the eventual Second Division and Alliance League.
were handed a vote of confidence yesterday (weds) for the blueprint for the game's future at a council meeting of all member clubs.
But two refinements to the plans were indicated by the 35 council members and the game's executive body are to meet on Tuesday December 15 to consider the club representatives requests.
Most council members opted for the retention of the Lancashire and Yorkshire County Cup competitions, possibly as a pre-season competition, but with mandatory participation.
And the board of directors were urged to review the conditions of demotion and promotion from the eventual Second Division and Alliance League.
Doyle pedals his wares
Michael Wale
TONIGHT, as usual, 34-year-old Tony Doyle will be pedalling his bike around an indoor circuit in Europe.
This week it's Zurich, a stage in the never-ending Continental six-day cycle race circuit.
This is one of those sports where the competitors agree secretly among themselves that they must be mad to take part in what is cycling's equivalent of marathon dancing.
This week Doyle's pedalling day takes in two shifts lasting from 2-5pm, followed by the real work from 8pm until four the next morning.
On Saturday the late shift is extended until 5am on Sunday morning, when 10,000 fans will still be there to eat, drink and cheer on the multi-colour clothed two-wheel gladiators over the final laps on the 200-metre round track.
Doyle is the only Englishman on the circuit.
With Australian team-mate Danny Clark, he won 16 six-day races from the mid-80s until one night three years ago in Munich when a rookie Russian cannoned into him.
From the moment he hit the track head-first and rolled down the 50ft high cambered banking, he had to fight for his life.
Flown home by ambulance plane, he spent seven weeks in intensive care in Charing Cross Hospital.
He had multiple fractures down his right side, including a smashed collar bone and arm.
Far more serious were the severe head injuries — in particular a bruising of the brain.
So badly was he affected that he had to be taught to speak again.
But now he's back on the track chasing the appearance money that has earned him a detached house in the Surrey stockbroker belt of Lightwater.
On the gravel outside stands a sleek black BMW to drive when he's not riding one of his three £1,500 hand-made bikes.
And when he gets a break from the circuit just before Christmas, he'll be taking wife Anne and baby George to Florida so that he can train in the sun.
Of the last decision he says: ‘Most of the winter I never see daylight.
We're like moles.
‘In Cologne we actually sleep under the track.
In Zurich we have prevailed upon the promoters to move us from caravans in the car park into a hotel.
Even when I'm briefly back home in England, I'll ride a bike on rollers in the living room to keep warm.
‘At least I can watch the telly as I train — although it's hard breaking the racing routine of having breakfast at lunchtime and your main meal at tea time.’
The riders are contracted separately for each event and live on appearance money — there is no prize-money as such.
Riders earn, according to Doyle, ‘the equivalent of a player in the Premier League football, which could range from £500 to Pounds 5,000 a week’.
Then there are special ‘one-off’ fees to the top Tour de France riders of up to £25,000 a race.
Doyle said: ‘In the past, Tour winners like Greg LeMond have ridden a couple of races for which he could name his price.
‘Sadly there isn't a venue in England yet 1,200 British fans came over to cheer me on at The Hague in Holland recently.’
Dear Stan, me old china
Roy Collins
Barry Fry's sacking leaves Barnet boss Stan Flashman looking for a manager.
With an eye for a nice little earner, Del Trotter dictated his letter of application to chief sports writer Roy Collins.
The lads in the Nags 'Ead were just talking about your bit of managerial bovver and I said to Rodney, ‘Bruv, this could be my big chance.’
Rodney, the plonker, said only fools and horses would apply for your job.
Karma Chameleon, I said.
This is fate because Barnet, you see, happens to be one of my most favourite places in the North.
My old mum used to take me to the fair there.
And that old Lady Barnet was a diamond, wasn't she?
I loved that radio show she was on…animal, vegetable or 'ookey, all that stuff.
Luvvly jubbly.
'Course, I don't 'ave any experience of football management as such.
But I've got the mobile phone, the furry coat and the big cigar.
People tell me that if I was a bit taller, I'd be a dead ringer for that Malcolm Allison geezer.
Mind you, 'e's an ugly git.
I also video Match Of The Day religiously, though it doesn't always come out because the instructions are in German and Uncle Albert, the silly old sailor, keeps messing it up.
I do the pools sometimes, an' all.
Anyway, what knowledge of football d'ya need to manage a bunch of plonkers in the Third Division?
Can't take a lot if that dipstick Barry Fry-Up could do it.
As they say at Wimbledon, Stan, he who bares wins.
And you see, the blinding thing about making me your manager is that I'd be able to put all the resources of Trotters Independent Trading at the club's disposal.
There's Rodney's Amstrad computer for starters, which would solve all those book-keeping problems you've been 'aving.
The plonker doesn't actually know how to operate it at the moment but he will once he's passed his night school exams.
Mind you, Barnet could be in the European Cup by then.
You and me would be a team, Stan.
Like bruvvers.
We've certainly got more in common than I 'ave with my real brother.
We're businessmen, good with people, lots of charisma.
We're winners.
Even our theme tunes would fit together: ‘No income tax, no VAT…no players' wages coming from me.’
Belting, eh?
Kit wouldn't be a problem.
I've still got 300 sets left over from that job lot I got the other Christmas.
Genuine acrylic, too, none of your rubbish.
They're not strictly speaking in Barnet's colours — actually, they're the colours of the Tanzanian national team.
But vive la difference, eh?
I've got a year's supply of Argentinian oranges for half-time.
And we can use the crates afterwards as executive boxes, geddit?
Just a joke.
Of course, there's the Trotters' executive motor as well , though I don't think we'd get all the team in the back of the van.
Perhaps we could make a couple of trips on match days.
I've got a cracking idea for training — you'll love this one.
We'll get that bloke what trained Mickey Pearce's dog when it won over hurdles at the 'Stow.
And it was only entered in a flat race!
It 'ad so much of the happy juice inside him, it took the hare three laps to catch it up.
The lads will soon zip up the League with some of that stuff, know what I mean?
And I fink the team should be a little more avant-Guardian, no ponceing about with this kick and rush nonsense.
Wiv all the money we'll make from the match day market and the find the lady stall in the boardroom — oh sorry, no, you've already got one — we'll be able to go out and buy a few proper players.
We'll get that French geezer — wossisnmame, Canteena or something.
Blinding!
And we'll get that soppy big girl's blouse with the dodgy knee who cries all the time.
You know, the one Spurs flogged to Italy for five million smackeroonies.
Zsa Zsa or something.
The opposition won't know what's 'it 'em.
Bit like those papapizza photographers you duffed up the other week, eh Stan?
Saucy gits, they 'ad it coming, I say.
Anyway, I'll leave you to fink about it.
But don't 'ang about too long because I've 'ad that Nottingham Forest on the blower.
You and me, we're three of a kind.
You know it makes sense, Stan.
This time next year, we'll be millionaires.
A dream come true in Valley of miracles
Giles Smith
THEY believe in miracles down at The Valley.
They may need one if Charlton's long-awaited return to their famous old ground, after seven years in exile, is to go ahead against Portsmouth on Saturday.
At the moment the ground looks like the biggest construction site in south-east London, with an army of building workers — and volunteers — desperately trying to get it ready.
But the big day is today(thurs), not Saturday, because that's when the men from Greenwich Council come to see if they can give the £4 million redeveloped ground the safety certificate it needs for Saturday's sell-out game to proceed.
‘It's a true miracle we've got this far.
We'll make it on Saturday,’ director and former club captain Derek Ufton confidently states.
And Colin Powell, former player and now head groundsman, insists: ‘It may look chaos at the moment, but actually there's only a little bit of tidying up to do.’
It takes some believing, looking at the half-finished West Stand with its incomplete entrance steps and the sea of mud and rubble that surrounds the pitch, which at least, to Powell's credit, looks immaculate.
But nobody at The Valley, which a near-bankrupt Charlton left in 1985 to become uneasy tenants at Selhurst Park and Upton Park, is going to let the present apparent chaos spoil the greatest day in the club's history since they won the FA Cup back in the glory days of 1947.
Certainly not the army of supporters who've been painting, odd-jobbing and generally mucking in over the past week.
to put the finishing touches for the great day.
‘You simply can't describe how important Saturday is to us all.
Just being back home is the greatest thing,’ said 32-year-old fan Paul Watts, who is spending most of the days he can get off work this week painting at The Valley.
Support
Paul's fanatical support for the club is typical.
He added: ‘I live in Mottingham, about seven miles from here and also about seven miles from Selhurst Park and Upton Park.
I followed them at all three, but if The Valley was a 100 miles away, I'd still be back.’
Ufton, who first watched Charlton as an eight-year-old with his dad before the war, talks equally romantically about the old days — and the days to come.
‘I was here as a 10-year-old when we had a record crowd of 75,000 for the Cup tie against Aston Villa in 1938,’ he said.
Playing in goal that day was the legendary Sam Bartram, after whom a road beside the ground has been named.
‘He was a huge man, a larger than life character,’ Ufton added.
‘Eleven years later it was like a dream come true when I played my first game for the club and he was still in goal.
I was playing with my idol.’
This week, though, he's keener to talk about the future, one that, after the traumas of the past decade, he believes can be bright.
‘The players will get a lift being back at home.
I really hope they can raise their game and get us back into the Premier Division.
I want that for the whole club, but firstly for the fans, who've been superb.
‘They have raised over £1 million for the redevelopment — they deserve to reap the reward,’ says the man who was captain when Charlton went down in 1956 to begin their troubles.
Irony
The irony that Charlton finally got back to the First Division in 1986, the year their exile from The Valley began, isn't lost on Ufton.
‘That was very sad.
Top flight football should have come back to The Valley.
Instead, we had to play on other people's grounds.
‘Let's hope history sort of repeats itself, and we get promoted back in the year we come back home.’
Wilko target
David Alexander
LEEDS manager Howard Wilkinson is ready to splash the money from the sale of Eric Cantona on a defender.
Wilkinson has made inquiries for three full-backs without success.
Manchester United refused to part with Dennis Irwin or Paul Parker, and Manchester City have made it clear they want to keep Ian Brightwell.
But Wilkinson denies he has made a £1.5 m bid for Arsenal right-back Lee Dixon and centre-half Steve Bould.
‘It's not true, I don't know where these stories come from,’ he said.
Everton's Martin Keown is available, but probably out of the Leeds price range at the moment.
But the Leeds manager is almost certainly on the point of making a move and the priority is the right-back position that has been a problem all season because of Mel Sterland's absence.
Vinnie on hold
VINNIE JONES has won a seven-day stay of execution from the Football Association.
The Wimbledon midfielder should have decided by yesterday whether to appeal against a record £20,000 fine for his part in the video, ‘Soccer's Hard Men’.
But Jones has asked for another week and FA spokesman David Bloomfield said: ‘We have acceded to his request.’
Souness slated for outburst
Ben Bacon
GRAEME SOUNESS was under fire last night for his condemnation of Crystal Palace following Liverpool's Coca-Cola Cup draw.
Souness, diverting publicity away from his side's inept display, insisted he would quit football if more clubs adopted the tactics he claimed Palace used in Tuesday's clash at Anfield, which finished 1-1.
But Palace assistant manager Alan Smith yesterday jumped to the defence of his young side and hit out at Souness — who is particularly angry at a Gareth Southgate challenge on David Burrows which left the full-back with ligament and cartilage damage.
Smith said: ‘I thought Graeme Souness was a bigger man than to come out with that stuff.
He's tarnished our performance and it's all a bit sour.
‘Of course, after Saturday, when Liverpool beat us 5-0, Souness was all smiles and happy to shake hands and extend invitations to the boot room.
‘But this time he just walked straight by us.
Wrong
‘Ronnie Moran shook my hand, though, and said we had done really well, while one of our directors, Bernie Coleman, said the Liverpool directors were complimentary to us.
‘Anyway, I would have thought Souness is the wrong person to go round criticising physical play — he was hardly a wallflower as a player.
‘I remember when I was a coach at Wimbledon — in the Southern League then — and Middlesbrough came down to Plough Lane for an FA Cup-tie.
Souness played and he was a heavy-set, mean bastard.
He was certainly giving it out.’
Of Palace, Smith said: ‘Even if we wanted to play dirty, our players just wouldn't know how to do it.
Our team on Tuesday night was so young we had a creche on the coach.
‘I'm sorry he's detracted from the performances of players like 17-year-old George Ndah and 21-year-old Rob Bowry, who were making their debuts.
‘Bobby Moore and Jimmy Armfield, former England captains, were at the match and didn't see it the way Souness did.
‘Simon Osborn is like a choirboy, Gareth Southgate is a clean, fresh player, Bowry is only 9st 7lb, and Ndah is still a youth player.
‘Once, Ndah was clean through and he was blatantly brought down by Mike Marsh, who got only a yellow card.
I'm not squealing about that.
‘What Souness has said will act only as a greater incentive for us in the replay at Selhurst Park.’
The FA are aware of Souness's comments, particularly about referee Brian Hill, whom he accused of letting ‘things go on which I've never seen in my time back in England’.
The FA are unlikely to take any action.
Crosby Roker choker
John Wardle
ANGRY Malcolm Crosby is ready for a showdown with chairman Bob Murray at Sunderland.
Things may have reached breaking point following the disclosure that Sunderland approached Crystal Palace manager Steve Coppell over Crosby's job as Roker boss.
Crosby has maintained his dignity despite a constant catalogue of names linked with the post.
Crosby blew his top after learning of the Coppell link and said yesterday: ‘I was angry and upset to read somebody connected with the club had been in contact with Steve Coppell.
Contract
‘I've been very patient, but this business is out of order.
It's made me question what chance I've got.
‘The only way to get to the bottom of it is to confront the chairman.’
Crosby took Sunderland to the FA Cup final last May and was given a one-year contract.
after leading FA cup finalists Sunderland to Wembley in May.
But he appears to have been on borrowed time ever since.
Murray declined to comment on Sunderland's bid for Coppell.
Tel fails to lift sorry Spurs
Rob Shepherd
Nottingham Forest 2, Tottenham 0
BRIAN CLOUGH could at last smile after Nottingham Forest last night belied their desperate League form to overcome Tottenham and reach the quarter-finals of the Coca-Cola Cup.
For Spurs supremo Terry Venables, though, it was a night of concern.
After the promise of recent weeks, Tottenham meekly succumbed to the Premier League's bottom club.
And it was perhaps significant that after such a surrender, chief executive Venables was compelled to leave the comfort of the directors' box to take his old place in the coaches' dug-out.
He was, however, unable to exert sufficient influence to change the direction of a game that Forest had controlled from the start.
Impact
Venables did manage to have some impact on the proceedings in the 65th minute, when he appeared to prompt the substitution of the inept Gordon Durie for Nick Barmby.
But within a minute, any hopes of a Spurs recovery were ended, when the outstanding Roy Keane scored Forest's second, thus securing their victory.
Venables could only shake his head, and you wonder now whether he will begin to exert even more influence on the playing side of things at Tottenham.
Spurs had come into this match unbeaten in their previous eight matches, and although they have improved their League standing, the cup competitions remain their best hope of success.
But, Vinny Samways apart, they lacked the resources to overcome a Forest side, who gradually looked more like the team we know they can be — one which has won this competition in its various forms twice in the past four years.
With Keane so powerful in midfield, Nigel Clough dropping deep to hold the ball up and play it forward, the use of two wingers in Kingsley Black and Ian Woan, plus the revived spirit of England captain Stuart Pearce, Forest out-manoeuvred Spurs despite the sodden pitch.
Indeed, it was a similar display to the one they produced at White Hart Lane in March when they put Spurs out of this competition in the semi-finals last season.
Admittedly, Spurs were handicapped by the loss of Paul Allen early on, but the deployment of defender Jason Cundy in midfield undermined their chances of taking advantage of Forest's lack of confidence.
Hoddle or Gascoigne, Cundy certainly is not.
And with Teddy Sheringham, back at the City ground for the first time since his move to Spurs, and Durie performing like statues, Forest quickly found the self-belief they have been lacking.
And in the 27th minute, after a period of sustained pressure they took the lead, the goal created by a clever Clough pass.
Woan read it perfectly, moving into the Spurs penalty area, skipping past Erik Thorstvedt and over the line.
Rocket
Samways might have equalised three minutes later but after creating an opening for himself, he blazed over the bar.
As Spurs over-extended themselves, Forest re-discovered their prowess on the counter and sealed victory.
Clough touched the ball invitingly to Keane on the edge of the area, and the Irishman sent a rocket of a shot into the roof of the net.
Spurs coach Doug Livermore acknowledged: ‘Forest played the better football, and they deserved to win.
They haven't had much fortune in front of goal of late, but this was their night.’
Kiwomya birthday joy
David Harrison
A Villa 2, Ipswich 2
IPSWICH striker Chris Kiwomya, who cost nothing, stole the glory from Aston Villa's £4 million hit men with two birthday goals last night.
Kiwomya, 23 yesterday, struck twice in the last 20 minutes to book his team a Coca-Cola Cup fourth round replay after Dalian Atkinson and Dean Saunders had twice put Villa in front.
A delighted Kiwomya said: ‘I told the lads I'd be pleased to get on the score sheet on my birthday, but to score a couple is unbelievable.
‘They might have looked easy chances, but I've missed easier than that.
‘I'm staying at Dalian Atkinson's house tonight and I might just have a little drink or two — hopefully he will be paying.
‘We've still got a lot of work to do to win the replay but it's great to get a result like that against a team which cost so much money.’
Villa boss Ron Atkinson said: ‘In the first half, we might have made a better game of it if we had turned up.
‘Then we got ourselves into a winning position only for carelessness to force us to go back to their place for a replay.’
Ipswich did their homework by following the example of East Anglian neighbours Norwich, who came to Villa Park on Saturday and smothered the Villa pair into submission by employing a sweeper.
It worked until the 64th minute, when Saunders at last found some space to cross for Atkinson to head home at the far post.
Forced to abandon their containing tactics, Ipswich came surging forward in search of the equaliser.
And when Mick Stockwell slid over a low cross in the 73rd minute, Kiwomya was on hand to sidefoot it past goalkeeper Nigel Spink.
It looked as if the Saunders-Atkinson partnership had done the trick for Villa again in the 77th minute.
This time Atkinson slid the ball through to Saunders, who waited for keeper Clive Baker to advance from his line before clipping it over his head and into the net.
But Kiwomya had the last word, capitalising on a slice of good fortune to make his birthday celebrations complete.
Phil Whelan's long through ball was booted clear by Spink, but it hit Mick Stockwell and rebounded into the path of Kiwomya, who took careful aim before stroking the ball into an empty net from 20 yards.
It was a night of further frustration for Villa boss Atkinson, whose team saw a 13-match unbeaten run brought to a halt by Norwich, and who now a testing replay at Portman Road on December 15.
Williams rap
STEVE WILLIAMS, the 34-year-old former England midfield player, has been suspended for two weeks without pay and stripped of his title as assistant manager following a bust-up with manager Alan Ball at Second Division Exeter City.
Bristol loss
BRISTOL CITY announced a loss of £742,000 for the last financial year at their annual general meeting at Ashton Gate last night.
Football staff wages at the Division One club came to more than £1.5m, including Pounds 612,083 in signing-on fees.
Notts plan
NOTTS yesterday took steps to secure Trent Bridge's future as a Test match venue.
The county unveiled plans for a new £1.5m stand with 1,600 seats and banquetting facilities for 250 people.
Brooks move
BOURNEMOUTH midfield player Shaun Brooks, who was alleged to have been involved in a fight with team manager Tony Pulis three weeks ago, is set to join Third Division Stockport in £30,000 deal.
Stevens hits out at court cases
by Tony Kell
FORMER England defender Gary Stevens has condemned players who take legal action against fellow professionals for ‘dragging the name of football through the dirt’.
Stevens was playing for Spurs when he became a victim of a Vinnie Jones tackle which eventually ended his career.
He spoke out yesterday after Brentford striker Gary Blissett was cleared of a charge of causing grievous bodily harm.
Blissett was found not guilty of ‘cynically and deliberately’ thrusting his elbow into the face of Torquay's John Uzzell, whose cheekbone was smashed during the match a year ago.
Stevens, now working for Capital Radio as a match summariser, said: ‘I think it is very worrying for football if this becomes a trend.
‘If players are dragging matters through the courts it can't be good publicity for the game.
Harm
‘Court proceedings could be long and drawn out, and how do you prove when a player went in for a tackle he did it with intent to harm his opponent?
‘It will just end up with long, protracted cases dragging the name of football through the dirt.’
Stevens added: ‘Things like this should be left to the PFA to sort out — that is what they are there for.
‘I'm worried that these recent developments will open the floodgates.
And not just in football.
‘It could happen in cricket if a fast bowler hit a batsman on the head with an intimidatory bouncer, or in a rugby match.’
Players backing Crosby
by John Wardle
SUNDERLAND players yesterday joined the chorus of protest at the treatment of boss Malcolm Crosby.
Roker midfielders Gordon Armstrong and Gary Owers jumped to Crosby's defence, insisting: ‘The gaffer doesn't deserve this.
All the players feel the same.’
Manager Crosby wants a meeting with chairman Bob Murray this weekend after blowing his top over claims that Crystal Palace boss Steve Coppell had been approached about his job.
Crosby yesterday described the continuing speculation as ‘disruptive’.
Issue
And Owers said: ‘The whole thing is getting out of hand and affecting everyone.’
Chairman Murray has yet to comment publicly on the situation, but the Roker staff clearly want the issue resolved quickly.
Armstrong said: ‘We thought that, after two successive wins, the talk would have died down.
If anything, it has got worse.
‘It does affect the players.
Every Monday we are half looking over our shoulders to see if there is a new man in the job.’
Keegan setback
John Wardle
NEWCASTLE manager Kevin Keegan yesterday sent home Swedish international Kennet Andersson.
Andersson has spent only one week of a planned three-week period on trial at St James' Park.
Keegan sent the 6ft 3in striker packing with instructions to sort out a transfer tangle with his Belgian club Mechelen.
He also wants Andersson to have treatment on an ankle injury he picked up in training.
Keegan said: ‘Kennet has done nothing to harm his chances of a move to Newcastle.
‘He has to go back and sort out the transfer situation, which is very messy.’
Andersson hasn't played for the Belgian club for three months.
Jokester's just the job
Henry Rix
AS the weather causes chaos with the fixture list there are few betting propositions on offer, but the final event of the day at Nottingham this afternoon is worth waiting for.
Today's only surviving meeting presents few opportunities, but the Chris Nash-trained Jokester should brighten up a damp afternoon with victory in the Ruddington Handicap Hurdle (3.35).
He really is thrown in on the form of Jokester was out of the handicap when an excellent runner-up that day, and now races off a stone lower mark.
He loves the ground and is ideally suited by a testing two miles.
Pollerton's Pride and Diane Clay have a great chance of defying a 7lb penalty in the Tyne Handicap Hurdle (3.05).
The combination snatched the spoils in the dying strides at Stratford 10 days ago, and further improvement is anticipated over this extra six furlongs.
Boogie Bopper has an ideal chance to make a successful debut over timber in the Lake Conditional Jockeys' Selling Hurdle (12.30).
Martin Pipe's gelding is clearly the best of those with Flat form, stays well and is suited by this very testing surface.
Pipe's Miinnehoma was yesterday cut to 6-1 clear favourite from 10-1 by the sponsors for the Coral Welsh National.
Others to attract support included Toby Balding's Belmount Captain (8-1 from 12-1) and Run For Free (10-1 from 12-1).
Rain causes havoc
THE weather continued to disrupt the National Hunt programme yesterday, threatening a big weekend of racing.
Today's card at Sandown and tomorrow's at Towcester became the latest victims.
And prospects for tomorrow are only slightly better.
More rain would jeopardise Sandown's fixture, where there is a 2pm inspection today.
The situation at Chepstow improved during the day.
Clerk of the course Rodger Farrant said: ‘It's raceable at the moment.’
The note of optimism came from Edward Gillespie at Wetherby.
‘Prospects are 100%,’ he said.
Wednesday's meeting at Worcester is almost certain to be called off with the course is under several feet of water.
Course manager Jack Bennett said: ‘The going could be described as choppy, and if anyone wants to know the prospects I suggest they contact the coastguard!’
I'll out-think Benn
Frank Ward
NICKY PIPER is an unlikely candidate for world title honours and will need all his mental aptitude to avoid being flattened by Nigel Benn in their WBC super-middleweight showdown.
But Piper and his manager Frank Warren argue that Benn's relative lack of boxing knowledge, despite one brief spell as WBO middleweight champion, will lead to his downfall at Alexandra Palace on December 12.
Piper, the Cardiff-based fighter with a MENSA rating of 153 who has lost only once in 18 fights, simply believes he is too clever for Benn.
‘I don't think Nigel is a thinking fighter, and that's why I'm going to win,’ claims Piper.
‘He rushes in with his chin exposed, and I aim to exploit that weakness.
‘He starts so fast, but tends to run out of steam.
If the fight goes beyond four or five rounds, the title's mine.
Flaws
‘Nigel's style includes getting caught with punches in order to land punches.
Against me, that will lead to defeat.
I have watched Nigel on video, and there are flaws in his attack.
‘Undoubtedly he is a very successful aggressive fighter, but he leaves himself open.
‘Nigel's left jab is very low, and his big right cross is very slow.
I'm about three inches taller, and unless he gets close with his hands held high, I know I can take him out.
‘I hit people on the chin with perfect counters because I understand the game.
My knock-outs are not desperate wild right-hand punches, they are precise single-shot counters.’
Victory for 26-year-old Piper would probably wreck hopes of rematch between Benn and Chris Eubank.
But the tall Welshman aims to make a Eubank-Piper conflict equally appealing.
‘After I win, I'll take on some of the opponents Eubank has beaten, and do a better job,’ said Piper.
‘People will be clamouring for me to fight Eubank.’
Warren, who was involved in Benn's first 21 professional fights, said: ‘Nicky is the better boxer and has nothing to lose.
There will be no pressure on him because everyone is picking Benn to win.’
Meanwhile, Herbie Hide has amazingly been linked with a world title fight against new undisputed heavyweight champion Riddick Bowe.
Barry Hearn, who has guided the Norwich-based prospect since 1989, admitted he has spoken to Bowe's manager, Rock Newman.
‘At this juncture, I am unable to comment further on Newman's assertions, but I can reveal that Hide's name has been linked very seriously with Bowe,’ he admitted.
With a grin, he added: ‘Herbie has told me he will not get involved in a slugging match, and will destroy Bowe in the later rounds.’
But Frank Maloney, manager of Lennox Lewis, declared: ‘Herbie is improving, but this is truly ridiculous.’
Blunders wreck England bid
Graham Otway
ENGLISH cricket fans are set to pay the price for political blunders at Lord's when the crucial vote is taken in February on the venue for the 1995 World Cup.
The Test and County Cricket Board has been comprehensively outmanoeuvred by the Indian sub-Continent on two key issues.
As revealed in yesterday's TODAY, the Indians, Pakistanis and Sri Lankans have made a shrewd financial offer to woo the world's 20 non-Test playing nations into supporting their campaign to stage the tournament.
Now it appears England's attempt to win backing from the nine countries with Test status by offering a higher bid of £300,000 may also be flawed.
England need only unanimous support from the Test countries to win the World Cup vote without having to refer to the ICC's associate members.
But with India, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka all certain to support their own bid, that avenue to success is already closed to the TCCB.
That immediately poses the question of why the TCCB opted to concentrate on impressing the Test nations with large financial guarantees, instead of copying the logical example of the sub-Continent and targetting the associates?
A question that becomes even more vital when unanimity is not available at the ICC, and a victory involving the associates must be backed by at least two thirds of the nine Test nations.
And here again England's bid looks set to fall down.
While New Zealand, Australia and the West Indies are thought to be ready to back the TCCB's bid, the chances of South Africa and Zimbabwe doing so are remote.
While the Indians have cleverly fostered the friendship of the world's two most recent recruits to Test cricket, the attitude at Lord's has bordered on arrogance and antagonism.
In Zimbabwe's case, England openly opposed their long-awaited elevation to Test status in 1992 on the grounds it would devalue the international game.
And while England are not even contemplating playing a Test against Zimbabwe in the near future, the Indians have extended a warm hand of friendship.
Within months, an Indian side had arrived in Harare to play the first historic Test and a reciprocal tour is being negotiated.
A year earlier, when South Africa applied to end its era of apartheid-rooted isolation from international cricket, the two World Cup protagonists also took strategically opposite stances.
The Indians, for so long arch opponents of the Pretoria regime correctly read the winds of change and not only supported South Africa's return to the Test brotherhood, but proposed it.
Again before the world could blink, a South African side was landing at Calcutta to play three one-day internationals.
Allies
India are currently in South Africa as the first black nation to play the Republic in a Test series while England's invitation to visit The Cape is still in the pending tray.
So, while England fall well short of support from six countries, India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka have two ready-made allies and need just one more.
The obvious target would be the West Indies, though there is little love lost between the sub-Continent and Caribbean cricket figurehead Clyde Walcott.
He is understood to be siding with ICC chairman Sir Colin Cowdrey in backing the England bid, knowing he is a leading candidate to next summer become the first non-English chairman of world cricket's governing body.
As the lobbying increases before February's decision, the Indians may well target the Aussies since, under a convoluted voting procedure, they must win the support of one of the ICC's two founder members — England or Australia.
Now England officials may find their past errors returning to haunt them.
Their main argument is that the World Cup should move around on a rotational basis, but having staged the first three tournaments, other countries have some catching up to do before it returns to these shores.
THE special general meeting of the MCC to discuss a motion of no-confidence in the England cricket selectors will take place at the Westminster Central Hall on January 27.
Top racing trainer dies
RACE horse trainer Arthur Stephenson, 70, died last night in South Cleveland hospital, Middlesbrough.
Based at his yard Crawleys, just outside Bishop Auckland, he was one of the most successful trainers in the country, enjoying Gold Cup glory with The Thinker.
ITV rugby deal
ITV have secured a £600,000 sponsorship package with Scottish Provident for coverage of all 13 British Lions matches on next season's tour to New Zealand.
The deal, including live coverage of the three Tests, will continue into England's South Africa tour in 1994.
Skipper Alec
ENGLAND vice-captain Alec Stewart has been re-appointed captain of Surrey for the 1993 cricket season, ending suggestions that his job might be on the line after the TCCB found the county guilty of ball-tampering.
Regan defence
NEW European flyweight champion Robbie Regan yesterday agreed to a voluntary defence of his title against Danny Porter in Cardiff on January 19.
He has also been ordered to defend against Ireland's Dave McAuley.
Monty marvel
SCOTLAND'S Colin Montgomerie played superbly to earn himself a share of the lead after hitting a five-under-par 66 in the opening round of the Johnnie Walker Classic in Australia yesterday.
Krabbe races on
KATRIN KRABBE, Germany's double world sprint champion banned for four years for failing a drug test, yesterday made her rallying debut in the Dubai International.
Driving a Mitsubishi with friend Silka Fritzinger, She finished 27th after the first day.
Big guns go west without Barnes
Mike Crouch
TRUE to the traditions of cup competitions, rugby union's Pilkington version threw up a number of surprises in the last round, not least the demise of all three big West Country clubs.
Most notable among the vanquished is Bath, supposedly a team of all the talents, but clearly relying more than one had supposed upon the inventive wit of Stuart Barnes.
In the last nine seasons Bath have failed to win the Cup only twice, and on both occasions they were without their influential fly-half.
Now they are devastated by their one-point defeat at the hands of Waterloo and must regret allowing Barnes to play for the Barbarians against Australia.
If Barnes is this irreplaceable in the nation's best club side it again raises the question of what England have been missing all these years.
Barnes first took the eye for Oxford University, and when he appeared opposite Rob Andrew in the Varsity match it was he who represented England's great hope for the future.
Andrew's performances then, and subsequently, were rock solid and the die was cast.
So it has been ever since, with Barnes, a more colourful, controversial and flamboyant alternative, condemned to a state of permanent reserve as Andrew's safe hands and feet unfalteringly served his country.
There has been nothing to complain about.
How can there be with England lining up a record-breaking third Grand Slam in a row?
But the question still niggles.
There's not much doubt who Campo would choose.
Farewell to a gentleman
Mike Crouch
DAVID BRYANT'S retirement from international bowls competition at the age of 61 signals the end of the mostly gentlemanly revolution in sport.
When he took up the game, there were no other young players around.
Now, the average age has plummeted, in great measure due to the efforts of this remarkable character.
Bryant, he of the slicked hair, spectacles, mouthful of teeth and curly pipe, was 21 when he won his first county title and first played for England in 1958.
Since then, he has won the world singles three times outdoors and three times indoors, four Commonwealth gold medals, a Commonwealth fours gold, a world indoor triples gold, six world indoor pairs golds and 26 national titles, the singles six times on grass and nine times on carpet.
Whenever he played, the last end was marked by a rueful smile, either at his own or, more often, his opponent's bad luck.
In his time, Even allowing for the good fellowship that exists throughout bowls, he has been a beacon of sportsmanship.
No other competitor in any sport has been as consistently good or as unfailingly good natured.
No defence, England
Mike Crouch
GIORGIO CHINAGLIA, Welsh-born Lazio hero of the 70s and one-time owner of the club, has no qualms about Paul Gascoigne's future in Rome.
And there are other English players, like Steve McManaman, he believes are capable of playing in the Italian league.
But he is derisive about English defenders and he has a descriptive way of saying so.
In his opinion they have ‘steel feet’.
To see what he means, take a look at any Premier League match and compare the body movements of our best defenders like Keown and Adams with Italians like Baresi and Bergomi.
The Italians can turn on a fivepenny-piece.
Their agility gives them the edge, not so much in dispossessing an attacker but in evading attempts to win back the ball and in creating time and space for passing and regenerating their own offence.
It is a technique quite remarkably absent from the English game and has not yet been conquered even by Des Walker, whose introduction to Italy has been faltering.
Walker relies on his speed to the ball and the change of the back-pass law has exposed his weakness in releasing it constructively.
Of course, learning to pirouette can be difficult in an English winter on waterlogged pitches where nimbleness seems only to be required by strikers slipping sliding tackles.
But this is the area where English football lags behind the Continent.
Despite England's recent poor scoring record, it is our lack of skill at the back which exposes our limitations.
Bobby's dazzlers dream of glory
David Tossell
NOT even the most imaginative of San Diego Chargers fans would have been entertaining Super Bowl thoughts after the team lost their first four games.
But with seven wins from their last eight, the Chargers look set to reach the play-offs for the first time since 1982 — the first to do so after such a poor start.
San Diego, at 7-5, are tied with Denver Broncos for second place in the AFC West.
Their four remaining games are against Phoenix on Sunday, Cincinnati, LA Raiders and Seattle — all with losing records.
Energised by new coach Bobby Ross, the Chargers are at last rewarding their patient fans.
Linebacker Gary Plummer said: ‘We haven't given the fans a heck of a lot to cheer in the seven years I've been here.
They're as excited as we are.’
Legend
San Diego have built their success on a dominating defense, a good running game and a sound season from quarterback Stan Humphries, signed from the Washington Redskins at the start of the season to replace injured John Friesz.
And there is the intriguing possibility of a new arrival next season — Joe Montana.
The legendary quarterback seems unlikely to oust Steve Young from the San Francisco 49ers starting job and may look to end his career elsewhere.
He has previously been linked with the Chargers and a move down the Calfornian coast may be on the cards.
Meanwhile, 24 other teams are still in the Super Bowl hunt.
Dallas, Minnesota and New Orleans will clinch play-off places by winning this weekend.
Pittsburgh can wrap up the AFC Central division by beating Seattle if Houston and Cleveland fail to win.
SUNDAY: Cincinnati at Cleveland; Detroit at Green Bay; Indianapolis at New England; Minnesota at Philadelphia; NY Jets at Buffalo; Seattle at Pittsburgh; Dallas at Denver; Kansas City at LA Raiders; Miami at San Francisco; San Diego at Phoenix; Washington at NY Giants; LA Rams at Tampa Bay.
MONDAY: Chicago at Houston.
Leader Faldo warms to task
George Stevens in Sun City
NICK FALDO overcame the desert wind and heat to fire a three-under-par 69 for a one-stroke lead after the first round of the Million Dollar Challenge here yesterday.
The world No 1 carded four birdies, three consecutively on the back nine, having earlier missed four putts of seven feet or less for birdies.
He admitted afterwards: ‘I didn't capitalise on my chances on the front nine.
I could have done some damage if a few of those had dropped, but ‘if’ is the biggest word in golf.
‘But I'm playing well and swinging well.
The next three days are going to be tough, though.’
Faldo's round was in sharp contrast to Ian Woosnam, the other Briton in the 10-man field.
The Welshman dropped four shots in the first four holes, and was relieved to finish only three-over-par.
Talented
‘I started the same way last year,’ he said.
‘For the first four holes I played like a 20-handicapper.
‘I hit three great drives on the practice tee and then hooked my first shot of the round into the bushes.’
Local hero Ernie Els, one of South Africa's most talented young golfers, was level with compatriot David Frost on 70.
The 23-year-old, like many of the other players who finished further down, complained that the wind and heat had caused problems with club selection.
Els moaned: ‘On the first nine, the wind was gusting, swirling, coming at you from the left, then the right, then from straight ahead.
‘But I've got a good caddie, who grew up here and is very good with yardage and club selection.
I putted nicely today and I think I can do a lot better over the next three days.’
Zimbabwe's Nick Price shot a level-par 72 to stand joint third with Spain's Jose-Maria Olazabal.
King of the giant-killers
Graham Fisher and Graham Otway
BOTH Yeovil and Altrincham have dispatched League opposition 15 times but TODAY set out to settle the argument as to which non-League outfit's record was, in fact, the more impressive.
And, using a unique scoring system, Yeovil just have the edge.
Points scoring system:
Quality of opponents: Div 1 = 5pts; Div 2 = 4; Div 3 = 3; Div 3 North or South = 2; Div 4 = 1.
(Altrincham's victory over Second Division Chester this season counts as Div 3).
Round in which victory achieved: 4th round = 5pts; 3rd = 4pts; 2nd = 3; 1st = 2; Qualifying = 1.
Home win = 1pt; away win = 2pts.
TOMORROW the country's two most distinguished non-League clubs continue their private blue riband contest in the FA Cup.
In years of glorious combat, Altrincham and Yeovil have seen off League opposition 15 times — and now they both have the chance to make it sweet 16 in this year's second round.
Altrincham, flirting with danger near the bottom of the GM Vauxhall Conference, are at home to Port Vale; Yeovil, nearer the top but off the pace, greet Hereford.
The Lancashire team, housed only half a dozen miles from Old Trafford, have slipped from grace after months of political unheaval following their last-gasp failure to beat Barnet to an automatic place in the Football League two years ago.
Yeovil, meanwhile, have debts approaching £750,000 following a move to a new 10,000 capacity ground two years ago from their famous Huish slope.
The FA Cup, of course, is something special to both clubs, with Altrincham's recent record the more meritorious.
For they were licked into shape in the late 1960s by two ambitious pals who ran a record shop in the Cheshire market town.
Peter Swales, Manchester City chief and a big wheel at the FA, was one.
Noel White, former Liverpool chairman, was the other.
During their reign, Altringham saw off a dozen League clubs, including First Division Birmingham, and took Everton and Spurs to replays.
They reached the third round in four consecutive years, a feat equalled by very few lower division clubs at the time.
In those days they were automatically exempt until the first round proper.
Now, their lustre faded, they must plough through the qualifying slog to get there.
But memories were stirred this season as the Robins pulled off a brilliant first round win over Chester to put themselves 90 minutes away from another era of fame and fortune.
Tradition
And their larger than life goalkeeper Joe Paladino, born in St Helens of Scilian parents, admitted: ‘Altrincham's Cup tradition is always at the back of our minds.
We can't help it because the fans keep telling us.’
The keeper is super confident that another scalp will fall.
‘Port Vale are Second Division, okay, but most of our lads have played League football and we don't think they're any better than us,’ he said.
‘They will know all about our reputation and they'll come here frightened to death.’
Paladino, 27, runs a taxi business by day, becomes a club bouncer at night and is currently thinking over an offer from Midlands promoter Ron Gray to turn pro in the boxing game!
The genial heavyweight said: ‘I've fought as an amateur for a few years.
My father-in-law is Ray Shiel, who once fought Johnny Prescott, and he reckons I'd be a success.
I probably will take up the offer.
‘There is a link between training for the fight game and for goalkeeping.
I've never shirked anything when it comes to a tangle of heads and bodies in the box and when I punch the ball it stays punched.
‘But I'll tell you this, I'd rather go 12 rounds with Lennox Lewis than face a 25-yarder from our full-back Clive Freeman!
‘Everybody marvelled at Clive's goal in the replay against Chester but he's scored 11 goals this season and 10 of them have been screamers like that.’
For Yeovil, who reached the fifth round against Manchester United in 1948-49 — they lost 8-0 at Old Trafford — modern reality tells a different story.
Player-manager Steve Rutter, a 30-year-old central defender and former policeman, faces a constant battle to balance the books.
‘The Cup record means very little to me or any of the players.
There is no-one here involved with the playing side of the club who has had anything to do with previous Cup exploits,’ he said.
‘In fact, if you look at what Altrincham achieved during the John King era in the 1980s, you would have to say their record as Cup giant-killers is much better than ours nowadays.
‘Winning on Saturday is what is important — a glorious Cup tradition doesn't pay bills but a Cup run this year will do.’
Rutter, who misses the Hereford clash after undergoing a recent ankle operation, is a former team-mate of Vinnie Jones and Stuart Pearce at Wealdstone.
Dramatic
He took the bull by the horns at the end of last season, slashing the club's wage bill by switching from expensive full-time players to part-timers, with dramatic results.
After losing a couple of games early in the season, Yeovil are now unbeaten in nine outings, moving up to sixth place in the Conference, and disposed of Torquay 5-2 in the first round with the aid of a hat-trick from striker Paul Batty.
And while most people are currently cursing the recession, Rutter can thank it for the improvement in Yeovil's playing fortunes.
‘We had some players on expensive long-term contracts that we couldn't afford, while I got some players to agree to wage cuts,’ he explained.
‘When I went out to look at replacements, I found there were plenty of quality players available looking for work.
‘In fact, I would say I now have a far stronger squad than I had last year and it isn't costing as much.’
Among the imports are two graduates, Paul Sanderson a winger brought over the border from Merthyr in Wales, and Paul Nevin, who had a spell in the League with Carlisle.
Keeper David Coles was once with Newport, while barely 12 months ago free transfer midfielder Wayne Dobbins was the subject of a Pounds 25,000 move from West Brom to Torquay.
And what are their chances of victory against Hereford?
‘I have seen them but if we can produce the form we have shown in our last eight to 10 games we can win,’ said Rutter.
‘We certainly weren't intimidated by Torquay and I don't think it will happen against Hereford either.’
Wales lose suspended Jones
MARK JONES, Hull's Welsh rugby league international forward, will miss the match against France in Perpignan on Sunday week after being suspended for six matches by the League disciplinary committee last night.
His ban follows a complaint by Warrington, who claimed their Australian forward Bob Jackson was injured as a result of a deliberate kick by Jones that went unnoticed by the referee when the teams met last month.
And in another trial-by-video, St Helens' Test winger Alan Hunte was banned for three matches after he was cited by Leigh, who alleged he fouled and injured their Aussie centre Scott Mahon on November 11.
Pool without pockets
Adrian Holloway
THE £400,000 launch of a professional pool circus yesterday ended in farce when an angry shopkeeper burst in to take the jackets off the backs of the leading players.
Events at Sheffield's Grosvener House hotel proved even more spectacular than entrepreneur Ray Carter had hoped for when Lisa Crossland, of GT Sports, claimed he that PPF pool entrepreneur Ray Carter had taken the jackets from her shop, promising to pay up later.
But when she arrived at the hotel, Miss Crossland, 27, claimed she ‘was fobbed off all morning waiting for the cheque’.
She added: ‘The players thought Mr Carter had bought the jackets.
They were very embarrassed.
‘When he refused to pay I asked all 16 lads to put the jackets in my bag, and left.
I'm very upset.
I've never been treated like this before.’
The plot thickened as Malcolm Ferris, from the UK Pool Federation, a rival of Carter's Q-Sport organisation, added: ‘Carter sent the shop woman to me to get paid.
I've never even spoken to the man.
This bloke will make pool a laughing stock.’
But Carter, who has offered four top players £100,000 each in a bid to make pool's profile rival that of snooker, said: ‘I know there was a bit of bother.
We did all the paperwork with her in the shop; we obviously had crossed wires after that.’
Loaned
And Gary Cook, assistant divisional manager of Q-Sport, said the jackets had only been loaned.
‘There's been some misunderstanding,’ he said.
‘We thought the jackets were loaned and that GT Sports were doing it because they could get publicity.
The woman thinks we were buying them, but she's taken them back and it's all sorted out.’
Carter, 42, from Streatham, ran into further trouble when rival pool administrators turned the launch into a public slanging match.
Even Ross McInnes, ranked No 1 by the professional pool players' organisation, quizzed the 16 players paraded by Carter, shouting: ‘Where's the money coming from?’
Carter, who did not appear on stage himself, later said: ‘The idiots who run pool in this country have had 20 years to get it right and they've messed up.
When they put it on TV people phoned up claiming their colour control had bust.
‘What I'm doing is dragging pool up by the scruff of the neck: it's gonna be shaken clean.’
Sheffield's Diamond Daz Ward, 22, the first player to sign a Pounds 100,000 deal with Q-Sport, said yesterday: ‘I have total faith in this organisation despite the shambles I've seen today.
I believe pool will take off like American wrestling.’
Kelly accused in court battle
Tony Kell
FA CHIEF executive Graham Kelly was last night accused of bringing the game into disrepute over his court-room comments in defence of Gary Blissett.
Brentford striker Blissett was yesterday cleared of a charge of causing grievous bodily harm after it was alleged he ‘cynically and deliberately’ thrust his elbow into the face of Torquay's John Uzzell.
The court had heard evidence from Kelly, who said that Blissett had been involved in an ‘ordinary aerial challenge’.
But his comments sparked an angry response from Torquay chairman Mike Bateson, who said afterwards: ‘His (Kelly's) remarks that he could watch four games a week and see 200 such tackles was the most ludicrous statement I have ever heard.
‘In my opinion it is almost an encouragement to players to behave recklessly and if he's been quoted correctly, he has brought the game into disrepute.
‘I will be forwarding a formal complaint to the Football Association about those remarks.’
Meanwhile, former England defender Gary Stevens condemned players who take legal action against fellow professionals.
Stevens was playing for Spurs when he became a victim of a Vinnie Jones tackle which eventually ended his career and he said: ‘If players are dragging matters through the courts it can't be good publicity for the game.
Things like this should be left to the PFA to sort out.’
Vinnie video bonus
Ben Bacon
VINNIE JONES was last night offered financial help to pay off his £20,000 FA fine by the company that produced his controversial soccer video.
The gesture was made by Bill Tennant, head of VVL, to Jones, who has been given an extra week by officials at Lancaster Gate to decide whether to appeal against his punishment.
I understand Tennant, an American, met Wimbledon owner Sam Hammam 10 days ago but he refuses to confirm or deny their rendezvous.
However, he did say: ‘We would be willing to help Vinnie any way we can.
Absolutely, we would help him financially.
Whether it would be £3, £30, £300 or whatever is hypothetical.’
The video, ‘Soccer's Hard Men’, which detailed the game's dirty tricks, has been hugely popular, yet Jones received only £1,600 after his agents took their cut.
He donated the fee to charity.
Tennant said: ‘The FA should be congratulating him on bringing it all to the surface.
Instead, they have tried, sentenced and executed him.’
Atkins is new boss
David Harrison
CAMBRIDGE UNITED are today set to appoint Ian Atkins as their new manager.
The Birmingham City coach met the Cambridge board yesterday.
Cambridge believe Atkins will push the club forward again after the sacking of John Beck in October.
They approached Birmingham last month for permission to speak to Atkins but were refused by chairman Samesh Kumar.
But the appointment of a receiver at Birmingham has removed any obstacle.
Atkins played for Shrewsbury, Sunderland, Ipswich, Birmingham and Everton and also managed Colchester.
He rejoined Birmingham as No 2 to Terry Cooper but has always wanted a top job of his own.
Reds jinx
NORWAY'S Stig Inge Bjornebye has fallen victim to Liverpool's injury jinx — before he ever appears in a red shirt.
Bjornebye, signed by manager Graeme Souness for £600,000 last month, will be out for at least three weeks after he was carried off on a stretcher with concussion while on international duty against China.
His call-up was made more pressing by the knee injury suffered by David Burrows in the Coca-Cola Cup draw with Crystal Palace, which has put him out of action for three months.
Charlton feel at home
Giles Smith
THE new Valley finally received its safety certificate yesterday — just 48 hours before Charlton's historic homecoming.
And the Charlton team, currently lying 11th in Division One, last night vowed to repay the directors and fans for ending the club's seven-year exile.
Captain Simon Webster, who leads the side out against Portsmouth tomorrow, said: ‘It's up to us now.
Coming back to The Valley is like coming home.
It will give us the lift we need to get back to the Premier League.’
Joint manager Alan Curbishley agreed: ‘Now we have a ground where other teams will fear to come.
That is enough to get us back into the top flight.
We owe it to the fans who have made all this possible.’
They were speaking minutes after Greenwich mayor Brian O'Sullivan had handed over the safety certificate to Charlton chairman Roger Alwen.
All around, frantic last-minute building work was still going on.
But a jovial Alwen, who is believed to have put £1 million into the move, said: ‘Don't worry, it's all cosmetic.
It really is ready.
There were always grave doubts whether we would ever make it, but we never gave up.
‘I'm more concerned about how I'm going to feel at 2.55 on Saturday when the team run out.
I think I will be very frightened and may want to go and hide.’
Curbishley's managerial partner, Steve Gritt, summed up the new feeling within the club when he said: ‘After Saturday we'll be a real club again.
‘For seven years we have been gypsies, wandering with no home.
Now we have to repay the supporters.’
I'm the one to blame
Ben Bacon
CRYSTAL PALACE manager Steve Coppell last night courageously accepted full responsibility for the club's disappointing start to the season.
In a remarkably frank interview, Coppell confronted the troubles he faces after eight years at Selhurst Park, and said he agrees with the inevitable consequence should he be unable to pass the biggest test of his career.
Palace, FA Cup finalists in 1990, currently lie second from bottom of the Premier League, and Coppell's efforts have not been helped by sniping on the sidelines from his chairman Ron Noades.
As a player with Manchester United and England, the 37-year-old university graduate never hid and he certainly doesn't intend to start now.
Tough
He said: ‘I want to make it clear that the buck stops with me.
I bought and sold the players, and I have no excuses.
It's not like I'm inheriting somebody else's team, either.
‘If I get all the praise when we're winning, then I fully expect to take all the criticism when we're losing.
‘I expect the flak.
If we get beat, it's my fault.
If we're bottom of the table, it's my fault, not the chairman's.
‘The fact that I've achieved relative success at this club doesn't help me now, and I don't think it should be taken into account either.
‘I should be judged on a season by season basis.
If I'm doing the stuff, brilliant.
If I'm not doing the stuff…there's no sentiment in football.
‘If the chairman keeps me, it's not because he thinks I'm a good chap or the world's a nicer place when I'm here.
He's running the club to be successful and if I'm not, he'll get somebody else.
I fully accept those conditions — in fact, I welcome them.
‘I have a contract which has 18 months to go, and as far as I'm concerned, I'll be seeing out those 18 months.
But if somebody decides differently, there's nothing I can do about it.
‘My first year at the club was tough when we were down the bottom of Division Two, but this is the biggest challenge I've faced.
Ambition
‘It worries me and I spend a lot of time thinking about it what we should be doing, what we can do.
You worry about it all the time, and every manager's the same.
‘It's a hell of a job to win one in three games.
‘Of course, like every manager in the League, I would like to go out and spend £5-£6 million, but I can't.
Being restricted here does not make me a special case, though.
In fact, I have already spent £1m on a player this season, Chris Armstrong.
‘Without doubt, things started to turn for Palace when Ian Wright left to join Arsenal in September of last year.
Ask any manager what it would be like if they lost a striker who scores 20-25 goals a season.
‘He was THE club.
Without him, we wouldn't have won promotion when we did, and he was the last player I wanted to lose.
I'd have loved to have built a 10-year career around him, but I fully understand his reasons for going.
‘As a footballer, my ambition was to play next week, and now as a manager, where the average expectancy is two-and-a-half years, it is to manage a winning team next week.
‘I sleep nights.
I'm sure someone like Graeme Souness at Liverpool feels like I do when our teams lose, but expectations change when you're at the top compared to the bottom.
‘Failure is relative.
When you're losing at the bottom, failure is a reality — you're removed from the division you're competing in.
If you fail at the top, you can still have a good season.
‘Whatever happens, I can always use my economics degree.
My brain's not defunct — it's as sharp as it was when I was 21.
Luck
‘My ambition as a player was to win the title.
If I have a pipe dream now, it's to be involved in a Championship-winning side.
‘But if I don't achieve it, I won't think I've had a life unfulfilled.
‘The alternative of being an economics teacher in Liverpool doesn't equate with being the manager of a Premier League club.
Like any human being, I need to earn a living and I enjoy what I do.
Plus the money is attractive.
‘No, I won't be offering to take a 10 per cent pay cut.
I have a contract which I honour and I expect it to be honoured.
‘I genuinely didn't expect the team to be at the bottom of the Premier League.
I thought we would be lower mid-table in a comparatively comfortable position, but when you get 15 little things and you lump them together you get a better idea why we haven't done so well.
‘Geoff Thomas's form falling after the Blackburn move fell down is part of it, so is our start, plus Salako.
‘We get paid to win games, and if you don't win you're not doing your job properly.
Anybody in any walk of life knows how they feel when they're not doing their jobs properly.’
As so often happens, luck deserts you when you're struggling.
Opinion
Palace experienced that at Liverpool on Tuesday, when Mike Marsh was allowed to stay on after a professional foul on George Ndah.
Minutes later Marsh equalised from a penalty.
Coppell said: ‘If an impartial observer from the planet Mars had come to watch the game, they would have thought we deserved to win.
‘If John Barnes had been going through on goal and he was brought down by John Humphrey, he would have been sent off.
It was all down to the two relative people concerned.
Barnes, the England star, Ndah, a young, unknown kid.
‘The 5-0 defeat at Liverpool on Saturday could prove to be a watershed, just like our 9-0 defeat a few seasons ago.’
Coppell, who turned down an indirect approach from Sunderland, has not been helped by the public criticisms of Noades.
But Coppell does not want a public slanging match, saying: ‘People don't know what the relationship is like, and it would be incorrect of me to say anything else.
‘It's his club, he has his opinion, and it's not for me to be drawn into a public dialogue with him.
‘I've said what I've had to say in private— that's where it will remain.’
Salako cash row
Ben Bacon
CRYSTAL PALACE face a battle with the FA over their intention to claim compensation for the injury John Salako sustained on England duty last month.
Earlier this week, Salako had surgery in the US on the same knee which kept him out for most of last season and Palace are set to demand the FA pay his wages until he is fit again.
I understand the FA will vigorously contest the claim which will extend beyond the end of the season.
Palace manager Steve Coppell said: ‘Morally, the FA are responsible.
Presumably, a player wouldn't be included in a squad if he's not 100 per cent fit.
They accept him lock, stock and barrel.
‘Although he did something to his knee on the Monday after the Chelsea match with us, he met up with England on Friday and I'm told, trained Saturday, Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday.
‘Then on Wednesday morning, he was training with the odds and sods and was injured again.
He trained twice a day for the previous three days and Graham Taylor says he was doing everything.’
The FA's insurers may have to cover the 23-year-old winger's wages of £100,000-plus a year until he is fit, if Palace can prove their case, but the FA will argue it is not a new injury.
Maxwell in £1m bid to buy Barnet
Tony Roche
A MAN named Maxwell last night offered to buy crisis-hit Barnet Football Club.
A packed Underhill clubhouse heard George D Maxwell, no relation to the late tycoon Robert, promise, ‘to give the shirt off my back,’ during an impassioned plea to a supporters' EGM.
Maxwell, a Scot who lives locally, heads a business consortium ready to buy out controversial chairman Stan Flashman for £1 million.
He said: ‘I support this club, as do my six-year-old and 12-year-old sons, and I believe in its future.
‘We are ready to discuss our proposals with Mr Flashman whom we would like to see go quietly.
Scuffles
‘I understand why you are upset and concerned about recent events, but I must remind you, when he first became involved in this club, his input helped to keep it going.’
Recent events include a £50,000 FA fine for financial irregularities, the sacking of long-serving manager Barry Fry and Flashman's public scuffles with photographers.
Maxwell added: ‘Before we can talk in terms of shares we must ascertain whether the Inland Revenue aim to deal with Mr Flashman as an individual or if Barnet FC is also liable.’
Flashman did not attend the meeting, his wife Helen reporting that he was unwell.
The fans hoped Fry would attend, but he was instructed by solicitors to stay away.
A player representation, led by caretaker manager Edwin Stein, received a rapturous welcome.
Stein insisted: ‘Our priorities still lie in what we do on the pitch.
The last couple of upsets in this club were followed immediately by defeats by Lincoln and Darlington.
‘We must make sure this does not have the same effect at Halifax tomorrow.’
Meanwhile the supporters want to set up a petition encouraging Flashman to go.
Dons new year sale
Rob Shepherd
WIMBLEDON have put top players Warren Barton, Robbie Earle and John Scales up for auction in a desperate bid to raise £2 million by the New Year.
That's how much the hard-up south Londoners need to maintain their cashflow, and they expect Liverpool, Blackburn and Leeds to lead the bidding.
All three players could fetch the required £2m, so it could be a case of first come, first served, with Barton the favourite to go.
The Dons have already offered him to Leeds, who are desperate for a right-back to solve their defensive problems.
Arsenal and Blackburn, who also admire Earle, will watch any developments, while Liverpool were in touch with Wimbledon the minute the three players went on the open market.
Versatile
Barton, 23, an England B international who has also been linked with the Gunners, is a versatile player who has won rave notices since joining the Dons from Maidstone two years ago.
His price could soon rocket if Blackburn challenge Leeds and Arsenal for his signature.
Alternatively, Blackburn may lose patience in their wait for Nottingham Forest midfielder Roy Keane and plump for Earle.
Liverpool's interest is believed to be in either Barton or central defender Scales as Graeme Souness seeks to strengthen his defence.
Cantona is in no hurry
Graham Fisher
FRENCHMAN Eric Cantona last night eased the way for Manchester United manager Alex Ferguson's toughest selection problem of the season.
Cantona looked ahead to the derby game with Manchester City and said: ‘I think Sunday may be too early.’
That helps Ferguson, torn between letting his back-to-form strike force of Mark Hughes and Brian McClair continue their good work, and giving Old Trafford its first sight of the controversial £1.2 million newcomer.
Cantona, who flew to Paris for the top-rated chat show Sacree Soiree after his United debut in Lisbon on Tuesday, added: ‘I am fit and I enjoyed myself in the opener against Benfica.
‘But it takes a bit of time to get used to other players and the way of things.
Perhaps I need a few more games.’
It was Cantona's exclusion by Leeds against Arsenal that led to his shock transfer last week.
But the clear implication yesterday that he would settle for a place on the bench this weekend should dovetail nicely with Ferguson's thinking.
Several rucks at Elland Road confirmed Cantona's previous billing as the enfant terrible, but French TV viewers saw him live up to his new label as Manchester United's ‘Gallic Gazza’ after the striker burst into tears before an estimated 15 million audience.
Just as Paul Gascoigne was overcome with emotion at England's World Cup exit in Italia '90, Cantona couldn't hold back the tears when he was joined on the chat show sofa…by his grandmother.
A spokeswoman for French TV station TF1 who screened the show, said last night: ‘Eric is very close to his grandmother, who helped to bring him up as a child.
‘We invited him to appear and talk us through some film of him as a boy, and he didn't know she was going to be there.
‘Eric was so surprised he couldn't stop himself from crying.
Meanwhile, minor United casualties, skipper Bryan Robson and winger Lee Sharpe, should be fit for the derby, along with midfielder Paul Ince who missed the trip to Portugal with a groin injury.
Banned Butch awarded £18.5m
David Harrison
AMERICAN athlete Butch Reynolds was last night awarded a staggering £18.5 million in damages in his claim against the International Amateur Athletics Federation.
A judge in Columbus, Ohio, announced that Reynolds should receive £4.5m in lost earnings and £14m in punitive damages after he was banned for two years for allegedly failing a drugs test.
And a delighted Reynolds said: ‘I hope this proves my innocence.
The court's decision was based on facts.
I hope this will restore my name and my reputation.
‘I went through a lot of difficulties, both myself and my family.
Now I hope to relax a little more.
Stronger
‘My life has been hell — and I did nothing wrong.
I've proved that.
‘I stood up for what's right.
It has made me stronger and I'm looking to move on.
Time heals all wounds.’
The bombshell decision follows a two-year fight by the 400 metres world record holder against the IAAF since they alleged he tested positive for steroids in Monte Carlo in August 1990.
District judge Joseph Kinneary said in making his decision that the IAAF had acted maliciously in their treatment of the athlete.
He also issued a permanent injunction against the IAAF and the TAC, preventing them from keeping Reynolds out of competition on the basis of the test made in Monte Carlo on August 12, 1990 which proved postive for steroids.
And Reynolds said he planned to return to indoor competition in the next couple of months and hoped to compete in both the world indoor and outdoor championships.
But now Reynolds faces a new battle to force the sport's rulers to hand over the £18.5 million.
IAAF president Primo Nebiolo has always refused to accept any decision taken by the American courts and that was still their stance last night.
A statement from the IAAF's London headquarters said: ‘Our position remains the same and we are advised that the US courts have no jurisdiction over the IAAF.’
The IAAF extended the ban on Reynolds until January 1 following his appearance in the American trials.
And Brooks Johnson, Reynolds' coach, said the ruling ‘shows that the court system still can protect the underdog.’
‘It's about what faith, courage and the judicial system can do, because nobody gave this kid the time of day about this case,’ he added.
There was speculation in the sport that any IAAF assets held in America could be seized by the courts and handed over to Reynolds.
Andrew and Barnes battle for supremacy
Tony Roche
ROB ANDREW and Stuart Barnes, whose differing talents divide the nation's opinion, return to the Divisional Championship stage today contesting England's fly-half shirt.
Andrew captains London against reigning Divisional champions Midlands at Wasps, while Barnes leads South West against North at Leeds, significant re-instatements for both players in a competition used by the national selectors to formulate the Five Nations' squad.
This will be Andrew's first domestic competitive game for a year, following a spell with French club Tolouse.
His recent return to England brought with it a 120-day qualification ban and he admitted: ‘This game will be crucial because I need the extra edge.
I have missed too many quality matches already.
‘Since coming home, I have played for Wasps against Cambridge and for England against South Africa, so I need three tough Divisional fixtures to sharpen up for the international championship.
Criticise ‘People criticise the Divisional idea but I am a supporter.
It throws into combat the best players from all corners of the country and, unlike the old final trial game, it gives you a second chance if you play badly first time out.
‘This ban is a pain but I just have to get on with it and make the most of the top games I am allowed to play between now and the Five Nations'.’
Andrew, England's most capped fly-half with 50, remains first-choice in the eyes of manager Geoff Cooke but Barnes has applied increasing pressure with a string of excellent displays, including last Saturday's blinder for the Barbarians against Australia.
Barnes, who won the last of his eight caps in 1988, makes his first Divisional appearance since that year and coach Keith Richardson has handed him the captain's armband, worn by Bath team-mate Andy Robinson last season.
‘When I elected to withdraw from international consideration, I felt it sensible to also step away from the Divisionals,’ said Barnes.
‘It was important for younger players to show their capabilities.
‘But now that I have made myself available for England again it's important to be part of this Championship.’
Today's games received an extra boost last night when Rugby Union secretary Dudley Wood revealed that this summer's England tour of Canada and the US looks likely to be upgraded to full Test status.
With England player involvement in the British Lions squad to New Zealand expected to reach double figures, it was decided to send a ‘second team’ across the Atlantic to play as an uncapped England XV.
But England's recent games against both nations have been full Tests and the squad will include those available England players not selected by the Lions.
It is a massive incentive to the 75 players outside the current England squad, who are in action today.
Title hopefuls Cardiff facing crunch
Barry Lucas
SWANSEA'S 100 per cent Heineken League record is on the line against Cardiff at the Arms Park today.
And Cardiff coaching organiser Alex Evans knows his side must win if they are to justify their claims to the All-Whites' throne.
‘All League matches are vital, but we simply have to win this one if we are to have any chance of taking the title,’ said Evans.
‘But we shall not be altering our style of play just because it is Swansea.
‘We know they are a good side and I am sure they will come to Cardiff with a great deal of confidence, but our approach to any big game is exactly the same.’
Full-strength Cardiff, who include League top scorer Adrian Davies at outside half, are given a lift by the news that Swansea will be without two of their key performers.
The League leaders will be without full-back Tony Clement, who has a stress fracture of the shin, and prop Chris Clarke, who will be playing in the English Divisional Championship for the South West.
Former Neath centre Jason Ball takes over at full-back, while Andrew Metcalfe comes in to replace Clarke.
Strudwick double bid
Ray French
LONDON CRUSADERS boss Ross Strudwick is hoping for a double celebration this weekend.
His wife, Lisa, gave birth to a bouncing, baby boy on Thursday and tomorrow he hopes to steer the Crusaders into the third round of the Regal Trophy for the first time.
Strudwick, still desperately trying to put rugby league on the map in the capital, said: ‘It's been hectic this week, having to dash to and fro from the training ground to the hospital.
I've not had time to celebrate but the champagne corks will be popping on Sunday night if we beat Leigh.
‘And, if we do get the breaks, there is no reason why we cannot move on to our first ever final.’
The Crusaders' first round rout of Wakefield Trinity sent shockwaves through the sport.
But, so important is tomorrow's clash against First Division strugglers Leigh at Hilton Park that coach Strudwick is prepared to back his mouth with hard-earned cash.
‘We have very little money in the bank but this match is so important to us that, cash or no cash, I have booked the team into a posh hotel for Saturday night so that we can get the right preparation.
‘That win over Wakefield increased our profile in London ten-fold and, if we can get to the third round, then it would help us to attract sponsorship and the public.
Publicity is like oxygen to us.’
Sadly for Crusaders, ace goal-kicker and second row, Chris Smith, is ruled out with rib cartilage damage.
But rugby maverick, 34-year-old Tim Wilby, now guesting with his eighth club and who describes himself in rugby's who's who as a ‘socialite’, lends his distinctive skills and experience to the pack.
Meanwhile, over at Wilderspool for today's TV inter-county Regal Trophy clash between Warrington and Bradford Northern, Wire coach Brian Johnson springs a surprise in relegating last season's Great Britain tourist and Wales scrum-half, Kevin Ellis, to the substitutes' bench.
Aussie half-back star Greg Mackey switches to No 7 with Kiwi Test star Kelly Shelford taking the stand-off role.
Northern coach Peter Fox is forced to leave out his club's record £140,000 buy, Great Britain scrum-half Deryck Fox, because of strained stomach muscles.
English pair out
ENGLAND'S challenge in the Pakistan squash Open was shattered in the semi-finals yesterday.
Holder Jahangir Khan, in his first final of an injury-plagued year, meets world champion Jansher Khan todaysat for the Pakistan Open squash title.
Holder Jahangir Khan, the unseeded former world No 1 one who dropped to 26th in the world rankings owing to a back injury, comfortably beat Simon Parke, 15-8, 15-7, 15-10.
‘He put up a brave fight,’ Jahangir said after taking 53 minutes to beat Parke, one of England's leading prospects.
Top seed Jansher Khan dropped the opening game before disposing of fifth-seeded Peter Marshall, 12-15, 15-12, 15-6, 15-5.
Brit Colin slips up
BRITAIN'S Colin Montgomerie slipped down the field after a disappointing second round 73 in the Johnnie Walker Classic in Melbourne.
He finished the day five shots off the lead, which was held by Australian Robert Allenby.
Davis triumphs
STEVE DAVIS last night clinched a quarter-final date with world No 2 Jimmy White in the Coalite World Matchplay at Doncaster with a comfortable 9-3 win over Alain Robidoux.
Ace Agassi
ANDRE AGASSI cruised to a comfortable 6-1, 6-2, 6-2 triumph over Marc Rosset last night to give the United States a 1-0 lead over Switzerland in the Davis Cup final.
Palace deal off
CRYSTAL PALACE manager Steve Coppell has pulled out of a Pounds 150,000 deal to sign Yugoslavian international defender Vujadin Stanoikovic from Partizan Belgrade.
Jacko reward
TONY JACKLIN, the most successful captain in Ryder Cup history, will lead a 10-man European team against the West Indies next month for the Couglan Cup in Tobago.
Just the jop
Henry Rix
1.25:WONDER MAN'S hurdling form is in a different league to that of his three rivals and, providing he jumps round, he is sure to win.
He joined David Nicholson from Jenny Pitman at the start of the season, and made a most impressive chasing debut for his new trainer at Wolverhampton last month.
He is potentially one of the best two-mile novices in the country, and I will be very surprised if he is beaten.
1.55:NICKY Henderson's Bally Clover was backed off the boards before landing a comfortable success at Cheltenham, and is likely to be well supported again this afternoon.
However, BIG BEAT, 9-2 with Hills and Ladbrokes, could well have crept in on a very lenient mark.
David Elsworth's useful Flat performer hardly came off the bridle for a 25-length victory at Folkestone 12 days ago.
2.30:AS far as the handicapper is concerned, Valfinet is virtually a steering job.
The five-year-old will race off a 16lb higher mark in future handicaps after bolting up at Cheltenham.
But he really is not worth backing at around evens, and I prefer JOPANINI, tremendous each-way value at 6-1 with Ladbrokes.
Nicky Henderson's gelding is suited by a stiff two miles on this ground, and is well in on the same mark as his Cheltenham victory.
3.00:DAVID Nicholson's Waterloo Boy made an excellent start to the season when beating Katabatic at Exeter.
But he faces a much stiffer task than when winning this race last year, and he is most unlikely to cope with DEEP SENSATION.
Josh Gifford's gelding won the H & T Walker Gold Cup in a fast time at Ascot recently, and remains well treated despite being 2lb out of the handicap.
Uncle Ernie can fill the runner-up spot.
Outlook improves
THREE of today's four meetings are set to go ahead after an improvement in the weather.
The course at Sandown was passed fit after inspection and unless there is heavy rain the card should take place.
Chepstow, which hosts an important Gold Cup trial — the Rehearsal Chase — are also confident of staging racing.
Clerk of the Course Rodger Farrant said: ‘More unsettled weather is forecast but hopefully everything will be okay.’
Racing's tributes to Arthur
RACING yesterday paid tribute to Arthur Stephenson, one of the all-time great trainers, who died on Thursday night, aged 72.
From his County Durham base, he sent out over 3,000 winners and his greatest success came when The Thinker won the Cheltenham Gold Cup in 1987.
Stable jockey Chris Grant said: ‘He had been ill for a long while, but carried on because his horses were his life.’
Tough
Grant, whose wife Dawn died in October following a long battle with cancer, added: ‘The boss always used to say to me how tough Dawn was, but there was no one tougher than Arthur.’
Leading woman trainer Mary Reveley said: ‘Arthur helped me so much.
Northern racing will never be the same again.’
Greystoke handler Gordon Richards said: ‘Arthur was a great man who knew his job and loved his horses.’
A question mark now hangs over the future of the yard, but nephew Peter Cheesbrough has been granted a temporary licence to continue operations.
Aga loses his appeal
A RETURN to British racing by the Aga Khan remains as distant as ever after his attempt to challenge the Jockey Club's disqualification of 1989 Oaks winner Aliysa ended in failure yesterday.
Three Court of Appeal judges held that the ruling by racing's controlling body was not open to judicial review.
The decision was a crushing blow to the Aga, one of the sport's most powerful owners, who must now consider whether to halt his costly campaign.
Taylor blasts Kelly
by Ben Bacon
GORDON TAYLOR, boss of the players' union, last night led the attack on FA chief Graham Kelly for his backing of Brentford striker Gary Blissett.
Blissett was acquitted of causing grievous bodily harm by ‘cynically and deliberately’ thrusting his elbow into the face of Torquay's John Uzzell.
Kelly said Blissett had been involved in an ordinary aerial challenge, the kind he can see 200 times in four games a week.
But last night Taylor blasted: ‘What he said goes beyond his role of Chief Executive.
We should all be out to clean up the game.
Last year, 20 players were sent off for the use of elbows.
‘Uzzell is now unemployed and injured, and he's made a complaint to us about Kelly, which we'll report to the FA.’
Bosses reward
By Rob Shepherd
THE FA have agreed to let managers climb Wembley's 39 steps and receive momentoes at the end of this season's FA Cup Final.
It will be the first time bosses have been allowed to officially join in the celebrations and it marks a victory for Lawrie McMenemy, who has conducted a 15-year campaign on behalf of fellow managers.
The England No 2 first made moves when he led Southampton to FA Cup victory over Manchester United in 1976.
He said: ‘Managers deserve a momento, after all the referee and linesmen get one.’
The policy extends to all cup finals.
Tall order from Wragg
MACCLESFIELD manager Peter Wragg knows his non-Leaguers have one major task if they are to banish Stockport County from the Cup this afternoon — stop Kevin Francis.
The 6ft 7in striker leads County's attack alongside 6ft 1in Andy Preece, and Wragg knows the aerial assault force could be the key to the tie.
‘Stockport are a very big side,’ said Wragg.
‘There is no way we can compete with that.
The tallest player in our side is not even six foot!’
‘We are just going to have to work on cutting off their supply.’
GM Vauxhall Conference rivals Altrincham, meanwhile, have injury problems for their game against Port Vale at Moss Lane.
Midfielder Simon Rudge has a calf problem, while winger Steve Saunders and utility man Russell Green are nursing knee injuries.
Little Accrington Stanley of the HFS Loans League face Crewe at Blackburn, with manager Phil Staley admitting: ‘I'll be a bag of nerves.’
Tyson is eager to reclaim title
John Hiscock in Los Angeles
DON KING last night put a black cloud over the hopes of Lennox Lewis and other heavyweights hoping for a long reign as world champion, by claiming that Mike Tyson will be out of jail early next year.
Tyson is serving a six-year sentence in Indiana for raping Miss Black America contestant Desiree Washington in Indianapolis in July 1991.
But King He can expect to be freed in three years' time but Don King is convinced the former champion's conviction will be overturned at a forthcoming appeal.
His hearing is being handled by top defence lawyer Alan Dershowitz and King, Tyson's manager and boxing's most flamboyant promoter, declared: ‘As soon as he gets out Mike is going to set about proving he is the best heavyweight the world has ever seen.
‘Nobody will be able to stay in the ring with him.
He desperately wants to fight again and he's in great shape.
There will be no stopping him.
He's training every day and has kept at his fighting weight.
‘The heavyweight division had better look out — he will knock out Riddick Bowe and Lennox Lewis in the same night.’
King had more bad news for Lewis.
If, as expected, the Briton is crowned WBC champion next month, given that Bowe is opting to defy the organisation and defend his title against another challenger, King reckons There was more bad news for Lewis when King suggested that should he be installed as WBC champion in January in place of Bowe could have the shortest reign of any heavyweight champion in history.
Britain's first world heavyweight champion in nearly 100 years he could be stripped of his title almost immediately.
That's because the WBC is insisting Lewis makes his first title defence against its No 1 contender, Tony Tucker, who is King's man.
Lewis is already planning to fight George Foreman in April, followed by defences against Tommy Morrison and Frank Bruno, and King said: ‘Rules are rules and they must be obeyed.
Lewis and his people are only too happy to accept the WBC title, but they don't want to abide by WBC rules.
‘Lennox Lewis is a sensational fighter, but he is being badly advised.
‘His people are justifiably condemning Riddick Bowe for flouting the rules, but they are doing exactly the same thing.’
Wanderers meet again
by Mike Walters
MARTIN O'NEILL scored the Nottingham Forest goal to spoil Ossie Ardiles' debut in English football more than 14 years ago.
Tomorrow, on a Buckinghamshire industrial estate, the pair renew hostilities with Ardiles fighting to protect his credibility and O'Neill's managerial aptitude already drawing comparisons with his mentor, Brian Clough.
O'Neill's Wycombe Wanderers are making such a one-horse race of the Vauxhall Conference that West Bromwich Albion, latest exponents of Ardiles' beloved ‘diamond’ formation, will warily arrive at Adams Park.
And less than two years after Woking sent Brian Talbot to the Job Centre, Albion's Cup mettle will be subjected to nationwide scrutiny by Sky cameras.
Hot
O'Neill, the former Northern Ireland winger tipped to succeed Clough at the City Ground, still recalls the day he squared up to Ardiles and Ricky Villa, just weeks after they lapped the River Plate Stadium in Buenos Aires as World Cup winners.
‘It was Forest's first League game as defending champions and Tottenham's first with their two imaginative Argentinian signings,’ he says.
‘I can remember my goal, the ground bulging, the weather being unbearably hot — and Ossie being a breath of fresh air for English football, as he has been ever since.’
O'Neill could say the same of his own team.
Kitted out in old-fashioned sky -blue and navy quartered shirts instead of pinstripes, sequins and chevrons, Wycombe spurn modern methods of airborne football — as befits a disciple of Clough.
The Adams Park pitch, O'Neill will tell you, has exactly the same dimensions as Wembley's.
But in front of its biggest audience — the match is a 7,100 sell-out — it will look about as inviting as the Addams Family to Ardiles.
‘To protect the pitch, we keep off the grass all week, so we might as well play our football on it,’ says O'Neill in a resounding echo of Clough's philosophy.
And even when he's off-duty, O'Neill happily embraces the aura of a man most would consider a burden.
But if imitation is the sincerest form of flattery, O'Neill knows it is no guarantee of success.
One of his favourite after-dinner stories revolves around the 1979 League Cup final win against Southampton, when Clough surprised the players by lifting his customary bedtime curfew the night before Forest's descent on Wembley.
‘At half-time, we were trailing 1-0.
Cloughie marched in, wagged his finger and bellowed: ‘Don't you DARE use last night as an excuse for that performance!’
‘With the fear of God in us, we played passionately in the second half and ran out 3-2 winners, so Cloughie's unpredictability in letting us stay up late on the Friday night was vindicated.’
‘I tried the same approach when we played at Runcorn this season…and we lost.
So much for late nights.’
Hiccup
If that setback was a rare hiccup in Wycombe's drive towards household name status, O'Neill is at home among the comparative anonymity of non-League football.
‘I couldn't tell you much about Liverpool's players these days but ask me about Uxbridge's outside-right and I'll give you a Dimbleby lecture — if you can stay awake long enough,’ he jokes.
‘But that's a measure of how much I've had to learn my trade and Sunday's Cup tie is just another staging post on the learning curve.’
Sterling effort, Posh
Peterborough 1, Kingstonian 0.
A SCRAMBLED second-half goal by Worrell Sterling knocked out Kingstonian and completed the irony of an FA Cup replay no one wanted.
The Peterborough winger got a final touch to the ball after Kings defender David Kempton flung himself full length into the goalmouth mud in a valiant but unsuccessful bid to clear a low 68th-minute cross from Gary Cooper.
Ordered to be replayed behind closed doors by the FA after an inquiry into last week's coin-throwing incident, the game posed as many questions as it answered.
Both managers were scathing afterwards, Peterborough's Chris Turner insisting the decision could spark similar incidents later on.
‘The FA should have been brave and made a decision either to eliminate Peterborough or allow the 9-1 result to stand.
What happens now if a similar situation arises later in the season with an object thrown say in the semi-final?’
Turner admitted difficulties in motivating his side.
‘It was a game no one wanted to play and I now have the added problem of a key defender, Lee Howarth, collecting a bad knee injury.’
Kings boss Chris Kelly added: ‘I didn't want to play at all and feel that on a neutral ground with our display against Peterborough we could have pulled off a shock win.
‘My lads did all that could be asked of them, especially as a couple of them had to work all night in order to get time off to play.
I was also very pleased with the way Adrian Blake handled himself.’
Posh now travel to Plymouth for Wednesday's second-round tie.
England still hopeful
by Graham Otway
OFFICIALS at Lord's were last night insistent they can win the right to stage the 1995 World Cup despite fierce opposition from Pakistan, India and Sri Lanka.
As details of the respective bids were unveiled in London and Delhi, TODAY's revelations that the TCCB has been outmanoeuvred by the sub-continent were confirmed.
The joint bid from Pakistan, India and Sri Lanka offers a Pounds 100,000 carrot for the 17 crucial votes of the ICC's Associate members, compared to England's £65,000.
Yet the TCCB, which has the backing of independent ICC chairman Sir Colin Cowdrey, remains optimistic of success when the issue is debated in London in February.
Spokesman Ken Lawrence said: ‘Despite what has been written in TODAY, we still expect to win the vote.’
The TCCB hopes to persuade the world's cricketing nations that England has more to offer than the sub-continent apart from hard cash.
Their submission highlights the ease of travel around the UK, the availability of top class practice facilities and warm-up opposition, and longer hours of summer daylight in which to complete matches.
The TCCB also points out that its £300,000 guarantee to Test nations is double the figure paid by Australia and New Zealand early this year.
Another argument is that the planned £250,000 prize fund guarantees the players, as well as administrators, a bumper tournament.
Yet with cash up front the main priority among the cricket world's developing nations, I understand the TCCB may try a new tactic.
Although the English bid offers only £150,000 to help the Associate members stage their qualifying tournament — compared to India's £200,000 — the TCCB may, in a gesture of good will, guarantee that cash, even if they do not stage the World Cup.
Biggins in bid to turn back years
by Adrian Holloway
WOKING hero Mark Biggins has been dumped on the bread-line by the recession since their epic FA Cup run two years ago, but at Brighton todaySAT, non-League football's most flamboyant midfielder will be back in the giant-killing business.
Extrovert Biggins is one of five survivors from the side that thumped West Brom 4-2 away and then lost 1-0 to Everton in a fourth-round ‘home’ tie, switched to Goodison Park to ensure a big pay day.
Woking then splashed out £300,000 on ground improvements, but two years on, painter decorator Biggins is really struggling.
‘When we played Everton I had four people working with me,’ recalls Biggins, ‘but now I'm working on my own for the VAT man.
I've become skint while Woking have gone on in leaps and bounds.
‘My life's a battle to pay the bills.
It's a relief to escape at the end of the week by playing football.’
Gifted
Biggins is regarded as the GM Vauxhall Conference's most gifted midfielder, and with Brighton sliding down the Second Division and £2.5 million in the red, the 29-year-old says he is determined to put on a show that will humiliate the home side.
‘Brighton are struggling just like West Brom were when we beat them.
They sacked Brian Talbot as a result.
We know Brighton are on a hiding to nothing and Barry Lloyd's job will be on the line if we win.’
Woking manager Geoff Chapple is confident Biggins will run rings round Brighton's midfield, declaring: ‘Mark can beat anyone.
At the Goldstone I bet he'll go past three or four players, and then lose the ball taking on a fifth instead of putting our strikers in.
He doesn't treat anything seriously.
If he turns up late he thinks it is funny.’
Biggins says: ‘I'm a flair player.
I don't defend or follow the coaching book.
In fact, I hate playing in Britain because I've always wanted to play in Spain or Belgium where they'd understand me.
There isn't much scope for skill here.’
But before he thinks about drifting off to the sun, Biggins wants another taste of cup glory.
‘Against Everton, I just couldn't get used to playing against these TV stars.
When I ran into Kevin Sheedy, I just looked at him.
I was in awe of the man.
It was like being in the Twilight zone.’
Woking expect 4,000 fans to travel to what should be Brighton's biggest gate of the season.
Wide of the mark
INDIA'S six-wicket victory over a South African President's XI in Pietermaritzburg last night was marred by unruly crowd scenes.
The day-night match finished with both teams fleeing from the pitch after home captain Peter Rawson, by prior arrangement with umpires and batsmen, deliberately bowled four byes.
The previous ball had been stopped just short of the boundary by some members of the crowd who had engulfed the pitch.
Rawson then bowled the next ball wide of the stumps before joining his team in a frantic dash for the pavilion.
Pakistan opened the World Series triangular tournament in Perth with a five-wicket victory over the West Indies.
Anfield hopes KO'd
by Des Kelly
LIVERPOOL'S hopes of a European reprieve were shattered yesterday at a FIFA meeting in Switzerland.
World football's ruling body were asked to unravel the case of Spartak Moscow's Mikhail Rusayev, who appeared in the first two rounds of the Cup Winners' Cup, including the 6-2 aggregate win over Liverpool, without compulsory international clearance.
FIFA said Rusayev's registration should be accepted, ‘even though no transfer certificate was issued’.
Confused
UEFA spokesman Rene Eberle added: ‘There is no need for us to intervene.’
Liverpool chief executive Peter Robinson does not expect to appeal.
Meanwhile, Stuart Barlow will provoke a confused reaction from family and friends in his first Merseyside derby on Monday night.
The 24-year-old butcher's boy was born and bred a Liverpool fan but leads the Everton attack.
‘It's a big day for me and my family,’ he said.
‘I grew up supporting Liverpool and they'll all be wearing red and white on Monday night — even though they'll be shouting for me.
Erik boosts Shelf life
by Ben Bacon
ERIK THORSTVEDT is playing his way towards a new contract at Tottenham.
The Norweigan international goalkeeper has had contract talks with chief executive Terry Venables and looks set to get a new deal after a string of brilliant performances.
Just weeks ago, though, Thorsvedt looked a certain departure next summer when his present agreement expires, but a remarkable resurgence in form is likely to extend his Shelf life.
Before Wednesday's Coca-Cola defeat at Nottingham Forest, Thorsvedt had gone five games without conceding a goal, and he puts his run down to a new carefree approach to the job which Chelsea will experience today.
Thorstvedt said: ‘If they throw me out, at least I'll be thrown out smiling.
I'm certainly in the best form since I came to Tottenham.
I put it down to greater maturity and not worrying.
I just try and enjoy myself.
‘At only 30, I still feel I've got as few years left and my family and I would like to stay in England.
My daughter goes to school here, and I love my job.
But there's no rush as far as I'm concerned.’
‘Tottenham is a big, big club and wherever you go is likely to be a step down.
Who knows what might pop up, though.’
Coach Ray Clemence added: ‘Erik has worked at his weaknesses and on current form he's up there with Neville Southall, Tony Coton and David Seaman.’
was intrumental in bringing Thorstvedt to Tottenham and the former England keeper also believes he's enjoying the best form of his life.
‘Erik is the first to admit that when he first joined us, he found the physical demands a bit difficult,’ said Clemence.
‘Eriks worked at his weaknesses and on current form he's up there with Neville Southall, Tony Coton and David Seaman.‘
Tottenham have an injury crisis and are without five regulars, including Gordon Durie and Paul Allen, so Darren Anderton is available for selection, and 18-year-old Sol Campbell is also in a 16 man squad.
Jason Cundy gets his first chance to play against his former club since moving from Stamford Bridge last season —‘I still don't know why they sold me — I thought I was there for my career, ‘he says — but Meanwhile, in-form Chelsea will be without the suspended Mick Harford.
Recipe for success
Graham Fisher
IF Ryan Giggs can put three nagging questions to the back of his mind at 4pm tomorrow, Manchester United's two wide boys will cut neighbours City to ribbons at Old Trafford.
The recipe is enticing: Lee Sharpe on the left, Giggs on the right, Bryan Robson behind them — and three strikers scrapping for the right to cash in.
United boss Alex Ferguson spelled out the facts of life that might be occupying his 18-year-old showman.
‘Teams know about him now and he is still learning,’ said Ferguson.
‘Also, he is playing on the right and thinking ‘what's going on here?
I'm supposed to be a left winger’.
Thirdly, he is not getting a game for Wales.
‘Things like that will be going through his mind.
All young players must accept periods like this in their early days.
They need to take a deep breath.’
Sammy McIlroy, once an Old Trafford prodigy himself, reckons Giggs is the most exciting player he has seen for years.
‘He makes seating redundant because he gets fans on their feet.’
Force
But if the kid from Cardiff isn't too happy at his shunt to starboard — to make way for a revitalised Sharpe — the twin source of young skills looked a devastating force in the victories against both Oldham and Arsenal.
Sharpe has been down with a calf strain this week but he trained yesterday and does not look in danger.
Ferguson added: ‘Lee has got his sparkle back.
It was no coicidence that he and Robson played a great part in the win over Oldham that ended our lean spell.
And he was superb again at Highbury, a real handful for their defenders.
‘Sharpe is instrumental to our regained confidence.
The performance at Arsenal was an indicator that we are back on song, and that is how we intend to stay.’
Buoyant Ferguson has decided who will chase the goals but would not reveal his hand yesterday.
I still believe that Mark Hughes and Brian McClair will kick off with Eric Cantona on the bench.
It is a tricky decision, though.
The manager can't justifiably desert either of his regulars at the moment but knows that if he walked the street and canvassed the fans there would be only one answer: bring on the Frenchman!
I'll make a further prediction that if ‘Eric the Enigma’ is substitute, Ferguson will pray for the chance to bring him on and bask in the reception for a stylist after Old Trafford's heart.
Two consecutive wins and the signing of the year have lifted a great weight from the place.
But the Manchester derby is no scene for false optimism.
Talent
City have won twice on the trot away from home — scoring six goals in the process — and have talent that could flatten the party like a ton of bricks.
Mike Sheron did not cost £1.2 million and he doesn't speak French but no-one in the Premier League has made swifter progress this season.
The 20-year-old from St Helens scored five goals in four games to put City back on course and the two at Goodison were among the best seen anywhere this year., both the products of nerveless execution.
Sheron has collected his first Under-21 cap and his first Young Eagle of the Month Award.
‘If I'm dreaming I hope I don't wake up for a long time,’ he says.
‘This past month has been easily the most rewarding and satisfying of my career.’
Says his admiring boss Peter Reid: ‘Mike has done really well since he came in.
He's the type of player to blossom in the heat of a derby match, a quality finisher.
We'll find out on Sunday — and I can tell you he's looking forward to it.’
City go into the 117th League derby without a win in them since their 5-1 landslide victory at Maine Road under former manager Mel Machin three years ago.
Ironically, their scorers that day — Oldfield (2), Morley, Bishop and Hinchcliffe — have all departed.
City player-manager Peter Reid, still a rookie in the hot seat, has done a fine job since replacing Howard Kendall.
Victory tomorrow would be a sweet first to savour, crushing any doubts among City's sometimes cynical following.
Aldo treble stuns sad Hammers
by Tony Kell
Tranmere Rovers 5, West Ham United 2.
SHELL-SHOCKED West Ham missed the chance to steal second place from Division One promotion rivals Tranmere last night after being shot down by Rovers' ace marksman John Aldridge.
Tranmere Rovers went nap in front of their biggest gate of the season to inflict a heavy defeat on promotion chasing West Ham.
Prenton Park's biggest crowd of the season saw the Republic of Ireland international grab a hat-trick and take his tally for the season to 17 goals, as Rovers struck twice at the death to clinch the points.
Clive Allen gave West Ham some hope with a 79th-minute goal, his 14th of the season, but then Aldridge inspired the Merseysiders in a grandstand finish.
led wo late Tranmere strikes made it safe for the Merseysiders as they consolidated their second place in the Division One table.
Aldridge said: ‘These are the nights you savour in football.
West Ham are no mugs and to get five against them was terrific.
‘It was a tremendous game for the fans.
We have surprised even ourselves this season, but there is a long way to go yet.’
A dejected Allen added: ‘You can't give John Aldridge chances like that — he is a quality finisher.
Everyone went away thoroughly entertained, but it was a very disappointing result as far as we are concerned.’
The Hammers produced some classy football at times, but Tranmere were equally impressive.
and caught them out with some incisive breaks.
West Ham boss Billy Bonds said: ‘You could have driven a coach through our defence tonight.’
All credit to Tranmere — their finishing was superb.’
Kenny Irons was outstanding in midfield for Rovers, and Dave Higgins and Steve Vickers impressive in central defence.
Kevin Keen worked tirelessly for the Londoners and Alvin Martin was prominent in defence despite the heavy scoreline.
Aldridge went clear from a lobbed pass by Neil McNab and rounded keeper Ludek Miklosko for his first in the 17th minute.
But West Ham levelled four minutes later with a superb half-volley by Trevor Morley from 25 yards.
following a cross by Julian Dicks.
It was his 13th goal of the season.
Superb
Tranmere regained the lead in the 49th minute through Kenny Irons as the Hammers looked in vain for offside.
Then it was Irons who set up Aldridge for the third with a superb pass form inside his own half.
Allen pulled one back for West Ham to give them hope of at least a point.
But in the 89th minute, Chris Malkin latched onto a poor clearance by Miklosko and set up Aldridge for his hat-trick.
Just 60 seconds later, Malkin headed in the fifth.
Graham feels the pressure
Mike Walters
GEORGE GRAHAM last night startled Arsenal by admitting he was nowhere near a job for life at Highbury.
The Gunners travel to Southampton today in search of their first point for a month after two successive Premier League defeats.
And manager Graham confessed: ‘In football, there is no such thing as a job for life.
‘Managers are only safe for a year at a time at maximum.
If you are unsuccessful over a period of time there's always a chance you will part company.’
Striker Andy Clarke last night warned Norwich that Wimbledon were in the mood for another upset.
‘We only seem to start playing when faced with teams near the top of the table,’ he admitted.
Dons boss Joe Kinnear has confirmed he must sell players to ease their cash crisis, as revealed yesterday in TODAY.
‘I want to keep my best players as long as possible,’ he said.
‘But if the phone rings you have to listen to offers.’
Sheffield United boss Dave Bassett, whose side travel to Selhurst Park, backed underfire Crystal Palace manager Steve Coppell.
Bassett said: ‘What directors and fans sometimes forget is the good times a manager has given them.’
Former caretaker-manager Gary Johnson is ‘shattered’ after Ian Atkins was appointed boss of Cambridge.
Johnson said: ‘I feel let down.’
Sitting targets
David Harrison
FOOTBALL managers have asked the FA to take them out of the firing line of the terrace hate mobs.
Dug-outs at some grounds have become chambers of horror, with visiting soccer bosses the sitting duck targets for verbal and, sometimes, physical abuse.
The demand for action comes in a week when John Bond has been advised to stay away from his former club, Burnley, for Shrewsbury's FA Cup tie this afternoon because of fears of reprisals from angry Turf Moor fans.
Aston Villa manager Ron Atkinson could also run the gauntlet of hostility at Hillsborough today when he goes back to the club he left under acrimonious circumstances two seasons ago.
Crowd violence towards players is another area of concern after the FA ordered a replay of the Cup tie between Peterborough and Kingstonian when the visitors' keeper was knocked out by a coin thrown from behind his goal.
Now the Managers' Association have been invited to outline the problems at a meeting of the FA's crowd control committee in February.
Chairman Howard Wilkinson said: ‘There is a strong feeling among managers and players that rules applying to them are not being applied to other people, namely supporters around the dug-outs.
‘We feel they are the targets for extreme abuse.
In some places you get fans banging on the top of the dug-out and at others they lean forward and actually shout into managers' faces.
‘The Managers' Association have written to the FA suggesting this is an area that needs to be looked at for the good of football.
The association would like to see minimum standards for visiting managers' accommodation on the sides of pitches.
‘In some cases managers are stuck in the middle of supporters with only a couple of inches of space between them,’ said chief executive John Camkin.
Meanwhile Atkinson laughed off any fears of a hostile reception at Hillsborough and said: ‘The only extra protection I want is thermal underwear.
It gets a bit chilly up there.’
The Villa boss faced ‘Judas’ taunts when he returned to Hillsborough at the start of last season because of his walk-out 18 months ago.
But he added: ‘I'm more frightened of their team than anything else.
It's going to be a bloody hard game.
‘They've got a good a squad of players as any in the division.’
Reynolds now faces a life ban
David Harrison
BUTCH REYNOLDS faces a lifetime ban from athletics after winning an £18 million damages claim against the IAAF.
The sport's governing body is also considering suing the American athlete for libel over accusations he made during a campaign to clear his name after he tested positive for steroids in Monte Carlo in August 1990 and was subsequently banned for two years.
A judge in Columbus, Ohio, announced on Thursday that Reynolds should receive £18.5 million from the IAAF for loss of earnings and impunitive damages.
But yesterday the IAAF launched a fierce counter-attack against the 400m world record holder, insisting American courts could not over-rule their decision to ban Reynolds.
Risk
A statement from their London headquarters said Reynolds had ‘In continuing this campaign against the IAAF, he ‘had made several libellous allegations about the IAAF and its officials.
‘Initially the IAAF took no legal action against Mr Reynolds.
regarding these outbursts as representing merely the frustration of a justifiably punished athlete.
‘However, the next council meeting the IAAF will consider the possibility of commencing proceedings against him for libel and taking further disciplinary action.’
The statement added the IAAF had stressed the serious problems that could arise from interference by civil courts, and such interference posed a grave risk and could ‘create serious damage to major sports everywhere, particularly in the US for the Olympic Games in Atlanta in 1996.’.
Faldo's bugged
by Bill Blighton
NICK FALDO was at the centre of a heated row as he surrendered the lead in the $1.65 million Sun City Challenge in South Africa yesterday.
The Open Champion described a delayed rules decision as ‘pathetic’ after alleging that home favourite and joint halfway leader Ernie Els had breached regulations when he used his putter to brush away a beetle on the second green.
Faldo, who struggled to a 74 and fourth place, said the row wrecked his concentration.
He added: ‘If somebody had known the bloody rules, they could have told us straight away and it would have been no problem at all.
We could have got on with our golf — it was pathetic.’
Faldo could also be disciplined after being heard to swear on TV when a spectator took a photograph at the ninth and Faldo scored a six.
The World No 1, who is bidding for the $1 million top prize after finishing runner up three times, was also upset with a patriotic gallery backing Els.
Brushing away an obstacle on the line of a putt is against European and US tour rules, but it was ruled acceptable in South Africa where it is dangerous to meddle with insects.
City slickers aiming for net profit
Having a ball…
Manchester City player-manager Peter Reid shares a joke with Mike Sheron yesterday, and is banking on his ace winger to hit the goals which will give City the last laugh on rivals United tomorrow.
Unlucky Kitt
START number 13 proved unlucky for American skier A J Kitt, with the season's first World Cup downhill at Val d'Isere abandoned due to bad weather after he had set the best time.
Jones blow
HULL'S Mark Jones last night lost an appeal against a six-match ban imposed by the Rugby League disciplinary committee.
He will now miss Wales' December 13 international against France.
Windies crushed
WORLD champions Pakistan yesterday opened the World Series triangular cricket tournament with a five-wicket victory over the West Indies in Perth.
But the win, achieved with four balls to spare, was clouded by an injury to opening batsman Aamir Sohail, who strained a thigh muscle and could miss half the series.
Pace pair Waqar Younis and Wasim Akram, plus leg-spinner Mushtaq Ahmed, helped restrict the West Indies to 197-9.
Brian Lara hit 59, the same score as opposition skipper Javed Miandad, who steered Pakistan to 199-5 in the final over.
Man-of-the-match Akram added an unbeaten 21 to bowling figures of 4-46.
Waddle says non
by David Alexander
CHRIS WADDLE is staying at Sheffield Wednesday, despite a £3 million bid to take him back to France.
Manager Trevor Francis confirmed yesterday that he had turned down the huge offer from Toulon.
It follows Wednesday's refusal to sell striker David Hirst to Manchester United for £3.5m.
Francis was adamant that if his top players left, he would leave.
Now, with the board backing his ambition to put Wednesday into the top bracket, he will sign a new contract on Monday.
The 38-year-old player-manager has accepted a deal that will keep him at Hillsborough for the next three-and-a-half years.
‘It's great for me to be able to turn down offers worth £6.5m for two players in a fortnight,’ he said.
‘I've spoken to Chris and he's happy here.’
Francis is determined to take Wednesday to the top but he has handed the credit for starting the process to Ron Atkinson, his predecessor.
‘He brought good players in, paid bigger wages and established a pleasing style of play.
My aim has been to continue where he left off,’ he added.
Wednesday meet Aston Villa today — and Atkinson's side are Francis's tip for the title.
Irate Crosby rounds on Roker critics
by John Wardle
MALCOLM CROSBY emerged from crisis talks with chairman Bob Murray yesterday, insisting he's still in charge at Sunderland.
The Roker boss declared: ‘There is no rift.
It's time to put the lid on all the talk.’
Crosby confirmed that he had offered to stand down, if results didn't improve following last month's televised defeat by Leicester.
‘But the chairman didn't want that and results have improved anyway,’ he said.
The Sunderland manager has lived with speculation over his job since signing a one-year contract at the end of last season.
Manchester United's Bryan Robson is the latest to be linked with the Wearsiders.
But Crosby's future only came to a head this week when he reacted angrily to claims of an approach for Crystal Palace boss Steve Coppell.
He said: ‘I have talked to the chairman and he has assured me that there is no truth in the Crystal Palace thing.
‘The last thing I need is to keep arguing with the chairman.
‘My job is to get the players right for the game against Barnsley.
I have told them not to get involved in what's going on at the club.’
Chairman Murray had said he was looking for an apology from Crosby over rumours linking the Sunderland boss in a reunion with former manager Denis Smith at Bristol City.
But Crosby replied: ‘I don't need to be talking about apologies.
‘If I was out of work I'm sure Denis would be the first person to try and help me.
But I want to get it right here if I can.’
Meanwhile, Kevin Keegan yesterday praised unsung hero Kevin Scott as Newcastle prepared to put even more distance between themselves and the chasing pack on top of the First Division.
Special
Up to 7,000 fans from Tyneside will visit Notts County today.
And Keegan said: ‘The fans here are something special.
They can only help us.
You need only look at Scott's form to see that.
‘Last season he felt the pressure from the terraces when the team was struggling and he was skipper.
‘But this year he has just gone out and done the job.
He thrives on the charged atmosphere now and the bigger the game, the better he plays.’
Forest Webb of intrigue
David Harrison
NEIL WEBB returns for Nottingham Forest today as manager Brian Clough makes a surprise shake-up of a winning team.
The former England midfielder, who missed the 2-0 Coca-Cola Cup victory against Tottenham on Wednesday because he is Cup-tied, will face Leeds at Elland Road.
But it means Irish international Roy Keane moves from his favoured central midfield role to the right wing in place of Kingsley Black.
Clough believes Webb's presence is more important.
The Forest boss said: ‘I was staggered by his performance against Southampton last week, particularly with the way he kept going.’
Leeds captain Gary McAllister has pledged himself to the champions.
The Scottish international midfielder has dismissed speculation linking him to Arsenal and Rangers.
Sheffield United manager Dave Bassett has warned Crystal Palace: Lay off Steve Coppell.
He said: ‘What directors and fans sometimes forget is the good times a manager has given them.’
Middlesbrough's Derek Whyte aims to put the brake on Blackburn dangerman Alan Shearer.
It promises to be a battle royal featuring Scotland's key defender and England's most potent attacker.
But Whyte said: ‘It won't worry me.
I played against Italy recently and I'm used to facing quality strikers.’
Andrew provides tasty trailer
by Tony Roche
HOLLYWOOD would go down on one knee for the exclusive rights to Saturday's England fly-half qualifier at Gloucester between Rob Andrew and Stuart Barnes.
On this evidence, Andrew will have to drown in incompetence while Barnes proves he can walk on water to change the England selectors' opinion that the Wasps stand-off must remain their No 1 decision-maker.
Andrew, who led and inspired London to a 26-16 triumph over reigning Divisional champions Midlands, next weekend confronts triumphant South West captain Barnes, who masterminded something historic in Yorkshire.
Bath's stand-off was the brain behind the South West's 29-9 over the North, setting up a virtual title decider at Kingsholm on Saturday.
Andrew relishes the challenge: ‘You have to believe you are the best in your role in the country and I know Stuart shares that view.
I accept he believes he should be England's fly-half.
‘Yes, the pressure on me has increased since Stuart decided to come back on the England scene, but this is not the first time he has squeezed the position and I accept that challenge from a top-class player.’
While Barnes was inspiring the South West, Andrew's use of boot, brain and vision made ribbons of the Midlands line-out superiority.
Visiting skipper Dean Richards was forced to admit: ‘He was the decisive factor.’
Andrew added: ‘This was the perfect return to domestic rugby for me and a fine display by an experimental side.’
Jump start
AUSTRIA'S Werner Rathmayr capped a brilliant ski jumping weekend by winning his second straight World Cup competition in Falun, Sweden — twice hitting 114 metres.
Bath strike it lucky
SUBSTITUTE Paul Randall earned non-League Bath City a 2-2 draw with Northampton yesterday with a late goal he did not even see.
With just eight minutes remaining, Randall, 34, curled over a cross which fooled Cobblers keeper Barry Richardson and dropped into the net.
completely lost for the ball to drop gently into the net.
‘I turned away because I didn't know where the ball had gone.
It was only when I heard the crowd roar I knew it was in,’ he said.
Andy Saville hit a hat-trick for HARTLEPOOL as they beat SOUTHPORT 4-0 yesterday.
UEFA in new bid
UEFA ARE ready to listen to radical new proposals for a European super league, but only if it benefits all clubs and not just the rich elite.
Lennart Johansson, UEFA president, said they are ready to discuss plans put forward by Englishman Alex Fynn, a former advertising executive.
But Johansson warned: ‘If somebody has ideas he should know we are always prepared to discuss it.
‘I cannot see any purpose in just saying no to every new idea.
‘But I cannot see the benefit of a league which makes the already rich richer and the other ones poorer.’
Fynn is proposing the formation of a UEFA premier league and three regional divisions — with promotion and relegation between them — to replace the European Champions' Cup and the Cup Winners' Cup.
Unhappy return for Ripley
David Alexander
Middlesbrough 3, Blackburn Rovers 2
STUART RIPLEY could hardly wait to get back on the Ayresome Park pitch but, once there, was glad to get off again, writes David Alexander.
For the powerful winger, who became a Boro promotion hero and then a £1.3 million Blackburn buy in the summer, the homecoming was just too much.
Boro's crowd gave their local boy a warm welcome, so warm it burned him off.
They killed him with kindness, and it didn't do Blackburn much good either.
Ripley, substituted 22 minutes from the end, explained how he was trapped: ‘I felt totally drained.
‘It was the strangest game I've played in — as if the crowd had stuck a big syringe in me and sucked all the energy out,’ he said.
‘I was fine until I got on the pitch but then it all drained away and the game just passed me by.
‘People in football will understand — Lennie Lawrence told me I needed to be superhuman to perform in that atmosphere.
‘It was all very emotional and I didn't handle it well at all.’
Ripley's failure was part of a team malfunction that left Blackburn beaten for the first time away from home in the League.
They gave the ball away far too much in a bad spell after half-time and were destroyed by John Hendrie's 15-minute hat-trick.
It made five goals in nine League games for the 29-year-old Scot and earned high praise from Lawrence.
‘He can become our Gordon Strachan over the next few years,’ said the Boro manager.
‘He'll have that sort of influence, and score more goals than Strachan.
‘Scotland should think about him because they don't have players who can go past defenders.
‘When I arrived here I was going to move him on.
I'd never rated him, but couldn't have been more wrong.
I want him here until the end of his career.’
Hendrie, who has had six clubs, said: ‘It's just nice to settle somewhere.
I was at Leeds and Newcastle for just a year and you didn't have time to get your boots dirty.’
Blackburn led through a sweet 43rd minute strike from the impressive Jason Wilcox, before Boro sub Jamie Pollock changed the game.
The 18-year-old's enthusiasm made the first and third chances for Hendrie after 51 and 66 minutes.
The Scot drove in his second after 54.
Blackburn's second came after 74 minutes with a Jimmy Phillips own goal.
Pollack, known as Jaws because of his ball-hunting capability, certainly took a bite out of Blackburn's title hopes.
But Kenny Dalglish revealed no concern at losing.
Dalglish made his playing debut for Liverpool at Boro and he said: ‘This was a hard place to come to then, and it's hard now.
‘It was disappointing to play so well at times and then lose it in that one spell.
We've got to learn to concentrate, but these are honest players so I'm not worried.’
MoM: John Hendrie, Boro (graft and goals).
Eric sparks United bid
Rob Shepherd
Manchester United 2, Manchester City 1
THEY are starting to talk about the Championship again at Old Trafford.
Leeds fans will tell you it was the arrival of Eric Cantona at Elland Road which proved the decisive factor in them lifting the title last season.
And even if it was hardly the most spectacular of debuts by the French international, his sheer presence seems to be bringing the best out of United — and especially Mark Hughes.
Last week, when Cantona sat watching in the stands at Arsenal, Hughes secured victory with a poacher's goal — something of a rarity in his scoring repertoire.
Doubts
But yesterday he produced his forte — a spectacular strike.
It came in the 37th minute, when he cleverly chested the ball down, and from 28 yards unleashed a fearsome, left-foot volley which flew beyond Tony Coton.
Alex Ferguson might have doubts about his ability as a team player, but there is no denying that, when the mood takes him, Hughes can be a devastating striker.
As the United faithful saluted him, with the familiar cry of ‘Hughsie, Hughsie’, Cantona looked on in admiration, but must have felt a little out of place.
His much awaited debut, while extremely profitable for United, was rather low-key.
for the flamboyant Frenchman.
Yet if his presence has the effect of spurring Hughes and the rest to play, then his arrival will be £1.2 million well spent.
Indeed, Leeds fans will swear that their championship success last season was inspired when Cantona was lured from France, via Sheffield Wednesday.
Not necessarily for what he did on the pitch, although the trickery and goals certainly helped but more importantly the presence of the man, and excitement he inspired amongst his colleagues.
Now having overcoming the shock of his surprise defection from the other side of the Pennines, it appears he might well have the same effect on United.
There was an urgency about United's forward line yesterday, in the knowledge that Cantona was sitting on the bench.
In fact, he made his entrance after the interval because of a foot injury to Ryan Giggs, and took his place alongside Hughes, with Brian McClair dropping into a deeper position on the right.
Cantona tried hard to get involved, and within five minutes might have stolen the show, had it not been for a fine interception by Keith Curle following a fine run and cross down the left by Lee Sharpe.
After that, Cantona strove desperately to get in the game.
Even if his colleagues ignored some of the good runs he made, City's defenders certainly did not.
Menace
That in itself emphasised what value he can be to United — his sheer danger and menace forces the opposition to follow him, which inevitably creates space for others.
That was certainly the case in the 73rd minute when Hughes applied the killer blow.
, because unusually he had sufficient time to compose and measure his shot.
Can Cantona do for United what he did for Leeds last season, then?
Certainly, yesterday the signs were promising.
But But this victory — which lifts Ferguson's team into fifth place, nine points behind leaders Norwich, who visit Old Trafford next Saturday — had more to do with the midfield prowess of Paul Ince.
Derbies, wherever they are played, have a habit of being won by the team which best combines finesse with physical power in what is always a hostile environment.
Last week, such qualities enabled Paul Gascoigne to be the hero in the duel of the eternal city.
In yesterday's rain-sodden arena, it was Ince who was the inspirational figure.
While Brian Robson, Steve McMahon, and in the second half Peter Reid, tried to kick anyone around them, Ince took a firm grip on the game.
No more so than in the 20th minute, when Steve Bruce rolled the ball back to him and from 25 yards he hit a low, left-foot shot through a crowd of players to give United the lead.
It was his first goal of the season.
But not content with that, the England international also cut out at least two of City's most dangerous attacks as they sought an equaliser.
Despite McMahon's attempts to intimidate him, Ince continued to be the motivating force for United, whose dominance culminated in Hughes's brilliant strike.
City though, managed to pull back a goal instantly when Niall Quinn stabbed the ball home from close range.
And with five minutes remaining, United keeper Peter Schmeichel pulled off a magnificent double-save from Quinn and then David White to ensure victory.
This may be the shape of things to come from United, and if Cantona — whatever his role — can bring the best out of the rest, then Ferguson will be saying ‘Vive Le Difference’.
Super Gascoigne
PAUL GASCOIGNE scored a stunning solo goal as Lazio beat Pescara 3-2 in Italy yesterday.
The England midfielder struck in the 25th-minute, although Lazio needed a last-minute goal from defender Luca Luzardi to clinch the points.
Des Walker's Sampdoria suffered a shock 3-2 home defeat by Atalanta.
Champions AC Milan were held to a 1-1 draw by lowly Udinese, but still stretched their lead at the top to four points following defeats for Inter and Juventus.
Deadly Des
DESMOND HAYNES hit an unbeaten 81 to guide the West Indies to a crushing nine-wicket victory over Australia in Perth yesterday.
The Aussies were restricted to 160-7 from their 50 overs in this World Series Cup match, Phil Simmons taking 2-22.
Haynes then steered the tourists to an easy victory with more than 11 overs to spare.
Frost glory loses shine
George Stevens
SOUTH AFRICA'S David Frost yesterday made history by becoming the first golfer to win the Million Dollar Challenge three times.
But the tournament, held in the magnificent setting of Sun City, will be remembered for the incidents on the third day rather than Frost's winning total of 276.
England's Nick Faldo and Nick Price of Zimbabwe were both disqualified by the tournament director Buddy Young.
Faldo's disqualification was a simple case to administer.
He made the most fundamental error possible in tournament golf, signing a card containing a wrong score.
Faldo ticked a four on the 18th, written down by his playing partner Bernhard Langer, when he had actually made a five.
Faldo said: ‘I guess the heat of the day got to the top of my head.
I'm very disappointed — it's a bit of a shock.
‘It was a real 100 per cent screw-up.
It's a lot of bucks but it serves me right.’
Price was disqualified after refusing to sign his card following a two-stroke penalty for moving an advertising hoarding.
Under the rules he was deemed to have disqualified himself.
Frost was affected by the incident when he began his final round.
He admitted: ‘There was doubt in my mind after the third round and I would have preferred to win by going head to head with Nick Price.
‘When John Cook got to within two shots of me I thought I might not win.
But then I realised I hadn't played one bad shot and I thought ‘what have I got to fear’’.
Frost finished four shots clear of American Cook, while Ian Woosnam finished well down the field on eight-over-par.
Kiwi struggle
OPENER Roshan Mahanama scored a masterful 109 as Sri Lanka made 303-6 on the first day of the second Test against New Zealand in Colombo.
Sri Lanka should have scored more, but collapsed to 182-4 after standing at 160-1.
Skipper Arjuna Ranatunga (76) and Hashan Tillakaratne (43) then steadied the ship, adding 92 for the fifth wicket.
Courier delivers victory
Frank Ward
JIM COURIER redeemed himself for past Davis Cup failures by beating Switzerland's Jakob Hlasek in Fort Worth, Texas last night to clinch the Cup for the United States for the 30th time since 1900.
The world No 1, who was left shaken by his five-set loss to Marc Rosset on Friday, posted a 6-3, 3-6, 6-3, 6-4 victory over Hlasek to give the United States an unbeatable 3-1 lead.
His team-mates Andre Agassi, Pete Sampras and John McEnroe rushed on court and lifted him on to their shoulders to carry him to the sidelines.
‘This is an amazing feeling.
You can't buy it,’ said Courier.
‘Nothing means more to me than to be here with this bunch of guys and bring the Cup back where it should be.’
Fight
Courier, who took an undistinguished 2-5 Davis Cup record into the match, explained his past failures by saying perhaps he wanted it too much when playing for his country.
But Sunday's win should erase those ghosts, as well as make up for last year's defeat to France in the final in Lyon.
He never really reached top form last night, but had enough fight to hold off the mentally tough, but physically drained Hlasek.
Courier, who had not played well during the first two sets, said he received a pep talk from Agassi that really picked up his spirits.
The fact that Courier was playing for the trophy was a result of Saturday's magnificent doubles victory by Sampras and McEnroe, whose emotional, fist-pumping speech inspired a remarkable comeback.
The Americans trailed by two sets to Hlasek and Rosset before hitting back for a 6-7, 6-7, 7-5, 6-1 6-2 victory.
Sampras revealed: ‘He was just getting pumped up and shouting, ‘Let's kick some ass’.
It was on that level.’
It was a fitting way for McEnroe, 33, to end his Davis Cup career.
He has indicated that this may be his last year on the tour, and he finishes a five-time Davis Cup winner.
Cardiff coach may have to quit
Giles Smith
CARDIFF'S joy at their 8-6 victory over Heineken League leaders Swansea in this top-of-the-table clash was shattered last night when their inspirational Australian coach Alex Evans announced he may quit the club at the end of the season.
Evans, who has transformed Cardiff from last season's Welsh rugby no-hopers to this year's championship contenders, said he had been asked to come back next year but personal problems might prevent him doing so.
Significantly, he added: ‘If the answer is no, I'll be letting them know by the end of this month.’
The loss of the Aussie coach would be a massive blow to resurgent Cardiff, and in particular to last-minute try scorer, Steve Ford, who said after his pounce had broken Swansea's 11-match winning run: ‘Alex has transformed this club.
It was a shambles last year.
It is completely different now.
The atmosphere is electric.’
Winger Ford's clincher was the climax of a week which turned tragedy into happiness for him.
His girlfriend, Janey, gave birth to a baby girl on Thursday, to help erase the memory of the death of their seven-month-old son at the start of the season.
Amazingly, he only got the chance to go for the try because Cardiff players over-ruled skipper Mike Hall.
Trailing 6-3, Cardiff won a last-chance scrum on the Swansea line and the players pressured Hall into running the ball rather than going for a drop goal which would have given them a draw.
The result was a great half break by the skipper, Adrian Davies was on hand for a chip to the line, and a charging Ford claimed the five points to the delight of the 14,000 capacity crowd.
Rob fires warning
Tony Roche
London 26, Midlands 16
HOLLYWOOD would go on one knee for the exclusive rights to Saturday's England fly-half qualifier at Gloucester between Rob Andrew and Stuart Barnes.
On this evidence, Andrew will have to drown in incompetence while Barnes proves he can walk on water to change the England selectors' opinion that the Wasps stand-off must remain their number one decision maker.
Andrew, who led and inspired an experimental London to a deserved 26-16 win over reigning Divisional champions Midlands, confronts triumphant South West captain Barnes next weekend knowing the Bath stand-off masterminded something historic in Yorkshire.
Barnes was the brain behind the South West's first Divisional 29-9 triumph over the North, setting up a virtual title decider at Kingsholm on Saturday.
Andrew relishes the challenge, admitting: ‘You have to believe that you are the best in your role in the country and I know that Stuart shares that view.
‘I am very happy with the way I am playing but I accept that he believes he should be England's fly-half.
‘Yes, the pressure on me has increased since Stuart decided to come back on the England scene but this is not the first time he has squeezed the position and I accept that challenge from a top-class player.’
Andrew's use of boot, brain and vision made ribbons of the Midlands line-out superiority and visiting skipper Dean Richards admitted: ‘He was the decisive factor.’
Andrew said: ‘This was the perfect return to domestic rugby for me and a fine display by an experimental side.
But on Saturday we face a new challenge, virtually the Bath team led by Stuartwho clearly has already made his mark on South West.
He has always made it tough for me when he has been in contention but I can deal with that because I have confidence in my game.’
While Martin Johnson and Martin Bayfield enjoyed line-out dominance, Midlands wasted possession outside the scrum.
‘Andrew, Steve Bates and Alan Buzza were superior to our decision-makers,’ admitted Midlands boss Les Cusworth.
‘They forced us to make errors while our decision-makers worked too much behind our gain line.’
Strip away the diplomacy and those sentiments reveal that John Steele and John Liley played badly and only replacement scrum-half Matt Dawson earned any plaudits.
In contrast, stand-in backs Mark Evans and Darren O'Leary excelled for London while the selectors were left in no further doubt that Jason Leonard, Brian Moore and Jeff Probyn must be England's front row to face France at Twickenham in January.
London gambled and won on an a free-running game by three tries to one — Dean Ryan, Andrew and O'Leary against Johnson, with Andrew and John Liley kicking the other points.
Fogdoe is flying
SWEDEN'S Tomas Fogdoe skied a brilliant second leg to snatch victory in the men's World Cup slalom in Val d'Isere yesterday.
But the 22-year-old — a lowly 12th after the first run — needed a helping hand from leader Patrice Bianchi, who fell with victory in his sights.
Fogdoe was more than half a second faster than any of his rivals on the deciding run, with Austrians Thomas Sykora and Hubert Strolz in second and third.
Furious Italian Alberto Tomba was a lowly seventh, his worst finish in a completed race for six years.
He claimed a British TV cameraman had distracted him during the second run, ruining his concentration and his chances of a top-three finish.
Davis in top form
STEVE DAVIS fought back brilliantly to beat old adversary Jimmy White 9-5 in the quarter-finals of the Coalite World Matchplay in Doncaster last night.
Davis had trailed 4-2 early in their match before winning six successive frames to lead 8-4 going into the final interval.
Although White managed to stop the rot after the restart, taking frame 14 with a clearance of 43, Davis kept his nerve to win the next 96-5 and clinch the match.
It had earlier looked promising for White, as breaks of 73, 64, and 52 helped him cruise into a 4-2 lead.
Lyon roars Saints to a new record
Ray French
Featherstone Rovers 8, St Helens 25
DAVID LYON, St Helens's £90,000 summer bargain, defied an ankle injury to steer Saints into a record 11th consecutive third round Regal Trophy draw this morning.
The 24-year-old Great Britain tourist, who was sidelined earlier this season for nine weeks with a troublesome hamstring injury, grabbed 12 points with a try and three goals to halt a gallant Rovers performance.
Rovers toiled tirelessly and were well worth their eight points from two Martin Pearson goals and an Ian Smales try.
Saints, though, always had the extra power in the pack, and the pace behind to test Rovers' spirited defence.
Following the first of his four goals in the 10th minute, Lyon raced on to skipper Shane Cooper's long pass from the base of the scrum to put Kiwi Test centre Jarrod McCracken over for the opening try in the 22nd minute.
Lyon converted brilliantly from the touch line before hooker Gus O'Donnell added a drop goal to give Saints a narrow 9-8 half time lead.
Second Division leaders Rovers roared into action on the resumption, subjecting the Saints defence to a 10-minute period of intense pressure on their try line, but to no avail.
A controversial try on the hour from Saints winger Anthony Sullivan, who raced on to O'Donnell's drop goal attempt and touched down beneath the posts, turned the game.
And Lyon settled the issue in the 72nd minute when he crashed over at the corner for the match-clinching try.
Rovers began to tire under intense pressure from the St Helens pack.
And it came as no surprise when Saints' strong-running second row Chris Joynt touched down for their fourth and final try in the dying seconds.
Crusaders crash
Leigh 16, London Cr 6
LEIGH dashed London's hopes of another giant-killing effort to book a place in the Regal Trophy quarter-finals.
Crusaders, who hammered Wakefield 30-0 in the first round, were never in front and were let down by bad handling in atrocious conditions.
Leigh's first-half tries came from David Hill and Barry Ledger with Jason Donohue adding a third four minutes from time.
Mark Riley scored London's touchdown just before the break.
Fairbank accused
Ray French
Warrington 12, Bradford 12
ANGRY Wire boss Brian Johnson blasted referee Jim Smith for his handling of this tough Regal Trophy second round battle on Saturday.
Johnson was furious Northern second row Karl Fairbank wasn't sent-off for a challenge on full-back Rob Myler.
He said: ‘That was the worst display of refereeing I've seen.
Fairbank should have been off.
‘He could have broken Myler's ribs, it was a blatant foul.’
Reynolds defiant
BUTCH REYNOLDS, the world 400m record-holder, is vowing to return to international athletics.
The IAAF has threatened to counter-sue Reynolds after dismissing as ‘worthless’ an American court judgment awarding him £18 million damages because he was banned for alleged drug-taking.
Wilf skates in
WILF O'REILLY, Britain's leading short-track speed-skater, clocked an unofficial 800m world record of 1min 15.20sec to win the Leon Wilson Trophy in Nottingham yesterday.
Kepler blow
KEPLER WESSELS and Fanie de Villiers could miss South Africa's one-day game against India today after both suffered heads wounds when they collided during training yesterday.
Spence adrift
ENGLAND'S Jamie Spence shot a final-round 74 to finish joint ninth in the Johnnie Walker Golf Classic in Melbourne yesterday, 12 shots behind Australian winner Robert Allenby.
Super Wasim
WASIM AKRAM claimed a hat-trick and opener Saeed Anwar hit 135 as Pakistan scored a 94-run win over a Northern Territory Invitation XI in Alice Springs yesterday.
Hurdles date for Docklands
TOP class chaser Docklands Express could well make his reappearance over hurdles at Cheltenham on Friday.
Kim Bailey's 10-year-old may use the ASW Gold Card Handicap Hurdle as a stepping stone for Kempton's King George VI Chase on Boxing Day.
Docklands Express pleased connections in a racecourse gallop at Newbury recently.
Plumpton yesterday passed a 10am inspection, and prospects of racing tomorrow are looking good.
Brothers clash again
Henry Rix
LEADING Champion Hurdle contenders Granville Again and Morley Street are poised for an exciting rematch at Cheltenham on Saturday.
The brothers, who fought out the finish of the Elite Hurdle at Cheltenham's Sunday fixture, are heading for another showdown in the Bula Hurdle over the same course and distance.
‘We intend to run Granville Again — he will definitely be entered,’ said trainer Martin Pipe.
And a spokeswoman for trainer Toby Balding confirmed: ‘Morley Street is likely to run at this stage.’
In a slowly run race, it was older brother Morley Street who quickened the better on the run-in to land the Elite Hurdle.
Pipe was yesterday mulling over future plans for Miinnehoma following the gelding's shock defeat at Chepstow on Saturday.
The nine-year-old, running for the first time since his victory in last March's Sun Alliance Chase, finished a tired horse behind his impressive stable companion Run For Free.
But the champion trainer is refusing to write off Miinnehoma, who is now almost certain to miss the Welsh National in three weeks.
‘Don't forget Run For Free is a very good horse.
And I'm sure Miinnehoma will come on for the race,’ he said.
But Ladbrokes reacted by easing Miinnehoma to 14-1 (from 10s) in their Gold Cup betting.
The Fellow was clipped a point to 3-1 favourite and Run For Free is 16-1 (from 25s).
Coral are more generous about The Fellow, quoting 5-1, but offer the same price about Run For Free (from 33s).
Clark takes the honours
John Wardle
Notts County 0, Newcastle United 2
KEVIN KEEGAN believes that Newcastle wonderkid Lee Clark has the ‘world at his feet’— and it is hard to contest that view.
Clark produced another dazzling display to help Keegan celebrate his November Manager-of-the-Month award in impressive style.
Clark was the inspiration behind Saturday's victory, leaving Keegan proclaiming: ‘This lad's got it all.
‘What is more, we haven't seen the best of him yet.
In fact, when he gets a goal you will see an even bigger difference in him because that will give him more confidence.’
He added: ‘Lee was outstanding as he has been all season.
We've now come to expect it of him, which is remarkable for someone so young and with very little experience.’
The gifted 21-year-old midfielder was denied that elusive goal by a brilliant save from County keeper Steve Cherry, but that paved the way for Kevin Sheedy to fire Newcastle into a 47th minute lead.
United's triumphant march to a 16th victory rarely looked in doubt against a County side that has now won only once in 14 league games.
And Clark delivered the killer punch with a run down the right to set up Gavin Peacock for his 12th goal of the season five minutes from time.
Sunderland teenager Michael Gray needed just 44 seconds to establish himself in Roker Park folklore during their 2-1 defeat of Barnsley.
Touch
That's how long it took the 18-year-old to score with his first touch on his Roker Park debut.
Crosby's faith in Gray was justified when he volleyed in his early goal after keeper Lee Butler punched out Gordon Armstrong's free kick.
Gray said: ‘I'll never forget that goal — no matter what happens in the rest of my career.’
Shaun Cunnington stretched Sunderland's lead in the 29th minute before a brave second-half fightback by Barnsley who scored through an Ian Sampson own goal.
Late thrills
Swindon 2, Derby 4
THREE goals and a missed penalty in the last two minutes climaxed a thriller, with Derby clinching their sixth consecutive away win.
Derby controlled most of the game but would have been run closer had Craig Maskell not missed from the spot in the dying seconds.
Tommy Johnson put the visitors ahead in the 28th minute and they went further ahead in the 40th minute when Swindon player-manager Glenn Hoddle fouled Martin Kuhl on the edge of the area and Mark Pembridge blasted the free kick into the net.
Kuhl made it 3-0 after 57 minutes, lashing home from 25 yards but then came the exciting climax, during which Swindon scored twice.
Micky Hazard started it with a header in the 88th minute and within a minute subsitute Ted McMinn had notched Derby's fourth.
Swindon swept back within seconds for Maskell to score, but a minute later he had his spot-kick turned around the post by Steve Sutton.
Dalian is Villa delight
Sheffield Wed 1 Aston Villa 2
DALIAN ATKINSON was given a new role at Villa and responded with two stunning strikes as they laid claims to the Premier League title.
But the former Wednesday striker seems to have misinterpreted tactical guidance.
‘He's unreal,’ said Villa manager Ron Atkinson.
‘Afterwards, he talked about the new position I gave him.
He thinks he played in midfield!’
Wednesday must have wished he had, the way Atkinson chested down and volleyed home a 20th-minute clearance, then spun brilliantly on a Neal Cox through ball to score a second after 67.
Behind
Wednesday's John Sheridan sees Atkinson as the future England partner to Blackburn's Alan Shearer.
So might England manager Graham Taylor, who watched Atkinson reach 13 goals for the season.
‘Shearer gets behind defenders,’ Sheridan said.
‘Atkinson is best running at them and nobody is doing it better.’
Mark Bright fired Wednesday level in the 27th minute but, in a parade of top-class strikers Bright, David Hirst, and even Villa's Dean Saunders were bit-players by comparison.
Others who deserved praise for shoring-up injury-hit Villa's win were defender Paul McGrath, Steve Staunton — moved to midfield — and Earl Barrett.
MoM: Atkinson, Villa (Sharp-shooter).
Quinn demand
David Harrison
Coventry 2, Ipswich 2
MICK QUINN has handed Coventry an ultimatum: ‘Meet my demands or I'm off.’
In only the second week of his month on loan from Newcastle, the 30-year old helped earn a point with his fourth goal for the Sky Blues.
The £250,000-rated striker is believed to want a £200,000 signing-on fee plus the £1,000 a week he earns at St James' Park.
Quinn said: ‘I'm not interested in more than a month on loan here.
‘Something has to be sorted out quickly or I'll go back to Newcastle and see if anyone else is interested.
‘The Coventry manager hasn't said anything to me and I'm a bit surprised about that.’
Chris Kiwomya gave Ipswich a 13th-minute lead only for Gallacher to level seven minutes later.
Quinn then seemed to have won it for City with a 51st-minute header but Steve Whitton levelled again from the penalty spot.
MoM: Peter Ndlovu, Coventry (Pace and trickery).
Clough's faith heals Forest
Roy Collins
Leeds United 1, Nottingham Forest 4
ON the day Forest not only climbed from their sick bed but announced their imminent discharge from the ward, Brian Clough may have been amused to note Arsenal's third successive defeat.
Arsenal manager George Graham was the most strident of those who hinted to Clough in recent weeks that when points go out of the door, football philosophy should fly through the window.
Clough's team decided they'd rather die than swallow such medicine.
What Forest displayed at Elland Road were not green shoots of recovery but a field of talent in full bloom.
And it's been achieved by Forest keeping their nerve, their heads, their shape and, above all, their beliefs during a year that was turning into annus horribilis.
Although Forest are still bottom of the Premier League table today, you'll find less people willing to bet on them still being there at the end of the season than on Norwich still being top.
Fewer still would bet on champions Leeds finishing above Forest.
Leeds, having apparently got rid of their one bad apple in the week, now suspect the whole orchard might be contaminated.
Manager Howard Wilkinson was so shocked that he couldn't even bring himself to deliver a dressing room rollicking afterwards.
‘Sometimes, it's best to say nothing,’ he said.
‘We had no spark, no electricity, no drive.
we were out-competed in everything from early on.I'm at a loss for words.’
Style
But Wilkinson, when he recovers his senses, will point Leeds towards recovery in the same manner as Clough.
By sticking to his own basic beliefs about attitude and playing style.
The emphasis may be different than at Forest but the essentials are the same.
So majestic were Forest that one had to look down to the programme to make sure it wasn't Robertson and Woodcock and McGovern and Gemmill combining in sweet harmony to carve open Leeds.
Gemmill is still on the team sheet, though it's now Scot and not father Archie.
Neil Webb is the echo of a later age.
Yet his return to the club looks like proving the most significant in Forest's recovery.
His passing skill was responsible for three of the four goals.
Roy Keane, who scored two of them, represents the future for Forest, though they're not the only club to believe that.
Kingsley Black also scored got one of the others and Nigel Clough — who else?— got the first.
Gary Speed hit a late reply.
MoM: Neil Webb, Forest (exquisite passing).
Walsh puts seal on happy return
Geoff Sweet
Charlton 1 Portsmouth 0
COLIN WALSH, already the subject of one Trivial Pursuit question, is probably lined up for another.
Who scored Charlton's first goal on their return to The Valley is a logical sequel to the original poser: Who was the first player to score in the first live televised game in England?
That was in 1984, a year before Charlton hit the road to Selhurst and Upton Parks, and two years before Walsh signed on and decided to live in SE7, because: ‘I was promised we would be moving home to our own ground and wanted to live amongst fans dying to get back.’
It took longer than anyone imagined but on Saturday, £4.6 million, 2,632 days and 360 senior matches later, the Red Red Robin was bobbing along in its own nest again.
The last lick of paint was slapped on at midnight on Friday and the final blob of tarmac laid five hours before kick-off.
No matter.
The weight and importance of tradition conquered all and the result was perfect.
‘It's a big gamble and we need the fans to keep turning up, but what a relief,’ said chairman Roger Alwen.
‘To get 8,000 people here was fantastic — there wasn't a person in the street at 2pm, we were sold out and everyone was in the ground.’
Coincidentally, Alwen — celebrating his 28th wedding anniversary — thought after almost four harrowing years in charge his luck was finally in.
Having taken the field with his directors to become surely the first board to be cheered to the rafters, he was presented with a cheque.
It was made out for £2m from the Football Trust, but should have been £1m.
Slog
Alwen might have known, for when the club decided to build the original Valley in 1919 they began with 2s 3d in the kitty and it's been a financial slog ever since.
Now the fund-raising starts to redevelop the famous high-rise East Terrace, which housed so many of the 75,031 that saw Charlton's Cup tie with Aston Villa in 1938, and the temporary West Stand.
Die-hard supporters, among them those who donated £1m to the Valley refit, arrived from America, Canada, the CIS and Holland for the grand return, and others marched to the stadium from Woolwich town centre.
‘That was a reverse of the journey we made so many times to council planning meetings,’ said Steve Clarke, chairman of the Supporters' Club and standing for election to the board.
‘We're ecstatic, I can't conjure up the superlatives to say how I feel.’
Yes, long before Walsh drove home a left-footer after only six minutes, 40 seconds, the mood was buoyant.
Charlton station was a clearing house for hundreds of expectant fans meeting chums from afar back on home territory.
Indeed, the Charlton players almost played second fiddle on an afternoon belonging to the fans.
‘When the crowd really got behind us I had not heard a noise like it in seven years,’ said co-manager Alan Curbishley.
‘Today we became a club again.
There have been a lot of sacrifices but we have our own identity again.’
That was it.
Charlton are home.
At The Valley.
MoM: The Fans (no contest).
Boot-iful for Wye
Mike Donovan
Brighton 1, Woking 1
SHANE WYE volleyed the goal which put non-League Woking in the third round draw with a pair of boots bought by his generous manager.
Boss Geoff Chapple dipped deep into his own pocket in October to pay Pounds 1,000 and bring back Wye brothers Shane and Lloyd from New Zealand.
Then, says Chapple, the brothers lost their credit cards and couldn't buy any boots.
‘It was back to my bank for another £150,’ he said.
‘Fortunately, my wife and I have separate accounts!’
Brave Wycombe refuse to surrender
Mike Walters
Wycombe Wanderers 2, West Bromich Albion 2
SUSPENDED defender Andy Kerr led the deafening celebrations as Wycombe Wanderers completed a stirring fightback in the best traditions of Cup football.
Kerr, reared in West Bromich and once a regular on the terraces at the Hawthorns, thought the chance of facing his boyhood idols had disappeared with his red card for a professional foul at Runcorn two weeks ago.
But Wycombe's thrilling revival from a 2-0 deficit with just 20 minutes left turned Adams Park into a bowl of bedlam — and Kerr into the happiest man in Buckinghamshire.
He said: ‘I was doing some commentary on our clubcall line and when we equalised, considered analysis went out of the window.
Jig
‘All I could do was scream down the phone — God knows what the listeners made of it.’
Well, more than 7,000 fans — plus Sky TV's audience — loved it.
Wycombe manager Martin O'Neill performed an Irish jig of delight when Steve Thompson's 25-yard shot cannoned into the roof of the net off Albion keeper Stuart Naylor, whose mistake perhaps betrayed a broken bone in his hand.
Fourteen minutes earlier skipper Glyn Creaser, a 33-year-old warehouse manager, had lit the blue touchpaper with a power header from Steve Guppy's corner.
It was no more than Wanderers deserved after a luckless opening.
After just 90 seconds, 12-goal striker Kim Casey dislocated his shoulder in a collision with Naylor, wasting a glorious chance provided by Guppy's left foot in the process.
Albion's Darren Bradley then drilled a sweet right-footer past Paul Hyde after 12 minutes and Bob Taylor repeated the trick two minutes before half-time.
The comeback sparked by Creaser left West Brom boss Ossie Ardilles musing: ‘Wycombe's first changed the course of the game psychologically.
They were running harder and jumping taller after that.’
Sorry Spencer
Graham Otway
Yeovil 0, Hereford 0
FORMER army sergeant Mickey Spencer should be doing 100 press-ups this morning after fluffing Yeovil's best chance to join the big boys in the FA Cup third round.
The 30-year-old striker had the Hereford goal at his mercy in the 66th minute but volleyed over from six yards out as the game ended goalless.
He said: ‘I got family and friends to video the match for me because it was my great chance to make a name for myself in front of millions on TV — and I blew it.’
Ray is rapped
David Tossell
QPR 3, Oldham 2
NORWEGIAN international Gunnar Halle last night cited veteran Ray Wilkins as an example of double standards in English football.
Halle was booed constantly by the QPR fans after a first-half tackle on Andy Sinton which saw the England winger carried off.
But he argued: ‘I don't know why the fans were having a go at me.
It was a fair tackle, I won the ball.
‘Then, late in the game, Ray Wilkins grabbed me by the shirt and threw me to the ground with a judo throw.
The referee didn't even speak to him.
‘It looks like different rules apply.
Wilkins is an excellent player, but the same rules should apply to him as the rest of us.’
Gary Penrice and two-goal Les Ferdinand killed off Oldham after Neil Adams and Ian Olney had pulled them level at 2-2.
MoM: Ferdinand (lethal finisher).
£1m Chris a marvel
Adrian Holloway
Crystal Palace 2 Sheffield Utd 0
STEVE COPPELL is tipping £1 million striker Chris Armstrong to lead a Selhurst Park revival.
Armstrong scored his seventh goal in 11 games to earn Palace their first home League win and Coppell said: ‘In terms of raw material, Chris has everything.
‘But he's unusually shy and when he first arrived from Millwall he felt his price tag was a burden.
‘Now his confidence is growing visibly.
He and the club may have turned the corner.’
Palace midfielder Gareth Southgate also had a big say in the result, his screamer ensuring victory.
MoM: Armstrong (Outstanding pace).
List of shame
JANUARY: Fined £1,500 by the FA following an incident with the crowd at Oldham in November.
Trouble flares after Wright scores late equaliser.
Wright is then alleged to have spat at a spectator as he left pitch.
SEPT 5: Allegations — unproven — that he made gestures to the Wimbledon crowd after scoring his second goal in Arsenal's 3-2 defeat.
Wright is also involved in off-the-ball clash with Dons defenders Brian McAllister and Scott Fitzgerald.
SEPT 12: Booked for a late challenge on Blackburn goalkeeper Bobby Mimms.
SEPT 21: Booked for fourth time this season in Coca-Cola Cup second round, first leg, against Millwall at Highbury following a tackle on Colin Cooper.
No FA inquiry into his claim that he was struck on the head by a coin thrown from stand occupied by Millwall fans.
Millwall chairman Reg Burr says: ‘Many people would not have been surprised had he been sent off.
It was as bad as I've seen in 60 years.’
OCT 3: Allegations that he made V-sign to Chelsea fans at Highbury after scoring Arsenal's late winner — again not proven.
DEC 5: Booked again following long-running feud with Southampton defender Ken Monkou, who says: ‘He's got a temperament, but you just have to leave him to it and don't argue with him because that's what he wants.’
Newton is the apple of Chelsea's eye
Ben Bacon
Spurs 1, Chelsea 2:
THEY call Eddie Newton ‘Isaac’ at Stamford Bridge, and you don't need a rotten apple on the head to work that one out.
Newton didn't have to be a scientist either to realise what his two goals had done for a Chelsea side which played with impressive self belief considering its young personnel.
They may be mostly kids who still worry about spots — facial as well as first team — but they performed with commendable maturity, resolve and verve at White Hart Lane.
Newton wasn't even born when Chelsea won their last major honour, the Cup Winners' Cup in 1971, but he could be about to help end the club's big-time slump.
With every other team apart from Norwich failing, Chelsea now lie fourth in the Premier League but any success-starved Blues fan will tell you they're equal second.
True, Chelsea know better than most about gravity after the way their annual hopes come crashing down — just like Isaac's apple, in fact.
But this season?
Just maybe.
This was their eighth win from 10 games and they achieved the result without the likes of Mick Harford, Paul Elliott and Robert Fleck, who had gone off by the time Newton struck.
But Chelsea have had promising kids before, so who has made all the difference?
Again, Newton hadn't even drawn breath when Don Howe masterminded Arsenal's double triumph in 1971, but his sure touch and attention to detail is just as evident today.
No wonder manager Ian Porterfield hailed him as his greatest signing.
Newton, 21 this Sunday, also paid tribute and promised Chelsea huge rewards if Porterfield and Howe can keep kids like himself, David Lee, Frank Sinclair and Graham Stuart together.
He said: ‘Of course Don has helped me.
He's come in and disciplined us.
In the past, Chelsea teams have not been so disciplined, and have given away silly goals.
He's stopped the leak.
‘Every day he works with the defence and makes sure everything is tight.
So we're doing that but scoring goals as well.
‘If the gaffer keeps us together we'll do the business for him.
We're all pulling for each other because we've all grown up together — from the youth team to the reserves and the first team.
‘We all know how each other plays and that's why things are ticking.
We've got some experienced older players who are doing the business too, so everything is just clicking.’
Newton transformed the game after Fleck limped off following a kick up the backside and he was given the lone striker's role.
He had already shown some delightful touches in central midfield, the position he regards as his best, speed of thought and a supple-like body in what he regards as his best position in central midfield, combining well with Andy Townsend, who usually delights in destroying Spurs on his own.
Newton, who celebrated by clubbing in London's West End, has played in every position for Chelsea — including goalkeeper for part of a reserve game — and Porterfield must be tempted now to leave him at the front for the next test against Middlesbrough.
Tottenham, it must be said, also had key players absent but what must be disturbing is how they failed to raise their game until a double substitution in the 70th minute.
The surge didn't last too long and Newton slid in his first goal seven minutes later and grabbed his second five minutes from time when he finished off a sweeping, decisive move involving Dennis Wise and Stuart.
Spurs grabbed a consolation just before the end from debutant Sol Campbell, who showed the enthusiasm his team-mates had lacked for most of the game.
In the match programme, Tottenham urged their fans to wear condoms — if only they could have ensured similar protection from Newton.
At least, David Mellor in the Press box was pleased, and so too must have been John Major whose only smiles these days seem to be inspired by the performances of Chelsea.
MoM: Eddie Newton (striking display).
Ian gunning for a real fall
Mike Walters
Southampton 2, Arsenal 0
IAN WRIGHT blew a fuse yet again — and Arsenal are fast blowing their title challenge.
Spontaneous combustion in a yellow shirt is one of the kinder expressions applicable to England striker Wright's appalling bickering and back-chat at The Dell.
Unless the £2.5 million man curbs that volatile temperament, the next manager to call on his services will be Mickey Duff instead of Graham Taylor.
If Wright had taken as much care with his finishing as his feud with Saints defender Ken Monkou, Arsenal would have escaped with a point.
Battle
But the open goal and late penalty with which he was presented both hit the woodwork.
Wright's spot kick was so hurried it was as if he wanted to get it over and done with while no one was looking.
Not for the first time this season, he was lucky to last 90 minutes.
Indeed, had Sheffield referee John Key not been so lenient, Wright could have been dismissed two or three times over.
As well as his running battle with Monkou, he left stud marks on defender Richard Hall.
Monkou, who has kept both Wright and his England partner Alan Shearer quiet inside a fortnight, said: ‘It's always physical against him and you need to look after yourself — but I'm big enough.
‘He's a very good player, he desperately wants to win, but the sun can't always shine.
‘Intimidation is his game, and at one stage I had to tell him to calm down a bit.’
In contrast, Monkou continues to prosper in Saints' mini-revival and is hopeful his performances will eventually bring long-distance international recognition from Holland.
Abuse
Saints fans, who had reserved their barracking almost exclusively for manager Ian Branfoot this season, suddenly found a new target for their abuse.
Branfoot said: ‘Wright got two hat-tricks against us last season, so this was our best performance — even if things were getting quite excitable out there.’
Arsenal have slipped to sixth after three successive Premier League defeats, and they will be without England full-back Lee Dixon for at least a month after he was carried off with a knee injury.
The Gunners swept all before them in October, and it may not be coincidence that their reversal of fortune has accompanied Paul Merson's switch from the ‘hole’ behind the front line to left-wing.
Merson admitted: ‘I was born up front.
It's my position.
But I won't sit out on the wing and sulk.
I'll keep trying.
You can't have ups all the time in football, there has to be a down side as well, although three defeats in a row is hard to take.
‘Back in August, we would have been satisfied with a place in the top six, well placed for a title challenge in the New Year at this stage.
But when you go and lose three on the trot, it doesn't look so clever.’
MOM: Terry Hurlock (Soton): Toughest of the lot.
UEFA are ready to listen to radical new proposals for a European Super League, but only if it benefits all clubs and not just the rich elite.
President Lennart Johansson said last night they are prepared to discuss innovative plans from a group of Europe's wealthiest clubs, but added: ‘I cannot see the benefit of a league which makes the already rich richer, and the other ones poorer.’
Happy days at Norwich
Norwich City 2, Wimbledon 1
RUNAWAY Premier League leaders Norwich have put the fun back into football, according to match-winner Dave Phillips.
The Welsh international midfield player revealed: ‘The spirit in our dressing room at the moment is exceptional.
We are all enjoying ourselves.
‘It's like a holiday camp sometimes and we are all having a good time.
Even training is fun these days.
‘The criticism we are getting and the fact that everybody is writing us off doesn't bother us a bit.
We get all the papers in the dressing room on a Monday morning and we just laugh when we read them.’
Upset
Norwich this week look likely to follow up their interest in Swedish international defender Patrik Andersson as they seek to strengthen their title challenge.
The 21-year-old Malmo player, rated at about £700,000, has already rejected moves to Liverpool and Leeds.
Wimbledon looked set to cause an upset through Lawrie Sanchez's 53rd-minute header, but Mark Robins levelled after 77 with his 12th of the season, and Phillips struck two minutes from time to put Norwich eight points clear at the top.
Wimbledon manager Joe Kinnear fumed: ‘My defenders need their bottoms kicked for both of their goals.’
MoM: Phillips (Revelation in midfield).
Gazza is the hero
PAUL GASCOIGNE scored a stunning solo goal as Lazio beat Pescara 3-2 in Italy yesterday.
The England midfielder struck in the 25th-minute, although Lazio needed a last-minute goal from defender Luca Luzardi to clinch the points and take some of the heat off embattled coach Dino Zoff.
Des Walker's Sampdoria suffered a shock 3-2 home defeat by Atalanta.
Champions AC Milan were held to a 1-1 draw by lowly Udinese, but still stretched their lead at the top to four points following defeats for Inter and Juventus, who were without the injured England international David Platt.
AC Milan, who suffered a rare off-day to drop only their third point of the season, took the lead in the 33rd minute with a shot from Italian midfielder Demetrio Albertini.
But Argentine Abel Balbo levelled the scores shortly before half-time with his 10th goal of the season.
Inter, second at the start of play, crashed 3-0 at second-from-bottom Ancona and had former Italy goalkeeper Walter Zenga sent off in the first half.
Flashman vow
Ben Bacon
STAN FLASHMAN last night vowed never to sell Barnet to any consortium involving Barry Fry.
The Barnet chairman, who sacked Fry last week, said: ‘I will never, ever sell Barnet to anyone who will employ Barry Fry.
He's a bad egg.
‘He acted improperly.
There will never be a reconciliation with Barry.’
Wycombe wonders
Mike Walters
MARTIN O'NEILL saluted his Wycombe warriors last night as the Buckinghamshire part-timers produced a stunning FA Cup fightback against Ossie Ardiles' West Bromich Albion.
Trailing 2-0 to the Second Division high-flyers, Wycombe bounced back in the last 20 minutes to force a replay with goals from skipper Glyn Creaser and Steve Thompson, a corporal in the RAF.
And they were rewarded with the prospect of a third round home tie against First Division West Ham United.
Speaking about the draw, O'Neill said: ‘We're thrilled, we've been drawn at home and although there's a small matter of beating West Brom — that shouldn't be a problem!’
And of Thompson, he added: ‘It took me about two years to buy Thompson from Slough.
He is as daft as a brush and had to be persuaded ours was a worthwhile cause.
‘Obviously I am ecstatic.
I will be lacerated with drink tonight and, although the replay will be very difficult, the eternal optimist in me says we've got a chance.
‘I would love to say our comeback was the result of managerial genius, but all the credit must go to the players.
They were fantastic and never gave up.
‘We play a very open game, sometimes to our detriment, and we needed a few slices of luck when West Brom were 2-0 up and bombarding our goal.
‘But the joy of seeing the equaliser go in was marvellous.
Believe it or not, I jump up and down on the touchline like that every week!’
Thompson, 29, said: ‘I was feeling tired, suffering from cramp and with only five minutes to go I just decided to give it a whack.
‘When it flew in, I went berserk.
And we've got to fancy our chances in the replay up there because we can play a lot better than that.’
Ardiles claimed: ‘Everyone was expecting a shock result here, so it was nice to prove the doubters wrong.’
Passage
North London rivals Arsenal and Spurs could both end up visiting non-League opposition.
The Gunners have been drawn at Yeovil or Hereford while Spurs will face either VS Rugby or Marlow.
Yeovil's manager Steve Rutter said: ‘If you could have picked the draw yourself that's the one you would choose.
It's got to be the plum — and I am sure Hereford will be thinking the same way too.’
Manchester United should have a comfortable passage against either Wigan or Bury at Old Trafford while neighbours City entertain Reading.
Non-League Woking's reward, if they see off the challenge of Brighton in a replay, will be a home tie against another south coast team — Portsmouth.
There are three all-Premier League clashes with Brian Clough's Nottingham Forest entertaining Southampton while Middlesbrough face Chelsea and Wimbledon take on Everton.
Holders Liverpool travel to Bolton while Kenny Dalgish's Blackburn Rovers will meet non-league Cheltenham or Bournemouth.
Tough
Under pressure Steve Coppell and Crystal Palace face a tough trip to Second Division Hartlepool.
First Division table-toppers Newcastle face Port Vale at St James' Park.
FA CUP THIRD ROUND DRAW: Nottm Forest v Southampton; Brentford v Grimsby; Man Utd v Wigan or Bury; Southend v Millwall; Middlesbrough v Chelsea; Crewe v Marine; Wycombe or West Brom v West Ham; Exeter or Swansea v Oxford; Hartlepool v Crystal Palace; Gillingham or Colchester v Huddersfield; Sheff Utd v Burnley or Shrewsbury; Aston Villa v Bristol Rovers; Cambridge v Sheff Wed; Bath or Northampton v Rotherham; Derby v Stockport; QPR v Swindon; Leeds v Charlton; Leicester v Barnsley; Watford v Wolves; Yeovil or Hereford v Arsenal; Luton v Bristol City; Norwich v Coventry; Oldham v Tranmere; Newcastle v Port Vale; Wimbledon v Everton; Man City v Reading; Brighton or Woking v Portsmouth; Blackburn v Cheltenham or Bournemouth; Ipswich v Plymouth or Peterborough; Notts County v Sunderland; Bolton v Liverpool; VS Rugby or Marlow v Tottenham.
Ties to be played on January 2, 3 and 4.
Odds: 7-1 Manchester United, Arsenal; 8-1 Aston Villa, Liverpool; 10-1 Blackburn; 12-1 Leeds, Tottenham; 16-1 Chelsea, Nottingham Forest, Norwich, Manchester City, 20-1 Everton, 1000-1 Wycombe.
Top Marks
Des Kelly
A MAGNIFICENT Mark Hughes last night upstaged Eric Cantona on his Old Trafford debut with a stunning derby winner.
The Manchester United striker hit the perfect response to the new French threat to his place with a typically superb volley in a 2-1 triumph.
Many had cast doubt on Hughes's future following the arrival of Pounds 1.2 million Cantona from Leeds, but United's hero confounded the doubters with his third goal in as many games.
And as United moved into fifth place, with the help of a rare Paul Ince strike, the Welsh centre-forward said: ‘Eric's arrival has affected the whole club — not just the attacking players.
He is a good player and it has boosted everyone, but it has not spurred me on to greater efforts.
When you play for United you know you must perform to the best of your ability every week.
‘Someone will take my place eventually — although, hopefully, that will happen later rather than sooner.
I am reasonably happy with my form right now and I just hope the goals keep coming.’
Ferguson then set Hughes the task of turning in his best goal haul during his time at United.
‘That is Sparky's ninth goal of the season and he's been scoring for us throughout,’ Ferguson said.
‘This could easily be the best season he's had for us.’
And although Cantona has played no more than a bit part following his half-time introduction, his new manager claimed he was well satisfied.
‘Anyone coming into a derby is going to find it hard to find their feet,’ Ferguson said.
‘But Eric showed some great touches and he put in two or three great crosses.
‘He'll be glad to get that behind him.
Cantona adds another string to our bow and we will certainly be better with than without him.
‘It's good that there is competition among the strikers — that can do no harm.’
Ferguson added: ‘We scored two marvellous goals and we're all very pleased.
I manager claimed he was well satisfied.
‘Anyone coming into a derby is going to find it hard to find their feet.
But Eric showed some great touches and he put in two or three great crosses.
‘He'll be glad to get that behind him.
He adds another string to our bow.
and we will certainly be better with than without him.
‘It's good that there is competition among the strikers; that can do no harm.’
Ferguson added: ‘We scored two marvellous goals and we're all very pleased.
I thought over the 90 minutes we were the better team.
‘The last few minutes were a real scramble, but we got the luck we deserved and it is good to win the derby games.
‘This is an important result for our supporters, but realistically it is just another three points and one more victory towards what we are chasing.
‘This is our third win in a row and it keeps our run going.
We want to keep moving up the table.
‘We have our confidence back and we look a solid unit at the moment,’ he said.
Cantona made his entrance after the interval because of a foot injury to Ryan Giggs, and took his place alongside Hughes with Brian McClair dropping into a deeper position on the right.
And he tried hard to get involved even if his colleagues ignored some of the good runs he made.
Clough bonus
BRIAN CLOUGH was handed a £96,000 FA Cup bonus yesterday when the BBC decided to screen live Nottingham Forest's third round clash against Southampton at the City Ground on Sunday, January 3.
Widnes blow
WIDNES'S £100,000-rated former Great Britain half-back David Hulme has asked for a transfer, despite signing a new one-year deal only three months ago.
Roker taunts hit spot
by John Wardle
ROKER flop John Colquhoun has revealed how terrace taunts stung him into his best performance for Sunderland.
The 29-year-old Scot, a £225,000 summer capture from Millwall, has struggled to find his form on Wearside but all that changed when he came on for the injured Don Goodman after just 12 minutes of Saturday's game against Barnsley.
Colquhoun tormented Barnsley with his pace and skill and last night admitted: ‘It hurts when you hear people calling you a bad buy.
But in a way, the criticism spurred me on.
‘I suppose it's true that I haven't really proved myself at Sunderland.
That's why I was so fired up.
Chance
‘I probably committed more fouls in that game than I have throughout my entire career — I was that determined to do well.’
With Goodman's hamstring injury certain to keep him out of the weekend's home clash with Brentford, Colquhoun looks set to be handed another chance to prove himself to the fans.
Meanwhile, under-pressure manager Malcolm Crosby has warned the First Division not to write his team out of the promotion picture.
Saturday's 2-1 win was Sunderland's third in succession and Crosby said: ‘We can still come up on the blind side.
There is tremendous commitment here and you have to remember we have 27 games left.
Hands off my rising stars, says Keegan
David Alexander
KEVIN KEEGAN last night warned Premier League clubs they are wasting their time trying to buy his rising stars.
Keegan emphasised that Newcastle will be buyers, not sellers.
And Newcastle's manager rammed home the point by insisting that no British club could afford Tyneside's new Gazza, 20-year-old midfield talent Lee Clark.
‘He's invaluable.
I couldn't put a price on his head,’ said Keegan.
‘Lee's not like any other player and I wouldn't swap him for anyone.
‘The only difference between Lee and Roy Keane and David Hirst is that they are doing it in the Premier League.
But Lee will handle that.
People are talking about millions for the other two but clubs can forget it as far as Newcastle are concerned.’
England U21 stars Stephen Howey and Steve Watson plus a clutch of young players are also attracting attention.
And Keegan hands a first team debut to his latest discovery in the Anglo-Italian Cup in Bari today — 17-year-old midfielder Richard Appleby.
‘We're building here and looking at buying,’ added Keegan.
‘Other clubs should know that we want to buy their players, not sell to them.’
Clark and Howey signed three-year contracts last month and Keegan said: ‘We sat down with the two lads and their fathers and worked out a deal that was right for them.
‘There were no agents involved, they don't need agents.
They know I'm a players' manager and will look after them.
In a year's time we may have to work out fresh deals for them but, whatever happens, they won't be leaving.
When they go, I won't be here.
‘The only thing that might make them move after three years here is Italy.
There is a bottomless pit of money there and by then the same might apply in Japan or America.
‘We can't compete with that but it's the only reason these players would need to leave Newcastle.
‘We're not a breeding ground any more — some clubs have to sell but Liverpool don't and we don't either.
‘These players can realise all their ambitions here.
Where can they go in Britain that is more exciting?’
West Ham manager Billy Bonds faces a dilemma going into their Anglo-Italian Cup tie in Cosenza.
Thirteen-goal Trevor Morley is suspended after being sent off against Reggiana and Bonds must decide whether to play Clive Allen alone upfront or give rookie striker Steve Jones his first team debut.
John Aldridge has a stomach strain and will miss Tranmere's trip to Pisa.
Rovers manager John KIng said: ‘The doctor has suggested rest for Aldo and it's best we let him have it.’
Bristol City manager Denis Smith aims to throw 17-year-old trainee Jason Fowler straight from youth team football into his senior side against Reggiana at Ashton Gate tonight.
Tough start
RANGERS, who ended Motherwell's reign as Tennant's Scottish Cup holders last season, begin their defence of the trophy against the same opponents next month.
The Ibrox side face a potentially hazardous trip to Lanarkshire to face Motherwell in the third round at Fir Park on January 9.
DRAW: Aberdeen v Hamilton; Cove or Peterhead or Montrose v Vale of Leithen or E Stirling; Motherwell v Rangers; Stirling v E Fife or Alloa; Dundee Utd v Meadowbank; Kilmarnock v Raith; Airdrie v Clydebank; Gala Fairydean or Arbroath v Morton; Partick T v Cowdenbeath; Hibernian v St Mirren; Dundee v Dumbarton; Clyde or Brechin v Celtic; Dunfermline v Ayr Utd; Falkirk v Inverness T or Berwick R; St Johnstone v Stenhousemuir or Forfar or Albion R; Hearts v Huntly or Queen of the South.
McCoist back for Euro clash
by Scott McMunn
ALLY McCOIST last night declared himself fit for tomorrow's European Cup match against CSKA Moscow — and vowed to make up for lost time.
The Rangers striker has spent two weeks on the sidelines with a calf strain after scoring 32 times in all competitions this season.
He missed the 2-2 draw with Marseille and the League matches with Partick and Airdrie.
But he's back for tomorrow's clash in neutral Germany at Bochum's Ruhr Stadium, and manager Walter Smith said: ‘Ally is bubbling and wants to make up for missing three games when he could have scored more goals.
‘Having him back is a huge boost and he's looking forward to the occasion.’
But skipper Richard Gough is out with a groin injury which has troubled him since the Skol Cup final.
Blow
He hasn't trained for a month and won't travel with the 18-man squad.
Smith added: ‘Losing him is a huge blow but with Gary Stevens back in the side and Dave McPherson fit, we have plenty of experience in defence.
‘But it's a case of looking at several options before deciding the team.
‘Pieter Huistra, Dale Gordon and Oleg Kuznetsov aren't included because of the three foreigner rule but we still have four non-Scots, so one will have to make way.
‘There's Gary, Alexei Mikhailichenko, Mark Ha-teley and Trevor Steven and all deserve a place.’
The Russian army team will earn more in the four-day trip to Germany for the European Cup crunch than they would in a month back home.
They will exchange their £30-a-day allowance for three times that much on the black market when they go back home.
And that's the incentive for them in the £30 million Champions League which has captured the continent's imagination.
Journalist Victor Guzev, who travels with CSKA, said: ‘In our society the players are considered to be wealthy and able to afford most things in life.
They have the best flats and most drive a reasonable car.
‘Football clubs will offer their best players new flats with maybe three bedrooms in a better area to get them to sign.
But footballers are still not wealthy by any means — so a trip to the west is the jackpot they hope for.
‘Few people in Moscow will ever be able to afford a flight abroad, so it's a big thing for footballers to travel the world.
‘A permanent move to Spain, Italy or even Scotland is what they all dream about.’
Dallas men of steel
David Tossell
IN the 1970s, a meeting between NFL powerhouses Dallas Cowboys and Pittsburgh Steelers was the highlight of America's sporting calendar.
This weekend, the sides' 1992 versions continued their march towards renewing this rivalry in next month's Super Bowl by clinching play-off places.
The Cowboys handed the Denver Broncos their first home defeat of the season in a 31-27 thriller.
Troy Aikman threw three touchdown passes and Emmitt Smith rushed three yards for the winning touchdown with less than three minutes left.
Meanwhile, Steelers running back Barry Foster reached 100 yards for the 10th time this season, including the game-winning touchdown in the fourth quarter, to clinch a 20-14 win over the Seattle Seahawks.
Pittsburgh suffered a severe blow, however, when quarterback Neil O'Donnell broke his right leg.
San Francisco 49ers receiver Jerry Rice caught his 101st touchdown pass to break Steve Largent's all-time NFL record and Tom Rathman scored twice to lead the 49ers to a 27-3 rout of the Miami Dolphins.
The surging San Diego Chargers beat Phoenix Cardinals 27-21 to move into joint first place in the AFC West with their eighth win in nine games.
Quarterback Stan Humphries threw for 275 yards, including 46 yards to Nate Lewis to set up the winning fourth-quarter touchdown.
RESULTS: NY Jets 24, Buffalo 17; Green Bay 38, Detroit 10; Philadelphia 28, Minnesota 17; Pittsburgh 20, Seattle 14; Cleveland 37, Cincinnati 21; Indianapolis 6, New England 0; Dallas 31, Denver 27; LA Raiders 28, Kansas City 7; Washington 28, NY Giants 10; San Diego 27, Phoenix 21; San Francisco 27, Miami 3; LA Rams 31, Tampa Bay 27.
Tipping Tim tops Budge betting
Colin Cooper
TIPPING Tim is favourite in all books to become only the second horse to land the Mackeson-A F Budge Cup double.
The improving seven-year-old, trained by Nigel Twiston-Davies (above), bids to follow in the footsteps of Pegwell Bay, who created history in 1988 by landing the valuable Cheltenham double.
An impressive seven-length winner of last month's Mackeson, Tipping Tim is a best priced 5-1 joint favourite by Ladbrokes to follow up on Saturday.
Better
Eleven horses stood their ground for the two-mile five-furlong handicap at yesterday's entry stage.
They include Another Coral, 8lb better off for the seven lengths he was beaten by Tipping Tim in the Mackeson, Martin Pipe's Milford Quay, the progressive Sacre d'Or and the 1989 Champion Hurdler Beech Road.
Ladbrokes full betting is: 5-1 Tipping Tim & Another Coral, 6-1 The Illywhacker, Second Schedual & Sacre d'Or, 7-1 Freeline Finishing, 9-1 Beech Road & Milford Quay, 10-1 For The Grain, 16-1 Elfast, 20-1 Nos Na Gaoithe.
Meetings in doubt
MARKET Rasen looks the only card certain to go ahead today with early inspections at Plumpton and Sedgefield.
‘Rain is forecast and it would not take too much more to have the meeting cancelled,’ said Plumpton clerk of the course Cliff Griggs yesterday, while overnight rain would also put Sedgefield in jeopardy.
Tomorrow's meeting at Worcester has already been abandoned due to waterlogging.
Hide seeks title shot
Steve Acteson
HERBIE HIDE will have illustrious company ringside at the Alexandra Palace on Saturday night.
Hide fights Louisville lip James Pritchard as the top fight on the undercard to Nigel Benn's defence of his WBC super-midddleweight title against Nicky Piper.
But 21-year-old Hide is the main attraction to some.
World champion Riddick Bowe may be there, and his verbose manager Rock Newman definitely will be, after their shock announcement last week that WBC International champion Hide is on Bowe's hit-list.
Lennox Lewis, his manager Frank Maloney, and Frank Bruno have also been invited to watch Hide, who at 14st 10lbs is a comparative lightweight in this division.
But the Norwich fighter still poses a heavy threat to their pretensions to Bowe's crown.
And a confident Hide said yesterday: ‘I've always known I was as good as people like Bruno and Lewis, and if I was offered a fight against Bowe in January I'd take it.
I want it.
‘I'm a good fighter, I've had 18 wins in 18 fights, and knocked seven of them out in the first round.
If my chance doesn't come sooner it will definitely come later and I'm prepared for it.
‘I've got a lot to learn, but so does Riddick.
Nobody stops learning, but at only 15st I'm the fastest heavyweight the world has seen in a long time.’
Hide added: ‘I'm fit, I'm fast and I hit hard,’ before heading towards stratospheric levels of self-delusion by saying: ‘I'm better than Evander Holyfield, I've got better footwork and speed and I don't get hit like him.’
American Pritchard may have fought three world champions in Mike Weaver, Michael Dokes and Tim Witherspoon, but he lost to them all, albeit forcing a split decision against the latter in March.
After running an accusing finger down Hide's record, he sneered: ‘I don't recognise a single name here — they're all bums.’
Meanwhile, Paul Hodkinson's threatened ambition to fight British featherweight foe Colin McMillan could become a mid-summer night's dream next June.
But first, Hodkinson must make the third defence of his WBC title against Puerto Rico's Ricardo Cepeda in London on either January 23 or February 3.
McMillan, who controversially lost his WBO crown to Ruben Palecio after dislocating his left shoulder in September, will be back in the ring in February.
But Hodkinson admitted last night: ‘When Colin lost his title to Palecio, I thought a fight against him had gone for good.
‘I thought it was the sort of injury that could prevent him from fighting again.
But now he's back in training so let's get it on.
‘But I still think I'll win.’
World in union suits Oxford
Giles Smith
WHAT do three Welshmen, three South Africans, three men from Northern Ireland, one from the Irish Republic, one each from Australia, Canada, and New Zealand, and just two from England have in common?
Answer: they all play for Oxford University at rugby.
When the 15 men from no fewer than eight countries run out in front of a packed house for the 111th Bowring Varsity match at Twickenham today (tues) you'd be forgiven for thinking you were watching some sort of world invitation XV taking on Cambridge.
‘They haven't called us the United Nations team yet, but after Tuesday I think they might,’ admits captain Michael Patton.
Just to add to the multi-national flavour, Patton was born in Northern Ireland, went to school in southern Ireland and university in Wales.
‘It might seem a little odd, but really, the blending of so many different nationalities is what the University and the Varsity Match is all about,’ says the 23-year-old hooker.
Despite criticisms that they're only there as star imports for the match, the ‘foreigners’ insist they are at Oxford for genuine academic reasons; the rugby is a bonus.
David Spence, a 23-year-old from Natal studying for a diploma in social science, said: ‘Oxford is seen as one of the very top universities in the world, and it is a dream come true just to be here.
I play rugby for enjoyment, but playing in the Varsity Match, which is famous even in South Africa, is a dream come true.’
He will be on the wing for Oxford this afternoon and will be cheered on by his father Malcolm, the last South African to win an Olympic medal before isolation (the 400m bronze in Rome in 1960).
‘I don't feel I am doing an Englishman out of a place in front of 54,000 in one of the great matches of the rugby calendar.
It has always been a tradition of Oxford and Cambridge to have overseas players,’ he added.
Aussie flanker Brendan Nasser, who was a member of the Wallabies' World Cup-winning squad last year will be the only international on the hallowed turf of Twickenham.
He is even more adamant that he is not stealing a place that could be filled by an Englishman.
At 28 he will also be the oldest man on the field and defends the fact that he is way past the age when most students go to university.
‘Back home in Australia, you can play for my university there, Queensland, for ever, so long as you've been there at some time.
It improves the standards and can only be good for the game,’ he says.
So how do the two lonely Engishmen in the team react to the array of overseas talent around them.
Kevin Street, a 21-year old centre, is unashamedly proud to be part of this multi-national team.
‘It is a dream to be playing with all these top players.
Very few people here in Oxford think it's strange.
People understand that the Varsity Match has always had lots of foreigners involved.
That's what makes it so special.’
The other, Bath and England B star Audley Lumsden, is just lucky to have his chance, having come back from an horrific, career-threatening broken neck.
Unlucky
But captain Patton is more concerned about the result than any controversy about foreigners.
‘Cambridge won last year 17-11 and we thought we were unlucky.
The previous year Oxford won 21-12.
That's the sort of scoreline we want to see today.’
Cambridge have six Englishmen, four Welshmen, three Scots and two Aussies — hardly home-grown either.
Oxford: M Joy; A Lumsden, K Street, D O'Mahoney, D Spence; N Malone, S du Toit; I Buckett, M Patton, A Williams, D Evans, J Daniell, B Nasser, C Lion-Cachet, B O'Mahoney.
Cambridge: L Davies; S Burns, D Hopley, J Flood, G Batstone; K Price, M de Maid; D Perrett, A Read, P Callow, D Bickle, D Dix, M Duthie, R Jenkins, E Peters.
Bells to the Yanks
Roy Collins
REPORTS of America's Davis Cup win over Switzerland suggest that it was the most repulsively nationalistic sporting event since the Hitler Olympics of l936.
The Swiss, those renowned troublemakers, apparently upset the Americans by waving their national flag and ringing cowbells.
Andre Agassi (above), equally well known for his sense of decorum, said: ‘To be honest, it kind of irritated me a little bit.
And I think those bells are a little obnoxious.’
The Wimbledon champion, though, had no words of condemnation for American fans, who cheered every service error by the Swiss and shouted ‘foot fault’ when Marc Rosset was about to serve.
Nor did he take colleague John McEnroe to task for abusing the Swiss non-playing captain, hitting balls at their team and gesturing at them with his racket.
Sometimes, one finds it hard to understand why Americans are so disliked on the sports field.
Walsh has shock chance
Ray French
THIRD DIVISION Workington were yesterday handed a dream Regal Trophy third round tie against five-times winners Wigan.
And their Aussie coach Peter Walsh intends to repay them for the huge gamble they took when giving him the job last summer.
Walsh said: ‘I was just a nobody and it was only a telephone call from Oldham coach Peter Tunks that persuaded me to apply.
I didn't think I had a chance of getting a job but Workington took the gamble with me and I want to repay them.
‘It will be a massive task for us.
If any of our players make a mistake then Wigan will make us pay for it.
They are one of the best teams in the world but we will certainly give them a game.’
Holders Widnes face a tricky trip to Warrington or Bradford Northern and St Helens entertain Castleford.
Hull face struggling Leigh.
DRAW: St Helens v Castleford; Warrington or Bradford N v Widnes; Workington v Wigan; Hull v Leigh.
Canaries fly in face of opposition
Roy Collins
WHEN the so-called elite of the Premier League find the bottle to break away and form the small, private division they wanted all along, there's one club they won't be touching with a bargepole.
This club are a serious inconvenience to the high and mighty through having a home in one of England's most remote corners.
So remote that a bargepole is more use to a traveller than a British Rail season ticket when the London train breaks down.
Home attendances are just above 14,000, which doesn't make it a viable working venue for Stan Flashman's considerable ticket broking expertise.
Also, against the avowed first principle of the Premier League, which is to rip off fans whenever possible, the club actually dropped some admission prices this year.
This was, though, only in a small section of the ground and appeared to be a token gesture.
Strangers
The manager and chairman are such strangers to national television that probably less than 10 per cent of football fans would be able to name them, let alone recognise them.
The players, too, are more anonymous than the cast of Eldorado, utterly failing day after day to appear in newspapers slagging off former colleagues, admitting to alcoholism or wife beating, promoting violent videos or even being pictured giving V-signs to supporters.
Not one has been sent off this season.
They are, in fact, comprehensively guilty of bringing football into repute.
They are, of course, Norwich City, a club so far ahead in the League that the title ought to be a formality.
Instead, the other Premier League teams are pretending not to notice.
The weekly title soundbites are of Big Ron jangling his jewellery at Villa, George Graham shouting at his Arsenal players, Graeme Souness moaning at Liverpool's luck and Fergie doing a dance to exorcise the ghost of United's past champions.
There's been more praise for Brian Clough, at the bottom of the League with Forest, than there has been for Norwich manager Mike Walker at the top.
Clough has deserved the plaudits for sticking to his football principles but, as he knows, it takes courage to play your football at the top of the League too.
Norwich's nerve hasn't failed them and according to their players, it won't.
Midfielder David Phillips says: ‘It's like a holiday camp here.
The fact that everyone is writing us off doesn't bother us.
We get the papers in the dressing room on Mondays and we just laugh when we read them.’
Norwich, with their homely attitude, their small gates, their inability to pay huge transfers and their level egos, are the sort of club the Premier plotters had hoped to exclude.
They may yet get their wish when Premier League II comes along.
In the meantime, wouldn't it be a wonderful kick in the teeth for the ‘platinum clubs’ if the first Premier silverware went to Norwich.
A case for self control
JOHN UZZELL is entitled to feel bitter about the elbow in the face from Gary Blissett that ended his career.
But it was entirely inappropriate for Blissett to be charged with causing grievous bodily harm, an offence we associate more with dark alleyways and the wielding of iron bars rather than football fields.
As nasty as Blissett's challenge may have appeared, he transgressed only the laws of football and was rightly punished by the football authorities.
When sport fails to deal adequately with the excesses of its performers, it is right and proper for the courts to take over.
Such a sport, though, would by then already have become meaningless.
For a man painted as a heartless thug last week, Blissett himself has shown a lot of character.
Despite the stigma and stress associated with a court case that threatened him with jail, he has so far managed to score 17 goals for Brentford in the First Division this season.
England tour threat
Graham Otway
ENGLAND'S winter cricket tour to India could be put in serious danger by a prolonged outbreak of Hindu-Moslem violence.
With only three weeks to go before the 16-man squad departs to the sub-continent, rioting across the country has put Lord's on the alert.
The unrest has claimed more than 200 lives across the country so far, and yesterday saw a riot by 10,000 in Bombay where Graham Gooch's men are due to play a Test in the New Year.
But TCCB cricket secretary Tim Lamb said Lord's would not be panicked into making an early decision about the tour which leaves Heathrow on December 28.
Lamb said: ‘We are aware of what's been going on in India and obviously things are not as rosey as we would have liked, but we all hope the conflict will die down.
Lamb said: ‘There is still three weeks to go before the team leaves and we will monitor events very carefully between now and then.
‘If the situation does not ease we would take advice nearer to the date from the Foreign Office about the tour, but at the moment we are not in the business of calling it off unilaterally.’
Liz runs up profit
LIZ McCOLGAN has agreed a £500,000 deal to run in the next three NutraSweet London marathons.
It is believed to be one of the biggest individual race contracts in the history of athletics.
Officials refuse to discuss the deal, but the world 10,000m champion is expected to earn up to £500,000 for competing in the race until 1995.
And McColgan predicted she would smash Ingrid Kristiansen's world best during the three-year assault.
‘One of the reasons I chose London was that it's a fast course and it would more special to break a record in front of a home crowd,’ she said.
Wilkinson title blow
REIGNING champion Gary Wilkinson last night lost his grip on the Coalite World Matchplay snooker title at Doncaster.
World No 8 Wilkinsonfrom Kirkby-in-Ashfield, went down 9-7 to stablemate Martin Clark, having fought back from 8-4.
Kiwi struggle
NEW ZEALAND are struggling to avoid the follow-on in the second Test against Sri Lanka after collapsing to 100-7 in Colombo yesterday.
Jayananda Warnaweera took 4-24 after Sri Lanka had scored 394.
Faldo award
NICK FALDO picked up the Ritz Club Golfer of the Year award and the Vardon Trophy, given to the European Tour's leading money-winner, at the Tour's annual dinner in London last night.
King Cronje
HANSIE CRONJE took 5-32 as South Africa romped to a six-wicket win over India in their one-day international in Cape Town yesterday.
Fry sets police on Stan
Ben Bacon
SACKED Barnet boss Barry Fry last night promised to shop chairman Stan Flashman to the police.
Fry, who admits he fears for his safety, wants Flashman investigated by Barnet police over allegations that the former ticket tout threa-tened him and the players.
And he intends to encourage the players to outline the verbal and physical threats they claimed to have publicly received from Flashman.
Superintendent Roy Symons of Barnet police promised to ‘investigate rigorously’ any threat claims which are brought to his attention.
In a radio interview on Sunday, Flashman warned Fry to ‘stay as far away as possible.’
Fry alleges more sinister threats have been made.
He said: ‘I fear for my safety.
The players brought out into the open the threats they have received, and I have also suffered them.
‘When I was manager, I previously told Chief Inspector Dick Hebberd, who used to be in charge of policing at Underhill, about them, but he has since been transferred.
‘I intend to contact Roy Symons and tell him.
I want Barnet police to investigate Stan Flashman over them.
I will also be encouraging the players to come forward because something must be done.’
Chief Insp Hebberd, now stationed in Kilburn, declined to comment.
This latest development is another blow for Flashman, who has received a number of crushing setbacks recently.
Last month, the club was found guilty of financial irregularities and fined £50,000 by the Football League, then last week Fry was sacked and the club, plus Flashman's north London mansion, was raided by tax officials.
The League announced yesterday that Barnet have appealed against the severity of the fine, and a hearing is likely to be heard in the New Year.
Fry again urged Flashman, who insists he won't sell to any consortium which will employ his former manager, to leave the Third Division club or risk its future.
He said: ‘If Flashman doesn't get out, then I have no doubt the club will not be in existence this time next year.‘
Heat is off Kendall
Rob Shepherd
Everton 2 Liverpool 1
FOR Howard Kendall, it was a night of sheer relief.
For Graeme Souness it was one of utter frustration.
Rarely has a Merseyside derby — and there have now been 147 of them in the League — had such significance for one of the managers.
Had Everton lost, then there is no doubt that the mutterings of discontent around Goodison Park would have become an audible cry challenging Kendall's leadership.
And it appeared the game, and perhaps Kendall's tenure, was slipping away when Mark Wright converted Liverpool's supremacy into a 62nd-minute lead.
As Souness punched the air in triumph, seeing a player he is ready to discard apparently maintain his side's impressive recovery in the Premier League, Kendell sat motionless in the dug-out.
A man alone.
They have yet to repeat the campaign of eight years ago, when slogans of ‘Kendall Out’ were daubed around the ground.
But just when it seemed the writing was about to be put back up on the wall, Kendall found an unlikely saviour.
Precious
Mo Johnston has been out of favour at Everton for some time.
Indeed, he has never really fitted in since Kendall brought him down from Scotland more than a year ago.
There has been talk of Johnston moving on, but within a minute of Wright's goal he gave Everton and Kendall a precious equaliser.
Understandably, Kendall could hardly contain himself, but it was nothing compared to the way he celebrated Peter Beardsley's winner six minutes from the end.
Kendall has doggedly maintained that, despite Everton's dreadful run which has dragged them towards the bottom of the Premier League, there is nothing intrinsically wrong with his side.
And so, as Beardsley wheeled away, Kendall made a point of moving towards the touchline, from his previously obscured position, to join in the celebrations in full view of the Goodison crowd.
By now Souness was the one slumped in his seat.
It was not difficult to see why.
To have lost a game against the local rivals that should have been sewn up was bad enough.
But for Beardsley, the man he allowed to walk out of Anfield and across Stanley Park, to be the hero appeared too much for the Liverpool manager to take.
Not least because Gary Ablett, another player who was a victim of Souness's clearout when he arrived at Anfield, had exchanged passes to enable Beardsley to find the space to hit his decisive 25-yard shot.
In his first reign at Everton, Kendall's fortunes changed when his side came back from the dead in a Milk Cup tie against Oxford back in 1984.
That game proved to be the turning point in the club's fortunes, and although there have been too many false dawns already in a thus far unsuccessful return, maybe last night's victory is the break Kendall has been waiting for.
Certainly, his side rode their luck.
Although the first half had been surprisingly passionless, it was Liverpool who were easily the better side, and had Ronnie Rosenthal seized three opportunities, they would have been comfortably in front by half time.
Trickery
In an attempt to change the direction of the game, Kendall dispensed with the sweeper system he had experimented with — but it was Liverpool, inspired by John Barnes, who increased their command following the break.
Barnes, using all his trickery and fine distribution, began to carve Everton's defence apart, but again Liverpool without Ian Rush lacked the final touch.
Torben Piechnik, and then Steve McManaman, both shot meekly after Barnes had created openings.
But after Barnes had forced Ablett to concede a corner, Liverpool finally got their reward when Wright jumped unchallenged to head beyond Neville Southall.
Even though Everton replied instantly, it still seemed Liverpool would win.
Barnes was desperately unlucky after a magnificent one-two with McManaman to see his volley come back off the foot of the post.
Liverpool continued to power forward, but in doing so left too much room at the back — a foolish thing to do when they know just how Beardsley can exploit space.
When Kendall snapped him up from the Anfield out-tray 16 months ago for £1m, everybody said what a bargain he had bought.
But the beleaguered Everton manager would have paid £1 million just for that precious late goal.
Ref is upset
KETTERING referee Brian Hill yesterday blamed three top managers for his Premier League demotion.
Hill feels brushes with Manchester United's Alex Ferguson, Liverpool's Graeme Souness and Howard Wilkinson of Leeds may have cost him his place in the top flight.
‘I have been happy with my performances,’ said Hill.
‘I don't know why I've been dropped but I can only think it's something to do with my run-ins with those high-profile managers.
‘If things go well for me in the Football League during January I'm sure I will be back in the green shirt.’
Batty blow rocks Leeds
Mike Walters
LEEDS UNITED'S season was dealt a further blow last night when David Batty admitted he was facing a lengthy lay-off.
Batty has been receiving electric shock treatment in a bid to cure the ankle ligament damage he sustained against Coventry on October 31.
But manager Howard Wilkinson's hopes that Batty would be available to spark a revival at Elland Road were dashed yesterday when the player said: ‘I can't set a comeback date and if things don't improve soon I'll have to see a specialist.’
The news is a huge blow for Wilkinson, who was banking on Batty's return to stem Leeds' growing crisis after a run of five defeats in six games.
Batty said: ‘I'd love to be out there helping the lads.
‘This is our biggest test of nerve since Howard Wilkinson became the manager here, but team spirit is still good.
If it wasn't I'd be worrying.’
‘We know what we are capable of achieving so we've got to dig deep and battle our way out of this bad spell.’
Sheffield United yesterday handed winger Brian Marwood a free transfer.
Fans in fury at Noades
Ben Bacon
CRYSTAL PALACE chairman Ron Noades has received personal threats and hate mail from angry fans after his indirect criticism of manager Steve Coppell last week.
Noades has revealed the full extent of fury from Selhurst Park supporters at what they perceived as his personal attack on Coppell.
Noades blamed unprofessionalism, a slipshod approach and complacency for the club's disappointing start to the season.
However, he has complained that he was misrepresented by newspapers, and had suffered a fierce backlash.
He said: ‘It's not nice to have threats and letters as I have had when you have a wife and family, and kids at school.
Letters
‘It was not an attack on the manager in any case.
I was stabbed in the back because I don't have those problems with Steve.
It was outrageous.
‘I then get letters of accusation, personal threats and everything from people who read the newspapers.
‘I don't think a change of manager would be of any benefit to Crystal Palace.
‘If you go back to 1980, they changed the manager four times and got relegated.
‘Steve has a contract, but I've never needed one with him.
‘If he said to me, he'll stay 12 months, he'll stay 12 months.
‘I have no intention of changing the manager.’
Ironically, Coppell's mailbag has never been so full of praise, despite the club being second from bottom of the Premier League.
Just last week, he said: ‘I have never received so many positive letters from supporters.
‘Some have praised our style and said it doesn't matter if we go down, so long as we keep playing football.
‘I don't know about that, but it's nice.
‘Even when we were at the top, I got critical letters about things such as team selection and tactics.’
Palace striker Paul Mortimer last night joined defender Lee Sinnott on the transfer list.
Clough praise
Tony Kell
BRIAN CLOUGH last night sent an early Christmas message to his Nottingham Forest board of directors.
‘They are the people I feel happiest for,’ said Clough after Forest's return to form with wins against Spurs in the Coca-Cola Cup and Leeds in the Premier League.
‘It's not been easy for the chairman and his board seeing us stuck on the bottom of the table,’ said Clough.
‘But they have not had one crib about it.
They've just let me and our coaches get on with the job of trying to get us out of the mess we were in, and still are in.
‘I have had nothing but support from the chairman, and not even the slightest hint of the dreaded vote of confidence.
‘I am genuinely delighted we were able to repay them just a little bit.
‘I just hope there's more to come.
But I have got to remind people that we are still on the bottom.’
Forest yesterday landed a £96,000 FA Cup bonus when the BBC chose their FA Cup third round home clash against Southampton for live screening on Sunday, January 3.
Saints will collect a similar amount.
Beck's blast
JOHN BECK took over as manager of Second Division Preston yesterday and immediately hit back at his critics.
The ex-Cambridge boss replaces Les Chapman, who was sacked 11 weeks ago.
Beck, who has signed a two-year roll-on contract, said: ‘I have been labelled as a certain type of manager with a certain method in mind.
‘I'm probably more open-minded than any manager in the League.’
Gary Peters, assistant to Beck at Cambridge, takes up a similar role.
Sam Allardyce becomes youth team coach.
Arsenal in brawl mystery
Mike Walters
ARSENAL manager George Graham last night tried to distance the club from allegations of a nightclub brawl which put an unidentified soccer star in hospital.
Graham, a confessed disciplinarian, issued a statement denying the involvement of any of the Gunners in a fracas following Saturday's 2-0 defeat against Southampton.
Hampshire Police confirmed yesterday that they were called to the scene of a fight outside the Captain's Corner nightspot in Southampton around midnight.
Gunners striker Paul Merson is believed to have been a witness to the incident.
A police spokesman said Saints' midfielder Terry Hurlock was set upon inside the club and former Arsenal forward Perry Groves helped restrain the attacker.
Trouble erupted again outside in the street which left a man injured.
But the wounded party refused to give his name to police, ambulance and hospital authorities.
The police spokesman revealed two local men were arrested in connection with the incident but were later released without charge because Hurlock didn't make a complaint.
Detective Sergeant Chris Warren of Southampton police fuelled the mystery further when he said: ‘My information is that a London footballer was knocked unconscious and taken to hospital.’
There is no suggestion that any player threw punches, and Graham said: ‘I've heard the rumours circulating and I've looked into it.
I'm satisfied no Arsenal player was involved.
‘We may be having one or two problems at the moment, but discipline isn't one of them — and as long as I'm here, it won't be.’
Despite Graham's protestations, Arsenal have picked up 23 bookings already this season and a growing injury list has further blighted the Gunners' bid for a third championship triumph in five seasons.
They go into Saturday's north London derby with Tottenham following three successive League defeats and minus the injured Nigel Winterburn, Alan Smith and Lee Dixon, who sustained a stress fracture of the kneecap at The Dell.
And Graham added: ‘It is a blow to lose Lee.
We are getting some terrible luck with injuries.’
Hurlock, 33, was involved in allegations of scuffling with team-mate David Speedie at a Jersey hotel earlier this year — but police said his conduct was beyond reproach this time.
That's what dreams are made of
Des Kelly
PETER BEARDSLEY last night took revenge on Liverpool and made his wildest dreams come true with an incredible Merseyside derby winner.
Everton's £1 million recruit from across Stanley Park snatched a famous victory just six minutes from time, when he drilled in a low shot from the edge of the penalty area.
Ironically, and to compound Liverpool's misery, the former England star was presented with the opening by another player discarded by Anfield manager Graeme Souness — £750,000 defender Gary Ablett.
After the vital 2-1 win, which eased the Goodison Park crisis, Beardsley said: ‘It means everything to get the winner in a derby — that is what dreams are made of.
‘We've been struggling a bit at Everton, especially at home, but we hope that will set us up for the rest of the season.’
Beardsley hit six derby goals in the rival red shirt, but this was his first in the blue since moving 16 months ago.
It also made him only the second man in history to score for both sides in a derby clash.
But he admitted: ‘Overall Liverpool deserved to win.
They played some great stuff and ran us all over the place.
‘We equalised their opening goal very quickly and that gave us a real lift because by then Liverpool could have been two or three up.’
He added: ‘I was very conscious that it was my first League goal here since May, but it was well worth waiting for.’
It was only Everton's second League win of the season at Goodison Park and eased the mounting pressure on their manager Howard Kendall.
He said later: ‘I'm delighted for Beardsley.
It was a great strike and created by Ablett.
They must have worked on that one at Liverpool.
‘I have never regretted signing Beardsley for one minute.
No, make that one second, a minute is too long.
‘I will look at the league table in the morning to put it all into perspective.
We are 17th and that is just not good enough.
‘But we are delighted with the result.
The fans here have not seen much all season and now they'll have smiles on their faces.’
The mood in the Liverpool camp was summed up by their skipper Steve Nicol.
‘We're all gutted,’ he grumbled.
Manager Graeme Souness blamed the end of an excellent run of three victories on his side's inexperience, claiming: ‘We lack ringcraft and that is a vital ingredient in that kind of match.
Sometimes you wonder how you lost a game — and that thought will keep me awake all night.’
The victory prompted incredible scenes of jubilation from the success-starved Everton fans who invaded the pitch on the final whistle.
Mo Johnston, playing only his second game after a two-month absence, scored in the 63rd minute to cancel out Mark Wright's towering header a minute earlier.
Then came Beardsley's late strike which secured Everton's first League derby win since March 1988.
Piper aiming to ruffle
Tom Lyons
NICKY PIPER'S thoughts this decisive week are divided between rival Nigel Benn and 70 feathered friends living in his back garden in Cardiff.
That's the number of birds the Welshman has in his aviary and he relaxes with them as he winds up preparations for Saturday's WBC title challenge against Benn at Alexandra Palace.
The 6ft 3in, 26-year-old Piper, officially Britain's brainiest boxer with a Mensa rating of 153, has won seven first prizes for best-coloured canaries at exhibitions this year.
Now he aims to come top in the ring when he faces the more experienced Dark Destroyer.
Piper explained: ‘I have already been written off by a lot of people and a lot of critics and I can understand Benn being favourite.
‘After all, he is the champion and he has been in with some of the best fighters of the day.
But I know myself and I am confident I have the beating of him.’
Piper has finished sparring and when he's not out running he spends most of his spare time with his birds.
He said: ‘Being with them is very relaxing.
They are good company and no trouble.
Now that exhibitions are over for the season, all they need is seed and water.
‘They are entertaining and patient creatures and I get a lot of pleasure from them.
They help take my mind off Benn but I'll be focusing solely on him when I leave for London.’
Piper is a former ABA light-heavyweight champion and this is his 19th professional bout.
His only defeat was when he stepped out of his weight division to meet British cruiserweight champion Karl Thompson from Manchester.
He conceded 12lb and paid the penalty when he was stopped in the third round.
Big puncher Benn sees Piper as a useful ‘warm-up’ before a lucrative return match with WBO champion Chris Eubank next spring.
He has halted most of his opponents in a 36-fight ring career, and his two defeats were to Michael Watson and Eubank.
Gemmill ready to stay
By Barry Lucas
BRIAN CLOUGH was last night close to persuading Scot Gemmill to sign a new long-term contract with Nottingham Forest.
Talks were said to be at an advanced stage and ‘going well’.
The 21-year-old Scottish Under-21 international, who was linked with Rangers during the summer, is one of 10 Forest players whose current contracts run out at the end of the season.
‘He's gone through what might be regarded as a quiet spell this season,’ said Clough.
‘He has taken the brunt of the criticism at our ground, but wrongly so.
Good ‘People think has given the ball away more than most.
But he always has two or three times more possession than most.
‘He never hides and in a lot of ways you could liken him to John McGovern.
There's no reason why he shouldn't have equally as good a career as McGovern, and people never fully appreciated just how good a player he was.’
Meanwhile, Manchester City's Welsh international goalkeeper John Dibble, is set to join Portsmouth.
McGrath resigns
JOHN McGRATH quit as manager of struggling Third Division Halifax Town yesterday.
as the storm clouds gathered over the struggling Third Division club.
McGrath, the club's 23rd post-war manager, was under increasing pressure from events both on and off the field.
Halifax have taken only two points out of the last 18, and And the club's directors will decide early next month whether or not to close down following the recent disclosure that Halifax were more than Pounds 100,000 in debt.
McGrath saw his side knocked out of the FA Cup by non-League Marine last month, followed by last week's 4-0 home Autoglass Trophy hammering by local rivals Bradford, and a 2-1 home defeat by Barnet last Saturday.
Halifax have taken just two out of the last 18 points.
McGrath, who took over from Jim McCalliog in October last year, for just 14 months, taking over in October last year from Jim McCalliog, and had 10 months of a two-year contract to run.
But his resignation means the club will not have to pay up his contract.
‘By going now I will be helping the club to solve their financial problems,’ he said.
Wash-out for Keegan
Dave Alexander
Bari 3, Newcastle United 0
NEWCASTLE'S Anglo-Italian Cup hopes yesterday failed to survive a storm of superior finishing by Bari.
Thunder, lightning and a torrential downpour provided an unreal prelude in the futuristic San Nicola stadium.
At half-time the driving rain temporarily disappeared but so had Newcastle's chances.
Bari were two goals in front through striker Bernadino Capocchiano and left no way back for Kevin Keegan's players.
And Keegand said: ‘You can see why the big problem throughout the club is forwards.
We need to get more on the end of our play — that's why we're looking to strengthen things up front.
It's imperative that we do it, and that's why we're looking now.
‘Our keeper picked the ball out of the net twice in the first half and didn't have much else to handle.’
Bari were relegated from Serie A last season despite spending millions on players, with David Platt consequently moving to Juventus for Pounds 8 million in the summer.
They are having a mixed season in Serie B but still showed too much class for a Newcastle side containing five of their younger players.
In fact, Bari, the last team to beat AC Milan in the league 47 matches and 18 months ago, were inspired by the makeweight in the Platt deal, Angelo Alessio.
The midfield man was involved in the move that put Bari ahead after five minutes.
He sent Rizzardi clear and his cross was missed by Brian Kilcline, enabling Capocchiano to put it away from close in.
Alessio set up number two for the striker after 27 minutes, breaking clear on the left to deliver a cross that was headed home from 10 yards.
Newcastle had to win both their Group A games to retain a chance of moving into the semi-final, but Keegan clearly saw this as a chance to use his developing players.
And England Under-21 centre-half Steve Howey, England youth team midfielder Alan Thompson and 17-year-old debut boy Richard Appleby were impressive.
Newcastle looked better in the second half, slogging their way forward in the heavy conditions looking for agoal.
Kilcline got the ball in the net with a header after 80 minutes but the referee Roger Milford disallowed it for pushing.
But when one came it was on the break, Tovalieri getting Bari's third.
Trevor plans ahead
By Tony Kell
TREVOR FRANCIS last night refused to bring down the curtain on his playing career, even though Sheffield Wednesday chairman Dave Richards has begged him to bow out.
Richards believes his 38-year-old player-boss should concentrate on the managerial side.
But Francis has replied by setting himself a new goal — carrying on past 40.
The former England striker revealed: ‘The chairman has been telling me the same thing ever since I took over 18 months ago.
Now I hope he carries on saying it for another 18 months.
‘If he does, it would mean that I'm still playing at 40 and I said many years ago that I felt that was possible.
Concern
‘I don't have a specific target of carrying on to the age of 40 and then retiring.
I'll just continue playing until I'm ready to pack in.’
Francis added: ‘The chairman's main concern is not wanting me to receive a serious injury which might prevent me from managing properly.’
Leeds cleared up the injury mystery last night surrounding England international David Batty.
Batty's leg was put in plaster after a bone scan detected a small hairline fracture of the tibia.
‘The plaster will be taken off next Monday, when Batty should be able to start training again,’ explained manager Howard Wilkinson.
Middlesbrough's third round FA Cup tie with Chelsea at Ayresome Park has been switched to Sunday, January 3.
The tie has been put back 24 hours on police advice as Boro's near neighbours, Second Division Hartlepool, face Premier League Crystal Palace at home in another third-round tie on the Saturday.
Deane on overtime
BRIAN DEANE was last night assured that his Sheffield United place is not under threat — even though the £3 million rated striker was demoted to the reserves on Monday.
Deane, anxious to end a wretched run that has brought him only one goal in 15 Premier League matches, failed to score in the reserves' 1-0 win at Leicester.
But Blades boss Dave Bassett defended the experiment, and said: ‘No way was it a punishment.
‘Brian himself was happy to play and he'll definitely be in the team against Everton on Saturday.
‘But I would play him in the juniors if I could.
It is just that I am trying to find ways of helping him through the first bad spell of his career.
‘Quite understandably, Brian is concerned about the way things are going, but I've got the utmost faith in him and resting him would gain nothing.’
Fry's offer
MERTHYR TYDFIL last night begged sacked Barnet manager Barry Fry to buy the club out.
So desperate are the Welsh GM Vauxhall Conference club to secure his services that chairman John Reddy has even told Fry he can name his own salary.
Merthyr want him to be their chief executive, masterminding their bid for Football League status — much as he did at Barnet.
And, in an unprecedented move, Reddy has also offered Fry the chance to buy his shareholding in the club.
After talks with Fry yesterday, Reddy said: ‘I have made Barry an offer that he will find very hard to refuse.
‘We have offered him the chance of coming here as chief executive — but also the opportunity to buy the club.
‘He has expressed a desire to own a Football League club.
We are knocking on the door of the League and I said to him: ‘Why not do a Barnet here?’’
Bruce is ready to move
KEEPER Bruce Grobbelaar has finally accepted he has no future at Liverpool.
The 35-year-old, who has collected 13 major trophies with the Anfield club, said: ‘I have slowly realised that I am not in Liverpool's plans for the future.’
This season, after the arrival of £1 million David James and the re-emergence of Mike Hooper, the Zimbabwean has started just nine of Liverpool's 28 games this season.
‘I wanted to go on playing here but life is too short to sit around doing nothing.
‘I'll play until I'm 40 and I wanted to do that with Liverpool.
I realise now there's no possible means of that.’
Grobbelaar, who has already been linked with Chelsea this season, has made 591 appearances for Liverpool since his arrival from Vancouer Whitecaps for £250,000 in 1981.
He added: ‘If all doors are closed in this country I would play abroad and I will give 100 per cent wherever I play.
‘I will be playing in the reserves at Newcastle tomorrow night because I need a game under my belt to get ready for Zimbabwe's qualifying group match against Egypt in Harare a week on Sunday.’
Bad formula
Michael Wale
AS THE arguments rage over whether Nigel Mansell will return to Formula One, a New Zealander who nurtured the career of Mansell's rival Ayrton Senna fears Britain may never produce a Formula One champion again.
Dick Bennetts runs West Surrey Racing from an engineering works near the M3, concentrating on Formula Three but serving Formula One with a supply of drivers.
His team has proved a successful nursery for a succession of young drivers who have made the Grand Prix circuit.
Talented
Belgian Bertrand Gachot, Emmerson Fittipaldi's nephew, Christian Fittipaldi from Brazil, and another Brazilian, Rubens Barrichello, who joins Eddie Jordan's Formula One team next season, are his latest successes.
Not one British driver among them.
Yet Bennetts said: ‘I'd love to run a young British driver.
There are a lot of young talented British drivers around.
‘But they don't get the backing from British industry.
I class myself as English now and I know the talent is out there.
‘You see all these Italian and French drivers being taken on in Formula One because their country's industries back them.
‘The Brazilians who come over are generally backed by food companies.’
Bennetts came here on holiday from New Zealand 20 years ago and never returned, ending up working for McLaren boss Ron Dennis until he founded WSR 10 years ago.
Senna was soon to become his first star.
‘It was the last Formula Three race of the season and we gave this Brazilian Ayrton Senna da Silva a drive,’ he said.
‘He got pole position and won by 13 seconds.
‘We signed him and when he came back from Brazil at the beginning of the next season, he explained that he had changed his name, dropped the da Silva.
‘I believe he did this because the da Silva was as common as Smith in Portuguese.
I do remember we'd already put his full name on the car and had to remove the last part of it.’
Senna went on to win nine Formula Three races in succession and his success was to ensure a regular succession of hopeful young Brazilians leaving home to drive under the watchful eyes of Bennetts.
After that one incredible season in Formula Three, Senna went straight into a Formula One seat.
To run a Formula Three car sets West Surrey Racing back almost Pounds 300,000 a season.
Drivers are expected to organise their own sponsorship, with WSR chipping in.
But Bennetts is willing to lower the driver's backing to £150,000 if he's British.
He recruits young drivers from their results on the karting and lower formula racing circuit.
This week he'll give a test drive to 19-year-old Christian Horner from Warwickshire.
He said: ‘He finished fourth or fifth in the Formula Renault Championship.
For a newcomer into single seaters he seems to be doing well.
‘In the end, it will depend on his sponsorship.
‘In fact, there are half a dozen good Brits out there.
‘I know the recession is world over.
But that isn't the reason for these kids not getting backing.
I can't put my finger on it.
But, given the money, I know we could come up with a British winner.’
No match for Morley
Henry Rix
RICHARD Dunwoody has turned down the chance to renew his association with former Champion Kribensis in the Bula Hurdle at Cheltenham on Saturday.
The Ulsterman has decided to remain faithful to 1991 Champion hero Morley Street, as Toby Balding's eight-year-old clashes with Granville Again for a second time this season.
Kribensis, out of action since gashing a hind leg at Cheltenham in March, pleased Dunwoody and trainer Michael Stoute in a schooling session yesterday.
However, Stoute stressed: ‘I am keen to get a run into him.
But I wouldn't want him to make his comeback on desperate ground.’
Graham McCourt and Declan Murphy are on the shortlist to replace Dunwoody on Kribensis.
Morley Street beat his full brother Granville Again in the slowly-run Elite Hurdle last month, but has since been beaten by Muse over two and a half miles at Ascot.
Muse's stablemate Oh So Risky, three lengths back in third in the Elite, renews rivalry.
Mark Tompkins confirmed yesterday that Halkopous will be his Bula Hurdle representative in favour of Staunch Friend.
Speed star Lyric Fantasy, who recently changed hands for 340,000 guineas, will remain in training with Richard Hannon.
What a team
TODAY racing experts hit the jackpot at Sedgefield yesterday.
Racing Editor Henry Rix consolidated his lead at the top of the national tipsters' table with 7-1 nap Cheeky Pot, and the same horse rewarded Top Shot followers with a 14 point profit.
Our excellent placepot feature Pot Luck proved successful at Market Rasen, yielding a £41.10 return to an £8 stake.
Piper won't be ruffled
Tom Lyons
NICKY PIPER'S thoughts this week are divided between Nigel Benn and 70 feathered friends in his back garden in Cardiff.
The Welshman keeps the birds in his aviary and relaxes with them as he winds up preparations for Saturday's WBC title challenge against Benn at London's Alexandra Palace.
The 6ft 3in, 26-year-old Piper, officially Britain's brainiest boxer with a Mensa rating of 153, has won seven first prizes for best-coloured canaries at exhibitions this year.
He has now finished sparring for the big fight and when he's not out running he spends most of his spare time with his birds.
Plumpton
PLUMPTON yesterday became the 12th meeting of the National Hunt season to be called off after parts of the course were found to be waterlogged.
At Market Rasen, Celtic Chief, the 1989 Champion Hurdle winner, could finish only third to Phils Pride on his first outing for Champion trainer Martin Pipe in the Newark Storage Novices' Chase.
It was a miserable day for the Pipe team, who later suffered reverses with hot favourite Cool Clown and Riverside Boy, who unseated Peter Scudamore at the start after coming under orders.
Warrior Glenn out to conquer world
Giles Smith
IN his black and silver warrior's robes, brandishing his flashing, menacing sword — and it is a real one — Glenn Lobo looks ready to do someone a great deal of mischief.
But when the 28-year-old Luton osteopath becomes Britain's only competitor in this month's Pentjak Silat World Championships in Indonesia, harming an opponent will be the last thing on his mind.
‘If I wanted to get into a fight, I could pick one behind any pub in Luton any night I wanted,’ he says, only half jokingly.
But anyone fancying their chances in a fight with this highly intelligent Goan who has lived all his life in this country had better watch out.
For he's one of the most highly qualified exponents of the ancient and mysterious martial art of pentjak silat — not just in Britain, but in the world.
Glenn has frequently been for training in one of the world's most deadly martial arts to its home in Malaysia, where he became the only non-Malay, non-Muslim to reach the Jurulatih, or ‘expert in technique’ grade.
Now he plans to put nearly 10 years of dedicated training to the test and go for a medal in the forthcoming World Championships.
‘I was sixth out of 21 in the last championships in 1987.
Now I want a top three medal, and I genuinely believe I can get one,’ he said at the Luton social club where he runs one of the few silat classes in this country — there are less than a hundred active practitoners of the martial art in Britain.
It's an extremely complicated and difficult martial art to learn, even to understand just watching.
‘It has elements of karate, jujitsu, Thai boxing, and many forms of wrestling.
But the most important element is the artistic and spiritual side.
‘It's not just winning the fight, it's how you do it, the style is just as important and wins you just as many points,’ says Glenn.
Suspect
Nor is he interested in hurting people, though you suspect he could if he put his mind to it — and the sword is only used in the artistic non-combat part of the competition.
‘I have seen people badly hurt in the sport, broken arms and fingers, gouged eyes, but when that happens it's because people aren't doing it right.
‘It's potentially a very tough, very violent martial art, but the essential point is that it can, and should, be very beautiful and very graceful,’ he adds.
‘You do tend to get thugs looking for a fight trying to join up for my classes, that's why you have to be very selective.’
For the moment though, the students will have to take a rest as Glenn jets out to do battle for glory in the world championships.
Saints search
Ray French
ST HELENS coach Mike McClennan is to quit Knowsley Road at the end of this season and return home to Auckland.
The former New Zealand Test player, who has guided the club to a Lancashire Cup final win and two runners-up appearances in the Challenge Cup and Premiership finals, could not be persuaded to extend his stay for another season.
Saints secretary, Geoff Sutcliffe, said: ‘We have been discussing the situation with Mike for some weeks now, but he wishes to leave and we will advertise the job in this country and abroad.’
McClennan added: ‘I have told Saints that I want a complete break from coaching and I will return home to Auckland at the end of the season.’
Current St Helens skipper Shane Cooper and former Wigan boss Graham Lowe are among the favourites to takeover.
Jahangir on way back
PAKISTAN'S Jahangir Khan yesterday continued his great comeback from injury with a 17-15, 15-7, 15-7 win over England's Tony Hands in the first round of the Hong Kong Open squash Championship.
Houston joy
TOUCHDOWNS by Bubba McDowell, Webster Slaughter and Lorenzo White gave the Houston Oilers a 24-7 NFL win against the Chicago Bears.
Moving on
SKIPPER Huw Woodland has dealt Maesteg a blow by joining First Division rivals Neath.
The centre will link up with former Maesteg coach Leighton Davies.
Testing time
GREAT BRITAIN rugby league stars Paul Loughlin (broken arm) and Mike Gregory (knees) plan make-or-break comebacks after lengthy injuries.
Charged
A 27-year-old man has been charged with causing actual bodily harm to Kingstonian goalkeeper Adrian Blake during the FA Cup replay with Peterborough.
Whacked Wayne is still on winner
Giles Smith
WAYNE FERREIRA won himself $100,000 yesterday — for being humiliatingly beaten in the first round of the Compaq Grand Slam Cup.
The fifth-seeded South African's embarrassing nice little earner lasted just an hour-and-a-half as he lost an up-and-down match to eccentric Frenchman Henri Leconte.
Ferreira went down 3-6, 6-3, 6-0 but raked in the greenbacks at an astonishing rate of more than $1,000 a minute.
Leconte wins a minimum of $300,000 for reaching the quarter-finals of this year-end event — which has prize-money of an incredible $6 million, the winner taking $2m.
It was an extraordinary victory for the 29-year-old Leconte, ranked nearly 50 places below world No 12 Ferreira.
In the first set he simply wasn't in the same class as his 21-year-old opponent in the huge Olympic Hall, at times pleading theatrically with Ferreira not to hit so hard, and giving his racket to a ball-boy as if to say, ‘you have a go, you can't be worse than me.’
But somehow Leconte pulled himself together to take the second set and the decider became a rout.
Now it was Ferreira's turn to show his frustration, often slamming his racket to the ground in anger as he could only muster 11 points in a set lasting only 20 minutes.
Afterwards Leconte, who only resumed training a week ago after injuring himself in the Paris Open, admitted he was surprised at the way Ferreira had fallen to pieces.
‘In the first set, I was just trying to get the ball back in play but in the third set my confidence really came back,’ he said.
Australia's Wally Masur also flew home with $100,000 under his belt after going out to seventh-seeded Czech Petr Korda 2-6, 7-5, 6-4.
Meanwhile, to the organisers' relief, American Davis Cup heroes Andre Agassi, Pete Sampras and John McEnroe flew in after a complicated, half-Concorde, half-private jet dash following their Fort Worth final triumph over Switzerland.
With world No 1 Jim Courier and Boris Becker boycotting the event because they say they're too tired, organisers were relieved to see Agassi and McEnroe turning up to add star appeal.
McEnroe, with his widely-publicised marital problems, looked anything but happy to be here, refusing to answer questions and scowling at photographers.
Croatia's Goran Ivanisevic beat Frenchman Guy Forget 7-5, 6-4.
Holland's Richard Krajicek became the fourth man through to the big money stage when he beat Spain's Emilio Sanchez 6-3, 6-2.
Eric's hopes sky high
Tony Roche
Cambridge 19 Oxford 11
ERIC PETERS inspired Cambridge to a remarkable Twickenham triumph with a display that could book his place on the England squad plane to Lanzarote on December 31.
The 22-year-old No 8 was the key to a back row supremacy that absorbed, disheartened and ultimately destroyed Oxford's thrust for glory in the 111th Bowring Bowl Varsity match.
Underdogs Cambridge survived a desperate opening 13 minutes during which they never set foot in Oxford's half.
But the Dark Blues did everything but score and paid heavily when Peters and his physically lighter troops cut loose in the second half.
Peters said: ‘They threw everything at us and got nothing, whereas our small breaks to their half did produce points.
‘In the end, we played positionally rather than going for an all-out assault, otherwise we might have had an even bigger score.’
Strength
Oxford, with Australian flanker Brendan Nasser the only full international on view, had most people's money on their backs on the strength of an allegedly superior back row.
And Cambridge were doubly hampered by what Peters admitted was ‘major problems with our goal-kicking.
He said: ‘We have struggled all season to find the right guy but Lloyd Davies came up trumps when it really mattered.’
Davies kept his nerve, contributing a drop goal, two penalties and a conversion to the final tally.
And Peters added: ‘This makes it a university record.
Lloyd's brothers Graham and Adrian have also played and scored for us in recent years, so I guess we will have to start scouring the valleys now to find another of his relatives.’
Oxford captain Michael Patton cut a desolate figure after his second successive Varsity defeat.
He said: ‘It was my last chance to be a winner.
I was so disappointed that I couldn't speak at the final whistle.’
Respective coaches Lynn Evans and Tony Rodgers were in total agreement on one point — their dislike of the new ruck and maul law which both men insisted ‘deprives the game of shape, creates offside situations around the edges which spoil back play and denies the attacking side the right to establish and sustain pressure’.
Oxford gave the 54,000 crowd the imperfect example of pressure, a sustained forward roll that yielded exactly zero.
But Cambridge found their feet and took an audacious lead.
Davies snapped the ball from the back of a ruck to send a drop goal sailing home true after 26 minutes but when Nial Malone equalised with a penalty two minutes later and then added a drop goal in the 32nd minute, it looked as if Oxford were going to turn their pressure into victory.
Kevin Price gave us a glimpse of what was to follow with a clever break and when the ball was set up from the resulting ruck, Paul Flood was equally successful with a drop goal.
When Davies converted a penalty three minutes into the second half, Oxford realised that it was time to take matters into their own hands.
And from a scrum, South African scrum-half Fanie du Toit broke on the blindside and sent left-wing David Spence racing to the corner to restore their lead.
But Davies restored the Cambridge situation with a 62nd-minute penalty and the Light Blues took total control with a wonderful try inspired by Peters.
Peeling from the back of a line-out he thundered through the Dark Blue ranks.
And, although he was halted on the line, Cambridge retained possession, Flood sending Richard Batstone hurtling in on the left for a try that Davies converted.
Peters added: ‘This is my last Varsity match also and I know how much Mike Patton and I have put into the season because it all builds up to this one day at Twickenham.
‘Now I can look forward to going back to playing club rugby for Saracens.’
And possibly also look forward to extending an England career that has already taken in student and Under-21 honours.
Roche agony
FORMER Tour de France champion Stephen Roche last night revealed the agony behind his decision to retire admitted the pressure cycling exerted on his family life prompted his decision to retire the end of next season.
The 32-year-old Irishman said his struggle to return to the form which won him the world title and Tours of France and Italy in 1987 his 1987 level, when he won a world title and the Tours of France and Italy, had placed strains on his family.
Roche speaking at the launch of next year's Leeds Classic, said: ‘I did everything I could to be good again, but I had problems.
‘I was like a pressure-cooker.
I became more egotistical and more dedicated.
It produced more tension and more time away from my family.’
Shattered Parrott is sent crashing
Frank Ward
JOHN PARROTT headed home last night to enjoy a snooker-free Christmas while James Wattana began his preparations for a Coalite World Matchplay semi-final debut.
World No 2 Parrott, out of form and out of sorts, slumped to a 9-3 defeat and then admitted: ‘I'm bushwhacked.’
The 28-year-old Merseysider, a beaten Matchplay finalist in 1988 and '89, added: ‘I've played snooker constantly since August and need a break.
I came to Doncaster not feeling I was going to win.
‘If I was a horse I'd be called ‘over the top’.
I always enjoy Christmas but I'm going to enjoy it even more this year.
I certainly won't be going in the practice room for a few days.’
Ironically, Parrott shot out of the starting stalls.
He won the first two frames and seemed on course to avenge a 10-5 defeat in last month's Belgium Masters final in Antwerp.
But errors crept into his game and, by the end of the opening session, world No 7 Wattana led 6-2 after knocking in breaks of 41, 65, 38, 73 and 43.
He then extended his frame-winning sequence to seven when play resumed with another half-century.
Although Parrott knocked in 81 — the best break of the quarter-final clash — his agony was over just 31 minutes later.
‘I always enjoy playing the world's top four players because there's less pressure on me,’ said Wattana, who now meets either world champion Stephen Hendry or Alan McManus.
Wattana's win means he has assumed World Series favourite status from Parrott, who began the day with a two-point lead after events in Beijing, Motherwell and Antwerp.
A place in Saturday's final would guarantee Wattana the title.
On a happier note for Parrott, his manager Phil Miller is recovering well from last week's heart bypass operation.
‘That's the best news I could possibly have,’ said Parrott.
Taylor grabs his chance to sink Windies
Mike Allan
MARK TAYLOR made a spectacular debut as Australian captain yesterday, snapping up four slip catches as they beat the West Indies by 14 runs in a rain-affected World Series match at Sydney.
Australia struggled to score 101-9 in a match reduced to 30 overs per side but hit back to dismiss the West Indies for 87 with three balls to spare.
The West Indies looked in control, chasing 102 for victory after a damp wicket and early afternoon rain delayed the start of play.
However, they never recovered after crashing to 31-5 as Taylor took an Australian one-day record four catches and used his bowlers impressively in the absence of injured regular captain Allan Border.
Claimed
Gus Logie top-scored for the West Indies with 20, while Paul Reiffel claimed 3-14 in six impressive overs for the Australians.
Earlier, Australia found themselves struggling after being sent in to bat.
Dean Jones top-scored with 21 and Mark Waugh made a brisk 17.
Meanwhile, New Zealand skipper Martin Crowe struck a defiant century yesterday to help keep his side afloat in the second Test against Sri Lanka.
‘It was the best century I have ever played,’ said Crowe as his side finished the third day on 277-6 -still 15 short of avoiding an innings defeat.
Crowe's 107 gave the visitors faint hopes of saving the match after they were dismissed earlier for 102, their lowest first innings total against Sri Lanka.
Crowe, out for a duck first time around and whose previous highest score on the tour was 19, recaptured his form at a fitting moment.
He was out in the last over before tea after completing his 15th Test century.
He batted for 159 minutes, facing 121 balls, and with left-hander John Wright adding 159 runs for the third wicket, it was New Zealand's only partnership of substance.
In the Kiwis' first innings, Jayananda Warnaweera took 4-25 and Muthiah Muralidaran 3-22, their best Test figures.
Allen's singing in rain
Cosenza 0, W Ham 1
CLIVE ALLEN took his tally to seven goals in five games with a spectacular volley on the stroke of half-time in rain-lashed Cosenza last night.
The waterlogged pitch, which survived two inspections by English referee Roger Dilkes, made football impossible as both teams struggled to get the ball forward in the driving rain.
But Hammers debut boy Steve Jones did not allow the Italian storms to dampen his first appearance following last month's £22,500 transfer from Billericay.
Partnering the experienced Allen up front, in place of the suspended Trevor Morley, Jones supplied a perfect cross just before the interval.
Allen, ankle-deep in water and with no hope of carrying the ball forward, chalked up his 14th of the season when he unleashed a crashing 25-yard volley which gave goalkeeper Graziani no chance.
On the hour, Jones waded forward again but this time Graziani pushed his crashing shot behind.
George Parris also went close in the dying minutes, but Allen's effort proved sufficient to keep Hammers' Anglo-Italian Cup hopes alive.
Allon is Bees hero
Cesena 0, Brentford 1
JOE ALLON'S 80th-minute goal helped Brentford to their third consecutive Anglo-Italian Cup victory yesterday.
Allon, who only passed a fitness test an hour before the kick-off, was on hand to lob home a long clearance from defender Jamie Bates to record his fourth goal in five games since his record £275,000 signing from Chelsea last month.
The Bees hopes of qualifying for the semi-final now rest on Bari's visit to Griffin Park next Wednesday.
But Brentford owed their victory to goalkeeper Graham Benstead, who made some fine saves.
Manager Phil Holder enthused: ‘I was delighted with Benstead's return, he made some tremendous one-on-one saves.
Joe took his goal well and we improved our defending in the second period.’
Peter's priceless
Des Kelly
HOWARD KENDALL last night hailed Peter Beardsley as the near-priceless asset that Liverpool let slip away.
The Everton manager, in the wake of Monday night's 2-1 Merseyside derby triumph, then issued a hands-off warning to any clubs tracking his match-winning Geordie genius.
Newcastle manager Kevin Keegan tried to lure Beardsley back to his native North East earlier this season, but Kendall spurned their attempt for the player he holds up as an example to all professionals.
He said: ‘I got Peter for £1 million and when you look at the lack of quality around today I would not argue when people say I got a bargain.
‘Put it this way, there would be an entirely different figure on him now if I had to name a price, even though he is 32 in January.
‘Realistically, only Blackburn Rovers could afford to buy him and even then we wouldn't let him go…although it would be nice if they tried to tempt me,’ he quipped.
‘From day one he has just been a super example to everyone — from YTS players to internationals — with his performances in matches and in training.’
Kendall then explained the background to his transfer coup.
‘I was in Switzerland on a pre-season tour and I had just missed out on sign ing Dean Saunders,’ he said.
‘Liverpool had also bought Mark Wright and when a club has spent more than £5m they are bound to be looking to recoup some money.
‘Beardsley had not been a regular under Kenny Dalglish and even Graeme Souness had left him out.
Quality
‘So when I contacted Liverpool and was told he was available I w sted no time in setting up the deal.
‘I just wish I had the opportunity to buy a quality player like that more often, but they are not around even if you have the money.
You cannot buy players like Peter for £1m these days.’
Meanwhile, strike partner While there has been no doubting the high regard Beardsley is held in around Everton, many had begun to question Mo Johnston, whose future at Goodison had been in doubt after two months in the cold, looks to have earned a temporary reprieve following his equaliser against Liverpool.
Johnston said: ‘Things have not gone very well for me at Everton and I spoke to the gaffer recently about it.
He The gaffer felt I was upset because I was not in the side, but I've had a virus.
I feel a lot stronger now and that was the best I've felt on Monday.’
Kendall added: ‘It seems Mo is a big-occasion player.
But I want players to think it's a big occasion every time they wear an Everton shirt.
Nobody is guaranteed a run in the team.’
A downcast Souness was left to reflect on the opportunities lostsaid: ‘I was feeling disappointed during the game at the prospect of only getting one point.
‘I can't give any answers as to why we were beaten, but I felt we were turning the corner and starting to play the Liverpool way again.
Now the players have to pick up the pieces.’
Midfielder Ronnie Whelan is expected to be out of action for another month following his latest injury setback, a thigh injury which required surgery.
Rangers are given scent of success
Rob Shepherd
RANGERS' hopes of European Cup success have been enhanced by the defection of Russian goalkeeper Dimitri Kharin.
Chelsea-bound Kharin was due to make his farewell appearance for CSKA Moscow in the Scots' second match of the champions' league in Bochum.
The Russians were even prepared to pay Khalin a £7,000 bonus — more than a year's wages to a Russian footballer.
But the 24-year-old Kharin refused to leave Moscow and take part in his team's preparations for the game, preferring instead to make final arrangements before leaving his country and moving to Stamford Bridge in a £200,000 deal.
Kharin's three-and-a-half-year contract with Chelsea is expected to be ratified within the next week, when he receives a work permit.
Chelsea chief executive Colin Hutchinson said last night: ‘We know Kharin is not playing for CSKA against Rangers.
‘We understand he's still in Moscow, and he's just waiting for the work permit to come through before signing for us.’
‘We expect the permit to be approved within the next few days.’
That leaves the Russians relying on inexperienced stand-in Aleksandr Goteyen, and Mark Hateley and Ally McCoist will be looking to exploit him.
But CSKA, who beat holders Barcelona to reach this stage, remain philosophical.
Club president Victor Muraschko pointed out: ‘We used to export vodka — now it's footballers.
Western clubs are picking our bones.
‘We cannot ignore the money being offered, and the players want it.
Who can blame them?
If someone wants one of our players, then he will leave.
‘It's a big disappointment to lose Kharin, but despite that we still have a good team — although when we play Rangers in Glasgow in April I don't know how many players we will have left.’
If Rangers can produce a victory tonight's game — played on neutral territory because of the severe Moscow winter — their prospects of emerging from the group as winners will be enhanced, particularly as the last of their six games will be against what is likely to be an even more depleted Russian side.
Battle
Hateley pointed out: ‘I always felt the league format might help us.
‘The standard of football we produced against Marseille did not warrant us a place in the final.
But we still managed to battle back and get a draw, and the away goals we conceded did not become crucial.
‘Hopefully we have learned something from that game.
We got a bad performance out of our system and now we are in the mood to show what we can really do.’
Rangers manager Walter Smith has one major injury doubt, England international Gary Stevens.
If he fails a fitness test on his knee, Stuart McCall will be switched to right-back, with Smith left to decide between Trevor Steven, Alexei Mikailichenko and Dale Gordon.
Cup test
ENGLAND will play their opening match against Germany in next year's US Cup in an indoor stadium.
The four-team tournament in June, which also includes America and Brazil, was officially launched last night.
England will face the world champions in the Pontiac Silverdome near Detroit on a grass surface which will be laid over artificial turf.
And England manager Graham Taylor admitted: ‘Any player worth his salt must be interested in playing for his country against the likes of Germany and Brazil, especially in the United States where the next World Cup will be played.’
Taylor will bring his side to the competition following two World Cup qualifiers on May 29 in Poland and June 2 in Norway.
Sunil Gulati, chairman of the competition, said: ‘We will use this tournament with an eye to the World Cup.’
Hornets give youth a fling
Mike Walters
BLACKBURN'S Alan Shearer could be marked by a teenage rookie making his full debut when Watford search for more Coca-Cola Cup glory tonight.
Britain's most expensive footballer, is likely to be shadowed by unknown 19-year-old Julian Alsford who, like seven of his team-mates, cost nothing.
Chelsea's FA Cup third-round tie at Middlesbrough has been switched to January 3.
Angry boss raps Walsh Powell is the Pompey hero
Graham Otway
Portsmouth 2, Lucchese 1
POMPEY boss Jim Smith branded striker Paul Walsh ‘stupid’ after he was sent off in their ill-tempered Anglo-Italian Cup tie victory at Fratton Park last night.
Walsh received his marching orders 75 seconds into the second half after aiming a kick at Lucchese's Roberto Marta.
The Italian was in the process of being shown the red card himself for a crunching tackle on Walsh when the Pompey striker hit back angrily.
Smith said: ‘Walsh was absolutely stupid.
To a certain extent you can understand retaliation in a hard game like that.
Pace
‘But he is a professional and you've got to be able to walk away from situations.
‘If he had walked away we would have been left with 11 men to their 10.’
Established to rekindle Anglo-Italian relations after the Heysel disaster, the tournament has only served to blacken the name of soccer.
The red card shown to Walsh and Marta meant that a total of 12 players have now received their marching orders in a competition that has yet to reach its semi-final stages.
Last night, in the rare intervals between bone-crunching tackles, there was some enterprising football.
A speedy, sixth-minute break saw Roberto Paci intercept Warren Neil's desperate back pass to give Lucchese the lead.
And the Italians looked well capable of further damaging Pompey's proud defensive record of only two home goals conceded this season.
The Italian Serie B side looked yards ahead in terms of skill and pace, and although Pompey fought hard to equalise, they did look vulnerable on the break.
In the 26th minute, only a last-ditch tackle from Andy Awford prevented Roberto Marta scoring an easy goal.
With both sides reduced to 10 men, di Francesco squandered two glaring chances to kill off Portsmouth.
And how the Italians paid for his wastefulness.
In the 76th minute, Darryl Powell stabbed an equaliser through the crowded penalty area.
And five minutes from time, he cheered a meagre 2,363 crowd — Pompey's lowest ever for a competitive game at home — with a clinical winner after a right-wing burst from Warren Aspinall.
Kiwis offer to save tour
Graham Otway
GRAHAM GOOCH'S England cricketers were yesterday offered the safe haven of New Zealand if the planned winter tour to India has to be abandoned.
This week's country-wide clashes between Moslems and Hindus have put the three-Test tour to the sub-continent — due to start on December 28 — in jeopardy.
But Kiwi cricket chief Peter McDermott is prepared to play host to England as an alternative to Gooch's men spending the complete winter unemployed.
New Zealand Cricket Board chairman McDermott told me: ‘I have not been approached by England, but if they need help we could provide it.
Pakistan are due to end a short tour here on January 8 and we have no international cricket scheduled then until the end of February, when Australia arrive here.
‘As far as I can see, putting together an international programme would not present too many problems — and it would be nice if we could tie in something with Australia as well.’
The Kiwis, however, would probably ask for a hastily-arranged tour based more around one-day internationals than Tests.
When England were in New Zealand last winter, the three-Test series was poorly attended, but the one-day games were a virtual sell-out.
That would not present a problem to England's selectors, since the 16-strong party picked for India already includes one-day specialists Graeme Hick, John Emburey and Neil Fairbrother with eight limited-overs games due to be played on the sub-continent.
Last night TCCB officials gave a cautious welcome to the Kiwi offer, spokesman Ken Lawrence saying: ‘At the moment we have not even thought of going elsewhere because we have not pulled out of the Indian tour.
‘But it is nice to think our old friends in New Zealand would help us out.
We certainly do not want a winter without any cricket.’
Indian cricket tour manager Amrit Mathur last night admitted his players were worried about the religious unrest at home.
‘The boys are naturally worried and they have been phoning home to find out more about the situation,’ Mathur said.
‘It is difficult to get full information here, but it is not something we want to comment on.’
Meanwhile, McDermott has said England should not hesitate to fulfil their two-week trip to civil-war torn Sri Lanka in March.
He was forced to fly to Colombo last month to rescue a New Zealand tour after a Tamil suicide bomber blew himself up just 50 yards from the Kiwis' team hotel.
McDermott said: ‘That was an isolated and freak incident that had no connection with the team.
‘Had it happened the week before we arrived, or on the other side of town, no-one would have noticed.
‘Since then, our players have said they are not at all worried.’
Kelly hits back over trial storm
Mike Walters
GRAHAM KELLY, the Football Association chief executive, last night defended himself against the barrage of criticism that greeted his evidence in the Gary Blissett trial.
Kelly revealed his anguish over the case that sparked a fierce debate in soccer and said: ‘Would the game's interests have been better served by Blissett spending Christmas in jail?’
Under fire from referees for his comments as a defence witness at Salisbury Crown Court last week, Kelly retorted: ‘When someone is facing a prison sentence and all the immediate trauma that it involves for his family, I believe the sensitivities of referees should come second rather than first.’
Kelly was talking for the first time since Brentford striker Blissett was acquitted of assaulting Torquay defender John Uzzell last week.
Torquay chairman Mike Bateson was outraged by Kelly's remark in court that Blissett's was an ‘ordinary aerial challenge.’
And the Association of Premier League and Football League Referees and Linesmen has issued a strongly-worded statement claiming Kelly has ‘caused immeasurable harm to the game.’
Uzzell, who suffered appalling facial injuries, will probably never play professional football again and still complains of dizzy spells.
Blissett, 28, was sent off for the challenge and received an automatic three-match ban for violent conduct under the FA disciplinary code.
Kelly added: ‘I am sorry for John Uzzell, but what can I do?
And what redress would he have had by Blissett going to jail?
‘I said in court that I might see 200 such challenges if I attended four games in a week — and I stand by that.
Of course I was not saying I see people elbowed in the face 200 times a week.
It really boils down to the question of intent.
I remain convinced that Blissett's challenge was not a premeditated or calculated assault on Uzzell.
‘I knew I was risking the possibility of offending referees or other people.
‘Bear in mind that I gave my evidence after Blissett had been charged by the FA for a serious breach of the laws of the game — and the experienced commission of inquiry, which conducted a rigorous investigation into the incident, cleared him.
‘No-one, me included, suggests that the referee (Arthur Smith of Birmingham) was wrong to dismiss Blissett.
It is unfortunate that the referees are upset.’
Rover Berg
Des Kelly
KENNY DALGLISH is poised to push his Blackburn spending towards the £12 million mark with a £300,000 swoop for Norwegian international defender Henning Berg.
The 21-year-old full-back from Lillestrom has agreed personal terms with Rovers and is now waiting for formal clearance to play in the Premier League.
Berg, who came on as substitute against England in the recent World Cup qualifier, said last night: ‘Everything is agreed between Blackburn, my club and myself.’
Jubilation for Sri Lanka
SRI LANKA yesterday clinched their first Test victory over New Zealand with a crushing nine-wicket success in Colombo.
Their third win in 42 Tests came 15 minutes before tea on the fourth day and was their first over the Kiwis in 11 Tests since the two countries first met at this level in 1982-83.
When the Kiwis were bowled out for 102 in their first innings the writing was on the wall.
Sri Lanka bowled New Zealand out for 361 shortly after lunch, spinners Muthiah Muralidaran (4-134) and Jayananda Warnaweera (2-107) sharing most of the work.
Wicketkeeper Adam Parore delayed Sri Lanka's victory bid by holding on for 223 minutes for a Test-best 60.
He was last out after hitting six fours and facing 184 balls.
New Zealand captain Martin Crowe said: ‘The spinners dominated the match and ended up winning it for them.’
Arjuna Ranatunga was ecstatic after his first win in 11 Tests since becoming captain in 1989-90.
‘A team effort won us the match,’ he said.
‘Our tail-enders did a good job to get us to 394.
‘Then when Warnaeera and Muralidaran got New Zealand out for 102, we knew we were in with a great chance of beating them.’
Fast Franz
SWITZERLAND'S Franz Heinzer clocked 2min 05.31sec before World Cup downhill practice was abandoned in Val Gardena.
Francis told he can buy
by Tony Kell
TREVOR FRANCIS has been promised more cash for new players despite Sheffield Wednesday's debts of around £2 million.
That overdraft has resulted from club-record spending by the Owls manager, who has splashed out £4.3m in his 18 months at the Hillsborough helm.
But Wednesday's playing stock has never been higher.
David Hirst and Chris Waddle recently attracted offers totalling £6.5m — swiftly rejected by directors who have the assets to justify further investment.
False
And chairman Dave Richards is looking far beyond a climb from the bottom half of the Premier League, a position Francis insists is false.
‘We are very ambitious and want to keep building,’ said Richards.
‘There's still money available should Trevor need it.’
Richards hopes for a longer liaison with his manager than the three-and-a-half-year deal just signed by Francis.
He added: ‘If things keep going well, Trevor can be at Hillsborough for as long as he wants.
We are happy with our progress we've made and it's really up to him.’
Bassett thanked
BRIAN MARWOOD, England winger turned Premier League reject, last night heaped gratitude on the man who has booted him out of Sheffield United.
‘Working for Dave Bassett has been the most important part of my football education,’ insisted Marwood, who won a Championship medal with Arsenal just three-and-a-half years ago.
Marwood's time at Bramall Lane looks more like a nightmare.
In 26 months since his £300,000 move from Highbury he has made just 18 full appearances — none this season — and has now been handed a free transfer.
But Marwood refuses to take issue with Bassett and, instead, has thanked him for furthering his management ambitions.
‘People say I must regret joining United, but I'm still pleased I came because working for Dave has been a great learning experience,’ said Marwood.
‘In particular, I've learned from his ability to man-manage.
I've admired his ability to get the best out of players and if I go into management, which is my aim, I'll take a lot of Dave with me.’
Allon sounds Roker alert
John Wardle
FORMER Newcastle United striker Joe Allon has Sunderland in his sights.
Allon, a life-long United fan, spearheads Brentford's attack at Roker Park on Saturday.
And the 26-year-old warned Roker fans last night: ‘I'd love to put one over Sunderland.
‘It would be a bit special to score against them in front of all my family and friends.’
But, once Saturday's game is over, Allon hopes Sunderland continue their climb up the First Division table — for the sake of manager Malcolm Crosby.
‘He's a great bloke and deserves to do well,’ said Allon, who has scored four goals in five games for Brentford since his £275,000 move from Chelsea last month.
The best is yet to come, says Keegan
David Alexander
NEWCASTLE celebrated their 100th birthday yesterday with manager Kevin Keegan promising: ‘It can only get better.’
‘The best years for this club are ahead.
The fans have got a right to expect that,’ said Keegan.
Newcastle are 12 points clear in the First Division and Keegan added: ‘There have been massive changes here and we're beginning to reap the rewards already.
‘The supporters here should have had more success.
The club has spent too many seasons in the Second Division and what the fans still talk about is the Fairs Cup win over 20 years ago.
Respect
‘Before that it was the great cup years of the early fifties but it's all too long ago.
‘In fact, the club's most successful time was in its early years and we'd like to re-create that.
‘We respect the past but our aim is to start something as exciting as anything that's ever happened here.
‘First, we want promotion this season and we're on course for that.
The credit is due to the players, who have nothing to fear if we go up.
‘This team will improve and we could expect to finish round about eighth in the Premier League without buying a player.’
Keegan led Newcastle to promotion in 1984 but the club failed to build on the success.
He added: ‘That was a great season from a playing point of view and the foundations were laid.
But when I left, I just felt it wouldn't happen, the politics weren't right.
But they are now.’
Dalian pulls his weight
David Harrison
DALIAN ATKINSON has turned himself from a confessed ‘fat, lazy, depressive’ into one of the country's most lethal marksmen.
The transformation is not yet complete.
Although he has already scored 13 goals for Aston Villa this season, the 24-year-old striker is self-critical enough to insist he is not yet firing on all cylinders.
When Atkinson moved from Real Sociedad to join Ron Atkinson in the summer of last year in a £1.6 million move, the world was at his feet.
He had been a raging success in Spain but was lured back to England by his namesake manager in the belief that his international prospects would be considerably improved.
‘I came back because I was hoping to get some England recognition and thought my chances would improve, especially under a manager whom I loved working with at Sheffield Wednesday,’ the player admitted.
Instead, he found only despair.
After scoring on his Villa debut against his former club, Wednesday, on the opening day of the season, he made only 13 more appearances because of injuries and failed to register another goal.
Self pity set in and so did eating binges.
Not even a torrent of verbal abuse from Ron Atkinson, nor a number of disciplinary fines, could jolt him out of his depression.
Dalian, who has scored in 12 of the 22 Villa games he has played in this season, explained: ‘When I came back from Spain a big adjustment had to be made.
I had got used to the pace over there which was so slow you could almost walk your way into scoring positions.
‘Because I was injured in my first game for Villa and then kept breaking down in training, I never had the chance to get sharp and readjust to the speed of the English game.
‘Our physio Jim Walker was great for me, tried to cheer me up by explaining that Mark Hughes had the same problem when he returned to Manchester United from Barcelona.
‘But the boss used to give me some right stick and told me I was no good to him lying in bed or on the treatment table.
‘He used to take the mickey out of me something awful.
While I knew he was only trying to give me a kick up the backside for my own good, I felt really, really low.
‘He fined me for being late and he fined me for being overweight.
I just got lazy.
‘It didn't help me to have to live in a hotel at the time.
I was always heading for the carvery and eating too much.
Because I wasn't in full training I wasn't burning the calories.
‘Most of my work was done on a bike.
I was probably better equipped to compete in the Tour de France than play top class football.’
The end of the season could not come quickly enough.
Atkinson went on holiday to America during the summer and began working himself back into shape to show Villa what they had missed last season.
‘It's not all there yet,’ he said.
‘I know I've got a lot more to offer despite the goals I've scored.
I'm an instinctive player and I'm still not doing the thing's I'm naturally good at.’
The arrival of Dean Saunders from Liverpool has ensured that Atkinson does not drift back into his apathetic state of mind.
Better
Their partnership has yielded 14 goals so far and looks capable of keeping Villa in the forefront of the Premier Division title race.
‘Deano works so hard and creates acres of space for me,’ said Atkinson.
‘His enthusiasm is so infectious.
When you see him charging around you can't help but get involved.
‘It's a good partnership and we think it's going to get better.
Things are shaping up nicely at Villa.
‘We've got a decent team but no-one here is going to tempt fate by saying what we can and can't win.’
Clark at the double
Ben Bacon
LEYTON ORIENT chief Frank Clark yesterday was appointed the managers' manager.
Clark, managing director at Orient, has been appointed chief executive of the League Managers Association, but will continue his duties at the club.
The ex-Nottingham Forest defender said: ‘My chairman is quite happy about it.
My advantage over the rest of the managers is that I can manipulate my time more.
Peter Eustace is entirely in charge of team affairs here.
‘I want the Association to have a powerful voice in the running of the game.
Too often in the past, when changes have been made, managers have been the last to know.
But in the last 15 months, the Association has made tremendous progress.’
Clark will take on his new role on January 1 from John Camkin, a former Coventry director, who will become the Association's secretary.
Association chairman, Leeds manager Howard Wilkinson, said: ‘We are extremely fortunate that Orient were prepared to allow a man of Frank's talent to take on the job.’
Abbey role
AXED Cambridge caretaker boss Gary Johnson has reverted to youth team coach at the Abbey Stadium following the appointment of Ian Atkins as manager.
Atkins, former No 2 to Birmingham boss Terry Cooper, is expected to bring in Luton physio-coach Brian Owen as his assistant.
Johnson was overlooked for the managerial job despite steering Cambridge to their first Coca-Cola Cup quarter-final.
Stig in Anfield chance
by Des Kelly
LIVERPOOL'S latest recruit Stig Inge Bjornbye is set for a dramatic debut next week after receiving a work permit.
The Norwegian international is scheduled to fly to Anfield on Sunday and he will officially complete a £600,000 deal 24 hours later.
Bjornbye could then step straight in against Crystal Palace in the Coca-Cola Cup replay on Tuesday despite fears over a head injury suffered a week ago.
The 22-year-old was carried off while playing for Norway in China and informed by the team doctor that he would be out of action until Christmas.
But I understand Graeme Souness could use him to replace the injured David Burrows.
Meanwhile, Mike Hooper is to retain his status as Liverpool's current No 1 goalkeeper and it appears Bruce Grobbelaar will be allowed to leave.
Souness said that the Zimbabwean had not approached him to discuss his future despite public grumblings from him that his future lay away from the club.
Souness said: ‘Bruce is finding it hard to accept he is no longer the automatic No 1.
I'm disappointed he did not discuss the matter with me.’
City interest
THE receiver handling the sale of Birmingham City has had 22 inquiries for the First Division club after it was formally put up for sale earlier this week.
Manchester-based Leonard Curties and Partners are busy drawing up a report on the club's financial affairs before attempting to finalise the sale next year for a fee of around £1.3 million.
Meanwhile, the receiver is still waiting for the club's chairman, Samesh Kumar, and his two brothers to resign from Birmingham's board of directors.
The club was put up for sale after the Kumar brothers' business empire went into receivership last month.
Allison bids for Ekstrom
by John Davies
MALCOLM ALLISON has got the go-ahead from Bristol Rovers to begin moves to sign Swedish international striker Johnny Ekstrom.
The 28-year-old player led IFK Gothenburg in last night's wed European Cup clash against Portugese champions FC Porto.
And Allison revealed: ‘Ekstrom only joined Gothenburg on the understanding that he is allowed to talk to other clubs interested in buying him.
‘I think there is a good chance of signing him because he really wants to play football in England.’
The deal will cost Rovers between £350,000 and £400,000 but Rovers directors have told Allison that cash is available for new players.
‘He is a world class player with all the attributes a striker needs to play at the top,’ added Allison.
Ekstrom has played for Italian club Empoli, Bayern Munich and French club Cannes during his career.
Let me fight Bowe
by Steve Acteson
LENNOX LEWIS is fighting his own manager Frank Maloney in a desperate bid to to accept an ‘insulting’ $3 million to fight world heavyweight champion Riddick Bowe.
The issue could even boil up to a climax this weekend when Bowe and his voluble manager Rock Newman are due in London to attend the BBC's Sports Personality of the Year awards programme.
Maloney said he and Lewis were having ‘serious discussions’— in other words, a row — over Lewis's tunnel-visioned determination to force the man he beat in the 1988 Olympic final back into the ring next April.
If Bowe cannot agree terms to fight Lewis by January 2 he will be stripped of the WBC version of the title and the crown will go to Lewis, who would then be told to make a mandatory defence against America's Tony Tucker.
Wishes
But Lewis passionately wants to beat Bowe inside not outside the ring and is prepared to take a derisory 10 per cent of the projected $30m fight instead of the normal 25 per cent.
And that is completely against the wishes of both Maloney and even his own brother Dennis, who believe they could eventually get at least twice as much.
Despite the in-fighting, Maloney has not lost his sense of humour and produced a crowing hen out of a cardboard box at his news conference yesterday saying: ‘This is Lennox's new mascot.
It's called Chicken Bowe and we're going to take it everywhere with us until he agrees to fight Lennox.
‘The present offer is an absolute insult, but Lennox is getting worried and he is adamant that he wants to fight Bowe.
At the end of the day he employs us and if he insists, we shall have to go straight into fourth gear to prepare for it.
‘We will to talk again with Bowe's people — and we will demand that Bowe has no warm-up fight beforehand.
This time we will be calling their bluff.
‘This type of thing eats away at a fighter's heart — it's like a cancer that has to be cut out.
But if it doesn't happen there is no way Lewis will be deflated.
After all, he'll still be the WBC champion in the New Year.’
If it does happen however, there is a strong possibility that the fight could be staged at the 70,000-capacity Skydome in Canadian-reared Lewis's home town of Toronto.
But Maloney also revealed that Lewis v Bowe almost went on outside the ring this week.
The two men came face-to-face in a New York hotel and Maloney said Lewis came close to ‘laying out’ the world champion adding: ‘Bowe had to duck round the corner.’
Top American fight figure Emanuel Steward, the overlord of the Kronk gymnasium in Detroit, which reared Tommy Hearns to fame and fortune, agreed that it would be an ‘insult’ for Lewis to accept a $3m offer.
‘Maloney is being wise and Lewis should listen to him.
There are no real heroes in boxing at the moment and Bowe has no other way to go in the end but to fight Lewis,’ he said.
‘If I was his manager I would offer Lewis $8m for the fight.
But the truth is, they're afraid of Lewis and they're trying to milk the title for all it's worth.’
Steward also predicted that when the pair eventually meet, Lewis will win saying: ‘I think Lennox will be too strong mentally for Bowe.
It happened against Razor Ruddock recently and it can happen again.’
Deposed champion Evander Holyfield has changed his mind again and decided to retire after all following his defeat by Bowe.
But Holyfield is bowing out in anger claiming he should have been awarded the decision which went to Bowe unanimously.
Holyfield has watched the fight on video many times and believes he should have won.
‘But I've accepted defeat,’ he said.
‘I ain't coming back.
I've got no reason to.
I'm only speaking now for the welfare of other fighters.
A champion should always leave something for people to remember.’
Stable again
IT IS A case of home sweet home for jump racing punters' darling Desert Orchid as he returns to the stables following a life-saving operation.
Dessie is on the recovery road after his intestine trouble.
Ali can still pack punch
Muhammad Ali Memories (Rizzoli International Publications Pounds 17.95) is a celebration in pictures of the career of the greatest heavyweight boxer of all time.
The photographs are by Neil Leifer, whose work has decorated Sports Illustrated since the early 1960s, and the text is supplied by Thomas Hauser, author of the definite Muhammad Ali: His Life and Times.
For three decades Ali provided Leifer with the perfect subject.
As the photographer says: ‘He loved the camera and the camera loved him.’
David Gower: The Autobiography (Collins-Willow £14.99) is as refreshing as gin and tonic.
And Gower and the hand which held the pen, Independent cricket writer Martin Johnson, are as well matched a combination.
Gower's relaxed attitude and Johnson's wry observation are served with a slice of lemon when it comes to the controversy over the differences with Messers Stewart and Gooch.
The Guinness Record of World Soccer (£19.95): This staggering 850-page volume is every armchair statistician's dream.
It includes results from every major (and obscure) football tournament around the world, a country-by-country guide covering both league and cup champions and major club directories.
Where else could you discover that Al Ittihad have won the Libyan League for the past four years?
Match of the Day (£12.95, BBC Books): Given the detail for which John Motson is renowned in preparing each of his commentaries, it is of little surprise that he has finally compiled a complete record of games featured on football's most famous programme since 1964.
Twenty-eight years ago Liverpool beat Arsenal 3-2 and 20,000 people tuned in to the first edition to hear Kenneth Wolstenholme describe the action.
Boxing Shorts — Punchy Tales From Inside and Outside the Ring (Guinness Publishing, £7.99) Graeme Kent's extremely worthwhile stocking-filler satisfies both pugilistic purists with its multitude of little-known facts and non-fight fans with natural humour.
Read, for instance, of a 1916 heavyweight bout that took place in a ring on the stage of a theatre.
One contestant was knocked out of the ring and into the orchestra pit, landing in the mouth of the big bass horn and unable to extricate himself before the count of 10.
The Climbers: A History of Mountaineering by Chris Bonington (BBC Books, Hodder and Stoughton, £16.95): Men against the mountain, pushing back the frontiers of the possible.
That, in a nutshell, is climbing, whether in a seige-style expedition or by abandoning oxygen and the safety of a fixed rope to test still further the fine balance between risk and survival.
Here, Chris Bonington looks at the way climbers develop their skills in order to test the above criteria, and sketches in the larger-than-life personalities and rivalries within the sport.
It's a beauty — and definitely not just for the avid climber.
Caught in the Frame (Collins Willow, £19.99): Pictures of a naked man, with nothing left to the imagination, playing the cover drive would, under most circumstances, send traditional cricket followers into a state of apoplexy over their pink gins.
Yet the fascinating study taken by Eadweard Muybridge in the 1870s earns a rightful place in a new book on the history of cricket photography by ace shutterman Patrick Eagar.
Gerry Greenberg's The Tower and the Glory — The Wade Dooley Story (Mainstream Publishing £12.99) is recommended reading for all rugby union fans.
The giant lock's colourful — and occasionally controversial — career is related in a relaxed, informative fashion.
The Rugby Union Who's Who 1992-93 (Collins Willow £9.99) follows in the footsteps of its two predecessors and gives profiles of all the top players in the four Home Unions plus, for the first time, a section on the French stars.
There is a review of the 1991-92 season by the captains of each of the Five Nations' Championship sides and ample space is given to their views of the game.
The Sporting News Chronicle of 20th Century Sport (Hamlyn, Pounds 19.99): Be warned.
The Sporting News is one of America's foremost sports publications so instead of FA Cups and Test matches, this book recounts tales of the World Series and Super Bowls.
Featuring a yearly look at the American sporting headlines, you can browse through the careers of everyone from Babe Ruth to Michael Jordan.
John Huxley's The Rugby League Challenge Cup (Guinness Publishing, £16.99) reminds us of when today's minnows — like Hunslet and Huddersfield — were the monsters of the game.
Lennox is knockout
Lennox — I'm British…and I'm Bad (Fox Video, £10.99) Produced in asociation with Sky Sports, this contains explosive action from Lewis's most recent fights, culminating in October's spectacular second-round KO of Donovan ‘Razor’ Ruddock.
Classic footage, but a golden opportunity wasted to trace his career from his Olympic gold medal days.
Kenny's Blackburn Magic (PolyGram Video) might more suitably be titled The Alan Shearer Show, so much does the prolific England striker dominate this one-hour collection of match highlights from Rovers' barnstorming entry into the Premier League.
From his opening-day double at Crystal Palace, Shearer is very much the star of the show, with cameos from Mike Newell, Stuart Ripley and Roy Wegerle, and interviews with manager Kenny Dalglish, his No 2 Ray Harford and several of the players — including Shearer of course.
PolyGram's impressive collection of Premier League videos also includes Leeds United's European Diary, Sheffield United — Blades Christmas Cracker, Aston Villa Chapter & Verse, Coventry City Sky High Blues and Wimbledon — The Gang.
The team sheet for THE REF'S A  @! *! *!!
(Revelation Video, £10.99) is impressive, boasting George Best, Tommy Docherty, Tommy Smith and TODAY's own Duncan McKenzie.
But these great footballing stars of yesteryear are all doing what they do second best — telling football jokes.
Best seems close to tears throughout this hour-long crack at our national game although his self-mocking provides a few of the brighter moments.
The bad language means this production isn't for the family enclosure but is recommended for those on the North Bank.
Mother always told you never to laugh at other people's misfortunes.
But in Own Goals and Gaffs (Vision Video), Danny Baker positively dares you not to.
Although not a classic, this 90-minute video is worth watching if only to see again the legendary mistakes of Leeds keeper Gary Sprake, or Lee Dixon's own goal for Arsenal against Coventry — surely the cock-up against which all future cock-ups will be judged.
Fellow team full of hope
FRENCH trainer Francois Doumen is brimming with confidence over The Fellow's bid for a second successive victory in Kempton's King George.
The Fellow finished third to Sibton Abbey on unsuitably soft ground in the Hennessy last month, and Doumen (above) expects faster going for the £75,000 Boxing Day showpiece.
Corals quote The Fellow as 11-8 favourite, a position he inherited from the injured Remittance Man, with Bradbury Star 7-2.
But Doumen feels The Fellow should have headed the market from the start.
Improved
‘The Fellow beat Remittance Man easily in last year's King George.
Everyone says Remittance Man improved a lot afterwards but what about The Fellow?
‘He has recovered from the Hennessy.
I just hope we get faster ground,’ Doumen said.
Pat's Jester's defeat at Haydock yesterday has led Corals to take him out of the King George betting.
Gold Cup hero Cool Ground was the major omission from the Welsh National at Chepstow on December 28 at yesterday's first forfeit stage.
Fence fiasco
Henry Rix
A BLUNDERING groundsman turned yesterday's Waterloo Hurdle at Haydock into a farce.
Confusion reigned as the field reached the second flight which had been mistakenly dolled off.
The four runners, led by Tim Reed on outsider Saintly Path, went round the obstacle.
Doubts instantly surfaced among the riders and David Nicholson, trainer of favourite Mighty Mogul, dashed onto the course to tell them to stop.
The jockeys then completed nearly a circuit at a gradually increasing pace before deciding among themselves to pull up.
With punters across the country totally baffled, the field regrouped and, after being given the go-ahead by course officials after an eight minute break, started again, this time jumping the offending obstacle.
Mighty Mogul eventually justified odds of 100-30 on, coming home six lengths clear from Ambuscade in a race that took over 12 minutes to complete, almost eight minutes longer than the standard time.
‘I knew they had gone wrong and shouted at them to stop,’ said Nicholson on welcoming back his winner.
Peter Niven, rider of Ambuscade, said: ‘Richard (Dunwoody) kept shouting that the race was void and when we found out it was, we pulled up.’
The stewards allowed the result to stand but quizzed the jockeys, clerk of the course Philip Arkwright and the racecourse foreman.
They found that a groundsman had dolled off the hurdle instead of the adjacent steeplechase fence — ommitted because of false ground.
A report is to be sent to the Stewards of the Jockey Club in London.
Arkwright said: ‘I checked with the foreman that the flight was clear, but then the groundsman dolled it off on his own initiative.
‘At least the race was completed and did not have to be declared void,’ Arkwright added.
Best by a mile
THE purple patch continues for TODAY racing experts.
Following hot on the heels of 7-1 shot Cheeky Pot at Sedgefield on Tuesday, Racing Editor Henry Rix struck again with his nap yesterday when El Volador (7-2) won on the all-weather at Lingfield.
And Top Shot coupled the same horse with impressive four-length Lingfield winner Killick (7-4) to land a 26 point profit for his followers.
Oaks no joke for Doughty
NEALE Doughty was left with egg on his face after turning down the ride on Haydock stalwart Twin Oaks in favour of Pat's Jester yesterday.
His mount put in a series of sticky jumps and could never get to grips with Twin Oaks, who made all and came home clear for his eighth win over fences at the Lancashire course.
Nicky Richards, son of winning trainer Gordon, said: ‘It's a pity the King George and Gold Cup aren't at Haydock as Twin Oaks is a different horse here.’
Williams waits for smoke to clear
Steve Acteson
NIGEL MANSELL'S old boss Frank Williams will be waiting on the sidelines today as motor sport's top brass sit down in Paris to find a way of saving next year's Grand Prix calendar and prevent his Williams team from paying a massive fine.
The constructors' championship winners, like nearly everyone else in Formula One, are alarmed at the threat posed by the actions of the French anti-smoking lobby and a provincial court's action in fining Canon Williams Renault.
The Didcot-based outfit, sponsored by Camel, were fined a reported £6 million for carrying tobacco advertising in Adelaide at last month's Australian Grand Prix, following a judgement made by a court at Quimper, in Brittany, where the anti-smoking lobby has a stronghold.
As a result, virtually all the leading Formula One teams — they are nearly all sponsored by tobacco companies — could have their cars or equipment seized if they travel to France and a major test session due to take place at Paul Ricard before Christmas is likely to be cancelled.
‘It's become a big problem, bigger than just the problem facing us,’ said a Williams team insider last night.
‘At the moment, no-one really knows what is going to happen so we are just waiting to see the outcome of today's (Thursday) meeting in Paris and then be guided by FISA.’
Next year's French Grand Prix, scheduled to take place on July 4 exactly one week before the British race at Silverstone, could be the first casualty of the anti-smoking brigade's war on tobacco sponsorship.
It could be chopped out of the calendar today (Thursday) by the FISA World Council meeting which goes ahead in Paris this afternoon.
A spokesman for FISA said yesterday: ‘This is a very important issue and at the moment the French Federation cannot give guarantees to safeguard the cars — so the race may have to be cancelled.’
Don't run the gauntlet
Graham Otway
VETERANS of England's last strife-torn Test series in India eight years ago have warned of the dangers and sacrifices that will have to be faced if Lord's insist on going ahead with an 11-week tour at the end of this month.
As news filtered through from Bombay last night of a city paralysed by strikes and tourists stranded at the City's airport by stone-throwing mobs rampaging through the streets, pressure for the tour to be called off is growing.
Forever anxious not to offend another cricketing nation, the Test and County Cricket Board will try until the last possible moment, before Graham Gooch's players are due to depart on December 28, to save the trip, even though New Zealand has offered a peaceful alternative.
But according to Chris Cowdrey, who made his England debut in Bombay in November 1984 just 48 hours after British High Commissioner Percy Norris had been gunned down in the streets nearby, tight security could suffocate the England players.
Unrest
‘After that shooting we were banned from leaving our hotel.
All we saw was the inside of the hotel and the inside of a cricket ground.
It wasn't that pleasant,’ said Cowdrey yesterday.
‘I don't believe cricketers should tour any country where there is political unrest.
‘After all, cricket is meant to be above all that — playing sport should be fun and it certainly isn't when you are confined to your hotel all the time.’
Cowdrey, like the rest of David Gower's touring party, had already seen the 1984-85 trip get off to a violent start.
Within hours of the players arriving in Delhi, Indian Prime Minster Indira Gandhi had been shot within a mile of the team's hotel.
The players were cases were barely unpacked when the team was forced to flee south on a private jet to the safety of Sri Lanka while mobs of Sikhs and Hindus fought raging battles in the Indian capital.
They returned to India a fortnight later, but when Norris was shot only hours after he had entertained the players with a convivial cocktail party at his private residence, the violence struck a personal chord.
Cowdrey recalled how he felt at the time.
‘Were we now the target?
Would there be a lunatic at the nets or in the stands?
‘No-one wanted to cut and run but 16 English cricketers in a coach on a busy Bombay street suddenly seemed a risk.
‘We'd seen enough burnt-out buses after Mrs Gandhi's assassination and we all of us in private had our own fears.
‘We stayed in our rooms.
Would it be safe to practice?
With armed police patrolling the hotel how could anyone be sure what was brave and what was foolish?’
At a team meeting on the night before the Bombay Test, tour skipper Gower soft-talked his team into playing even though several were upset by the no-nonsense attitude of manager Tony Brown, who angrily offered to send home anyone who disagreed.
Fear
But the sort of fear that England players may well have to face in India in the New Year was graphically described by opening batsman Graeme Fowler, writing about the start of the Bombay Test in his diary Fox on the Run.
‘I am not sure we were mentally attuned to the day.
‘Even if you give 100 per cent and try like hell, prior events must affect you — you can't eradicate them completely.
‘The English press with us feel that the tour should be called off.
Their presence here guarantees any events would get worldwide press coverage.
‘That's a large carrot to dangle before a terrorist's nose.
‘If they are planning any more killings (or bombings or God knows what) they might as well wait until the English cricketers are in town.
We shall be taken notice of then.
‘I would be a liar if I said the thought of being shot at didn't cross my mind.
‘If anyone decided to make their political statement by shooting at an English cricketer, after Gower at the toss, I was the next Englishman to be involved on the field.
‘And as receiver of the first ball I was a nice stationary target.’
Fortunately for Gower's tour, India quickly returned to calm after Mrs Gandhi's death and while a nerve-frazzled team lost the Bombay Test they overcome adversity to win the series 2-1.
But what security precautions could the Indian's offer to make England feel any more comfortable in the coming weeks if the current Hindu-Moslem clashes continue?
Barbed wire boundaries patrolled by khaki-clad policemen with guns Second World War Lee Enfield 303s lazily slung over their shoulders are a common sight on cricket grounds in India.
In the past, the guards have smacked of overkill, since it rarely takes more than a baton charge with their lathi sticks to quell the traditional rotten orange barrage that welcomes most touring teams.
But such shows of strength are no guarantee for player-safety as photographer Graham Morris demonstrated in 1984.
Forty eight hours after the killing of Norris, Morris decided to test the security at the Wankhede stadium.
Terrorist
‘I was wearing a flak jacket with bulging pockets and over my shoulder was carrying a bag with my long lens in it — it could have been a bazooka since no-one searched it.
‘I introduced myself to a senior police officer as an international terrorist who would like to be taken to the England dressing room.
‘The officer escorted kindly obliged, escorting me to the dressing room door.’
I could have been anyone.’
If Lord's has any thoughts for the anxiety felt by the families at the thought of England's players running a gauntlet of violence for 11 weeks the tour should be called of.
The TCCB might even be able to turn the political situation to its advantage.
In February, England will be pitted against the Indians, Pakistan and Sri Lanka and their equally volatile neighbours from Pakistan and Sri Lanka in the bidding for the right to stage the 1995 World Cup.
If England were to decline to tour India on the grounds of safety, other countries might not be so willing to visit there for a one-day jamboree.
Hearn blasts absent Benn
Steve Acteson
NIGEL BENN was yesterday attacked for ‘unprofessionalism’ and threatened with a heavy fine by promoter Barry Hearn.
It came after Benn failed to attend a press conference at London's Bloomsbury Crest Hotel to publicise his WBC super-middlewight title defence against Nicky Piper at Alexandra Palace on Saturday.
Hearn rang him at his home to plead with him to change his mind but Benn just snapped: ‘I'm not coming.’
But later it was revealed the real reason for Benn's no-show was that he was too frightened to catch a cold.
He only arrived back in England on Tuesday from his sunny Tenerife training camp.
Hearn said: ‘What happens next depends on what is said by Nigel — he's in breach of contract and I could fine him, although I don't like that.’
Benn's commercial manager Peter De Freitas added: ‘I forewarned Barry Hearn that Nigel would not be there.’
Andy Till, who defends his British light-middleweight title against Tony Collins at York Hall, Bethnal Green tonight, also failed to show at his same-venue news conference.
Promoter Frank Maloney said: ‘I'm lodging a complaint with the British Board of Control.’
Silent Mac runs risk of $10,000 fine
Giles Smith in Munich
LOVE-TORN John McEnroe tonight risks yet another huge fine of up to $10,000 in a career of many.
After easily reaching the quarter-finals of the Compaq Grand Slam Cup with a 6-1, 6-4 victory over sadly outclassed Swede Nicklas Kulti, McEnroe — who could be playing his last singles tournament — refused to attend the normal mandatory post-match press conference.
Amid scenes bordering on farce, officials who had originally persuaded him to attend — so long as there were no questions about the break-up of his marriage to Tatum O'Neal — had to announce that a ‘visibly insecure’ McEnroe had changed his mind.
Grand Slam committee administrator Bill Babcock said: ‘None of us like the situation, but there is undue pressure on him, and we have decided to exempt him from the rule on press conferences for this match, and only this match.’
While McEnroe, who appeared far from visibly insecure, enjoyed watching the following match between compatriots Andre Agassi and Michael Chang, a clearly embarrassed Babcock was left to confirm that if he failed to come to a press conference after his next match — against Goran Ivanisevic tonight — he would be fined up to $10,000.
Losers
As McEnroe won $300,000 for his 75-minute triumph, even a fine of that size pales into insignificance.
‘I have to admit it would not unduly burden him financially,’ said Babcock.
The only losers if McEnroe fails to overcome his perennial distrust of the media will be the charities to which he has promised to give his winnings from the $6 million tournament he has described as ‘obscene’.
The whole episode smacks of the extraordinary hold this mercurial man appears to hold over people who run tennis — no other player in the world would have escaped a fine under yesterday's circumstances.
However verbally reticent he was, though, there was nothing wrong with McEnroe's play as he overwhelmed poor Kulti, who knocked the 33-year-old superstar out of the French Open in the first round this year.
McEnroe began with two stunning aces, then broke Kulti's first two service games with disdain to take the opening set in just 28 minutes.
Kulti, 21, put up a little more resistance in the second set, but to no avail.
The only German in the field, Michael Stich, beat top seed Stefan Edberg to ensure continuing home-country interest in the absence of Boris Becker, who is giving the tournament a miss because of tiredness.
Stich, the 1991 Wimbledon champion, beat the world No 2 7-6, 6-7, 8-6 in a marathon duel.
Star attraction Agassi, the world No 9, also crashed out, comprehensively beaten 6-4, 6-2 by No 6 Chang.
American Pete Sampras was a convincing 6-3, 6-4 triumph over Russian Alexander Volkov.
Wessels assault probe
CAPTAIN Kepler Wessels was accused of assaulting Indian all-rounder Kapil Dev with his bat in South Africa's limited-overs international in Port Elizabeth.
The alleged incident came after Kapil, who was about to bowl, ran out Peter Kirsten when he backed up too far.
Kirsten argued with the umpires and Indian players before reluctantly leaving the field.
Three balls later Wessels' bat appeared to collide with Kapil at the bowler's end as the South African turned for a second run.
Now match referee Clive Lloyd is to investigate the incident after a complaint by Indian manager Amrit Mathur, who claimed: ‘Kirsten showed dissent against the umpires and provoked the crowd by staying in the middle.
‘Wessels was at fault in striking Kapil on the shin.
These acts violate the ICC Code of Conduct and it is now for the referee to take action.’
South Africa eventually won the match by six wickets.
Sri Lanka yesterday clinched their first Test victory over New Zealand with a crushing nine-wicket success in Colombo.
Nick takes a swipe
Bill Blighton
NICK FALDO has launched a bitter and angry attack on top TV commentator Peter Alliss and the British press.
The world No 1 blames the media for the pressure which almost cost him the Open Championship at Muirfield — and also blitzed the Americans for their win-at-all-costs attitude to the Ryder Cup.
Bulging
But Faldo has reserved his most barbed comments for Alliss and the press, even though the publicity afforded him over the last 16 years has brought a £2 million home and bulging bank account worth more than £10m.
He has reopened old wounds with Alliss after the pair were involved in a verbal battle during the British Masters last May when Faldo's practice routines came under questioning.
Faldo, interviewed in Golf World magazine, blasted: ‘I have been 16 years on tour and I can honestly think of only two times I have seen Peter Alliss on a practice ground watching me or anybody hit balls.
‘Even if I am wrong and think of a dozen times, it is still dreadful that somebody so involved in the game is not out there watching the guys.
‘He is very much of the old school.
He thinks you arrive, hit a dozen balls, go out and play, shoot a 72, then go to the bar and have a chat.
‘Then next morning you feel a bit better, have a swing and shoot 71.
You do that now and you are on the road.
You drive home.
That's the difference between now and then.’
Faldo savages the press for his treatment at Muirfield, where he set out as one of the hottest favourites in Open history.
He was criticised by some officials for his victory speech in which he thanked the press ‘from the heart of my bottom’.
Faldo said: ‘Well, it all came out.
I got it off my chest.
The younger generation thought it was wonderful; the older generation thought, ‘what a bloody fool’.’
Extremes
However, one top European player player said later: ‘The only time Nick Faldo opens his mouth is to change feet.’
Faldo added: ‘The only pressure I felt came from the media.
I was fine in myself.
I was very positive.
The only negative was the bloody media.
‘They are always on one of two extremes.
You are either the nicest guy on earth and everything you have done is wonderful.
or you are a dog — or worse.’
His latest outburst comes as a surprise, as Faldo claims he is more relaxed both on and off the course.
In my recent experience, that appears to be the case.
He has been approachable and quite happy to talk about his golf — even his personal life, although he is always on his guard.
When I met him at Wentworth earlier this week he called for a peaceful Ryder Cup match against the Americans at The Belfry in September.
Faldo is asking for less hype and a return to the days when the biennial encounter was a friendly, usually won by the Americans.
Yet Faldo insists in the article: ‘It has gone past being a match.
It has become life and death.
‘It has become so important for the Americans to win.
If anything can be done (by their officials) to get the result their way, it will be done.’
FALDO ON LYLE…
WE have been through a lot in the press.
And it is disappointing to see that it is still going.
As I have said, the thing is we are just totally different people.
We get on very well as competitors.
I overheard him say that he lost his desire, lost his drive and everything.
When he was playing well and winning, he still hit diabolical shots that you couldn't believe.
But I don't know about all this working on his game, whether he actually likes it.
He is a guy who likes to quick-fix it —‘just turn your grip that way and that's that.’
…
ON NORMAN
I FEEL sorry for him because he's been through so much — hammered in every way.
I think he's finally admitting that it's all had an effect on him.
He can't go to Australia and hide because they hammer him there — the press there are very cruel.
He's at a very difficult stage of his career.
He's obviously not playing as well and gets nailed for it.
I like the guy, but we're different.
He likes to arrive with all the razzmatazz, while I prefer to slip in the back door quietly.
He's created the media thing, rightly or wrongly, but it must put more pressure on him.
…
ON BALLESTEROS
I THINK his charisma and style of play have been fantastic for our tour and for golf in .The way he manages to win tournaments.
Everybody dreams of winning tournaments that way.
Unfortunately, we are total opposites.
If I hit three drives into the woods, I would think: ‘My game's gone.
End of the world.’
He does not.
So we are totally different in that respect.
The way he plays is quite unbelievable.
…
ON COUPLES
I LIKE Freddy.
Everybody does.
The press gave him a hard time for his swing and his technique, but I love his attitude.
I think it is great.
I have used some of the things that he has done as a good example to myself.
Once he has hit a shot it is gone.
How he is enjoying stardom, I don't know.
When you win your first big one, it is a big difference.
You get fed up with everybody wanting to know every bloody thing about you.
I have been hearing reports that he is floundering a little bit, which you do.
…
ON OLAZABAL
HE IS going to be held up by his technique because he reverse-pivots with a mega-weak grip.
He is putting his body under unbelievable strain, which is fine when he is 26.
But the day when he gets up there to 30, it all changes, it really does.
He should really start thinking about double-checking a few things.
Great determination and guts and all that sort of thing.
He is on the verge of being too dedicated.
…
AND WOOSNAM
MR POWERHOUSE.
I think the one thing I have noticed, he is a bit one-dimensional on the draw.
He always plays the draw.
I think that's the thing has probably hurt him.
He doesn't fade it enough.
But when he was hot in 1987 he wasn't like just anybody.
He was just unbelievable.
Belts the ball a mile, fun to watch, very courageous.
Gives it a smash, gives it a rip.
Great competitor.
Taylor went too far, says Lineker
Rob Shepherd
GARY LINEKER has finally acknowledged that he believes England manager Graham Taylor conducted a personal vendetta against him.
In a biography about the former England captain about to be published, the rift which existed between the pair for the final 15 months of Lineker's international career is at last revealed.
Although Taylor made Lineker his captain, when he took charge of the national side after the 1990 World Cup Finals, it wasn't long before hostility emerged between the pair.
In the book, which was written with Lineker's knowledge but not his direct input, Taylor criticises his former striker.
He says Lineker's agent Jon Holmes openly canvassed for his man to be made skipper of England.
And he alleges England's trip to New Zealand was used by the striker to set up his own lucrative deal with Japanese club Grampus Eight.
When Lineker became aware of Taylor's comments, he felt he should put his side of the argument.
Lineker's style was always laid back.
But when England drew 1-1 with Eire at Wembley, Taylor felt it had gone too far.
He was not happy with Lineker's commitment and substituted him.
Lineker became incensed when Taylor went public, not only questioning whether Lineker should remain as captain, but whether his form justified a place in the side — even though he was maintaining his phenomenal strike rate.
Lineker says: ‘It really started, if Graham's honest, when he had a dig at me about the Republic of Ireland game at Wembley, when I did a piece with one of the newspapers saying I was a bit tired.
‘Graham was not happy about that and had a dig at me in the press.
‘He's done it to Dave Seaman and Chris Waddle and I don't think that's the way to do things.
It's something a manager shouldn't do.
‘On the continent, if managers do that they get kicked out by the players.’
And although it was a typical Lineker goal which ensured England's place in the European Championship finals, when he scored a late equaliser in Poland, Taylor's doubts began to emerge clearly.
Respect
Far from hailing Lineker as England's saviour, Taylor was dismissive, suggesting that any other striker worth his salt would have done what Lineker did.
Obviously that didn't go down well with Lineker and he soon announced that he would quit the English game after the Championship finals.
This did not please Taylor.
He saw the announcement as presumptuous, with Lineker clearly implying he would be in England's squad eight months before it was announced.
Taylor even considered not selecting him for Sweden so he could blood the likes of Alan Shearer and Ian Wright.
But he quickly rejected the notion, realising the furore it would cause.
But it didn't stop him leaving Lineker out of England's friendly against France.
At the time, Lineker was just coming to terms with the fact that his baby son, George, was battling against leukaemia.
So he was far from impressed with having to take part in the entire build-up, only to learn at the last minute he would not play from the start.
By this time, I believe Lineker had lost his respect for Taylor.
Certainly, that was the case, when after missing a penalty against Brazil — thus failing to equal Bobby Charlton's 49-goal record for England — he then received another blast from Taylor.
So Taylor took Lineker into the European Championship as his first choice marksman, but with big doubts about what he would contribute.
Disgust
It all came to a head in what proved to be Lineker's final game, when as England were trailing against Sweden in Stockholm, Taylor pulled him off.
When Lineker threw down the captain's arm band in disgust, the rift between the pair first became public.
And it was only a matter of time when the truth came out.
For nearly two years, England played with a manager and captain at loggerheads.
Hendry is humbled
SHELL-SHOCKED Stephen Hendry last night suffered his second consecutive defeat at the hands of fellow Scot Alan McManus.
World champion Hendry was beaten 9-6 by the 21-year-old Glaswegian in their Coalite World Matchplay quarter-final at Doncaster in a repeat performance of last month's UK championships at Preston, where McManus won 9-8.
Hendry, a winner of nine titles last season, has yet to break his duck in the opening seven tournaments of the 1992-93 campaign and is clearly struggling for confidence.
Breaks of 59 and 92 gave McManus a perfect start, and he had stretched his lead to 6-2 by the end of the first session.
Hendry rallied after the break, winning four of the next five frames to trail 7-6, but his countryman steadied to take the next two frames and seal victory.
McManus, who now faces Thailand's James Wattana in tomorrow's semi-final, said: ‘If I play as well as I did against Stephen, there's no reason why I can't go on to win.
But there are three other guys left in the tournament who feel the same way.’
Mixed meets for athletes
BRITISH track and field athletes claimed a first yesterday when it was announced that men and women of the same standard will compete against each other.
Although the move does not apply to major meets, such as national championships, the British Athletic Federation said it will give top women a higher calibre of competition.
Pair of aces
GREAT BRITAIN'S team of Mark Petchey and Chris Wilkinson yesterday beat Czechoslovakia 2-1 in the first round of the European men's team tennis championships in Trieste, Italy.
Delight for Del
ENGLAND'S Del Harris beat South African Craig Wapnick 15-9, 15-10, 16-17, 15-14 in the Hong Kong squash Open first round.
Cram in jam
STEVE CRAM last night defied a niggling hamstring injury to finish seventh over 3,000m at his South African debut in Durban.
Giant wage
BASEBALL'S Barry Bonds is the highest paid player in team sport after signing a $43.75m six-year deal with the San Francisco Giants.
Milan march
ITALY'S AC Milan maintained their impressive form with a 2-1 European Cup victory over PSV Eindhoven in Holland.
They stormed into a 2-0 lead with goals from Frank Rijkaard and Marco Simone.
Romario replied with a brilliant volley.
In the other Group B match Sweden's IFK Gothenburg beat Portugal's Porto 1-0 thanks to Peter Eriksson's late goal.
Marseille of France had a comfortable 3-0 Groupo A win over Belgium's Club Brugge.
Their goals came from a Franck Sauzee penalty and two strikes from Alen Boksic.
Jones gambles on FA appeal
Ben Bacon
VINNIE JONES took the biggest gamble of his controversial career yesterday when he risked having his record fine increased.
The Wimbledon midfield player officially lodged an appeal with the Football Association against his £20,000 fine and six-month suspended ban.
But an FA official warned: ‘If the appeal is lost, the commission's options include increasing the fine, suspension, or both.’
Jones was found guilty on a disrepute charge after the FA decided his involvement in a controversial video, ‘Soccer's Hard Men’, tarnished the game's image.
Liverpool's latest recruit Stig Inge Bjornbye is set for a dramatic debut next week after receiving a work permit.
The Norwegian international is expected to complete the £600,000 deal on Monday.
Bjornbye could then step straight in against Crystal Palace in the Coca-Cola Cup replay on Tuesday.
Trevor Francis has been promised more cash for new players, despite Sheffield Wednesday's £2m debt.
That overdraft has resulted from club record spending by Francis but chairman Dave Richards said: ‘There's still money available should Trevor need it.’
Malcolm Allison has got the go-ahead from Bristol Rovers to begin moves to sign £400,000-rated Swedish international striker Johnny Ekstrom.
Ekstrom, 28, led IFK Gothenburg in last night's European Cup clash against FC Porto.
Pride and passion
Rob Shepherd
CSKA Moscow 0, Rangers 1
RANGERS might not be the best side in the European Cup, but there is no doubt they possess the will to win the competition.
In the wake of their magnificent revival in the opening game of their League group against Marseille last month, they once again demonstrated their courage and conviction to overcome CSKA Moscow in their adopted home of Bochum.
After an inept start, Rangers battled belligerently to achieve the result they sought which keeps them abreast of Marseille, who defeated Club Brugge 3-0 in France.
The competition now goes into winter hibernation, but when Rangers travel to play the Belgian champions in March they will do so believing they really can reach the final.
Rangers manager Walter Smith was keen not to get over-excited.
With two matches against Brugge, then the important trip to Marseille and the last game against the Russians, there is still a long way to go.
But Smith admitted: ‘We've got three points out of four, and that's what we set out to achieve from the first two games.
Better
‘In the end, we deserved it.
We started a bit shaky, and took a while to adjust, but in the end we could have added to our tally, by which time I felt we were the better side.’
It didn't appear it would go that way, however, in the first minute when Moscow should have gone ahead.
Rangers lost the ball from the kick-off, and stood and stared as the Russians cut through their defence.
Oleg Sergueev ran clear and seemed certain to score.
But the striker hit his first shot weakly at Andy Goram.
The second from the rebound was blocked on the line by Trevor Steven, and before he had a chance to roll the ball home David Robertson lashed it away.
It was a significant moment, because had the more gifted Muscovites taken control then, they may well have swamped Rangers with their precise, but powerful play.
Although Rangers were under the cosh for most of the first half, they went into the interval with the lead they refused to relinquish.
It came in the 13th minute, when the defection of Dimitri Kharin from Moscow to Chelsea, cost the Russians dearly.
Replacement goalkeeper Alexander Gouteev proved a weak link.
Clearly unnerved by the physical presence of Mark Hateley, he failed to clutch a looping cross by Robertson.
Hateley instantly exploited the error, rolling the ball back to Ian Ferguson and what followed was hell for defender Sergei Fokine.
Ferguson thumped a 20-yard shot, which hit Fokine, and then spun high over Gouteev's body and dropped into the net.
At that point, the Russian spirit did not appear to be too affected.
After all, in the second round they had eliminated holders Barcelona in the Nou Camp.
So they proceeded to take the game to Rangers with their elegant style.
In the 20th minute they thought they had equalised, but Sergueev was clearly off-side when Eugeni Douchmanov's shot struck his body, and flew beyond Goram.
Wasted
The Russians continued to enjoy plenty of possession — but they lacked penetration.
Indeed, the only time Goram was really worried after that was in the dying seconds when Sergueev wasted another fine opportunity when sent clear.
By then, though, Rangers should have added to the scoreline — and goal difference may be important in this group.
In the 37th minute, Steven, performing impressively as an emergency right back — a hint perhaps to Graham Taylor — let fire from 30 yards, Gouteev again fumbled and this time the ball fell to McCoist.
The angle was acute, but the prolific Scottish international's snap shot roll across the face, grazed the far post and run away harmlessly.
Shortly after the break, McCoist was again frustrated, this time denied by a fine save from Gouteev.
Smith insists Brugge are still a threat, but Rangers' journey to Marseille in April appears to be the key to who meets AC Milan — and surely it must be the Italians — in the final.
Argyle squeeze it
: Plymouth 3, Peterborough 2
PLYMOUTH had to survive a spirited comeback from Peterborough last night to earn an FA Cup third round tie at Ipswich Town.
Plymouth looked to be cruising to victory when striker Dwight Marshall made up for an early miss with two goals in three minutes in the first half of this tie.
Marshall completely messed up a 22nd-minute chance when he was one-on-one with Posh keeper Ian Bennett.
But 12 minutes later he got on the end of a superb cross from Paul Dalton.
And then he took advantage of a mix-up between Bennett and defender Darren Bradshaw to nip in and side-foot home.
Second Division Plymouth, unbeaten at home all season, dominated their First Division opponents.
And but for goalline clearances from Noel Luke and Bradshaw they would have been even further behind.
However, there was a storming finish as Peterborough twice hauled themselves back into the match.
In the 73rd minute Philliskirk netted as he got on the end of a cross from Boro substitute Bobby Barnes.
But a minute later Plymouth restored their two-goal lead when Steve Castle headed home.
And then seconds later Worrell Sterling got another one for Posh when he slotted home after a mistake from keeper Ray Newland.
Afterwards Plymouth player-manager Peter Shilton praised two-goal hero Dwight Marshall, who had not scored since August.
He said: ‘It was nice to see Dwight come into a bit of form.
‘Now he's got to keep on doing it week in and week out.
We had a lot of youngsters in because of injuries and they didn't let us down.’
Grim for Glasgow
VS Rugby 0, Marlow 0
MARLOW'S Kenny Glasgow missed a glorious chance to settle this tense FA Cup second round tie.
With just 15 minutes left and a dream third round clash with Premier League giants Tottenham Hotspur beckoning, Glas-put a header wide of the gaping Rugby goal.
It piled on the agony for Glasgow, who had passed up another chance two minutes before the break.
Atkinson is pulling his weight
David Harrison
DALIAN ATKINSON has turned himself from a confessed ‘fat, lazy, depressive’ into one of the country's most lethal marksmen.
The transformation is not yet complete.
Although he has already scored 13 goals for Aston Villa this season, the 24-year-old striker is self-critical enough to insist he is not yet firing on all cylinders.
When Atkinson moved from Real Sociedad to join Ron Atkinson in the summer of last year in a £1.6 million move, the world was at his feet.
Lured
He had been a raging success in Spain but was lured back to England by his namesake manager in the belief that his international prospects would be considerably improved.
‘I came back because I was hoping to get some England recognition and thought my chances would improve, especially under a manager whom I loved working with at Sheffield Wednesday,’ the player admitted.
Instead, he found only despair.
After scoring on his Villa debut against his former club, Wednesday, on the opening day of the season, he made only 13 more appearances because of injuries and failed to register another goal.
Self pity set in and so did eating binges.
Not even a torrent of verbal abuse from Ron Atkinson, nor a number of disciplinary fines, could jolt him out of his depression.
Dalian, who has scored in 12 of the 22 Villa games he has played in this season, explained: ‘When I came back from Spain a big adjustment had to be made.
I had got used to the pace over there which was so slow you could almost walk your way into scoring positions.
‘Because I was injured in my first game for Villa and then kept breaking down in training, I never had the chance to get sharp and readjust to the speed of the English game.
‘Our physio Jim Walker was great for me, tried to cheer me up by explaining that Mark Hughes had the same problem when he returned to Manchester United from Barcelona.
‘But the boss used to give me some right stick and told me I was no good to him lying in bed or on the treatment table.
‘He used to take the mickey out of me something awful.
‘While I knew he was only trying to give me a kick up the backside for my own good, I felt really, really low.
‘He fined me for being late and he fined me for being overweight.
I just got lazy.
‘It didn't help me to have to live in a hotel at the time.
I was always heading for the carvery and eating too much.
Because I wasn't in full training I wasn't burning the calories.
‘Most of my work was done on a bike.
I was probably better equipped to compete in the Tour de France than play top class football.’
The end of the season could not come quickly enough for Atkinson.
He went on holiday to America during the summer and began working himself back into shape to show Villa what they had missed last season.
‘It's not all there yet,’ he said.
‘I know I've got a lot more to offer despite the goals I've scored.
Space
‘I'm an instinctive player and I'm still not doing the thing's I'm naturally good at.’
The arrival of Dean Saunders from Liverpool has ensured that Atkinson does not drift back into his apathetic state of mind.
Their partnership has yielded 14 goals so far and looks capable of keeping Villa in the forefront of the Premier Division title race.
‘Deano works so hard and creates acres of space for me,’ said Atkinson.
‘His enthusiasm is so infectious.
When you see him charging around you can't help but get involved.
‘It's a good partnership and we think it's going to get better.
‘We've got a decent team but no-one here is going to tempt fate by saying what we can and can't win.’
Lewis in title plea
Steve Acteson
LENNOX LEWIS is fighting his own manager Frank Maloney in a desperate bid to accept an ‘insulting’ $3 million to fight world heavyweight champion Riddick Bowe.
The issue could boil up this weekend when Bowe and his manager Rock Newman are in London.
Maloney said he and Lewis were having ‘serious discussions’ over Lewis's determination to force the man he beat in the 1988 Olympic final back into the ring next April.
If Bowe cannot agree terms to fight Lewis by January 2 he will be stripped of the WBC version of the title and the crown will go to Lewis, who would then be told to make a mandatory defence against America's Tony Tucker.
But Lewis passionately wants to beat Bowe and is prepared to take 10 per cent of the projected $30m fight instead of the normal 25 per cent.
And that is completely against the wishes of both Frank Maloney and even his own brother Dennis, who believe they could eventually get at least twice as much.
Maloney said: ‘The present offer is an absolute insult, but Lennox is getting worried and he is adamant that he wants to fight Bowe.
At the end of the day if he insists, we shall have to go into fourth gear to prepare for it.
‘We will to talk again with Bowe's people — and we will demand that Bowe has no warm-up fight beforehand.
This time we will be calling their bluff.
‘But if it doesn't happen there is no way Lewis will be deflated.
After all, he'll still be the WBC champion.’
Top American fight figure Emanuel Steward, the overlord of the Kronk gymnasium in Detroit, which reared Tommy Hearns to fame and fortune, agreed that it would be an ‘insult’ for Lewis to accept a $3m offer.
‘Maloney is being wise and Lewis should listen to him.
There are no real heroes in boxing at the moment and Bowe has no other way to go in the end but to fight Lewis,’ he said.
‘If I was his manager I would offer Lewis $8m for the fight.
But the truth is, they're afraid of Lewis and they're trying to milk the title for all it's worth.’
Taylor's vendetta
Rob Shepherd
GARY LINEKER has attacked Graham Taylor for his treatment when he was England captain.
For the first time he has revealed that his controversial substitution in the European Championship finals came after a series of confrontations.
And he says Taylor's public criticism of him after he had missed a penalty against Brazil would have been enough to get the manager the sack on the Continent.
In a new biography of him, Lineker says: ‘The substitution was a decision that was up to the manager.
‘Other people thought it might be a personal thing but I never really believed it until I heard some of the things Taylor has come out with.
Now you think, perhaps it was.
‘It seems after he decided to pull me off, he looked back and decided on different reasons for things over the years to stir up our relationship.’
Lineker also reveals his anger when Taylor criticised him after an international against the Republic of Ireland and when he was dropped 24 hours before a friendly with France.
The substitution came in England's final game against Sweden when Lineker was chasing Bobby Charlton's 49 goals record for his country.
England lost 2-0.
Lineker was disappointed and said: ‘The funny thing is, against Sweden was the best I'd felt in the whole tournament.’
Until now neither Lineker nor Taylor had admitted what everyone close to the England camp knew — they simply did not get on.
During Italia '90, Taylor saw how player power influenced Bobby Robson and wanted none of that.
And then he became irritated by Lineker's ‘goody two-shoes’ image, because he felt it was not necessarily justified.
Shear bliss for six-hit Blackburn
Graham Fisher
Blackburn Rovers 6, Watford 1
SUPERMAN Alan Shearer destroyed Watford in a personal tour de force as Blackburn coasted into their first League Cup quarter-final for 31 years.
The £3.6 million England striker scored twice, taking him to 19 goals for the season, and was involved in the other four.
Mike Newell also weighed in with two, but it was the awesome, all-round power of Shearer that smashed the First Division club's hopes of Coca-Cola Cup glory.
And only a great save from Perry Suckling denied the master blaster his first hat-trick for Blackburn's.
Brave
With Shearer in this form, it will be a brave man who bets against Rovers in either this competition or their bid for the Premier League title.
Cambridge United will be their quarter-final visitors next month and they shouldn't stand a prayer.
Shearer revealed: ‘I'm getting marked very tightly these days, but it is up to me to combat that.
I've been working on that part of my game and it came off tonight.’
He added: ‘We are in with a good chance in this competition.
Hopefully we can go all the way to Wembley, but we've all been saying in the dressing room that there are some big league games coming up and we have to concentrate on them.’
That includes the game against Liverpool on Sunday, manager Kenny Dalglish's first a return to Anfield since his dramatic walkout 20 months ago.
A generous Dalglish said: ‘Watford played better than the score suggests, but obviously we are pleased to see a few goals go in.’
After a bright start, Watford were overwhelmed.
But their own ace striker Paul Furlong never stopped running and deserved his goal late on.
Ironically, it was Watford's first since Jason Drysdale's penalty despatched Leeds in the third round.
In fact, both Furlong and Andy Hessenthaler had chances to open the scoring before Blackburn blew the dam.
Shearer's brisk, instinctive pass was the fulcrum of a splendid 25th-minute move that resulted in Mark Atkins breaking the deadlock with an excellent finish.
Six minutes later, Shearer collected his fifth Coca-Coal goal of the campaign when a harmless looking corner from Jason Wilcox ricocheted off two bodies and fell nicely for Shearer, who wasted no time in sending the ball into the back of the net.
A clever low header by Shearer gave Newell his first goal after 53 minutes.
And when Suckling completely missed a Stuart Ripley cross, Shearer tapped in his second.
The defiant Furlong pegged Rovers back briefly, and keeper Bobby Mimms was required to make an amazing triple save from Furlong, Gerard Lavin and David Holdsworth.
That was a mere interruption in the exhibition.
Shearer crossed for Newell to make it five, then rolled the ball into the path of substitute Roy Wegerle to complete a comprehensive rout.
Heinzer target
SWISS skier Franz Heinzer bids to complete a hat-trick of downhill successes when the first of two World Cup races begin in Val Gardena, Italy today.
The defending World Cup champion was fastest in practice.
Mac in touch
MALCOLM MacKENZIE shot a four under par first round 68 to trail by one shot in the £90,000 Coolum Classic in Australia.
Fellow Briton Ben Jackson, 15-over after nine, was disqualified for refusing to sign his card.
Double boost for Wales
Ray French
WALES rugby league coach Clive Griffiths yesterday received a double dose of good news when Ian Marlow and Allan Bateman announced they should be fit to face France on Sunday.
Warrington centre Batemen (injured thigh) and Hull forward Marlow (groin strain) were both named in the side to play in Perpignan.
But the two must still pass a late fitness test and Griffiths admitted: ‘Our injury problems have hit us hard, but the team spirit is tremendous.
There is plenty of courage in this side and we are determined to get a good result in France’.
WALES: Ford (Salford); Hadley (Widnes), Bateman (Warrington), Devereux (Widnes), Sullivan (St Helens); Pearce (R-York), Ellis (Warrington); Young (Salford, capt), Bishop (London Cr), Marlow (Hull), Moriarty (Widnes), Phillips (Warrington), Ackerman (Salford).
Clear-out plan at Boro
John Wardle
MIDDLESBROUGH manager Lennie Lawrence is planning a massive shake-up at Ayresome Park after tonight's televised game against Chelsea.
‘I have about 22 in my first team squad and that's too many,’ said the Middlesbrough boss.
It's an ominous warning which gives his players an extra incentive to impress against the Londoners tonight.
Robbie Mustoe, Alan Kernaghan, Willie Falconer and Chris Morris are all injured and miss the Ayresome Park clash.
But the shock clear-out will only begin once Boro's squad is back to full-strength.
‘I will have too many bodies here when everybody is fit,’ said Lawrence.
‘I won't be able to keep them all happy.
Some will be knocking on my door and demanding to know what's going on.
‘If they want to go through the correct procedure and ask for a transfer, then so be it.’
Republic of Ireland international Bernie Slaven, who is also injured, is certain to be among those on their way out.
One of the players whose future is assured is 18-year-old Jamie Pollock, who is set to return to the side tonight after struggling to hold down a regular place.
‘Jamie's an eye-catching type of player and a great competitor,’ said Lawrence.
Chelsea arrive at Ayresome Park with impressive form behind them.
‘They're a good attacking side but not so good defensively.
‘But we've got our pride back after beating Blackburn and we believe we can overcome anybody on our day at Ayresome Park.’
Wednesday warning
By Tony Kell
LEEDS have been warned to beware another upset — against the Sheffield Wednesday team they thrashed 6-1 on the way to becoming champions last season.
Although Trevor Francis's team could face a a backlash from the ailing champions at Elland Road tomorrow, Wednesday players are strongly motivated.
‘Leeds were on top of their game when they thrashed us at Hillsborough in January,’ said defender Nigel Worthington.
‘We'll be out to make sure nothing like that happens again.
‘But any visit to Elland Road is tricky, especially when Leeds have just had a good spanking from Nottingham Forest.
We'll have to be on our mettle from the start.’
But Wednesday are also under orders to smarten up their act and Worthington admitted: ‘Although we are playing well enough, we've been sloppy at times and have not stuck our chances away.’
‘We've got to be more ruthless and more direct in the last third of the field.’
Mark on the move
NEWCASTLE left-back Mark Stimson has agreed to join former boss Jim Smith at Portsmouth on a month's loan with a view to a Pounds 300,000 transfer.
Stimson, 24, who has been out of favour at St James' Park since John Beresford arrived from Pompey in the summer, will make his debut at Peterborough on Saturday.
Smith signed London-born Stimson from Tottenham when he was in charge at Newcastle.
He is one of several Newcastle players who have been told by manager Kevin Keegan they can go.
Ray Daniel, Pompey's regular left-back, will be out for three weeks after damaging ankle ligaments against Millwall.
Smith said: ‘I know Mark well from my time at Newcastle.
I rate him very highly as a defender and he will do a good job for us.
We will look at the permanent situation as well.’
Meanwhile, Kevin Keegan has promised defender Brian Kilcline he still figures in their plans.
Kilcline has started only three League games, but Keegan said: ‘He's a key player and his time will come.
The only thing he has done wrong is get injured at the start of the season.’
Pascoe setback
By John Wardle
COLIN PASCOE'S injury jinx has struck again at Sunderland.
The Welsh international has been sidelined for much of the past two seasons.
Now he is out of action again after fighting his way back into the first team.
Manager Malcolm Crosby said yesterday: ‘Colin would possibly have been involved, but he has injured his heel.’
Striker Don Goodman and midfielder Gary Owers miss tomorrow's game against Brentford and Peter Davenport is doubtful.
Struggling Second Division Wigan Athletic have been taken over by a London-based consortium.
Majority shareholder Bill Kenyon, who quit as chairman after being targeted by angry fans, has sold the group his controlling interest.
Poor Palace land a nice little earner
Ben Bacon
CRYSTAL PALACE, the club which ordered its non-playing staff to take a 10 per cent drop in salary, are shortly to announce profits of £1 million.
Chairman Ron Noades will soon reveal the figure, but he insists the decision to cut the wage bill at Selhurst Park is the right one.
He said: ‘I shortly will be announcing club profits which may be a bit difficult for people to understand, appreciate and accept as they'll be close to £1m from last year.
‘But last year's trading, is like last week's match.
It doesn't have much bearing on the next season.
Force
‘I've got to manage Crystal Palace in the way I see fit to help it in business.
That's my job.
‘I've also got to look at our income levels next year and how we can be a force.
‘The players are not responsible.
We've got to look at the recession that we are in.
We've got a drop in income in all areas.
‘It's no use me doing nothing now and wondering why we've got a problem in March.’
The only staff who have not taken a drop in their pay packets are manager Steve Coppell, his assistant Alan Smith and the players.
But Noades revealed that if he had insisted in altering the payment arrangement of his players, they would have been automatically entitled to free transfers and could have walked out and signed for someone else.
Shares fizz at Taunton
SOARING cider sales and a bumper apple crop have boosted profits at stock market newcomer Taunton Cider.
Pre-tax profits were up 54% to £8m, further helped by the interest charge halved at £2.2m.
Shares were given a fizz rising 8p to £2 before slipping to close at 198p.
Despite flat sales in other parts of the drinks market, cider sales in the UK are up 7%, and Taunton has upped its market share to 34%.
Taunton is in good shape with borrowing down from £10.4m to Pounds 1.1m.
The interim dividend is upped from 1.9p to 2.4p.
Jester target
TRAINER Dick Allan yesterday confirmed that Pat's Jester remains on course for a crack at the King George at Kempton on Boxing Day.
Pat's Jester was defeated by Twin Oaks at Haydock on Wednesday, with jockey Neale Doughty reporting the horse to have finished sore.
But Allan has failed to pinpoint a problem and believes the heavy ground was to blame.
‘He had never run on heavy ground in his life and his best form was always on good or fast going,’ he said yesterday.
Kelly takes on role of dishonour
Mike Crouch
GRAHAM KELLY is the sort of big soft target one takes no satisfaction from hitting again.
However, his appearance in the witness box in support of Gary Blissett in the John Uzzell case was plain barmy.
It is like the Lord Chief Justice giving evidence for the defence in an appeal case.
Kelly is at the head of the Football Association and he must be seen to be above the fray.
Why he decided to come down on one player's side against another is beyond comprehension.
Two motives are discernible.
The one Kelly admits was to ‘tell the truth’.
The other may well have had something to do with a desire to spike police interference with football.
The first is hard to explain because, although Kelly may be right in asserting that the clash was one of a kind seen every week, it was still bad enough for his own organisation to have upheld a ban on the man in the dock.
The second attracts some sympathy.
The police and the courts should be the last resort for handling football indiscipline and we are reaching the stage where they are becoming the first.
However this was a thoroughly misguided way to conduct the case for the FA.
Kelly's clumsy handling of the affair has done immense damage to the authority of his own office and he has only succeeded in attracting more attention to the ineptitude with which football is run.
If he and his cohorts at the FA want their ball back, they must crack down harder themselves on all that is bad in football.
Graham Kelly should be putting his own house in order, not making guest appearances in the witness box.
Star Wars II
Mike Crouch
THE sudden explosion of wrath between Gary Lineker and Graham Taylor comes as no surprise to close observers of the England camp.
The seething had been going on more or less from the time Taylor took over as manager.
It should not be a shock to others either, for this is an action replay of Gower versus Stewart, the clash of cavalier and roundhead, flair and commitment.
The only difference here is that the argument is condensed into one book rather than two.
Taylor, even more than Stewart, was a modest artisan as a player and, like the cricketer, places great emphasis on coaching.
Lineker is like Gower, another natural talent; neither loves training.
On top of that, Taylor is said to have been determined from the outset to exert his authority and not to be overshadowed by superstars.
So the only surprise is that the explosion didn't happen before.
For that we have to thank other characteristics which Lineker shares with Gower.
They both have a wider perspective of life and are blessed with good manners.
Gone cuckoo
Mike Crouch
WITH a meaningless tournament offering a first prize of $2 million, tennis finally made the grade as a cuckoo's nest this week.
And the players promptly set about taking over the asylum.
The United States Davis Cup team are now insisting on John McEnroe being made captain next year.
Old mouth McEnroe, who can't stop himself from foully abusing anyone in authority with whom he disagrees.
A frowning, fidgeting Captain Brat.
Even Jack Nicholson wasn't better cast.
As someone said, you can't be serious.
Ian the devil worshipper
Adrian Holloway
IAN COOPER of the Cardiff Devils is proud to be the most hated man in British ice hockey, so he will welcome the deafening boos when he squares up to Whitley Bay Warriors in Saturday's Benson and Hedges Cup final.
But Cooper is more than a hard man.
He is regarded as the best English player in the league and is set to become the burgeoning sport's first pin-up boy.
At 23, Cooper is ice hockey's hottest property, a marketing man's dream with long blond hair and a tendency towards violence.
‘I love it when the fans boo me,’ Cooper says.
‘If they ever stopped I think I'd retire.
I make people angry — that's my game.’
The booing dates back to Cooper's early days at his native Durham Wasps.
He recalls: ‘I had a bad name when I first came into the league because I skated round trying to hit as many Canadians as possible to get myself noticed.
Scrapping
‘I used to have a lot of fights and got a reputation.
Older players thought I was an upstart, so they made a point of scrapping with me but I thrived on it.
‘In ice hockey you have to fight.
If someone upsets you, the most sensible thing to do is drop your stick, take off your gloves and go for him.
It's a very positive way of letting out pent-up aggression and far less dangerous than slashing someone across the face with your stick — and I've got the scars to prove it.’
A much sought-after right-winger, Cooper has been transferred four times.
On each occasion it has been a joint move with his brother and fellow Great Britain international, Stephen.
The pact of loyalty between the brothers is part of modern ice hockey legend but their combined success must be unparalleled in British team sport.
For wherever the Coopers have gone, ice hockey's biggest prize, the Heineken Championship, has followed.
Despite moving from Durham to Cardiff, and back to Durham before rejoining Cardiff this summer, the Coopers have played in five consecutive winning teams at Wembley.
This season they are at it again.
Cardiff are top of the Heineken league and, if they beat Whitley at the Sheffield Arena, they will be on course for a grand slam of domestic titles.
The brothers are a curious contrast.
While Ian menaces around the ice with his blond ponytail flowing from beneath his helmet, Stephen, 25, is a clean-cut, gentlemanly defenceman who commands great respect.
Stephen says: ‘Unlike me, Ian is hated wherever he goes.
I probably hit more people than him but I'm a fairer player than he is.
He's a marked man and takes a lot of stick.’
In a league dominated by a restricted number of Canadian imports, home grown talent is craved like gold.
Cash
Only half a dozen Britons are bona fide professionals and the Coopers are certain to cash in if the sport continues to boom.
Cardiff manager John Lawless moved heaven and earth to get the Coopers back to South Wales this summer and is believed to have given them both an unprecedented £10,000 signing on fee and a £30,000 salary.
Before Lawless made his approach, Ian was a warehouse manager in Durham, while Stephen was a car salesman.
Neither thought they would ever make a living from ice hockey.
Ian says: ‘Five years ago nobody got paid.
I was shelling out Pounds 200 for boots and losing money.
We were so excited when they started paying expenses but I never dreamt the sport would come on like it has.’
The 12,000 crowd expected in Sheffield will be the largest the Coopers have ever played in front of but the publicity that would accompany Olympic success for Great Britain could make Ian into hockey's first Gazza-figure.
Ian says: ‘If we can qualify for the Olympics, then the sky is the limit.
If the sport grows over the next 10 years as quickly as it has in the past five, I could make a lot of money.’
In daily fear of his life
Steve Acteson
AS Stephen Hendry bent over the table to line up another shot there was more than victory at stake — he was literally taking his life in his hands.
As defeat followed defeat, the millions watching the world champion's slump in form on TV could only sit and wonder.
But now TODAY can exclusively reveal that every time Hendry went to the table he feared that a lethal shot could ring out from the crowd.
Since early September the 23-year-old multi-millionaire had been stalked by a mystery woman threatening to kill the man she once idolised.
She had worshipped Hendry as she watched him on TV marching to his second Embassy world title last April and made nightly notes in her diary detailing her adulation.
But by August her feelings had turned full circle, she wrote that she wanted to kill both Hendry and his manager Ian Doyle — the nightmare had begun.
And last night Doyle told me the truth behind the bizarre and evil campaign.
Doyle said: ‘Stephen made a brilliant start to the season but then we started to receive death threats in early September.
For the first two weeks the office treated it as a joke.
Everybody famous gets crank calls and letters.’
But Hendry was unwittingly being protected behind a wall of silence, Doyle deciding that it was pointless to unduly alarm him with so many big tournaments coming up and while police collaborated with British Telecom to try and trace the woman.
But Doyle himself realised just how real the threat to Hendry was the day a large parcel arrived at his Stirling offices.
‘Inside was a 200-page bound script written on a word processor and it was the most scary thing I've ever seen,’ he said.
Play
‘It was a play called Death by Dagger in the Billiard Room.
It had 30 characters, from Steve Davis to Pontius Pilate, and it all led up to Stephen's death.
‘We showed it to some professional scriptwriters and they couldn't believe what they were reading.’
By October there were upwards of 30 written death threats and the same warnings were coming by phone every week.
But Hendry had quickly noticed that security was being beefed up, with police mingling with crowds at the Rothmans Grand Prix in Reading and the UK Championship in Preston after threats to shoot him at the table.
And eventually Doyle was forced to tell him the whole story.
Hendry then experienced fear at first hand one night when he took his dog for it's nightly walk on the beach near his apartment in South Queensferry.
Doyle said: ‘When he got back to his Mercedes Stephen saw a front window had been smashed.
Convinced
‘But there were 20 CDs in the car and other valuables and nothing had been taken.
Stephen became convinced that someone was following him.’
The fear followed him on to the table at the Rothmans and the man who had pillaged nine titles last season lost to world No 52 Tony Chappel — a player who had managed to take just one frame off him in two previous meetings.
And Hendry's ego was further shattered by losing to John Parrott in the last frame of the Dubai Duty Free Classic final and again to him in Belgium.
Then came more harrowing defeats to fellow Scot Alan McManus, both at the UK Championship and then at this week's Coalite World Matchplay in Doncaster.
Doyle added: ‘Nobody will ever realise how much this has upset Stephen, it affected his confidence very, very badly.
‘But it has not only suffered when he is playing — his whole confidence in life has been affected.
He can't believe somebody would want to do this.’
Davis shows record form
STEVE DAVIS is only one match away from pocketing his second Coalite World Matchplay crown after last night's 9-4 semi-final win over Martin Clark.
He also wrote himself into the history books by becoming the first player to compile three total clearances in a match.
Till on top
MILKMAN Andy Till, 29, delivered a gold top performance to retain the British light-middleweight title after stopping Tony Collins in the third round at the York Hall, Bethnal Green last night.
Gullit recall
RUUD GULLIT was yesterday recalled to the Dutch squad for the World Cup qualifying match against Turkey next week.
The former Dutch captain had asked to be left out of the squad in September.
Reid on song
DALE REID fired a 71 to lie two shots off the lead after the first round of the Heart Health Open in Melbourne yesterday.
Canada's Jennifer Wyatt, Australian Shani Waugh and Alicia Dibos of Peru share the lead.
Briton's woe
BRITAIN'S Julia Snell failed in her bid to repeat her silver-medal start to the freestyle skiing World Cup in Tignes, France.
Lacking competition practice, she could only finish in sixth position.
TCCB resist Gower bid
Graham Otway
PLANS by MCC rebels to protest about the exclusion of David Gower from England's tour to India hit a brick wall last night.
London financier Dennis Oliver has mobilised a group of MCC members to call for a special meeting of the club to protest about Gower's absence.
But the TCCB, responsible for all England team matters, has no intention of giving way.
Chief executive Alan Smith said: ‘Board members are right behind the team and the people responsible for picking it.’
Asif Mujtaba hit a six off the final ball to give Pakistan a dramatic tie against Australia in the World Series in Hobart.
South African captain Kepler Wessels has escaped punishment for allegedly hitting Indian skipper Kapil Dev with his bat during the one-day international on Wednesday.
Mouthy Mac in a final furore
Giles Smith in Munich
JOHN McENROE bade farewell to top-level tennis last night in much the same fashion as has marked his 15 stormy years on the circuit.
While at times playing quite brilliantly, the brash New Yorker picked up a formal warning for swearing at the umpire…typically vintage McEnroe.
He ended his singles career by being blasted out of the $6 million Compaq Grand Slam Cup by big-serving Goran Ivanisevic, 3-6, 6-4, 6-2 in an hour and 44 minutes.
At least he produced one pleasant gesture.
He has termed the prize-money on offer ‘obscene’ and his winnings of $300,000 are going to charity.
Inevitably, though, he was unable to resist a trademark eruption of fury, loudly venting his anger on umpire Bruno Rebeuh after a disputed call in the second set.
A four-letter word was among his offerings and the official had no alternative but to give him a warning for verbal abuse.
Until then McEnroe, under intense pressure because of the break-up of his marriage to Tatum O'Neal, had kept his notorious temper under control.
Aces
Once it had gone, though, he had little chance against Ivanisevic, who bombed down another 18 aces, to leave him needing just eight more for an astonishing 1,000 in all tennis this year.
McEnroe was a tortured soul throughout, never once smiling, and at the end stalking off without shaking the umpire's hand.
His only concession to emotion was to give his shirt to one of the ball-boys — a valuable memento for one German lad.
Afterwards McEnroe finally agreed to hold a press conference — thereby avoiding a $10,000 fine following his refusal to attend one after the first round.
And he all but confirmed this was his last match, saying: ‘I basically feel the same way as I have all year, and although I am not going to announce my retirement, I guess that is it.
I am not 100 per cent but I suspect that's it, yes.’
In the first set, McEnroe was superb, showing all the which brought him 77 titles, including seven Grand Slams.
Things went sour, though, in the seventh game of the second set.
Ivanisevic double-faulted twice to go 0-30 down, then served an apparent fault — but it was called an ace.
McEnroe lost his cool, and the umpire got the full treatment.
as so many of his colleagues have received over the years.
‘That was a crucial call,’ said McEnroe.
‘It only takes a little thing like that.
That was the big point.’
Afterwards Ivanisevic described his opponent as ‘an idol for me’ and said: ‘This match is always going to be in my memory because he is leaving tennis and I beat him.
That is what I was dreaming about when I was young.
‘It is really bad if he leaves tennis because he is such a great champion.’
McEnroe was philosophical: ‘It just got to be too long where I hadn't won the big one.
I couldn't convince myself that it was going to happen anymore.’
Ivanisevic will meet Michael Chang in the semi-finals after Chang's 6-3, 6-4 defeat of Czechoslovakia's Petr Korda last night.
French to switch venue
THE famous Nurburgring in Germany last night emerged as a contender to stage next year's ‘cancelled’ French Grand Prix in the latest crazy saga surrounding the race threatened by the French anti-smoking brigade.
As Nigel Mansell prepared to fly into Paris to collect Britain's first world drivers' championship prize since 1976 at tonight's glittering prize-giving ceremony, it became clear that the world's oldest Grand Prix may next year have to be run in a ‘foreign’ country.
After a meeting of the International Motor Sports Federation (FISA) world council, president Max Mosley said: ‘The race is not being replaced.’
He did add, however: ‘But it is possible that it could be held elsewhere, maybe in Italy, Germany or Britain.’
Favre's Bay of plenty
David Tossell
FANS of the NFL associate the Green Bay Packers with legendary coach Vince Lombardi — after whom the Super Bowl trophy is named.
Twenty-five years after the second of his two consecutive Super Bowl triumphs, a new picture is being painted on the banks of Lake Michigan.
At the centre of the frame is new coach Mike Holmgren, quarterback Brett Favre and brilliant wide receiver Sterling Sharpe.
Favre, brought in to replace injured Don Majkowski, has made the quarterback position his own — despite his first pass hitting an opponent and rebounding back into his own arms for a legal completion.
Even during Green Bay's 2-5 start, the 23-year-old showed poise and promise.
Now, after five wins in six games, the Packers travel to the Houston Oilers on Sunday in the running for their first play-off appearance since 1982.
‘At the beginning of the year, I'd have laughed if you'd have told me we'd be in this situation,’ said Favre.
Sharpe, meanwhile, is only just short of breaking Art Monk's NFL record of 106 catches in a season, set in 1984.
And Holmgren said: ‘Sterling is our one legitimate star.
He helps in a lot of other ways than catching the ball.
He's an exceptional blocker.’
Holmgren, though, is being careful not to raise expectations: ‘We are in a position to make the play-offs and that is a great thing for everybody.
But let's keep this thing in perspective.
We are long shots and we are approaching it that way.
There are so many things we can't control.’
SATURDAY: Denver at Buffalo; NY Giants at Phoenix.
SUNDAY: Atlanta at Tampa Bay; Cincinnati at San Diego; Cleveland at Detroit; Dallas at Washington; Indianapolis at NY Jets; New England at Kansas City; New Orleans at LA Rams; Philadelphia at Seattle; Pittsburgh at Chicago; San Francisco at Minnesota; Green Bay at Houston.
MONDAY: LA Raiders at Miami.
Royle backs leaders
Graham Fisher
OLDHAM boss Joe Royle is backing his old Norwich City pals to stay the course and pull off the first Premier League title.
Royle, who finished his distinguished playing career at Carrow Road before taking over at Oldham, destroys the suggestion that the Canaries will not have the bottle to see off a glut of high-powered challenges.
Only three seasons ago, under Dave Stringer, Norwich led Division One until New Year's Eve, hung on to second place for nearly three more months but collapsed to finish fourth, 14 points behind Arsenal and Liverpool.
Belief
Royle says, though: ‘There can be no self-doubt now.
Norwich won at Arsenal and at Aston Villa the other week — convincingly too, from what I gather.
‘You don't go from places like that with three points if you don't have belief in yourselves.’
Meanwhile, Oldham have forgiven rebel goalkeeper John Keeley, who walked out on the club last week after being dropped at QPR.
Dilemma for City
John Davies
BRISTOL CITY look like being priced out of the market for Danish international defender Bjorn Kristensen.
Kristensen plays his last game on loan from Newcastle in Sunday's local derby against Bristol Rovers.
City's defence, which has conceeded 40 goals this season, has been strengthened since his arrival a month ago from St James' Park.
Kevin Keegan said yesterday he is asking £150,000 for the 29-year-old, but City will be hard-pressed to pay the Dane's wages.
‘I don't think Kevin Keegan will extend the loan,’ said Kristensen.
‘So a decision will have to be made next week.
I've enjoyed my football with City and would like to stay.’
Donaghy is pumped up
Adrian Holloway
CHELSEA are banking on the second oldest swinger in town to outwit Middlesbrough's attack tonight.
Mal Donaghy is seeking his first Championship medal at the age of 35 as fourth-placed Chelsea try to extend a brilliant run of seven wins in their last 10 games.
Donaghy is 12 years older than anyone else in Chelsea's back four, but the newly converted left-back has been playing some of the best football of his career since his £100,000 move from Manchester United in the summer.
Nevertheless, among the capital's top-flight teams, only QPR's Ray Wilkins is Donaghy's senior.
So what keeps Donaghy's engine running?
‘Well, I'd never done weights before I came to Chelsea, and my wife gives me better things to eat than bananas.
I suppose my secret is the luck of the Irish.
‘In 15 years I've never been injured.
All I've had is two broken noses, so every year I keep passing my MOT while a lot of other lads fail on dodgy knees.’
‘But when I get in the weight room at Chelsea, the other lads put me to shame.
‘Don Howe's got us all on this exercise programme and I'm not breaking any records in there but my general conditioning is OK.’
‘When Chelsea signed me Ian Porterfield told me that if I got in the side he wouldn't drop me so I want to make up for lost time.’
And manager Porterfield is now hoping his blend of youth and experience can land Chelsea's first major trophy since 1971 and give their success-starved fans something to smile about.
Harford helps put Chelsea in title chase
Duncan McKenzie
WATCHING Mick Harford recently, it was hard to resist the thought that he's a prime candidate for any buy-of-the-season award.
Harford was the best player on the pitch against Everton at Goodison Park and Chelsea manager Ian Porterfield must be well pleased with him.
You probably couldn't say the same for Howard Kendall — the Everton manager tried in vain to sign the big fellow from Luton earlier in the season.
The fee wasn't much, but Harford wanted a club in the south and that was it — not much consolation for Kendall, who knows he might well have done for Everton what he's doing for Chelsea, helping to turn them into a real Premier League force.
He is still one of the most deadly aerial players in front of goal and has formed a good combination with Robert Fleck.
He has the power, the Scot the pace.
Together they typify the new Chelsea.
Parties
The old Chelsea were definitely the showbiz club, where the parties were more important than performances and image was everything, much more vital than results.
About 12 years ago I was there for four months, and it was 16 weeks too long.
I remember once going to Anfield, losing 2-0, and the chairman coming into the dressing room to congratulate us warmly on only losing by two goals.
It was a ‘wonderful performance’.
We had three managers in one day, which must be some sort of record.
One, Danny Blanchflower, called us together and told us he wanted the team to play like the great one-touch Spurs side of the 60s.
It was pointed out that you needed 10 great players to do that, and we'd have trouble mustering one.
It didn't seem to make any difference, though.
The party had to end eventually, of course, and it was brought to a full stop by one man — Ken Bates.
The chairman may seem brash, even offensive to some, but he's turned the club on its head.
The glamour has gone, replaced by hard work and application.
As well as sorting out Stamford Bridge, he's put together a good management team in Porterfield and Don Howe.
Porterfield was a good player who always wanted to become a manager.
He learned the hard way at Rotherham, Sheffield United, Aberdeen and Reading.
Howe's presence this season as coach is a real bonus to him.
Don has credibility in the game, vast experience, and the players look to him — very important.
Their outlook is reflected in the team.
The luxury performers have gone, and the days when Chelsea saw a ‘tanner ball player’ and said ‘let's sign him’are over.
They've put together a side of young lads and journeyman pros, and that is meant as a compliment.
Graft
The players are not frightened to work hard and graft for each other, and the know-how of people like Dennis Wise, Andy Townsend and Mal Donaghy is complemented by the pace of younger players like Eddie Newton.
Chelsea are now London's leading club and one of the form teams.
They are live Championship contenders — a transformation which is little short of remarkable.
Saints testing Vernon
SOUTHAMPTON have joined champions Leeds in the race to sign wonder-kid Deion Vernon.
Vernon, 18, hero of non-League Bath City's FA Cup win over Cardiff, is on trial with Saints and manager Ian Branfoot wants to look at him in a reserve game.
Leeds manager Howard Wilkinson has already declared an interest in him after he spent a week training at Elland Road.
The striker was discovered by Joe Jordan playing club football in the riot-torn St Pauls area of Bristol.
He was released by Bristol City two months ago but Bath manager Tony Ricketts gave him a chance and he rewarded the GM Vauxhall Conference club with the winner against Cardiff.
Branfoot said: ‘I will give him the chance to show what he can do.’
Ipswich dilemma
IPSWICH team boss Mick McGiven is hoping that Clive Baker will be fit to face Manchester City tomorrow and avert a possible goalkeeping crisis.
Baker, 33, understudy to injured first-choice Craig Forrest, played through the pain barrier during Ipswich's 2-2 draw with Coventry City last Saturday after picking up a groin injury.
He is still receiving treatment and with Canadian international Forrest still sidelined with a stomach muscle problem, it could mean a first team debut for Jason Winters.
He has played in the last nine reserve matches.
Stimson on the move
PORTSMOUTH have signed Newcastle full-back Mark Stimson on a month's loan with a view to a £300,000 transfer.
Pompey boss Jim Smith has signed Stimson once before — when he was manager of Newcastle.
And he had no hesitation in going back to St James' Park to pick up the 24-year-old, who has been out of favour with the First Division leaders since the arrival of former Pompey star John Beresford in the summer.
Dario goes it alone
DARIO GRADI, football's most successful exponent of nurturing young talent, vowed last night to maintain his solitary existence outside of the newly-formed League Managers' Association.
Crewe boss Gradi is the only manager of a club in either the Premier or Football League not a member of the organisation — and it's partly down to the incorrect spelling of his surname.
He said: ‘A few years ago Graham Taylor, then at Aston Villa, rang and said I should join the old organisation.
I said OK — but when the letter arrived, they couldn't even spell my name properly.
I think I was Dario O'Grady.
‘I thought then why should I join an organisation which can't even spell my name correctly.
And I haven't changed my mind since.
I'm happy as I am.’
He does not intend to join now, despite the appointment of his friend Frank Clark, Leyton Orient's managing director, as the LMA's first chief executive earlier this week.
Clark wants the LMA, headed by Leeds boss Howard Wilkinson, to have a powerful voice but Gradi, who encouraged talents as Rob Jones, David Platt and Geoff Thomas, won't team up.
Gradi says: ‘I'm not interested in changing football, I'm interested only in Crewe.
I don't feel left out, or odd.
In fact, I don't feel anything about it.’
Kenny's mistake
Des Kelly
IAN RUSH believes Kenny Dalglish made a terrible mistake when he walked tearfully out of the Liverpool dressing room for the last time.
Anfield's record-breaking striker is certain that neither Blackburn Rovers' financial clout nor their present League position can ever console the Scot that he made the right decision on that dramatic day in February 1991.
And when the Ewood Park boss returns to face the Kop with his new club for the first time, Rush says Dalglish will be trying hard to hide his regret.
Rush insists that he only acted under the strain of mental pressure.
‘He's probably realised now he made a mistake,’ said Rush.
‘Everyone was looking for reasons why he left us and no-one appreciated at the time that his health was suffering.
Hasty
‘It's easy now to say he was hasty, yet at the time he just wanted to get out of the place because he was so ill.
‘Once he'd recharged his batteries I'm sure he realised it was the wrong decision.
‘You only have to look at a picture of him when he resigned and compare it with one from six months beforehand.
There is a major difference and it's easy to see he was not at all well.
‘But coming back to Anfield will mean a lot to Kenny.
He's been to watch quite a few games here since the day he left and that shows he still loves the place.
He might try to play the occasion down, but inside he'll be desperate to win.’
Dalglish's incredible decision to leave Liverpool provoked feelings of bitterness among some Merseyside supporters, angry at the way the club had been abandoned in the crucial run-in to the season.
But Rush is confident that any animosity has long-since faded and that his former boss is due for a hero's welcome when he leads his side out at the ground he graced for 14 illustrious years as player and manager.
‘He'll get a good reaction from our fans because the people appreciate everything he did for the club,’ Rush said.
‘They also understand about that at the time Kenny left he was obviously under a lot of the stress.
‘But it'll be strange to see him go left out of the tunnel.
and take his seat in the visitors' dug-out.
I'll half-expect to see him walk into our dressing room for the team talk.’
Rush vividly recalls the day when Dalglish shook football by turning his back on the club he loved.
‘It was Friday morning when players heard,’ he said.
‘It was the biggest shock of my life.
I could not believe it when he came in and told us.
‘There were tears in his eyes and he couldn't really speak.
He mumbled a couple of words that I couldn't quite hear.
Then he said he was leaving, walked out of the room and left it to our coach Ronnie Moran.
‘It just didn't sink in at the time — I didn't quite realise what was happening.
You learn to expect the unexpected in this game, but that was a real bombshell.
None of the players had an inkling.
We simply weren't aware of what was going through his mind at the time.’
Rush admits the midweek FA Cup fifth-round replay against rivals Everton, which ended deadlocked at 4-4, was the last straw for a man under psychological strain.
Rush said: ‘Everyone tells me that was the best game they've seen.
But we threw away the lead four times.
Now it makes you wonder just what it was doing to Kenny.’
Anfield's Welsh wizard also took time to pay tribute to Dalglish the player.
‘We had a good understanding as players, but we weren't that close off it,’ said Rush.
‘Kenny had the ability to put the ball into impossible places.
Perfect
‘At first I didn't bother to make a run, because I thought there was no point.
‘But Kenny would be furious as he'd hit a perfect pass.
So I used to go for it, just in case, and nine times out of 10 he'd find me.
‘He saw things before anyone else and that must be one of most frustrating things for him as a manager, because he can't do anything about it now.
‘Off the field he was an established star and I was just a youngster.
We didn't talk all that much.
In fact, it seems I've spoken to him more since he left the club.
‘Kenny called me the other week to congratulate me the day after I broke Roger Hunt's club scoring record at Manchester United.
He was ribbing me about how I could never score against United under him.
‘But without doubt he was the greatest player I have been in the same side with and he helped me improve myself no end.
‘Now he is proving he is a good manager all over again at Blackburn.
He's spent a lot of money, but he's spent it well.
‘Players like Alan Shearer are a good investment and he's brought him on.’
But it's difficult to convince Rush that Dalglish is not deluding himself if he says he is fulfilled by life after the Kop.
‘No-one expected Rovers to be doing so well and challenging for the League,’ he admitted.
‘They've done well — but let's face it, Blackburn are not as big a club as Liverpool, are they?’
Big three lift Spurs
Ben Bacon
TOTTENHAM are hopeful three of their injured stars will return for tomorrow's north London derby with Arsenal.
Gordon Durie, Paul Allen and David Howells — absent against Chelsea last weekend — all trained yesterday and could be back, providing they have suffered no untoward reactions.
Howells said: ‘I'm confident I'll be fit enough to get into the frame.
‘I'm really looking forward to it, particularly after two defeats.
‘It's a special game for everyone and I'm sure our youngsters will come through.
‘It's unusual to go into a game with Arsenal with us losing two, and them losing three games in a row.
‘But I'm sure it will be another tough game.’
Arsenal captain Tony Adams said: ‘Tottenham's a big game, whether we're top or bottom.
Everyone is charged up and raring to go.’
Chelsea's experienced midfielder, Alan Dickens, yesterday joined West Bromwich Albion on a month's loan.
Now Hateley slams England boss
Rob Shepherd
MARK HATELEY last night accused Graham Taylor of failing to earn the respect of high-profile international players.
In the wake of the England manager's feud with Gary Lineker becoming public, Hateley, once Lineker's strike partner, supports the former captain's views.
Apart from Lineker claiming Taylor had a personal vendetta against him, he also suggests Taylor did not treat players in the proper manner.
And Hateley, frozen out of the England scene, but who produced a high-quality display in Rangers' 1-0 European Cup win against CSKA Moscow on Wednesday, said last night: ‘I think Gary Lineker was quite right to criticise Graham Taylor.
‘When you consider what a great ambassador for the sport Gary has been, for him to come out and say what he has, then obviously things could not have been right.
‘If you have experienced pros, you have got to show them the respect they deserve.
‘If that happens they will give respect back.’
But clearly Hateley, who made his England debut back in 1984 and earned a fortune playing abroad, does not feel he was properly treated by Taylor.
He was recalled from the international wilderness last March to play against Czechoslovakia.
A possible European Championship place beckoned and he performed well in the 2-2 draw in Prague.
Although Taylor had a number of players out injured, Hateley was left out for the next match.
Hateley baffled and upset by the affair says: ‘I came in for that one game, and I thought I did reasonably well.
But I have not spoken or heard from Graham Taylor since.
‘I think for a man in my position with my experience of playing for England and on the continent, it does not show much regard.’
Meanwhile, Taylor's ‘boss’ Peter Swales last night insisted the public revelation of the England manager's feud with Lineker will not affect his position.
Manchester City chairman Swales, head of the FA's International committee says: ‘I remain 100 per cent behind Graham Taylor.
I've always said he's the best man for the job.
‘The fact Gary Lineker has said these things does not alter my feelings at all.’
Noades plan may set up fresh battle
PREMIER League clubs will be asked to back a breakaway second division next week — a move certain to spark another major bout of in-fighting.
Crystal Palace chairman Ron Noades is behind the TV-oriented scheme — which flies in the face of FA policy — to be considered by chairmen of the 22 clubs at a meeting in London.
And Football League president Gordon McKeag said: ‘When the Premier League was formed the FA said they would not sanction a second division.
‘That assurance has been reiterated by both the chairman (Sir Bert Millichip) and chief executive (Graham Kelly).’
There are signs, however, that Kelly and company may not be quite so entrenched as McKeag would like to think.
But FA spokesman Mike Wilmore said: ‘We have said that in principle we wouldn't be in favour, but it would be a brave man who said that would always be the position.’
Wealth
A major stumbling block is likely to be the include the redrawing of voting rights and a redistribution of wealth, with another 22 clubs demanding a share of the BSkyB TV cash.
Meanwhile Palace, who recently ordered their non-playing staff to take a 10 per cent drop in salary, will shortly announce profits of £1 million.
Noades will soon reveal the figure, but insists the decision to cut the wage bill at Selhurst Park is right.
He said: ‘The profits which may be a bit difficult for people to understand, appreciate and accept.
‘But last year's trading, is like last week's match.
It doesn't have much bearing on the next season.’
The only staff who have not taken a drop in their pay packets are manager Steve Coppell, his assistant Alan Smith and the players.
Cork target
ALAN CORK, aiming for his 150th League goal this weekend, has set himself a new target — to join the 200 Club.
The veteran former Wimbledon striker, 34 in March, and an almost perpetual substitute for Sheffield United this season, knows he is nearing the end of his big-time career.
But Cork, who hit goal number 149 at Norwich last month, insists the next milestone won't be his last.
‘I can go on for another three or four years yet because I'm still as fit as a fiddle,’ he said.
‘There's no reason why I can't go on for 200 goals and I don't agree with the argument that you should retire at the top.
You've got to keep playing as long as you can.’
Cork, aiming to combine playing with a new career in management when his Bramall Lane contract expires next summer, added: ‘I should have had more than two goals this season because I kept missing chances.
‘To get my 150th would be another landmark and it would be nice if I could do it in the Premier League.’
Hendry's fatal attraction
Steve Acteson
STEPHEN HENDRY has been living under a Fatal Attraction nightmare since September.
The 23-year-old multi-millionaire world snooker champion's form and confidence have fallen apart under the pressure of being the victim of a bizarre death plot.
Police have even infiltrated crowds at major snooker tournaments to counter threats that the brilliant young Scot would be shot at the table.
A mystery woman bombarded Hendry's manager Ian Doyle's Stirling offices with venomous death threats by letter and phone.
Tributes
She first tuned into Hendry when he was sweeping all before him en-route to a second Embassy world title last April.
Each night she wrote glowing tributes to him in her diary but love had turned to hate by August and diary entries showed she had decided to kill the object of her former devotion — and his manager.
But the most chilling moment was when a 200-page play, written by the woman, with Hendry's death the climax, was received entitled: Death by Dagger in the Billiards Room.
At first, Hendry was not told of the mystery woman's mission but was informed when he noticed the beefed-up security at his matches.
And as the horror sunk in, the form of a man who won nine titles last season deserted him.
He even lost his Rothmans Grand Prix title by losing in the first round to world No 52, Welshman Tony Chappel, while in the grip of fear.
The shadow of death has haunted Hendry, culminating in defeats by fellow Scot Alan McManus at the UK Championship and this week's Coalite World Matchplay in Doncaster.
Said Doyle last night: ‘After a great start Stephen's season has been totally blighted.
He has shown courage in exposing himself in public to the danger.
‘Someone in his financial position could easily have got a doctor's certificate to pull him out of tournaments but to his credit he never even considered it.’
Howe's illness scare
CHELSEA coach Don Howe was taken into hospital for precautionary chest checks last night.
Manager Ian Porterfield said former England No 2 Howe, who had a triple heart bypass operation in 1988, was admitted after feeling unwell.
As Chelsea's players prepared for tonight's Premier League match at Middlesbrough, Porterfield said: ‘Don Howe has a chest infection and, as a precaution due to his previous history, he has gone into hospital for checks.’
The 57-year-old was first taken ill in 1988 after coaching England at the European Championship finals, but recovered quickly to return to coaching.
Howe joined Chelsea this season.
Parke takes Open KO
THIRD seed Brett Martin, conqueror of Pakistan's Jahangir Khan, ended the run of England's former world junior champion Simon Parke with a 13-15, 15-8, 15-4, 15-8 triumph to reach the semi-finals of the Hong Kong Open squash tournament yesterday.
Aussie glory
BRITISH-born Australian Dave Russell scored a unanimous 12-round points decision over American Dan Murphy in Melbourne last night to capture the World Boxing Federation cruiserweight title.
British-born Russell won by scores of 118-110, 120-107 and 117-110 on the three judges' cards after fighting from close quarters to negate Murphy's height and reach advantages.
Japan boost
JAPAN'S Katsuya Onizuka retained his World Boxing Association junior bantamweight title when he outpointed Armando Castro of Mexico in their scheduled 12-round title bout in Tokyo last night.
Young's private battle
by Ray French
WALES rugby league skipper David Young has a point to prove when he leads Wales out against France in Perpignan tomorrow.
Discarded by big spenders Leeds as a costly £150,000 flop less than 12 months after switching codes, the 16-stone Salford prop defied the knockers when he was handed the captaincy of his country.
And although Wales will be without half a dozen established stars tomorrow — including Jonathan Davies, Jonathan Griffiths and Mark Jones — the 25-year-old Welsh captain relishes the chance yet again of defying his critics.
He is determined to lead his injury-stricken outfit to victory in France for the first time in 22 years and last night insisted: ‘I've had to fight for respect in rugby league.
Signing for Salford and gaining the captaincy of Wales has given me the chance to prove myself.’
Next up Swansea
NEWBRIDGE will look to put their off-field problems behind them and earn some much-needed Heineken League points when they entertain defending champions Swansea this afternoon.
This week the club lost captain David Rees to Newport and coach Paul Evans has decided he can no longer commit himself to the club because of the pressures of his Welsh Under-21 assistant coaching duties.
Scrum-half Steve Fealey will skipper the side in the absence of Rees.
Beresford set for emotional return
Steve Acteson
NEWCASTLE'S John Beresford will make a sentimental return tomorrow to the club which rescued his career.
Beresford was handed a lifeline by Barnsley after Manchester City kicked him out in 1986.
‘City boss Billy McNeill didn't think I could play,’ Beresford said last night.
But the dynamic left-back has since proved him wrong by moving into the England reckoning with his performances for Kevin Keegan's side.
And Beresford will never forget the debt he owes Barnsley, who will have a capacity crowd for tomorrow's all-ticket televised game.
‘I spent nearly three seasons at Oakwell and it was just what I needed after City had killed my confidence,’ said Beresford.
‘The fans were quite upset when I left — they invaded the pitch and waved money at the directors in a protest.
‘But the manager Allan Clarke was only keeping his word when he let me go to Portsmouth.
‘He always said he wouldn't stand in my way if a bigger club came in for me.
‘Now it's great to be going back there in a successful side — I only hope they give me a good reception.’
Beresford has no doubts though about the welcome he will receive from the 6,000 travelling Newcastle fans.
‘He has a cult following among our supporters, and he deserves it because he is streets ahead of any left-back in our division,’ enthused Keegan.
‘He would be in the England squad if Newcastle were in the Premier League and we'll put both those things right next season.
‘I said when I signed John and Barry Venison that they were possibly the best pair of full-backs in the English game.
‘People might have though it was a stupid statement at the time — now they know I was right,’ added Keegan who has named an unchanged team.
Plymouth Argyle player-manager Peter Shilton is rocking under an injury crisis the like of which he has never known.
‘I don't think I have known it this bad at any club in my career,’ he said.
Shilton, who is himself injured, has just 14 full-time professionals to choose from for the visit of Hartlepool after losing Just when Shilton thought things were looking up for his Second Division side before the 3-2 FA Cup win over Peterborough, he lost striker Paul Boardman with a foot injury and on-loan defender Richard Dryden with a groin injury.
And that leaves him with just 14 full-time professionals to choose from.
‘Long-term things are clearing up a little bit,’ said Shilton, who is also injured.
‘But short-term it is bad.’
Incredibly, Argyle have maintained an unbeaten home record in all competitions.
But that will be put to the test today by Hartlepool, who have lost only once away from home all season.
Former Plymouth players, goalkeeper Martin Hodge and defender Ryan Cross, are included by Hartlepool who have lost only once away from home this season.
for the visit to Home Park.
And Cross will be given the task of marking Plymouth's record signing Paul Dalton today.
Winger Dalton joined Plymouth from Hartlepool in the £250,000 deal that took Cross to Hartlepool.
Exeter's FA Cup second round rematch against Swansea will go ahead next Tuesday after all.
The Welsh club were leading 2-1 when the original tie at St James Park was abandoned following floodlight failure five minutes from time.
Despite Swansea lodging a protest, the FA yesterday ruled that Exeter were not at fault for the abandonment.
Mal in the mood
by John Davies
MALCOLM ALLISON is in outrageous mood as he prepares his Bristol Rovers side for tomorrow's first division confrontation against neighbouring Bristol City at Twerton Park.
‘Local derbies, I luv 'em,’ chuckled Big Mal, who once lowered Manchester United's flag to half mast before they clashed with his Manchester City team at Maine Road.
‘I think I only ever lost one of those all-Manchester derbies.
The wonderful City squad I coached, which included the talents of Franny Lee, Mike Summerbee, Colin Bell, Tony Book and Joe Corrigan were so dominant in those battles against United that I used to feel sorry for Matt Busy.
‘So meeting a Bristol City side that have conceded 24 goals away from home this season and have never won at Twerton Park holds no terrors for me or my Rovers lads, who are emerging as one of the best teams in the division.’
Allison, who took over Rovers four games ago after the sacking of Dennis Rofe, has already hauled them off the bottom of the table and claims they are going to be a force to be reckoned with.
‘When they beat Leicester 1-0 at Filbert Street two weeks ago I was delighted with the performance,’ he said.
‘In that kind of form they will give any team in the country a game.
‘All I hope is that it is an excellent game which my Rovers lads win 8-0.’
Leeds may splash out for Poole
David Alexander
LEEDS manager Howard Wilkinson has added Plymouth right-back Gary Poole to his wanted list in a bid to ease the crisis at Elland Road.
Wilkinson knows he must bolster his defence if the champions are to salvage anything from this season and the 25-year-old joins QPR right-back David Bardsley and Wimbledon centre-half John Scales as possible saviours.
Poole started his career at Spurs and had spells with Barnet and Cambridge before joining Peter Shilton in the summer.
Wilkinson's need for a right-back has heightened with injured Mel Sterland likely to be out for weeks after a further training setback.
Sterland has missed the whole season so far with ankle ligament damage.
But Leeds have problems at centre-half, too, and Wimbledon confirmed they have received an inquiry for Scales.
Reluctant
The Harrogate-born 26-year-old was given a free transfer by Leeds seven years ago and later joined Wimbledon for £70,000.
QPR are reluctant to let England squad member Bardsley leave but the right bid could force their hand.
Meanwhile, Wilkinson has reacted to the crisis by warning his players: you've got to keep your bottle.
He is trying to bring his players back to the basics that won the title last season.
‘We've got to believe in ourselves,’ he said yesterday.
‘One product of losing is self doubt and growing anxiety.’
Leeds meet Sheffield Wednesday at Elland Road today and Wilkinson added: ‘The best pill for our ills is winning — and sooner rather than later.’
Wednesday, third last season, are next to Leeds in the bottom half, though they have had major injury problems all season.
They have now largely cleared up and there could be 13 internationals in today's derby.
‘There'll be a lot of talent on view,’ said Wilkinson.
‘But everyone knows teams that just look great on paper only win paper cups.’
Leeds are still reeling from last week's four-goal home mauling by Nottingham Forest and club captain Gordon Strachan said: ‘I've watched it on video and I'm still a bit confused about what happened.
‘I have my own ideas but it's better if I keep those thoughts to myself.’
Centre-half Chris Whyte is likely to return today after missing the Forest defeat.
Surprise
But Wednesday's Roland Nilsson pinpointed Tony Dorigo as the surprise dangerman as Trevor Francis's team seek revenge for last season's Hillsborough hammering by Leeds.
Lee Chapman helped himself to a hat-trick in that 6-1 victory but the onslaught really stemmed from Wednesday's failure to cut out Dorigo's overlapping runs.
Nilsson admitted: ‘Last season we had problems over who was playing on the right and nobody was there apart from me.
‘In my opinion, Tony is definitely the number two left-back in the country behind Stuart Pearce but, hopefully, we'll do better against him this time.’
Jim'll fix Mathie
by Scott McMunn
TOUGH Hamilton skipper Jim Weir has vowed to stop Morton's B&Q Cup scoring machine Alex Mathie.
The Cappielow striker has scored in every round and includes the only hat-trick of the competition among his seven strikes.
But Accies stopper Weir insists he will not add to his tally in tomorrow's final at St Mirren's Love Street ground.
Weir said: ‘I'm confident of keeping Alex out and stop him scoring.
I've known him since our youth days and we became quite friendly when we were picked to play for Scotland's Under-20 side together a few years back.
‘We both ended up on the bench and since neither of us were very happy, we just sat and moaned at each other!
‘There will be none of that on Sunday, though.
It's a big game for both of us, and friendships will be forgotten while we're on the park.’
’ There's no doubt that he's on form just now and his pace is really difficult to handle.
Airdrie are banking on their own Mark Hateley to dump Lanarkshire derby rivals Motherwell deep into relegation trouble.
Beanpole striker Andy Smith has emerged as one of the key figures in the Diamonds' recent revival.
And assistant boss John McVeigh reckons the 24-year-old does just the same job at Broomfield as Rangers' European Cup hero.
But he added: ‘I wouldn't want to saddle anyone with comparisons to Mark.’
Colquhoun calamity
John Wardle
JOHN COLQUHOUN has left Sunderland facing a striker crisis.
Colquhoun suffered a back injury in training yesterday and is almost certain to miss today's game against Brentford.
Sunderland will check on him this morning, but coach Bobby Ferguson admitted last night: ‘We don't hold out much hope.
‘I feel sick for John because he was desperate for a chance to show what he can do.’
Manager Malcolm Crosby is already without regular strikers Don Goodman, Peter Davenport and Colin Pascoe.
David Rush, Brian Mooney and Warren Hawke stand by as Sunderland go for their fourth win in a row.
Coming home
Graham Fisher and Des Kelly
KENNY DALGLISH sent a heartfelt message to Anfield last night by saying: ‘I'm coming home.’
Blackburn boss Dalglish faced the nostalgia head-on as he prepared to lead out the opposition against Liverpool for the first time since his astonishing walk-out 20 months ago.
The Blackburn Rovers boss carefully segregated his thoughts into pigeon holes labelled personal and professional.
‘The Liverpool club has given me so much, including in private ways,’ he said.
‘My four children were brought up on Merseyside and that is where my home is.
‘My oldest daughter is 17 so we are talking about most of her life.
‘But for the first time since I came to England in August 1977, I'll be hoping Liverpool don't win again.
For all the family commitment, the team I work for is the team I want to win.’
He accepts there will be a bit of a hullabaloo when he steps out of the tunnel, maybe smiling at the ‘This is Anfield’ sign.
‘I haven't a clue what kind of reception I'll get,’ he added.
‘I know all the hype will surround myself but to me it's about the Rovers lads who have got us where we are.’
Dalglish, a much more relaxed man these days, seemed conscious of his old po-faced Anfield image when he claimed to possess as much feeling as the next man.
He said: ‘I don't know how fans looked at me when I was at Liverpool.
Some people might say I don't show any emotion but every time a goal went in there always seemed to be a picture of someone jumping up from the bench.
If that's not emotion I don't know what is.’
The not-so-dour Scot knows it will be a unique experience for him to take the visitor's dressing room at the citadel where his deeds as player and manager became legend — as did his departure.
He sounds a bit nervous to me, and that's hardly surprising.
On the professional front he can talk from strength.
Blackburn are six points clear of Liverpool in the table and have beaten them to a place in the Coca-Cola Cup quarter-finals.
‘Liverpool are still the best passing team in Britain,’ he said.
‘We can't match them at that but they can't match the way we play.
‘There are more ways than one of playing football.’
Dalglish will be welcomed back to Anfield tomorrow with a handshake from Graeme Souness, who will then aim to spoil his emotional homecoming.
The Liverpool manager refuses to allow the sentiment surrounding his friend and predecessor's return to the Kop to cloud his pursuit of three vital Premier League points.
And while Souness paid tribute to Dalglish for all he achieved in his time on Merseyside, he intends to bury their former alliance for tomorrow's 90-minute battle of wits.
‘We will shake hands before the game, then shout at each other across the dug-outs during the match, and shake hands again afterwards,’ said Souness.
‘We were together at Liverpool for seven years.
We argued for those seven years on the pitch, at half-time, and at the end of the game.
‘Yet we still sat next to each other on the team bus and shared the same room.
‘Kenny's accent was very difficult to understand in those days — in fact it still is — so we had a simple arrangement.
He would answer the door and my job was to answer the phone.
‘I know Dalglish and there are players here who played under him.
But it's got to be a case of saying ‘hello’ and then getting on with business.
‘I still see him, but it's mostly at games now because we're both in management.
I'm sure he'll try to say it's just about going to get a result, but it will be an emotional day for him.
‘Dalglish is the first ex-Liverpool manager to return to Anfield in over 70yearsscharge of a new Dalglish's decision to abandon the club in the run-in to the 1990-91 season still rankles with many around Merseyside, but Souness insists that should not affect the warmth of his reception, saying: ‘Kenny should be remembered as the greatest player this club has had and as a successful manager.
That is how our supporters should remember him too.
‘And the reasons he decided to leave here are really his business.’
Souness added: ‘Blackburn will be stiff opposition for us.
They are a strong, physical team.’
Stevens suffers new setback
by Scott McMunn
GARY STEVENS' injury torment took another turn for the worse yesterday when the Rangers full-back was ruled out for up to six weeks with a stress fracture of the knee.
Stevens had been regarded as the ‘Mr Indestructible’ of the Rangers defence, missing only two League games in the previous three seasons.
But the England international was sidelined for the first 24 games of the current campaign with a stress fracture of the foot.
And he was just half-way through his fourth comeback game against Airdrie recently when he suffered a kick on the knee.
The latest setback will keep the 29-year-old out over the hectic festive period, but gives him scope to return for the next series of European Cup games.
Rangers boss Walter Smith said: ‘It's terrible.
I really feel for Gary.’
Smith is beset by problems for today's Premier Division clash with Falkirk at Brockville.
Ian Ferguson begins a suspension, while Trevor Steven is doubtful with a calf injury.
Skipper Richard Gough, out for six weeks with a groin injury, was expected to return, but plays in the reserves instead.
Smith said: ‘He hasn't trained properly for six to seven weeks and needs a game under his belt.’
Dale Gordon and Pieter Huistra, who both missed the midweek victory over CSKA Moscow due to the restriction on foreign players, are back in contention.
Walker clears final Welsh hurdle
by Barry Lucas
THE meteoric rise to rugby fame of Nigel Walker, the former Olympic hurdler, has been recognised by the Welsh selectors.
Walker, who only switched sports in August, is named in the 29-strong squad that travels to Spain next month as part of the build-up to the Five Nations' Championship.
The 29-year-old Cardiff winger is one of six uncapped players bound for the training camp in Lanzarote and will be hoping to win a starting place over Llanelli's Wayne Proctor against England at Cardiff Arms Park on February 6.
Rival
‘Playing against England at the Arms Park would be an experience to rival any in my athletics career, including running at the 1984 Olympic Games,’ said Walker.
Since joining Cardiff, Walker has become an overnight success, scoring eight First Division tries in a dozen matches as the club have moved up from strugglers last season to table-toppers.
The other uncapped players in the party are Rupert Moon, Ricky Evans, Nigel Meek, Paul Kawulok and Sean Legge.
Squad: Backs: M Rayer (Cardiff), A Clement (Swansea), I Evans (Llanelli), R Bidgood (Newport), S Gibbs (Swansea), M Hall (Cardiff), N Davies (Llanelli), N Walker (Cardiff), W Proctor (Llanelli), A Davies (Cardiff), N Jenkins (Pontypridd), C Stephens (Llanelli), R Moon (Llanelli), R Jones (Swansea).
Forwards: M Griffiths (Cardiff), R Evans (Llanelli), G Jenkins (Swansea), N Meek (Pontypool), H Williams-Jones (South Wales Police), J Davies (Neath), A Copsey (Llanelli), Gareth Llewellyn (Neath), P Kawulok (Cardiff), E Lewis (Llanelli), M Perego (Llanelli), A Reynolds (Swansea), R Webster (Swansea), S Legge (South Wales Police), S Davies (Swansea).
Recipe for success
DIPLOMATS, heads of state, and royalty shared tables at the sumptuous banquet aboard the royal yacht Britannia at Edinburgh last night.
The 58 guests in the vessel's grand royal dining room tucked into a menu of terrine de saumon (salmon mousse) followed by a couronne de perdreau souveroff (crown of partridge), legumes panaches,(mixed vegetables) pommes croquettes salade (salad of sliced potatoes).
For dessert poires tatin (caramelised pear tart) was served.
There was also a selection of fine wines available, including Chablis Grand Cru Vaudesir 1985, Chateau Talbot 1981, Bollinger 1983 champagne and Cockburn 1967 port.
For those who preferred a non-alcoholic drink, there was a plentiful supply of Scottish mineral water for the toasts.
As the guests dined, they were treated to a variety of music from the ship's orchestra, including Strauss's Stories of the Vienna Forest, The Swing of the Kilt, Cats by Andrew Lloyd Webber and Grieg's Peer Gynt suite.
Wattana makes final
JAMES WATTANA earned a place in the £160,000 Coalite World Matchplay final with a 9-3 semi-final victory over Scotland's Alan McManus yesterday.
The world No 7 from Thailand raced into a 7-1 lead and will now face Steve Davis.
Indians triumph
WOORKERI RAMAN hit his first one-day international century to lead India to a four-wicket victory over South Africa with five balls remaining in Pretoria yesterday.
They are 2-1 down in the series.
Super Sarah
SOUTHEND swimmer Sarah Hardcastle made a successful return to competition yesterday after a six-year absence by winning the 400m freestyle at the Optrex National Winter Championships in Sheffield.
Weighty problem
THE International Weightlifting Federation will decide in February whether to restore a ban on Britons Andrew Davies and Andrew Saxton, who were thrown out of the Olympics after failing drug tests.
Squash row
ENGLAND'S top mens squash players could lose their rankings and be barred from the national team if they carry out their threat to boycott next month's National Championships in protest at low prize money.
Jockeys escape
THREE jockeys escaped serious injury after a pile-up in the Glasgow Paddocks Selling Hurdle at Doncaster yesterday.
Cixi, partnered by Jonothan Lower, was hampered and fell, bringing down both Elegant Friend (Paul Smith Eccles) and Stratford Lady (Steve Williams).
Lower bruised his left leg and was stood down for the rest of the afternoon by the course doctors.
Fear is the key to Benn triumph
Steve Acteson
NIGEL BENN must run scared of Nicky Piper tonight or risk blowing a £750,000 fortune.
Victory will open the door to a money-spinning rematch with Italy's Mauro Galvano, from whom Benn wrenched the WBC super-middleweight title so brilliantly in early October.
To follow should be a £1 million second showdown with WBO king Chris Eubank in September.
But Benn thrives on fear and any lack of respect for his Welsh opponent in his first defence of the crown at the Alexandra Palace tonight could prove disastrous.
Mistake
For although Piper's manager Frank Warren thinks Benn believes he has made a big mistake in selecting Piper as a first challenger and doesn't fancy the job, I suspect the opposite is true — he may think it is going to be too easy.
Benn's greatest victories, over Doug De Witt to win the world middleweight title, his opening-round knock-out of Iran Barkley and his fourth-round defeat of Galvano were all fuelled on fear.
But that apprehension was not physical cowardice, rather the fear of defeat and subsequent demotion from big-money fighter to poorly-paid has-been that drove him on.
In stark contrast, Benn's only two defeats in 36 fights were the direct result of being over-confident.
When he lost to the now-tragic figure of Michael Watson in 1989, Benn believed he was invincible — incredibly he spent nearly five hours on fight-day having his hair plaited.
And after running out of ideas against Watson he then appeared to run out of strength and motivation and was actually looking at the canvas instead of into his opponents' eyes in the seventh round when he was flattened by a thumping left jab.
But the lesson had not been learned, and when Benn fought Eubank as a champion 18 months later, he believed the fight was merely a stepping stone towards big-money outings in America.
Instead, Eubank clinically TKO'd him in the ninth.
Tonight Piper could provide another fearful disaster for Benn — for the Welshman has brains (MENSA rating 153) as well as brawn.
Piper studies each opponent carefully and has re-run the video of the Benn-Watson fight repeatedly to develop the strategy which he believes will prove the key to victory.
Piper knows Benn is prone to run out of gas if he can't get through in the early rounds.
with his stinging left jab opening the way for the coup de grace, the big overhand right, just as he did against Watson.
And Piper is an orthodox boxer rather than a brawler.
He can switch tactics on demand and also has a good left jab, with a wicked right cross his most fearsome weapon.
That punch put him in the Guinness Book of Records with the quickest KO in history when he flattened American Johnny Ellis in 12secs in November 1990, and he has claimed two other victims in 19secs and 27secs respectively.
Piper's only defeat came as a 12st 6lb light-heavy.
He was badly beaten up by late substitute Carl Thompson, who scaled 13st 3lb — around 17lb more than Benn will weigh tonight — and went on to become British cruiserweight champion.
Now, from being a light light-heavy, Piper has become a big super-middleweight.
He's bigger than Benn in almost all departments physically — including a five-inch height advantage — but is heavily outgunned in terms of experience.
Piper may be articulate and polite, but he is genuinely tough and a real threat to Benn — who I believe must get through to him in the first six rounds or face disaster.
Stich shines again
Giles Smith
MICHAEL STICH last night came close to producing the sort of form that won him Wimbledon two years ago, to move into the semi-finals of the Compaq Grand Slam Cup.
In front of 10,000 passionately supportive countrymen, the German squeezed through 7-6 (7-4), 7-5 against Holland's Richard Krajicek.
It was a notable achievement by 24-year-old Stich, who has slipped from third to 15th in the world rankings since his 1991 Wimbledon triumph, while Krajicek, with the biggest serve in the world game, is the up and coming star, having just moved into the top 10.
Stich said later: ‘I want to get back to the world top 10 — that's my goal.’
Stich faces world No 3 Pete Sampras of America today, who last night beat France's Henri Leconte 7-6 (7-3), 6-4.
The other semi is between America's Michael Chang and Croatia's Goran Ivanisevic.
French lifeline
MOVES to save the French Grand Prix were yesterday put into gear.
Already, the Magny Cours Formula One race and the motorcycling Grand Prix at Le Castellet have fallen victim to the country's strict anti-tobacco laws.
But now a former French cabinet minister is vowing to repeal the law.
Michel Charasse has put forward an amendment which would allow cigarette advertising at the Grand Prix.
Doncaster TV guide
by PHIL LOGAN
1.10:USEFUL Flat handicappers Barford Lad, Beauchamp Express and Busted Rock all shaped with promise on their debuts.
Mrs Piggott's BUSTED ROCK was not given a hard race when 14½l sixth to Satin Lover at Ascot and is open to plenty of improvement.
1.45:KIM Bailey appears to have found an ideal reappearance race for one of last season's most improved chasers DOCKLANDS EXPRESS.
Runner-up to The Fellow in the King George before finishing a brave third to Cool Ground in the Gold Cup, Docklands Express should defy top weight with all of his rivals at least 7lb or more out of the handicap.
2.15:LYNDA Ramsden's Sillars Stalker lost his unbeaten record when runner-up to Bollin William at Haydock and is worth opposing off a 5lb higher mark here.
Course winner CREEAGER, in good form on the Flat in the spring, is well handicapped back over hurdles and, at the 25-1 with Hills and Ladbrokes, makes plenty of each-way appeal.
2.45:OLIVER Sherwood has a high opinion of COPPER MINE and he can open his account over fences following his encouraging third to Fighting Words at Wetherby.
Dis Train and Man Of The West can give him most to do.
A fast buck
Henry Rix
12.45:IT is hard to envisage anything but the front two in the market winning this Grade Two contest.
The progressive Dreamers Delight touched off the useful Texan Tycoon in a fast time at Newbury two weeks ago and deserves the greatest respect, but I prefer SATIN LOVER.
Nigel Tinkler's gelding, a smart staying handicapper on the Flat, has taken well to hurdling and hasn't come off the bridle to maintain his unbeaten record.
He should outspeed his main rival.
1.20:THIS rematch between leading Champion Hurdle contenders Granville Again and MORLEY STREET is a fascinating contest.
The Martin Pipe camp believe that they would have beaten Morley Street granted a faster pace in the Elite Hurdle here last month, but I doubt it and confidently expect Toby Balding's star to confirm his superiority on 6lb better terms.
He wasn't at his best over two and a half at Ascot last time, but can redeem his reputation around his favoured left-handed track.
1.55:IMPRESSIVE Mackeson winner Tipping Tim is worth opposing on an 8lb higher mark with the ground softer than he likes.
I fancy ELFAST, who loves Cheltenham and is on offer at a very generous 33-1 with Corals and Ladbrokes.
John Webber's gelding is well in on just a 5lb higher mark than when landing the Mildmay Of Flete at the Festival in March.
The ground is against Another Coral, and Second Schedual, who will appreciate this stiffer test, is more of a threat.
2.30:LEADING American hurdler Lonesome Glory is extremely difficult to assess but he is unlikely to appreciate these testing conditions.
Jim Old's Al Mutahm, recently purchased by composer Andrew Lloyd Webber, finished runner-up to the useful Staunch Friend here last month, and is sure to go close over this more suitable trip.
However, I prefer the useful filly BEEBOB, who was let down by her jumping last season but has apparently schooled much better recently.
Niven ruled out
TOP northern jockey Peter Niven misses the ride on exciting novice chaser Cab on Target after a bad fall at Doncaster yesterday.
And Mary Reveley is now considering withdrawing the horse from today's race.
Niven came to grief at the eighth fence on Flight Hill and had his left arm in a sling when he left the course by ambulance.
Guilty
He said later: ‘They don't think there's anything broken but I definitely won't be riding tomorrow.’
Mrs Reveley said: ‘Nobody else has ever sat on the horse over jumps.
I'll speak to the owners first but there is a possibility I might end up withdrawing Cab on Target.’
Former champion amateur jump jockey Dermot Browne yesterday lost his appeal against a ten-year disqualification.
He was found guilty of six offences last month, including selling information to a bookmaker.
Hopley can make most of chance
Tony Roche
DAMIEN HOPLEY had just finished celebrating his Twickenham triumph with Cambridge on Tuesday when a phone call from London coach Tony Jorden sent him dashing off to get in another round.
Hopley, a huge midfield influence in the Light Blues 19-11 victory over favourites Oxford, lines up alongside Wasps team-mate Fran Clough in London's crucial ADT Divisional Championship match against South West at Gloucester today.
‘I wondered if I would get in,’ Hopley admitted.
‘I was unavailable for the game against the Midlands and the side won despite losing a number of players.
‘I am delighted and this caps a memorable week.
I can put the Varsity match out of my mind now and concentrate on improving my international ambitions.’
Those England ambitions are shared by Hopley's direct opponent at Gloucester, 22-year-old Northampton three-quarter Nick Beal.
Burst Beal's sensational progress since joining the Midlanders from High Wycombe this year bore serious fruit with two tries for the South West last week.
‘I used to be nervous before big games, but what has happened this year has given me increasing confidence,’ said Beal.
Hopley burst on to the scene with a dazzling Wasps debut against England captain Will Carling at Harlequins two seasons ago.
Since then he has won three England B caps and sat on the England bench against Wales in Cardiff last year.
Injuries have interrupted his progress and he is in no mood to allow Beal to do likewise.
Nikau inspires Cas win
CASTLEFORD boosted hopes of their first ever championship with a fifth successive win.
Inspired by Kiwi loose-forward Tawera Nikau, Castleford always looked the sharper side and built a 6-2 interval lead in a rehearsal for next Saturday's Regal Trophy quarter-final clash at Knowsley Road.
Nikau's clever pass sent Simon Middleton in for a try after 24 minutes and Lee Crooks increased the lead with a 30-yard penalty goal.
St Helens's only first-half points came from a David Lyon penalty.
And they fell further behind after 50 minutes.
Crooks sent Tony Smith clear to score.
Crooks sealed victory with two more penalty goals.
Lyon added a consolation try for the visitors in the last minute.
Frano Botica scored two tries and four goals as Wigan trounced Halifax 32-8.
Bishop in late scare
DAVID BISHOP almost handed Wales an early disaster as they prepare for Sunday's rugby league Test against France in Perpignan, writes Ray French.
The bus the 30-year-old hooker was travelling in to Manchester airport suffered a puncture and Bishop made the rendezvous with only minutes to spare.
Bishop said: ‘It really was panic stations, but luckily they delayed the plane for half an hour otherwise I would have been in real trouble.’
Fox pledges to give his idols a chasing
Adrian Holloway
REJUVENATED Ruel Fox is set upon tormenting the club of his boyhood dreams as Norwich take their amazing eight-point lead at the top of the Premier League to Old Trafford today.
The winger's dramatically improved form has been a key factor in Norwich's surprise success and Fox believes that a visit to Manchester United, which also sees the return of £800,000 striker Mark Robins to Old Trafford, will provide the perfect stage to show how far he has progressed.
‘I am going there at the peak of my form,’ he says.
‘I supported United as a boy, even though I lived in Ipswich.
They are still the most glamorous club in Britain, but our confidence is so high now that we could take them apart.
‘It's brilliant being eight points clear.
We just muck around in training and have a laugh.
There's no pressure, it's all like a dream.’
Fox's dream began in June when a nightmare ended.
The 5ft 6in speedster felt he was persona non grata throughout Dave Stringer's five years in charge at Carrow Road, but Mike Walker's arrival in the summer has given him a new lease of life.
Fox, 24, says: ‘Dave Stringer didn't fancy me as a player, it was as simple as that.
I was always having to prove things to him.
I felt the way he treated me was wrong.
Whatever I did, he'd always put me back on the subs' bench.
It was very frustrating because I'd made my debut when Ken Brown was manager and I'd done really well.’
Fox's woes were compounded by the emergence of Dale Gordon, who took his place on the wing and kept it until leaving for Rangers in November 1991.
Fox recalls: ‘I was always in Dale's shadow.
Eventually I asked for a transfer, but couldn't get one, so I stayed and now I'm glad I did.’
Meanwhile, Tottenham welcome back winger Darren Anderton, who is set to play his first full game after a hernia operation injury for Tottenham against Arsenal.
since a hernia operation eight matches ago.
He said yesterday: ‘It would be my biggest ever game for the club, and it'll be the biggest since I played and scored for Portsmouth in the FA Cup semi-finals last season.
It would stand comparison even with that special day.
QPR's England winger Andy Sinton has made a remarkable recovery to be fit for the visit of Crystal Palace since leaving Loftus Road on crutches after last week's win against Oldham.
Sinton said: ‘It was a very late tackle and it looked nasty.
I treat it as a compliment that people say I'm a marked man now, though I doubt it's true.’
Palace striker Chris Armstrong has confessed for the first time that manager Steve Coppell took a huge gamble signing him.
The 21-year-old striker has scored seven goals in 13 Premier League games since a surprise £1 million move from Millwall in September.
Armstrong said: ‘It was a big risk for Palace to sign me.
I could not believe somebody was prepared to pay so much for me.
‘The price tag worried me and I badly wanted to repay the faith Palace had shown in me.
‘It was an unbelievable move and it took me a few weeks to come back down to earth.’
He, s all Wright
Ben Bacon
IAN WRIGHT was given a remarkable and timely vote of confidence last night by Arsenal chairman Peter Hill-Wood.
As the England striker prepares for today's potentially explosive clash at Spurs, the Gunners chief gave Wright unreserved support despite his controversial display at Southampton last weekend.
‘I'm 100 per cent behind him,’ declared Old Etonian Hill-Wood, who also backs Anders Limpar.
‘Ian's a very exuberant, super guy who sometimes gets over-excited.
He's not a nasty piece of work, though.
‘He's a decent guy, full of enthusiasm.
Once in a while he lets his feet and everything else get ahead of him.
‘He does get frustrated but there's a delicate balance between curbing him too much and losing his effectiveness.
I'll leave that to the coaches.
‘Obviously what I don't like is a dirty player.
Ian does foul people but he's not a vicious boy at all.’
‘He occasionally gets knocked about and has to suffer some pretty robust challenges.’
He's no problem — I'm 100 per cent behind him.‘
Temper
Wright was genuinely touched by Hill-Wood's public support — and he needs the support after being criticised by Saints defender Ken Monkou following the Gunners' 2-0 defeat at The Dell, their third successive League loss.
Wright lost his infamous temper, picked up a booking and Monkou said: ‘Intimidation is his game and at one stage I had to tell him to calm down a bit.’
The Arsenal striker, who scored in both north London derby games last season, refused to be drawn into a slanging match after the game but responded forcefully yesterday.
He said: ‘Monkou is a whinger and I will be waiting for him when Southampton come to Highbury.
‘What he said was unfair.
I'm not a Vinnie Jones.
Intimidation is not part of my game.
My record shows I don't go out to hurt people.
‘I know when I play someone like Tottenham's Neil Ruddock we'll both give it out, but afterwards we'll have a drink.
‘Monkou goes whingeing, and slaughters me.
I've seen him outside of football a couple of times — but it just shows there are no friends in the game.’
‘Of course, I go out to give defenders a hard time — it's part of my job.
You give it out and you expect it in return.
‘I always give 110 per cent and that's why fans at most clubs would want me to play for their teams if I was to get a move from Arsenal.’
The £2.5 million forward will be scrutinised like never before at White Hart Lane in a match that will severely examine his character.
He has already been booked four times this season and two more cautions will result in automatic suspension.
He's looking for goals, not trouble, though, and said: ‘I think it's going to a good, open game.
‘It certainly won't be a stalemate like most derbies.
Both sides have a lot to prove to their fans.’
Hill-Wood, happy to declare his support for Wright, is just as enthusiastic about another Highbury favourite, Limpar.
Sometimes it looks as though Limpar, who has had run-ins with manager George Graham, has no future at the club.
Extend
But that notion was dispelled by Hill-Wood, who wants the Swedish international — relegated to the subs' bench for the last two matches — to extend his career with the Gunners, where his current contract expires in 18 months.
He said: ‘No-one's happy being on the bench.
Anders is a tremendous player and I think everybody else at the club feels the same.
‘It takes all sorts to make a team.
You need the Anders Limpars just as much as the Tony Adams.
‘We have no intention of letting him go and I would like him to stay on after his present contract expires.
‘No matter what people may think there's no trouble between him, George and the board.’
Today's changes
Aston Villa v Nottm For
Kingsley Black returns to Forest's starting line-up replacing hamstring-victim Ian Woan.
Villa welcome back keeper Nigel Spink and Ray Houghton from injury.
Last season: Villa 3, Forest 1; Forest 2, Villa 0.
Ipswich v Man City
Ipswich may have Geraint Williams back while City player-boss Peter Reid starts his first game for three months.
Garry Flitcroft is recalled as Fitzroy Simpson and Mike Sheron are dropped.
Last season: No corresponding fixture.
Leeds v Sheff Wed
Chris Whyte returns to Leeds's defence, while Wednesday captain Nigel Pearson could return in place of Viv Anderson or Paul Warhurst.
Last season: Leeds 1, Sheff W 1; Sheff W 1, Leeds 6.
Man Utd v Norwich
Ryan Giggs is doubtful with an ankle injury and Eric Cantona stands by for his first full game.
Norwich are unchanged but may move Ian Culverhouse from full-back to sweeper.
Last season: Man Utd 3, Norwich 0; Norwich 1, Man Utd 3.
QPR v Palace
Palace may prefer Bobby Bowry to Simon Osborn in midfield.
QPR's Andy Sinton and Les Ferdinand have recovered from knocks and are in the squad.
Last season: Palace 2, QPR 2; QPR 1, Palace 0.
Sheff Utd v Everton
Everton have Billy Kenny suspended, while Matt Jackson and Andy Hinchliffe are doubtful.
Sheffield United will be without suspended Carl Bradshaw.
Last season: Sheff U 2, Everton 1; Everton 0, Sheff U 2.
Soton v Coventry
Skipper Stewart Robson (hamstring) and Andy Pearce (back) are missing for Coventry.
Lloyd McGrath and Phil Babb are expected to fill in.
Saints only doubt is Ken Monkou.
Last season: Coventry 2, Soton 0; Soton 0, Coventry 0.
Spurs v Arsenal
Gordon Durie, David Howells and Paul Allen all face late fitness tests.
Gudni Bergsson is set to play his first game of the season at sweeper.
Arsenal will make a late decision on whether to recall left-back Nigel Winterburn.
Last season: Arsenal 2, Spurs 0; Spurs 1, Arsenal 1.
Wimbledon v Oldham
Warren Barton faces a late fitness test.
Oldham are unchanged.
Last season: Wimbledon 2, Oldham 1; Oldham 0, Wimbledon 1.
TOMORROW
Liverpool v Blackburn
Ian Rush, Don Hutchison, Mark Walters and Paul Stewart have all been passed fit.
Kevin Moran, Chris Price and Tim Sherwood return to the Blackburn squad.
Last season: No corresponding fixture.
My pal's in same mould as Gazza
Ben Bacon
IAN WRIGHT and Andy Gray hardly exchanged pleasantries the first time they met.
‘I kicked him up the backside,’ smiles Gray at the memory of their clash on a London soccer pitch when they were both 13-year-old ragamuffins.
Today, though, Gray won't have the chance for another unconventional greeting when Arsenal and Wright arrive at Tottenham for the 216th derby between the clubs — Spurs lead 86-85 in wins.
Gray is sidelined with a groin injury, but the Spurs midfield player is still ideally placed to give a revealing insight into the character of one of the country's most controversial sportsmen.
From their inauspicious start, the pair could hardly be closer now.
Their relationship was bonded at Crystal Palace, where they helped the club to the FA Cup final, and they virtually live next door to each other in a leafy Surrey suburb, just south of Croydon.
Wild
Indeed, during the interview, Wright popped into Gray's house for a chat, bringing him a unexpected gift of tracksuit bottoms.
Gray, who will watch today's game at White Hart Lane, vividly recalls that first clash with the striker he now regards as the most exciting in Britian.
He said: ‘We would have been about 13 and I was playing for South London district and Ian was in the Blackheath team, which also had Paul Elliott in it.
‘Something happened in the first half and I lashed out, giving him a kick up the backside.
I got told off by the ref — I was a bit wild then — and Ian began moaning as though he was crying.
We then went for London trials and I got in, he didn't!
‘There were loads of players who were just as good as Ian, but they didn't have his determination.
Some dropped out and got into drugs, others just fancied drinking with their mates in the pub.
‘But he stuck at it, even though clubs didn't give him his chance until he went to Palace.
Now, the same people who discarded him as a kid are the ones who want to shake his hand.
‘I must admit, when he came to the club we didn't hit it off.
I felt threatened by him because I used to play up front, so I decided to show him who was boss.
But that all changed after an incident in training.
‘All the older pros used to take the mickey out of us, but then one day in a practice match Ian went past Jim Cannon, who had been at the club for ages, and he didn't like it.
‘Cannon abused him and pushed his face in the mud.
I stood up for him and said it was rubbish, and told all the black players to quit training.
From that moment on, Ian and I were pals.’
Gray gets just as incensed when people criticise Wright's character.
‘Look,’ he said, ‘Everyone is different.
If we weren't, we'd all be Klingons.
If everyone played the same chess game, it would be stalemate.
‘Why should he change?
People talk about him in the pub on Sundays.
He wants to win and do well for himself.
He's not dirty at all— he just gives defenders a hard time.
Class
‘No one has a go at Van Basten, who's aggressive and gets stuck in with his elbows flying.
Ian's in the same mould as Gazza.
‘Alan Shearer is hard-working blah, blah, blah — but Ian can excite supporters.
When he's on song, he does unbelievable things.
‘The moment I will never forget is our second goal in the Cup final against Manchester United when he came on as a substitute.
‘It was class…all he went through…the two broken legs…it was an example of somebody who never gives up.’
Dalglish factfile
BORN: Glasgow March 4, 1951
HONOURS
CELTIC (69-77): 112 goals in 204 games.
League 72, 73, 74, 77; Cup 72, 74, 75, 77; League Cup 75.
LIVERPOOL: Player (77-90): Signed for British record £440,000. 118 goals in 397 games.
League 79, 80, 82, 83, 84; FA Cup 86; League Cup 81, 82, 83, 84; European Cup 78, 81.
Manager (85-91): League 86, 88, 90; FA Cup 86, 89.
BLACKBURN (1991-): Division Two 92.
SCOTLAND: 102 caps, 30 goals.
Kenny still the king
Des Kelly
RETURNING to Anfield tomorrow means a great deal to Kenny Dalglish, but I'll be surprised if the players see a flicker of emotion in those tense last moments in the dressing room.
Kenny doesn't give much away and is not one for great speeches.
He doesn't shout or bark out orders and that cool approach was something I found difficult to come to terms with when I first arrived at Liverpool.
For instance, I couldn't believe it when we were kept in the dark about the team until the hour before kick-off.
It just seemed weird to me that we didn't have a clue about the line-up.
But I soon saw that keeping everyone guessing was Kenny's way of retaining control.
As he'd quietly read out the names on the teamsheet, there'd be 16 players sitting on the edge of their seats, all waiting and expecting to be picked.
Eager
Five would be disappointed, but we were always kept on the hop.
The whole squad was eager because they all thought they had a chance of being involved.
That was Kenny's strength.
Mind you, I suffered a number of times because of this.
Kenny had a ‘horses-for-courses’ policy and he'd sometimes switch to a five-man defence and leave out me or Peter Beardsley.
He was slated for his tactics when they went wrong, but how often did that happen?
I think people were just dying to seize upon anything they could find.
Those who want to argue with his approach just have to look at the trophies he won.
I'm sure Kenny will take a backseat approach with the Blackburn players today.
I've spoken to Kevin Moran when we've been away with the Republic of Ireland and he says things there are quite relaxed.
If you have a bad game he'll leave you in no doubt about what he thinks, but he very rarely loses his temper.
In fact, he is not a great motivator through the actual force of his personality, and if I had to name a weakness that would be it.
Kenny commanded incredible respect, though, because of everything he achieved in the game.
He might not have involved himself too much in the day-to-day running of the club, yet I was never in any doubt as to who made the final decisions.
The public always see a fairly dour character, too, but with the players he was exactly the opposite.
He was the kind of manager you could approach without hesitation and he had a sharp sense of humour.
His behaviour in the aftermath of the Hillsborough disaster was exemplary, his character shone through.
Of course he later left Liverpool and I'm sure there'll be a lot of talk about that again.
Personally, I think the loss of Alan Hansen through injury had a lot to do with it.
When he went, Kenny had lost a friend and a player of great talent and status at the same time.
In my time you even had to survive Hansen's unofficial scrutiny before you made it to the first team.
Shrewd
On the pitch he was practically impossible to replace and I'm sure all this contributed to the pressure bearing down on Dalglish in those last months.
I wasn't surprised when he came back, though.
Kenny was always football mad and he couldn't stay out for long.
He's shrewd, he's got money available at Blackburn and that's a recipe for more success.
Souness factfile
BORN: Edinburgh May 6, 1953
HONOURS
MIDDLESBRO (72-78): 22 goals in 176 games.
Div Two 74; Anglo-Scot Cup: 76.
LIVERPOOL: Player (78-84): 38 goals in 247 games.
League 79, 80, 82, 83, 84; European Cup 78, 80, 84; League Cup 81, 82, 83, 84.
SAMPDORIA (84-86): 8 goals in 56 game.
RANGERS: Player-Mgr (86-91): 3 goals in 40 games.
League 87, 89, 90, 91; Skol Cup: 86, 87, 88, 90.
LIVERPOOL: Manager (91-): FA Cup 92.
SCOTLAND: 54 caps, 4 goals.
Gutsy Graeme gets 'em going
Des Kelly
IN THE two or three minutes before kick-off Graeme Souness will make his players believe they are 10 feet tall and can walk through fire.
His greatest quality is the way he motivates his team.
No-one in the Liverpool dressing room is left in any doubt as to the standards they are expected to achieve each time they are selected.
While Kenny is the quiet man before and during a match, Graeme is more volatile and likely to blow his top if his demands aren't met.
He will not back away from confronting individuals when he wants to get his message across.
He won't have a go if you have a bad game, but he expects everyone to give their all.
If he feels someone is not applying themselves 100 per cent, he won't spare reputations or ego — whoever you are.
Like Dalglish, Souness commanded immediate respect from all the staff because of his great record in the game.
And we knew what lay in store from him as well.
The methods Souness used when he set about a struggling Rangers, turned them around and picked up Championships and cups, prepared us for what was on the way at Anfield.
Basically we were aware we had to fight for our futures.
We knew Souness would want his own set of players and that he'd shift people in and out very quickly just as he had in Scotland.
All you could do deep down was to pray it wouldn't be you for the chop.
Souness had the opportunity to sell me and he took it.
It was over finance in the end, but that's all I want to say for now on that matter.
While Graeme is certainly a very opinionated and forthright personality, he seemed more aloof from the players to me.
Steel
I felt he maintained a distance and because of that I found him more difficult to approach than Dalglish if there was anything I needed to discuss.
At least that is a weakness I would pick out.
But no-one can doubt his steel.
The way he was fired up for last season's FA Cup semi-final against Portsmouth, despite knowing he was to have major heart surgery the next day showed his commitment.
Even the after effects could not keep him from the final.
The changes are still under way at Liverpool and Souness will put a few more noses out of joint before he's finished.
But he's the sort who won't worry too much about that as long as he follows the course he believes will revitalise Liverpool.
At the end of all this, Kenny steals my vote in a head-to-head.
I admit I'm a wee bit biased though.
Kenny signed me for Liverpool.
Graeme sold me to Villa.
What do you expect?
Parker blooming at Villa
Tony Kell
GARRY PARKER has the best possible reasons for holding no grudges against Brian Clough when he lines up against his old club Nottingham Forest at Villa Park today.
The initial ‘hurt and disappointment’ that accompanied the realisation that he was no longer wanted at the City Ground, remains fresh in the memory.
Parker, after all, had been a key figure in helping Forest reach four Wembley finals over the previous three seasons.
But he admits: ‘I could never have envisaged the the way things have worked out for me.’
While Forest are into their fourth month rooted to the bottom of the Premier League, Parker's form for the new title favourites, Aston Villa, has been rewarded with call-ups by Graham Taylor for England's first two World Cup qualifying ties against Norway and Turkey.
Shocked
‘At the time I didn't want to leave Forest,’ he said.
‘I was shocked when Scot Gemmill was brought in for me at the start of last season because it came out of the blue.
But good luck to the lad.
‘He's done well for himself, and as things have turned out, I got a great move to a club that are really flying at the moment.
‘There is a brilliant atmosphere at the club now and when I was at Forest we didn't have this sort of camaraderie.’
‘They've shown in their last two games in beating Spurs and Leeds that they're in a false position.
There's no way I can't see them getting out of trouble.’
Wholesale Hammers
by Adrian Holloway
WEST HAM boss Billy Bonds announced a pre-Christmas clear-out to reduce the club's massive wage bill on the eve of Southend's visit to Upton Park today.
Bonds has added centre-back Tony Gale to a long transfer list which includes experienced pros Ian Bishop, Mike Small, Mitchell Thomas and Colin Foster.
‘We have a big squad here and a big wage bill,’ said Bonds, who is eager to loan out players in the hope of off-loading them permanently.
Meanwhile, Hammers hope to give Canadian striker Alex Bunbury a debut in the Anglo-Italian Cup tie against Pisa on Wednesday.
Fry is back
by Ben Bacon
BARRY FRY capped one of the most astonishing comebacks in football yesterday when he won his old job back as manager of Third Division Barnet.
That is the latest bizarre instalment in the never-ending story of extraordinary events at Underhill.
Fry, sacked only 10 days ago, has somehow patched up his differences with chairman Stan Flashman and will take over his old job for the game against Rochdale today.
It is an astonishing development in a saga which has repeatedly stunned football.
Fry and Flashman both launched a tirade of abuse against each other following their parting, but now they have shelved their differences and will work together again in a twosome, the like of which football has never seen, or is likely to again.
Fry confirmed last night:’ Life is full of surprises.
I've got my old job back on the same terms and I'm delighted.
‘It's a great day for me and I hope we can get Barnet the promotion we deserve.
‘Stan called me and we met for a chat at his home.
We talked it through and agreed we'd had great years together and why shouldn't we get back together again.
‘All I want to do now is concentrate on football and work for the success of a great little club.’
Since his shock sacking, Fry had promised to sue for unfair dismissal, and he urged his players to report Flashman to the local police for threats he had made against them.
But Flashman said: ‘We have had our run-ins in the past, but that's all behind us now.
Barry has always been the best man for the job and we're going to continue our partnership.’
Assistant manager Eddie Stein, who had taken temporary control, said: ‘The chairman did ask me how I felt about Barry possibly coming back earlier this week and I told him I'd welcome him with open arms.
He's still the only man for the job.’
The Football League, who recently fined Barnet £50,000 for financial irregularities, is sure now to take a very dim view of the events at the club.
Hitchcock thriller lifts Blues
by David Alexander
Middlesbrough 0, Chelsea 0
CHELSEA ‘Hitched’ a lift along the road to a Premier League prize last night.
They moved into second place, underlining the fact they are a team of substance this season, thanks to a first half spectacular from keeper Kevin Hitchcock.
The 30-year-old produced three excellent first-half stops to keep Boro out and set up the draw that leaves Chelsea seven points behind leaders Norwich.
And manager Ian Porterfield said: ‘I think we are good enough to stay up there.
I'd give anything to win something with Chelsea, my Wembley goal and my Cup Winners' medal.
I want success for Chelsea more than anything and we need to win another major trophy.’
Hitchcock could be the man to help them achieve that, despite a threat from Russian keeper, Dimitri Kharin, due to arrive from CSKA Moscow in the near future.
With Hitchock in this mood it already looks a good signing and Porterfield said: ‘We are not bringing the Russian to take Kevin's place.
The fact is we need two keepers.
Kevin is in charge of the shirt because he is playing so well and long may it continue.
I've got a lot of players fighting to get in this team, and the Russian will have to join them.’
The Chelsea keeper produced three top-class stops before half-time as Boro threatened to break open the defensive grip Chelsea were looking to keep on the game.
For the second 45 minutes it was Chelsea who made the chances, with Boro keeper Steve Pears reacting well to keep them out.
Porterfield added: ‘We started well but lost it a bit and I was happy to be level at half-time.
‘They hit the bar and we were a bit lucky there but we deserved a break because we fought right to the death on a very heavy pitch.’
Porterfield paid tribute to his developing side: ‘It's only December and there is a lot of football to play yet but we can stay near the top.
‘This is a young side and I've known them for four years and watched them mature and get stronger.
It gives me great satisfaction but we are not shouting about being second for what might be a few hours.’
Boro boss Lennie Lawrence said: ‘It was a fair result.
We can have no complaints.
‘Chelsea worked hard and they were better than us in the second half.’
There were two bookings, Boro's Jimmy Phillips and Chelsea's Frank Sinclair.
Mansell emotion shows at title party
NIGEL MANSELL last night gave a glimpse of how much he will miss Formula One when he limped forward to collect his World Drivers' Championship trophy at a glittering ceremony in Paris.
Mansell, accompanied by his wife Roseanne, was in emotional mood after hopping on to the stage at the International Motor Sports Federation's annual prize-giving.
He said: ‘I have to take one long last look round and take all this in.’
Earlier, he had told a packed audience at the French Automobile Club: at the Place de la Concorede: ‘I don't know if I will stand before you all again — but you never know, do you?’
’ I just want to congratulate and thank everyone in this room tonight for all they have done to bring this moment to reality.’
Clinch
Mansell won nine of this year's 16 Grands Prix to clinch his prize after a 12-year career in Formula One racing, and he was clearly determined to make the most of it.
He was the only champion to go forward and take the microphone, and he stayed behind afterwards to sign autographs and pose for photographs.
‘It is all over now,’ he said.
‘But it has been a wonderful year and a wonderful time for me.
It was just a bit sad the way it all ended.’
Mansell spent some time on stage with his former boss Frank Williams, whose Canon-Williams team had won the Constructors' Championship.
Derek Warwick collected his prize as sportscar world champion and the BBC won the Television Trophy for their presentation of the British Grand Prix.
Taylor lifts Aussies
AUSTRALIA top the World Series table after an eight-wicket victory over Pakistan in Adelaide yesterday.
The Australians, needing 196 from 47 overs to win a rain-affected contest, were led by man-of-the-match Mark Taylor with a patient 78 off 109 balls, which included just one boundary.
Taylor, the stand-in Australian captain, has now had two wins and a tie since taking over the helm last week from the injured Allan Border.
David Boon helped set the foundation for the innings with a solid 40 and Dean Jones finished unbeaten on 48 as Australia won with two overs to spare.
Pakistan struggled for much of game, with Wasim Akram providing one of their few bright spots, smashing 36 from 15 balls, including two towering sixes.
Sri Lanka beat New Zealand by 31 runs in the third and final one-day international in Colombo yesterday, to win the three-match series 2-0.
The first game was abandoned because of rain.
Sri Lanka made 262-6 in 49 overs and New Zealand were all out for 231 with only one ball remaining.
Reid in a rage at ref
Julie Tunney
Ipswich 3, Man City 1
UNHAPPY City boss Peter Reid left the field remonstrating with referee Ray Lewis after his side fell victim to a spirited Ipswich fightback.
City had not won a League game at Portman Road for 30 years, and had not scored in their last seven visits, but the jinx looked to have come to an end when Gary Flitcroft's first senior goal for the club gave them a 37th minute lead.
However, Ipswich hit back with three second-half efforts from Mick Stockwell, Gavin Johnson and Paul Goddard.
And when Steve McMahon was booked for a harsh foul on Town's Steve Whitton in the dying seconds, player-manager Reid's emotions took over.
Reid, playing in a slightly changed side having dropped Michael Sheron to the substitutes' bench, was unhappy about an earlier, seemingly accidental, challenge on Niall Quinn by Phil Whelan.
He said: ‘I don't like to comment on referees, but I had a chat with him — and he was an amiable chap.
‘We had a slight difference of opinion in the interpretation of stamping on people.’
MoM: Stockwell, Ipswich (Gutsy grafter with an eye for goal).
Howard has lost his way
Graham Fisher
Sheff Utd 1, Everton 0.
THE trouble with Everton is that Howard Kendall does not appear to know his best team.
Also, his ideas about formation are pretty liberal.
Different circumstances may call for a different approach, fine.
But Everton's midfield (Horne, Beardsley, Beagrie, Warzycha, Kenny, Ebbrell, Preky) and the strike force (Cottee, Johnston, Rideout, Barlow) seem to be manned on a rota basis in the hope that something comes up.
Their confusion was illustrated by an outbreak of schizophrenia in the mind of Stuart Barlow when put through with only Alan Kelly to beat.
Instead of employing the skills for which he is well paid, he passed to an offside Mo Johnston.
Barlow confessed: ‘Mo called for the ball and put me in two minds.
I know now I made the wrong decision, I should have buried it.’
Adrian Littlejohn's goal earned the points for a grateful United.
MoM: Glyn Hodges, United (Always a threat).
Veteran Gordon sparks united
by David Alexander
Leeds United 3, Sheffield Wednesday 1.
EVEN Sheffield Wednesday took time to applaud Gordon Strachan after another match-winning performance.
That was after the game.
The problem was they did it too much during the 90 minutes, too.
On a day that much expensive talent short-changed a dull derby scarred by offside, Strachan made the first two for Leeds and earned an ‘assist’ for the third.
Strachan on song is a familiar sound this season, so much so that Howard Wilkinson confesses he finds it difficult to say something new about his club captain.
‘When you consider the players on the pitch today and their ability, he was just miles in front,’ said the manager.
And Wednesday's John Sheridan, who left Leeds six months after Strachan arrived, praised the 35-year-old tormentor, saying: ‘He's different class.
If you stop him, you stop half the team but we didn't do that today.’
Wednesday had nobody of Strachan's dynamism but there was another difference, too — Leeds put their chances away, Wednesday did not.
The Leeds victory was partly based on David Rocastle's holding role in midfield that allowed Gary Speed to get forward so effectively.
This is the Welshman's best position and he backed Strachan brilliantly for two of the goals.
Confusion
Strachan's quick thinking at a free kick caused confusion, and Speed was there to head the first.
After another Strachan run, Speed hit a first-time drive touched in by Imre Varadi for the third.
In between, Strachan showed his alertness again, running Nigel Worthington and John Harkes ragged in the first seconds after half-time to set up a simple header for Lee Chapman.
‘In a wide position like that, there isn't anyone more difficult to beat than Worthington,’ said Wilkinson.
But even he couldn't stop the Scot.
Wednesday's Harkes missed two chances and it took a first-half strike from right-back Roland Nilsson to show the frontmen how to do it.
Wednesday have now gone seven League games without a win and must start taking chances or stop making basic mistakes at the back.
Manager Trevor Francis seems more puzzled than worried.
‘If Leeds played like that more often they'd be near the top,’ he said.
‘The way we played we'd have come away with a result from most games.’
MoM: Strachan (Scotland need him).
O'Connell shoots down Magpies
David Alexander
Barnsley 1 Newcastle United 0.
HIGH-FLYING Newcastle were brought briefly down to earth at Oakwell yesterday.
In fact, it was Barnsley's own airforce that did the damage to the First Division leaders.
The crucial strike was made four minutes after half-time and, predictably, it came in the air.
Barnsley always looked threatening on the aerial front and they made it count when Brendan O'Connell arrived at the back post to bury a Wayne Biggins cross with a power header.
But Kevin Keegan's team are still 12 points in front and their good-looking football dominated the first half and the last 20 minutes.
It was just the middle period that Barnsley, fuelled by the goal, were on top.
It was then that O'Connell stepped in with his 49th-minute winner and the 26-year-old midfield man could have had another five minutes later.
He broke through to hit a post and substitute Andy Liddell's follow-up was cleared off the line by Barry Venison.
In an incident-packed game, chances were evenly shared and Barnsley manager Mel Machin said: ‘We needed that result.
It was our little cup final.
Newcastle are quality, make no mistake.
It's tremendous for us because they're obviously the best side in this division.’
Newcastle's major share of possession before half-time produced a crop of openings, as did their late pressure.
And manager Kevin Keegan said: ‘We had the chances to win it.
I'm disappointed about that but not about the standard, it was a great game.
‘The only difference between this and other games is that we didn't put goals on the end of the performance.
‘Maybe this is one we shouldn't have lost, either.
But Barnsley worked very hard, right to the hilt, and they held on.’
Newcastle had lost just one League game away from home before this and they started with all the confidence of a four-match winning run behind them.
After just six minutes, Kevin Scott crashed a Kevin Sheedy free kick against the bar.
When Newcastle recovered from the effect of the goal, they again made chances with man of the match, keeper Lee Butler, keeping out a point-blank Sheedy header and Clark twice going close.
Poole praised
John Murray from Oxford
Oxford United 0, Leicester City 0.
LEICESTER keeper Kevin Poole was in dazzling form to keep out Oxford yesterday
However, his manager Brian Little called it merely ‘a typical performance.’
Poole pulled off six terrific saves as Oxford bombarded the Leicester goal.
Afterwards, Little said: ‘He may not be the biggest keeper in the world but technically he's very good.’
Poole's most spectacular stop came from a ferocious 20-yard drive from Mickey Lewis on 33 minutes, with the keeper turning the effort around the post at full stretch.
Oxford's 21-year-old winger Joey Beauchamp embarked on several superb runs down the right but Oxford, missing the suspended John Durnin, had no-one to apply the finishing touch.
And Leicester might have snatched all three points at the end as substitute Ian Ormondroyd set up Bobby Davison but the player blasted the ball over the bar.
Oxford boss Brian Horton said: ‘I'm pleased in a way because we kept a clean sheet and we certainly created plenty of chances.’
Tony's Roker choker
TONY NORMAN knows the high price of failure for goalkeepers.
Norman gifted the game's decisive goal to Micky Bennett as Sunderland crashed 3-1 at home to Brentford on Saturday.
And he admitted: ‘If keepers make a mistake it stands out like a sore thumb.
‘That's the way it goes, but I still wanted to dig a deep hole and dive in it.
I will remember that error for a long time, but I won't let it get me down.’
DERBY finally had the fans singing their praises following a 3-1 home win — but for Birmingham it was just another taste of the blues.
County had lost six of their last eight League games at the Baseball Ground, which had prompted disgruntled supporters to call for the resignation of manager Arthur Cox.
Mark Burke insists WOLVES are still in the promotion race — despite losing 2-1 at home to lowly Luton at Molineux.
‘It's disappointing, but it's not the end of the world,’ said Burke.
‘We have suffered setbacks before and bounced back.’
Pompey in for Leighton
Scott McMunn
JIM LEIGHTON, Dundee's international keeper, is set to join Portsmouth in a £200,000 deal this week.
Leighton joined Dundee in February, helping them gain promotion to the Premier Division before losing his place early this season.
Dundee boss Simon Stainrod said: ‘We are negotiating with a club to sell Leighton but I don't want to mention them at this stage.’
However, Portsmouth boss Jim Smith is known to want Leighton, capped 58 times by Scotland.
Celtic's Andy Payton, whose goal sunk Dundee on Saturday, has set his sights high, insisting: ‘I've scored seven goals and I would like to finish with 20.’
Hamilton won the B & Q Cup for the second successive season yesterday with a 3-2 win over Morton.
I don't care
by Mike Walters
IAN WRIGHT, facing the possibility of an FA ban and massive fine, last night brushed off the prospect of a trial by television and said: ‘I don't care what the BBC shows.’
Wright was captured by Match of the Day cameras cuffing Tottenham's David Howells off the ball in Saturday's tempestuous North London derby.
Arsenal's £2.5 million England striker escaped censure from controversial referee Alf Buksh for his latest moment of madness — but the flashpoint is certain to earn him a Football Association misconduct charge this week.
And there is a worrying precedent for Wright, 29, as regards the Arsenal manager George Graham and England chief Graham Taylor.
When another Arsenal man, Paul Davis, was caught by TV cameras breaking Southampton rival Glenn Cockerill's jaw with an off-the-ball punch in September 1988, Davis was hit with a nine-match ban and £3,000 fine.
If the FA follow that example, Wright could find himself suspended until mid-February — which would threaten his international place for England's next World Cup qualifying game against San Marino.
But Wright, when warned of the BBC's footage of his clash with Howells, replied: ‘I don't care what the BBC say or show.’
And Wright, whose misery over the weekend was compounded when he wasted a glorious chance to rescue a point for Arsenal, added: ‘Some people are just having a go at me for the sake of it and it's beginning to get to me.’
Davis never recovered fully from the stigma of the left hook which flattened Cockerill and Graham must act to harness Wright's volcanic temper before another Highbury career goes into premature decline.
But Graham refused to single out Wright for special condemnation after a stormy game featuring five bookings, saying: ‘It would not be right for me to focus on just one player.
‘There were a lot of things going on out there.
Ian's temperament is something he is working on and we've been working on all the time, but he just seems to be getting maximum publicity at the moment.’
And Graham will cap a dismal month by writing to the FA, demanding that Buksh does not officiate at any more Arsenal games this season.
Kenny's Anfield agony
by Des Kelly
KENNY DALGLISH'S return to Anfield ended in heartbreak last night as his new club Blackburn Rovers were overcome in a titanic struggle with Liverpool.
Just 22 months after walking out on the Merseyside club, the 41-year-old Scot received a warm reception from the Kop as he took his place on the Blackburn Rovers bench.
But as a fiercely-contested clash ended in a 2-1 defeat, sealed by substitute Mark Walters in a thrilling finale, he found he has been replaced by his successor Graeme Souness as king in the affections of the Anfield faithful.
The crowd gently goaded him by chanting: ‘Kenny what's the score?’ and afterwards Dalglish admitted: ‘I am disappointed we didn't get anything from the match because I thought we played well enough.
‘Everyone was passing judgement on this being my big day but I enjoyed it.
‘Obviously, I have a tremendous amount of memories from here and I had a tremendous amount of success here, too.
‘Liverpool Football Club will never leave me, although I have left them.
There is no reason to change that view.
‘I got a great reception but the club were always generous to me when I played and managed here.
I appreciate everything they have done for me and I'll never forget that.
But we'll settle for finishing above Liverpool at the end of the season.
‘Our display was better than the result and the lads did themselves proud but sometimes Lady Luck dictates how things go.
‘You have to put this into context.
Rovers have made enormous strides in the past 14 months and we were totally committed today — as we have been all season.’
The result edged Liverpool into ninth place, 11 points behind leaders Norwich, but it had great personal significance for Souness.
The Liverpool manager diplomatically avoided any attempt to bill this encounter as Souness versus Dalglish.
He said: ‘I haven't spoken to Kenny yet but I am very happy indeed.
We scored two grat goals and I think we just deserved to win.
’ Blackburn are very difficult to play against.
They are a strong and aggressive side and make you work very hard.’
Mark Walters climbed off the substitutes' bench to score Liverpool's two goals in a frenetic closing 13 minutes.
The former Rangers winger said:’ The first is without doubt the best goal I have scored for Liverpool.
As soon as I came on the pitch the Rovers defenders were trying to push me inside.
‘But I have a good right peg and it ended up in the back of the net.’
England striker Alan Shearer saw his sensational equaliser cancelled out and complained:’ We thought we deserved at least a draw.
‘We played them off the park for the first 25 minutes of the second half.’
Hill will replace Mansell
Steve Acteson
DAMON HILL, son of former world champion Graham Hill, will today be named as world champion Nigel Mansell's replacement in the all-conquering Canon-Williams-Renault team for next season, writes Steve Acteson.
Team owner Frank Williams — the man who ultimately gave newly-crowned Mansell his chance of glory — was last night keeping a veil of secrecy over the identity of Mansell's replacement.
But 30-year-old Londoner Hill is certain to become the former world champion Alain Prost's number two for several hard reasons.
Firstly, he has been involved with the team as a test driver for the last two years' development of the incredibly successful active-ride suspension system which powered Mansell to the world title.
Hill knows the old and new Williams cars inside out and vastly impressed Prost not only for his technical expertise, but also his driving talent in testing at Estoril last week.
Quicker
Mansell, speaking at the BBC's Sports Review of the Year show, said: ‘Damon deserves the opportunity to drive for Frank Williams.
‘That's because he's been part of the package that won the championship, he's done a phenomenal job and at the moment, he's quicker in testing than Prost.’
Hill has driven only two Grands Prix, making his Formula One debut for Brabham last May in Monte Carlo, the track once dominated by his double world championship-winning father.
Super Stich back to his best
Giles Smith in Munich
MICHAEL STICH last night resurrected a career that had been rapidly going downhill ever since he was the shock winner of Wimbledon 18 months ago.
Stich signalled his return to form with a convicing victory in the richest tournament in tennis, the $6m Compaq Grand Slam Cup.
The German totally overwhelmed America's Michael Chang, 6-2, 6-3, 6-2, in the final to take the first prize of $2m — but, more importantly for him, instil renewed self-confidence that the Wimbledon triumph was no fluke.
He has taken the scalps of the world number two, Stefan Edberg, then the number three, Pete Sampras, on the way to this final.
And last night, with his big service really back in the groove, looked well capable of moving back from his present lowly ranking of 15th to the top ten next year.
He revealed afterwards that he, like John McEnroe, who had described the prize money on offer as ‘obscene’, was considering giving some of it to charity.
‘For me the important thing was winning the match, the money is very much the second thing.
Lots of charities are going to come to me, and I will be considering what I will do.’
Staggering And, after earning at the staggering rate of nearly $60 a second throughout this tournament, he said: ‘I would rather win Wimbledon again and a few thousand pounds than this tournament and all this money.’
The match proved beyond any doubt that a good big 'un will always beat a good little 'un, despite Chang's David and Goliath act in the semi-final on Saturday when he beat, from his tiny height of 5ft 10ins, the 6ft 5ins Croatian giant Goran Ivanisevic.
But with 6ft 4ins Stich firing on all cylinders, and Chang looking jaded it was one Goliath too many for the brave American.
McCarthy banned
FORMER British light-heavywight champion Steve McCarthy has been suspended for three months, fined £1,000 and banned from fighting abroad by the British Board of Control after being disqualified in the third round of a bout with Darius Michalczeski in Hamburg in September.
Kelly's a hero
JIM KELLY ran for one touchdown and threw for another as Buffalo beat Denver 27-17 to move within sight of an NFL play-off spot.
Phoenix beat the New York Giants 19-0 in the night's other game.
Brits third
BRITAIN'S Sean Olsson and Eric Sekwalor clocked 2min 01.45sec to finish third behind Italy and Switzerland in yesterday's World Cup two-man bobsled event in La Plagne, France.
Baker quits
LIZ BAKER, 36, the first female chief executive in the Football League, has announced she is quitting her job at Plymouth Argyle after 15 months.
Adam record
ADAM RUCKWOOD, 18, yesterday clocked 57.57sec to break the British 200m backstroke record at the Optrex national swimming championships in Sheffield.
Making a Marc
LUXEMBURG'S Marc Girardelli boosted his hopes of a record fifth overall World Cup ski crown by winning the giant slalom in Alta Badia, Italy, yesterday.
Let me at Benn pleads Eubank
Steve Acteson
CHRIS EUBANK will today implore his manager Barry Hearn to ‘give Nigel Benn the £1 million he wants to fight me — and let's get it on.’
Eubank was impressed by Benn's new maturity in his 11th-round stoppage of Welshman Nicky Piper in the first defence of his WBC super-middleweight title at the Alexandra Palace.
‘Nigel looked calmer than usual, his aggression was more controlled and that makes him a more dangerous fighter than before,’ said WBO title king Eubank.
After his triumph, Benn said: ‘I don't want to fight Eubank because I don't like him but I'll take it for the million he was asking for.’
He then added: ‘Although maybe now I'll just do what he does and fight a bum a month instead of taking the hard fights.
I've got the superior title and he can come looking for me, he can stick that in his pipe and smoke it.’
But Eubank is keen to make Eubank v Benn II a reality next summer and insisted last night: ‘Never mind that, Nigel deserves his million and he should be given the chance to redeem himself against me.’
Taunts
Eubank is also asking for £1m to fight Benn once more but admitted: ‘I would even take it if it meant that the winner got Pounds 1m and the loser only half as much — the fight is that important to me.’
And Eubank added taunts to temptation by saying: ‘Despite what Benn says, I still think the man is bottling another fight with me.
I don't think he has the heart for it.
‘He is misleading people and will do everything in his power to keep away from me because we both know I'll beat him again.
‘And if he is not prepared to fight, then he should say so but there is no point in lying to the people around him saying he can do the job if he really believes he can't.’
New trainer Jimmy Tibbs has done wonders for Benn.
He is a far more controlled fighter and his stamina cannot be questioned for he had never gone beyond 10 rounds in his previous 36 fights.
Piper, fighting behind a stiff left jab and a MENSA rating of 153, backed Benn up in the first two rounds, with hard short rights.
But Benn took the fight to the Welshman in rounds three to six, brilliantly switching tactics and working to the body with lacerating left and right hooks.
Brave Piper took the seventh round on my card, while drawing three others, and impressed English judge Mickey Vann to make him a round up going into the climatic 11th, which made a joke of Piper's manager Frank Warren having objected to Vann as a judge.
But in that 11th, Benn was the Dark Destroyer of old, first knocking Piper down for a count of eight with three big rights and a sweet left hook and then punching him all round the ring — blood spurting from Piper's mouth with every blow — until referee Larry O'Connell mercifully stopped it.
Although Tibbs warned Benn that he needed the last two rounds, I already had him five rounds up — and so did Eubank.
He said: ‘Nigel's tactics were commendable.
I was pleased that he was more diplomatic afterwards instead of being as over the top as ever.
He conducted himself properly.
That's a sign of the new maturity he says he possesses and I respect him for it.’
Harsh
But Eubank had only harsh words for Piper saying: ‘The only thing that impressed me about him was that you could see he was thinking about what he was doing.
‘Piper was boxing out of the textbook.
And when Benn started hitting him with those big shots in the 11th, the textbook should have gone out of the window for the animal instinct to take over but he didn't have it the way I had against Benn and Michael Watson, unfortunately.
‘You have to have that quality because unless you do when you are fighting an animal then it will execute you.’
Bowe-baiting
Steve Acteson
LENNOX LEWIS last night threw down the ultimate gambit to world heavyweight champion Riddick Bowe saying: ‘If fighting me is so personal, let's do it and send all the money to Africa.’
Bowe was guest of honour on the BBC's Sports Review of the Year, but came head-to-head with Lewis, who is holidaying in Jamaica, via a satellite link.
Bowe will be stripped of the WBC version of his title if he fails to agree to honour his contract for a defence against Lewis by January 2 — having already turned down what Lewis termed as a ‘smack in the face’ offer to fight him for $3 million.
Bowe still taunted Lewis, opening his dinner suit to show one of his championship belts.
‘Lewis has reneged six times to fight me,’ claimed Bowe.
‘I've never ducked a good fight in my life, it's personal between us and I would love to fight him.’
Crowning glory
Nigel Benn knocks down Welshman Nicky Piper for a count of eight in the 11th round at the Alexandra Palace and (inset) celebrates after successfully defending his WBC crown.
Jones injury setback
WALES scrum-half Robert Jones could miss the East v West clash on December 28 after pulling a hamstring in Swansea's 28-0 victory over Newbridge.
He missed the West Wales training session in Swansea yesterday and said: ‘I felt it go when I was running.
It stiffened up overnight.
Not having ever had an injury like this before I don't know how long it will take to heal.
‘I'll be going to see a specialist to get it sorted out as soon as I can.’
Cardiff swept to a 46-12 win over Aberavon, and their eight tries knocked Swansea off the top of the Heineken League for the first time since February 5.
Wing Nigel Walker celebrated his call-up to the Wales squad by collecting four tries, including one from a spectacular 70-metre sprint, while Simon Hill weighed in with a hat-trick.
Adrian Davies scored the other.
Andrew on points
Tony Kell
COACH Keith Richardson praised the inspirational qualities of Stuart Barnes after South West beat London 26-24.
Richardson said: ‘Stuart has demanded a steely band of professionalism from the squad and told the players to give everything.
‘He did not have the greatest game as a player, but as a captain he was wonderful.’
Rob Andrew won his personal duel with Barnes, ramming in 19 points.
Watched by England manager Geoff Cooke and coach Dick Best, Andrew remains England's stand-off, with Barnes still the eternal No 2.
‘I was not at my best.
Rob played very well, but nobody is going to make a decision on one game.
England are in a position where they have a couple of good players at No 10,’ Barnes said.
The South West had 10 players from champions Bath and Barnes added: ‘When we were 14 points adrift I regarded that as an Alpine peak to climb — not a Himalayan.
‘At Bath we can work on that sort of deficit.
But the South West have never managed such recoveries.
‘But we dogged our way back using the new found commitment and will of the region,’ he added.
The South West had won only four of their 20 divisional matches before last week and had never achieved two wins in a single season.
But a draw against Midlands on Saturday would hand them the Divisional Championship for the first time.
An Alex Snow try and three penalties from Andrew had given London a commanding lead.
But the game turned with two South West tries in three minutes from Andy Robinson and wing Nick Beal.
Andrew added a try and a conversion to put London back in front.
South West bounced back again with a try from Jeremy Guscott and completed their triumph with a Jon Webb penalty.
Leicester's highly-rated young lock, Martin Johnson, whose decisive second-half try set up the Midlands 16-13 win over the North, played down his England prospects.
‘If I was the best second row forward in England I'd hope to get into the side, but that's not the case at the moment,’ he said.
Cab has Kempton Target
TOP novice chasers Barton Bank and Cab On Target are set to clash at Kempton on Boxing Day.
The duo are on course to meet in the Tripleprint Feltham Chase after convincing wins on Saturday.
Cab On Target produced a bold round of jumping to defeat highly-regarded Dusty Miller at Doncaster.
And Mrs Reveley immediately pinpointed Kempton as the next target.
‘I think he will be as good over a sharp three miles,’ she said.
Barton Bank's trainer David Nicholson is refusing to be scared away after watching his imposing gelding beat Young Hustler seven lengths at Cheltenaham.
Richard Dunwoody, 17 ahead of Peter Scudamore in the jockeys' championship after a treble on Saturday, was yesterday trimmed to 4-7 (from 4-6) by Coral for the title.
Reigning champion Scudamore is out to 6-4.
Maguire just Champion
Henry Rix
ADRIAN MAGUIRE, who partnered Halkopous to a tremendously impressive victory at Cheltenham on Saturday, will retain the ride on the new Champion Hurdle favourite.
Halkopous stormed to the head of the Champion market at 5-1 with Coral following his 10-length success from Granville Again, with Morley Street back in third.
And, although Steve Smith Eccles partnered Halkopous to a smooth victory at Newcastle, trainer Mark Tompkins yesterday confirmed that Maguire will be on board when Halkopous attempts to further his reputation in the Irish Champion at Leopardstown in January and at the Festival.
Smith Eccles, sidelined by a whip-ban on Saturday, will ride Tompkins's other Champion contender Staunch Friend.
‘Adrian did well on Halkopous and, assuming he is available, he will ride him,’ Tompkins said.
The Newmarket trainer was especially impressed with the way Maguire carried out his orders.
‘Adrian followed the instructions to the letter.
Saturday was a Champion Hurdle rehearsal — so I think my horse is entitled to be favourite,’ Tompkins added.
Morley Street was beaten 16 lengths and trainer Toby Balding said: ‘The jockeys on the fancied horses were so busy watching each other that Adrian was able to get first run and nick it.’
Peter Scudamore offered no excuses for Granville Again.
Coral's full list of Champion betting: 5-1 Halkopous (from 16-1), 6-1 Granville Again (from 9-2) and Mighty Mogul (from 7-1), 8-1 Destriero, 10-1 Morley Street.
Pearce is drop class
Ray French in Perpignan
France 18, Wales 19
A SUPERB 25-metre drop goal by Gary Pearce earned Wales a dramatic victory yesterday — their first on French soil for 22 years.
Wales' injury-ravaged side summoned up amazing reserves of courage and strength to stave off a hectic final French flourish.
A brilliant 30-metre solo try by Allan Bateman and two tries from John Devereux and Rob Ackerman saw Wales roar into an 18-4 lead.
And after Pearce's drop goal in the 33rd minute, Wales looked to be coasting to an easy victory.
Pearce said: ‘We always planned to try for a drop goal whenever we were in the French 20 metre area.
But I never realised how important this one would become.
‘In the second half, we just had to hang in there.’
France, inspired by captain Gilles Dumas, who opened the scoring in the fourth minute, displayed their breathtaking array of attacking skills in a frantic final 40 minutes.
A Lucien Demacedo try sent the first shockwaves through the Welsh camp.
And further second half tries from Claude Sirvent and Pierre Chamorin had Wales on the rack.
But, inspired by fierce tackling, Wales' heroic defensive line amazingly held firm.
After the match, delighted Welsh skipper David Young insisted: ‘It was an honour to captain such a bunch of lads.
In the second half we saw little ball and we had to defend for our lives.
I couldn't have asked for more.’
But St Helens winger Anthony Sullivan damaged knee and ankle ligaments and will be out for at least a month.
Woe for Leeds
Sheffield 31, Leeds 14
CRISIS-CLUB Leeds plunged into deeper trouble yesterday after their first-ever defeat against their Yorkshire rivals.
Leeds led through a try by Ellery Hanley.
But the Eagles stormed back with tries by David Plange and Garry Jack, with Mark Aston converting both and adding a drop goal.
Gary Mercer and Hanley powered over for Leeds, but Aston restored the Eagles' lead with a penalty.
A try by Plange and two from Richard Price sealed Sheffield's victory.
HULL KR, without 10 first-team players because of a pay dispute, lost 31-24 at LEIGH.
People Choice
PEOPLE'S CHOICE…world Formula One champion Nigel Mansell was last night voted BBC Sports Personality of the Year for the second time ahead of Olympic gold medallists Linford Christie and Sally Gunnell.
Ipswich import success
Julie Tunney
Ipswich 3, Man City 1
BULGARIAN star Bontcho Guentchev was given an unexpected debut just days after receiving international clearance — and could have bagged a double as Ipswich moved up to sixth in the Premier League.
The forward, together with Australian international Vlado Bozinoski, joined the East Anglian club from Bobby Robson's Sporting Lisbon for a joint fee of £250,000.
And he found himself in the starting line-up when top scorer Chris Kiwomya went down with flu.
Twice in the first half he had a clear-cut chance to score, but both times opted for the spectacular overhead kick when a safe, sure-footed shot would have sufficed.
However, team boss Mick McGiven was pleased with his new recruit.
He said: ‘It was some baptism in what was a very fast game.’
Ipswich, unbeaten at home in more than eight months, looked to have problems when Gary Flitcroft gave City the lead.
But Mick Stockwell headed an equaliser, Gavin Johnson claimed the second and Paul Goddard drilled home No 3.
MoM: Stockwell, Ipswich (Gutsy grafter).
Players witness fan row
Adrian Holloway
QPR 1, C Palace 3
MATCH-WINNER Eddie McGoldrick and QPR goal scorer Gary Penrice were caught in the middle of a violent confrontation between rival fans after Palace's surprise win.
Both players were standing outside the players' lounge when three men ran past them into the building, for which they are believed to have produced entrance tickets, pursued by around 20 Rangers fans.
One man was searched inside the lounge by police and led away.
Shepherd's Bush police said yesterday that two men had been charged after the match in unrelated incidents.
After falling behind to Penrice's goal, struggling Palace rallied superbly to produce their second consecutive League win.
McGoldrick's two strikes came either side of a Chris Armstrong goal.
Armstrong said: ‘Things are really looking up for us now.
We've gone three games without losing and confidence is getting higher and higher.
This run can go on and on.’
MoM: Armstrong, Palace (Outstanding pace).
Bazza's barmy soap opera climbs the ratings
Roy Collins
THE message emblazoned on a fan's Santa hat said it all.
‘Barnet's barmy army’ it read and it seemed an apt description of an outfit that aren't Even Barry Fry, the manager whose latest sacking and return enlivened another crazy week at Underhill, admits that the club, which beat Rochdale 2-0 on Saturday, is a laughing stock.
Confident that ‘Bazza’ would return, the programme editor left a white space where the manager's notes should have been, blank but for the message: ‘This page is reserved.’
Some of Barnet's players didn't know about Fry's Friday night re-instatement until they turned up at the ground.
Striker Gary Bull said: ‘I didn't know anything about it until I saw it on Ceefax.’
Barnet's fans had threatened to vote with their feet in protest at the increasingly erratic actions of chairman Stan Flashman.
But when match day came round, their feet carried them there regardless.
It was Stan who stayed away.
Fan Jules Bevis explained: ‘We love Barnet too much to stay away, though we do want Flashman to go.’
Jules ought to be a decorated member of the barmy army, as he travels from Norwich, where he could watch the Premier League leaders.
An afternoon at Underhill is enough to explain the addiction of fans who eschew the more sophisticated fare on offer at Arsenal and Tottenham to support the Bees.
Barnet may not be able to offer the executive box comforts of the North London giants but you can see what Fry means when he says: ‘We've got a lovely little club here.’
Fry felt that he might have left it for good after his latest week of unemployment.
‘I don't know how many times Stan has sacked me before,’ he said.
‘I usually take no notice and just turn up for work the following day.
This time, it was a bit more serious because I got a registered letter.
‘My wife thinks I might be risking all my credibility by coming back and that I might not get another job in football.
Is she here today?
No, I think she's gone to see about a divorce.’
Even a trial separation from Barnet was too much for Fry, who says that he couldn't have looked himself in the mirror if he'd refused to come back.
‘I feel for the place,’ he says, ‘and they need someone here to look after it.’
He is, he admits, ‘frightened’ by what could happen to the club.
He's frightened about the inquiries into Barnet by the League, the FA and the Inland Revenue.
Most of all, he's frightened about losing the players who've taken the club to the top of the Third Division.
Fry says: ‘19 of the 20 players are out of contract at the end of the season.
That's unprofessional of the club.
You don't let players get to the end of their contracts or you get peanuts for them.
We should be talking to them now.
Otherwise, what we've built here could disappear as quickly as it came.’
Unfortunately, Fry's pleas don't seem to have much impression on the chairman, which is why he's still keen to join a consortium trying to buy out Fat Stan.
Fry has done just about every other job at Barnet, including cleaning out the toilets, so the boardroom would seem a natural progression.
His team, he admits, got away with murder in this match before goals from Paul Showler and Mark Carter took them to the top.
Centre half David Barnett deservedly and appropriately won the man-of-the-match award.
The real Mr Barnet, of course, is Fry himself, who says he gave himself more chance of being hit by a sniper's bullet than getting his job back.
How long does he reckon he'll last as manager this time?
‘If I keep out of the chairman's way, I should still be in charge for Wednesday's Capital League match against Reading.’
It's war and disorder
Mike Walters
Spurs 1, Arsenal 0:
PLAYERS from England, Scotland, Ireland, Norway, Denmark, Sweden, Iceland and Spain were on duty in the 111th north London derby — at times they needed a United Nations peace-keeping force to maintain law and order.
Arsenal boss George Graham doesn't want referee Alf Buksh in charge of any more Gunners games this season.
But if they all turn out to be as cantankerous as this one, Mr Buksh will probably be happy to steer clear of them.
Not that Arsenal should be singled out as sole instigators of the ill-feeling at White Hart Lane.
They were sinned against as well as sinners.
Paul Allen's 21st-minute winner was the only entry on my score card, but the chaps from the WBC keeping tabs on Nigel Benn and Nicky Piper down the road at Ally Pally would have had a much busier afternoon.
Derby matches wouldn't be so spicey without the fervour and passion born out of local rivalry.
But Merseyside and Manchester both proved last week that it is possible to concoct high drama without substituting motivation for mutilation.
The seal for an uncompromising war of attrition was set in the opening two minutes, when Spurs midfielder David Howells sent David Hillier tumbling and Ray Parlour, Arsenal's best player, was denied an obvious penalty when Dean Austin tripped him.
Had Buksh taken the appropriate action on each occasion — a yellow card and pointing to the spot respectively — we might have been spared the subsequent skirmishing:
16th minute: Spurs' Gordon Durie and Gunners midfielder John Jensen clashed off the ball; Durie appeared to aim a kick at the Dane, which was not spotted.
26th minute: Steve Bould became the first of five bookings for his second tackle from behind on Teddy Sheringham.
27th minute: Durie was cautioned for a foul on Parlour.
47th minute: Arsenal skipper Tony Adams was unlucky to earn a booking for dangerous play as Durie stooped for a header.
Adams is now suspended for two matches over Christmas.
54th minute: Tottenham's Neil Ruddock will also spend the festive season on the sidelines after a rough challenge on Parlour, which also warranted a yellow card.
62nd minute: Jensen was next in Buksh's book for a tackle from behind on Vinny Samways.
65th minute: Ian Wright emerged from an innocuous challenge with Howells and clouted the Spurs man.
Buksch, only a few yards away, sees the aftermath and Wright escapes with a lecture.
68th minute: Arsenal's assistant manager Stewart Houston was warned for touchline coaching.
80th minute: Adams and Tottenham's Justin Edinburgh were involved in a pushing and shoving contest.
The bad blood continued with an eyeball-to-eyeball confrontation on the final whistle.
Jensen insisted he relished the hostile atmosphere, but joined his manager's condemnation of Buksch, saying: ‘The ref lost control from the very first minute.
‘That was the most obvious penalty I've seen in my career.
All the players went to the ref afterwards to ask why he didn't give it.’
Durie, already branded a cheat by the FA this season, had another unhappy day.
He was confronted, briefly, by an Arsenal supporter in the car park an hour after the match and Jensen said: ‘Yes, Durie was kicking me — but it was that kind of game.’
Graham said of Buksch: ‘I'm not allowed to criticise referees, but I shall be writing to the FA asking that this guy does not take charge of our games again this season.
Managers have that power and I shall be using it.’
Spurs assistant coach Doug Livermore was more charitable.
He said: ‘I feel sorry for the ref if he's being hammered.
He kept up with the play very well.’
Livermore was understandably keener to discuss the moments in which football held sway over the niggling.
But substitute Nick Barmby's late shot against the bar excepted, few could think of any.
MOM: Parlour (Stamped his authority on the game, not other people).
Mal's tonic for Rovers
John Davies
Bristol Rovers 4, Bristol City 0
ADORING Twerton Park fans are now calling Rovers ‘Malcolm's Marvels’ after this remarkable triumph.
For the astonishing fact is that Malcolm Allison, soccer's oldest boss at 65, has revitalised a Bristol Rovers side that had won only two of 16 games before he took over from the sacked Dennis Rofe a month ago.
This win over their local rivals now means Rovers' record under Big Mal's vibrant leadership is one defeat followed by a run of one draw and three victories which have lifted them off the bottom of the table.
Allison said: ‘The atmosphere was just like the Manchester derbies when I was at Maine Road.
I am delighted with the three points.
We have been working on finishing and we got four fine goals.’
City's attackers The signs were already there for City that they might be in for a spanking when their formidable attack of Andy Cole, Leroy Rosenior and playmaker Jacki Dziekanowski were held in a tight grip in a first-half an opening 45 minutes that was marked by a spectacular 30-yard goal from Justin Channing, in the final week of his loan spell from QPR.
But it was in an amazing, 12-minute onslaught in the second-half that Allison's men broke City's hearts.
It started with a 66th-minute goal from Marcus Stewart after a Paul Hardyman throw-in.
Two minutes later Carl Saunders scored with a 25-yarder.
Ten minutes later, top-scoring striker John Taylor rattled in his ninth goal of the season.
By now the whole ground was resounding to the lilt of Rovers' battle hymn of ‘Goodnight Irene’ from the terraces.
Charlton blow
Watford 1, Charlton Athletic 1
THERE was relief for Steve Perryman's Watford and disappointment for Charlton yesterday.
Charlton, although taking the lead against the run of play through John Robinson with their first shot of the match after 26 minutes, finished annoyed that they had failed to record their second successive victory.
‘We've had a run with just two wins in 12 games so it is unusual for us to be disappointed with a point, but I thought we were going to win,’ said joint Charlton boss Alan Curbishley.
Perryman's relief came in the 52nd minute when Ken Charlery, his Pounds 350,000 signing from Peterborough, scored his third goal in seven matches to bring an end to more than 400 minutes of League football without Watford scoring.
‘That run seemed to be dragging on,’ admitted Perryman.
Leicester keeper Kevin Poole was in dazzling form to keep out Oxford in yesterday's 0-0 draw.
Newcastle were brought down to earth when Brendan O'Connell earned Barnsley a 1-0 victory.
Blissett double delight
BRENTFORD'S Gary Blissett let his goals do the talking after the 3-1 victory over Sunderland at Roker Park.
The striker, acquitted of a GBH charge last week, scored twice to clinch his side's third successive League victory.
But, for the second weekend in a row, Blissett insisted: ‘I've nothing to say.’
There was further evidence at Roker Park that Blissett is developing a potent partnership with record-buy Joe Allon.
LUTON defender Trevor Peake insists his troubled side will quickly climb out of danger if they can maintain the form they displayed in their 2-1 victory at Wolves.
He said: ‘When we play like that it makes me wonder why we are in the wrong half of the table.
We caused Wolves all sorts of problems.
‘Now we desperately need to get our home form sorted out because three of our four League wins this season have been away.
A change in our fortunes at Kenilworth Road will soon get us up the table.’
Town fell behind to a goal from Paul Blades but a double blast from striker Phil Gray guaranteed the points.
Micky takers
Graham Otway
Southampton 2 Coventry 2
BOBBY GOULD has no choice but to put striker Mick Quinn at the top of his Christmas list.
Quinn's brace of neatly taken goals took his tally to six in four games since starting a month's loan from Newcastle.
Gould, aware Quinn is a player who can capitalise on the exciting skills of Peter Ndlovu, agreed a £250,000 fee with Newcastle manager Kevin Keegan on Friday.
And Ndlovu said: ‘We need him — I just want the manager to sign Mick this week.
‘He doesn't just score goals, he works for the rest of us.
It's great playing alongside him.’
Maddison and Dowie salvaged a point for Saints.
MoM: Quinn (Real bargain).
Survival stakes
David Tossell
: Wimbledon 5, Oldham 2
THE Premier League may have been billed as a whole new ball game, but for the smaller clubs the survival struggle is the same as ever.
Wimbledon manager Joe Kinnear knows his club must keep producing youngsters like two-goal Neill Ardley to enable him to sell big name men and compensate for the low income produced by attendances like the pathetic 3,386 for this game.
Kinnear, who has had enquiries for midfielders Warren Barton and Robbie Earle, said: ‘I want to hang on to my players as long as possible — my job's hard enough as it is.
‘We have to go out and find players like Neill, produce them and then sell them.’
MoM: Vinny Jones, Wimbledon (sprayed ball around like Johnny Giles).
Rai stings Barcelona
FAVOURITES Barcelona were upset by Sao Paulo in the world club champions match in Tokyo yesterday.
Hristro Stoitchov gave the European champions an early lead, but they went down 2-1, with both Sao Paulo goals coming from Brazil's top player, Rai.
Meanwhile, Frenchman Jean-Pierre Papin scored twice as the AC Milan machine rolled mercilessly over lowly first division newcomers Ancona on Sunday, winning 2-0 to go six points clear at the top of the Italian first division.
Nearest rivals Internazionale lost 3-1 to a sparkling Lazio — without the injured Paul Gascoigne, while Juventus were beaten 2-1 at Foggia.
Former champions Napoli fell further back after a 2-1 defeat at Genoa.
Fergie faces up to McClair dilemma
Rob Shepherd
Man Utd 1, Norwich 0:
ALEX FERGUSON faces a week of heart-searching decisions.
If he comes up with the right solution then the destiny of the championship could be decided.
Ferguson was accused of muddled thinking in the final, fatal weeks of last season's abortive title assault.
If that was true, now he can make amends.
But he must be ruthless.
Brian McClair is the player who should be sacrificed, if Ferguson's dream team is to become a reality and the title won.
When Eric Cantona, having completed his first full 90 minutes, embraced Mark Hughes at the end of this significant victory, it was apt that McClair should quietly shuffle down the tunnel.
Now McClair is a player Ferguson cherishes because he puts the team cause above personal glory.
So when Bryan Robson failed a fitness test, opening the way for Cantona's full debut, it was McClair who was pushed back into midfield.
But Robson is expected to be back for next Saturday's visit to fourth-placed Chelsea.
And Fergsuon acknowledges: ‘We might not be so reliant on Robbo as we were two years ago but he is still the leader, the player the rest look up to.
We still need him in our side, so someone has got to make way.
‘It is not a job I want to do.
Now, Brian McClair is a great club player.
He had to suffer in a sense by playing in midfield but, with Robbo back, I don't expect to be playing him there.’
Ferguson could of course retain McClair and leave out Ryan Giggs or Lee Sharpe.
But that would upset the exciting shape United have now found, with Cantona giving them an extra attacking dimension.
With so many other potential challengers struggling, United are suddenly looking the team most likely to win the Premier League.
That pacesetters Norwich were quite comfortably beaten emphasised what United, who have now won four games in a row, are capable of achieving.
They still lack goals but the signs were they will come.
Indeed of Hughes, now scoring the simple as well as the specatucal — as he did in the 60th minuted to secure victory — Fergsuon said: ‘That was his fourth goal in successive games.
I think this could be his best season ever in terms of scoring.’
Certainly, the arrival of Cantona has given Hughes a fillip.
But Paul Ince who was the driving force of this victory, which lifted United into third place, warned the Frenchman: ‘He did some lovely things and he can do the flicks all day if we are winning, but if were losing he's got to get his foot stuck in.
’ We do sense though he's determined to make a success of it here.
Complex
After all the moving I think he wants to make this his last club.’
If he does then that ought to be bad news for McClair.
Norwich manager Mike Walker has less complex selection problems.
He must somehow try and maintain Norwich's wonderful start on their limited resources at the East Anglian club.
They might not have been at their best on Saturday, but until the outstanding Ruel Fox was injured they played some impressive football.
, And even if their defence lacks the stability of United's, Walker's’ realistic’aim of earning a place in Europe, is not beyond them.
Mom: Ince (assuming the Robson mantle).
So sweet Souness
Rob Shepherd
Liverpool 2 Blackburn 1
IT WAS the day when the Graeme Souness era at Anfield truly began.
Even when Liverpool won the FA Cup in May to present him with his first trophy, Kenny Dalglish still held a significant place in the hearts of the Kop.
His phenomenally successful reign, in the wake of his outstanding achievements as a player, meant this great club Bill Shankley created became known as Kenny's kingdom.
It has been hard for Souness to stamp his authority in a similar way since he took over when Dalglishfatigued by the demands of the Anfield job departed 22 months ago.
He found a team in decline, but in setting about reviving their fortunes he has found it difficult to win the sort of universal adulation Dalglish enjoyed.
Superb
So the fact that it was Mark Walters, one of his Liverpool players signed in the first stage of his rebuilding programme, who gave Souness this victory on Dalglish's return to Anfield was particularly poignant.
Little surprise then that when substitute Walters, who ignited a wonderful game with a superb goal, scored the winner six minutes from time, Souness could not contain himself.
He leapt out of his dug-out and danced right in front of Dalglish.
And the Kop instantly registered their approval.
They had offered Dalglish an emotional welcome when he emerged before the game and took an unfamiliar place on the visitors' bench.
The old chorus of ‘Dalglish, Dalglish’ reverberated around the ground, which was bursting at its seams with a crowd of 43,668.
But as Souness celebrated that decisive goal, up rose the chant of: ‘Kenny, Kenny, what's the score?’, followed by a verse of ‘Souness, Souness’.
Liverpool's future is in Souness's hands now, so it was an appropriate occasion for his re-fashioned and now emerging team to mark another stage of their evolution against the club where Dalglish is building a new dynasty.
Yesterday, both sides displayed sufficient quality for them both to believe the Premier League title is not beyond them.
Liverpool dominated the first half, but found the Rovers defence determined to make their manager's return a successful one.
Pressure
Then, in the early stages of the second half, with Alan Shearer outstanding and well supported by Mike Newell, they threatened to take the game.
Shearer demonstrating just why he is the most complete striker in the game today, was always at the heart of Blackburn's best moves, and in the 55th minute he instigated an attack which culminated in Mike Hooper pulling off a desperate save to keep out a Gordon Cowans drive.
Souness decided to make what proved to be a decisive substitution, replacing Ronnie Rosenthal with Walters.
Rovers maintained their pressure, but Jason Wilcox fluffed a near-post flick after being set up by Shearer, and then Newell hit the bar after turning cleverly and shooting past Hooper.
However, Liverpool began to pull themselves back into the game, and in the 68th minute Bobby Mimms had to push Ian Rush's close-range header off the line.
But nine minutes later, Mimms could do nothing when Walters broke the deadlock.
Given the ball by Jamie Redknapp, Walters moved in from the left flank, used his famous double shuffle to find some space and then beat Hooper with a thunderous drive.
Dalglish then made two alterations of his own, putting on Roy Wegerle and Stuart Ripley to give his side more attacking options, and within four minutes Blackburn were level.
A long Ripley pass had forced Liverpool to concede a corner, and from
From a corner, Shearer reacted brilliantly to a Colin Hendrie head down, lashing a superb volley into the roof of the net for his 20th goal of the season.
Honours even might have satisfied the neutrals, but after last Monday's Merseyside derby defeat, nothing less than victory would do for Souness and in the 84th minute it came.
Ian Rush fed the ball to Steve McManaman, who for just about the first time was decisive with his delivery, hitting the ball low across the face of the goal, and there was Walters at the far post to tap it in.
At the final whistle, Souness and Dalglish politely embraced.
The week begun with Dalglish dominating Merseyside once again in the build up for this special occasion.
But in the end it was Souness's day.
Not only had he won a match he was desperate to succeed in, he had also earned his Liverpool colours.
Villa pass the Pearce title test
David Harrison
Aston Villa 2, Nottingham Forest 1
STUART PEARCE offered the ultimate seal of approval to Aston Villa's title challenge by claiming: ‘They are the strongest League team I've ever played against.’
The new championship favourites are still five points behind leaders, Norwich, but Villa proved the bookies are no bad judges by coming from behind to beat Forest.
But it was Pearce's assessment which carried a more convincing argument in favour of Ron Atkinson's team.
A man of few words, but strong opinions, the England skipper is not prone to make rash assessments.
When he speaks, people listen.
Strong
And Pearce said: ‘Villa are the strongest team I have ever come up against in League football.
They would not let go.
‘Even when we had a right go at them late in the second half, they were still strong.
‘We didn't get the rub of the green and felt we deserved something, but we got zilch and I think it is because this Villa side are so good.
‘I can't tell you how impressed I was by them.’
Villa boss, Atkinson, finds the praise heaped on his team by both opposition, admirers and the bookmakers difficult to accept — though his uncharacteristic modesty is aimed at avoiding the complacency trap.
Atkinson said: ‘It's barmy that we are favourites.
The favourites are Norwich.
If I had to put any money on any one at this moment, it would have to be them.
‘Any team who are five points clear at this stage have to be the favourites.’
Villa's comeback powers were revealed when Cyrille Regis equalised in the 34th minute after Roy Keane had given Forest a ninth minute lead.
Paul McGrath headed Villa's winner in the 46th minute.
MoM: Keane, Forest (Here, there and everywhere).
Arsenal in for Keown
Des Kelly
HOWARD KENDALL last night admitted he faces a battle to hold on to Everton's £2m-rated defender Martin Keown.
The Goodison Park manager admitted Arsenal had moved for the centre-half — as exclusively revealed in TODAY earlier this month.
Kendall said: ‘George Graham asked me about Keown in October, but I said I wanted to keep him.
‘I've had talks with Martin about a new contract and more are planned.’
But Keown's present deal expires in June and struggling Everton badly need cash to finance their own transfer moves.
Blackburn are hoping to upset Norwich by completing the signing of £1m-rated Swedish international Patrik Andersson from Malmo this week.
Coaches walk out
HEINEKEN League Division Two side Glamorgan Wanderers' entire coaching staff has Heineken League Division Two side Glamorgan Wanderers resigned in the wake of Saturday's humiliating 64-10 defeat by Tenby United.
Chief coach Gordon Pritchard, forward coach Peter Souto and back coach Chris O'Brien all left the club — Pritchard offering his resignation after the game and Souto and O'Brien following suit yesterday.
Wanderers chairman Geoff Wyatt issued the following statement: ‘By amicable agreement the three coaches have parted company with the club and we wish to thank them for their committment and efforts during their time as coaches with us.’
Allison stays in charge
by John Davies
BRISTOL ROVERS announced yesterday that Malcolm Allison will stay in charge of the First Division club until the end of the season — at least.
Sunday's 4-0 derby thrashing of Bristol City raised the signal that the 65-year-old former hell-raiser is truly back in business.
Since Allison took over from Dennis Rofe, who walked out of the club refusing to work with Big Mal, Rovers have lost only once in the league and achieved three victories and a draw.
They had managed only two wins in their previous 16 games.
‘We have no plans whatsoever to let Malcolm slip out of our grasp,’ said Rovers vice-chairman Geoff Dunford yesterday.
‘You have to sit up and take notice of his great knowledge about the game.
But we don't know yet what his plans for next season are.’
But Allison already has new plans.
He said: ‘I wouldn't work 16 hours a day, seven days a week, chasing all over the country watching games as I did when I managed Plymouth, Manchester City, Crystal Palace and Middlesbrough.
Delegate
‘I would delegate.
Do you know there's only one club in the Premier League that employs a fitness coach?
And it's supposed to be a professional game!
‘Psychologists, dieticians and physios should have their place in clubs that spend millions of pounds on their players.’
Brady faces hospital test
John Wardle
SUNDERLAND starlet Kieron Brady will undergo a full body scan today to pinpoint a mystery blood disorder.
Brady's condition is causing increasing concern at Roker Park and boss Malcolm Crosby hopes hospital tests will ease fears over the future of his 21-year-old Republic of Ireland winger.
Brady has had pains in his legs and pins and needles in his toes.
Two weeks ago he was forced out of a reserve match complaining of cold feet.
The problem may explain why Brady has not made more of an impact since exploding on the scene three years ago.
Crosby said: ‘Stamina has been one of the lad's weaknesses and this could explain it.
We are worried.
I'm just keeping my fingers crossed that it's not too serious.’
Furious Kendall drops Mo
Report by Des Kelly
HOWARD KENDALL last night lashed his Everton players for their ‘unacceptable’ performances and dumped striker Mo Johnston into the reserves.
The Goodison Park manager heads into tomorrow's Coca-Cola Cup fourth round replay at Chelsea knowing defeat will only increase the pressure currently bearing down on him.
But Kendall's patience with his struggling stars ran out after the dismal defeat at Sheffield United edged the Merseysiders closer to the relegation zone.
Banished
He accused his players of possessing a big-time mentaility and being unwilling to scrap for vital Premier League points away from the glamour matches.
That should be less of a problem in the cup-tie atmosphere of Stamford Bridge, but £1.5 million Johnston and Serbian import Preki have still been banished to the reserves playing at lowly Mansfield.
Kendall stormed: ‘The players are letting themselves down as well as everyone connected with this club.
‘After the defeat at Bramall Lane they had the biggest hammering they've had off me for a long time.
‘You don't want to be in a position where that need arises, but the way we played was totally unacceptable — particularly in the first half at Sheffield.
‘It is very disappointing when you think we've beaten Blackburn, Manchester United, Aston Villa and Liverpool — all clubs tipped to challenge for the title.
‘But if the players are only going to produce their best in the glamour games and not pick up on the importance of matches against the likes of Wimbledon and Sheffield United, then they won't be playing when the big games come round again — it's as simple as that.’
Big Mac steps up
JOHN McCLELLAND, the former Northern Ireland defender, yesterday took over as caretaker manager of St Johnstone following the shock axing of Alec Totten.
McClelland joined the Perth club as player-coach earlier this season from Leeds United.
Club chairman Geoff Brown blamed the sacking of Totten, who took the club from obscurity to the Premier Division, on the need for a ‘fresh approach.’
Totten admitted he was ‘shattered’ and said: ‘St Johnstone may find a better manager, but I don't think they will get a better ambassador for the club.
‘If we had been sitting at the bottom I could accept my fate, but we are seventh and have lost only one of the last eight games.’
Pipe out in force
CHAMPION trainer Martin Pipe may have six runners in the Coral Welsh National.
Pipe has won the Chepstow race three times in the past four years and his possible squad for this year's renewal on December 28 is Bonanza Boy (winner in 1988 and 1989), Run For Free, Rushing Wild, Miinnehoma, Chatam and Cushinstown.
‘At this stage they are all possible runners,’ Pipe said yesterday.
‘I'll see what happens with the weights before deciding.’
Cool blow to SGB Chase
Henry Rix
THE participation of Cool Ground threatens to decimate the field for Saturday's £30,000 SGB Chase at Ascot.
Of the 13 horses standing their ground in the weekend's feature event, just five will be in the handicaper proper and trainers are planning to sidestep the valuable contest if the Gold Cup hero takes his chance.
The news from Balding's stable was a blow to Andy Turnell, the trainer of Country Member.
The recent Sandown winner will be 13lb out of the handicap.
‘I want to run, but if the top-weight is in the field we'll have to miss the race,’ Turnell said.
But Cool Ground's stablemate Romany King, set to carry a handy 10st 7lb, will be one of the main beneficiaries.
However, Jonathan Geake, assistant to trainer Toby Balding, denied that Cool Ground was being left in to improve the chance of his stable companion.
With Richard Guest injured, Graham Bradley will ride Romany King and Cool Ground will be partnered by Adrian Maguire.
Mary Reveley may be tempted to run Cab On Target in a weak-looking Rovacabin Novices' Chase on Saturday's Ascot card.
Cowboys are ambushed
David Tossell
THE Dallas Cowboys were left raging at a refereeing decision which could eventually cost them a place in the Super Bowl.
Dallas were leading the Washington Redskins 17-13 with time running out when quarterback Troy Aikman was ruled to have fumbled in his own end zone.
That allowed Washington's Danny Copeland to grab the ball for the winning touchdown.
Furious Cowboys coach Jimmy Johnson argued it should have been called an incomplete pass and made his point forcibly after the Redskins' 20-17 victory.
Dallas seemed to have the game in their hands after Aikman's two five-yard touchdown passes to Jay Novacek earned them a 17-7 half-time lead.
But costly turnovers allowed Washington to creep back into the game, despite the dominance of the Cowboys defence.
With the San Fransisco 49ers beating Minnesota Vikings 20-17, the Cowboys now seem to have lost their chance to stage all their play-off games at home.
The 49ers hero was running back Amp Lee, who rushed for 134 yards and scored two touchdowns.
The Green Bay Packers kept alive their play-off bid when Brett Favre's six-yard pass to Sterling Sharpe late in the game gave them a 16-14 win at the Houston Oilers.
RESULTS: San Francisco 49ers 20, Minnesota Vikings 17; Chicago Bears 30, Pittsburgh Steelers 6; Kansas City Chiefs 27, New England Patriots 20; Indianapolis Colts 10, New York Jets 6; Atlanta Falcons 35, Tampa Bay Buccaneers 7; Detroit Lions 24, Cleveland Browns 14; Washington Redskins 20, Dallas Cowboys 17; Philadelphia Eagles 20, Seattle Seahawks 17; New Orleans Saints 37, Los Angeles Rams 14; San Diego Chargers 27, Cincinnati Bengals 10.
Clark wins England place in the sun
Tony Kell
SWANSEA prop Chris Clark is one of seven uncapped players named yesterday in a new-look 30-man England squad for warm weather training at the start of the New Year in Lanzorote.
Loose-head prop Clark is making a big impact for the South West in this month's ADT Divisional Championship.
Wasps wing Darren O'Leary, Leicester lock Martin Johnson and Bristol lock Andy Blackmore are three other squad newcomers who have also improved their status during the divisionals.
The other three uncapped players are Harlequins' stand-off Paul Challinor and established England B players, Cambridge University centre Damian Hopley and Bath flanker Steve Ojomoh.
Leicester No 8 Dean Richards, a policeman based in Hinckley, is unavailable for the trip because of his work commitments.
Richards, who played against Canada at Wembley in October, lost his place to Bath's Ben Clarke for last month's Test against South Africa at Twickenham.
Richards's back-row partner against Canada, Dean Ryan, has been left out of the squad — but there is a recall for Bath's John Hall, who joins three other blindside specialists in Ojomoh, Mike Teague and Tim Rodber.
Ryan prefers to wear the No 8, but can play lock or flanker and his omission stresses England's strength at the back of the scrum.
It was two years ago in Lanzarote that Hall received another knee injury when he looked certain to claim the flanker place — eventually taken by Teague — for England's 1991 Grand Slam side.
Hall has not played for England since, but now has a strong chance of a comeback.
Also relegated from contention is Richard Hill, who only 13 months ago was England's World Cup final scrum-half.
England, going for a third consecutive Grand Slam, will name the team to play France at Twickenham on January 16 from their Canary Islands sunspot on January 3.
THE SQUAD
Full-back: J Webb (Bath); Wings: R Underwood (Leicester), T Underwood (Leicester), D O'Leary (Saracens), I Hunter (Northampton); Centres: W Carling (Harlequins), P de Glanville (Bath), J Guscott (Bath), D Hopley (Cambridge Univ and Wasps); Stand-offs: R Andrew (Wasps), S Barnes (Bath), P Challinor (Harlequins); Scrum-halves: S Bates (Wasps), D Morris (Orrell); Props: C Clark (Swansea), J Leonard (Harlequins), J Probyn (Wasps), V Ubogu (Bath); Hookers: B Moore (Harlequins), J Olver (Northampton); Locks: M Bayfield (Northampton), A Blackmore (Bristol), M Johnson (Leicester), W Dooley (Preston Grasshoppers); Back row forwards: M Teague (Moseley), T Rodber (Northampton), J Hall (Bath), S Ojomoh (Bath), B Clarke (Bath), P Winterbottom (Harlequins).
Drugs swoop
FOUR top Russian athletes were ordered to return to Moscow yesterday after Swedish customs officials found illegal substances in the team coach's luggage.
The four stars were identified as pole vaulter Rodion Gataullin, women's world 100m hurdles champion Ludmila Naroshilenko, women's world 400m hurdles champion Margarita Ponomaryeva and sprinter Tachana Reshnetikova.
A spokesman said: ‘Customs officials found anabolic steroids and syringes in a suitcase belonging to the coach, Lydia Fedotova.’
The four have undergone doping tests and the results are expected within a few days.
Reid blow for Aussies
AUSTRALIAN left-arm pace bowler Bruce Reid is out of the next two Tests against the West Indies after undergoing surgery on a shoulder injury.
The injury-prone Reid, who has been troubled by back and shoulder injuries throughout his career, will not be be able to train until early January.
Cruyff contract
BARCELONA have offered coach Johan Cruyff a two-year extension on his contract after the European Cup holders' 2-1 Intercontinental Cup defeat by South American champions Sao Paulo in Tokyo on Sunday.
Black balled
FORMER chairman Rex Williams, Mark Wildman and veteran Australian Eddie Charlton yersterday all failed in their bids for re-election to the World Professional Billiards and Snooker Association board.
Richie date
TELFORD'S Richie Woodhall will defend his Commonwealth middleweight title in Wolverhampton on January 20 against Jacques Le Blanc, a former Canadian champion who has lost only four of his 25 contests.
Champ quits
RUDY DHAENENS, Belgium's former cycling world champion and the 1990 professional road title-holder, announced yesterday he had quit the sport because of a heart problem — and is to become a bond trader.
Bishop plea
DAVID BISHOP, the 31-year-old Wales rugby league scrum-half who is still in dispute with Hull Kingston Rovers, yesterday pleaded for a top club to buy him and help rescue his international career.
Rocky road to top
Frank Ward
DAMON HILL, who has progressed from being a hard-up member of a punk rock band to one of Formula One's most envied drivers, admitted last night that he had never had it so good.
After he and Frank Williams had confirmed the sport's worst kept secret, the 30-year-old Londoner said: ‘Both my sisters are going to be at home this Christmas and I've got a job — so I guess I'm buying the drinks.
‘That makes a change and I'm looking forward to it!’
Hill and Williams had earlier revealed they had agreed a one-year contract, with an option for a further two years.
Chance
Given the standard-setting qualities of the team's FW15 car, which will make its racing debut at Kyalami in 12 weeks, there is every chance Hill may not only win his first race with the Didcot team but also go on to challenge for his first title.
He made it clear that this was his target when he said yesterday: ‘Put it this way, if there was a chance of winning the championship and I didn't think I might just do it, then I wouldn't be normal, would I?
‘I hope we will still have a very competitive car next year.
There is a good chance that will be the case and if it is, then the only person I will have to beat will be Alain Prost.
‘No racing driver wants to be second to anyone.
I'm sure no-one will be surprised at hearing that.’
Hill, who was a member of the little-known punk band Sex Hitler and the Hormones in the 1970s, will have gone a long way from those roots if he does manage to succeed his father Graham, who won two titles in the 1960s.
And Hill recognises he owes both his famous and late dad and his predecessor at Williams, Nigel Mansell, thanks for their efforts in helping him to land the chance he now has.
He said: ‘I've been told all the stories about how my dad used to stand in the Steering Wheel Club with half a pint of lager just waiting to talk to people and to worm his way into Formula One.
‘It seems the story has been repeated.
I'm not someone with the gift of the gab, though, and I don't have that sort of charm.
In fact, I'm completely charmless!
I just persevere.’
Dangers
Earlier in his racing career, the under-funded Hill spent most of his formative years riding motor bikes long before his mother Bette decided she had had enough of the dangers of two-wheel road racing.
‘She paid to send me away on a racing car school course at Magny-Cours in France,’ admitted Damon.
‘It changed my whole attitude to racing.
Now she is absolutely delighted to see me in Formula One.’
During his biking years, Hill was often used as a despatch rider and toured businesses looking for sponsorship for his racing career.
‘It was all part of the job,’ he said with a grin.
‘But in this job I know what to expect.
It's going to be very tough with Williams.
There's a lot of pressure.
‘Driving the Brabham was different altogether.
There wasn't exactly much pressure there.
‘People ask me what sort of person I am, but I can't answer.
I'm a different person to different people.
I know who I am in the car and I think I am as determined as anyone to fulfil my own potential.
‘I hope I can go out and avoid accidents and do the best I can.’
Hill is quoted at 8-1 by William Hill to win next season's World Drivers Championship.
They make his team-mate Alain Prost 6-4 favourite.
10 things you didn't know about Damon Hill
1
Damon, aged 30, shares Stirling Moss's birthday.
2
He started racing in motorcycle scrambling at the age of 10.
3
His first car was a 1964 Ford Consul which he and three friends bought for £15, plus an additional £5 for petrol.
He drove it around the grounds of his father's Herts home.
4
He used to play guitar and wear outlandish costumes in a punk band.
5
Damon's first car race was against Gareth Hunt and Geoff Hurst in a 1980 celebrity event at Brands Hatch.
Damon said at the time: ‘I don't have any ambitions to follow my father into Grand Prix racing.
I much prefer bikes.’
6
His first victory on four wheels was in a Formula Ford 1600 race at Brands Hatch in 1984.
7
In the early 1980s Damon took a business studies course at South Bank Polytechnic, converted some houses in South London, and worked as a motorcycle dispatch rider.
8
In 1988 he married fashion designer Susan George, nicknamed Georgie.
9
He struggled to find sponsorship for the Formula Three and Formula Ford circuits.
In 1989 he had to put his Wandsworth house up for sale to go Formula 3000 racing, the final step before Formula One.
10
Damon raced in Formula One for Brabham last year.
His best finish was 11th in the Hungarian GP.
Lewis backs loser
Roy Collins
ONE simple truth emerges from all the embarrassing squabbling between Riddick Bowe and Lennox Lewis.
It was pinned down by Bowe when he said: ‘Lewis will never be regarded as world champion until he beats me.’
That's why Lewis's decision to accept the WBC version of the heavyweight title instead of agreeing to a deferred fight with Bowe could backfire on him.
Sure, he will have the immediate option to make himself rich by fighting Frank Bruno, though that in itself would diminish the status of the belt.
After that, who else is he going to fight?
And who would want to fight for his title when Bowe is the one who won all three belts in the ring?
Bowe's earnings capacity will be undiminished by the defection of one belt to Lewis.
And he can go on avoiding him forever on the grounds that he was the one who split the title.
The Lewis camp must learn to box a little more cleverly outside the ring or forfeit any hope of the undisputed championship.
Wrighting a wrong
Roy Collins
‘IT'S always me, isn't it?’ was the cry of innocence from Ian Wright when confronted with TV evidence of his punch at David Howells.
Similar protestations were no doubt uttered by Billy The Kid whenever he was discovered astride a corpse holding a smoking gun.
As Wright is asking, yes, it does always seem to be him and until he and Arsenal manager George Graham do something to stop it being him, the ambitions of a fine talent will remain strictly limited.
If he won't listen to his critics, Wright should at least heed the words of England No 2 Lawrie McMenemy, who says: ‘A lot of players go through these kind of spells.
Sadly, some don't come through it.’
McMenemy might have been thinking of Steve Williams, another promising talent who'd already won six England caps when he moved from Southampton to Arsenal in December l984.
Williams was one of those players who never learned to properly channel his aggression, never believed anybody knew better than him and always asked ‘Why me?’ of critics rather than himself.
A series of injuries slowed his progress but ultimately, it was attitude that cost him the chance of blossoming into a great player.
He played only 95 full games for Arsenal and is now peddling the last of his talent at Exeter, where he's rumoured to have fallen out with manager Alan Ball.
Anxiety
Temperament is already undermining the career of Wright, whom Graham Taylor reported to be in a state of high anxiety before England's game against Norway.
If it's not harnessed, temperament could destroy his career.
A false sense of injustice has been fuelled in Wright by the dirty tricks played on him this season by opponents and fans.
Yet, until he faces up to his own fatal flaws, he has no hope of conquering them.
He won't do it without help from his manager, a man who likes to present himself as a disciplinarian but who appears powerless to prevent his players misbehaving on the field.
Arsenal remains a club at which standards and image are still supposed to count for something.
Graham is so conscious of his own image that he took a course in public relations.
Perhaps, he should now be re-trained in blunt speaking instead of PR platitudes.
Whatever refereeing failures there may have been by Alf Buksh at Tottenham on Saturday and most critics believe Mr Buksh booked too few Arsenal players too late Graham's remarks afterwards did not befit an Arsenal manager.
He compounded the defence of his players with arrogance by saying that he'd be asking the FA not to allow Buksh to referee any more Arsenal games this season.
From reports of the game and what we saw of Wright and Arsenal on TV, Graham could be doing Mr Buksh a big favour.
Probyn's pointer
Roy Collins
ENGLAND prop Jeff Probyn has intriguingly revealed one of the tell-tale signs of the impending axe.
When he got too much praise in training, Probyn said: ‘I knew they were going to try someone else.’
In rugger, it would seem, praise is like football's vote of confidence, not entirely what it seems.
Bath's Stuart Barnes, the man who wants to take the fly-half's job from Rob Andrew, will doubtless bear this in mind if the plaudits are flying in England training sessions between now and the game against the French on January 16.
Wigan chase bonus
Graham Fisher
WIGAN ATHLETIC'S mysterious new owners are standing by for an instant bonus — a third found FA Cup-tie at Old Trafford and the Pounds 100,000 minimum windfall it would bring in.
First there is tonight's second round tie against struggling Third Division Bury to negotiate — a nerve-shredding 90 minutes with the thought of pitting wits against the stars of Manchester United enough to inspire both sides.
A London consortium took over Springfield Park last week, installed businessman Michael Morris on the board and issued specific instructions to Chief Executive Brian Hamilton: ‘Get a few results and move us up the Second Division table.’
Hamilton, who will be released from admin duties to work closer with coach Dave Philpotts on the training field, says: ‘That suits me fine.
It's nice to have new owners who don't think we are down among the dead men.’
Philpotts has 12 fit outfielders to choose from tonight, which means at least one junior on the bench.
He said yesterday: ‘We'll be going hell for leather to get that date at Old Trafford.
The trouble is, so will Bury.’
Coppell in crisis
Mike Walters
CRYSTAL PALACE are facing a crippling injury crisis for their Coca-Cola Cup replay against Liverpool at Selhurst Park tomorrow.
Manager Steve Coppell is almost certain to be without a recognised striker for the grudge match against Graeme Souness's men, who complained of Palace's physical approach in the 1-1 draw at Anfield two weeks ago.
With leading scorer Chris Armstrong Cup-tied, Coppell must field a patchwork attack because Paul Williams and Chris Coleman are definitely out and youngster George Ndah is struggling for fitness.
Club captain Geoff Thomas is also missing.
Time to put it Wright
Geoff Sweet
HE MAY not say it in public, but George Graham has a clear message this morning for Ian Wright: ‘I can always get another forward but see what trouble you'll have leaning backwards on a broken career’.
Make no mistake, Wright's short fuse is a serious business and if Graham is to lose a top player through suspension, on top of all the headlines on his ill-discipline, the Arsenal manager may soon wonder if he is worth the trouble.
He already has Tony Adams banned from the heart of his defence over Christmas and the last thing George wants to worry about is problems at the other end.
On top of that, Wright has his England future to worry about because much as he may look forward to an avalanche of goals against San Marino in February, first he must ensure his presence in the team, then be in control of himself when the chances come.
I know how desperately Wright wants to be looked upon as the natural replacement for Gary Lineker, and this is one of his problems.
Meanwhile, back at Highbury, Arsenal have not scored in four games and lost the lot.
Wright has a short fuse, and without the goals going in his situation is worsening.
But he's not alone, and Wright should look at every other striker in the land being kicked from behind every Saturday — they all have their problems, but don't act like him.
To rid himself of some of the frustration, Wright, who I know and like, should look for a solution very close to Highbury in Alan Smith.
In his Championship-winning days, Smith would be without goals for four or five games then find them flowing in the next five or so.
Football is like that, and Wright must realise it.
He should forget the tension, try to stay out of trouble and nick the odd goal or two without creating the screaming fuss we have come to expect from him.
As Arsenal manager and given the importance of this player to the team, I would have accepted that.
George doesn't want Wright to become a burden to the team.
He doesn't need other players becoming second class news because their colleague is grabbing all the headlines for the wrong reasons.
This is where Smith can help.
He's a good guide as to how to behave during barren times and, while I accept their temperaments are chalk and cheese, he might just talk some sense into Wright.
Call
Further up the line Graham will call Wright in for the one-to-one.
There will hardly be need for words once their eyes meet because Wright knows he has a problem and is in the wrong.
But George, calmly, will impress on him how he is part of a team and the profound effect his actions are having on the success of the club.
It's no use moaning about being picked on, the ‘it's always me’ argument.
In short, George — a strong disciplinarian — will say the whole business is getting too high profile and must stop…
NOW.
That Wright is ultimately responsible for handling his short fuse and, to help him do that, think back to the hundreds of games he's played when there has been no trouble.
George can only advise, issue ultimatums and final warnings, while England No 2 Lawrie McMenemy has made it clear how the international camp looks upon bad behaviour.
But George and Arsenal can impress upon Wright the harm he is doing his own career.
All this will be done privately because there is nothing to be gained by castigating him in public.
This is some dilemma facing the manager but he can cope: the question is whether this gifted player can respond.
I hope so.
Dalian's fitness mission
David Harrison
DALIAN ATKINSON has hitched a ride on a ‘space capsule’ in an attempt to win a fitness race for Aston Villa's Coca-Cola Cup replay against Ipswich tonight.
Atkinson is relying on a revolutionary machine to help cure a stomach strain.
He has spent four one-hour sessions in the hyperbaric therapy unit — a pressurised cabin into which pure oxygen is fed.
The 13-goal marksman's chances of being fit have improved since he started the treatment and his manager Ron Atkinson said: ‘If he does make it and this machine has done the trick I'll gladly pay out Pounds 25,000 myself to buy one.’
Striker Atkinson said: ‘I've felt better since I've been in the unit.
It's like being in an aeroplane with the pressure building up on your ears.
‘If I play, I daresay every club in the country will be wanting one of these.’
Atkinson is keen to maintain his record of goals against his former clubs.
He has netted twice against Ipswich this season and has three to his credit against Sheffield Wednesday.
He has struck the sort of form which is prompting thoughts of an international call-up and he admitted: ‘My main priority is to do well for Villa, but if I get an international chance then I'll be ready to take it.’
Atkinson's close friend, Chris Kiwomya, will be back for the home side after missing the 3-1 win over Manchester City at Portman Road on Saturday with flu.
Hammers get their man
WEST HAM will today complete the £200,000 signing of Canadian international striker Alex Bunbury.
The 24-year-old arrived in Britain yesterday after finally receiving a work permit and is standing by to make his debut in tomorrow's Anglo-Italian tie against Pisa.
He said: ‘It's been a long wait but anything worth having takes time.
I'm psyched up to make an appearance on Wednesday if I get the chance, whether it is for one minute or 10.’
Former England Under-21 international goalkeeper Brian Horne was given a free transfer by MILLWALL yesterday.
Bob Houghton has quit as assistant manager of struggling SOUTHEND after just four months at Roots Hall.
Liverpool eye Lambert
Mike Walters
LIVERPOOL are ready to join the chase for Reading winger James Lambert, who flew out to the French Riviera for a two-day trial with Monaco last night.
Anfield manager Graeme Souness was at the Deva Stadium last Saturday to watch 19-year-old Lambert turn on a wonder show in the 3-0 rout of Chester.
But the Kop boss faces surprise competition from Monaco — not least because Lambert, a solicitor's son, has an A-level in French.
Reading manager Mark McGhee, who is with his prodigy in Monte Carlo, insisted yesterday that Lambert is not for sale and would be offered an improved contract to stay at Elm Park.
But he could use the trip to offer the French first option on the Reading school of excellence graduate, who shot to prominence with a glittering debut in the FA Cup win over Birmingham only last month.
Monaco despatched a scout to trail him at Bournemouth the following week, and they will use the next couple of days to decide whether to gamble on bringing Lambert to Europe's gambling capital.
McGhee said: ‘Monaco have not made an offer and we have no intention of selling James.
They see him as a possibility for the future and they would like to take a closer look at him.
‘Rather than selling him, we are about to offer James a new and extended contract which will keep him here for the next two or three years.’
Reading coach Colin Lee added: ‘Lambert does things which I used to see on tapes of George Best.
Cracked
‘Other lads given a trial at 19 by a big club like Monaco might think they've cracked it — but Lambert knows we are simply giving him a glimpse of what he should be aiming for.
‘The kid has fantastic ability — on Saturday, he was up against Arthur Albiston, who was good enough for Manchester United and Scotland, and he tore him to pieces.
He was the best player on the pitch by a mile.
‘He has a super, laid-back attitude — if anyone kicks him, it's the worst thing they can do.
It just makes him want the ball even more.’
Meanwhile, Arsenal and Aston Villa are leading the chase for another teenage prospect attracting rave reviews in the lower divisions — Walsall full-back Richard Knight.
Coventry and Oldham are also in the hunt for Knight, who has just four League games under his belt.
All four Premier League asset-strippers were represented in Saturday's 2-2 draw with Darlington.
Saddlers manager Kenny Hibbitt said: ‘I always knew he had quality and he's made a tremendous start to his career.’
Wycombe banking on Jones magic
Mike Walters
ASPIRING giant-killers Wycombe Wanderers are relying on the healing hands of physio David Jones as they bid to heap more FA Cup humiliation on West Brom tonight.
Jones was the unsung hero behind Wycombe's thrilling comeback from 2-0 down against Ossie Ardiles' side at Adams Park nine days ago.
Wycombe manager Martin O'Neill revealed last night: ‘At half-time in the original tie, David performed some miraculous running repairs on Simon Stapleton, who was struggling with a back injury.
‘Against the odds, Simon was able to play on after the interval and was an instrumental part of our fight-back.
‘Unfortunately, Simon's going to be touch-and-go again because he has hamstring trouble, but if Jonesy can work his magic again we can't rule him out.
‘West Brom will be less apprehensive about the replay, but playing away from home has not presented us with any major phobia.
‘We've won more away games than any other Vauxhall Conference team in the past couple of years and, if we give West Brom less space, we can be quietly confident of doing oursevles justice again.’
Ardiles was dealt a double blow yesterday with the news that striker Simon Garner is almost certainly out after twisting his ankle at Swansea on Saturday.
And Chelsea have refused Albion permission to field on-loan midfielder Alan Dickens in case he is required in later rounds of the competition at Stamford Bridge.
Ardiles said: ‘We know the pressure is on us because we are expected to win.
But the way Wycombe came back at us in the first game should serve as a warning that it will not be easy.’
Wycombe, handsome leaders of the Conference, expect to be backed by an army of 3,500-plus travelling fans and O'Neill promised: ‘We'll be giving it our best shot for them.’
Beasant deal off
DAVE BEASANT'S move on loan to Portsmouth was blocked yesterday by the Football League.
The Chelsea goalkeeper had agreed to join the First Division club as cover for Alan Knight.
But the League stopped the move because Portsmouth already have two players on loan, the maximum allowed at any one time under League rules.
It was a major disappointment for Beasant, who was ready to fly to Italy with Portsmouth for tomorrow's Anglo-Italian Cup clash against Ascoli.
Chelsea coach Don Howe was allowed home from hospital yesterday.
The former England No 2 was admitted for tests last week after suffering a chest infection.
Hill steers his own course
Frank Ward
DAMON HILL joined the elite band of Formula One drivers yesterday and then warned: ‘Don't expect me to be the new Nigel Mansell.’
Hill was confirmed as the Canon-Williams-Renault team's replacement for newly-crowned world champion Mansell in 1993.
He will drive as Alain Prost's No 2 after the Frenchman personally backed his recruitment.
The 30-year-old son of double world champion Graham Hill admitted his debt to Mansell when he appeared alongside team owner Frank Williams at a news conference at their Didcot headquarters.
Pressures
‘I have a lot to thank Nigel Mansell for and obviously as an Englishman I know what sort of pressures there will be on me.
But I must say I don't expect to be seen as the next Mansell, but as the first Damon Hill.’
Williams added: ‘We are extremely pleased to formally welcome Damon into our race team.
His testing experience and technical knowledge of our car will be invaluable to the team.’
Hill, who impressed the team with his speed in a recent test session at Estoril, has agreed a one-year contract with a two-year option to partner Prost, who has won the world championship three times.
Williams added: ‘I am confident Damon will prove to be an ideal partner to Alain.
Damon's previous work with us has played an important role in our success and I'm very happy to be able to repay him for his efforts in this way.’
Hill said: ‘This is the opportunity I have worked for and I would like to thank the team for putting their faith in me.
‘I would also like to thank Renault, Elf and the team's sponsors for their support during the two years I have worked with them.
‘I look forward to contributing further in helping them achieve all their objectives.’
Hill, married with two sons, will start his racing career with Williams in the South African Grand Prix at Kyalami in 12 weeks time — and admits he has much to learn from the ‘old professor’ Prost.
‘There's no doubt I can learn a lot about racing from Alain and I will be looking forward to that opportunity — but I have to say also that I am aiming to be my own man.’
Over to you
Rob Shepherd
GEORGE GRAHAM last night assured the Football Association that if they don't deal with Ian Wright, Arsenal will.
After watching video evidence, Graham is satisfied Wright threw a punch at Tottenham's David Howells and I understand Arsenal are ready to take severe disciplinary action — but only if the FA do not act.
Yesterday, the FA also studied film of Saturday's ill-tempered north London derby and will issue their findings within the next 24 hours once they have received referee Alf Buksh's report.
Four years ago another Gunner, midfielder Paul Davis, was banned for nine games after a similar off-the-ball incident involving Southampton's Glenn Cockerill — also captured by television cameras.
Fiery
Wright, consistently in trouble this season, has insisted to Graham that he didn't throw a punch, but the Arsenal manager said:Graham said last night: ‘I have now spoken to Ian and he insists he did not throw a punch.
‘Even if he did raise a hand there is a problem in my opinion.
At Arsenal FC we do not condone these sort of things.
‘The Arsenal way of doing things, though, is that we do them in private— not in public .
‘I feel Ian Wright has a similar fiery temperament to Paul Gascoigne.
‘While he was at Tottenham, Gazza was told how to deal with such situations by Terry Venables.
He learned a lot then, and he is now maturing into a great player.
I am now working in a similar way with Ian.
‘But what is important is that we do not lose these sort of players from our game because of these things.
We are working hard to solve the problem and if we succeed it will not only be good for Arsenal, but will work for the betterment of England, too.
It will help Ian's England career.’
The Wright incident comes at an embarrassing time for Graham.
On the back of a disastrous run which has undermined their Premier League title hopes, the club is once again embroiled in a controversial disciplinary affair just a week after an alleged confrontation involving an Arsenal player in a nightclub.
On top of that, if the FA see the Davis case as a precedent, they could be without their England striker for a long spell, while Wright could find his international claims weakened.
Last night, Cockerill called for a long suspension should Wright be found guilty.
‘If Wright is guilty of hitting Howells like Davis hit me, then he should be given a nine-match ban,’ he said.
‘I felt a nine-match ban was a fair punishment for Davis, who was just breaking into the England squad at the time, and I suspect the FA may make an example of Ian as well.’
Graham, however, refused to discuss the possible ramifications of the case, only saying: ‘It's up to England how they deal with Ian Wright.
Perhaps they should use Gazza as an example.’
If the FA do act, then Wright could also face a fine, while if left to Arsenal the matter is likely to cost Wright two weeks wages — around £5,000.
But if the FA decide to take up the matter, I believe Arsenal will not take action, because they do not want to see Wright punished twice.
Lewis is champ
LENNOX LEWIS yesterday became Britain's first heavyweight champion this century — without throwing a punch.
The WBC carried out their threat to strip Riddick Bowe of their version of the world title after the American dramatically dumped his WBC belt in a dustbin at a London press conference yesterday.
A WBC statement said simply: ‘We are officially recognising Lennox Lewis as the WBC heavyweight champion of the world.’
They had ordered Bowe to defend against Lewis or be stripped of his title but Bowe told yesterday's press conference: ‘Today will be remembered as an historic day in boxing.
‘For today as undisputed, undefeated, universally-accepted champion of the world, I reject, renounce, repudiate and totally dismiss the unfair, immoral, unethical and downright silly actions of the WBC and their president Jose Sulaiman.
‘Boxing titles are won and lost in the ring and in order to be a champion, you must fight the champion and beat the champion.
I did that and now because of the corrupt politics of an organisation hated and disrespected around the world they're challenging my rights to be called world champion.
‘For as long as I am the champion I will not recognise or defend or fight for their dishonoured belt.’
Bowe's manager Rock Newman said: ‘Lewis is only a legend in his own mind, a household name in his own household.
Everybody knows him here, but he isn't a name in America or the rest of the world.
Lewis won't be a champion unless he gets in the ring and beats Riddick.’
Lewis, on holiday in Jamaica, will return to training next month in readiness for his first defence, possibly against Alex Stewart.
Last night, he said: ‘I will miss the glory of beating Bowe in the ring.’
The new WBC champion said he ranked Bowe among the best heavyweight fighters today, but was ‘confident’ he would beat him if the two met.
‘I'm the better fighter,’ he said.
The last Briton to hold the world title was Bob Fitzsimmons, who reigned between 1897-1899.
Goal-den boot Dean
Graham Fisher
ONE of rugby league's most coveted records is in danger and Dean Marwood — the man with history at his feet — didn't know until I told him.
Marwood has kicked 90 goals in 15 games for Third Division leaders Workington Town.
Three legends share the quickest century but Bernard Ganley, David Watkins and Steve Quinn did it in 18 games.
Workington face mighty Wigan at Derwent Park on Sunday for a place in the Regal Trophy semi-finals, then take on neighbours Whitehaven on Boxing Day.
But scrum-half Marwood insisted: ‘I am not going to think about it.
My feet will stay on the ground.’
Meanwhile, Martin Strett, Oldham's rugby union signing from Orrell, may make his senior debut against Bramley on Sunday.
Regan defence
Tom Lyons
WELSHMAN Robbie Regan will make the first defence of his European flyweight crown against Hitchin's Danny Porter at the National Ice Rink, Cardiff on January 19.
It will be Porter's third attempt to win the European title having lost twice to Italian Salvatore Fanni — who Regan beat to become champion.
Regan has been ordered by the European Boxing Union to defend against Dave McAuley, the former IBF world champion.
If negotiations have not been completed by February 15, the contest will go to purse offers.
Cash in the Till
ANDY TILL, the British light-middleweight champion, has been offered £25,000 by Mickey Duff to defend his title against Robert McCracken in the New Year.
McCracken, unbeaten in 13 fights, stopped Ensley Bingham in an eliminator last month.
Fidel Castro Smith, Sheffield's former British super-middleweight champion, returns to the ring in Rome tonight to challenge for the vacant European crown.
Smith takes on former world title challenger Vincenzo Nardiello of Italy.
Nottingham's former British welterweight champion Del Bryan has been invited to top the bill in Luxembourg on January 2 against Commonwealth title challenger Godfrey Nyakana of Uganda.
Bethnal Green's Francis Ampofo meets Scot James Drummond for the vacant British flyweight title in London next Tuesday.
Halifax safe
JIM BROWN, chairman of Third Division Halifax, has called off next month's crisis meeting, lifting the threat of immediate closure.
Peter tops
PETER Scantlebury of London Towers has been named English basketball player of the year for 1992.
Smith needs Italian boost
John Davies
DENIS SMITH took his ailing Bristol City side to Italy for today's Anglo-Italian Cup clash with Cremonese aware that he scorns his chairman's hobby-horse at his peril.
Already smarting from Sunday's 4-0 thrashing by neighbours Bristol Rovers, Smith is put under further pressure by the fact that City chairman Leslie Kew also chairs the trouble-strewn Anglo-Italian competition.
Although Smith may still be a distance away from the dreaded vote of confidence, City have lost all three of their matches so far in the international section of the competition.
Unbeaten Cremonese are just two games from the final, but Smith said: ‘We still have our pride at stake.
We need a win to restore our pride in the competition and give us a boost for Saturday's game against Peterborough.’
Keegan tapes target
John Wardle
KEVIN KEEGAN yesterday pocketed £250,000 from Coventry for Mick Quinn, then mounted a video watch on a possible replacement…
Dutch international striker Eric Viscaal.
Keegan will tonight be at Newcastle's Anglo-Italian Cup game.
But he plans to tape Viscaal in action for Holland in their World Cup qualifier in Turkey.
‘It's no secret we are interested,’ said Keegan, who flew to Belgium earlier this month to check out the £500,000-rated Ghent goalscorer.
‘Eric is No 1 on my list at the moment.
That doesn't mean he will automatically come here.
‘Dealing with agents and foreign players is difficult.
But there are precious few strikers available in this country.’
Keegan doesn't expect to do business before Sunday's game with Millwall but is clearly ready for a transfer market breakthrough.
Quinn, meanwhile, joined Coventry with a good luck message from the boss who showed him the door at St James' Park.
Keegan said: ‘A lot of people appreciate what Mick has done for this club.
It's a great move for him and I wish him luck.
‘Hopefully we'll meet him in the Premier League next season.’
But Bristol City's £150,000 bid for Bjorn Kristensen has hit trouble.
Keegan has spoken to City boss Denis Smith and said: ‘His hands are tied at the moment.
He would like to buy Bjorn but Sunday's derby defeat by Bristol Rovers hasn't helped.’
Keegan called for cool heads in tonight's home clash with Cesena after the explosive finale to the Ascoli match three weeks ago saw striker David Kelly sent off.
‘I don't want to get involved in anything like that again,’ he said.
‘The game was going OK and then it went up in flames.
I just hope it's not the same referee!’
Ex-England midfielder Paul Bracewell is set for only his third start in a black and white shirt after injury problems.
‘The fans haven't seen much of him but what they've seen they have liked,’ said Keegan.
‘You have to play more than one way to win the Championship and having him back gives us more options.
The worst thing we can do is become pred-ictable.’
Meanwhile, Bobby Ferguson yesterday threw down the gauntlet to Sunderland's Welsh international, Colin Pascoe.
And he told top scorer Don Goodman: ‘Get us more goals!’
Pascoe is back on Wearside after a four-month loan spell with Swansea and Roker No 2 Ferguson said: ‘He should be bashing on the door to get into this side.
‘Colin has not had the best of luck with injuries but technically he is an excellent player.
‘I've rated him since he was a kid.
There is definitely room for him but the ball's very much in his court.’
Pascoe will come into the first team reckoning this weekend if he impresses tonight in a reserve game.
NEW Preston boss John Beck will seek Football League permission to sign a goalkeeper on loan to replace the injured Simon Farnworth.
League rules limit the number of loan players to two and North End already have Deiniol Graham and Shaun Garnett.
But Beck said: ‘Under exceptional circumstances we can get clearance from the Football League.’
Farnworth injured ankle ligaments in training on Friday and Beck played veteran Barry Siddall, who has helped with coaching at Deepdale, in Saturday's defeat against Port Vale.
Setback for Souness after Molby injury blow
Des Kelly
LIVERPOOL'S Jan Molby suffered another injury setback last night when he had an ankle operation.
Anfield's Danish midfielder has not played since he damaged ligaments in a challenge with Manchester United's Darren Ferguson on October 18.
Two months of treatment has failed to clear up the trouble, so Molby has had surgery and is not expected to return to action for another six weeks.
It had also been hoped that midfielder Michael Thomas would play this week but the former Arsenal midfielder has suffered a reaction to his Achilles problem and his comeback has been delayed.
Anfield defender Mark Wright will travel to join his team-mates later today after missing the team bus travelling to Crystal Palace.
The England international was given permission to make his late dash to London for tonight's Coca-Cola Cup replay as his family is suffering from a virus.
Manager Graeme Souness is expected to make just one change to the side that defeated Blackburn on Sunday, with Ronny Rosenthal set to make way in the starting line-up for match-winner Mark Walters.
Meanwhile, Norwegian Stig Inge Bjornbye has set his sights on a quick call-up to the Liverpool side.
The 23-year-old said: ‘It's a good move for me.
I'm just waiting for my international clearance now, which should only take a few days, and then I'll be aiming to challenge for a first team place.’
Meanwhile, Everton's Howard Kendall last night followed up his attack on the attitude of the Goodison Park players by ruthlessly swinging the axe.
The frustrated Mersey manager has pledged to drop at least four of the side that lost at Sheffield United on Saturday for tonight's vital Coca Cola Cup clash with Chelsea.
Kendall will come under increased pressure if he loses this fourth round replay and he is not prepared to keep faith with the players that failed him at Bramall Lane.
He has already dumped reserves, while yesterday defender Matt Jackson and Stuart Barlow Kendall said:’ You expect a reaction to the kind of hammering I have the players on Saturday.
That does not guarantee results, but I want to see than at Bramall Lane.
’ I want us to be positive, even though Chelsea deserve respect because of the very impressive run they've had.
’ They virtually killed off our season when they beat us in the FA Cup at Stamford Bridge last year, but now we have the incentive of setting up another Mersey derby if we win.’
Alan Harper returns at right back, teenager Billy Kenny is brought into midfield, with Paul Rideout and Peter Beagrie recalled to the attack.
It is another chance for Beagrie to stake a claim in his helter — skelter Goodison career.
He said: ‘It's up to me to convince the manager I deserve to be in the team regularly.
Manchester United skipper Bryan Robson has recovered from the muscle strain that kept him out of Saturday's win over Premier League leaders, Norwich, leaving boss Alex Ferguson with a headache.
It was Robson's return four games ago that helped spark a maximum haul of 12 points.
Robson's mere presence against Oldham, Arsenal and Manchester City helped to turn the tide but Ferguson will be reluctant to disturb the impressive combination that beat Norwich.
He admitted: ‘It's a nice problem but one I will try to ignore for as long as possible.’
Trevor Francis yesterday handed a vote of confidence to his stumbling Sheffield Wednesday stars by declining an offer of more transfer cash from the big-spending Hillsborough board.
Chairman Dave Richards revealed last week that he is ready to invest again, even though Francis has already splashed £4.3m since taking charge.
And the invitation is even more tempting now with Wednesday's winless run extended to seven matches by a 3-1 defeat at Leeds.
But Francis replied: ‘With the squad I've got, I'm happy to carry on the way we are.
‘That is not to say I am not looking around and it's reassuring that there's money available if necessary.
But at the moment, I'm quite satisfied with my squad because I know it's a good one.’
Buzaglo back to frighten Brighton
by Mike Walters
TIM BUZAGLO, the Woking hat-trick hero cruelly cut down by a Gazza-style knee injury, is back to boost their latest FA Cup odyssey at Kingfield tonight.
Buzaglo is the Gibraltar World Cup cricketer who effectively handed Brian Talbot his P45 by cracking three goals in Woking's shock 4-2 win at West Brom nearly two years ago.
Only the width of a post denied him a sensational late equaliser at Everton in the following round, and Second Division Brighton will greet his return to action with some trepidation in tonight's second round replay.
Woking manager Geoff Chapple, whose injury-hit squad is down to 13 part-time players, said: ‘I doubt if Brighton will be pleased to see Tim hovering around their box.
Quiet
‘He had 18 months out of the game with a knee injury every bit as bad as Paul Gascoigne's, and he's done superbly to recover from it.
‘He was a bit quiet at Runcorn on Saturday, but the FA Cup is more his stage.
He's only played three games this season, but I will have no hesitation in using him.’
The winners will be at home to Portsmouth, in the third round, and Chapple revealed: ‘I was an apprentice at Aldershot in the early 1960s when Pompey manager Jim Smith was on the playing staff.
‘It would be nice to renew acquaintances with him, but Brighton will fancy a nice south coast derby themselves.’
Only five survivors of Woking's 1990-91 heroes are expected to feature tonight — Buzaglo, Mark Biggins, Trevor Baron and Wye brothers Shane and Lloyd — but they will be roared on by a 6,000 capacity crowd.
Cheltenham chairman Dennis Deacon is hoping his luck holds for tonight's replay at Bournemouth.
Deacon won £1,500 on Monday when his horse Mr Dynamic won at 50-1 at Newton Abbot.
Now several of his friends have invested £50 at 10,000-1 on Cheltenham winning the Cup.
Deacon said: ‘We'll beat Bournemouth.
They didn't do much in the first game and we're unbeaten away.’
Besides, the players are on a high becuase they backed Mr Dynamic.’
Former Arsenal winger Alan Skirton is keener than most that Yeovil overcome Hereford in their replay at Edgar Street.
Skirton, now commercial manager at Yeovil, wants the chance to face his old club in the next round.
Yeovil are £700,000 in debt, and a visit from Arsenal would ease the club's financial burden.
He said: ‘I still have a soft spot for Arsenal.
I had some wonderful times there, but my job now is to help sort out Yeovil's problems.’
Justin blasted
TORQUAY UNITED'S Justin Fashanu has been carpeted over his party appearance with Coronation Street star Julie Goodyear.
Fashanu, 31, was first spotted with the soap's Bet Gilroy at a party in Manchester on Friday night to celebrate the street's 32nd birthday.
But Torquay had a League match at Colchester on the same night, with the black star out with a calf injury!
The phones were red-hot at Torquay, with fans ringing to complain that Fashanu's absence may have been instrumental in their 2-0 defeat.
Meeting
But Chairman Mike Bateson emerged from yesterday's clear-the-air meeting with Fashanu to declare that there would be no disciplinary action.
He said: ‘I am satisfied that Justin was not fit to play on Friday night.
He was booked in by our manager Paul Compton to watch our Boxing Day opponents Walsall play on Saturday and he intended to travel up as normal on Saturday morning.
‘However, at the last minute the chance of this Granada Christmas party came up.
‘There is no doubt that if he had been fit, he would have played at Colchester.
The matter is closed.
No club rules have been breached in any way.’
Brady fined and banned
Scott McMunn
CELTIC manager Liam Brady was yesterday fined £500 and banned from the team's dug-out for three months.
The Scottish FA's disciplinary measures, which included identical punishment for Airdrie coach John Binnie and assistant manager John McVeigh, follow an incident at Parkhead on October 24, which was reported to match officials by police.
Meanwhile, Aberdeen boss Willie Miller knows his side must clamp down on Ally McCoist and Mark Hateley if they are to overcome Rangers at Pittodrie tonight.
Miller admitted: ‘They are the dangermen, with a great scoring record.
We have got to put them out of the game.
Linford set to retire at top
David Harrison
LINFORD Christie will quit athletics in two years' time — aiming to bow out as the undisputed No 1 sprinter in the world.
The Olympic 100 metres champion will retire after the Commonwealth Games in Canada in 1994, by which time he hopes to have added the World Championship gold medal to his trophy chest.
Christie, who yesterday signed a deal with Puma worth an estimated £500,000, said: ‘I'll make a clean break from athletics in two years time and I won't be competing anymore.
‘I don't want any kid coming along and beating me in my twilight years.
I set out to be the best athlete Britain has ever known and I've achieved that.
‘But first I want the gold medal from the World Championships in Stuttgart next year.
That's the one thing missing.’
But despite his £500,000 windfall, Christie revealed yesterday he had refused to pay £55 for a special visa to race in Australia with Colin Jackson.
Christie, who has already signed money-spinning deals with Lucozade and clothing firm High and Mighty since Barcelona, said: ‘We didn't see why we should pay for a visa when we were prepared to take part in races for nothing.
It was the principle of the thing.
But it doesn't bother me.
Australia are the ones who'll be losing out.’
Master plan
Bill Blighton
AMERICAN Fred Couples is near to completing a scintillating year on the world golf tour which has seen him win close to £1m.
Here, in the first part of an exclusive series, he talks to TODAY golf writer Bill Blighton about his success.
FRED COUPLES snubbed President Bush and his marriage hit the rocks — yet 1992 was still the most successful year of his career.
The 33-year-old's personal life floundered after his US Masters triumph last April but as a professional golfer, he was second only to Nick Faldo.
Couples earned $1.34 million from only 22 events on the US tour, but added a staggering $732,000 from global stops during November alone.
He can make yet another significant contribution to a bank balance already worth $7 m when he defends the $2.7 m Johnnie Walker World Championship in Jamaica this week.
He confessed that the monetary rewards are becoming obscene but feels it is worth risking ‘burn-out’ to secure his financial future.
He said: ‘The money going round is crazy.
But I'd be crazy to pass it up.’
And Couples is already planning a supersonic surge in 1993 to lift him alongside world No 1 Faldo.
Couples, second in the Sony rankings to Faldo, is still coming to terms with the adulation heaped on him after Augusta but is prepared to run the gauntlet again if it means winning a second Major.
Action
‘It was tough for me but it will be easier second time around,’ he said.
‘Everybody wanted a piece of my action and I found it very difficult to adjust.
‘I got so frustrated.
If I gave an interview I was the greatest guy in the world but if I said ‘no, I want some time to myself’, they wouldn't give me the time of day.
I felt I was being pushed around and lost some enthusiasm.’
Couples locked himself away in his Florida home after breaking Europe's five-year grip on the Masters, refusing to answer the telephone even when President Bush called with an invitation to dinner at the White House.
His estranged wife Debbie handled that side of his success.
‘I didn't take the call, I was watching TV,’ recalled Freddie.
‘I didn't make the dinner date either, I was due to play golf in Houston that week.’
Couples took over as the American No 1 at the Bay Hill Invitational in March and stayed there, although he admits it was a struggle.
He added: ‘I made a tremendous start to the year and badly wanted that No 1 spot for the first time but it made me become negative.
It was nerve-wracking.
‘I stopped trying to win and just thought about making enough money to stay ahead of everybody else.
That was a bad attitute but fortunately I managed to hang on.’
Couples will be back to his aggressive best next year with his blistering long game allied to the best short-iron play on the US tour.
‘When I go out in January, everybody will be back to zero again.
I know I'll have to work hard to keep my standing,’ he said.
‘I expect to come out and do well after a two-week break at Christmas.
But if I start putting pressure on myself, saying ‘Man, I am the No 1 and I'm going to do it again’, that would be a load of garbage.’
‘I know I am not going to win every time I'm in contention, I never have and probably never will.
I don't intend to push myself, I just want to be ready.’
It rankles Couples, who had two three-week breaks last year, that many critics rate him an uninterested under-achiever and that he has failed to win more tournaments because he is so laid back.
He is dedicated, although he confesses there are occasions when he could practice harder.
He said: ‘They think I just sit back if I have a good start to the season.
It's not that at all, I do the same thing every year.
‘I play hard and then I relax.
Golf is a full time deal now.
I have to get away from it completely.
‘There were times when I really didn't want to play at all.
It wasn't a case of being fed up with golf, I just get really tired so I put the clubs in the bag and forget them.’
Defend
Couples wants to become the third golfer behind Jack Nicklaus and Faldo to successfuly defend the Masters but his top priority is the Open Championship at Royal St Georges.
He described his performance at Muirfield last July when he missed the halfway cut as ‘the most disappointing point of my year.’
He added: ‘If there is a ever a tournament I can win back-to-back, it's the Masters.
‘But the one I really want is your Open and I think I can do it.
The British Open is the finest major in the world and it's much fairer than ours.
‘I've had a few good British Opens and lost them.
But I have the feeling that it could be my next Major because it will be on a course I can play.’
Cup draw is hell for Hull
Ray French
HULL coach Royce Simmons yesterday blasted Silk Cut Challenge Cup organisers after the Humbersiders were drawn to face Wigan in the preliminary round.
The Aussie boss insisted: ‘You have one of the best sides in the world in Wigan and we have been very competitive this year — it's not right.’
DRAW: Prelim Rd:(Jan 17): Wigan v Hull; Batley v Blackpool; Widnes v Swinton.
First Rd:(Jan 30/31): Dewsbury v Wigan or Hull; Warrington v Castleford; Leeds v Barrow; Huddersfield v Nottingham; Featherstone v St Helens; Chorley v Batley or Blackpool; Hunslet v R-York; Salford v Wakefield; Halifax v Carlisle; Rochdale v Doncaster; Bradford v Workington; Whitehaven v Widnes or Swinton; Hull KR v Bramley; Sheffield v Leigh; Oldham v London; Keighley v Highfield.
Hull KR are confident their players' strike will be settled at a further meeting tonight.
Christie to bow out
David Harrison
LINFORD Christie will quit athletics in two years' time — aiming to bow out as the undisputed No 1 sprinter in the world, writes David Harrison.
The Olympic 100 metres champion will retire after the Commonwealth Games in 1994, by which time he hopes to have won the World Championship gold medal.
Christie, who yesterday signed a deal with Puma worth an estimated £500,000, said: ‘I'll make a clean break from athletics in two years time.
‘I set out to be the best athlete Britain has ever known and I've achieved that.
But first I want the gold medal from the World Championships in Stuttgart next year.’
But despite his £500,000 windfall, Christie has pulled out of races in Australia after being asked to pay £55 for a special visa.
‘It was the principle of the thing,’ he said.
Mighty row as Mogul defects
Colin Cooper
MIGHTY MOGUL is likely to boycott the valuable Ladbroke Hurdle at Leopardstown on January 9.
The Champion Hurdle hope, trained by David Nicholson (above), will have to shoulder 12st in the probable absence of top weight Halkopous.
And stablemate Baydon Star (10st), third favourite in Ladbrokes' list at 10-1, is also likely to face a considerable rise in the weights.
When the original top weight defects from handicap hurdles in Britain, the new horse at the head of the weights shoulders only 11st 10lb.
Blasted
Nicholson blasted: ‘It's a ridiculous situation, and they ought to think about changing the rules in Ireland.
As it is both my horses are unlikely to run.’
The sponsors make the English Cesarewitch winner Vintage Crop (10st 6lb) second favourite at 9-1 behind Swinton Hurdle winner Bitofabanter (9st 13lb) on 8-1.
Handicapper Ted Kelly admitted it had been a difficult task rating Vintage Crop.
‘His weight is not based on anything he's achieved on the Flat,’ he said.
Waugh leads Aussie charge
MARK WAUGH top-scored with 57 then took a career-best 5-24 as Australia scored a dramatic four-run victory over the West Indies yesterday in a World Series match in Melbourne.
Australia, heading for certain defeat, captured seven West Indies wickets for 21 runs in the last six overs as the visitors were all out for 194.
Anderson Cummins was out last ball, caught by Craig McDermott trying to tie the scores by hitting a four.
The West Indies, chasing Australia's 198-8, collapsed spectacularly after looking in total command at 157-2.
Medium-pacer Waugh bowled superbly to dismiss Brian Lara for 74, skipper Richie Richardson (61), Keith Arthurton (9), Junior Murray (5) and Cummins (2).
Record
Richardson said he could not understand how his men had thrown away the game.
‘I can't believe it.
We had the match in our grasp and gave it away,’ he said.
The win maintained stand-in captain Mark Taylor's unbeaten record in charge of Australia, who have won three and tied one since he took over from the injured Allan Border.
SOUTH AFRICA last night crushed India by eight wickets in Bloemfontein to take a winning 4-1 lead in the best-of-seven one-day international series.
Andrew Hudson hit 108 to set up South Africa's 208-2 off 47.2 overs in reply to India's 207-4 off 50 overs.
Union talk tough
ROB ANDREW'S current four-month ban from club competition could seem like a weekend break if the Rugby Union's planned hardline against players who change teams is put into effect next year.
Dudley Wood, secretary of the Rugby Union, has confirmed what officials, who run the registration rules, have been saying: ‘It may be necessary to lengthen the period of qualification following a change of clubs to 12 months with dispensations.’
They are determined to crack down on players moving when they are offered inducements.
Lewis can walk tall as champion
Geoff Sweet
WHEN Lennox Lewis picked up his WBC world title on Monday night, he put the claims of his great rival Frank Bruno firmly in perspective.
Bruno is in the shade…and that's only right.
Frank has made a career of knocking on doors, finding the wood is solid and going round the back way.
Lennox, meanwhile, has walked right through anything.
Yes, Bruno has fought for two world titles.
But on both occasions it was the next logical step — he had nowhere else to go.
Otherwise, he's been happy knocking over inferior opposition and now people wonder how serious he is about the whole thing.
That's the difference between Lewis and Bruno.
Lennox has always truly wanted to fight for the world title and was happy taking the tough route.
It's important to him that everyone knows he is the champion, that he is better than anyone else and not necessarily looking for easy pay days.
Scared
That's why today, even though he won a world title without throwing a punch, he walks tall, convinced everything possible was done to secure a deal with Riddick Bowe.
He was ready to accept next to nothing to fight and keep the heavyweight division unified, but Bowe and if not him, his handlers — knew who would win.
Lennox would make Bowe look like a muppet.
Let's face it, the only reason Bowe won the world title was because Evander Holyfield simply wasn't big enough.
You wait, Bowe will turn out to be another Buster Douglas.
On the other hand, I believe Lewis to be a worthy world champion and until Mike Tyson gets out of jail that's the way it will stay…and who's to say he won't beat him.
Lennox shouldn't worry that the world heavyweight title is no longer unified.
Life is rarely as it should be and, given that Bowe ran scared of him, the WBC belt fits just right.
He'll prove himself the best fighter in the world because the WBC's main contender Tony Tucker and WBO champion Mike Moorer, a really dangerous customer, are waiting in the wings.
If they are beaten there can be no disputing Lewis's standing.
First, though, give him the benefit of a voluntary defence, possibly against Alex Stewart, and then let him get on with making us all feel good about finally having another British world heavyweight champion.
There will be plenty of excitement to come.
Don King is looking for a return to the big time with Tucker, who will be a tough opponent.
But everyone forgets about Moorer, who could be even trickier.
He's the unbeaten American southpaw and heavyweights are simply not used to facing this style.
Cool
Mark my words, Moorer is a real force — a ‘bad liver’ who is forever involved in some sort of real-life drama.
Actually, I'm convinced the man to beat Lewis will do it through applying more mental pressure than physical strength.
Remember how Razor Ruddock danced into the ring at Earls Court looking wild and wanting to beat Lennox up.
That's exactly how I felt whan I fought him.
And now I know from first-hand experience it's the wrong approach.
You have to be as cool as he is.
Believe me, Lennox is so cool he really winds you up and that's part of the secret behind his success.
That's a lot more than you can say for Bowe, whose actions in coming to Britain to throw his WBC belt in the dustbin and make Lewis look like a garbage picker was sheer bravado.
He may have created some drama, but the only thing the scenario proved was that Bowe doesn't want to fight Lennox.
Rivals clash
BRITAIN'S most bitter boxing rivals bawled it out during a chance encounter in London yesterday when Nigel Benn and Chris Eubank came face-to-face for the first time in 25 months since their epic world title fight.
‘Please, I hope you get the million you want to fight me and that you don't bottle out,’ said WBO super-middleweight champion Eubank.
‘If you can't get it, come down to what I want to get the fight on.
‘I want £750,000, but there may not be enough money in the fight to give you your million.’
Benn, the WBC title-holder, countered: little more than a few inches from his hated foe's nose, returned the observation in kind.
‘I have the premier belt and you want it — but I'm not just going to give it to you.’
Eubank had a perfect reply: ‘It is not about belts, it is about winning and I beat you.
That is all that bothers me.’
But Benn, who lost his WBO middleweight title to Eubank in November 1990, wasn't finished.
‘I've chased him and waited far too long.
I'm not going to jump because he has decided he wants to meet me,’ he said.
Hurt
Also on Benn's hit-list is old foe Iran Barkley, beaten in one round by the Dark Destroyer the last time they met.
Benn added: ‘I really want him bad.
I really want to hurt him.’
Eubank and Benn were attending an ITV launch of a new seven-fight package featuring both men in New Year title defences.
King Bob hardly a true Brit
Frank Ward
NEW WBC champion Lennox Lewis may still be considered essentially Canadian in some boxing circles.
But the 1988 Olympic gold medallist undoubtedly knocks spots off ‘freckled’ Bob Fitzsimmons in his rating as a true Brit.
Cornish-born Fitzsimmons held the heavyweight crown for two years, defeating James J Corbett in 14 rounds in Carson City, Nevada on March 17, 1897 to lift the title.
However, when Bob was nine-years-old, the Fitzsimmons family cut their ties with Britain and moved to Lyttelton, New Zealand — never returning to their homeland.
Specialising in sprinting and American football, Fitzsimmons developed fast legs and upper body strenth, an attribute enhanced by his days as a blacksmith.
With little money to be made in New Zealand, Fitzsimmons moved to New South Wales in Australia to further his fight career before emigrating to the United States.
His first fight in America, against Billy McCarthy, earned him $1,250.
After winning the title, Fitzsimmons toured America with a theatrical show before losing his crown to James J Jeffries in 1899 in a bruising encounter.
Fitzsimmons broke Jeffries nose, cut both cheeks to the bone, but Jeffries landed a right to the stomach and a left hook to the jaw and ‘Fitz’ was counted out.
Virginia's challenge
Giles Smith
BRITAIN'S young tennis players were yesterday challenged by our last two Wimbledon champions to take the country back to the top of the world game.
Fred Perry and Virginia Wade issued the task at the official opening of the LTA's new eight-court International Training Centre at Queen's Club in London.
‘For years British players have moaned at the LTA, now we have a proper national training centre and we await the real success story,’ said 1977 Wimbledon champion Wade.
And three-times 1930s champion Perry, in a letter from the American hospital bed where he is recovering from a triple heart bypass operation, added: ‘To the youngsters who will use this centre, I say, use it with pride.
Help
‘But it's up to you.
However much help or coaching you get, you have to do it yourself.’
Perry's letter was read by Roger Taylor, three-times British Wimbledon semi-finalist, who was deputising for him.
And Taylor said: ‘At last, our young players now have the facilities to put us at the top of the world game.’
The £2 million centre, sponsored by Cellnet, is part of the LTA's five-year £60m effort to revive British tennis and will be available to our top players and promising juniors all year round.
Belt is stolen
CRISANTO ESPANA, the Belfast-based Venezuelan WBA welterweight champion, was unable to receive his victor's belt at a scheduled awards ceremony in Caracas last night because it was stolen at gunpoint from a boxing official.
Two other belts were also taken from Simon Rasquin, a Venezuelan Boxing Association official, as he left his Caracas home.
Espana took the WBA title by defeating Meldrick Taylor of the United States in Belfast on October 31.
Andy Till, the British light-middleweight champion, has been offered £25,000 by Mickey Duff to defend his title against Robert McCracken in the New Year.
McCracken, unbeaten in 13 fights, stopped Ensley Bingham in an eliminator last month.
Fidel Castro Smith, Sheffield's former British super-middleweight champion, returns to the ring in Rome tonight to challenge for the vacant European crown.
Drugs wait for Russia
RUSSIA'S athletics chief, Valentin Balakhnichov, has announced he will wait for dope test results, expected later this week, before passing judgement on four athletes expelled from Sweden on Monday.
Will won't
WILL CARLING, who missed London's first two Divisional Championship ties, has been left out of Saturday's game against North.
Bianchi joy
PATRICE BIANCHI of France edged out local hero Alberto Tomba to win a World Cup slalom in Madonna Di Campiglio, Italy yesterday.
Golf putt-off
A DECISION on golf's inclusion at the 1996 Atlanta Olympics has been referred to the IOC's executive board meeting in Lausanne in March.
Prize guy
NIGEL MANSELL walked off with four awards at a lunch held by the British Racing Drivers' Club yesterday.
Premier posers
RADICAL proposals to cut the Premier League to 18 teams and introduce a Second Division could be put to the vote today.
All 22 Premier League chairmen meet in London today where they will hear a call from Arsenal vice-chairman David Dein to reduce the League to 18 clubs.
The meeting is also expected to vote on a proposal from Crystal Palace supremo Ron Noades for the formation of a second division.
It is the first time all 22 Premier League chairmen have come face to face since the Noades-inspired walk-out last September when the so-called ‘Platinum Eight’ clubs blocked a £10million Bass sponsorship deal.
And League secretary Mike Foster warned: ‘We will be looking for a significant majority in favour of forming another division if we are to pursue Ron Noades's plan.
It will be interesting to see what happens.’
Durie appeal
Mike Walters
GORDON TAYLOR today bids to rid Tottenham's Gordon Durie of his ‘cheat’ label.
Players' union chief Taylor is expected to defend Durie at an appeal hearing in London.
Durie became the first footballer to be convicted of feigning injury nine weeks ago after a confrontation with Coventry's Andy Pearce in August.
But last night Taylor said: ‘Our case was that the video showed evidence of contact between the players and that the referee was not in a good position to judge.’
If Durie's three-week ban stands, it will start on January 2.
Meanwhile, the FA are still considering whether to take any action against Arsenal's Ian Wright for his alleged punching of Tottenham's David Howells last weekend.
Home comfort for Chelsea
CHELSEA'S future at Stamford Bridge was assured tonight after the Royal Bank of Scotland bought the west London stadium.
The club now has a 20-year lease on the ground with an option to buy, and relieved chairman Ken Bates said: ‘I am delighted and very appreciative of the totally supportive role taken by the Royal Bank of Scotland, who have been instrumental in keeping Chelsea at Stamford Bridge.
‘Chelsea fans everywhere have every reason to celebrate their good fortune.’
The Bank refused to reveal the amount paid to previous owners Cabra Estates, but they have told Bates that Chelsea do not have to pay any part of the purchase price for up to 20 years.
However, they can buy the ground at any time before 2012 if they want to.
Chris is Ipswich cracker
Adrian Holloway
Ipswich 1, Aston Villa 0
MATCHWINNER Chris Kiwomya's smile lit up Portman Road last night as Ipswich visibly grew in stature while sweeping Villa out of the Coca-Cola Cup.
Unbeaten at home this season, and with just two defeats away from home, Mick McGiven's enterprising East Anglians must now be considered serious contenders for honours.
Their success was built upon a resolute defensive display, shutting out 12-goal Dean Saunders.
And though Villa's lively attack looked the more likely to score, they never looked like recovering after Kiwomya had given his side a deserved lead.
Glorious
He had scored twice at Villa Park a fortnight ago to earn Ipswich this fourth round replay, and he sealed a glorious night with an opportunist strike after 57 minutes.
Villa had suffered a double injury blow before manager Ron Atkinson had settled in the dugout.
First, top scorer Dalien Atkinson missed the starting line-up after revolutionary oxygen chamber treatment failed to heal him in time to face his old club.
Then his replacement, 34-year-old Cyrille Regis, hobbled off injured after 13 minutes.
The new strike partnership of Saunders and substitute Dwight Yorke failed to make an immediate impression as Ipswich pressed hard.
Ipswich could have taken the lead as early as the second minute, when Steve Whitton picked up a poor clearance by Nigel Spink and cracked a drive just wide from 25 yards.
Then midfielder Gavin Johnson went close with a header before veteran striker Paul Goddard found the net only to see his spectacular volley disallowed for a foul on Ray Houghton.
But Villa had not forgotten the enterprising football that has taken them second in the Premier League, and in an eight-minute spell before the interval, they twice worried Ipswich keeper Clive Baker.
Saunders toe-poked wide after skipper Kevin Richardson's cross shot found the Welshman in a dangerous position.
Then Garry Parker missed an equally good chance, blazing his shot over the bar from the edge of the area following good work by Neil Cox.
Sharp
Villa were made to pay 12 minutes into the second half.
Kiwomya was out with flu for Ipswich's 3-1 win over Manchester City on Saturday, but he looked razor sharp as he flicked Jason Dozzell's header high into the net following a Neil Thompson corner.
It was Kiwomya's sixth goal of the season, and Ipswich were well worth their lead.
But as the game's tempo reached fever pitch, Saunders squandered a golden opportunity to grab an equaliser.
Clean through against the experienced Baker, Saunders scuffed his shot along the ground into the keeper's arms.
Villa suffered another setback when Parker went off injured to be replaced by Matthias Breitkreutz.
The visitors continued to search desperately for a late equaliser, but Ipswich dug deep and hung on to book a quarter-final tussle at home to Sheffield Wednesday next month.
Barnes nightmare ends with perfect tonic
Mike Walters
FORMER staff nurse Andy Barnes is ready to provide his manager Steve Coppell with the perfect cure to Crystal Palace's injury crisis against Liverpool tonight.
Barnes could face his England namesake John in the Coca-Cola Cup fourth round replay at Selhurst Park after just 22 minutes of first-team action with Palace in a nightmare 15 months blighted by knee injuries.
And Coppell may have to pair his £100,000 capture from non-League Sutton with another rookie, 18-year-old Grant Watts, who came on as a half-time substitute at QPR last Saturday.
The Selhurst sick parade already includes Chris Coleman and Paul Williams, while top scorer Chris Armstrong is Cup-tied and teenager George Ndah — who made his debut in the 1-1 draw at Anfield a fortnight ago — faces a late test on a gashed leg.
So Barnes, a 25-year-old who was in park football two years ago, could be pitched into the big time barely a year after revolutionary surgery in the States saved his career.
He said: ‘I signed for Palace on Friday the 13th (of September) last year — which was the worst thing I could have done.
‘On Saturday the 14th, I was carried off on my reserve team debut at Arsenal with ruptured anterior cruciate knee ligaments.
‘Within two or three days of John Salako flying out to California for his knee operation, he had me for company on the same ward.
‘Going out to America saved me a lot of time — an English surgeon had told me it would be a year before I kicked a ball again but I was back playing within six months.’
Coppell, who is putting out the most inexperienced team he has fielded in nine years at Palace, said: ‘Because Andy is a diabetic, he could not have the operation under general anaesthetic.
‘He was wide awake while the old Black and Decker was being drilled straight through his kneecap and a donor tendon was being placed at the back of his knee, which is unbelievably advanced surgery.’
‘We are a bit thin on the ground up front but if I stuck the cleaner and laundry lady out there I know they would give me 110 per cent.’
Barnes added: ‘Being on the same pitch as that other bloke Barnes would be a dream because only two years ago I was putting up the nets on Sunday mornings for my hospital team.’
Meanwhile, Chelsea keeper Kevin Hitchcock is determined to repeat last season's Cup heroics against Everton in the fourth round replay at Stamford Bridge tonight.
Hitchcock got the edge over rival Dave Beasant when he saved a penalty from Everton's Tony Cottee in the FA Cup in January.
Eleven months on, Beasant is an outcast and Hitchcock is getting rave reviews in Chelsea's brilliant run, but now Hitchcock may lose his place to Russian Dmitri Kharin.
Kharin's £200,000 transfer from CSKA Moscow will be completed any day now but Hitchcock wants to give him the Beasant treatment.
He said: ‘I'm confident of my ability and I'm looking forward to competing with Dmitri, who's a nice bloke.
‘But I'm still the man in possession.
We've tightened up considerably at the back, and that's very pleasing from my point of view.’
Hitchcock added: ‘Now we're fourth in the League, everyone's talking about us winning something, especially in the cups.
But we've got to beat Everton first.
‘We fought our way back into the game at Goodison to get home advantage and the whole club's been boosted by Don Howe's recovery this week.
We want to do it for him.’
Howe has returned home after a scare over a chest condition.
The former England No 2 required a triple heart by-pass operation four years ago and was admitted to hospital last week for tests after feeling unwell.
West Ham's assistant manager Harry Redknapp will not face police charges after being accused of making obscene gestures to fans during Hammers' 5-1 win at Bristol City in September.
A police spokesman in Bristol said: ‘It has now been decided to take no further action against Mr Redknapp but we have sent a report to the FA.
‘It was felt that they are a more appropriate body to deal with it.’
Ruud on the move
Rob Shepherd
RUUD GULLIT could be teaming up with Paul Gascoigne at Lazio.
The Dutch star's contract with AC Milan expires in the summer and, providing Holland still have an interest in England's World Cup qualifying group, he will continue his career elsewhere in Europe.
I understand an option is a move to Lazio.
The 30-year-old midfielder makes his international comeback against Turkey tonight.
But if they fail here, the feeling in the Dutch camp is their team could be disbanded, with Gullit following Gary Lineker to Japan.
But victory will see them as serious threats to England's hopes of making it to the finals in 1994 and Gullit may well take Lazio president Sergio Cragnotti's offer to join Gazza.
‘There is a lot at stake for me,’ he admitted last night.
‘If we win this game then we still have a good chance of qualifying from this group.
That will have a bearing on my future.’
Meanwhile, Gullit's AC Milan and Dutch team-mate, striker Marco van Basten, is in doubt for the Turkey match with leg injuries.
Brave Wycombe bow out in style
David Harrison
West Brom 1, Wycombe 0
WYCOMBE went home with everything but the one prize they wanted last night — a place in the third round of the FA Cup.
A standing ovation from the 17,640 spectators at the Hawthorns, and the admiration of Sky TV viewers accompanied them back to Buckinghamshire.
But the home tie with West Ham in the next round went to Second Division West Bromwich Albion.
Wycombe were beaten by Bob Taylor's 82nd-minute winner, and their disconsolate boss Martin O'Neill said: ‘I was actually looking forward to extra-time because I was so sure we would win.
‘I was even thinking about how we would play against West Ham.
I was that confident.
Proud
‘I was proud of the way we played.
Ossie Ardiles and Keith Burkinshaw came into our dressing room at the end and commiserated with us and I know they were not patronising me.
‘Even after all my years in the game, I'm still surprised we lost having played so well.’
His sentiments were shared by West Brom boss Ardiles, who said: ‘They made it very difficult for us and Martin did a very good job in planning the game the way he did.
‘Wycombe have some very good players.
Maybe we will buy some of them.
They came with nothing to lose and played a very relaxed game.
That gave them a psychological advantage.
I was even tempted to start smoking again!’
Albion were on their guard from the first minute when Steve Guppy curled a shot into keeper Stuart Naylor's body.
And Keith Scott shaved the post in the 29th minute.
They were lucky to survive in the 40th minute when Taylor headed against the crossbar, but Wycombe's Steve Thompson saw a 49th-minute header was cleared off the line by Paul Raven.
But Wycombe grew heavy-legged and Taylor took advantage to hit the match winner.
Herobbed Guppy just outside the area and swept a low shot past keeper Paul Hyde.
But Wycombe almost snatched a dramatic, last-gasp equaliser when Simon Hutchinson's cross flew across the face of the goal and Keith Scott fractionally failed to get a decisive touch.
Meanwhile, Tim Buzaglo, the Woking hat-trick hero cruelly cut down by a Gazza-style knee injury, is back to boost their latest FA Cup odyssey in tonight's second round replay against Brighton tonight.
Buzaglo is the Gibraltar World Cup cricketer who cracked three goals in Woking's shock 4-2 win at West Brom nearly two years ago.
Lewis offered £10m Bruno bait
Frank Ward
LENNOX LEWIS'S first day as WBC champion ended with the prospect of a £10 million all-British heavyweight showdown with Frank Bruno moving a shade nearer last night.
Bruno's promoter, Micky Duff, urging Lewis to cash in on his first defence with a summer clash at Wembley stadium, said: ‘That kind of money puts Frank in a very solid position.
‘Lewis can make a lot of money from it because he's not yet a big enough name in the States.
‘It would fill up Wembley, sell it out — a major heavyweight fight between two Britons, something that has never really happened before.’
Lewis became champion when unified title-holder Riddick Bowe unceremoniously dumped his WBC belt in a bin, and the angry Mexico City-based organisation stripped him of the title.
The big money for a Lewis-Bruno fight will come from the paying audience.
There would probably be delayed TV rights in America, and the fight could just be the making of pay-as-you-view in Britain.
Duff added: ‘Frank is ready, willing and able to fight Lennox.
But while it may be appealing to the British public, I'm not making it my life's work to get it together.
‘Frank's got other opportunities.
For one, he could fight Bowe.
He's got as good a chance as any of the other challengers, and better than most.
He's got to start as a contender.
‘I've got a March date for Bruno at Wembley, but I'm holding tight to see how the wind blows.
I'm going to the States on December 21 and will do some business while I'm there.’
The Lewis camp, meanwhile, are considering a three-fight programme which would begin with London-born Alex Stewart and culminate in a showdown with Bruno.
Lewis's manager Frank Maloney said: ‘It is very important that we take a top-ranked American to establish credibility over there.
‘Then we would probably have a mandatory defence, which we would not duck, and then come back for a third defence against Bruno.’
Robbed
Lewis added: ‘Bowe's stripping has robbed me of the chance of beating him in the ring.
But I'm still the champion, and I'm still a better fighter than he is.
‘We are going our own ways, but hopefully one day we will get together.
I beat him once in the 1988 Olympics and I know I can beat him again.’
Lewis was speaking yesterday from his luxury holiday home at the Tryall Beach Resort in Jamaica before flying on to Toronto.
He is not expected back in London until after Christmas.
A WBC crowning ceremony is planned for January 11.
Bowe, meanwhile, is set to defend his remaining WBA and IBF titles against Alex Garcia at New York's Madision Square Garden on February 6.
Gould fury at ban
Tony Kell
FURIOUS Bobby Gould was last night forced to cancel plans to appear as a BSkyB commentator at West Brom's FA Cup second round replay against Wycombe after he was banned from The Hawthorns for his own safety.
Coventry manager Gould was advised by West Brom chairman Trevor Summers not to go because police feared a fans' backlash after Gould's sacking by the club last season.
Gould said: ‘I'm absolutely disgusted at this decision and find it very hard to swallow.
I find it totally unacceptable that another football club manager is not allowed into a ground to do a job.
‘I have been in this game a lifetime and wonder in what direction it is going and where it will all end up.
‘It is quite possible that my club, Coventry, could be drawn against West Brom in the Cup this season.
I'd like to know what would happen then.’
A Sky spokesman added: ‘We agreed to a police request that Bobby Gould should not be at the ground, even though he worked for us in the same capacity at the first match between the two sides.’
Gould was verbally abused at The Hawthorns before his departure and at one protest supporters paraded with a coffin on their shoulders.
Last night's ban comes only 10 days after a similar incident in which Shrewsbury manager John Bond was forced to stay away from an FA Cup tie at his former club, Burnley.
Bond received threats of a ‘warm welcome’ from Burnley fans, who blamed him for the club's decline after his season in charge eight years ago.
After discussions between Bond, the Shrewsbury board and Burnley police, he agreed to stay away rather than run the risk of provoking incidents on the terraces.
In last night's Hawthorns replay, Wycombe were finally sunk by an 82nd-minute goal from Albion's Bob Taylor.
But Wycombe manager Martin O'Neill admitted: ‘I was proud of the way we played.
I was actually looking forward to extra time because I was so sure that we would win.
‘But we gave away a bad goal through sloppy defending.
You can't do that with a player of Bob Taylor's ability.’
West Brom boss Ossie Ardiles added: ‘Wycombe raised their game and made it very difficult for us.’
Big Ron's in rage as Villa fall
Adrian Holloway
ASTON VILLA manager Ron Atkinson stormed away from Portman Road last night after seeing his side crash out of the Coca-Cola Cup.
They were toppled by a 57th-minute Chris Kiwomya strike, and a furious Atkinson rushed away, saying: ‘I can't believe this result.
Our keeper didn't have a save to make and we are out.’
Kiwomya won Ipswich a quarter-final clash with Sheffield Wednesday when he flicked in Jason Dozzell's header from a corner.
It was the deadly striker's 11th goal of the season — he also scored both when the sides drew 2-2 in their first meeting at Villa Park.
He said: ‘I was stunned when I scored.
It's a move we have practised so many times in training and I always send them over the bar.
‘I'm delighted we are doing so well now.
‘We have had some good games against Wednesday, but now we fancy our chances against anyone at home.
‘We played them at their place not so long ago and we drew 1-1 in a good, entertaining game so we're looking forward to getting them back here.’
Davies dilemma
WIDNES are seeking talks with Welsh star Jonathan Davies after claims he wants to leave rugby league early to coach his old union club, Llanelli.
Davies, 30, who has two and a half years of his contract to run, is understood to be disillusioned and keen to quit the professional game.
Widnes chairman Jim Mills said: ‘I'll have a chat with Jonathan to see if there are any problems and, if there are, hopefully we can sort them out.
‘He has not had a good season with injury and must be a bit depressed — he wants to be playing.
He has also missed a few internationals through injury.’
Davies, who turned pro nearly four years ago, would have to sit out three seasons before he can return to his old sport as a coach.
Foulds out
NEAL FOULDS, snooker's world No 5, suffered a shock 5-2 defeat against Durham's Dave Rippon in the first round of the Strachan Challenge at Aldershot yesterday.
NZ all-clear
PAKISTAN have given New Zealand the go-ahead to use a third umpire when the countries meet in one cricket Test and three one-day games later this month.
Premier II bid rejected
by Tony Kell
PROPOSALS to form a Premier League second division were thrown out as England's top clubs achieved a rare showing of unity at a London meeting yesterday.
The Premier League clubs were so unaninmous in their view against a second division that chief executive Rick Parry did not even call for a vote on the issue.
He said: ‘I was prepared to set aside time at a future meeting for full discussion, but the clubs felt they didn't want to even talk about the issue any further.
‘The overwhelming view was: No, we don't want to contemplate it.
There were no indications whatever of strong support for the move.’
Crystal Palace chairman Ron Noades was a leading advocate of an enlarged Premier League, which would have sounded a death knell for the Football League.
Even if there had been a ‘yes’ vote the idea would almost certainly have been scuppered by the Football Association.
Graham Kelly, the FA chief executive, told the meeting that the question of a Premier League second division had been discussed by the FA Council months ago.
‘The Council indicated they were unwilling to give their sanction,’ said Kelly.
‘I also reminded the meeting of the effects the speculation was having on the commercial activities of the Football League.’
But the Premier League clubs did come up with two positive measures in what Parry described as ‘the most constructive meeting we have had for a long time.’
Working parties will be formed to make recommendations on criteria for Premier League stadia and to examine a recommendation by Tottenham's Terry Venables that a Premier Under-21 league should be formed.
Welsh cash boost
WALES'S rugby players will get £2,000 each this season from sponsorship money paid into their trust fund, writes Tom Lyons.
The figure is £1,000 more than England's stars pocketed last season.
Jonathan Price, the Welsh union's commercial executive, said: ‘New regulations on amateurism allow players to be paid for promotional work.
That's what our players do.’
Relieved Mel's on the mend
Graham Fisher
MEL STERLAND bounced into Elland Road yesterday with the best news Leeds United manager Howard Wilkinson has heard for months.
‘I feel fine,’ said the jubilant full-back after his first taste of serious action since hobbling out of United's title challenge last March.
Sterland came on for the last half-hour of this week's 3-0 reserve team win over Manchester City at Maine Road, and yesterday declared: ‘It went brilliantly.
‘The important thing is that I got in a couple of block tackles, which was significant.
‘That could have been a psychological barrier after my kind of injury.
But there was no problem and there has been no reaction this morning.’
Sterland's long exile began when he injured ankle ligaments in the game at Tottenham on March 7.
He underwent three operations on the long haul back to fitness and has been a helpless onlooker as Leeds floundered in their title defence.
The 31-year-old Yorkshireman's enthusiastic work in the back four, his surging runs on the overlap and his ferocious shooting have all been badly missed in a side that has lost its heart and its way in a disastrous plunge down the table.
Sterland's next step is a full reserve outing against Newcastle next week.
Wilkinson will be hoping to count on his old retainer early in the New Year, but Sterland is not counting chickens yet.
Setbacks
He said: ‘I have had so many disappointments, so many setbacks, that I have stopped setting myself targets.
I'm just keeping everything crossed from now on.’
Meanwhile, Aston Villa manager Ron Atkinson was last night reeling from the body blow of one of his biggest disappointments in football.
The Villa boss was still trying to pick up the pieces after his side's shock exit from the Coca-Cola Cup in Tuesday night's fourth round replay at Ipswich.
The East Anglian side were also the culprits the last time Atkinson hit an all-time low, when Ipswich beat his West Brom side in the 1978 FA Cup semi-finals.
Atkinson said: ‘I haven't felt as bad as this since that semi-final at Highbury.
‘It was all set up for us on Tuesday night, yet we went out to their only effort on goal.
‘With a home game against Sheffield Wednesday in the quarter-finals as a reward for getting through, there was a big incentive for us.
Yet we end up getting dumped out.
‘I was so amazed by it all, I had to play the video on the team coach coming home to confirm what I thought — that Ipswich won with their only effort on target.
‘This was a golden opportunity for us and we've been kicked out because we were so powder puff up front.
‘It was a competition I thought we had a realistic chance of winning.
But it's history now and we can only blame ourselves.’
Sheffield Wednesday wonderkid Chris Bart-Williams last night pleaded with manager Trevor Francis for a chance to re-launch his season.
The England Under-21 midfielder revealed his frustration at being relegated to the bench on no less than 11 occasions this season.
Bart-Williams, who has started just two of the last nine games, said: ‘I am very disappointed not to be in the side.
‘I keep being reminded that I am only 18, but I am eager and enthusiastic to play.
I've just got to keep working hard then hopefully an opportunity will come my way.’
Francis promised: ‘Chris will get his chance again.
Even when he is on the bench, he always comes on.
‘He's tremendous to work with and will get better and better.’
Rocking Robins grab a point in goal blitz
from John Davies in Cremona
Cremonese 2, Bristol City 2
STRIKER Leroy Rosenior earned Bristol City their first point in the Anglo-Italian Cup with an 88th-minute equaliser.
Rosenior's goal provided the climax to a four-goal blitz in the final 13 minutes.
Striker Andy Cole gave the Robins the lead after 78 minutes in the mist-shrouded Giovanni Zini Stadium.
But three minutes later, their joy was jolted when Cremonese striker Marco Bruzzano equalised.
Seconds later, disaster struck when City keeper Keith Welch brought down Matius Florjanic, who scored from the spot.
City, still smarting after the 4-0 mauling they received from Bristol Rovers on Sunday, confronted the dazzling talents of Florjanic from the outset.
Unlucky
The striker had a foot in every move set up by Cremonese, unbeaten in the Cup and en route to the semi-finals in the New Year.
Cremonese dominated the first half and were unlucky not to get a penalty when winger Massika Lombardini was brought down by a joint tackle from Osman and Gerry Harrison.
City manager Denis Smith said: ‘I was pleased we kept a clean sheet in the first half.
I thought we were good for at least a point with our second-half display.’
Portsmouth's Warren Aspinall was caught in an on-pitch brawl as Jim Smith's side came from a goal down to keep alive their faint semi-final hopes with a 2-1 win at Ascoli.
The Italian Serie B side had defender Carlo Pascucci sent off after Aspinall gave Portsmouth the lead with a 75th-minute strike from outside the area.
Solihull referee Vic Callow showed Pascucci the red card and booked Aspinall and Oliver Bierhoff during an 80th-minute clash.
German striker Bierhoff gave Ascoli, fourth in the Italian Second Division, the lead in the ninth minute when a superb run and curling shot from outside the area beat Alan Knight.
Guy Whittingham, denied three times by goalkeeper Marco Bizzarri, finally grabbed the equaliser just before half-time.
Whittingham, with 22 goals this season, latched on to a mistake by defender Salvatore Fusco in the 39th minute, drew the keeper off his line and calmly finished from the edge of the area.
But Aspinall's goal sparked ugly scenes.
Defender Pietro Ziani was fouled by Aspinall and lay pole-axed for two minutes as the Pompey player and Callow were surrounded by jostling Italian players.
When play re-started, Pascucci lashed out at Aspinall with a callous tackle and referee Callow instantly dismissed him.
Birmingham boss Terry Cooper blasted his players after they crashed out of the Cup with a 3-0 loss at Lucchese.
Cooper, who saw striker John Gayle sent off after an off-the-ball clash with Daniel Delicari in the 70th minute, stormed: ‘With a chance to qualify for the semi-finals of the competition, I thought the players would really have gone for it.
Agony
‘The time has now come for me to act and sort out some of the players.
I was particularly disappointed with the standard of our passing.
‘Footballers get paid well and it makes you wonder about the standard of players at the moment.’
Birmingham fell behind to a seventh-minute Searo Bettarini goal after captain David Rennie gave the ball away in midfield.
Goals to Roberto Paci, in the 36th minute, and Macimo Rastelli, with a 60th-minute penalty, compounded Birmingham's agony.
Gazza on Tyne
John Wardle
PAUL GASCOIGNE is set to make an emotional return to Tyneside with his club Lazio early next season.
Gazza is eager to fix up a friendly with his former club and Newcastle chairman Sir John Hall said: ‘Our fans would love to see Gazza back at St James' Park.’
Gascoigne's agent Mel Stein confirmed: ‘We are trying to find a date.
Lazio are dead keen.’
Meanwhile, Dutch striker Eric Viscaal is keen to join Newcastle.
‘I'll be interested if Newcastle make me a good offer,’ said the 25-year-old Ghent striker.
Newcastle are understood to have made a £500,000 bid for Viscaal, in Holland's squad for last night's game in Turkey.
Yob rule blasted
David Harrison
POLICE and football clubs were accused last night of giving in to the ‘yobs and thugs’ by forcing managers to stay away from matches.
The League Managers' Association want talks with senior officers after Bobby Gould pulled out of BSkyB's commentary team for the FA Cup tie between his former club, West Brom, and Wycombe Wanderers on Wednesday on police advice.
And recently, John Bond had to stay away from Shrewsbury's Cup match at Burnley.
Association chief executive Frank Clark said: ‘We say we won't give in to the IRA and yet the police say they cannot guarantee the safety of a manager at a football match.’
Clark was advised by police to lose a match at Burnley in May 1987.
He said: ‘It was after John Bond had left and we (Orient) had to play at Burnley on the last Saturday.
We had to win to get into the play-offs and they needed to win to stay in the League.
In the event, Burnley won and it was all sweetness and light.’
Stevens hits back
Scott McMunn
CROCKED star Gary Stevens last night blasted the Airdrie hard-man who has put him out for six weeks.
The Rangers ace suffered a stress fracture of the right knee after a late tackle in the recent 1-1 draw at Broomfield.
And as he recovered at home, he opened up about the moment he thought his season was over.
The World Cup star did not mention the player by name, but blasted: ‘He knows who he is.
I am very bitter about it and want him to know how I feel.
‘I took a kick on the side of the knee and it was so unnecessary because the ball was two or three yards away.
‘I've never suffered serious injury before, yet this season I've picked up two.
‘They say bad luck comes in threes — but I hope this time that's not true.’
Castro falls
SHEFFIELD'S Fidel Castro Smith failed to take the vacant European super-middleweight boxing title when he was outpointed by Italy's Vincenzo Nardiello in Rome last night.
Faldo is the best in world — Couples
Bill Blighton
FRED COUPLES has swept all before him in the USA, but Britain's Nick Faldo remains a thorn in his side.
Here, Couples compares his own laid back approach with the intensity of Faldo's play.
WHEN the famous Green Jacket was draped around the shoulders of Fred Couples last April, the American might well have shuddered.
For although he had denied world No 1 Nick Faldo a third title, he immediately feared a backlash from Britain's star player, who regards Augusta as his spiritual home in America.
The 1993 contest promises to be an intriguing tussle of talent and nerve, tinged with mutual respect between the US and European No 1s, and Couples is already preparing his battle plan to beat Faldo again.
‘I know exactly what I have to do and I also know that Nick is the man we all have to beat,’ said Couples, as he contemplated a Christmas musing over the Masters.
He added: ‘I accept that Nick is the best player in the world.
But I love Augusta as much as he does and anything can happen.’
If opposites attract, Couples and Faldo should be the best of pals.
The 33-year-old from Seattle is so laid back he is almost horizontal, while Faldo's intensity over every shot would have most other players reaching for the straight jacket.
Conceded
The pair partner each other in first two rounds of the Johnnie Walker World Championship in Jamaica, starting today, and Couples conceded: ‘We have different outlooks on the game.
‘Nick Faldo is not there to take it easy, but that's Faldo's game.
He does it better than anybody else and deserves the acclaim.’
Couples practises when he needs to and takes a complete break, normally three weeks, when he considers he has done sufficient to earn one.
He added: ‘No-one works harder than Faldo and I admire him because it must be very difficult for him to do that.
I don't know how many kids he has (Faldo has two, with a third expected the week of the Masters) but I find it amazing he can combine both ways of life.
‘He must have the right kind of family.
I'm sure he gives them a lot of his time but if you practise and play that much…hell, you have got to do so many other things as well.’
Couples not only finished top of the US rankings but became only the eighth player in history to win the Vardon Trophy, awarded for the lowest stroke average, and the PGA Player of the Year.
‘I believe I've had a year like Nick,’ he said.
‘But I cannot compare myself with him and I wouldn't want to.
Faldo has won five Majors and he's probably going to be next to get close to Jack Nicklaus, Gary Player and Tom Watson.
‘Some guys might knock him because he hasn't won in the States this year but I wouldn't.
He had that wonderful stretch when he was always in the frame and he won five times in Europe, including the British Open.
I reckon 1992 was the best year he has ever had.’
Faldo has often been the butt of cruel comments from other US tour pros, who deride his application, attitude and pace of play.
Steve Pate said of his round with Faldo in the Open at Muirfield: ‘It was like playing on my own — but it took an hour longer.’
Pleasure
Couples, however, will happily tee up alongside Faldo at Augusta, or anywhere else.
He said: ‘It is always a pleasure to be that close to such a great golfer.’
That prompted more thoughts of their Masters showdown and Couples added: ‘I get my streaks and Nick is so consistent, that's the difference between us.
I want to get close to his five Majors but it's so darn hard.
‘That's what everybody wants.
But you just watch Nick Faldo play a round of golf in a Major, no-one does it better.
That's when reality sets in.’
Monie's deal
Ray French
JOHN MONIE has accepted a two-year contract to coach Auckland when he finishes at Wigan at the end of this season.
Monie will lead the first New Zealand side into Australia's Winfield Cup in 1995.
The Aussie boss said: ‘This is a new challenge.’
WIDNES chairman Jim Mills has scotched talk of Jonathan Davies quitting to coach rugby union at Llanelli.
Mills said: ‘There is no way he wants to return to Wales before his contract expires.’
Hero Fairbank
Ray French
Bradford Northern 9, Warrington 6
KARL FAIRBANK'S try was the difference as Bradford set up a Regal Trophy quarter-final against holders Widnes on Sunday at Odsal.
After a goal each from Tony Marchant, for Northern, and Tony Thorniley, loose forward David Heron and skipper David Hobbs combined to put Great Britain second rower Fairbank over for his fourth try of the season in the 17th minute.
Marchant added the conversion for an 8-2 half-time lead and Hobbs eased the pressure with a drop goal in the 54th minute.
Despite the penetrating runs of Kiwi Test half-back Kelly Shelford and centre Allan Bateman, Warrington could only muster a late try from winger Neil Kenyon in the closing minutes.
Miinne's a probable
MARTIN Pipe's exciting chaser Miinnehoma is ‘60 per cent likely’ to take his chance in Saturday's SGB Handicap Chase at Ascot.
After Peter Scudamore had schooled Freddie Starr's gelding yesterday, Pipe said: ‘I was pleased with the horse and at the moment the odds are 60-40 in favour of him running.
But he is also in the Welsh National and the King George VI.’
Fitz on jackpot trail
Henry Rix
TWO canny Irishmen were last night toying with the same plot — to plunder the booty on offer in the Victor Chandler Chase at Ascot.
Naas trainer Arthur Moore and Yorkshire-based Jimmy FitzGerald entered their star novice chasers to see what chance the handicapper would give them against the established performers in next month's £32,000-added showpiece.
The handicapper has given both of them 10st, with last year's winner Waterloo Boy heading the weights on 12st.
Sybillin put up a bold display when successful over the two-mile Victor Chandler course and distance last month, and FitzGerald's reaction to the weight was positive.
‘10st is not too bad.
A novice gets in better at this stage of his career than at any other,’ he said.
‘If the ground is reasonable he'll run at Newcastle on Saturday, and then he will go to Ascot unless the ground is testing.
He wouldn't want it heavy.’
FitzGerald added.
Soft Day's latest success, a 20-length rout at Punchestown, set Irish pulses racing, but Moore, who has a fine record with his British raiders, struck a more cautious note than his compatriot.
‘It's impossible to say what might be a fair mark on what Soft Day's achieved, but he's a nice horse and has done everything right so far,’ he said.
Tonic for Holder
RICHARD Holder, critically ill for two months in hospital, got the best possible pick-me-up yesterday when 33-1 shot Beresfords Girl and 3-1 chance Charmed I'm Sure scored a 135-1 Exeter double for his Portbury stable.
And, to top it all, Holder's doctor informed him he can spend Christmas Day at home with his family.
Lewis ordered to fight Tucker
Frank Ward
LENNOX LEWIS'S three-fight plan was upset last night when WBC president Jose Sulaiman insisted he makes his first title defence against Tony Tucker.
The WBC appointed Lewis as their belt holder because unified champion Riddick Bowe refused to fight him, even though the Briton was the No 1 contender.
Now the WBC are determined the situation won't be repeated.
Sulaiman said: ‘I'm confident Lewis will go ahead with the fight and not do what Bowe did.’
Lewis, who planned to fight Alex Stewart in a voluntary defence before taking on Tucker and then British rival Frank Bruno, took the news on the chin.
From his Jamaican holiday retreat, Lewis said: ‘I can beat Tucker, I know I can knock him out.
I hope the fight is in London, but I'm prepared to fight in America.’
Lewis's manager Frank Maloney denied he had been outmanoeuvred by Tucker's manager, controversial promoter Don King, who wants to give his man the advantage of a fight in America.
Maloney said: ‘If we have to fight Tucker we will, but I've got Alex Stewart lined up for the first defence.’
Lewis, meanwhile, intends to turn up at each of Bowe's fights to shame the IBF and WBA champion into fighting him.
The Briton warned: ‘I will turn up wherever Bowe fights.
I'll be at ringside, I'll embarrass him into fighting me.
My mission is not over until I'm undisputed champion.’
Bayfield injury blow
ENGLAND and Northampton lock Martin Bayfield has a shoulder injury and misses the Midlands' Divisional Championship decider against South West on Saturday.
Premier II veto
PROPOSALS to form a Premier League Second Division were unanimously thrown out by England's top clubs at a meeting in London yesterday.
Rovers return
HULL KR players who went on strike last week have settled the dispute.
Captain Wayne Parker said: ‘There was a misunderstanding over bonus and incentive payments.’
GP scrapped
THE International Motorcycling Federation has scrapped next year's French Grand Prix because of the country's tough new laws on tobacco advertising.
Suspect deal sparks fight for survival
Roy Collins
SILVERSTONE, home to RAF bombers during World War Two, is facing its greatest battle for survival as a Formula One Grand Prix circuit.
The circuit's owners, the exclusive British Racing Drivers' Club, whose members include Nigel Mansell, Stirling Moss, James Hunt and Jackie Stewart, admit that they need to spend £15-20 million on the track if it is to continue as home of the British Grand Prix.
They also admit that without the Grand Prix, it would be ‘relegated to the ranks of secondary, unfunded circuits’.
But a bungled, unlawful business deal has so far cost them £5.3m and led to the sacking of all the BRDC's 12 directors.
Members have also rejected a £6.7m rescue plan.
Silverstone's demise would be mourned by everyone in Formula One, since it offers a unique challenge as the fastest track in the world, with drivers lapping at over 150 miles per hour.
But now Silverstone, which underwent millions of pounds of improvements four years ago, installing new pits, new bridges and two new corners, faces its biggest crisis.
Tom Walkinshaw, chairman of the BRDC and their trading subsidiary Silverstone Circuits Ltd before the deal was made, has since been sacked and has resigned his membership of the Drivers' Club.
This could seal Silverstone's fate since Walkinshaw is a close confidant of Bernie Ecclestone, the man who runs Formula One.
Walkinshaw is now believed to be helping Donington Park prepare for next year's European Grand Prix.
If that's the big success that everyone predicts, Donington could keep the European Grand Prix and emerge as a rival to Silverstone when the latter's contract for the British Grand Prix runs out in l996.
Silverstone has become synonymous with the British Grand Prix, following Mansell's three wins there.
And Mansell (pictured celebrating this year's success) has provided it with its most emotional moments.
It has also been the scene of other great British triumphs.
Jim Clark, Stewart, Hunt and John Watson all pulled off home wins there, inspired by the unique atmosphere at the Northamptonshire track.
In recent Grand Prix events, up to 200,000 people have slept in tents and trailers in the centre of the track.
Romantic
Silverstone calls itself the home of British motor racing and it could equally call itself the home of Formula One since the first race of the first world championship was held there in l950.
It's bends and curves carry names that are the most romantic in Grand Prix racing.
Becketts Corner, named after Thomas a Beckett and Stowe Corner, where Mansell kissed the ground after his l987 win, named after Stowe School.
And Hangar Straight, where cars reach a terrifying l95 miles an hour, is a permanent reminder of the circuit's former role as a military airfield.
But Silverstone's position as one of the world's premier circuits could be on the last lap…
Diary of the Deal
Roy Collins
APRIL 9: Silverstone Circuits Ltd (SCL) secretly enter a deal with TWR Group to buy a small retail garage business called M H One Ltd, which had lost £0.8m in 1991.
The new company is to be called Silverstone Motor Group.
SCL puts in £5.3m, made up of cash, £1.8m raised from investments and £3m from a mortgage on the Silverstone circuit and other property.
TWR put in no cash but hand over eight garage franchises to the new company.
The plan is for SMG to be floated publicly within five years to raise £20m needed for improvements necessary to keep Silverstone as a Formula One Grand Prix track.
APRIL 24: Members of the British Racing Drivers' Club (BRDC), the parent company of SCL, are told about the deal for the first time at their AGM.
Members are so angry they throw out chairman Tom Walkinshaw.
Ken Tyrell, head of Tyrell Racing Organisation, forms a Members' Action Group and calls a June EGM.
JUNE 9: Two months AFTER the deal has been completed, BRDC's financial advisers, Rawlinson and Hunter, report they consider it a ‘high risk’ investment.
JUNE 30: At the EGM, the BRDC members vote down a resolution by directors to ratify the deal and vote for a special resolution to have it unwound.
JULY 23: Leading QC Daniel Serota reports that because of Tom Walkinshaw's multiple involvement in the companies involved, it is ‘unlawful’.
It is, in fact a form of business incest and contrary to the provisions of Section 320 of the 1985 Companies Act.
But he warned that, though the deal was unlawful, it would be impossible to reverse.
OCTOBER 1: At a second EGM of the BRDC, the directors announce they've negotiated a £6.7m buyout of the deal with Wisanbell Ltd.
This would have given the BRDC a £1.4m profit on their orginal investment and allowed them to retain the right to five per cent of any future public flotation.
Tom Walkinshaw offers his personal guarantee for any shortfall, conditional upon him being released from any liabilities or claims under the Companies Act.
The members turn down the deal and vote out all 12 directors.
A new board is voted in on the promise that they'll get a better deal.
DECEMBER: Tom Walkinshaw says there is no chance of the BRDC getting any money back and that the SMG ‘is going along nicely.’
Ken Tyrell talks of the new board taking legal action against Walkinshaw for the unlawful deal.
But Walkinshaw could counter-sue for breach of contract.
Profits from the British Grand Prix have virtually been used up to redeem the mortgage on Silverstone, but there is still no sign of a new deal.
Setting off on a crash course
Roy Collins
TOM WALKINSHAW set Silverstone on the starting grid towards potential disaster with a chance remark to fellow directors of the British Racing Drivers' Club.
Walkinshaw happened to mention that his motor group TWR Ltd were working on a deal with a retail garage business to form a company which would be floated off within five years.
The BRDC directors, urgently seeking to fund improvements at Silverstone, asked to look at the deal and went ahead without consulting their members.
They were advised that this wasn't necessary, but a leading QC has since ruled this ‘unlawful’ because Walkinshaw, at the time, was chairman of both the BRDC and their trading subsidiary Silverstone Circuits Ltd and chairman and major shareholder of TWR.
He says: ‘SCL asked to look at the deal I was putting together and straight away they said the biggest problem is conflict of interests.
So I said they could look at it as long as they made up their own minds and I wasn't involved.
‘They decided they wanted to be involved and how much they wanted to pay for it.
They used independent financial and legal advisers.’
Walkinshaw has now washed his hands of the BRDC, saying: ‘You should speak to them.
I don't really want to say anything else, except that SMG is now operating quite nicely.’
Ken Tyrell, head of the Tyrell Racing Organisation and leader of a members' action group opposed to the deal, says: ‘I'm not involved in this business anymore, but I'm sure the new board will sort it out.
‘Obviously they're looking at every aspect and it may include action against Tom Walkinshaw for putting together a deal that has been ruled unlawful.’
Peter Jopp, a former director kicked off the BRDC board at an extraordinary general meeting on October 1, says: ‘What has happened is very sad for Silverstone and the BRDC.
‘Awarding the European Grand Prix to Donington is also a shot across our bows.
It's a warning that we don't have a divine right to the British Grand Prix, though I've got to be confident about Silverstone.’
In fact, Silverstone had sunk to ninth or tenth in the world league table, which is why improvements are necessary.
John Watson, British Grand Prix winner at Silverstone in 1981, says: ‘I'm sure the contract we have until 1996 will be honoured.
What happens after that I don't know.’
Brawl boys to play on
THE Anglo-Italian Cup degenerated into open warfare with another six players sent off in yesterday's eight games — taking the total of dismissals to 18 in the competition's 32 games to date.
But Bristol City chairman Leslie Kew, also chairman of the strife-torn Anglo-Italian Cup said last night that he expected the competition to be staged again next year despite the appalling disciplinary record in this season's tournament.
The tournament has been dubbed the Aggro Cup.
A mass brawl on the St James's Park pitch highlighted Newcastle's clash against Ascoli last month and many of the matches have been marred by spitting, punch-ups and tackles from behind.
‘Perhaps the answer might be to appoint referees from neutral countries to officiate in future competitions,’ said Kew.
In yesterday's games there were double sendings-off at Tranmere, where Aldo Monza of Cosenza and Neil McNab were shown the red card after an 80th minute bust-up, and West Ham, who had Matthew Rush dismissed along with Pisa's Giovanni Fasce after a flare-up early in the second half.
Ascoli's Carlo Pascucci at Portsmouth and Birmingham's John Gayle in the game at Lucchese completed the roll of dishonour.
In between the nastiness Derby County and Brentford both chalked up victories and will now face each other in the semi-final.
Paul Kitson gave the Rams a dream start with his 13th goal of the season after just three minutes at Reggiana and further strikes from Mark Pembridge and Marco Gabbiadini completed a comfortable 3-0 win.
Brentford beat Bari 2-1 at Griffin Park with goals from Kevin Godfrey and Lee Luscombe.
Bernardino Cappocchiano grabbed an injury-time consolation effort for the Italians.
It was Brentford's sixth win in the competition — and their tenth victory in their last 12 games.
Nicol blunder stuns Liverpool
Mike Walters
Crystal Palace 2 Liverpool 1 (After extra time)
STEVE NICOL'S extra-time blunder sent Liverpool spinning out of the Coca-Cola Cup as Crystal Palace's patchwork heroes claimed a famous victory at Selhurst Park last night.
The home crowd rose to acclaim Steve Coppell's battlers as Palace, deprived of 13 injured or Cup-tied players, found the energy to complete an unexpected London double over Merseyside.
Grant Watts, an 18-year-old striker making his full debut, and defensive rock Andy Thorn scored the goals that gave Coppell thrilling respite from his taxing season in relegation territory.
Graeme Souness had ensured this fourth round replay would not be lacking in spice by making disparaging remarks about Palace's muscular approach in the 1-1 draw at Anfield two weeks ago.
Brutality
The early tackles inclined towards brutality, however, were largely perpetrated by Liverpool, with Paul Stewart announcing his return to the side with a crunching tackle on Watts.
But after 14 minutes, the youngster was in clover and Palace were in front.
Simon Rodger's near-post corner was flicked on by Thorn, and Watts's header beat Mike Marsh on the line.
Nicol led a token Liverpool protest that it had not crossed the line, but 12 minutes later Palace's fans had far greater cause to howl their disapproval.
As Jamie Redknapp's free-kick sailed over, linesman Brian Firmin's flag shot up and referee Peter Foakes pointed to the spot.
Presumably, the penalty was for a push on Ian Rush, although Liverpool looked as surprised as anyone.
But Marsh needed no second invitation and sent keeper Nigel Martyn the wrong way to level the score.
Liverpool should have used their good fortune to forge an impregnable half-time lead, but Mark Walters volleyed one glorious chance against the bar and saw another saved smartly by Martyn.
Watts continued to plough a lonely furrow up front for Palace and And the YTS striker was nearly rewarded for all his selfless running with a second goal three minutes after the break.
Thorn's flick-on from another Rodger corner caused panic, in the visitors' ranks, but this time Watts's header was deflected onto the crossbar and scrambled away by Rob Jones.
The ill-feeling from the battle of Anfield always remained close to the surface and Stewart was booked for an uncompromising tackle on Eric Young, with Palace's Richard Shaw receiving a caution for similar treatment of Walters.
Nicol, who escaped with a close call when he sliced an attempted clearance close to his own goal in normal time, suffered a costly relapse 10 minutes into the extra period.
Keeper Mike Hooper had come to meet John Humphrey's harmless through ball, but Nicol inadvertantly lifted it beyond him and Thorn followed up to head into the unguarded net.
Yeovil are Gunning for glory
Hereford 1, Yeovil 2
YEOVIL grabbed a record 16th victory against League opposition in the FA Cup and earned a fairytale third-round clash with Arsenal.
Substitute Neil Coates struck the 89th-minute winner for the Vauxhall Conference side in last night's thrilling replay.
Yeovil player-manager Steve Rutter said: ‘This is a night I'll never forget.
The crowd were fabulous and you could not fault any of the players.
‘I'm not sure I really want to watch Arsenal, but they are not playing that well and it's going to be a phenomenal game.’
Yeovil took a deserved 18th-minute lead through striker Paul Sanderson.
Hereford were further rocked in the 52nd minute when player-coach Greg Downs was sent off for a professional foul on striker Mickey Spencer.
Hereford keeper Alan Judge saved a 70th-minute penalty from Paul Batty, and Owen Pickard snatched a late equaliser before Coates's winner.
The debt-ridden non-Leaguers can now look forward to a capacity 9,000 crowd for the visit of Arsenal.
Handy Andy swings it for Blues
Adrian Holloway
: Chelsea 1, Everton 0
ANDY TOWNSEND was the proudest man in west London last night after leading 10-man Chelsea to victory at Stamford Bridge.
Skipper Townsend's 19th-minute strike proved decisive in an acrimonious cup-tie in which four players were booked and Chelsea's Gareth Hall was sent off.
The right-back was shown the red card in the 63rd minute after a dreadful, two-footed tackle on young Everton striker Billy Kenny.
As Hall departed for the dressing room, incensed Everton boss Howard Kendall gave him a tongue-lashing from the dugout.
Hall made a brief reply and a policeman had to step in to ensure the exchange remained purely verbal.
But nothing could take the gloss off Townsend's night of glory.
He has been on the losing side in Cup semi-finals on five occasions, and if he finally makes it to Wembley this year he may look back on this bitter struggle as the crucial victory along the way.
But his joy was almost stolen in the final minute when Everton's Paul Rideout hit a post.
A year ago, Everton's only hope of salvaging anything from a miserable season evaporated when they lost at Stamford Bridge in an FA Cup tie.
Their desperate League form this season has consigned them to a similar predicament, while Chelsea are on the crest of a wave.
Ian Porterfield's young side immediately showed to the challenge from the start, showing the form that has taken them to fourth in the Premier League after just one defeat in their previous 11 games.
Townsend almost gave his side the lead after just five minutes.
He collected the ball from Hall 40 yards out and jinked past two defenders before spearing his shot just wide with keeper Neville Southall beaten.
Chelsea continued to dominate with Graham Stuart and Dennis Wise running dangerously at the visitors' defence.
Tension
And it was Wise who next went close with a free kick from near the corner spot which caught the wind and eluded Southall before bouncing to safety.
But Townsend gave his side a deserved lead in the 19th minute The Republic of Ireland midfielder was perfectly positioned in the nineteenth minute when Graeme Le Saux touched back a crossfield ball from Fleck for his skipper to drive home a low shot.
Chelsea might have increased their lead 15 minutes later, but Wise elected to shoot across the face of goal rather than pull the ball back to the well-positioned Fleck.
Everton produced their only chance of the half 10 minutes before the break when Peter Beardsley hit a ferocious drove into keeper Kevin Hitchcock's arms from 20 yards.
After the interval, Everton began to match Chelsea in midfield.
As the tension mounted, Mal Donaghy and Le Saux were booked for rash challenges.
Le Saux then threatened the visitors' goal with a piercing run which Alan Harper ended with a cynical body check.
Harper was booked and after David Lee drove the resultant free-kick into the box, Chelsea made vigorous claims for a penalty as Fleck fell under Martin Keown's challenge.
Referee Jim Borrett consulted his linesman before rejecting their appeals.
Reduced to 10 men by Hall's dismissal, Chelsea played keep-ball whenever possible, while Everton brought on Ian Jenkins.
to try and capitalise.
Barry Horne became the fourth player to be booked for a foul on Le Saux.
Crumplin to the rescue
Woking 1, Brighton 2
SUBSTITUTE John Crumplin broke non-League Woking's hearts to snatch Brighton a money-spinning FA Cup third round clash with Portsmouth.
Crumplin scored the winner with a spectacular diving header six minutes from time after good work from Clive Walker and Gary Chivers.
Having escaped a winding-up order in the High Court earlier in the day, Brighton manager Barry Lloyd said: ‘It's just the lift we needed.
We should have a full house for Portsmouth which will come in more than handy.’
Woking boss Geoff Chapple said: ‘The lads did me proud and it would have been nice to have just one more glory run in the Cup.’
Trevor Senior had given the Conference side the perfect start, firing them ahead after seven minutes.
But Woking failed to maintain their momentum and Robert Codner drove home a deserved equaliser before half-time.
Woking keeper Laurence Batty played on after a clash of heads with striker Kurt Nogan, but was sent for hospital tests after the game.
Dutch danger
Rob Shepherd
Turkey 1, Holland 3
HOLLAND last night re-emerged as a serious threat to England's World Cup hopes.
Although they struggled for long periods against the same Turkey side England beat 4-0 last month, Graham Taylor — watching from the stands — said: ‘Of the three results possible, this was the worst one.
‘It puts Holland right back in it, and we know they are well capable of stringing a run together.’
Striker Peter van Vossen emphasised Holland's strength in depth.
Playing only his third international in the absence of Marco van Basten, Vossen scored twice, with Ruud Gullit claiming Holland's other goal on his international return.
London pride
Mike Walters
STEVE COPPELL last night hailed his walking-wounded heroes as Crystal Palace unearthed a new teenage starlet in their Coca-Cola Cup triumph over Liverpool.
He praised the performance of 18-year-old Grant Watts, scorer of Palace's first goal in a shock 2-1 win, and said: ‘It was a night to enjoy after all the trouble we've been having this season.
‘Watts is really only sixth in the pecking order up front, but suddenly he found himself playing the biggest game of his life and he did himself proud.’
Truce
Coppell added: ‘We were lightweight and inexperienced.
We press-ganged Simon Rodger into playing, and George Ndah had three stitches in his ankle and shouldn't have been there.
‘But we were well organised and, defensively, each and every player earned his pay this week — even in an age of cut-backs.’
Coppell called a truce in the war of words with his Anfield counterpart Graeme Souness, saying: ‘There was a flurry of words after the last game, but we both have respect for each other.
‘I'm a great admirer of Liverpool and certainly there's no malice lingering from my point of view.’
But Souness, bitterly disappointed his side squandered the lion's share of possession, said: ‘I said some critical things about Palace last time, which I'm prepared to stand by.
‘But they won through in a dour encounter and I wish them well in the next round.
‘You have to turn possession into goals and it's a worry because we've played games this season — and this was another one — where we've dominated and come away with nothing.’
Durie is cleared of cheat slur
Mike Walters
GORDON DURIE was sensationally cleared of feigning injury by a Football Association appeal commission last night, wiping out the stigma of being branded the game's first official ‘cheat’.
Six weeks ago, Tottenham's £2 million striker received a three-match ban after a clash with Coventry defender Andy Pearce at White Hart Lane on August 18.
But after yesterday's two-hour hearing at Lancaster Gate, players' union chief Gordon Taylor hailed the dramatic U-turn as a ‘triumph of justice’.
Tottenham's powerful delegation used video footage — slowed down to 20 frames a second — to prove their Scotland international's innocence.
Durie, visibly drained of emotion, said: ‘I'm very relieved it's all over.
I'd like to thank the club, the PFA, my wife and kid for their help.
I want to go home and just get on with playing football now.’
Spurs chief executive Terry Venables said: ‘I'm thrilled for Gordon because he has been suffering with this ‘cheat’ slur hanging over him.
‘As time has gone on, the whole thing has got him more and more down, so this is a great relief and a huge weight off his shoulders.
I've spoken to Gordon at length about this several times and he has been coping with it — but only with difficulty.’
Durie was booked by Banbury referee Dermot Gallagher for ungentlemanly conduct after collapsing in a heap following an eyeball-to-eyeball confrontation with Pearce, who last night was unavailable for comment.
Tottenham claimed contact was made and physio Dave Butler revealed Durie's nose was bloodied as a result of the clash.
The board of appeal — Norfolk's Ray Kiddell (chairman), Frank Patterson, of Durham, and John Reames (Lincoln)— said: ‘Having accepted the finding of the original Commission that contact may well have occurred between Mr Durie and the opposing player,(it was) concluded that Mr Durie did not feign an injury.’
PFA chief executive Taylor said: ‘We are going down a dangerous road when it is left to referees to decide whether players are injured or not.
‘There is no question of us condemning a referee here.
It is a volatile game in which referees have to make decisions quickly and on the spur on the moment.
‘But if their decisions are misinterpreted it can lead to the kind of dreadful pressures Gordon Durie has been suffering.
‘Gordon is an established professional who has represented his country and played for his clubs with distinction and we took up his case because we felt it was a slur that needed to be removed.’
Venables added: ‘It is unfair that the stigma of being a cheat was attached to Gordon and to our club in the first place, especially when you consider some of the play-acting that goes on abroad.’
Wright to face charge
Mike Walters
IAN WRIGHT was last night charged with misconduct by the Football Association and ordered to appear before a disciplinary commission in the New Year.
Arsenal's £2.5 million striker is in the dock for an off-the-ball punch on Tottenham's David Howells in last Saturday's stormy North London derby.
In the end, FA disciplinary chiefs did not wait for Dollis Hill referee Alf Buksh's match report to materialise before charging Wright.
They decided that video evidence — millions of viewers saw the offending blow on BBC's Match of the Day — was sufficiently incriminating to bring 29-year-old Wright to book.
He has 14 days to appeal but has already been told he must appear before the FA Commission.
‘In most cases a player can choose whether he wants a personal hearing but we felt Ian Wright should watch the film with the Commission,’ said an FA spokesman.
The timing of the hearing could be crucial to Wright's hopes of breaking his international duck in England's next World Cup qualifier, against San Marino at Wembley, on February 17.
He is almost certainly facing a suspension, having been fined Pounds 1,500 for spitting back at Oldham fans last season.
Any ban imposed is likely to be in line with the three games Liverpool's Dean Saunders spent in cold storage for a similar incident involving Bristol Rovers's Ian Holloway during an FA Cup tie last season.
The more extreme alternative facing the panel is to match, or beat, the nine-game ban and £3,000 fine given to another Arsenal player, Paul Davis, in 1988.
Tolerated
England assistant manager Lawrie McMenemy has already warned Wright that ill-discipline will not be tolerated in Graham Taylor's regime.
Meanwhile, Fulham goalkeeper Alan Gough has been charged with technical assault on a referee and banned from football until an FA disciplinary hearing next year.
The FA acted following Gough's dismissal in an Autoglass Trophy tie at Gillingham nine days ago when he appeared to grab Southend referee David Axcell.
10-man Chelsea roll on
Adrian Holloway
EVERTON boss Howard Kendall had an angry touchline row with Gareth Hall after the defender was sent off last night in Chelsea's bitter Coca-Cola Cup victory at Stamford Bridge.
Hall was dismissed in the 63rd minute for a foul on Billy Kenny and Kendall sarcastically applauded as Hall trudged off.
The pair exchanged words before a policeman intervened.
Kendall was still seething afterwards, complaining: ‘If Vinnie's going to start another video, there's one for it.
You've got to be upset about it.
When you see Chelsea fans applaud something like that it makes you wonder.
The lad Kenny's OK but I don't know how.’
Skipper Andy Townsend's 19th-minute goal gave Chelsea their ninth win in 12 games — and a quarter-final tie at Crystal Palace.
Manager Ian Porterfield praised Townsend's performance in a game that also saw four bookings.
Porterfield said: ‘Andy is a different class.
When we were under the cosh with 10 men he really buckled under.
‘After Hall was ordered off you really saw our resilience and will to succeed.’
King reigns again
John Hiscock in Los Angeles
HIS charge, Mike Tyson, may be in jail, his seat empty at recent world title fights but the irrepressible, if far from universally popular, Don King is re-emerging.
The WBC decision to split ranks from the unified world heavyweight scene has made his latest hope, Tony Tucker, certain of an early shot at new champion Lennox Lewis's title.
And it could be just in time.
Remember those heady days not so long ago when 800 journalists packed into the ballroom at the Mirage Hotel in Las Vegas to see King and Tyson before the disgraced champion beat up Razor Ruddock for the second time?
Crumbling
Then, King fought his way through a mob of well-wishers eager to shake his hand or receive a nod of acknowledgement.
He and Tyson were the undisputed stars of the celebrity-filled arena.
Now, shut out of the heavyweight division since Tyson's fall from grace, mired in lawsuits and under investigation by several state boxing commissions, the taxman and the FBI, Don King has had to lay off staff and is struggling to keep his empire from crumbling.
But who would deliver King the full count?
Even his old rival, Bob Arum, is not willing to discount him just yet.
‘A cat has nine lives.
Don King has 50,’ he said.
‘So I wouldn't count him out.
If anybody can make a comeback, he will — and I'm not one of his great admirers.’
King was back with his latest promotion this week…and had seen better audiences.
Three dozen assorted fight fans and hangers-on and a dozen Mexican sportswriters and cameramen milled around listlessly as the self-proclaimed King of Boxing took the stage to deliver another high decibel paean of praise to hype his latest promotion.
There was the usual non-stop tirade as he praised America, himself and his latest promotion, in this case a fight card at the Mirage — not in the 17,000-seat outdoor stadium where Tyson ruled but in the 4,000-seat ballroom, with tickets selling for $25 instead of $1,000.
But if King is discouraged by the change in his fortunes he doesn't show it.
When introduced by the Mirage Hotel's Bob Halloran at a recent press conference as ‘America's greatest promoter’, King instantly corrected him.
‘The WORLD'S greatest promoter, if you don't mind,’ he boomed.
As he always has done, King produced the big names.
The card featured three world champions in Julio Cesar Chavez, Julian Jackson and Terry Norris, as well as former champions Greg Haugen and Tucker.
But instead of fighting each other, the big names were matched against nobodies in what was probably the most lopsided fight card in boxing history.
Tucker stopped light-heavyweight Frankie Swindell in the sixth round — and that was one of the best fights.
Chavez (83-0, with 71 knockouts) stopped Marty Jakubowski, who had scored only eight knockouts in his 37 fights, in the sixth round.
Terry Norris, the WBC superweight champion, scored an easy third-round stoppage of ‘Irish’ Pat Lawlor — described by one sportswriter as ‘pound for pound, one of worst fighters in the world’.
Haugen (31-4) outpointed little-known Armando Campas (16-5).
Jackson, the WBC middleweight champion with a 45-1 record and 42 knockouts, KO'd club fighter Eddie Hall (21-9), who had won only one of his last five fights.
King described it as ‘a phenomenal card’ but really it was an opportunity to promote a war of words between two of the fighters, Chavez and Norris, to build up anticipation and demand for them to meet in the ring.
Money
It also gave King an audience to verbally push his next card — Chavez against Haugen and Norris against Maurice Blocker on February 20 in the 102,000-capacity Azteca Stadium in Mexico City —‘the biggest live boxing gate in the history of mankind’, as King grandiosely puts it.
Until Tyson gets out of jail, which King is convinced will be within a few months, the promoter is shrewdly banking his hopes for big money on Chavez, the unbeaten WBC super-lightweight champion who is often referred to as the best pound-for-pound fighter in the world.
At press conferences and public appearances the good-natured Chavez sits on King's right in what was the Tyson seat and the promoter poses for photographs with his arm flung around the Mexican's shoulders.
With Tyson gone and Tucker's prominence chequered in the continuing row over who Lewis should fight first, King has no charismatic heavyweight to bring in big money so sees Chavez as his passport into Mexico, where the fighter is viewed almost as a God and where vast live gates and previously untapped pay-per-view television income looms large.
To write him off, said King, was a big mistake.
‘I've heard that I'm the most unsavoury, unconscionable character that ever existed but people all want to be associated with me and sit with me,’ he said.
Lennox confident of WBC blessing
Frank Ward
LENNOX LEWIS will make a voluntary title defence before taking on top contender Tony Tucker.
That is if the WBC uphold a formal application from his manager Frank Maloney.
After long talks with WBC president Jose Sulaiman, Maloney is confident that approval will be given for Lewis to fight the Hammersmith-born Jamaican Alex Stewart in the first defence of his title.
Maloney has, on the insistance of Sulaiman, made a request in writing.
‘Sulaiman said that I should write to the WBC.
The request will go before their committee and I think we'll get the Stewart fight first,’ Maloney said.
‘We had a very friendly conversation and he is 100 per cent behind Lennox Lewis and is happy to see the title in the hands of a man with dignity.
‘Sulaiman put his case as to why we should fight Tucker first, and I put mine to him about a voluntary defence, and he replied that if that was Lennox's wish, the WBC would do all in their power to grant it.’
But news filtered back yesterday that the WBC were adamant about Tucker, the former IBF champion, being Lewis's first opponent in a mandatory defence.
Meanwhile, Seth Abraham, boss of big fight pay-masters Home Box Office, is due to fly into London to discuss terms for another contract with Lewis's team, and a clash with Stewart in America could be the first of the new deal.
Angol drug probe
DEREK ANGOL must appear before the British Board of Control on January 13 after a positive drugs test.
The Commonwealth Cruiserweight champion tested positive after losing his European title clash against Akim Tafer in France last October.
To combat chest congestion, Angol took an over-the-counter medication which contained a substance on the Olympic banned list.
The risk business
David Tossell
MARIO JOHNSON had just seen his friend and New York Jets team-mate Denis Byrd carried from the field, his neck broken, his young body paralysed.
‘We risk our lives every time we go out there,’ said Johnson quietly.
‘We're like stunt people, we do crazy things.
‘People say American football players get paid too much money.
But it's not too much if you lose your legs, your arms, your touch.
There's no sport like this.’
Just as viewers of cop programmes become immune to scenes of violence, NFL fans have grown used to the procession of injured players leaving games.
But Byrd's fate, a year after Detroit Lions lineman Mike Utley was paralysed by a neck injury, has brought into sharp focus the perilous nature of a sport based upon fierce physical contact between men — many of them giants — whose bodies were never intended to absorb and administer such punishment.
Unfit
According to a survey in Sports Illustrated, almost 500 players had to miss games through injury during the first 11 weeks of this season, an average of around 17 per team.
Based on average NFL salaries, that means teams paid out almost $84 million in wages during that time to players unfit to take the field.
Falcons trainer Billy Brooks admits: ‘In this business you get a bit numb to all the injuries.
Three weeks into the season, these guys are all beat up.
You just shake your head and do the best you can for them.’
But players' agent Leigh Steinberg counters: ‘You wouldn't be numb to it if you got the tearful phone calls I get on Sunday nights and Monday mornings.
It's become a major part of my job.
I should have gone to medical school.’
As Byrd begins the long rehabilitation process which doctors hope will enable him to regain some movement, former team-mate Al Toon, one of the game's top wide receivers, sits in retirement after being unable to shake off the effects of the ninth concussion in his eight-year career.
Toon, 29, suffers from headaches, memory lapse and uneven balance.
‘It seemed to take less of a hit to give me a concussion and it's taking me longer to recover,’ he says.
‘I know I'll get better, but what happens after that?’
It is cases like Byrd, Utley and Toon which are the chief cause for concern.
Of this season's injuries, more than one in 10 have been to the life and movement threatening areas of head, neck and back.
Many feel it is time to improve or change coaching methods.
Gridiron players are taught to tackle head first, driving their facemask into the opponent's chest.
The key to survival is to keep the head up.
But Houston Oilers quarterback Warren Moon explains: ‘Creating turnovers has become so important that players are being coached to strike with the helmet first in the hope it will jar the ball loose.
Sometimes the helmet strikes the body, not the ball.’
Dr Joseph Torg, professor of orthopaedic surgery at the University of Pennsylvania, adds: ‘If you take the head out of the game, that removes the cervical spine from the game.
‘The spine must be straight.
If the head stops and the body is still moving, the spine cannot dissipate the force.’
The most precious of NFL species is, of course, the superstar quarterback.
This weekend John Elway returns for the Denver Broncos after a three-week shoulder injury; the Houston Oilers fight for a play-off place without Warren Moon and his broken arm; and Joe Montana is due back in San Francisco 49ers' uniform after two years of elbow trouble.
One way for the NFL to protect their most marketable assets is greater punishment for late hits on the quarterback.
With half the NFL games played on artificial turf it is the knee which is the most frequently injured part of the body, as our graphic shows.
Torn
While grass allows the foot to swivel when a player changes direction, feet often stick to plastic.
Therefore, when the body turns, the foot remains planted and the knee ligaments are torn.
In the must-win, must-make-money world of the NFL, it is unlikely that player safety is ever going to be the top priority.
Especially when the players themselves happily accept the high stakes for which they play, gambling with their bodies.
As Mario Johnson says: ‘I like to play this game.
It excites me.
I risk my life every day.
That's what I do.’
SATURDAY: Kansas City at NY Giants; Tampa Bay at San Francisco.
SUNDAY: Buffalo at New Orleans; Chicago at Detroit; Houston at Cleveland; LA Rams at Green Bay; Minnesota at Pittsburgh; New England at Cincinnati; Phoenix at Indianapolis; San Diego at LA Raiders; Seattle at Denver; Washington at Philadelphia.
MONDAY: Dallas at Atlanta.
Pot pays again
POT LUCK continues to pay dividends.
Followers of our Placepot feature were in the money yet again yesterday with a £98 payout to an £8 stake at Towcester.
Racing Editor Henry Rix struck with his nap Johnston's Express (4-1).
Get Moving
Henry Rix
LONDON Marathon founder Chris Brasher knows an athlete when he sees one and the former Great Britain international may have found a medal winner in the shape of Moving Out, who looks something to bet on at Uttoxeter this afternoon.
A useful sort on the level for Mark Prescott, Moving Out is with the right trainer — Henrietta Knight seems to have a talent for turning Flat horses into capable jumpers.
The colt races in the colours of Chris's wife Shirley, and they're due a bit of luck — a horse they bought over from Ireland for Henrietta Knight to train died of colic not long ago.
Moving Out certainly shaped as though he had a future at the winter game on his reappearance in a very hot race over two miles at Haydock earlier in the month.
He is sure to outspeed his rivals in the St Modwen Novices' Hurdle (12.30) on ideal ground and over a trip that is certain to suit.
The ‘good thing’ of the day is Fly For Gold in the Levy Board Novices' Handicap Hurdle (2.30) at Uttoxeter.
She had no chance in competitive company at Lingfield last Saturday, but is well in for her handicap debut judged on her effortless victory in a seller at Nottingham last month.
With Martin Pipe's Flying Speed, the warm favourite, unlikely to appreciate the soft ground, it is worth taking a chance with Qualitair Memory in the G Evans Ltd Claiming Hurdle (1.30).
She absolutely bolted up by 20 lengths at Warwick recently.
Tragedy for Jonjo
JONJO O'Neill's stable star Danny Connors had to be put down after breaking a leg at Kelso yesterday.
Owned by legendary Irish punter J P McManus, Danny Connors landed a gamble in the valuable Coral Golden Hurdle at last year's Cheltenham Festival.
O'Neill said: ‘It's bloody awful for everyone associated with the horse and it hasn't really sunk in yet.
‘He was the best horse I've trained and was only just getting going again after being off the track for nearly a year.’
Clown does trick again
COURSE specialist Bit Of A Clown recorded his fifth victory at Towcester yesterday in the Chris Thornton Memorial Handicap Chase.
But the 2-1 favourite was under pressure almost from the outset and betting slips were already being crumpled before the second circuit.
Then he started to slog his way through the field and, to the delight of the locals, collared Direct close home.
Struggling to keep one jump ahead
Michael Wale
SHOWJUMPING makes its annual pre-Christmas outing to London's Olympia this week.
Outwardly it's as wealthy as ever, but behind the scenes the reality for some can be very different.
Eighteen-year-old Linda Charley is a prime example.
Today she takes part in the only amateur contest of the week, The Young Showjumpers Award.
Last night she and her mother bedded down on a mattress in the back of their secondhand horse-box eating food heated up on a mobile stove because they refused to pay the London prices of the arena's eating places.
Not for them the £120,000 customised horse-boxes around them with built-in kitchens, television and sleeping accommodation.
To qualify to jump in the competition that has in the past produced young internationals like Annette Lewis, Marie Edgar and Paul Sutton, she has had to tour all over England.
Smart
The leading showjumpers can earn over £100,000 a year, but it's that red jacket with the Union Jack on it that Linda has her eyes on.
But the cost could yet defeat her.
She'll look as smart as the rest when she enters the ring on Paddock Sportsline just before noon today in front of an almost empty arena.
Her velvet helmet cost £60.
The navy blue jacket £80.
The white shirt beneath it £20.
The riding breeches £30 and the new pair of riding boots £225.
As for the horse: his bridle cost £100, the saddle nearly Pounds 500 and a best rug for his big day out £70.
The horse-box the Charley mother and daughter slept in cost £4,500 secondhand and is L-registered.
It holds up to three horses and will be driven to and from London by Mrs Charley from their home just outside Coventry.
Nurturing her daughter's undoubted talent has cost Mrs Charley dearly.
Widowed four years ago, she lives off two pensions left by her late husband.
This week she spent looking after Paddock Sportsline and their other emergent horses so that Linda could earn money working as a stable girl in Ted Edgar's stables.
Tomorrow morning, a bit like Cinderella, Linda will have left the glamour of Olympia and be mucking out again at 7.30am for Edgar.
Every penny she earns in various part-time jobs goes towards her ambition to become a professional showjumper.
So what chance realistically does Linda have of succeeding and giving up all those part-time jobs?
She says: ‘A little bit of luck is needed.
Well, to be honest, a bit of a miracle.’
But as Mrs Charley says: ‘When you've given up holidays and worked on a budget as tight as ours then you have to believe in miracles.’
Squash threat
ENGLAND'S squash rebels will play in next month's National Championship in Manchester if the governing body accept a compromise.
The players are demanding an increase in prize money and an upgrading in status of the event.
But the Squash Rackets Association said stay-away players would jeopardise their rankings and be ineligible for England selection.
Now the eight rebels, including defending champion Peter Marshall, will play if the threat is lifted on those who refuse to participate.
But top 10 player Chris Walker warns: ‘If they turn us down, the chances are several more England players could join the boycott.’
Cash is a casualty
FORMER Wimbledon champion Pat Cash suffered a reoccurrence of a knee injury and was forced to withdraw from his round-robin match against fellow Australian Wally Limberger at the Colonial Mutual Classic tournament in Melbourne yesterday.
Limberger had taken the first set 6-4 when Cash, a candidate for Australia's first-round Davis Cup match against the United States in late March, decided the tendinitis in his knee was too painful to continue.
Duff given a warning
MICKEY DUFF has been severely reprimanded and warned about his future conduct by the British Boxing Board of Control's disciplinary committee after an incident with Simon Block, Board assistant secretary.
Home and away
RUGBY LEAGUE'S Regal Trophy semi-finals on January 2 and 9 will not be staged at neutral venues this season.
The first team out of the hat in Monday's draw will get home advantage.
In charge
LIVERPOOL'S David Matthews has replaced Fred Howard on England's three-man referees' panel for the Five Nations' Championship.
He joins Ed Morrison and Tony Spreadbury.
Wright honoured
WOLVES are inviting Hungarian side Honved to celebrate the opening of the new Billy Wright stand, named after the former Wolves and England captain, at Molineux next December.
Lifer Neale
FORMER Worcestershire captain Phil Neale is set to become only the fifth honorary life member of the club at the county's annual meeting in February.
Super Simmons
PHIL SIMMONS took four wickets for just three runs against Pakistan yesterday to record the most economical spell in one-day international cricket history.
The West Indies' medium-pacer helped send Pakistan crashing to 81 all out, giving the West Indies victory by 133 runs in their World Series Cup day-night match in Sydney.
The previous record was held by Indian spinner Bishan Bedi.
At one stage, Simmons had figures of three for nought and he conceded only two scoring shots in 60 deliveries.
Trinidadian Simmons troubled the top-order from the outset, bowling Asif Mujtaba, having Aamir Sohail caught for six and Salim Malik caught for a duck.
His fourth wicket was captain Javed Miandad, caught behind by Junior Murray for two.
‘Javed's wicket was the most delightful of all of them,’ said Simmons.
The West Indies made 214-9 from their 50 overs, opener Desmond Haynes top-scoring with 96.
Hick mind games
Giles Smith
TROUBLED Graeme Hick has turned to a shrink to help break his Test hoodoo in India this winter.
Without naming his new guru, the Zimbabwe-born batsman — who has failed to live up to the blaze of publicity which greeted his arrival on the Test scene in 1991 — revealed that his poor form in five-day games against Pakistan last summer led him to seek psychiatric advice.
‘This guy sort of tapped into my mind,’ said the Worcestershire star, who averages almost 60 in county cricket, but just 18 in Tests and 39 in one-day internationals.
‘He told me my attitude wasn't right.
He instilled a new confidence into me.’
Hick, speaking as the England squad completed its pre-Indian tour preparations at Lilleshall yesterday, added: ‘I wanted to know why my form in the one-day internationals was good, while I couldn't do it in the Tests.
‘I came to the conclusion it was a matter of attitude.
In the Tests I was just looking to survive and build an innings, and it didn't matter how long it took.
But it wasn't working.
‘In the one-day game you have to be positive and go for it from the word go.
This guy persuaded me I had to adopt that attitude in the Tests as well.
Advice
‘That is what I intend doing in India, and I think it can work.’
During his up and down summer, Hick received plenty of advice from well-wishers, but he admits: ‘The difficult bit was to decide which bits of advice were going to help.
‘I think I narrowed it down after a lot of sifting through.
My confidence came back a lot towards the end of the season.
‘One piece of advice was to think back on the big innings I have played and think about the positive parts of those innings — picking out the pieces I really enjoyed.
‘I aim to take the positive approach all the time now.
I hope it works.’
Meanwhile, England off-spinner John Emburey talked of his sympathy for Ian Salisbury, the leg-spinner who missed out on a senior tour place despite taking 85 wickets for Sussex last summer.
Emburey, returning from a two-and-a-half-year South African ban, is bound for the sub-continent while Salisbury joins the A team in Australia.
‘He was very unlucky to be dropped after the Old Trafford Test last year,’ said Emburey.
‘It had been one of the flatest, non-turners of the season.
‘I hadn't realised how talented a player he is.
He is also much younger, 23, than I thought — he seemed to have been around a long time.
‘It's a very good thing he's been involved in the pre-tour training at Lilleshall and is going along for the first three weeks of the Indian tour to bowl in the nets.
‘He'll be a real help to the batsmen, and it will do his confidence a great deal of good.
‘He was unlucky to take 23 wickets in Sussex's last two games of the season after the touring side had already been picked — I guess I was the lucky one to benefit.’
Another reprieved rebel is former skipper Mike Gatting, but the Middlesex man insisted he hasn't thought about taking over the England captaincy when Graham Gooch gives it up.
‘It honestly hasn't crossed my mind, I am just enjoying being back,’ he said.
‘My only aim is to play well enough to stay in the Test team.’
Gatting also maintains that he respects the views of people like Derek Pringle, who have strongly criticised the decision to allow the rebels back early.
He said: ‘Pring is entitled to his opinion, as is everyone else.
I have no less respect for him as a person or a player because of his views.
You can't hold grudges because of people's opinions.’
Clear
Mike Atherton, meanwhile, has been told he will be resuming his opening partnership with Graham Gooch — as long as his form warrants it.
‘They've told me the plan is that I should be opening, all things being equal,’ he explained.
‘I am glad that has been made clear.
‘I don't mind where I go, but I prefer opening, and the main thing is that you know where you are.’
Atherton then had a dig for the Pakistani fast bowlers, who made his life so uncomfortable in the summer.
‘There's only one side in the world who can make the old ball swing, and it isn't the Indians!
At least that shouldn't be a problem.’
Chairman of selectors Ted Dexter was at Lilleshall to run his eye over final preparations and said: ‘We have had one of the most successful years at international level that we have enjoyed in recent times, but the coming tour represents quite a different challenge to the ones our players have had before.’
The tour, which finishes in Sri Lanka, includes four Tests and eight one-day internationals, and Dexter added: ‘Nowadays, each tour seems to be very different.
We have 12 key games and all of them have an equally high priority.
‘Any suggestion that the one-day internationals don't matter as much as the Tests is not right and is certainly at variance with the way the players view it.’
Wonder Wessels
KEPLER WESSELS led from the front again yesterday as South Africa cruised to a 39-run victory over India — their fifth success in the seven-match one-day series.
The South African captain top scored with 78 in the Republic's total of 216-8.
He was well supported by Peter Kirsten (44) and Hansie Cronje, who hit 25 off 29 balls.
Kapil Dev bowled well to finish with figures of 3-23.
India were always struggling after a tight opening blast by Allan Donald and Fanie de Villiers and were bowled out for 177.
Only Mohammad Azhuruddin (41), offered any real resistance before falling to a superb diving catch by de Villiers at square leg.
Mat cures spin fears
Graham Otway
ENGLAND will be setting off to India after Christmas to face the mystical eastern spinners with the help of a magic carpet.
During six weeks of intensive pre-tour training at Lilleshall, Graham Gooch's batsmen have, for the first time, been using a special indoor mat in the nets that has spun like a sub-continental wicket.
And when the team arrives in Delhi at the end of the month, manager Keith Fletcher is confident that his players will now be able to handle tricky leg spinner Anil Kumble and his slow left-arm partner Ravi Shastri.
Fletcher said: ‘In the past it has often been an unfair battle between batsmen and spinners in indoor nets, many surfaces have been straight up and down and the ball hasn't turned.
It has been soul destroying for the bowlers.
But this new mat has given the spinners a lot more encouragement and, over the week, some of the batsmen have improved their technique against spin.’
The mat, bought from a Huddersfield manufacturer by Fletcher, also won praise from Mike Gatting.
He said: ‘It's been great, the ball really did turn and I really had to concentrate on every ball.’
Schofield's happy return
Barry Lucas
GARRY SCHOFIELD, at odds with Leeds over their refusal to let him play in Australia next summer, is back for tonight's Headingley clash with Halifax.
The Great Britain skipper, out for four of the last six games with hamstring trouble, said: ‘I'm glad to be back and hope I can sort things out with the club without too much fuss.’
Full-back Alan Tait will play after taking a knock on the head at Sheffield last Sunday but forwards Steve Molloy (back), Shaun Wane (calf) and Andy Goodway (hand) are out.
In come Mike O'Neill, Mick Worrall and Paul Dixon.
It will be Leeds' first home game since November 1 and only their fifth in the League at Headingley this season.
Pressure
Cast-offs Gary Divorty and John Bentley aim to pile more pressure on under fire Leeds coach Doug Laughton.
Both were shipped out to Halifax in a £100,000 deal in the summer and Divorty vowed: ‘I want to show the directors they were wrong.
‘If we can get on top early on, the supporters will get frustrated and turn on Doug and the players, which will make our job easier.
‘Tonight's game will be extra special for John and myself.
We were both unhappy with the way things went at Leeds at the end.’
Divorty is in the second row in place of injured Australian Mike McLean, with another ex-Leeds man, Gary Lord, at loose forward.
Lions tourist Graeme Hallas is fit after a chest problem.
Meanwhile, Wigan full-back Steve Hampson has put his comeback on hold for at least another week.
Hampson, missing since October with a groin injury, aimed to return for Sunday's Regal Trophy tie at Workington.
And coach John Monie let Joe Lydon undergo a twice-postponed knee operation, which will sideline him for up to three weeks.
Monie said: ‘I thought it was going to be a nice, smooth change-over with Steve ready to take Joe's place.’
But Hampson pulled a calf muscle when he stepped up his training.
Frano Botica will again be the emergency full-back and 18-year-old Jason Robinson is at scrum-half.
Top prop Andy Platt is in the second row and Billy McGinty, who missed last week's match at Halifax with a leg injury, is on the bench with Neil Cowie.
Barnes bid for key job
Tony Kell
JOHN BARNES last night promised England manager Graham Taylor: ‘Give me a licence to attack and I'll work wonders for you.’
The Liverpool winger, nearly back to his best after rupturing an Achilles tendon, has his eyes on England's next World Cup qualifier on February 17 against minnows San Marino.
He said: ‘I hope that as long as my form for Liverpool improves I will be knocking on the door.
And if I get the right role, I could be flying again.’
Ideally, Barnes wants a Paul Gascoigne-style free reign to help England qualify for the 1994 World Cup finals.
He explained: ‘Gazza would not have been able to function the way he did against Turkey without Paul Ince and Carlton Palmer because they had a very important job to do.
‘It's about time England adopted the attitude of: Why make Gazza track back and defend, when we could have other players to do that and let Gazza do what he's good at.
Creative
‘That approach will benefit any attacking player if there are hard-working ones to complement them.
That's what has happened in world football for the last 10 years and we've just started doing it.
‘Gazza exploited his responsibility to attack and all creative players should have that responsibility.’
Barnes believes the England team is big enough for him and Gazza.
‘Of course you can't have too many players free of defensive duties but you definitely need more than one person who has a licence to attack,’ he said.
‘You can't look to just one man to have the freedom to create because what happens if he's not doing it or is marked out of the game?’
Barnes confirmed his growing fitness after missing the first half of the season.
He was injured playing for England in the friendly against Finland before the European Championship but insisted: ‘I am now injury-free but not 100 per cent fit yet.
It will take me six to eight matches to get fit — I've played four so far so, hopefully, I only need a few more.
‘The injury has totally cleared up and responded well to matches and I will definitely be as good as I ever was.
‘I would never go into a match in the Premier League if I had any doubts about the injury.
I have got back on the adrenalin and enthusiasm for these first few matches and hopefully in the next six weeks you will see the best of me.’
Barnes has been in constant contact with England boss Taylor during his rehabilitation.
He said: ‘I have known Graham for a long time but there will be no sentiment when he picks the England team.
‘That will depend on my performances and I hope that as long as my form for Liverpool improves I will be knocking on the door.
Of course it depends on how other people are doing and how the team are doing.’
Barnes was speaking after the announcement of the Premier League's first sponsorship deal, a £3 million three-year package with soft drinks firm Lucozade Sport.
Premier League chief executive Rick Parry said: ‘This is great news.
In Lucozade Sport we have secured a brand with an excellent reputation, which clearly prizes its involvement with sporting excellence.’
Crystal Palace: The next generation
Mike Walter
GEOFF THOMAS last night warned Chelsea to prepare for a creche-landing after Liverpool's Coca-Cola Cup disaster in the Crystal Palace kindergarten.
Skipper Thomas, out of action for a month with knee trouble, watched from the stands as Palace, once labelled Team of the Eighties under Terry Venables, found a new generation of Selhurst Park kids to heroically outwit Anfield's all-stars on Wednesday night.
Thomas enthused: ‘It's quite a feat to beat Liverpool on a normal outing, but the side we put out the other night was straight from the creche.
‘Some people reckon they couldn't distinguish between the mascots and the players before kick-off, and that's a tribute to the youngsters who took care of Liverpool.
Although nobody outside the club gave us a prayer of winning, the lads had already done the difficult part of the job by turning the tide at Anfield.
‘Drawing 1-1 up there with a team of kids when you've been spanked 5-0 four days earlier made them believe they could finish the job at home.’
Thomas said: ‘If we go into that one cast as the sacrificial lambs, we won't mind.
We've always relished the role of the underdog who refuses to lie down.’
Thomas was particularly impressed with 18-year-old striker Grant Watts, who scored on his full debut, and midfielder Simon Rodger, ‘pressganged’ by manager Steve Coppell into playing his first game of the season.
He said: ‘Watts had to play alone up front and he was a revelation.
‘He was up against international defenders and they paid him the ultimate compliment of having to trip him up half of the time.
‘When Mark Bright was the lone striker he used to say it was the most difficult job around.
‘Grant took it on as if he did it every week and showed a wise old head on young shoulders.
And Rodger has only just come back from three weeks' rehabilitation at Lilleshall.
His dead-ball delivery was excellent and Liverpool looked uneasy at set-pieces.
‘The emergence of this new crop of youngsters is a healthy pointer to the future for the club.
‘But we can't get carried away by one result because our main aim must be to stay in the Premier League.
‘Cup-ties are a great realease from the staple diet of League football but the lads — especially the younger ones — have to grasp the importance of staying up.
‘It's no good getting to Wembley this season and then finding ourselves at Barnsley in September.
To chuck away the big time for a day out at Wembley would be a shame.
‘That's why our League position is a sobering reminder to us.
And one blessing is that we aren't likely to be saddled with the tag ‘Team of the Nineties’— which is a real kiss of death — while we're trying to find our feet in the Premier League.’
TEAM OF THE 90s
1
NIGEL MARTYN: Age 26.
Britain's first £1 million keeper.
2
JOHN HUMPHREY: 31.
Approaching 100 League games.
3
RICHARD SHAW: 24.
Came up through the ranks.
4
GARETH SOUTHGATE: 22.
Another trainee.
5
ERIC YOUNG: 32.
Deputising as skipper.
6
ANDY THORN: 26.
Wednesday winner was first goal of season.
7
SIMON OSBORN: 20.
Another youth team product.
Made debut last season.
8
BOBBY BOWRY: 21.
Another former YTS signing.
9
SIMON RODGER: 21.
Left-sided midfielder, dead-ball specialist.
10
GRANT WATTS: 18.
Took on Liverpool after with just 45 minutes' first-team football.
11
EDDIE McGOLDRICK: 27. £10,000 bonus for reaching 10 goals this season.
12
GEORGE NDAH: 18.
Made his debut at Anfield.
TEAM OF THE 80s
1
JOHN BURRIDGE: 41.
Playing for Hibernian.
2
PAUL HINSHELWOOD: 36.
Joint-manager of non-league Whyteleafe.
3
KENNY SANSOM: 34.
Playing in Premier League for Coventry.
4
JIM CANNON: 39.
Manager at Dulwich Hamlet.
5
BILLY GILBERT: 33.
Joint-manager of Beazer Homes side Waterlooville.
6
PETER NICHOLAS: 33.
Youth team coach at Chelsea.
7
STEVE KEMBER: 39.
Hinshelwood's partner at Whyteleafe.
8
GERRY FRANCIS: 41.
Manager of QPR.
9
DAVE SWINDLEHURST: 36.
Now a player-manager in Sunday morning soccer.
10
MIKE FLANAGAN: 40.
Parted company with Charlton coaching staff last season.
11
VINCE HILAIRE: 33.
At Waterlooville with Gilbert.
12
TERRY FENWICK: 33.
Still in first-team picture at Tottenham.
Wright's England warning
Rob Shepherd
GRAHAM TAYLOR last night confirmed that troubled striker Ian Wright has put his international career at risk.
The England manager watched film of the Arsenal striker's clash with Tottenham's David Howells that led to a Football Association charge of misconduct and said: ‘If he is forced to miss some games because of this then it will give him a problem in terms of our next match.
‘This doesn't put me in an embarrassing situation, it puts Ian Wright in one.
My view is that international players must understand that their behaviour for clubs is just as important as when they play for England.’
Taylor, speaking in Istanbul after the Turkey's World Cup tie against Holland, refused to comment directly on Wright's alleged punch.
But he said: ‘Managers can't be held responsible for what players do on the pitch.
‘Wright has to realise that certain behaviour can cost a player their place.’
The FA could ban Wright from playing for England for a period.
But Arsenal colleague Tony Adams escaped this despite being sent to jail.
Lack of match practice could be Wright's undoing if the FA deliver a tough sentence.
And that's a pity as he could expect to open his international goal account against tiny San Marino.
Blackburn swoop to capture Andersson
Graham Fisher
BLACKBURN ROVERS backer Jack Walker broke the bank again yesterday when he underwrote lucrative personal terms for Swedish international Patrik Andersson.
Only two weeks ago, Andersson walked out of talks with Leeds boss Howard Wilkinson and complained: ‘If Leeds are going to pay peanuts, they can expect to sign monkeys.’
But Kenny Dalglish's remorseless policy of reinforcement and the money-no-object support of mega-rich Walker, the Jersey-based ex-steel tycoon and now owner of an airline, has beaten all rivals to the punch.
Dalglish will pay Swedish club Malmo £800,000 for their star man, taking his gross transfer outlay soaring to nearly £12 million in the 14 months since he took over at Ewood Park.
Andersson, capped 15 times, should be eligible in the New Year after work permit formalities have been sorted out.
He plays at centre-back for his club and country but is equally at home in central midfield.
Both areas have given Dalglish concern in a worrying Blackburn sequence of only one win in eight games.
But Rovers are still well-placed for a drive towards honours in the second half of the season.
They are fifth in the Premier League, eight points behind Norwich, and have reached the Coca-Cola Cup quarter-finals.
Manchester United and Norwich were also interested in the 21-year-old Malmo defender, a big hit in the European Championship finals and widely admired ever since.
But Dalglish is determined not to be left behind for want of class and numbers when the going gets tough.
And Walker says: ‘I don't have a bottomless pit.
But if a player becomes available and Kenny wants him, then that's never a problem to me.’
Meanwhile, Coventry City manager Bobby Gould has slammed West Bromwich Albion's board of directors as the row over his banning from The Hawthorns rumbles on.
Gould is writing to the Prime Minister and the Minister of Sport to express his concern after he was banned from working for BSkyB at Albion's Cup match with Wycombe on Tuesday.
West Brom's directors were concerned that the appearance of Gould, who was sacked as Albion's manager in May, could provoke crowd trouble.
But Gould said: ‘I had absolutely nothing to be ashamed of.
The Albion board over-reacted.’
Sorrowful Shail
YEOVIL TOWN captain Mark Shail was heartbroken last night over the rash moment which may cost him the chance of playing in the dream FA Cup tie against Arsenal.
The highly-rated defender, who has brought League scouts flocking to the Huish, looks certain to miss the game after being booked in the second round replay triumph at Hereford.
Shail was cautioned for kicking the ball away, and manager Steve Rutter said: ‘We are convinced he is going to miss out.’
Durie booking blow
GORDON DURIE'S delight at winning his ‘cheat’ appeal was marred last night by a shock Football Association verdict.
Tottenham striker Durie was cleared on Wednesday by an FA Appeal Board of feigning injury during a match against Coventry on August 18.
With the Appeal Board clearing Durie it had been expected the caution would be expunged.
But the two-point booking will stand, the FA have announced.
‘The player was charged under the rule covering misconduct and won his appeal on this charge,’ said an FA spokesman.
‘There is no appeal against individual cautions so the booking still stands,’ he added.
Cup woe for Hall
Adrian Holloway
GARETH HALL will miss Chelsea's Coca-Cola Cup quarter-final with Crystal Palace after being sent off in the stormy fourth round replay against Everton.
Hall faces a three-match ban, which would also rule him out of the third round FA Cup tie at Middlesbrough on January 3, three days before the Selhurst Park showdown.
Chelsea skipper Andy Townsend, who scored the winning goal against Everton, insists: ‘The fact that some players struggle to be picked for the reserves is an indication of our depth.
‘It is good to be in the frame at the top of the Premier League and competing in the cups.’
Gale blasts Hammers
WEST HAM stalwart Tony Gale last night hit out at the club's decision to place him on the transfer list.
The mild-mannered defender fears his testimonial plans, scheduled for next year, will be ruined if West Ham insist on selling him because they can't afford to pay his wages.
Gale said: ‘I am gutted over this.
I feel let down after giving the club 10 years' loyal service.
I still have 18 months of my contract to run.
‘If I leave, my testimonial year won't have the same impact because I'll no longer be a West Ham player.’
Faldo traps Fred in sands
Bill Blighton in Montego Bay
NICK FALDO turned golf's showdown of the year into a calypso carnival before hitting the wrong note in the £1.8 million Johnnie Walker World Championship here yesterday.
The World No 1 buried No 2 Fred Couples in the sands of Montego Bay, with Faldo outscoring the US Masters champion by six shots.
The pair were pitched together to play in the opening two rounds, and while Couples collapsed with a 77, Faldo reduced their duel in the sun to a calculated ambush.
It was reminiscent of the cold-blooded massacre he inflicted on Greg Norman in the 1990 Open at St Andrews, which sent the Australian into a golfing wilderness for two years.
Faldo powered into the lead in the race for the £366,000 top prize with a series of rapier thrusts producing three birdies in the first six holes on the tough Tryall course skirting the Caribbean.
But the wind sweeping in from the sea even got to him, with the Open Champion dropping four shots in three holes, including a double bogey five at the treacherous 15th.
That left him with a 71, three strokes behind Australian pacesetter Craig Parry.
Earlier, while Faldo prospered with a blistering outward run of 32, it was all Tryall and error for crumbling Couples.
The American's triple bogey eight at the fourth hole had him gasping for air in the suffocating heat as he stumbled out in 41.
Couples, the US Player of the Year and defending a title which inspired him to glory at Augusta last April, regained his compsure to cover the last seven holes in one under par.
But by that time, Faldo had already done the damage.
Faldo, who shares second place with Yorkshireman Mark Roe and Australians Greg Norman and Peter O'Malley, said: ‘I played well all day but I lost a couple of shots, and that was a shame.
‘But I have just got to forget it, go forth and carry on.
The only poor shot I hit was at the 14th, when a little wedge went right over the green.’
Faldo, who took five at the next short hole, added: ‘I was only 10ft from the flag and I was in a hole.
All I could do was dig it out.
‘I haven't looked at the high scoring yet but there are no surprises at what you are going to get out there.’
Faldo was disappointed with his 71.
But Roe, who qualified to join the line-up featuring 28 of the world's best players courtesy of his victory in the Lancome Trophy, was delighted with his.
After snapping up four birdies, he said: ‘The course was hideously tricky in that wind.
‘I would have settled for that before I went out.
I could easily have been overawed, I've been thoroughly on edge all week.
But I was okay when I got to the first tee.’
Welshman Ian Woosnam would have joined them in second place but for a double bogey at the 17th for a 73, while Scotland's Colin Montgomerie is tucked in just behind after finishing four over par.
Sandy Lyle had a triple bogey seven in his 76 to stand alongside Spain's Seve Ballesteros, who was more concerned with breaking 80 after standing at seven over par with six holes to play.
But they are both still in the hunt, unlike South African David Frost.
He ballooned to a 13-over-par 83, while US tour winner Brad Faxon suffered a disastrous run of 6-9-6-7 as he fell away with an 82.
Tour goes ahead
Graham Otway
ENGLAND'S winter cricket tour to India received the green light yesterday despite the recent fierce rioting on the sub-continent between rival Muslim and Hindu factions.
The Test and County Cricket Board's chief executive Alan Smith said he was satisfied with assurances he had been given about the safety of Graham Gooch's 16-man squad.
Smith received a telex yesterday from the Indian Board president Mahdav Cindra, via the British High Commission in Delhi, confirming that the rioting that followed the destruction of a Muslim mosque had died down.
‘The assurances are OK and we have no intention of either looking elsewhere or altering our original itinerary,’ Smith said.
It had been hinted that England might abandon their Indian plans and arrange an emergency tour to either New Zealand or Zimbabwe.
But now that the tour will go ahead, the players will leave for Delhi three days after Christmas as originally planned.
The news was welcomed by England skipper Graham Gooch, who said: ‘Obviously we wouldn't be going to India if the conditions were not suitable.
Concern
‘I am not worried about extra security.
I have played in Jamaica where a guard with a machine gun has boarded our team bus — my main concern then was that he wouldn't be able to shoot straight.’
The news came as Gooch's squad were finishing their intensive Autumn pre-tour training programme at Lilleshall.
Gooch, manager Keith Fletcher and England chairman Ted Dexter all praised the Whittingdale sponsorship which has allowed them to gather together for two days in each of the last six weeks.
You quit too soon
Rob Shepherd
GRAHAM TAYLOR last night questioned Gary Lineker's decision to quit international football prematurely.
The England manager hit back in the row with his former captain and said: ‘I find it hard to understand how any player can retire from international football at the age of 30.
‘I respect their decision, but I find it strange.’
Although Lineker has just turned 32, he quit the English game last summer — having made his intention clear for the previous seven months.
And Taylor, under fire last week when the Lineker camp claimed he was jealous of the striker's personality, image and status, knows he was thinking about it even sooner.
‘I felt that as soon as I took over Gary had it in his mind that he wasn't looking to play for England beyond the two years which took him up to the European Championships,’ he said.
‘But I have just been to America, where England will play a big tournament next summer against the US, Brazil and Germany.
We then hope to be back there the following year for the World Cup finals.
‘There is a big buzz over there.
I looked around and was excited by it all, and I wondered to myself given the chance, who could possibly want to miss all this?
‘Who would want to retire — because in football it will all be over too soon anyway.
Respect
‘While I respect a player's decision to retire, I've just seen Holland's Gullit and Rijkaard both come back from retirement.
‘They will want to be playing in the World Cup — yet I've seen Steve Nicol decide he doesn't want to play for Scotland anymore.
And, of course, Lineker has retired.
‘It's strange, and I just hope younger players don't see it as an example that international football is something you retire from early.’
Taylor, whose relationship with Lineker hit a low when he substituted England's top scorer in the final European Championship game with Sweden, maintains he did not harbour a grudge against the former Footballer of the Year.
Naturally, there are two sides to the argument.
Taylor is obviously full of anticipation as he embarks on the most important year since taking on the England job.
Lineker, on the other hand, took his decision having already played in two World Cups, deciding it was in his best interests to seek a fortune playing in Japan rather than face the prospect of losing his status and even his England place as his legs began to fail him.
Taylor refuses to say whether Lineker would still be in his team had he carried on playing in England.
Seething
And he laughed off suggestions that he might recall Lineker once he starts playing again for Grampus Eight in May.
Taylor joked: ‘I'm not certain that, with a three-day get-together for England games, he could get back from Japan.’
He then attempted to play down the row which surfaced following Lineker's comments in his biography.
But I believe he is still seething about being dragged into the debate and left to look the villain of the piece.
‘It is hard now to convince people that it was anything other than personal between us,’ Taylor insisted.
‘I do not see it that way, but it's all been built up now.
From my point of view, I didn't have any up and downers with Gary.’
Billy whizz
BRITISH and Commonwealth lightweight champion Billy Schwer took only three rounds to stop Mexico's Mauricio Aceves with a badly cut eye at Wembley's Grand Hall last night.
Pit prop Phil last of an era
by Tom Lyons
CARDIFF prop Phil Sedgemore is the last of a vanished breed in Welsh rugby.
Sedgemore is the only coalminer playing in the First Division of the Heineken League.
Sedgemore, 27, who packs down against Maesteg in the fourth round of the Swalec Cup at the Arms Park tomorrow, works underground at Tower Colliery, Hirwaun.
He joined Cardiff last season from Hirwaun, and has been an ever-present this term.
There was a tradition in Wales that when club or country wanted a front row forward all they had to do was stand at the pit head and whistle.
Now, with only two pits still working in South Wales, the previously endless supply of forwards has finally dried up.
Sedgemore has improved so much since entering top grade rugby that club coach Alex Evans is tipping him for international honours.
Explained Evans: ‘For such a big man Phil gets around the field like a flanker.
If he maintains his present form he will get caps.’
Sedgemore said: ‘I joined first class rugby late but I am enjoying life with Cardiff.
My ambition is to help them win the Cup or the League — or both.’
‘Only a few years ago they were plenty of colliers playing rugby in Wales.
When my colliery closes it will be the end of a forward-producing era.’
Meanwhile, Cardiff will rest full-back Mike Rayer tomorrow.
Paul Armstrong takes his place and Mike Hall returns from injury.
Going Dutch
John Wardle
KEVIN KEEGAN has agreed a fee with Belgian club Ghent for Dutch international striker Eric Viscaal.
The 25-year-old will cost around £700,000 and the signing is likely to be pushed through in the next few days in time for the Christmas programme.
Keegan confirmed: ‘We have made an offer and it has been accepted.
The next step is to talk to the player.
We have been dealing with an agent so I don't know how he really feels.
‘But something definite will happen one way or the other in the next 48 hours.’
Meanwhile, Sunderland, who face Luton tomorrow, have injury doubts over Colin Pascoe and Brian Atkinson.
Mal digs up a gem
MALCOLM ALLISON believes he has unearthed his first golden nugget for Bristol Rovers in 21-year-old striker Marcus Browning.
Browning will parade his talents in front of England No 2 Lawrie McMenemy against Cambridge United at the Abbey Stadium tonight after Big Mal persuaded Big Lawrie, the England Under-21 squad manager, to take a look at the Bristol-born former YTS lad.
‘Marcus is the best young athlete and talent I have seen for a long time,’ said Allison.
Gould taking his Albion ban to the top
Mike Allan
COVENTRY CITY manager Bobby Gould has slammed West Bromwich Albion's board of directors as the row over his banning from The Hawthorns rumbles on.
Gould is writing to the Prime Minister and the Sports Minister to express his concern after he was banned from working for BSkyB at Albion's Cup match with Wycombe Wanderers on Tuesday.
Albion's directors were concerned that the appearance of Gould, who was sacked as Albion's manager in May, could provoke crowd trouble.
But Gould said: ‘I had absolutely nothing to be ashamed of.
The Albion board over-reacted to the whole situation.
‘But that is their hall-mark.
They either over-react or under-react.
‘They have set a dangerous precedent.
I have written to both the Prime Minister and the Sports Minister because I wonder if my civil liberties have been infringed.
‘If that is the case then I shall be contacting my advisers.
I don't believe that the fans would have caused me any problem.
They might have jeered, but they are not malicious.
‘How come Ron Atkinson can go back to Sheffield Wednesday just a couple of months after leaving the club and yet I am banned from The Hawthorns?’
Albion chairman Trevor Summers has ruled out making any further comment on the controversy after the club issued a joint statement with the police explaining that their decision was taken because of the adverse reaction that Gould received during Albion's first match with Wycombe at Adams Park earlier this month.
Meanwhile, Birmingham City striker John Gayle has warned his team-mates: ‘You're too soft.’
Gayle, sent off during Birmingham's Anglo-Italian Cup clash with Lucchese on Wednesday, has called on the players to toughen up as they face up to a New Year relegation battle.
The former Wimbledon striker said: ‘We've got to start digging in and dish out some of the rough stuff.
‘I don't mean it in a bad way, but teams are rolling us over.
It's all about determination.
If we can go out and show some of it first we'll be hard to beat.
‘We're all old enough and wise enough to know what to do, but we aren't doing it.
‘We've got to pick up three points against Watford tomorrow or it will be more bad news.’
Rovers swoop to sign Swede
by Graham Fisher
BLACKBURN Rovers backer Jack Walker broke the bank again yesterday when he underwrote lucrative personal terms for Swedish international Patrik Andersson.
Only two weeks ago Andersson walked out of talks with Leeds boss Howard Wilkinson and complained: ‘If Leeds are going to pay peanuts they can expect to sign monkeys.’
But Kenny Dalglish's remorseless policy of reinforcement and the money-no-object support of mega-rich Walker, the Jersey-based ex-steel tycoon and now owner of an airline, has beaten all rivals to the punch.
Dalglish will pay Swedish club Malmo £800,000 for their star man, taking his gross transfer outlay soaring to nearly £12 million in the 14 months since he took over at Ewood Park.
Andersson, capped 15 times, should be eligible in the New Year after work permit formalities have been sorted out.
He plays at centre-back for his club and country but is equally at home in central midfield.
Both areas have given Dalglish concern in a worrying Blackburn sequence of only one win in eight games.
But Rovers are still fifth in the Premier League, eight points behind Norwich, and have reached the Coca-Cola Cup quarter-finals — ideally placed for an honours drive in the second half of the season.
Manchester United and Norwich were also interested in the 21-year-old Malmo defender, a big hit in the European Championship finals and widely admired ever since.
But Dalglish is determined not to be left behind for want of class and numbers when the going gets tough.
And Walker says: ‘I don't have a bottomless pit.
But if a player becomes available and Kenny wants him then that's never a problem to me.’
Wigan facing missile attack
by Ray French
THIRD DIVISION Workington Town have a secret weapon for five-time Regal Trophy winners Wigan in tomorrow's third round…18-stone Kiwi missile James Pickering.
If Pickering survives a fitness test on a twisted ankle, coach Peter Walsh is sure his fierce Fijian-born prop will blast holes in the Trophy favourites' defence.
Walsh warned: ‘James has been unstoppable this season since he trimmed down in the summer from 22 stone to a mere 18.
‘He can sidestep as well as a back and is a frightening sight when he's running at the opposition.
‘We have used him as our main battering ram this season and Wigan's forwards will find him a tough customer.’
Explosive
The 26-year-old Aucklander could, according to Walsh, start the match from the bench and make an explosive entrance 20 minutes into the game.
And, along with former Newcastle Knights full-back Mark Mulligan and half-back Dean Marwood — the League's leading points scorer this season with 220 — the powerful Pickering will have plenty of support from an anticipated 10,000 crowd at Town's tiny Derwent Park ground.
Despite losing Great Britain full-back Joe Lydon, out for two weeks after minor knee surgery, Wigan should still have the power in the pack to stop Pickering.
Former All Black Frano Botica will take Lydon's place, with 18-year-old Jason Robinson at scrum-half.
Paul's break
PAUL LOUGHLIN hopes to make as big an impact for St Helens today as when he was last at Knowsley Road.
Loughlin's try and seven goals in last season's Premiership semi-final against Castleford — today's rivals in a televised Regal Trophy quarter-final — helped Saints win 30-14.
Loughlin, who broke his arm for the second time in 16 months on Great Britain's summer tour Down Under, is in the centres after 10 minutes as sub in last Friday's League defeat at Wheldon Road.
Saints coach Mike McClennan said: ‘Both teams are of equal talent but we have to make fewer mistakes than last week.’
Hat-trick Hanley sparks a Leeds revival
by Barry Lucas
Leeds 42, Halifax 14
GARRY SCHOFIELD and Ellery Hanley inspired crisis-hit Leeds to a stunning triumph last night at Headingley.
Hanley scored a hat-trick of tries and Great Britain skipper Schofield kicked five goals as well as having a hand in many of Leeds' eight touchdowns.
Leeds' best performance of the season gave long-suffering Headingley supporters an early Christmas present and spared underfire coach Doug Laughton further embarrassment.
With speculation growing that Laughton will be sacked unless results improve rapidly, Leeds began badly.
A long pass by Andy Gregory almost conceded an early try but Graeme Hallas knocked on as he went for the interception.
That reprieve did not last.
Leeds second rower Paul Dixon high tackled Kiwi opposite Brent Stuart and Paul Bishop kicked a simple penalty.
And then weak Leeds defence let in centre Mark Bailey after a powerful break by Gary Divorty.
But midway through the first half the Leeds performance improved dramatically with two tries in three minutes.
Schofield and former All Black Craig Innes combined to put Dixon over and shortly afterwards Kiwi Test centre Kevin Iro touched down after a superb break by Schofield.
Stand-off Schofield was again responsible for the third Leeds try five minutes before the interval.
His kick ahead was picked up by Carl Gibson, who linked with James Lowes to set up Dixon's second try.
Leeds had recovered stylishly to lead 14-8 at half-time.
Within a minute of the resumption, man-of-the-match Iro continued the Leeds recovery with a powerful 40-yard dash to the line and Schofield added the goal.
The transformation gathered pace with another quick try.
Scrum-half Gregory fed Hanley close to the Halifax line and the Leeds skipper easily rounded the visitors' defence.
Schofield kicked his third goal and the side threatened with relegation after only three victories was looking unstoppable.
Halifax's crumbling defence couldn't cope and Schofield's skill created a sixth try, this time for Innes.
Leeds continued to pile on the points as Iro burst through for loose forward Hanley to score a seventh try.
Hanley confirmed the rout as he completed a hat-trick in perhaps his best performance of the season to give Leeds the result they urgently needed.
Just before the final whistle, former Leeds player Gary Divorty grabbed a consolation try, converted by stand-off Bishop.
Rebel with a cause
by Giles Smith
PAUL JARVIS simply doesn't accept that as a reprieved South African rebel and with a reputation as one of the most injury-prone cricketers in the country, he's lucky to be going on England's tour of India.
He offers no apologies for joining Mike Gatting's ill-fated tour of the Republic and insists he won't be breaking down this winter as he has so often before in England's colours.
‘I know I have a lot to prove,’ says the 27-year-old Yorkshire fast bowler.
‘It was a difficult decision to take going to South Africa with the rebel tour.
‘I followed my instinct, it was an offer I found difficult to refuse.
I had to seize my chance.’
His belief that his fitness problems may at last be over stems from an unusual remedy — putting on weight as a conscious policy.
Strength
‘Through my early years, I always did a lot of running and I came to the conclusion that that was the reason for my injuries.
When I was out early last summer, I was advised it might be better to do less running, put on some weight and concentrate on building up my strength.’
The result is that Jarvis has put on more than half a stone — he's up to 11 and ahalf now — and feels all the better for it.
‘I'm one of those people who can eat and drink what I like and not put on weight, so I had to do it by weight training and build up the muscle weight,’ he adds.
‘The extra weight is all muscle and I feel very fit.’
Chairman of selector Ted Dexter has called Jarvis's shock selection for the tour a ‘hunch’ and the controversial bowler knows there's a lot of pressure on him to stay fit and improve on his admittedly modest international record — 14 wickets in six Tests at over 50 runs each.
He says: ‘I know that 50 runs apiece for wickets isn't good enough and I am determined to get that figure down if I can.’
One reason he thinks he can do it is the help he's had over the past six weeks of intensive Lilleshall training from England's newly-installed bowling coach, the former Surrey and Sussex star Geoff Arnold.
‘Geoff has been giving me a lot of help, having a look at my action and making a few minor adjustments.
I think I have really improved and, in particular, am really swinging the ball again.
‘I don't know if I'll be able to swing it in India, it depends on the pitches and conditions, but as the Indians' attack looks to be mainly swing and seam, it could happen.
I hope so anyway,’ he says.
With 30 wickets in an injury-curtailed season, Jarvis believes he's earned his place on Gooch's tour.
‘Of course I would have liked to have taken 50 or 60 wickets, but I felt that in the latter part of the season, I proved my fitness once and for all.
‘I was really concentrating on getting the ball to swing again after my injury, and I got it back, it is all coming back.’
And he is defiant in the face of critics who say he's lucky to be selected.
‘I am top of the averages of the England bowlers selected and I think I am bowling as well as anyone in the side at the moment.
I know that there will be people just waiting for me to be injured and say ‘I told you so’ but I am confident that, this time, it's not going to happen.’
Problems
Jarvis, who has had his ups and downs in his relationship with his county Yorkshire over the years, is confident those problems are over too.
At 16 years and two months, the Redcar-born Jarvis was the youngest player ever to make his debut for the once all-powerful county.
But the years since then have been ones of decline for Yorkshire, mainly, many observers of the game believe, because of the white rose county's obstinate refusal, until last year, to move with the times and have an overseas star player in the side.
Jarvis thinks the decision to break with tradition and bring in Indian prodigy Sachin Tendulkar last summer, and take on West Indies captain Richie Richardson next season was the right one.
On balance he'd have preferred to have seen them take on a top world fast bowler to ease the new-ball burden on him — as indeed they intended before negotiations with Australia's Craig McDermott broke down months before the start of the season — but sees at least one advantage in having a star batsman rather than bowler.
‘I suppose I might have ended up bowling up the hill into the wind at Headingley, and that might not have done much for my prospects, but generally the policy change was inevitable, and I am glad it happened.’
He now firmly refutes suggestions that he is unhappy with the Yorkshire set-up and is looking around for a move to another county.
‘I have two years left of my contract, and I am hoping to have a benefit in 1995.
I am happy there at the moment, and I want to repay Yorkshire for all the support they have given me over the years.’
For the moment, though, his mind is firmly set on India and proving the knockers wrong.
A successful tour is the priority — the icing on the cake would come if wife, Wendy, could hang on a week or so for the birth of their second child due a month before the end of the tour.‘
‘I'll be keeping my fingers crossed, it's late,’ says the newly-enthusiastic and, he promises, fit Jarvis.
Marie's peak perfomance
MARIE EDGAR, on Sure Thing, pipped Everest team-mate Nick Skelton by one hundredth of a second in a nine-horse jump-off to win the Brandy Butter Stakes at the Olympia Championships in London yesterday.
Geoff Luckett, another of the Everest squad, had earlier won the Snowman Stakes two-horse competition.
Matt finish
MATTHEW PINSENT, Britain's Olympic rowing gold medalist and Oxford rowing president, led his crew to victory in the Dark Blues trials on a storm-lashed Thames yesterday.
Super Sarah
SARAH BENTLEY, the 19-year-old No 2 seed from Surrey, won the BWTA Christmas tennis tournament in London yesterday with a 6-2, 6-3 victory over Siobhan Nicholson.
Skipper Mark
MARK NICHOLAS has been re-appointed Hampshire captain for next season, ending speculation that he would be joining a Sunday newspaper as a cricket correspondent.
Must be Miinne
Henry Rix
12.50:HOT favourite Baydon Star bolted up at Aintree last time, but faces a stiffer task and should be opposed at short odds.
I believe it is worth taking a chance that FLOWN, who has plenty in hand at his best, goes on the ground.
Nicky Henderson's gelding, an impressive Cheltenham winner last March, looked in need of the run and was not disgraced behind Mighty Mogul at Newbury in the soft on his reappearance.
Kaher is likely to need the run and Hashar was most disappointing last time.
1.20:DAVID Elsworth's Muse heads the market due to a brave success from Morley Street over two and a half here last month.
But I am not convinced that he truly stays this extra five furlongs, and BURGOYNE will stretch his stamina to the limit.
Peter Easterby's front runner was disqualified after holding the late challenge of Tyrone Bridge in a fast-run race at Newbury three weeks ago, but he should gain compensation on 4lb better terms.
Martin Pipe's decent handicapper Vagog could well run into a place.
1.55:THIS valuable contest has been made very much less competitive with the participation of top weight Cool Ground.
MIINNEHOMA should take advantage, and is worth backing at 2-1 with Ladbrokes.
He is well handicapped, loves the ground and should be spot on after chasing home stable companion Run For Free at Chepstow.
Kildimo prefers faster ground, both Romany King and Captain Dibble disappointed last time, and the bottom three face stiff tasks from out of the handicap.
Super Woody
RICHARD Dunwoody continued his countdown to Christmas by kicking home yet another treble at Uttoxeter yesterday.
Now 18 clear in the jockeys' table, the Ulsterman has the Midas touch at present and he must be regretting that next week the seasonal festivities mean three days without racing.
Dunwoody moved onto the 77 winner mark with Bishops Island, Royal Piper and Its Nearly Time.
William Hill's title betting: 2-5 Dunwoody, 13-8 Scudamore, 25-1 Niven.
Darren's on sunny side
Adrian Holloway
WHEN Darren O'Leary plays for London against the North in the final round of the ADT Divisional Championship today he will be forgiven if he is caught day-dreaming of England training in sunny Lanzarote.
Left-wing O'Leary, just 19, was the surprise package when the 30-strong party was announced this week for five days' warm weather training starting on New Year's Eve.
And with only 10 first-class matches under his belt, O'Leary confessed to being shocked by his call-up.
‘I never thought I'd be seeing in the New Year with Will Carling and company in Lanzarote.
Impressed ‘I was looking forward to a night out with the England Students squad on their training weekend at Bisham Abbey, but I won't say no to a bit of warm weather instead.’
O'Leary is in his first season at Saracens, and impressed England coach Dick Best when he scored on his debut for the London Divisional side against the Midlands earlier this month.
London can win the tournament if they beat the North at Harlequins today and the South West lose to Midlands.
‘All we need is two good halves,’ O'Leary says.
‘We're very confident of winning.
London run the ball so I should have lots of opportunities.
‘Being in the same side as people like Rob Andrew can only do me good.
Playing in this competition has been a great springboard for me.’
A product of Campion School, Essex, the wing holds the remarkable record of having scored tries for England at Under-18, colts and Under-21 level.
‘I don't see why I can't continue my run for the seniors,’ he says, ‘but I'm taking nothing for granted.’
O'Leary is in the second year of a leisure management course at West London Institute where he says he is adjusting to minor celebrity status.
‘The news of my call-up has slowly filtered through, but all my friends have been really good about it.’
England's far-sighted youth development policy is now being matched by the selectors' willingness to throw teenagers in at the deep end.
O'Leary is the first off the production line.
He says: ‘Although I've played next to no club rugby, I've got lots of big match experience through playing in all the age-group teams England now run.’
The guiding light along O'Leary's path has been Campion and Saracens coach John Davies, who says his star pupil will push the Underwood brothers hard for their places.
‘Darren has always had flair, all we had to do was control it.
In 18 months he'll be even better.
Then I think Darren will be an exceptionally good player.
He's a very ambitious young man.
‘Darren's had some luck because London have brought young players into the squad, and Chris Oti dropped out injured at the crucial moment before the first game of the season against the Midlands.
From then on, however, he's taken his chance.
But England could have missed out on the youngster if he had chosen the country of his father's birth.
O'Leary explains: ‘I am qualified for Ireland through my dad's nationality, but I've always considered myself an Essex man because I was born in Harold Wood.’
O'Leary takes his place in an unchanged London side at the Stoop Memorial Ground in the final round of the Championship.
The North have never been whitewashed in the Championship, but they now look vulnerable as injuries, defections and selection switches have deprived them of a consistent team.
Influence Dewi Morris is back at scrum-half after missing the middle match of the divisional season.
England's scrum-worker will be an important influence in supplying possession to the Underwood brothers on the wings, Ian Hunter at full-back and kicking mastermind Paul Grayson at stand-off.
But London's Test front row of Jason Leonard, Brian Moore and Jeff Probyn, allied to Rob Andrew's scoring skills, should give London a comfortable success.
The South West need only to draw their game with the Midlands at Leicester's Welford Road to lift the Championship title for the first time.
However, such is the current power and purpose of a team who'd only ever won four times before the start of this season, that nothing less than victory will do to complete a remarkable transformation from perennial under-achievers to Championship top dogs.
‘The old inter-club rivalries and jealousies have undoubtedly been banished this season and it will be good for the tournament and for English rugby if we can win it,’ said coach Keith Richardson.
Henry in twin battle
by Frank Ward
LONDON-BORN Henry Akinwande challenges German Axel Schulz for the European heavyweight title, vacated by Lennox Lewis, in Berlin tonight.
But the rise of neo-Nazism is not the ideal backdrop for a sporting visitor of Nigerian parentage.
And Akinwande's manager Mickey Duff realises his hope could have more than one battle on his hands.
‘Henry's got it all to do.
There's a lot of bad feeling in Germany right now with the neo-Nazis and so forth,’ said Duff.
‘That makes it a little more concerning, but I still think Henry will win.
Hopefully there won't be any problems, but I'm not asking the promoter Wilfred Sauerland to take any extra precautions.
Shout
‘He will know what is the right thing to do and so will the people who manage the building where the fight is being held.’
Akinwande, 27, said defiantly: ‘They can shout at me as a foreigner but in Mickey, the best manager anyone could have, I've got someone who's got a good voice too.’
A win for Akinwande, who beat the much-hyped Herbie Hide for the 1989 ABA title, will elevate him close to a world top-10 rating, if not pushing him into the elite of one of the four organisations.
Blundell makes GP comeback
MARK BLUNDELL, the 26-year-old Marlboro McLaren test driver, is poised for a return to Grand Prix racing next season with the Ligier-Renault team.
Blundell was in southern France testing with McLaren yesterday and was unavailable for comment.
Ligier also avoided confirming the appointment.
But insiders close to Blundell confirmed the deal was agreed and says he is almost certain to return after one year out of competitive Formula One racing, during which he won the Le Mans 24-Hours classic alongside fellow Briton Derek Warwick.
Blundell has filled the vacancy which had been earmarked for first-choice newcomer Damon Hill.
But the 32-year-old son of the late Graham Hill has since landed the sought-after No 2 spot alongside Alain Prost at Canon Williams Renault.
Next year's French Grand Prix may be reprieved after a Government announcement that cars carrying cigarette advertising will not be seized.
Mighty Quinn to pound beat for the Blues
by David Harrison
MICK QUINN will pound out a goalscoring message of arrival today — to the rhythm of the Mersey beat.
The 30-year-old Scouser plays his first game for Coventry since his £250,000 permanent move from Newcastle against Liverpool, the club he worshipped as a boy.
Quinn will work himself into the right mood for the game by listening to tapes of his favourite Beatles music beforehand — not that he needs too much extra motivation.
It has been a long and winding road for the much-travelled Quinn to achieve fully-fledged Premier League status, even though his career record is better than a goal every two games.
And now he intends to prove that he can flourish as a goalscorer among the highest company.
He has never found it hard to practice his goalscoring trade on his travels here, there and everywhere.
And his six goals in his four games while on loan to Coventry City have shown he has not lost his knack.
Discarded
But he still feels miffed and mystified as to why manager Kevin Keegan discarded him so readily from St James' Park and why no other Premier League clubs were willing to hire his lethal skills.
Quinn said: ‘Bobby Gould was prepared to take a gamble on me at Coventry, so I will be trying to pay him back for that by scoring even more goals.
‘I'll also show the other managers they were wrong to ignore me.
It's incredible, I always seem to get off to these sort of starts.
I got four in my first game for Newcastle against Leeds and nine in my first five matches.
I'm as good now as I was then and my target is 20 goals for the season.
I've no doubt I'll make it.
‘The match against Liverpool is an incredible wind-up for me.
I supported them as a lad and idolised Kevin Keegan.
There's got to be a bit of irony somewhere there.
‘Here I am facing Liverpool in my first game as a fully-fledged Coventry player, so if I can put one over them, it will be the end of a perfect week.’
Jinx
Despite his hot streak of goals, Quinn has not yet been on the winning side for the Sky Blues and now he wants to put that unwanted record in the dustbin.
He said: ‘First of all, we desperately need a win.
I'm beginning to think the fans will soon see me as a bit of a jinx.
I've got six but we just can't get a win.’
Music and horse racing are Quinn's great passions outside football and when his playing days are over he would like to make a new career on the turf.
He said.
‘I was given a Beatles compilation tape as a lad and was immediately hooked.
John Lennon has always been my main man.
When I finish playing, I hope to follow Mick Channon into racing but before that happens I have to prove myself in the Premier League.
‘I've never had any doubts about my scoring ability but I have still got to go out and do it on a consistent basis.’
Quinn can give the bookmakers a caning today if he scores the first goal of the game.
He is quoted as 9-2 favourite to do so and Ladbrokes report heavy betting on the new Sky Blues striker.
A spokesman said: ‘It has become virtually a one-man book, with almost all the bets on the mighty Quinn.
‘If he does score the first goal, he won't make it a very good Christmas for Ladbrokes.’
However, Quinn was not popular with the bookies earlier this week when one of his horses, Va Utu, trained by Channon, won at Lingfield at 6-1.
Ossie risks axe in Gould row
David Harrison
OSSIE ARDILES put his job on the line yesterday by slamming the West Brom board for their decision to ban Bobby Gould from the Hawthorns.
Former boss Gould was kept away from Tuesday's FA Cup replay against Wycombe following interventions by Albion directors and police who felt his presence could provoke crowd trouble.
But the decision has backfired on the Second Division club.
Gould has threatened to take legal action and has written to the Prime Minister claiming his civil liberties were infringed.
Ardiles stepped into the row yesterday and said: ‘I am very disappointed and angry that the name of West Bromwich Albion has again appeared in the press for all the wrong reasons.
‘We are working hard here to change a lot of things after all the problems the club suffered off the field last season.
‘It was a stupid and unnecessary action to take against Bobby Gould and I am deeply concerned about it all.
‘On the one hand it has dragged the name of this club through the mud and on the other, as a manager, I have got to be worried by the implications.’
Gould received an official apology from West Midlands police yesterday over their part in the decision to force him to stay away from the Cup replay, but he may still take legal action.
Posh buy-out
MANAGER Chris Turner is part of a three-man syndicate that has bought First Division Peterborough United for a sum believed to be more than £1 million.
Turner, 41, who returned to the club as manager almost two years ago, has been joined by local businessmen Alf Hand and Shaun Riley to buy out Oxford-based chairman and owner John Devaney.
‘We have had to beg, steal and borrow substantial funds to put the club back in the hands of the people of Peterborough, which is where it belongs,’ commented Turner, who moves to the boardroom as chairman.
‘I still expect to have a substantial interest in the day-to-day running of the club and my assistant Lil Fuccillo will be appointed manager.’
Fuccillo, who like Turner is a former Posh player, takes charge against Bristol City tomorrow.
Turner heads a four-man board, with Hand and Riley and one member of the previous board, Philip Sagar.
Newton is on the up and up
by Adrian Holloway
EDDIE NEWTON, the rising Chelsea star who had his jaw smashed in a racist attack just six months ago, is determined to break Manchester United hearts at Stamford Bridge today.
The young midfielder was an unknown Chelsea reserve when a gang set upon him as he played in a park five-a-side in West London last summer.
But Newton, 21, is now a major factor in fourth-placed Chelsea's emergence as genuine title contenders.
And today's meeting with United, who are one place and one point above them, will be a real test of the Londoners' Chamionship credentials.
Newton says the vicious attack now seems a lifetime ago.
‘It's all well behind me now,’ he said last night.
‘It came as such a shock, but since I got over it, life's been brilliant.
‘I've established myself in the Premier League and struck up a good relationship with the fans.’
Newton says his successful rapport with Chelsea supporters is itself a triumph in the light of recent history.
Amazing
‘A few years ago some Chelsea fans got on Paul Canoville's back because he was black.
People like me and Frank Sinclair really owe it to ‘Caners’ because he broke the ice for us.
‘In fact, the thing I enjoy most about being in the side is experiencing our amazing support.
Our fans are the loudest away fans in the League.’
Since winning his place in the Chelsea midfield in early September, the Hammersmith-born youngster has never looked back.
But Newton, known in the dressing room as ‘Isaac’, still has to pinch himself to be sure he really has arrived in the big time.
‘Before I got in the first team,’ he says, ‘I was asking myself over and over again: ‘can I really do it?’.
‘Now I'm in the side, I'm running into these superstars and thinking I'm only a young boy, but I'm mixing it with the best.
That's a great feeling.’
Newton and skipper Andy Townsend have hit five goals each this season in a dynamic midfield partnership, and Townsend's influence has been crucial to his sidekick's development.
‘I'm very fortunate to have a top pro like Andy next to me,’ says Newton.
‘He talks me through the game.
He knows exactly what's going on, so I was gutted when the manager signed Nigel Spackman to play alongside him.
Then Nigel got injured so the thing never came to a head.
‘Now I'm the man in possession.
I know I've got a lot to learn, but I'm in the best place to do it.’
Manager Ian Porterfield certainly sees Newton as an important part of Chelsea's future, insisting: ‘Eddie's got authority, and that makes him very, very promising.’
Porterfield is likely to recall Mick Harford after suspension for today's game, with Graeme Le Saux most likely to be dropped.
Harford target
by Rob Shepherd
ALEX FERGUSON revealed yesterday how he tried to sign Mick Harford just before the transfer deadline to win him the title last season.
‘Harford is one of the most under-rated strikers in the game,’ said Ferguson.
‘I felt that if we'd signed him he could have given us just that little bit extra up front which would have enabled us to win the title.
‘However, David Pleat did not want to sell him because he was involved in trying to keep Luton out of relegation trouble.’
Harford, who moved to Chelsea last summer and has since scored 10 goals, is now backing United to become the first Premier League champions.
‘Their defence is the best in the League, particularly their two centre-backs, and that is a vital part of a side which will win the League,’ said Harford.
Saints rising star Maddison gives thanks to Shearer
Mike Walters
SOUTHAMPTON'S Neil Maddison last night offered former team-mate Alan Shearer a vote of thanks for sustaining his career.
Maddison and Shearer arrived at the Dell from their native north-east at the same time and shared a house when they were virtual unknowns.
Now the powerful midfielder is following in Shearer's footsteps towards stardom.
Maddison, 22, has survived four knee operations and he said: ‘I've been through the worst time of my career — now, at last, I'm getting the chance to show what I can do.
‘The last time I went to see a specialist about my knee, I was ready to pack it in if he'd told me I was facing another year out.
‘I used to get down about my injuries, but I shared digs with Alan for two years and he always kept me going.
I owe him for that.’
At Everton today, Maddison squares up to Barry Horne, who left Saints in a £750,000 deal last summer.
Tottenham first team coach Doug Livermore called on his side to produce the form that could catapult them into the European reckoning.
Livermore said: ‘The fact we are only four points off the top six shows how close the Premier League is.’
Gerard McMahon, an 18-year-old Irish whizzkid signed from Glenavon for £30,000, is included in the squad for the trip to Oldham.
Also in the party are £1.7 million Darren Anderton and Paul Moran, who both hit hat-tricks for the reserves in midweek.
Gerry Francis, the QPR manager, demanded more steel from his men on the eve of their return to Hillsborough, where they were trounced 4-0 by Sheffield Wednesday in the Coca-Cola Cup three weeks ago.
Francis said: ‘We're still seventh in the table and I don't believe there are any major problems, but there is a little shortage of battling qualities at the moment.’
Former Watford boss and England coach Steve Harrison has teamed up with Vicarage Road old boy John McClelland at Scottish Premier side St Johnstone as No 2.
Reading winger James Lambert, 19, will sign a new three-and-a-half year contract before today's clash with Stockport to warn off big clubs hunting his signature.
Lambert spent two days on trial with French giants Monaco this week and said: ‘I think I made a good impression but I'm quite happy to stay with Reading.’
Wilko wary of daring Eagles
by David Alexander
CRYSTAL PALACE may be struggling to keep in step with the rest of the Premier League but they were named yesterday as models of military efficency.
The Eagles are finding it difficult to take off but were still compared with a high-flying elite — the SAS.
Leeds manager Howard Wilkinson made the compliment in the wake of Palace's battling mid-week Coca-Cola Cup victory over Liverpool.
‘Palace are difficult to play against, efficient and well organised,’ said Wilkinson.
‘Against Liverpool they had a sweeper and man-marked all over the pitch.
They stopped Liverpool playing.
‘They're excellent at it.
When it comes to going in, doing a job and getting out, they're just like the SAS.’
Qualified
The Leeds manager is well qualified in the martial arts — he's always introduced over the Elland Road tannoy as Sergeant Wilko.
And, appropriately, tomorrow's game against Palace is live on Sky.
Wilkinson's appreciation of Palace's Eaglets indicates the difficulty of the job for Leeds at Selhurst Park.
The champions have yet to win away from home in nine League attempts this season and their only victories at Palace were in 1921 and 1981.
‘If we win there before 2041 I'll have to regard it as a bonus,’ joked Wilkinson, frustrated at the way his players have failed to perform so often this season.
‘This is going to be a difficult game but we know what we've got to do.’
Lee Chapman is likely to be fit, despite injuring his shoulder against Sheffield Wednesday last Saturday.
‘He isn't fit now but he could be by Sunday,’ added Wilkinson.
‘It was a painful knock and many players would have come off with it.
‘Chappie stayed on and scored, which sums him up — it sounds stupid but he can be at his best when he's injured!’
The Leeds players are in search of some away form motivated by a warning from coach Mick Hennigan, who this week accused some of them of becoming ‘celebrities’ after the title win last April.
Meanwhile, Palace's Geoff Thomas, who may be recalled tomorrow, last night reflected on a nightmare year in which he lost his England place and the chance of a move to big-spenders Blackburn.
He is back in the squad after three weeks of treatment on a knee ligament injury at the Lilleshall Rehabilitation Centre.
It has been desperate year for Thomas.
England manager Graham Taylor left him out of the European Championship squad last summer and Blackburn pulled put of a £3 million transfer at the 11th hour in August.
And this season, injury has restricted him to just 10 appearances.
‘1992 has already been scrapped as far as I am concerned,’ said Thomas.
‘It has to be the worst year of my career given the expectations I had when it started.
There was so much to look forward to.
‘Everything collapsed so quickly but things can change for the better in just as short a space a time.
There's no point in dwelling on what might have been.
‘Now I cannot wait to get back into the team.
The youngsters have done superbly and the spirit is great.
‘I have had the equivalent of a pre-season training session at Lilleshall and I cannot wait to get back into the side.’
Dons head back home
by Giles Smith
WIMBLEDON'S Crazy Gang are returning to Plough Lane, the happy hunting ground they had to leave for safety reasons two years ago.
Serious negotiations with the owners of the Greyhound Stadium next to the old ground are under way and are aimed at getting the club to play on a new pitch inside the track there, in a rebuilt 15,000 all-seater stadium.
A move back to Plough Lane would be a massive boost to the club currently languishing four from the bottom of the Premier League and in deep financial trouble.
Manager Joe Kinnear confirmed last night: ‘Yes, the negotiations are taking place and we hope to be back at Plough Lane next season.’
Kinnear is fed up with his side playing in front of the smallest crowds in the Premier League, averaging only just over 4,000 at Selhurst Park, the ground they share with Crystal Palace.
Warned
‘It puts us at a great disadvantage playing at Selhurst Park.
We never get to train there — it's just like playing an away game.
We are at as much of a disadvantage as the team we are playing,’ he added.
But club chairman Stanley Reed warned last night there was still some way to go in the negotiations.
‘It's a bit like the Grand National.
You get over one hurdle and there's always another one to jump — and we haven't got to Becher's Brook yet.
But we are hopeful,’ he said.
The Dons left their spiritual home because of safety concerns in the wake of the Taylor Report.
If the negotiations with the Greyhound Racing Association, who own the dog track, are successful, the capacity would rise from 6,000 to around 15,000.
The move would not interfere with greyhound racing and would leave the old Plough Lane football ground available for redevelopment.
Kinnear has warned he may have to sell stars like Warren Barton and Robbie Earle before the end of the season to raise much-needed cash.
Both are doubtful for tomorrow's trip to Nottingham Forest, along with John Fashanu, Neil Ardley and Lawrie Sanchez.
Wright's so sorry
by Mike Walters
IAN WRIGHT last night apologised to Arsenal supporters over his derby day clash with Tottenham's David Howells and claimed: ‘I've never hurt anyone.’
The £2.5 million England striker, speaking for the first time since being charged with misconduct by the Football Association over the incident, said the furore surrounding his disciplinary problems was ‘getting beyond a joke’.
And the Gunners' record signing, pilloried for his moment of madness in the battle of White Hart Lane a week ago, said: ‘People in the street are going to look at me as if I'm some kind of nutcase trying to put people out of the game.’
Wright, who lines up against Middlesbrough today, added: ‘When you analyse the incident, I didn't punch the guy.
‘I'm not saying I didn't lift my arm and I'm sorry for the embarrassment it has brought on the club and our supporters.
‘It will not happen again — the image of the club is important and I'll just have to try and accept any punishment the FA give me like a man.
‘It's just my determination and wanting to win and sometimes I get a bit over-zealous — but there is nothing malicious about me.
‘I've never hurt anyone with a challenge or anything like that, so I'm in control of what I'm doing on the pitch.
I'm still the same person.
‘Last week, the incident happened just after the chance I missed, which may have had something to do with it.
‘But there were three or four incidents off the ball, and I should have known it was me they would try and pin something on.
‘Although George Graham is not condoning what I've done, he knows it was just a bit of over-exhuberance and a bit of silliness.
‘When anyone can, they stick the knife into Arsenal at every opportunity, but we will come together and we will be back on top again.
‘We are going to have to take the stick we are given.
You just have to try and do what got you good results in the first place.
‘People have said I can't take the pressure, but things like this happen to me week in, week out.
Banter
‘Actually, I get on well with referees and get involved in banter with them.
You would have thought that what happened at Tottenham had never happened on a football pitch before.
‘But I can promise the fans I'll be going out against Middlesbrough to make sure we get a win and put a smile back on the place.’
Meanwhile, Graham last night spelled out an unequivocal warning to his misfiring Gunners and threatened to replace his big-money stars with kids who cost nothing.
The Arsenal manager, facing up to the worst sequence of League defeats at Highbury for 16 years, is refusing to become a hostage to the reputations of what he calls ‘name players’.
After four successive losses and six weeks without a League goal, Graham's patience with Arsenal — who have sunk to eighth in the Premier League — is wearing thin.
He said: ‘I'm not going to create a situation, like the one I inherited, where a lot of name players are not performing.
‘That's when I brought the kids in — I've never been afraid to do it before and I won't hesitate to do it again if it is best for the club.
It's no use having talented players if they are not performing.’
Hot Nick rocks on
Bill Blighton in Montego Bay
NICK FALDO was scotched on the rocks but toasted a scintillating 70 for the halfway lead in the £1.8 million Johnnie Walker World Championship here yesterday.
The World No 1 ran aground at Tryall's treacherous 15th hole but floated a shot ahead of Greg Norman and Tom Kite with a one-over-par 141.
And now Faldo is primed to show the rest of the world's top golfers that he is the undisputed champion.
The Open champion's engine room is his ability to keep the ball in play, but Seve Ballesteros's spluttered and died as he took a six-over-par TEN at the 10th hole.
The Spanish star's tee shot was carried out of bounds by the wind, and he five-putted from only 12ft to realise every hacker's nightmare.
Faldo is ruthless when he scents victory, but he was also sympathetic.
‘It's so easy to get frustrated on this course,’ he said.
‘If you don't feel you're in the event, you keep taking gambles.
When they don't come off, you run up a big score.’
He risked everything at the short 15th after his five-iron tee shot finished among the rocks.
‘I could have made a real mess of that hole, but I took a calculated gamble and it paid off,’ added Faldo, who walked off the green with a bogey four — one shot less than he registered in the first round.
He said: ‘I knew my club would hit the rock but I popped the ball up to 20ft and two-putted.
Had I hit it a bit harder, I would have got it quite close to the flag.’
But he endured the frustration that humbled Ballesteros, who also had an eight at the 14th to card 82 for an 18-over-par 158.
Faldo's putter was ice-cool in the 90 degree heat, with at least 10 birdie putts of 18ft or less missing the target.
He went straight to the practice putting green to cure a defect that has robbed him of a commanding lead.
‘I played very well, I hit a lot of good shots in the right places.
I only missed one fairway and that is vital here.
‘If the wind carries on blowing, I will have to play very solid stuff to keep my score at around level par.’
Faldo carved just three birdies from the unforgiving terrain but only three bogeys blemished his card.
Courageous
Kite, the US Open champion, had a seven at the fourth but recovered with six birdies for a 69, while Norman failed to join Faldo in the lead by missing from 8ft at the 18th for a 71.
Sheffield's Mark Roe refused to be intimidated by the course, shooting a courageous 72 to be fourth on 143.
He is a stroke ahead of Ian Woosnam, who birdied two of the last three holes for a 71.
Woosnam, though happy with his position, considered the course and conditions too demanding.
‘It's a great tournament but they are ruining it by making it too tough.
I hate tournaments where the leader is one over par.’
Meanwhile, Faldo is still unsure whether he will miss the US Masters in April because of the birth of his third child — and Sandy Lyle has the same dilemma.
Lyle's wife, Jolande, expects their first baby at the end of March, and the first British winner of the title in 1988 will almost certainly withdraw if she is late.
He said: ‘Jolande wants me to be at the birth, so it may mean missing the Masters.
But I have a lifetime exemption for the tour-nament.’
Lyle, who scored a 71 for 147, hasn't qualified for the other two American majors.
Leigh blow
LEIGH and Widnes have both had bizarre injury blows in their bids to reach the Regal Trophy semi-finals.
Leigh scrum-half Stuart Pugsley, who hoped to return at Hull tomorrow after concussion, faces a further lay-off after falling down his stairs at home!
The former Great Britain amateur skipper has damaged knee ligaments.
And Julian O'Neill, Widnes' Australian utility back, is in doubt for their trip to Bradford with a septic finger after being hit in the hand by a dart.
Widnes coach Phil Larder said: ‘Julian was playing darts with a young lad in his digs but one went through his finger.’
Minnows launch missile raid on Wigan
by Ray French
THIRD DIVISION Workington Town are set to launch a secret weapon in tomorrow's third-round Regal Trophy tie against five-time winners Wigan…18-stone Kiwi missile James Pickering.
If Pickering survives a fitness test on a twisted ankle, coach Peter Walsh is sure his fierce Fijian-born prop will blast a hole or two in the Trophy favourites' defence.
Walsh warned: ‘James has been unstoppable this season since he trimmed down in the summer from 22 stone to a mere 18.
‘He can sidestep as well as a back and is a frightening sight when he's running at the opposition.
‘We have used him as our main battering ram this season and Wigan's forwards will find him a tough customer.
I expect he'll bounce a few off him.’
The 26-year-old Aucklander could, according to Walsh, start the match from the bench and make an explosive entrance 20 minutes into the game.
And, along with former Newcastle Knights full-back Mark Mulligan and half-back Dean Marwood — the League's leading points scorer this season with 220 — the powerful Pickering will have plenty of support from an anticipated 10,000 crowd at Town's tiny Derwent Park ground.
Walsh added: ‘I expect James's ankle to be right but I'll probably start him from the bench and let him make an explosive entrance.
‘Cumbria is rugby league mad and everyone wants to see this match.
The atmosphere should be electric and I am sure for many of my players it is the biggest game of their careers.
‘We will certainly have a surprise or two in store for Wigan.’
Despite losing Great Britain full-back Joe Lydon, out for two weeks after minor knee surgery, Wigan should still have the power in the pack to stop Pickering with players such as Great Britain internationals Andy Platt, Phil Clarke, Martin Dermott and Denis Betts.
And then world-class backs Martin Offiah, captain Dean Bell and Martin Offiah will surely end the Cumbrians' run of nine victories and destroy their hopes of reaching the semi-finals for the first time in the club's history.
Former All Black Frano Botica will take Lydon's place, with 18-year-old Jason Robinson switching to scrum-half.
Bradford Northern coach Peter Fox has delayed naming his side for tomorrow's Trophy quarter-final against Widnes but Great Britain scrum-half Deryck Fox is definitely out.
The club's record signing is still trying to recover from a stomach muscle injury and coach Fox said yesterday: ‘He trained on Thursday night but he is not ready yet.’
Winger Brimah Kebbie is also ruled out with a pulled thigh muscle but versatile Australian Tony Anderson may play after treatment for a mouth abcess.
Buns' tasty treat
CARDIFF and District club side St Albans have a mountain to climb in the fourth round of the newly-named Swalec Cup this afternoon.
The only second-class side still left in the competition travel to Stradey Park to take on mighty Llanelli, the current holders of the trophy and eight-times winners in all.
It will be Llanelli's 104th cup tie, prop Lawrence Delaney's 58th appearance in cup rugby — and the first time St Albans have reached this stage of the event.
It all adds up to an awesome task, but, come what may, the ‘Buns’ are determined to enjoy themselves and, in the words of secretary Allen Morris, ‘savour the moment.’
Unbeaten
St Albans have quite a record of their own.
They are the holders of the Welsh Brewers Cup, the competition for second-class clubs, and are unbeaten in any match so far this season.
Welsh international outside half Neil Jenkins will again be missing from the Pontypridd side that makes the trip to West Wales League side Pontarddulais.
Jenkins is still suffering from the effects of an ankle ligament injury.
The only all-First Division tie of the round takes Maesteg to the Arms Park to take on top of the table Cardiff.
Five-times winners Cardiff recall centre and skipper Mike Hall after injury.
Rangers welcome back duo
by Scott McMunn
RICHARD GOUGH and Trevor Steven make a welcome return for Rangers against St Johnstone today.
Ibrox manager Walter Smith said: ‘We are still without injured Gary Stevens and suspended Ian Ferguson, but we are in a good position with our squad.
‘The extra few days off helped Gough, but it wasn't my intention to play him at Aberdeen if the midweek game had been on.’
Saints will be fired up under new boss John McClelland, who has taken over from the sacked Alex Totten.
Yesterday, McClelland appointed former Watford manager and England trainer Steve Harrison as his assistant.
McClelland said: ‘The players know it will be a difficult match but they are ready.’
Meanwhile, Celtic boss Liam Brady was boosted by the return of Tony Mowbray and Mike Galloway for their trip to Hearts.
That is also good news for John Collins, who was forced to fill in at left-back during Galloway's injury and Mowbray's suspension.
Hibs will be without Micky Weir, Gordon Hunter and Pat McGinlay for the clash with Aberdeen.
Partick Thistle, who have now suffered five successive defeats, hope to turn the corner this aternoon when they face Airdrie.
Wing prayer
by John Davies
BRISTOL CITY boss Denis Smith, painfully familiar with what can happen to a manager at Christmas, introduces two wingers against Peterborough at Ashton Gate today in an effort to relieve the pressure.
Smith's job is whispered to be on the line since club chairman Leslie Kew said after City's 4-0 defeat against Bristol Rovers last Sunday: ‘Now we're all under pressure.
Denis is a professional and knows that as well as I do.’
The 42-year-old Smith certainly knows all about pressure after being sacked almost a year ago by Sunderland following a 3-0 defeat at Oxford.
Coincidentally, City face Oxford at Ashton Gate on Boxing Day and Smith urgently needs good results in both games.
Bristol Rovers announced an annual profit of nearly £90,000 and disclosed they have £1.3m in the bank.
Wages amounted to nearly £1.2m, including compensation paid to sacked manager Martin Dobson last season.
Kenny still in credit
by Tony Kell
KENNY DALGLISH last night confirmed that Blackburn chairman Jack Walker will keep signing the transfer cheques.
There are no boundaries to Dalglish's spending power.
He has paid out nearly £12 million in 14 months, and said: ‘We will pay a price for anybody, provided we think that price is right.’
Dalglish switched the focus to Europe for his latest captures, Swedish defender Patrik Andersson and Norwegian Henning Berg, but insisted it wasn't because Walker's vast wealth means Rovers are being held to ransom in this country.
Threat
‘Nobody can hold you to ransom,’ he said.
‘If we want to buy a player, it is us who decide the price.’
Rovers entertain Sheffield United today and a confident Dalglish said: ‘With a performance like last Sunday at Liverpool, we'll win a lot more than we lose.’
There's little doubt where Blackburn's main threat will come from — and Blades keeper Alan Kelly has been studying videos of Alan Shearer's goals in prep-aration.
Kelly confessed: ‘I've never played against Shearer before and it's quite a daunting prospect.’
Gray the saviour
John Wardle
SUNDERLAND boss Malcolm Crosby has ditched his interest in Watford midfielder Gary Porter — because of the stunning form of teenager Michael Gray.
Crosby tried to land Porter on loan earlier in the season and the 26-year-old — transfer-listed this week — said he would welcome a return to his home-town club.
But Crosby said yesterday 18-year-old Gray had encouraged him to put away his cheque book.
‘I would have been interested in Porter if Michael had not come through as he has,’ he said.
‘The lad could save the club a lot of money.’
Gray plays at Luton today, but Crosby is without Don Goodman, Gary Owers, Brian Atkinson, Anton Rogan and John Colquhoun.
Big Ron gears up for glory
by David Harrison
RON ATKINSON last night put his Aston Villa players on Championship alert, warning: ‘The title race starts here.’
Until now, Atkinson has played down title talk, referring to his team as ‘half decent’ and describing their position as bookies' favourites as ‘barmy’.
But he said: ‘We are a clear second in the table — and not just hanging on by goal difference.
Now we've got the job of hauling Norwich back.
We made up some ground on them last weekend and have to continue to do so.
‘If we can get a couple of results back to back we know we will be in the race.
A few weeks ago I said there were 10 teams in contention, now I reckon it has whittled down to six.
‘I can see one or two teams who are slipping out and I don't think they'll come back in.
‘My experience tells me that few teams have come from outside the top five after Christmas and won the League.
We have to make sure we are still in there.’
Pitfalls
Villa go to Manchester City today, face Coventry on Boxing Day and Arsenal on December 28.
‘I expect to come out of these games with good results,’ said Atkinson, before warning about hidden pitfalls in the long run in to the finishing line.
‘At Manchester United I have been top of the table in April and still lost it.
I've also been in the situation at Old Trafford where we took just two points out of last 12 and still only lost the title by four points.’
In contrast, cash-strapped Peter Reid as good as excludes City from his long list of title candidates.
‘As I see it, around eight teams have a chance of winning the Championship and that makes a welcome change from the two or three-horse races we have been used to,’ he said.
‘Arsenal, Manchester United and Villa have got to be favourites but you cannot disregard the likes of Norwich, Blackburn or even Ipswich.
‘But I'm scared of my own squad in terms of numbers.
‘I have 12 or 13 players who can hold their own with the best in the League but injuries would leave me struggling and I know it.’
City have slumped to halfway after three defeats on the trot and it is doubtful whether the recovery will start at Maine Road today against a Villa side that Reid acknowledges is ‘brilliantly balanced right through’.
Reid's bid for Celtic striker Tommy Coyne is on hold until he can raise cash from sales and the only potential departure is goalkeeper Andy Dibble.
Portsmouth are interested but want assurance on his recovery from a broken arm before parting with £350,000.
Villa will prove a stern examination of City's credentials to stay in the hunt.
Reid admitted: ‘It's hard to find a weakness.
‘People say Ron Atkinson was presented with all that David Platt cash to rebuild his team.
‘But in my book it's good management and Ron has as good a chance as any to get his hands on that title.’
Anfield new boy Stig jumps in to make timely debut
Des Kelly
LIVERPOOL blood their new signing Stig Inge Bjornbye at Coventry today after receiving last-minute clearance for the Norwegian.
The £600,000 defender, a former ski-jumper, was granted his international transfer certificate moments after Anfield manager Graeme Souness had announced his squad for this afternoon's match — his 100th in charge.
Bjornbye was immediately drafted into the party and could make a surprise appearance in the starting line-up at left back.
The 23-year-old said: ‘This is a great Christmas present for me.
I always wanted to play football in England and now I have the chance.
‘I like the physical aspect of British football and I feel my game is suited to the Premier League.’
With the arrival of defensive re-inforcements, Souness turned his attention to his strikers and urged Ian Rush, John Barnes and company to get tough with Coventry.
‘We must be more aggressive in attack,’ Souness said.
‘The players have to be prepared to put themselves into dangerous positions, to go in for a hard tackle, be brave and take the blows.
Then we might get some goals.
‘We are dominating games, but just not punishing teams.
I can't understand how we can have so much of the ball and end up losing.’
Everton manager Howard Kendall called on his struggling stars to take a leaf out of Southampton's book and scrap for survival like today's opponents at Goodison.
‘Nobody needs to tell anyone at this club how important our next two home games are.
‘Southampton were down at the bottom, but they rolled up their sleeves, put a run together and that's what we now have to do.
‘But the positive thing is that we did win our last home game and it was a big one.
There have been two disappointments since then, but we need to build on it.’
Meanwhile, Oldham's forgotten man Andy Barlow steps from the Boundary Park shadows to face in-form Spurs.
Barlow lost his place to big-money signing Neil Pointon — the man he replaces today because of suspension.
Barlow said: ‘It is up to me to keep Neil out of the side and prove the manager wrong.
But it is a bad time to be coming back into the side with results poor and confidence low.
We are staring relegation in the face.’
Sandy's on baby alert
Bill Blighton in Montego Bay
SANDY LYLE is ready to pull out of the US Masters to be at his wife's side for the birth of their first child.
Lyle, who became the first British winner of the title in 1988, has been concerned throughout 30-year-old Jolande's pregancy.
And it could be the ‘Baby Blues’ for Britain at Augusta with twice winner Nick Faldo's wife Gill also expecting their third arrival in late March or early April.
Scot Colin Montgomerie's wife Eimear is also expecting a baby at around the same time.
Lyle, who has two sons from his previous marriage, said: ‘It is important for Jolande for me to be with her.
She wants me at the birth.
Pity
‘The baby is scheduled at the end of March, but if it is late, I may have to miss the Masters.
It would be a pity, but I have a lifetime exemption at Augusta, I can play in the tournament for the rest of my life.’
Jolande, who met Lyle when she was a masseuse on the European circuit, underwent surgery last May to improve the chances of the couple having children.
Lyle, who was born in Shropshire, but now lives on the exclusive Went-worth estate, is scheduled to move into a 16-bedroom home near Edinburgh in February and he added: ‘Who knows, the baby might even be born in Scotland.’
He and Faldo are in Jamaica this week playing in golf's richest championship — the £1.8 million Johnnie Walker World Championship — and both have left their wives at home.
As with Thursday's opening round, the wind sent scores soaring yesterday.
US Open champion Tom Kite took a seven at the fourth, but Faldo swiftly obliterated Craig Parry's three-shot overnight lead.
Parry, nicknamed Popeye because of his bulging forearms, dropped two shots in five holes and title favourite Faldo moved menacingly alongside the Australian to share the lead on level par, while Lyle was the last of the 28 starters.
We needed big Mick
by Rob Shepherd
ALEX FERGUSON revealed yesterday how he tried to sign Mick Harford to win him the title last season.
Two weeks before the transfer deadline, and in a desperate bid to clinch Manchester United's first Championship in 25 years, Ferguson made a call to David Pleat at Luton, where Chelsea striker Harford was playing at the time.
‘I felt that if we'd signed he could have given us just that little bit extra up front which would have enabled us to win the title,’ said Ferguson.
‘However, David Pleat did not want to sell him because he was involved in trying to keep Luton out of the relegation situation.
‘Harford is one of the most under-rated strikers in the game, and undoubtedly he will cause us a few problems at Stamford Bridge.’
Harford, who has scored 10 goals this season, takes on United today aiming to help the fourth-placed Londoners leapfrog Ferguson's men.
But, whatever the result, he is backing United to be the first Premier League champions.
The 33-year-old striker, who will be making his 500th League appearance, says: ‘I believe United have the strongest squad, and they will be there at the death, no question.
‘Their defence is the best in the League, particularly their two centre-halves, and that is a vital part of a side which will win the League.’
Chelsea, however, are not in Ferguson's list of title rivals.
‘The teams I really fear are Arsenal and Leeds,’ said the United manager.
‘Arsenal can still win the title, and I can see Leeds stringing a set of results together which will suddenly put them back in contention.’
United, already without the injured Bryan Robson, will also be missing winger Ryan Giggs, prompting Ferguson to draft 18-year-old Keith Gillespie into his squad.
Ferguson will decide this morning between the untried Gillespie, Clayton Blackmore and Andrei Kanchelskis.
Eric Cantona seems certain to continue in the side.
Ferguson added: ‘When Eric joined Leeds last season, he gave them that extra bit which enabled them win the title.
‘We have already seen his effect on us.
Hopefully it can carry through to the end of the season.’
Keegan £1m bid
by David Alexander
KEVIN KEEGAN is set to mark Newcastle's ‘perfect’ position with a £1 million-plus double signing.
The Newcastle manager yesterday agreed personal terms with Pounds 700,000 Dutch international striker Eric Viscaal.
And Keegan revealed last night he plans to complete a second deal.
‘One signing is imminent but I want to bring two players in,’ he said.
The First Division leaders meet promotion rivals Millwall in a televised game tomorrow and confident Keegan added: ‘Everything's absolutely perfect at this club.
‘Just about everyone's fit.
I've got 20 players fighting for a place and 11 who don't want to give up the shirt.
‘We've got a good lead, we're the top scorers and we've conceded the least.’
Fit-again keeper Tommy Wright and midfield influence Paul Bracewell are unlikely to be in the starting 11, with Keegan sure to stay with the same side.
Keegan is keen to persuade Viscaal that his future lies in England.
The 25-year-old played for Holland in the World Cup win in Turkey on Wednesday and Keegan said: ‘He's a Newcastle-type player — comfy on the ball, a football brain and he wants to be a winner.
‘You've got to have ambition if you want to come to this club.’
Grave doubts about Tom
THE appointment of Tom Graveney as match referee for next year's Test and one-day series between West Indies and Pakistan could be blocked because of a comment he made five years ago.
After the infamous Mike Gatting-Shakoor Rana row in 1987, Graveney, 65, said of Pakistan: ‘They've been cheating us for 37 years and it is just getting worse and worse.’
Pakistan haven't complained yet but ICC secretary Colonel John Stephenson has sent a FAX to their Board ‘asking whether there is any official objection’.
Smith has last laugh
Graham Otway
ROBIN SMITH last night laughed off reports that an injury could wreck his early tour plans in India.
Fears that the hard-hitting Hamsphire batsman is facing a three-and-a-half week lay-off with a cracked toe after a pre-tour training accident at Lilleshall last week have been allayed.
Indeed, callers to his home in the Hampshire village of Whiteparish were greeted with a sarcastic telephone message, which said: ‘I am sorry Robin cannot come to the phone — he has gone to have his foot amputated.’
The truth is that while batting in the indoor nets he was struck on the toe by a ball from paceman Chris Lewis and an X-ray over the weekend revealed he had indeed suffered a cracked bone.
But Smith, who will join the England party at Gatwick as scheduled on December 27, told newmanager Keith Fletcher yesterday: ‘It's still sore but not serious.’
And he added: ‘I've never had a broken toe before but Ian Botham will tell me I'm a big softie if I'm not playing by the middle of next month.
‘I'll be very disappointed if I'm not competing for a place in the first one-day international on January 16.
That would mean it would take more than three weeks to heal.
‘I may have to miss the first game but I'm hoping to get myself a boot made for my left foot with a steel plate in it to protect the toe so that I can practice as soon as I get to India.’
Smith doesn't want to be out of the selectors' minds at the start of the tour because he is desperate to improve on his overseas record for England.
Despite a Test average of 50 and seven centuries in 66 innings, he has yet to score a Test ton abroad.
And if he doesn't succeed against India and Sri Lanka, he will be hard pressed to break his duck in the West Indies in 1994.
Welsh ace is KO'd
COLIN STEPHENS was tackled onto the Stradey Park terraces, and out of the East v West game, as cup holders Llanelli moved through to the fifth round of the SWALEC Cup with a 54-3 win over St Albans.
Welsh outside half Stephens was clattered into touch by wing Kevin O'Sullivan and then fell over a concrete wall onto the terraces and will miss the December 28 game.
He cut his right thumb, had five stitches put in a nasty gash beneath his right knee and badly bruised his right ankle.
Rivals
The injuries are almost certain to keep him out of the Christmas cracker match at the National Ground on Monday and hand his two biggest rivals for the Welsh No 10 jersey the chance to shine.
Neil Jenkins will be fit to resume his season for East Wales, while Cardiff's Adrian Davies, Stephen's understudy against Australia, is likely to fit into the West Wales' line up at the Llanelli stand off's expense.
That was the only hiccup in Llanelli's 10-try victory, although they were not the highest scorers of the day.
That honour fell to Swansea who trounced Abercynon 75-0.
Cardiff also went on a points rampage against First Division rivals Maesteg, scoring nine tries in a 55-3 victory.
But the minnows had their day as well as Gwent village side Fleur de Lys beat Aberavon 9-5.
Howard furious
FRED HOWARD has blasted officials after his demotion from England's panel of international referees.
Howard, from Liverpool, has an England record of 20 Tests, officiated in both World Cups and has been on the panel for nine years.
And he said: ‘I am feeling very bitter.
I could accept the decision by the Referees' Committee if my marks had gone down.
But that is not the case.
‘I have been told that my knee problem brought the decision.
But I have carried that knee for 15 years without any trouble.’
The knee injury forced him to give up playing at 23.
‘Last year I was one of the four best referees in the world.
Now I am not rated among the top three Englishmen.’
Howard (43) earned the tag ‘Fearless Fred’ when, after sending off Australian David Codey in the 1987 World Cup, he dismissed three more internationals in 1990 — Kevin Moseley, of Wales, Frenchman Alain Carminati and Andre Stoop, of Namibia.
Morris guards against the axe
Giles Smith
London 20, North 24
DEWI MORRIS admitted last night his England scrum-half place could be in danger, despite a superb return to form in this shock win by the North.
Although striking an important psychological blow by coming out on the winning side against his main challenger, Wasps' Steve Bates, he admitted: ‘Even though I am the man in possession, it would be just as easy for the selectors to pick Steve.’
The Orrell man, who was such a key player in England's Grand Slam last year, had helped inspire a superb North effort to end what small chance London had of taking the Divisional title.
‘Yes, I know there were criticisms of my form in the internationals against Canada and South Africa.
But I think it was coming back in this match, and I would be disappointed not to be in the team to face France.
That is what I am concentrating on now,’ he said.
Morris was at the heart of an amazing North defensive effort to hold on to a 24-17 half-time lead in the face of a strong second-half wind.
London hardly set foot in their own half in that second half, but, with Morris constantly exhorting his forwards and putting in key tackles, the North restricted them to just one Rob Andrew penalty goal.
With the wind in a 41-point first half, North had the upper hand with tries from Alan Brown and Rory Underwood, and one conversion and four penalties from outside half Paul Grayson, against London tries from Mickey Skinner and Damien Hopley, converted by Steve Pilgrim, and a penalty and a conversion from Andrew.
But London couldn't convert overwhelming territory and possession into points in the second half.
‘On another day we might have had four or five tries in the second half, but it just wasn't to be,’ said London coach Tony Jorden.
Barnes blasts fixture farce
Tony Roche
Midlands 18 S.West 18
FOR a man clutching the ADT Divisional Championship trophy, Stuart Barnes was decidedly ratty.
But then just about everybody involved in this remarkable afternoon of attrition at Leicester emerged chewing a bone of contention.
To dispense with the basics, the Midlands deserved to, but failed to, win the match and the South West deserved to, and did, win their first Divisional title.
In a fierce, raw and, at times, downright nasty battle, Barnes led his besieged troops to glory only to hit out in a variety of directions afterwards.
‘I feel knackered already,’ he said.
‘And this time next year, with 18 League games instead of 12, the game will only be played by students and guys with secure jobs.
Strain
‘The whole programme is growing too large.
The England lads going to Lanzarote this month are already feeling the strain, yet there is worse to come.’
Barnes is also bemused by ‘the strange decision to announce the England squad before this Championship was completed’.
He said: ‘I thought the idea was to see everybody in action first.’
And, speaking of England: ‘I am surpised that Neil Back has been omitted from the squad because he is an outstanding player.
It is very tough to be left out for a rookie like Steve Ojomoh.’
Enter Midlands skipper Dean Richards, who misses the Lanzarote jaunt because of work.
‘Neil is one of the best openside flankers in the world, a player who runs at 110mph and gives 125 per cent,’ he said.
‘I cannot see the logic in leaving him behind.’
On his own decision to go for the draw with a last-minute John Liley penalty, Richards said pointedly: ‘Trying to win the game by opting for the scrum would have been a waste of time because the moment we drove for the line, they would have wheeled it or collapsed it.
‘So I chose the three points, the draw and second place in the Championship.’
Back, outstanding throughout, said: ‘We should have won this with room to spare.
As for my own disappointment, I will keep playing the best I can and hope things change.’
Referee Fred Howard, recently dumped off the England international panel, admitted: ‘I feel very bitter about it.
They say my leg is dodgy but how could I referee a game like this one if that were the case.’
Fortunate
With Richard Hill warned for three beefy challenges on the impressive Matt Dawson and Mark Linnett fortunate that a few loose uses of fist and foot went unseen, the atmosphere was anything but festive.
Was anybody actually happy?
‘I am,’ said South West coach Keith Richardson.
‘I'm happy that we have finally shaken off the Aunt Sally label in this competition, happy with the attitude of the players and happy that Richard Hill was not sent off.’
The Midlands scored through tries by Richards and Stuart Potter plus two penalties and a conversion by Liley.
Jon Callard and Andy Blackmore scored the South West's tries, Barnes and Callard kicking the rest of the points.
Barrett in world bid
PAT BARRETT, the former European champion from Manchester, will today get the go-ahead for a February 27 title challenge to WBA welterweight champion Crisanto Espana.
Barrett had a first round victory over American Sam Gervins in Italy on Saturday.
Marshall mauled
ENGLAND No 1 Peter Marshall was crushed 15-7, 15-12, 15-10 by former world champion Rodney Marsh in the £85,000 Qatar international squash tournament quarter-finals in Doha.
Ashes on air
BALL-BY-BALL radio commentary of next summer's Test series against Australia has been confirmed by the BBC.
Coverage will be shared by Radio 5 and Radio 3 FM.
Marc in touch
LUXEMBOURG'S Marc Girardelli trails overall World Cup leader Alberto Tomba of Italy by five points after victory in a giant slalom in Kranjska Gora, Slovenia, yesterday.
Lewis loot
BRITAIN'S Dave Lewis won £8,000 yesterday after finishing third in the IAAF world cross country challenge at Mol, Belgium, won by Olympic 10,000 metres champion Khalid Skah.
Ndlovu shines
COVENTRY'S Peter Ndlovu scored a 45th-minute goal and Liverpool goalkeeper Bruce Grobbelaar also shone in Zimbabwe's 2-1 World Cup qualifying victory over Egypt in Harare.
Ward is the sinning Saint
Ray French
ST HELENS' Test prop Kevin Ward faces a bleak Christmas as he prepares to meet the Rugby League's Disciplinary Committee on Wednesday.
Ward was dismissed in the fourth minute of Saints' 12-8 Regal Trophy quarter-final defeat by Castleford on Saturday for a trip on Mike Ford.
And Saints' hopes of closing the gap on League leaders Wigan will take a dive if the 35-year-old is ruled out of their Christmas derby clashes against the Central Park champions and Widnes.
Saints led 8-6 at half-time but a lapse of concentration in the first minute of the second half, when Kiwi loose forward Tawera Nikau put centre Tony Smith through the gap for Cas' match-winning try, proved the turning point.
Town fail in gallant glory bid
Ray French
Workington Town 12, Wigan 24
WIGAN fought all the way before seeing off Workington Town's hopes of a historic first semi-final place in today's Regal Trophy draw.
A crowd of more than 8,000, Workington's biggest for more than a decade, saw the Cumbrians produce a battling second-half performance.
Wigan led 18-0 after 25 minutes with tries from Frano Botica, Denis Betts and Sam Panapa, all converted by Botica.
But in the 35th minute Aussie Mark Mulligan and Dean Marwood combined to put hard-working prop Peter Riley over beneath the posts.
And 14 minutes later, the cool Marwood foxed Wigan by switching the ball to the blindside where winger Paul Penrice evaded Martin Offiah to score in the corner.
Marwood, the League's leading scorer with 224 points, added both goals to make it 18-12.
Internationals Shaun Edwards, Dean Bell, Phil Clarke and Betts used all their skills and power to subdue Town.
And Great Britain loose forward Clarke grabbed the match-clinching try in the 72nd minute.
Wigan coach John Monie admitted: ‘Everything I had heard about Workington proved to be true.
They showed tremendous courage in the way they came at us and it was a glorious day for Cumbria.’
Hull marched into the Trophy semi-finals with a 24-12 win over Leigh.
But they had an early fright as Leigh took the lead after six minutes.
Jason Donohue raced on to a speculative John Pendlebury kick and beat the Hull defence to touch down.
David Tanner added the conversion.
Hull levelled with an excellent try by Rob Nolan from a pass by Aussie Scott Gale.
And Gale was involved again as compatriot Ivan Henjak collected his kick ahead to touch down.
Excellent kicking from winger Paul Eastwood pushed Hull into a commanding 10-point lead at half-time.
Eastwood then put the result beyond doubt with a 45-yard touchdown and a penalty for a match tally of six goals and a try.
Battling Leigh never gave up and were rewarded with a late try from Andy Collier, converted by Simon Baldwin.
Meetings in doubt
TODAY'S racing is dependent on two early morning inspections.
Officials at Lingfield will inspect at 7am, but further rain would put the fixture in doubt.
Edinburgh will also take a look at 7am, where the problem is frost in the ground.
However, clerk of the course Sam Morshead is optimistic.
Fellow's odds-on
Henry Rix
FRENCH raider The Fellow is now odds-on favourite to land a second successive King George VI Chase at Kempton on Boxing Day.
Francois Doumen's seven-year-old is 4-5 with Ladbrokes for the Pounds 70,000 showpiece on Saturday following sustained support.
The Fellow, a comfortable winner from Docklands Express in last year's King George and twice touched off in the Gold Cup, has apparently thrived since finishing third in last month's Hennessy.
But his presence has failed to frighten away the opposition and 11 runners have stood their ground at the five-day declaration stage.
Josh Gifford will saddle Bradbury Star and Deep Sensation.
‘The Fellow is obviously the one to beat, but if anything can beat him, I think it could be one of mine,’ he said.
‘Of the two, Bradbury Star is probably more likely to give The Fellow a race because he's certain to get the trip, whereas we just don't know if Deep Sensation stays,’ he added.
Kim Bailey has snapped up Peter Scudamore for Kings Fountain, and Anthony Tory will ride stable companion Docklands Express.
Nigel Twiston-Davies anticipates a bold show from Tipping Tim, but Cool Ground and Miinnehoma, both beaten at Ascot on Saturday, are unlikely to run.
Ladbrokes bet: 4-5 The Fellow, 5-1 Bradbury Star, 8-1 Docklands Express, 10-1 Deep Sensation, Kings Fountain, 14-1 Tipping Tim, Pat's Jester.
Rix on a roll
RACING Editor Henry Rix hit the target again on Saturday with yet another winning nap.
His best bet of the day, impressive Lingfield winner Carlowitz (5-1), coupled with next best El Volador (11-8) rewarded followers at odds of over 13-1.
Carlowitz was Rix's sixth winning nap in 12 days.
Bruno must wait, says Maloney
Frank Ward
FRANK MALONEY last night laughed off suggestions that his world heavyweight champion Lennox Lewis could meet Frank Bruno at Wembley in May as ‘pure fantasy’.
The two British fighters have been tipped for a multi-million pound British showdown since Bruno's boxing licence was renewed 14 months ago, and the prospect gathered pace last week when Lewis was crowned WBC champion.
But Maloney says reports over the weekend that Bruno's manager, Mickey Duff, hopes the fine print will be settled soon, with No 1 contender Tony Tucker being offered a ‘step aside’ payment of £500,000, are completely wrong.
‘Bruno figures in our three-fight plan, but any suggestion from Mickey Duff that Lennox will defend his title against Bruno in May is pure speculation,’ said Maloney.
‘I know Duff has spoken to Lennox's American promoter Dan Duva, but he has not spoken to anybody directly involved with Lennox's career in Britain.’
Lewis is expected to make his first defence against London-born New Yorker Alex Stewart.
However, overshadowing this is the ominous presence of former world champion Tucker, with the influential support of his manager Don King.
Maloney added: ‘If Duff wants to pay King £500,000, step aside and allow Bruno to get in the ring, that would be fine.
But Lennox fears nobody and we will not be paying anybody anything to step aside.
Contract
‘I have contacted Bruno's lawyer and told him to tell Frank that if he wants to fight Lennox he should get in contact with us directly as I understand that Duff's promotional contract expires in April.
‘Bruno against Lennox means something in London but it means nothing in America and I just can't see it happening until October at the earliest.
‘We might even fight Tucker first, but until Lennox's coronation on January 14, I don't expect a firm decision to be made about his first defence.’
Last week Bruno pleaded with Lewis not to risk his title and their giant pay day by going to America to meet Tucker.
‘In America you'll have to beat two men,’ he claimed.
‘This is my dream — first a fight against Lewis, then a decider against Riddick Bowe.
I am confident.’
Meanwhile, WBA and IBF champion Bowe has lined up Michael Dokes for his first title defence on February 6.
Akinwande blow
HENRY AKINWANDE shed a tear after a draw with the raw Axel Schulz in Saturday's vacant European heavyweight title challenge in Berlin.
But he could cash in with a lucrative return against the 24-year-old German early next year.
Akinwande's manager, Mickey Duff, offered Schulz's handlers £75,000 to come to London but they rejected it and the rematch is destined to go to the highest bidder.
‘I suppose half a robbery is better than a full robbery,’ said Duff.
49ers on top
David Tossell
THE San Francisco 49ers took a big step towards the Super Bowl by clinching the NFC West division and securing home advantage throughout the play-offs with a 21-14 victory over the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.
Steve Young threw three touchdown passes, including two to Jerry Rice, while Joe Montana, back in uniform for the first time in two years, stayed on the sidelines after being listed as the 49ers' third-choice quarterback.
Young connected with Rice for a 30-yard touchdown in the fourth quarter to snap a 14-14 tie and give the 49ers their league-leading 13th victory.
The Kansas City Chiefs blew their chance of a play-off spot and lost ground in the race for the AFC West crown by losing 35-21 to the New York Giants.
Debut delight
MICHAEL Whitaker put the gloss on a successful first show as an Everest rider by winning the Grand Prix event at the Olympia showjumping championship last night.
Whitaker, on Midnight Madness, had to overhaul Olympic champion Ludger Beerbaum of Germany to earn the £10,000 prize and his fourth win of the week.
He said: ‘I've always wanted to win this one, and this proves how good my horse is.
He's a fighter, and on his day can beat anything.’
Earlier, Nick Skelton won the Christmas Knockout and the Six Bar competition to ensure he would not be the only Everest rider without an outright win.
All Whyte for Boro
Mike Walters
Arsenal 1, Middlesbrough 1
IAN WRIGHT'S equaliser papered over the cracks of a sluggish Arsenal display but it didn't stop Boro's Lennie Lawrence dreaming of a Whyte Christmas.
Wright's smart reflexes rescued a point for the Gunners eight minutes from time, which was tough on Middlesbrough's Derek Whyte, his shadow all afternoon.
But Arsenal's first League goal for six weeks failed to placate the Highbury faithful after four successive defeats, and Wright's overdue reconciliation with respectable behaviour was a small mercy indeed.
After their dubious role in Love Thy Neighbour at Tottenham the previous week — which is now the subject of FA investigation — Arsenal must have known it would be another trying day, even before kick-off.
For a start, was it coincidence or conspiracy that the match sponsors were Kick?
And on the subject of conspiracies, what future does Swedish winger Anders Limpar have at Highbury if a 20-year-old from up the Piccadilly Line at Wood Green is now ahead of him in the pecking order?
When asked why Limpar hadn't even made the bench, manager George Graham replied tersely: ‘Because he wasn't selected.’
In his place, Mark Flatts showed sufficient application and skill to suggest Limpar may have a long wait to get his place back.
Graham warned his stars last week that he would not suffer overpaid under-achievers — and the suspicion is growing that Limpar was one of the main targets.
He added fuel to the theory last night by saying: ‘We have the talent here but we don't have the consistency.
If the established players are not doing it, I will give the youngsters a chance to show they can.
‘I hope some of the senior players are looking at Flatts' attitude.
He's prepared to work and graft.’
Back in the autumn, marking Wright was possibly the shortest straw in football.
But Whyte emerged from his duel with him to report: ‘Ian was no problem.
We even had a laugh and a joke.’
MoM: Whyte (All right on the night).
Olney boost
Tony Kell
Oldham 2, Spurs 1
MODEST hero Ian Olney was the first to admit he has not been playing well.
And the Oldham boo-boys were still screaming for him to be substituted when he headed an injury-time winner.
The record £700,000 buy said: ‘I've been missing chances and I can understand the fans' frustrations but this goal should help.’
It was only the Lancashire side's second win in nine games and manager Joe Royle admitted: ‘We needed that.
I was on the edge of my seat for most of the time but nobody could deny we deserved this result.’
Royle added: ‘Olney has taken time to settle in but he is full of running and he is now doing okay.
It was certainly a vital goal for us.’
And Spurs coach Doug Livermore added: ‘It is sickening to think we had done enough and then had to leave with nothing.
‘We had a good run in losing only one of our previous eight games and had hoped to get a good result at Oldham.’
Leading scorer Graeme Sharp put Oldham in front after 29 minutes when he headed home a Mark Brennan free-kick.
But Teddy Sheringham levelled in the second half when he converted a Gary Mabbutt flick-on.
MoM: Neil Adams, Oldham (Busy).
FA probe derby row
TOTTENHAM chief executive Terry Venables and Arsenal manager George Graham could face FA disciplinary charges following an alleged incident in the tunnel at half-time during last week's derby.
Referee Alf Buksh is understood to have complained in his match report of being verbally abused by officials from both teams.
Spurs' club coaches — Doug Livermore and Ray Clemence are also understood to have been mentioned in Buksh's report.
An FA spokesman confirmed: ‘The referee's report includes an incident involving himself and members of both clubs' management.
The use of abusive language to the referee is specifially mentioned.’
Lee has that Sharpe look again
Rob Shepherd
Chelsea 1 Manchester Utd 1
FOR most of this year, Lee Sharpe has wondered if he would play at the top again.
Recently, his return for Manchester United has been overshadowed by Eric Cantona's arrival.
But Sharpe's presence has been no less significant to United's Championship hopes than the Frenchman's.
Since losing to Aston Villa in his comeback game a month ago, United have won four and drawn one.
And in 73 minutes of an uninspiring game at Stamford Bridge, Sharpe showed why United, despite a poor display, are more viable contenders for the title than London's leading candidates.
Ahead through a David Lee goal, Chelsea braced themselves for United's response.
But their defence could do nothing as winger Sharpe burst down the left and opened them up with a devastating cross.
Cantona's eventual finish, a delightful turn and shot to claim his first goal for United, was a peach.
But Sharpe's penetration made it possible.
Such on tap inspiration is still beyond Chelsea.
As Ferguson put it: ‘Sharpe is a deliverer, not a flatterer.
At one point there was real concern about his future but he is now back and playing better than when he was first picked by England.’
Sharpe was sidelined for most of last season with a groin injury.
During the summer he was struck down by meningitis.
He admitted: ‘It has been a shocking year for me.
When I had meningitis, I wondered whether I would be able to come back properly.
‘But I have just won the Young Eagle award and feel I am close to my best.’
Ferguson believes the unwanted break has benefited a player who, still only 21, has a great future.
The United manager added: ‘The trouble is these days youngsters play so much they don't get the chance to watch the game from the terraces and get a passion about it, like my generation.
‘One thing Lee has benefitted from is being able to do that.
He has been able to see others' strengths and weaknesses.
I feel the improvement we have seen in him is down to that.’
Sharpe agreed: ‘I was able to look at games, then relate situations to mistakes I was making.
‘I now feel I defend much better and instead of always looking to beat the full-back I am happy to get half a yard on him and cross the ball as quickly as possible.’
Sharpe insisted: ‘The players are still hurt by what happened last season.
There is a strong determination to put it right this time and not to let things slip.
The fact we are not ahead of the pack at the moment is a help because everyone is not talking about us winning it.’
United are more convincing candidates.
Ferguson admitted: ‘We didn't deserve to win, we didn't play well.
But in terms of the Championship race we churned a result out.
If you are going to be successful sometimes you have to do that.’
Chelsea are an efficient rather than exciting team.
They don't appear good enough to win the title yet with a crop of youngsters emerging and a new maturity in central midfielder Dennis Wise, they are hard to beat.
They could well win one of the cups.
MoM: Wise (new image).
Anfield's no-hopers
David Harrison
Coventry City 5, Liverpool 1
LIVERPOOL shook their heads in disbelief at the cruel circumstances of the heaviest defeat Graeme Souness has suffered as a manager.
But the stark reality they have to accept, after being crushed by a vibrant Coventry side, is that they are now also-rans in the race to become the first champions of the Premier League.
Any suggestion from the other contenders that the men from Anfield are dangerous dark horses was exposed as a sham.
Despite a bright start, Liverpool were eventually shown up as a brittle, spiritless outfit whose heads dropped when the roll of the dice went against them.
And, indeed, it could have been an even bigger drubbing.
As winger Mark Walters said: ‘Without Mike Hooper in goal, it could have been seven — and that's disgraceful.
‘As far as the title is concerned, the boys think we can still get up there, but it's looking difficult.
It's not in our hands any more.
We have got to rely on others.
‘It important that we win our games over Christmas.
If we go into the New Year in 10th place, we are not going to be able to do it.’
Souness was still grumbling about the decisions that went against his team — the penalty that gave Coventry their first goal, the free-kick that led to their second, an offside flag that never came for the third and the sending off of Jamie Redknapp.
He said: ‘Eventually we went to pieces.
We gave them an early Christmas present.
Correction, someone gave them an early Christmas present.
‘Those four decisions changed the game entirely.
If someone had gone home after 55 minutes when we were well on top and switched on his TV to see the score, he would have thought someone was playing a joke.’
But John Barnes' assessment of the performance was more pointed.
Asked by Norwegian TV about new boy Stig Inge Bjornebye's performance, the England winger said: ‘As a team we let him down.
He's good in the air and can distribute the ball.
All he needs now is someone to pass it to — another 10 players around him.’
Dream
After full-back Brian Borrows had scored twice, Kevin Gallacher added a third before Redknapp pulled one back for Liverpool.
But Mick Quinn had the final say, scoring the last two goals to take his Coventry total to an astonishing eight goals in five games.
The 30-year-old striker, who used to support Liverpool from the Kop, said: ‘It's always been my dream to score against them.’
The result earned Coventry the vote from Graham Taylor's panel as the Barclays' Performance of the Week.
A local boys' club will collect the £650 prize.
MoM: Lee Hurst, Coventry (Bundle of energy).
BLACK DAYS FOR THE REDS
LIVERPOOL have conceded five goals or more just five times since 1954.
Saturday's trouncing at Coventry is their equal-third heaviest loss since then…
9-1 v Birmingham, Division Two 1954-55
7-2 v Tottenham, Division One 62-63
5-1 v Ajax, European Cup, 65-66
5-1 v Aston Villa, Division One, 76-77
5-1 v Coventry, Premier League, 92-93
4-0 v Arsenal, Division One, 91-92
4-0 v Coventry, Division One, 83-84
4-0 v Derby, Division One, 69-70
4-0 v Everton, Division One, 65-66
4-0 v Chelsea, Division One, 65-66
4-1 v West Ham, L'woods Cup, 88-89
4-1 v Luton, Division One, 86-87
4-1 v Wolves, Division One, 80-81
4-1 v Newcastle, Division One, 74-75
Rideout goal rubs it in
PAUL RIDEOUT proved a point with the winner as Everton beat his former club Southampton 2-1.
Rideout said he held no grudge against Saints manager Ian Branfoot, but admitted: ‘It was a very satisfying goal for me.
He gave me three games — which I didn't think was a fair chance.
But I went on to bigger clubs.’
MoM: Gary Ablett, Everton (Solid).
Villa's official favour
David Alexander
Man City 1, Aston Villa 1
RON ATKINSON admits that Villa are rightfully title favourites as the season approaches half-time.
Big Ron's job lot are joint market leaders with Manchester United, but if they do lift the Premier League referee Raymond Bigger should be on the celebration party guest list.
Villa were worth a point, but they will receive no bigger favour than the one at Maine Road.
The Norfolk official left City looking as crestfallen as Christmas turkeys when Garry Parker volleyed them in front with clinical skill — with Dalian Atkinson clearly offside, twice.
It was confusion created by the back-pass law.
Atkinson challenged City keeper Tony Coton, was offside when the ball came back quickly, and again when Parker scored.
Bigger judged the striker wasn't interfering.
‘The key phrase is ‘seeking to gain an advantage’, and we didn't think he was,’ said the referee.
‘I think we made the right decision, but it is a grey area.
‘I can see why managers have a different point of view and say the game should always be stopped.’
MoM: Paul McGrath, Villa (Better than ever).
Nilsson simply priceless
Alan Biggs
Sheff Wed 1, QPR 0
TREVOR FRANCIS last night hailed Roland Nilsson as the right-back money can't buy.
‘There's no one in the Premier League to touch him,’ said Francis after Nilsson's complete dominance of England winger Andy Sinton.
Francis, who is delighted to have tied his Swedish star to a new three-and-a-half-year contract, added: ‘No amount of money would budge Roland from Hillsborough.
‘He was absolutely outstanding against one of the best left-side specialists in the business.’
But for QPR's Les Ferdinand there was another dip in fortunes midway through a season that began with an international breakthrough.
‘Things haven't been going well since my England call-up,’ said Ferdinand, who thought he should have won a late penalty after colliding with Chris Woods.
Mark Bright was Wednesday's first half matchwinner, 20 minutes after a Gary Penrice strike was harshly ruled offside.
MoM: Nilsson (Impeccable).
Bees block
Brentford 0, West Ham 0
BRENTFORD'S run of six successive wins came to an end before their best crowd of the season and West Ham were unlucky not to have taken all three points.
However, Hammers' manager Billy Bonds said: ‘It was a good point.
Our back four defended really well.
We might have done better with one or two chances, but I am pleased with the overall performance.’
Clive Allen missed one great chance six minutes before half-time when his snap shot from inside the box, following a superb pass by Julian Dicks, was brilliantly tipped over by Bees' keeper Graham Benstead.
Benstead had made another great save turning aside a rasping shot from Ian Bishop and in the second half Trevor Morley blazed over.
Brentford almost snatched victory when substitute Neil Smillie had two outstanding chances in the last three minutes.
First a mix-up in the West Ham defence gave him a clear sight of goal, but Ludek Miklosko threw himself at Smillie's feet to save.
And, in the dying seconds, Miklosko blocked Smillie's close-range effort.
Former West Ham striker Frank McAvennie, 33, has joined Scottish Premier Division Partick Thistle on a two-month contract.
Magic Marco
AC MILAN striker Marco van Basten yesterday won the European Footballer of the Year award for the third time.
The 28-year-old Dutchman, winner in 1988 and 1989, became only the third player to be crowned three times after compatriot and mentor Johan Cruyff and Frenchman Michel Platini.
Manchester United keeper Peter Schmeichel finished fifth but there were no British players in the top 10.
Van Basten goes into a St Moritz clinic todaymon for surgery on an ankle injury.
Top 10:
1
Marco van Basten (Netherlands, AC Milan);
2
Hristo Stoichkov (Bulgaria, Barcelona);
3
Dennis Bergkamp (Netherlands, Ajax);
4
Thomas Haessler (Germany, AS Roma);
5
Peter Schmeichel (Denmark, Man Utd);
6
Brian Laudrup (Denmark, Fiorentina);
7
Michael Laudrup (Denmark, Barcelona);
8
Ronald Koeman (Netherlands, Barcelona);
9
Stephane Chapuisat (Switzerland, Dortmund)
10
Frank Rijkaard (Netherlands, AC Milan) and Enzo Scifo (Belgium, Torino).
Mark drops a clanger
David Harrison
Nottm Forest 1 Wimbledon 1
MARK CROSSLEY dropped Nottingham Forest deeper into the relegation mire yesterday with an error which even a Sunday morning park footballer would find embarrassing.
The much-maligned Forest 'keeper literally let two points slip away when he handed Andy Clarke a 12th-minute equaliser after Nigel Clough had got his dad's team off to a flying start.
Poor Crossley became the laughing stock of a 19,326 crowd when Vinnie Jones overhit a through ball, leaving the Forest No 1 with the seemingly easy task of collecting it yards ahead of the advancing Clarke.
But, in pantomime fashion, he let it fumble from his hands and Clarke could hardly believe his luck as he rolled the ball from into the empty net.
Crossley's howler left Forest rooted to the foot of the Premier League, four points behind second-from-bottom Wimbledon.
More crucially, there are now six points between Brian Clough's side and a position of safety.
Their confidence soared and crashed in the space of seven minutes at the start of a game always haunted by the spectre of relegation.
Clough junior, used as a lone striker, put Forest ahead after five minutes, prodding the ball wide of Hans Segers after Kingsley Black had picked up a dreadful pass by Wimbledon's Roger Joseph.
Then came Crossley's blunder and, although he made a fine one-handed save from Dean Holdsworth three minutes later, there were no seasonal feelings of goodwill from the Forest fans towards their 'keeper.
Scot Gemmill should have put Forest back in front in the 20th minute after being put through by Stuart Pearce.
But the Dons also had a chance to snatch victory when Clarke shot wide just after half-time.
Support
Forest had virtually disappeared as an attacking force, with the outnumbered Clough receiving little support from midfield.
So Forest will go into the New Year at rock bottom with murmurings of discontent from the Forest crowd growing ever louder as the threat of relegation looms ever larger.
Indeed, Wimbledon boss Joe Kinnear warned Brian Clough afterwards: ‘It's every man for himself now.’
But Kinnear believes his team's experience at clawing their way out of trouble in previous years will serve them well in their latest survival struggle.
‘We do it year after year,’ he said.
‘Forest have got to come to terms with the position they are in and dig in.
‘Questions will be asked of all their players individually, but if anyone can cope with it, Brian can.
But I do think they will struggle to score goals with Nigel Clough up front on his own.
‘If we can go through the Christmas programme, with games against Crystal Palace and Chelsea coming up, and get good results I think we'll get out of it.
‘I was satisfied up to a point today, but the game was there to be taken.
I thought Clarke should have scored a second goal when he went through.’
Forest's £3 million-rated midfielder Roy Keane is reported to have agreed an extended contract for another two years.
Away-day misery for angry Millwall
David Alexander
Newcastle United 1, Millwall 1
FURIOUS Millwall claimed they were the victims of a controversial penalty decision yesterday.
They were 15 minutes from a battling victory at St James' Park and seemed to be riding tremendous pressure when referee Steve Bell stepped in to award the Division One high-fliers a spot kick.
Newcastle's Robert Lee tangled with Millwall substitute Alex Rae and right-back Ken Cunningham and when the winger went down linesman John Jones immediately signalled a foul.
Referee Bell pointed to the spot and striker David Kelly stepped up to equalise with his 12th goal of the season.
But angry Millwall manager Mick McCarthy stormed afterwards: ‘The decision was a disgrace.
Newcastle deserved something but the decision did disappoint us.
‘I've been to see the referee and he told me to ask the linesman because it was his decision.
Pontius Pilate washed his hands of it and passed it on.
The linesman said it was for a push and handball.
I've watched it on TV and couldn't see either.
Everyone's confused — the players and the TV people.
‘That's me fined now for bringing the game into disrepute.’
Millwall's protests ended with Cunningham being booked and they were still arguing at the end.
Their indignation looked justified but it was Newcastle's third penalty appeal of the game and that might have been what swayed the decision.
Newcastle, though, deserved a goal for the pressure they created and the chances they made.
But Millwall's graft and their sweeping system locked Kevin Keegan's side out after they built a solid base for their defending with a goal after 20 minutes.
It was 21-year-old Jamie Moralee who stole the ball from Kevin Scott to run on and score his seventh League goal in 11 games.
Chances
Newcastle manager Keegan admitted: ‘We created a lot of chances but it has to be said that it was a dubious penalty that gave us a goal.
‘The referee could have given us two penalties in the first half but the one he did give didn't look much from where I was in the dug-out.
‘But we deserved something from the game.
Millwall played their part and America could win the World Cup if they have a few more like their keeper Kasey Keller.’
Derby delight
Grimsby 0, Derby 2
DERBY yesterday strengthened their Division One promotion challenge with a seventh successive away League victory at Grimsby.
A Tommy Johnson goal a minute before the break and Paul Kitson's 14th of the season midway through the second half condemned Grimsby to their fourth consecutive defeat.
But they were left ruing missed opportunities and were frustrated by fine goalkeeping from Mark Taylor.
Taylor pulled off a great stop from Dave Gilbert in the 36th minute and two minutes later made the save of the match to tip over Tony Rees's header.
Derby's first goal came after Martin Kuhl found Johnson, who rounded goalkeeper Steve Sherwood and slotted the ball home.
Grimsby pressed hard after the interval but Jim Dobbins's 49th-minute volley was spectacularly saved by Taylor.
In the 68th minute, Derby clinched victory through Kitson's lob after an excellent break by Paul Williams.
Happy return
Leicester 4, Swindon 2
STEVE WALSH returned from a four-match ban to inspire Leicester to a great win over Swindon, who had Colin Calderwood sent off.
Walsh was switched up front from the centre of defence and manager Brian Little admitted: ‘I think he did ever so well and I am glad I made the decision.’
David Oldfield headed Leicester ahead in the 10th minute and two minutes later David Lowe volleyed in the first of his two goals.
Walsh then set up Julian Joachim to make it 3-0 in 27 minutes, but in the second half Martin Ling hit the bar before Mickey Hazard pulled a goal back.
Lowe restored the three-goal balance before Calderwood was dismissed for his second bookable offence and Craig Maskell fired in Swindon's 80th-minute consolation goal.
After the game Swindon boss Glenn Hoddle said he was disappointed by his team's first half performance.
‘You can't give three goals away like that and expect to win the match,’ he said.
Leeds suffer Thorn in side
Des Kelly
: C Palace 1, Leeds Utd 0
ANDY THORN'S matchwinner ensured Crystal Palace's revival continued to gather pace — but it meant a sixth defeat in eight games for Leeds, the crumbling champions.
Leeds have now dropped to 40-1 outsiders to retain the title and manager Howard Wilkinson admitted morosely: ‘At the start of the season I never imagined we would be in a situation like this going into Christmas.
But we haven't played well enough, it's as simple as that.’
Thorn, the big defender who was also the hero of the midweek Coca-Cola Cup triumph over Liverpool, powered the Eagles ahead with a 29th minute header and Steve Coppell's men grimly fought tooth and nail to claim their fourth successive victory.
Palace's recent turnaround in form gives some cause for optimism that their relegation fears will recede in the New Year, but if Howard Wilkinson's men continue to falter they could find themselves being unthinkably dragged into the mire.
It would be humiliating for England's title-holders to have to scrap for survival at the foot of the table.
But the pride of Yorkshire sit just three points ahead of their Selhurst Park conquerors and on an accelerating downward spiral.
Leeds' disastrous results away from home have been their undoing.
Amazingly, they have not won outside their Elland Road fortress since April 26 — the day they clinched the League crown at Sheffield United.
Perhaps Wilkinson should hold the kind of crisis meeting that Thorn insists is the cause of Palace's new-found belief.
The defender said: ‘When we lost 5-0 at Liverpool a couple of weeks ago we all got together and had a heart-to-heart.
We sorted a few things out then and now we have turned the corner.’
A delighted Coppell agreed: ‘Inevitably when you lose a game like that people point fingers and aportion blame.
But everyone here now realises what it means to be in the Premier League.
‘It's nice to get four victories on the bounce, but I just hope Christmas has not come too early for us.’
Leeds were being linked last night with a £1 m bid for Manchester City defender Ian Brightwell, but Wilkinson also needs to bolster his mis-firing attack.
Former England coach Steve Harrison is back at Crystal Palace after turning down the assistant manager's job at Scottish Premier Division St Johnstone.
Harrison accepted an offer from new St Johnstone boss John McClellend, his old Watford colleague, on Friday.
But he changed his mind about the move hours before St Johnstone's 2-0 defeat at Rangers on Saturday.
Extra special
Bill Blighton in Montego Bay
NICK FALDO was crowned Johnnie Walker world champion after surviving a dramatic sudden-death play-off and a super-charged 63 by Greg Norman here yesterday.
The world No 1's five-shot overnight lead was ripped apart by Australia's Great White Shark, who fumbled a 3ft putt on the last green before Faldo won at the first extra hole.
Norman's seven-birdie course record gave him a one-shot lead playing the 18th, but he should have known his chance had gone with Faldo having won two Augusta titles in extra time.
The Australian has lost more majors than most have won, and Faldo, who had fired a 68 for a six-under 274, ruthlessly carved out a four at the sudden-death 18th.
Norman, meanwhile, sent his approach shot through the back of the green and needed another two to get down.
‘Thank God I had that five-shot lead,’ gasped Faldo after receiving the £348,763 winner's cheque.
‘I couldn't do anything about Greg.
He played so great, he could have shot 60.
It was like fighting Lennox Lewis.
‘I took all the punches and then came back.
I played really well too, and my score could have been a few lower.
‘The 72nd hole was do or die.
I felt he was going to make his putt so I thought ‘Just whack it in, what the hell’.’
It was hell again for Norman, who was crucified by Faldo in the third round of the 1990 Open at St Andrews, when they set out sharing the lead before Faldo hammered him by nine shots.
Norman said: ‘I played great out there, but I still don't go home with the trophy.
I feel like I can be a dominant force again, I feel like a 21-year-old.
‘I was really pumped up for this one, I was even doing chin-ups on my bed last night.
I wasn't nervous on the 18th, I just misread the putt.’
But yesterday's rain-hit showdown must have felt like a recurring nightmare for Faldo, too.
For the fifth time this year, he was made to struggle in the final round after being in a seemingly impregnable position.
He lost both the French and Belgian Opens with last-day collapses, and he narrowly won the Open at Muirfield and the Irish after surrendering four-shot leads.
Faldo took his 1992 winnings to a world record £1.5m, while Norman's only consolation was that the £190,234 runner's-up cheque made him the first player in history to breech the $10 million barrier in career earnings.
Faldo couldn't have had any idea of the tropical storm brewing when he and Norman exchanged birdies at the first two holes.
But Norman, who ended his 28-month exile from the winner's rostrum in the Canadian Open in September, unleashed a punishing run of three birdies in the next five holes to reach the turn in 31 against Faldo's 33.
Faldo still enjoyed a three-stroke cushion, but the pumped-up Australian resembled an executioner as he hacked away at the Open champion's lead.
Norman birdied the 11th, coaxed home a six-yarder for a two at the 13th, and surged ahead with a two-shot swing coming on the next green.
Crashed
He powered his drive down the middle of the 545-yard 14th, while Faldo's ball crashed among dense palm trees fringing the right of the fairway.
With his ball unplayable, Faldo took a penalty drop before lurching to a six, while Norman chipped to three feet for his birdie four to go six under par.
Both safely negotiated the treacherous short 15th hole and Faldo's putter rescued him on the 18th green.
For the first time, Norman was master of his own destiny, hitting a fine recovery from sand to within a yard of the pin, with Faldo 12 feet behind the flag.
Faldo sank a worthy putt for a birdie, but Norman's victory still looked a formality until his tiny effort, similar to that which Scott Hoch missed for Faldo to win the 1989 Masters, hit the hole and ran past.
FINAL SCORES: 274: N Faldo (GB) 68, G Norman (Aus) 63.
Faldo won at first extra hole.
283: D Love (US) 66, T Kite (US) 70. 284: I Woosnam (GB) 68. 285: M Roe (GB) 70. 287: F Couples (US) 73. 288: D Edwards (USA) 70, R Floyd (US) 70, T Johnstone (Zim) 67. 289: P Azinger (US) 67.
Other: 291: C Montgomerie (GB) 70. 292: S Lyle (GB) 70. 295: C O'Connor jnr (GB) 75. 296: B Langer (Ger) 71. 301: B Lane (GB) 74. 304: A Forsbrand (Swe) 81. 306: S Ballesteros (Sp) 75.
Pakistan turn on power
PAKISTAN'S batsmen hit their way out of a recent slump with a blazing performance against Queensland at the Gabba in Brisbane yesterday.
Brushing aside Test paceman Craig McDermott and spinners Allan Border and Steve Storey, Pakistan powered to 342-4 at stumps in reply to Queensland's first innings total of 260.
Inzamam-ul-Haq hit 83 in a polished display.
But McDermott refused to be denied completely and he had number five batsman Saeed Anwar caught in the slips for 13 in his 20th over.
The diminutive left hander stood firm against Queensland's three-pronged pace attack of McDermott, Greg Rowell and Mike Kasprowicz and pushed his claim for selection in Pakistan's one-off Test against New Zealand to be played in Hamilton in early January.
Ace Reid strikes gold
SCOTTISH golf professional Dale Reid yesterday sank a hole-in-one in the final round of the Alpine Australian Ladies Masters on Australia's Gold Coast.
Reid earned a jackpot prize of £20,000 for acing the 164-yard, par three 14th hole.
Nick at double
NICK SKELTON, runner-up five times earlier in the show, yesterday made a final-day breakthrough with two successes at the Olympia showjumping championships.
Skelton ensured he would not be the only Everest team member without an outright win by beating new colleague John Whitaker in their sponsors' Christmas Knockout.
Then showing excellent jumping form with Major Wager, Skelton shared the Six Bar competition with Germany's Franke Sloothaak, on San Patrignano Dorina.
Skelton had partnered Florida in the knockout event and just shaded Whitaker and Fonda in a thrilling dash to the finishing line.
Shear joy
Graham Fisher
Blackburn 1, Sheff Utd 0.
IN the midst of this routine entertainment Alan Shearer stood out like a supernova.
He didn't score, but too often we saddle our better strikers with ridiculous demands — as Mark Hughes knows only too well — and in any case with 20 on the board in four months Shearer is well placed to double his career record by the end of the season.
He didn't score because United's gallant John Pemberton got under his feet at the critical moments like a wad of chewing gum.
That didn't stop him roving, teasing, passing and crossing that bit better than anyone else on the field, a constant delight to the eye.
And when he did try one of his celebrated long shots, 30 yards out with not long to go, the ball — perfectly, beautifully struck — missed the far top corner by millimetres.
Pemberton's defiance should have helped United to a point, which was the least they deserved.
The centre back wore a head bandage over six stitches in a cut after the break and said: ‘Shearer is a handful, no doubt of that.
But it was our job at the back to stop him and Mike Newell scoring and we did that.’
Kevin Moran scored the winner, with a first rate header after 27 minutes.
MoM: Shearer, Blackburn (Top of the cast).
Butcher fear
Adrian Holloway
Luton 0, Sunderland 0.
DEFENDER Terry Butcher swallowed up Luton's attack — then confessed he could be forced to retire in the next few weeks.
Butcher was outstanding in Sunderland's defence, despite being troubled by a long-standing knee injury.
The 33-year-old former England star admitted: ‘My knee could go at any moment.
I'm not even taking the next game for granted.
‘I'm just trying to keep going and hope I don't break down.’
Manager Malcolm Crosby praised Butcher for his bravery.
Crosby said: ‘He's got a dodgy knee yet he still gives it his all and wants to win.
‘All through his career he's had the ability to lead and inspire and he's really got through to our players and conveyed that.’
Sunderland dominated from the start and should have won easily.
But David Rush was unlucky with a string of good chances.
Dodson eyes $100m future
By Frank Ward
BRITAIN'S newest professional fighter, Adrian Dodson, can earn $100 million in an eight-year career.
The amazing prediction came yesterday by controversial agent Ambrose Mendy, the man behind Nigel Benn's rise to fame.
Dodson, 22, who boxed in two Olympics, will be managed by close friend Colin McMillan, the former WBO featherweight champion, while his first fight could be on the undercard of Riddick Bowe's first world heavyweight title defence against Mike Dokes at Madison Square Garden in New York on February 6.
But Mendy, back in boxing after serving a prison sentence for attempted fraud, insists that Guyanan-born Dodson will become undisputed world champion and earn countless riches.
Mendy said he would be backed by a consortium — so far un-named — of professional sports people and had been guaranteed £100,000 in his first year, £200,000 in his second and £500,000 in the third.
‘With the advent of pay-per-view television, Dodson will earn $100m in his career,’ he claimed.
As Great Britain's top Olympic hope, Dodson faltered in the second round in Barcelona last summer, beaten by the scales after being forced by the ABA to fight as a welterweight.
We can suit Eric — Fergie
Des Kelly
ALEX FERGUSON took a swipe at Leeds last night as he insisted that Manchester United are the only club big enough to deal with the ego of Eric Cantona.
The Old Trafford manager has been angered by what he described as ‘tittle-tattle’ filtering out of Elland Road following the controversial Frenchman's £1.2 million transfer.
Leeds boss Howard Wilkinson, criticised by sections of his crowd for allowing the deal, went to the unusual lengths of attacking Cantona's refusal to obey club rules and detailing his faxed request to leave.
And Cantona himself suggested in a French newspaper interview that he might be on the look-out for a new challenge after just a few months at any club.
Unique
But Ferguson countered: ‘A lot of people have been looking at Eric's move with a very negative attitude.
‘I know he has had his moments in the past, but perhaps he has never been at a club big enough to cope with his particular character.
‘I believe he is smart and intelligent enough to realise he is now at a club which can satisfy him emotionally.
‘I'm not interested in all the tittle-tattle that has been flying about.’
Ferguson added: ‘I know he will like it here because he is a great entertainer with a feel for the game.
Old Trafford is not called a theatre of dreams for nothing.
We have a unique stage here just right for his talents.’