

Thomas the Cardmaker (c.1740–1803)
Frome, Somerset
LEAN TIMES
We must not expend every last drop of sympathy on William Titford the cardmaker, for there are others who need some too; William's brother Thomas was one.
Married to a sickly wife, then having to cope as a widower with a daughter who suffered fits frequently, finding work difficult to obtain, Thomas Titford must have felt he had enough crosses to bear for one lifetime.
His wife was Elizabeth Adlam, whom he had married in 1765; baptised in 1737, daughter of William and Ann, she came from a fairly prolific Frome family.
Thomas and Elizabeth lost their first child five months after the marriage; the next, Nancy or Nany, was buried at Catherine Hill on 16 December 1773, the day of the Boston Tea Party.
She was barely seven years old.
One more child had died in 1768, shortly to be followed by the births of daughters Elizabeth and Mary.
There were to be no male heirs for Thomas — indeed, he was to father only one robust child who would survive into old age, as we shall see shortly.
The delicacy of the children seems to have been passed on to them by their mother, and in any case a succession of pregnancies had very probably weakened her own constitution severely.
As early as 1777 she was on parish relief of 1s. per fortnight, augmented ‘during winter’ by a further 6d. — for fuel, presumably.
Increasingly it becomes clear that her plight was the result of her poor health; in addition to the regular help she was receiving, the overseers had the generosity to pay her various ad hoc amounts as the need arose, ‘On acct. being sick’.
There was at least something to be said, after all, for a poor-relief system which was adaptable to suit personal need as it arose; for all the parsimony of parish overseers, careful guardians of the ratepayers' monies as they were, they were dealing with paupers whom they knew as people.
Eventually the Frome overseers decided, and annotated it accordingly, that Betty Titford was a ‘sickly woman’; and so she remained until her death.
The poor book entry for 1783 helpfully gives us her age as 48, and she is variously described as living at ‘Coniger’, ‘Cowards Batch’ and ‘Nail Street’— all within the Trinity area.
The family may well have moved around from street to street, but by 1785 they were settled in Fountain Lane, that most familiar of Titford haunts.
Thomas, as a cardmaker, was by no means the only person down the lane in that year who depended upon the wool trade for his livelihood: we find several shearmen, a scribbler, a weaver and a wiredrawer, with the added variety of a butcher and a baker, a tailor and a miller, John Moon at the Lamb and Fountain Inn , and a lady charmingly described as a ‘widow bewitched’.
Meanwhile, Betty Titford was clearly getting no better as years went by, and she must have had friends who realised only too well that 1s. a fortnight could hardly supply even her most fundamental needs.
So, whether the overseers were aware of it or not, the members of Sheppards Barton Baptist Chapel set about helping their ailing sister with a bit of cash support of their own.
They started off with a lump sum of 5s. in the January of 1778, followed by a similar amount a year later, and 10s. for each of the next two Christmases.
They, too, listed her as ‘sick’, and it wasn't long before they were eking out her parish relief     with a regular 1s. a month, starting in the March of 1783.
What the chapel and the parish managed to ensure, in the last analysis, was that Betty's last few years were less harrowing than they might otherwise have been.
With the usual lack of euphemism, the overseers enter the rubric ‘Dead’ against her name at the beginning of 1786; their accounts for 10 January indicate that it had cost them the grand sum of 3s. 9d. to bury three paupers: ‘West Wife; Titford and Robbans’.
Betty left this world with a one-and-threepenny funeral, supplemented only by the generosity of the chapel which had stood by her in time of need: ‘Pd.
for Betty Titford's grave: 3/6d’.
21.
Census of 1785, Frome, Somerset.
From a copy probably made by John Battle in 1789.
Thomas Titford, cardmaker, is occupying a house on Fountain Lane owned by Mrs. Adams.
The house is said to have one male and three females living within it.
22.
Overseers' accounts, Frome, Somerset.
Paupers receiving benefit, 1801–02.
Mary Titford, a sufferer from ‘Fitts’ is receiving a helping hand, as is her father Thomas, who has ‘no work’.
(SRO DD/LW.)
She was buried on New Year's Day, 1786, at Catherine Hill; six years later, predictably, up came her remains to accommodate Joseph Coles, aged 99; and up he came, finally, in November 1796, to allow some space for Hippy Millard.
The extended family were all moving over to make room for each other once this fleeting life had passed.
We should pause, as we did for his brother William, to contemplate Thomas Titford's state in 1786: a widower, with one 17-year old daughter who seemed healthy enough, one who was to be constantly gripped by fits, and at least three children previously dead in infancy.
He struggled on, as he had to.
Payments to him for his sick daughter Mary are included first in what are known as ‘Church Extras’, then in the main list of relief to paupers.
The handouts are intermittent; the amounts vary, as does the regularity of payment.
Sometimes we read of ‘Thomas Titford’; sometimes ‘Thomas Titford's child: subject to fitts’ or ‘fitts continually’; sometimes ‘Thomas’is crossed out, and ‘Mary’inserted instead.
In 1800 Thomas was still living in the house on the north-west side of Fountain Lane, then owned by Mrs. Hellier.
In the next year, one in which bad harvests had pushed up the price of wheat to 119s. 6d. a quarter, the overseers not only paid 1s. per week to Mary, but also found a further 2s. per week for Thomas himself from 26 May until 30 June on account of him having ‘No work’.
Supplementary to Mary's allowance was ‘1s. for rent: J. Pobjoy’.
Two years later, having outlived brothers William and Charles, Thomas died.
Immediately after his burial on 13 November 1803, poor Mary's benefit was doubled to 4s. a fortnight.
Even that proved not enough to save her; less than a year after her father's passing, she finally succumbed to the illness which had beset her for so long, and was laid to rest at St John's.
Sister Elizabeth, then in her early thirties, was the only survivor of Thomas the Cardmaker's family, having outlived her parents and all her siblings.
She was still in Frome, we may hope; if she had nursed her younger sister and helped her father through his years of loss, she had done well indeed.
Now there were few options open to her; rather on the old side to be sure of getting married, she decided to do what most of those who wanted to survive usually did: she left Frome.
She was destined to remain a spinster, finding work as a domestic servant in — of all places — far-away Surrey.
as if to make up for the early deaths of her sisters, she lived to a ripe old age, dying in the Almshouses at Dorking on 4 November 1855, aged eighty-seven.
Her will included legacies of twenty pounds each to her Frome cousins, Mary and Sarah, the daughters of her uncle John Titford; she was not to know that Mary would die just two months before she did, though Sarah, as we shall see, survived for another five years, long enough to bless the generosity of her Surrey cousin.
We, too, should be grateful to Elizabeth; not only did she have the foresight to bequeath a will for posterity to read, she also had the good taste — so rare in the family, alas — to be buried beneath a headstone which would retain its legibility over the years.
She lies in the churchyard in the village of Wootton, near Dorking: ‘Elizabeth Titford.
Died Nov 4th, 1855.
Aged 87’.
Charles the Cheesemonger (c.1749–1802)
Frome, Somerset
SCRAPING A LIVING: THE FRENCH THREAT
A nation of cheesemongers !
Louis XIV's description of the Dutch
‘Charles the Cheesemonger’ now moves to the centre of our stage; a very significant actor in the little drama, too, since he, and he alone of his generation of the Titford family in Frome, was to father sons who would in their turn pass the name down through the 19th into the 20th century.
Neither Charles nor his bride, Elizabeth Carpenter, could sign their own names when they married at St John's on 9 July 1770 — or rather, neither would admit to being able to do so.
So they made their bold little crosses in the register and set off on their adventure.
A marriage of Baptists believers, this: Charles, unlike his brother John, was never a full member of Badcox Lane Chapel, and he was even to play safe by having his children christened at the parish church; but it was to the Baptists he turned whenever there was a death in the family, and eventually he and his wife would find a last resting place in the chapel burial ground on Catherine Hill.
The Carpenter family were themselves stalwarts of the said chapel, and Charles's bride is probably the Elizabeth Carpenter who was baptised there on 2 April 1760, then aged between 11 and 12 years old.
Although various records of their activities exist in Frome itself, many of the Carpenter family lived in the nearby parish of Rodden.
A certain George Carpenter was even hanged at Warminster in 1812 for the murder of a farmer called William Webb of Roddenbury Hill — but for the most part the Carpenters, like the Titfords, seem to have been law-abiding, not to say staid, folk.
One thing that marks the Carpenters out is their uncanny fondness for incorporating the names of distaff families into their own; from the early days of the 18th century we can spot the Frome and Rodden Carpenters by their use of the name ‘Thynn’ as a first or second Christian name for boys, and even in the middle years of the 19th century a branch of the family in London called one son Starmer Thynne Carpenter.
It would be tempting to assume that we have evidence here of some direct relationship with the Thynne family, Marquesses of Bath, at nearby Longleat; that may be the case, but an equally likely explanation could be that the family was involved in nothing more than a slightly sycophantic attempt to ingratiate itself in some way with the local aristocracy.
Back to the Titford/Carpenter marriage, then.
Charles, the bridegroom, was in some ways set apart from his three brothers; for a start he appears to have been illiterate, whereas they were not, and also he was the only one who was not a cardmaker — or if he had learned the trade, he chose not to practise it.
That was a wise decision in the event, for judging by the poverty of William, Thomas and even John, cardmakers were about to hit bad times.
Charles was essentially a shopkeeper and pig butcher; he turned his waste animal fats into tallow candles — a foul-smelling process at best— to sell to those who chose not to make their own, and also kept up a bit of a sideline in cheese — a product for which the area was, of course , justifiably famous.
Nothing very dramatic here, then, but at least he was in the  buying and selling game, not a wage slave, and there can hardly have been a time when it was not easier to sell the odd pork chop or two than it was to convince an employer that he ought to buy your skills as a craftsman.
The craftsmen in the family went to the wall: Charles just put up his prices and carried on.
Elizabeth was pregnant very shortly after their marriage; a harrowing pregnancy, too, we may be sure, as that merciless winter and spring of 1770/1 set in.
The child was born to what must have been exhausted parents, strained to their physical and mental limits, and it never lived to see another year; in the December of 1771 the nameless infant was buried on Catherine Hill — the first occupant of plot number 119, but certainly not the last.
A son followed in 1772; what should he be called?
An examination of the naming patterns used by the Titfords of Frome would suggest at a cursory glance that every eldest son was named after his paternal grandfather, as a matter of course.
In the event, perhaps there was a slightly different factor at work.
It had been the custom from early times to name children after their godparents; precisely because the paternal grandfather was an obvious choice to fulfil such an office for the eldest-born son, the impression we often receive — wrongly, perhaps — is that a specific Christian name was perpetuated just because it was that borne by the male-line grandparent.
But suppose the paternal grandfather were dead when the eldest grandson was born?
This was precisely the situation in which Charles and Elizabeth found themselves in 1772; and we may surmise that they did what brother John was to do later — in the absence of Thomas the Calvinist, who had died just over a year previously, they honoured Charles's elder brother William by making him the godfather and giving the child his Christian name.
So far so good, it seems; but what with brother William Titford and his son William, there was every chance that individuals with the same name might soon be confused with each other, leaving a whole host of Williams, Wills and Bills to confound the assembled company at every family gathering.
Charles and Elizabeth seem to have come up with an intelligent expedient: they would give the boy two Christian names — the first Frome Titford ever to enjoy this luxury — and he could be called ‘William Charles’ after his uncle/godfather and father respectively, though they would actually use the name ‘Charles’in everyday conversation.
Little wonder, as things turned out, that in adult life poor ‘W. C. T.’, as his cousin William Jowett Titford called him, found it very difficult to convince bureaucrats that he was really called ‘William’, though everyone knew him as ‘Charles’, like his father.
Various documents later describe him as ‘Charles Titford’, with the ‘William’ entered later as an afterthought, or they settle for calling him ‘Charles William Titford’instead.
When W. C. T. was two years old his mother gave birth to his brother John; the pair of them were baptised together at the parish church on 21 January 1775.
From then on, every two years or so, they were to acquire more brothers and sisters: Elizabeth; Mary, who died the year after her birth; then Sarah or Susanna, baptised along with a new Mary in 1784.
All attempts by the parents to have a Lydia or a Charles would be doomed to failure: one Lydia just lived to see her first birthday — the first two years of life seeming to be the most dangerous by far for the poor little infants — and the next passed away at the age of three, baptised at St John's but buried by the Baptists of Badcox Lane.
Similar fates were to befall those children called Charles: Charles Thynne Titford (the influence of the Carpenter family at work here in the choice of a second Christian name) survived for a mere 11 months, and a further Charles was dead and buried within three weeks of his birth.
Poor Mary, Charles's daughter who was buried at Catherine Hill in 1779, was to share a similar fate with many Titfords of the period — a fate we have seen before.
The stolid sexton, James Whiting, had to find a bit more space in her grave to accommodate a certain Mary Humphries; we know her — she is Thomas the Calvinist's daughter Mary,née Titford, who had married Stephen Humphries of Devizes in 1752.
So Mr. Whiting carefully entered in the burial register against little Mary's name: ‘…and diged up a gain and Mrs Humphries put in’.
So aunt and niece lay together, Mary Humphries being buried ‘in the same grave’.
23.
The children of Charles Titford, Cheesemonger.
Family notes listing Charles Titford's children from William Charles onwards; the notes themselves were written many years after the events they outline — in 1860 or thereabouts.
Details of exact dates of birth and death recorded here provide information not available in any public record.
24.
Burial register, Badcox Lane Baptist Chapel, Frome, Somerset.
Family notes reveal that Lydia Titford, daughter of Charles, died on 6 August, 1786.
Two days later she was buried in the Badcox Lane Baptist Burying Ground by John Kingdon, the pastor, ‘aged 1 year’.
(PRO RG4/1550.)
One further male child survived this period of holocaust.
Benjamin Titford — the name had always been a popular one with the Carpenter family — was born on 15 December 1786, and was baptised along with his ill-fated sister Lydia and brother Charles Thynne at St John's on 27 May 1792, Whit Sunday.
Charles the Cheesemonger was not averse to using the parish church to record the existence of his children, but on this occasion he may have been under more pressure than usual from the Anglican minister to arrange this triple baptism.
Faced with the mounting cost of a war against the American colonies, the coalition government in Westminster had instituted a punitive and highly unpopular tax by the Stamp Act of October 1783: all registrations of baptisms, marriages and burials would be charged at 3d. a time — and so there was every incentive for local clergy, working on 10 per cent commission, to get around the parish and bring in the strays.
Two years later the tax was extended to include Nonconformist registrations — a move petitioned for by the Dissenting churches themselves, who welcomed the official sanction of their records.
Badcox Lane and Sheppards Barton Chapels in Frome began their burial and birth registers, respectively, in the October of that year, 1785, within three weeks of the new act being passed.
The tax on all registrations was eventually repealed in the October of 1794, but in the meantime Charles the Cheesemonger had had to hand over ninepence of his hard-earned money to have his little brood's details entered in the Anglican parish register, having already spent sixpence in the same way for Mary and Sarah in the October of 1784.
If pig butchers kept piggy banks, his must have been empty once in a while during this period…
As the 18th century wore on, families could expect to see more and more of their children reach adulthood; nevertheless, the survival rate of Charles and Elizabeth's offspring — only six out of 13 reached their twenty-first birthday — is certainly nothing abnormal for the period.
Being born and brought up next to a butcher's shop in a Somerset town in the closing years of the 18th century may not have been the healthiest start in life for a child, but those who saw out the dangerous first two or three years seemed to have stood a good chance of survival thereafter.
And compared to his three brothers, Charles was not doing too badly in the world, after all.
Unlike any of them, he actually paid rates; not on any property as such, but on his ‘stocks’— probably stores of pigs' carcasses, tallow, cheese and the like.
In common with most of his contemporaries paying such rates, he was charged twice a year from 1783 onwards at a penny a time, though even he was excused in 1784 on grounds of poverty.
It seems clear from the overseers' accounts for the late 18th century that two of the four adult Titford brothers were living as occupants of houses once held as leasehold properties by their better-off ancestors.
William was in one of his father's two dwellings on High Street, while Thomas had taken over one of the original Fountain Lane/Cowards Batch houses built by his forefather William a hundred years before.
The two younger brothers, Charles and John, had no such luck, and were forced to look for accommodation of their own; Charles found his on Pig Street — appropriately named, in view of his activity as a pig butcher — just north of Frome town bridge.
The Land Tax returns for 1780 show that John Prior, owner of the Ship public house at Oldford, held several properties which included ‘2 houses, Wid.
Pains’, then occupied by Charles Titford.
Indeed, ‘two houses’ was probably a fair description of what consisted, in fact, of a dwelling house and an adjacent shop.
They would pass into the hands of number of different owners over the years, but Charles Titford was to remain the occupier until his death in 1802.
So Charles and his family lived in the southernmost house and shop on the east side of  the street, a fact confirmed by a deed of 1783 which defined the property in question as being immediately to the north of a stable, killing house and other buildings owned by Daniel Rossiter, clothier.
Having a slaughterhouse for his pigs next-door may have been very convenient for Charles, but it was a luxury he was soon to lose: The Frome Turnpike Trustees had decided to drag Frome into the modern world by demolishing Rossiter's buildings as part of a scheme to widen the road and ease the notorious bottleneck north of the bridge.
‘On the north’ the trustees wrote by way of explanation, ‘is a dwelling house of Joseph Mintrim's now in the tenure of Charles Titford’; and from this dwelling house Charles and his family could have watched the demolition men at work.
The census of 1785 confirms that the Titfords were still on Pig Street, not having been driven out by the noise of falling stone or splintering wood; not that noise would have been anything unusual for them — they already had Thomas Addams' blacksmith's shop down the street, and the ringing sound of metal on metal emanating from there must have mingled nicely with the constant clip-clop of horses' hooves as Henry Webley went about his business as the Bristol carrier a few doors away.
It was very much an artisan street this, but with a smattering of richer folk, too, so the shearmen, scribblers, shoemakers, carpenters and shop-keepers were neighbours to an attorney and two well-heeled clothiers — Thomas Clement, employing 11 scribblers and 12 shearmen, and Henry Sheppard, who even described himself as a ‘Gentleman’.
By 1785, Mary Gifford of The Swan Inn across the street had taken over the ownership of Charles's house.
And pretty cramped it must have been there, too, with three males (Charles, described in the census as a ‘shopkeeper’, with son William Charles and son John) and five females (Elizabeth the mother, and daughters Elizabeth, Sarah, Mary and Lydia).
Ten years later, still in Pig Street, things were rather different: there were more children to cram into the same limited accommodation, but by the middle of 1795 they were motherless.
Elizabeth, having given birth to 13 children and aged only 46, was buried at Catherine Hill on 19 June.
Like all his brothers, Charles was destined to outlive his wife; and in a sense we may not wonder at that fact.
We have seen what a struggle it must have been for men in the late 18th century to keep body and soul together — how much worse, then, for their womenfolk.
Things had improved slightly for married women since the patriarchal days of the feudal system, and few people in the late 1700s could have shared Luther's view that:
If a woman becomes weary, or at last dead, from child-bearing, it matters not; let her only die from bearing, she is there to do it.
But to be forever in child-bed, surrounded by countless sons and daughters, many of them ill; to run a self-supporting household with endless heavy domestic chores; to be victim to a view that a woman's one means of self-fulfilment must be through the home — all that adds up to a state of affairs not to be envied.
A rather chilling symbol of what we would now regard as the male chauvinism of the times is furnished by the wording and the sentiments contained in an Act of Parliament passed in the year Charles and Elizabeth were married, 1770:
All women, of whatever age, rank, profession, or degree who shall, after this Act, impose upon, seduce, and betray into marriage any of His Majesty's subjects by virtue of scents, paints, cosmetic washes, artificial teeth or false hair, iron stays, bolstered hips, or high-heeled shoes, shall incur the penalty of the law now in force against witchcraft and like misdemeanours; and marriage under such circumstances, upon conviction of the offending parties, shall be null and void.
One can only hope that Charles Titford had chosen a wife for her lasting qualities, and was not ‘seduced and betrayed’ by a daub of lipstick and a set of false teeth; his marriage lasted — as, in a sense, marriages had to — and it bore fruit.
But we can scarcely doubt, for  all that, that Elizabeth must have gone to her death not a little exhausted by the duties of a wife and mother in hard times which found out the slightest weakness in every individual's constitution.
In a sense it is all too easy in retrospect to see what it must have been that hurried Elizabeth to that early grave.
James Woodforde, ever a reliable source for the minutiae of late 18th-century life, wrote on 25 January 1794 that he could never remember having seen the barometer lower; a savage and relentless winter was setting in throughout Britain and the rest of Europe.
Again, just as in 1771, Elizabeth Titford was pregnant when it struck; her last son Charles was born within a week of Woodforde's ominous comment about his barometer — little wonder, then, that the poor child was dead inside three weeks.
Inevitably a disastrous harvest followed — one-fifth below the average for those of the previous 10 years — and prices almost doubled.
Wages did not rise in proportion, and by the Spring of 1795 there was the extensive distress and threat of mass starvation which led, in May, to the infamous meeting of the magistrates at Speenhamland in Berkshire, an event which would have such an impact on poor-law provision for the next few decades.
By Easter heavy frosts had ended hopes of a good harvest that year, and in the summer and autumn food riots broke out in the country at large as the price of a quartern loaf — where one could be had at all— rose from 3d. to over 1s.
And the cycle of bad weather, poor harvests, high prices and malnutrition looked all set to repeat itself.
Caught inextricably in that cycle, with pregnancies to confuse and exacerbate the situation, Elizabeth Titford's body finally gave up the struggle in June; with tragic inevitability, we might be tempted to say, looking back with the advantage of hindsight.
Charles, then, was the second brother to be left a widower, after Thomas; the domestic burden thus falling upon him and his remaining daughters must have been rather a daunting one, including the need to feed, control and educate young Ben, then only nine years old.
At least there was soon to be a bit of activity in the neighbourhood to distract the young lad's attention: in June of 1797 Charles the Cheesemonger was to achieve the singular distinction of being mentioned,en passant , in an Act of Parliament.
The Frome Turnpike Trustees have returned to the scene; the powers vested in them by previous legislation having been insufficient to meet their needs, they were now given a helping hand on 19 June 1797, with:
An Act for enlarging the Term and Powers of two Acts…for repairing and widening several roads leading to, through, and from the town of Frome in the County of Somerset.
and for paving the Footways and lighting the Streets within the said Town.
Certainly there was every need for a road-widening scheme: four years earlier, in the October of 1793, poor old Parson Woodforde had nearly come a nasty cropper on Frome Hill, when the chaise he was in had had an unfortunate encounter with a large ‘heavily loaden’ London waggon, complete with eight horses:
…it being very narrow where we met it, the Driver of the Chaise in backing his Horses to avoid being drove over overturned his Chaise, but very providentially, blessed be Almighty God for it! we received very little Injury, Nancys Face was a little bruised.
It was a wonder that we escaped so well, as we were afraid that the Waggon would have crushed us.
After a walk back to the inn and a half-hour wait, they set off again for Bath, very much relieved that matters had not been worse.
The demolition of Daniel Rossiter's slaughterhouse in 1783, it seems, had just been an interim measure to ease congestion near the bridge; now the Trustees were to have the power to ‘…pull down and remove certain Houses and Buildings, now being in the Line of the said new proposed Road…’.
The road in question was to be the new North Parade, and — just to be sure — the Trustees wanted permission if necessary to knock down almost the whole of Pig Street and a lot else besides, including:
…a Messuage or Tenement with the Outhouses, Yards, and Hereditaments, adjoining or near thereto, now or late in the Tenure or Occupation of Charles Titford…
25. (right) Commercial directory, Frome, Somerset.
Showing ‘Charles Titford, Chandler's Shop and Pig-butcher’.
From the Universal British Directory, 1794–8, vol. 3.
26. (below) Act of Parliament relating to roads in Frome.
Certain roads in Frome are to be widened: among the properties affected are ‘…a Messuage or Tenement, with the Outhouses Yards, and Hereditaments, adjoining or near thereto, now or late in the Tenure or Occupation of Charles Titford 19 June 1797.
And if Pig Street were to fall under the axe, there would be a real rag-bag of properties of every sort razed to the ground, including — from the sublime to the ridiculous — a tennis court and a dung pit:
Courts, Messuages, Tenements, Stables, Outhouses, Yards, Workshops, Tennis Court, Dung Pit, Barns, Waggon or Coach House, Woodhouse, Press Shop, Orchard and Hereditaments…
In the.
event, at least in the short term, most of these multifarious properties would be safe: North Parade was cut east of Pig Street itself, with the result that Charles Titford's shop, already exposed on its south side in 1783, would now have a naked eastern flank as well, leaving it on a kind of promontory.
Maybe it was all good for trade?
But Charles now had another little job to do: the new Act allowed for pavements to be laid in the town, with the proviso that:
…all and every Person and Persons, inhabiting within the Said Town where the said intended Pavements shall extend shall sweep and cleanse, or cause to be swept and cleansed, the Footways in the whole Length of the Front of their respective Houses, Buildings, and Walls, once in every Week, upon Pain of forfeiting and paying the Sum of Two Shillings and Sixpence for every Neglect therein.
And those who couldn't afford a half-crown fine, but would rather wait until nightfall to sweep or cause to be swept their bit of pavement, must have been more than grateful that the Trustees would also kindly provide ‘Lamp Irons or Lamp Posts to be put or affixed into, upon, or against the Walls or Pallisadoes of any of the Houses, Tenements, or Buildings within the said Town,.
Frome was being catapulted, despite itself, perhaps, into the world of the new century about to dawn.
And the prospect of that new century, and with it the hope for a better future, was something the people of Frome, like the people of Britain itself, sorely needed.
It is easy — too easy, perhaps — to see the last decades of the 1700s as a time of unalleviated misery for a large part of the population of the British Isles.
To attempt to bring up children in the 1780s and '90s was an unenviable task indeed — yet the number of such children was itself increasing by leaps and bounds.
The population of Britain was to rise from between seven and eight million in 1760 to 15 million in 1820 — in other words, it doubled in a period of 60 years.
Not everyone saw this as an ‘explosion’ as such, but those commentators who did, like the much-quoted Thomas Malthus, prophesied disaster if the growth couldn't be controlled; how was the country to survive when there were hundreds of thousands of extra mouths to feed every year?
The overseers of the poor in Frome must have asked themselves very much this same question; at one time or another something between a quarter and a half of the population of Britain were to receive parish relief in the late 18th century — and the £l, 970 per annum it was costing for such relief in Frome in 1792 would rise to a staggering £11,723 per annum by 1831.
To complicate matters still further, many parishes after 1795 began to adopt the Speenhamland system of making up wages to a minimum rate dependent upon the price of corn.
That sounds humane enough in theory, and no doubt it saved many hundreds of families from starvation during the years of the French wars; but it positively encouraged employers to keep wages at rock-bottom levels, while anyone who wanted to do an honest day's work for an honest day's pay was subject, instead, to the  ignominy of accepting supplementary alms in order to live.
A man remained a pauper, in other words, even when he was in full work.
Things wouldn't have been so bleak, perhaps, if the dramatic rise in population had been brought about by healthier times and a consequent increase in life expectancy; in the event, many scholars would cite a different cause or causes for it — like the fact that the decline of  the apprenticeship system meant that couples were marrying younger, and so increasing the number of child-bearing years per family.
For all the rise in the number of births, and despite some medical advances, potential causes of a premature death were lurking around every corner, or sweeping the country in periodic epidemics; especially vulnerable were the very young, the old and the infirm.
Inoculation against smallpox had been practised since the 1720s, although it constituted a potentially lethal measure in itself and only achieved an erratic degree of success against a disease which probably claimed the lives of up to a quarter of the population throughout the century, and disfigured many of the survivors.
Jenner had begun to make use of cowpox for human vaccination in 1798, but it would be a few years before its use was widespread, and 1840 before it was available free.
In the meantime, it is likely that everyone had contracted the disease at some time or another in his or her life, and it proved fatal to those with the merest weakness whose bodies could not withstand its ravages.
And if smallpox didn't get you, there was always diphtheria, scarlet fever, typhoid, typhus or consumption lying in wait.
In Frome, as elsewhere, a large proportion of the population lacked the general state of good health which would have gone some way towards combating these killer diseases.
In their cramped and insanitary dwellings, often ill-fed as they were, the poor of Frome were constantly beset by outbreaks of typhus; known variously as ‘Irish Fever, or ‘Gaol Fever’, it frequently picked off not only the inmates of the country, s overcrowded prisons, but also the hapless judges who had to try the prisoners.
Under attack on all sides, not least from the infant population which was itself unwittingly helping to spread disease through the narrow streets and alleys of the town, some Frome people found a temporary escape in one or other of the forty or more pubs which vied with each other for custom; drunkenness was commonplace, and many of those who didn't go to an early grave with some infection or other departed this life with a putrid liver.
All this would have been bad enough, even without another little trick nature had up its sleeve: the weather.
The first half of the 18th century had seemed kind enough: improved climatic conditions and better harvests had combined with the disappearance of bubonic plague to help curtail the mortality crises which had beset Northern Europe up until then.
But things grew a great deal worse as the century wore on.
Severe winters, of course, hit the poor twice over: those who survived the effects of the frost and snow might well die of malnutrition as the resultant disastrous harvest reduced the amount of food available and forced up prices.
The Titford family, as so often, was a mirror of the times; every major period of dearth in the 18th century is reflected in at least one family burial, and sometimes more.
The late 1720s, the most brutal time of all with its bad harvests, high prices, and killer epidemics, saw off no fewer than six Titfords within two years; the period 1766/7 also claimed its victims in the family, as did the winter and spring of 1771, as we have seen; and the near-famine year of 1795, following hard on a winter which was said to herald something resembling a new ice-age, had brought the death of Charles the Cheesemonger's wife Elizabeth.
The price of wheat is frequently used as a measure of degrees of economic hardship by historians of this period; not every family, it is true, was totally dependent upon wheaten bread, but the steep upward price curve which was to reach an undreamt-of high of 113s. 10d. per quarter of wheat in 1800 must be a fairly accurate barometer of the plight of the poor, especially in the 1790s.
Wages, meanwhile, were held down — or, at best, rose only very slowly; and it doesn't need a Mr. Micawber to tell us that the net result for thousands of families was a fluctuation in living standards bordering all too often on total destitution.
‘In the past’, as G. M. Trevelyan put it, ‘poverty had been an individual misfortune; now it was a group grievance’.
What the country needed, we might say, was a compassionate and caring government, prepared to control the balance between wages and prices, and to attempt to regulate working conditions.
In the event, it got nothing of the kind.
The country's rulers were, after all, running scared: the American colonies had declared their independence in 1776 in dangerously democratic terms; the writings of Tom Paine were being disseminated far and wide; and, most threatening of all, there was every chance that the Jacobin ideas of the French Revolution of 1789 might take firm root in English soil.
‘Life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness’ and ‘Liberty, equality, fraternity’were rallying-cries guaranteed to provide a few sleepless nights for many an English gentleman.
Class divisions hitherto non-existent or only latent in English society were beginning to open up as the Agrarian and Industrial Revolutions gained momentum, and popular unrest was in the air.
Government was in no mood, in the circumstances, to give much priority to the plight of the poor.
In any case, many of its members in the late 18th century, though not yet necessarily committed to a full-blooded doctrine of ‘laissez-faire’, were moving towards a political philosophy involving less, not more, government intervention in everyday affairs, leaving the ‘natural’ market forces of supply and demand to regulate the economy as best they may.
From 1793 that economy was one of a country at war.
Pitt, as Prime Minister, was ill-prepared for such a turn of events, and through years of hesitancy and uncertainty he watched a yet deeper impoverishment overtake many thousands of his fellow-countrymen.
The government was quite content, in essence, to use inflation as a weapon of war: somebody had to bear the costs, and apart from those assessed for the new Income Tax of 1799, that somebody had to be the consumer.
Prices were allowed to rise unchecked, hitting the poor worst of all and adding thousands to their number; parish relief, it was argued, would provide for the true paupers, and the rest would have to be satisfied with the temporary increase in employment which the war brought with it.
Yet as the war years set in, the landed classes, together with the newly-rich manufacturers, had never had it so good; Napoleon has been called, not entirely without justification, ‘The patron saint not only of farmers, but of landlords’.
And there are few enough references to international hostilities in the novels of Jane Austen, or signs of distress in the great landscape and portrait paintings of the age.
Down in Brighton or Bath, it must have seemed, nothing had changed.
Elsewhere, however, from 1793 onwards the French war itself would vie with food prices as the most talked-about subject in town and country alike.
There were those, of course, who wondered why England should be sending her brave lads across the Channel to fight against a country which seemed — the Reign of Terror notwithstanding — to be the cradle of a new and attractive democracy.
Others — and the majority, no doubt— would wait anxiously for any news as a French invasion force was massing ready to launch itself against English shores.
The two countries would be fighting each other, on and off, for 22 years; and there were those, like Benjamin Titford, born in 1786, who lived through nothing but wars and rumours of wars from the day they were born to the day they died.
Down in Frome they were preparing for the worst; on 23 February 1798 a meeting of the ‘inhabitants of the town and neighbourhood of Frome’ took place at the George Inn .
As a result of this and subsequent deliberations it was agreed to form a local defence force consisting of 60 cavalrymen, who were to extend their protection ‘…as far as any adjoining town not exceeding 20 miles distance from Frome’, together with 100 infantry.
The Frome Military Association, later re-named the ‘Frome Selwood Volunteers’ had been born.
Throughout the spring, talk of invasion was on everyone's lips; those who could help to fund the new military force did so, while others, providing they were householders or ‘such other Persons as shall be recommended by two Householders’, were invited to enlist at the  George Inn, ‘…where such persons as are willing to join the Frome Selwood Volunteers, either cavalry or infantry, are requested to attend and sign their names’.
All of this excitement — the meetings, the handbills, the brave volunteering — can hardly have escaped the notice of the Titford family down in Pig Street.
William Charles, the eldest son, had only recently left town for good, off to join his cousins in London; young Benjamin was too young to be playing at soldiers, and Charles the Cheesemonger himself was a bit too old and certainly far too unhealthy to offer his services as a volunteer.
So the mantle fell on the second son, John, then 23 years old; without more ado, he set off over the bridge into the Market Place, across to the George, and signed up for the infantry.
It is not without significance, of course, that a young man of good Dissenting stock, with impoverished uncles, aunts and cousins, should nevertheless have chosen to stand up and be counted in a fight against a nation which, for all its extremes, represented some form of democratic republicanism.
Can John really have been so politically conservative?
The question is probably too sophisticated: after all, his own father was by no means destitute, and had at least something worth conserving.
We must remember, too, that Dissenters in the 18th century were not the political revolutionaries they had been in the 17th — there was a sense in which the rabid Nonconformity of one generation became the established respectability of the next, and commentators like Halevy have suggested that it was precisely the innate conservatism of the new dissent, Methodism, which helped stave off revolution in England in the early 19th century — a real opium of the people, in effect.
Not only that, but post-revolutionary France would have represented atheism at worst, Catholicism at best ; little wonder that a good Baptist lad, fired by an upsurge of patriotism which temporarily united all Englishmen in opposition to a common foe, should have joined the struggle.
In any case, Titfords have not exactly been famous for their military prowess over the centuries, so we should cherish young John's gesture.
He had to provide his infantryman's uniform at his own expense — a deep-blue coat with matching lapels, and blue pantaloons with red edgings.
A musket and other accoutrements were provided from Ordnance, and pistols followed at the end of the year.
There was to be no pay, and yet any private who failed to attend for two hours, at least twice a week, for ‘The Exercise’ when the troops would ‘…go through the Evolutions together’would be fined two shillings.
Admittedly the main duty of this force — if we may call it that — was ceremonial, but at a time when many of their contemporaries were off fighting in a real war, they must have looked at times like extras from a pantomime.
Why, then, was John Titford a member of this glorified Home Guard when, at the age of 23, we might have expected him to have joined the regular army or to have found his way somehow into the militia?
The answer is an all-too-simple one: by the time he courageously signed on as a volunteer infantryman, John was in the terminal stages of consumption.
Having survived the early years of childhood, unlike so many of his siblings, he had been struck down by that other malady which afflicted a tragically high proportion of those who lived on into teenage years and beyond.
As incessant rain lashed the town in late July, 1798, to be followed on the 28th of that month by one of the worst floods in living memory, John's health can hardly have improved — and who knows what bacteria he was daily picking up from his father's butchery?
Frome itself was nothing if not lively that year; 170 of the North Gloucester Supplementary Militia arrived in June, en route to Plymouth, and then the Prime Minister himself passed through the town on his way to Burton Pynsent, accompanied by the Chief Speaker of the House of Commons.
Plenty here for poor John Titford and his brother Ben to stand and gaze at.
The infantry went to church in their new uniforms for the first time on 9 September, and  had the singular honour, a month later, of joining their fellows in the cavalry who were escorting the funeral cortège of the late Earl of Cork ‘in slow and decorous movement suitable to the solemnity of the occasion’.
There was some good news, too: the harvest had been the best for over thirty years, and after much anxious waiting there was a victory to celebrate from the war front — Nelson had trounced the French fleet at the Battle of the Nile.
Having sworn allegiance to the sovereign on 15 October, the Volunteers then had a special function to perform two weeks later: they were out in force at Divine Service on 29 November, forming a focal point for a day of General Thanksgiving for the glorious victories achieved by His Majesty's troops by land and sea.
Immediately afterwards they had a grand Field Day.
And so the year 1798 drew to a close, and with it came another crippling winter in a decade of crippling winters.
On 2 February 1799 Parson Woodforde, by then in Norfolk, wrote in his diary: ‘Such severe weather has not been known for the last sixty years till the present’.
Heavy snow had fallen in Frome the day before that, the deepest since 1767, and conditions were dismal.
It proved the last straw for John Titford; ill enough, no doubt, without the need to struggle against a winter to end all winters, his weary body gave up the ghost.
Edmund Crocker, the son of the master of the Blue Coat School just across the bridge from Pig Street, kept a diary during this period, and young John Titford's death did not escape his notice.
An entry for 8 February reads:
On the 2 d instant died in a consumption J. Titford, aged about 4 or 5 and 20 years.
He being a volunteer in our Infantry, he was this day interred with the military honours due to him.
It can have been no easy journey for the funeral procession of mourners and military volunteers as they followed the coffin up the steep climb to Catherine Hill Burial Ground that bleak Friday in February with the snow thick on the ground.
The Rev. John Kingdon, the Baptist minister, had two other ceremonies to perform that day, as he also officiated at the burials of Mary Whiting, aged 77, and a deaf and dumb girl of 45 years, Christiana Yerbury.
He duly entered John's interment in his register: ‘Aged 24; with Military Honours’.
And so it was over.
As he left that all-too-familiar graveyard and tramped home through the snow, Charles the Cheesemonger must have thought that the century was drawing to an unpropitious end indeed.
Yet back at Pig Street the diminished family-Charles himself, Elizabeth, Sarah, Mary and young Ben — had plenty to occupy themselves with, apart from a period of mourning and an attempt to keep warm.
Five days later the snow melted, and on the morning of 11 February the second massive flood in seven months overtook them; it was all very well for the town directory to speak in glowing terms of the River Frome teeming with trout, eels, and all manner of fine fish — but to the inhabitants of Pig Street that wretched river too often spelt disaster and  despoliation .
How they must all have found curses on their lips, Baptists or not!
And really it was no joking matter: across the bridge John Chapman, nephew to a Market Place shoemaker, went back to work in the shop too soon after the flood, caught a chill in the process, and died in the April, aged just twenty-one.
And as if the elements were ganging up on defenceless human beings, half the neighbourhood around the bridge was woken up at 3 o'clock on the morning of Sunday, 10 March by shouts of ‘Fire!’ as a stable next to Sheppards' workshops went up in flames.
Thanks to the timely action of those living nearby — the Titfords probably among them — and the deployment of the town fire engines, the workshops themselves were saved.
Edmund Crocker, the diarist, added his own laconic comment to his account of the episode: ‘All was insured’!
Through all this period of turmoil the cruel winter was beginning to abate, but only very slowly; Woodforde in his diary was still lamenting conditions in April: ‘Never such cold     known by man’.
And what he has to say makes it clear that young John Titford was not the only one to die in its grip:
Very dismal accounts on the Papers respecting the last severe Weather — many, many People having lost their Lives thro' the inclemency of the same.
Mail coaches &c. unable to travel…the long continuance of so severe cold Weather having scarce been known for the last Century.
[17 Feb. 1799.]
27.
Frome prepares for the expected invasion, 1798.
John Titford responded to the call and signed up for the Volunteer Infantry.
(SRO DD/LW.)
28.
The diary of Edmund Crocker of Frome, 8 February 1799.
‘On the 2d instant died in a consumption J. Titford aged about 4 or 5 & 20 years — he being a volunteer in our infantry, he was this day interred with the military honours due to him.’
(SRO DD/LW.)
Woodforde is certainly prone to a touch of hyperbole in such matters, but weather which.
even prevented him from getting to the outside privy (‘Jericho’) must have been severe indeed…
In Frome there was one more natural disaster to come before the year was out: the afternoon of September 17th saw ‘One of the highest floods that has been remembered perhaps for these 20 years’, according to Crocker.
It was up two stairs in the Crockers' house, and level with many of the old women's beds in the Blue Coat School almshouses.
One can imagine, in the circumstances, what havoc it caused in Charles Titford's house and shop across the bridge…
Perhaps we might have a look at things, at this stage, through the eyes of young Benjamin Titford, the youngest surviving son, left motherless at nine years old; waving his big brother William Charles goodbye as he set off for London soon afterwards; watching brother John cough himself into an early grave; listening to endless conversations about high prices, shortages, and a war across the channel; dragged out of his bed in the middle of the night to cries of ‘Fire!’ and ‘Flood!’; struggling to keep warm every winter; watching his father die of a long illness — these experiences made his childhood, in modern terms, an awful, albeit a dramatic one.
And, indeed, he must have been a tough little lad to have survived it all, though it was to take its toll on him eventually; by the time he died in far-away London at the age of 29 he had lived through some very harsh times indeed.
Meantime, there was a lot happening just down the street to capture his attention, as troop after troop of soldiers passed through Frome on their way somewhere else: 300 of the Staffordshire Militia came in April of 1799, replaced by an equal number of the same later in the month; then the 300-strong Somerset Supplementary Militia arrived from Wells, complete with their own band, followed by the glorious Fifteenth Light Dragoons —‘It is supposed that these are the finest men and horses of any regiment in England’; and the next year no fewer than nine hundred men of the Seventeenth Regiment of Light Dragoons came at one go.
Ben must have been wide-eyed.
There were other goings-on to occupy his attention, too, not least the marriages of two daughters of the Titfords' Pig Street neighbour, Thomas Clement the clothier, within a three-month period.
‘Mr Shatford's Company of Players’ arrived in town in the July of 1800, consisting of Mr. and Mrs. Shatford themselves, together with 11 men, one ‘Miss’, five ‘Mrs.'s’and someone described darkly as a ‘young lady of Bath…’.
Having regaled the population of Frome with ‘Hamlet’, ‘Romeo and Juliet’, ‘School for Scandal’ and a few other evergreens, they were soon off to take the same dose of culture to Shepton Mallet and Wells.
Ben may not have been much of a theatre-goer, but he would no doubt have been fascinated by one unexpected visit in the June of 1801:
Arrived here, for the inspection of the public, a basking shark, caught at Abbotsbury, in Dorsetshire, in the fishing seine of Hardy and Co., May the 4th.
It measures 28 feet in length and 20 feet in girth. the tail from point to point is 8 feet.
The body has contained 27 persons at one time, and its liver produced four hogsheads of oil…
The so-called ‘proprietor’ of the shark, glorying in the name of ‘Captain Wm.
Boatswain’, no doubt knew how to entertain an audience, just as the Shatford Players had done: ‘…after it was entangled in the net, it received seventeen musket balls from the Greyhound  Cutter’(Gosh!); ‘…it was dragged to the shore by seven horses…’
(Well!); ‘…and three hundred men…’
(Gadzooks!
Odsbodykins!
Zounds! etc.…
) Life in Frome, for all the town, s comparative isolation, can hardly have been dull.
Of course, and as we might expect, despite alterations made to the weir and hatches in the river below the town, another tremendous flood had arrived on 9 November 1800.
The entire Market Place was underwater, and the road over the bridge was impassable from six in the morning until seven at night.
Poor Charles the Cheesemonger can hardly have sold much in his little shop that day.
In any case, the price of food in that year, in the aftermath of a very bad harvest, had soared abruptly: Charles Titford, your friendly butcher and cheesemonger, would be charging 7d. per pound for pork in March, 1800, as against 4½d. in January; his cheese would now cost you 7d. per pound, against 5d. in January.
He may well have lost customers; and even those he retained would no doubt have been despondent if not positively angry at what they were having to pay.
Further down the street, the local baker would be telling his hapless visitors much the same story as their butcher: the cost of wheat was out of all control, and he was as sorry as they were that his prices were up, while their wages had held steady.
In January of the following year, a grand masquerade held at nearby Orchardleigh House served supper ‘in the richest profusion’, but ‘from a laudable attention to the severity of ‘'existing circumstances’, the use of bread was entirely prohibited'.
Even the gentry, then, were having to eat pheasant without bread; what was the world coming to?
By 1800 the overseers, rate books indicate a few changes in the personnel living down Pig Street.
Thomas Balne had acquired the Swann Inn , and was also Charles Titford's new landlord.
Elizabeth Addams lived next door, Thomas Addams was still at work in his smith's shop, Thomas Burge had taken over as the Bristol carrier, and the Clement family were producing cloth for all they were worth in workshops at the end of the street.
As Charles stood in his doorway and looked around, he must have seen a bustle of activity and a variety of dwellings only possible before the days of clinical town planning.
So although his neighbours opposite occupied houses with gardens, his side of the street had to work for a living: he would have been used to seeing the flame fanned by the bellows of the blacksmith, the steam rising from the sweating horses in the carrier, s stables, and — we may hope — a line of customers waiting to be served in his little shop.
The sounds, as we have already said, must have provided a constant cacophonous background to the daily round, while the smell of a street which included a butcher and chandler's shop, stables, a smithy, clothiers, workshops and a liberal supply of earth closets would be scarcely credible to modern sensibilities.
Flies, we can well imagine, must have had a hey-day in such an environment, and those attracted by the flesh and the dung of horses would have had to be whisked off Charles's meat — perhaps by boys with birch whisks specially employed for the purpose.
Little wonder, in a sense, that so many children died in early infancy, or that those who survived would have built up a set of antibodies we might well envy.
Had Charles looked the other way — south, over the town bridge — we have a very good idea of exactly what he would have seen, thanks to a contemporary engraving by Abraham Crocker.
There is the Blue House and the Blue Boar , the Market Place still divided by buildings across the centre of it, and the spire of the unrebuilt St John's church rising in the middle distance.
A tranquil enough scene, we may say, once the squads of militia had departed and the floods abated.
Crocker's engraving was published on l June 1802; five days later, aged 52, Charles the Cheesemonger died.
On 2 October of the same year William Jowett Titford, great-grandson of William the Emigrant, wrote to his mother in London: ‘The father of our relation W. C. Titford died at Frome June 6th after a long illness’.
Charles joined his young nephew     Joseph in plot no. 223 on Catherine Hill; there he lay in peace until 1811, when — and this should not surprise us by now— he was ‘digd up again’ while Betty Naish, 67, was put in.
29.
Frome: Blue House and Lower Market Place.
This engraving, showing what would have been the view from Charles Titford's shop in Pig Street, was published on 1 June 1802, five days before he died.
30.
The Letter-book of William Jowett Titford.
William Jowett Titford's copy of a letter to his mother of 2 October 1802, mentioning the death of Charles the Cheesemonger: ‘The father of our relation W. C. Titford died at Frome June 6th. after a long illness’.
From the letter book in possession of Mr. Tony Titford of West Horsley.
One month after Charles's funeral, wasting little time, his eldest daughter Elizabeth, who had probably tended her father through his final illness and was by then the official occupier of the dwelling house next to his shop, upped and married by licence.
She became the wife of James Baker, a saddler in the town who was also making his professional services available to the Frome Volunteers.
He was to live on until 1832, when he died, aged 58 described as being of the Lower Market Place.
So it was ‘all change’ on Pig Street: Solomon Mead replaced Elizabeth Titford in the little dwelling house which had served the Titford family so well over the years, and Thomas Tuck began to see what kind of commercial success he could make out of the vacated butcher and chandler's shop next door.
One male Titford of the new generation — William Charles — had left the town already; his brother Benjamin was soon to follow him to London; Elizabeth was now a married woman, with two as yet unmarried sisters, Mary and Sarah.
Charles the Cheesemonger's major contribution to the history of his side of the family was to ensure that the name continued; not in Frome, where Titfords were to disappear completely by the 1860s, but in London.
The young males had left the nest and taken wing; within a couple of generations almost no-one would even remember these Westcountry origins — such is the way of things.
But we know, and Henry James Titford, a great-great-grandson of Charles the Cheesemonger, born in 1875, could still remember in the 1960s having heard it once said that his surname came from Frome.
How right he was — folk-memory was not quite dead, after all.
John the Cardmaker (c.1750–1828)
Frome, Somerset
NO BREAD FOR THE BAPTIST BROTHER
The story of the Frome Titfords properly ends with the youngest of the four brothers whose fortunes we have been following; his children were to be the last Titfords in the town, and he himself outlived William, Thomas and Charles.
John Titford was a more ardent Baptist than any of the others; he alone of the males of his generation was ever a fully-baptised member of Badcox Lane Chapel:
Tuesday, March 7th, 1780.
John Titford came before the church & made a profession of his faith to their satisfaction.
He was baptised by John Kingdon in the chapel's own ‘baptistry’ on Friday 5 May 1780 and officially received into the church two days later.
John was by then an adult, of course, aged about thirty, and also a married man.
All four of the Titford brothers of this generation were in their early twenties on their wedding day — a reflection in itself of the fact that the average age at marriage for men was falling as the century wore on; that average in the early 1700s had been as high as twenty-seven.
John was 21 years old when he married Ann Oldbury on 15 June 1771, three months to the day after the death of his father during that most vicious of winters.
There are just the odd hints here and there that John and Ann did not always see eye-to-eye on religious matters.
She appears not to have worshipped alongside her husband at the chapel; he was a full member, and his daughters would later follow in his footsteps, but Ann never committed herself in quite that way.
Then there is the baptismal entry at St John's on Christmas Day 1773: ‘Sarah Titford, daughter of Ann’.
This might be an illegitimate birth of some kind, as it seems to be, or possibly just evidence of John and Ann's first child.
John himself would hardly have deigned to enter the parish church with a child of his, and may have sent his wife instead: ‘If you want her baptised, dear, you go and do it…
I'm having nothing to do with it…’.
At all events, John was singularly successful in the long run at turning his back on everything that smacked of Anglicanism; he alone of all the Titford brothers managed to cold-shoulder St John's church for everything except his marriage.
John's other children consisted of two boys, William and Joseph, and four girls — one of whom, Elizabeth, born in 1787, would eventually broaden the family's chapel affiliations by being registered as an adult church member at Rook Lane Independent Meeting House in 1837.
John was a cardmaker, and yet it was his good fortune to have depended on parish relief rather less often than some; he and his family needed a brief period of support in the famine period of 1801–2, when they were allowed 2s. a week, later reduced to 1s., until payment stopped on 9 March 1802.
Only in 1817 do we encounter them again, in a list headed ‘Our Paupers’, when first Ann ('70 years old…
Behind the Hill') and then, in 1821, John and Ann ('70; Behind the Hill') pick up amounts varying between 5s. and 10s. per fortnight.
Parish authorities generally were constantly reviewing their ideas about what constituted a minimum acceptable subsistence payment during this period.
If we pause briefly and attempt to list the possible reasons why an individual or a family might have needed parish relief in the late 18th and early 19th centuries — sickness, unemployment, the needs of one-parent families or of orphans or young children, support in times of local or national economic crisis, old age — then we have now found Titfords in every category.
Betty Titford, Thomas's wife, received help because she was sick; Thomas himself was out of work in 1801, and qualified for relief both on that score and because he was the head of a one-parent family which included a sick daughter; Hephzibah, the little orphan, had been helped and then apprenticed by the overseers, and finally John and Ann, briefly subsidised during times of economic dearth, eventually survived long enough to collect a very modest old-age pension.
The couple had lived for many years on a narrow pedestrian street known quite simply as ‘Behind the Hill’(later Paul Street), a useful little short-cut between Palmer Street and Catherine Hill.
The 1785 census finds them there, two males and four females in a house owned by Mr. Muir.
Catherine or St Catherine's Hill itself constituted a Pandora's box of small-town trades and occupations at the time: everything from a gingerbread maker to a hairdresser, a staymaker, a breechesmaker, Charles Tucker the coalminer, John Golledge the blind schoolmaster, Mrs Allen at the Castle public house, and even John Ward, who seemed to be able to support himself by practising the noble art of a ‘horse jockey’.
The Titfords' little house nestled among others occupied by these larger-than-life characters — John was, after all, merely a humble and humdrum cardmaker.
In 1800 the family's landlords are given as ‘Muir and Wayland’, and the property itself is described as ‘House and Garden’.
By 1802 John Wayland — a member of a famous Frome family, some of whom were to be very eminent in Baptist circles in America — was the new owner, and rates on it cost him 4d.; lucky old Mrs. Muir, then, who had taken over by 1804, and was only charged half the price…
John Titford was never what we would call a leading light at Badcox Lane Chapel — he seems to have been reliable, but perhaps not dynamic.
Even so, he was called upon to sign documents on occasions, as when a conveyance relating to the chapel and its land was prepared in 1805 and his name as witness ('John Titford, Cardmaker') appears alongside those of John Lacey, shoemaker, Richard Butler, weaver, and James Browning, clothier; together they form a nice little thumb-nail sketch of the kind of men who were ‘Chapel’ rather than ‘Church’at this period.
Eight years later, on 2 l May l 8 l 3, a set of proposals for the enlargement of Badcox Lane Chapel was drawn up — signed by the deacons, the minister, subscribers and seven members, including John Titford.
The new meeting house opened its doors for worship almost exactly a year later; it had cost £3,366.
Though his name appears on various lists of members of the chapel, John never became a deacon and never involved himself deeply in church affairs.
His three spinster daughters, whom he had not registered at the parish church in any way, were all baptised as adults at Badcox.
Mary, the youngest, was the first to commit herself, in June 1810:
The following persons related their religious experience before the church: Eleanor Cullen.
Rachel Rowe; Emma George; Mary Titford — who were all baptised on the Sabbath morning, June 10, and admitted in the afternoon.
Ann followed suit in 1815, and Sarah in 1816, though all three sisters had actually attended the chapel for some years before becoming full members: a seating list for April 1807 shows us that Mary was in Mr. Porter's ‘Dark Gallery’, with Ann and Sarah sharing Mr. Coomb's ‘Light Gallery’.
Ann, the mother, as we have seen, refrained from sharing those galleries with her daughters or from sitting next to her husband in chapel on Sundays.
Yet Badcox Lane must have regarded her as a member of their congregation in the widest sense, at least in spirit; when she died, aged 79, and was buried at Catherine Hill on 18 May 1826, the chapel entered the fact in its register.
A visiting minister performed the burial service, a man who was lending the chapel a helping hand during the interregnum which came between the departure of Samuel Saunders and the arrival of Thomas Fox Newman.
And Ann, till the very end, seems somehow to have been a member of no chapel and yet of every chapel; here she was, being afforded a burial service by courtesy of the Badcox congregation, yet being laid claim to at the same time by a neighbouring Dissenting church: Sheppards Barton Baptist Chapel registers include the entry: ‘Anne Titford.
Frome.
May 18th, 1826.
Aged 79.
In the Burial Ground on Catherine Hill.
W. A. Murch, Minister’.
John outlived his wife by just over two years, dying on 5 June 1828.
His old friends the overseers did him proud to the very last: in their generosity they provided him with a 14s. funeral.
John had been the last of his generation.
There were now to be fewer and fewer Titfords in Frome as time went by; many had died, some had left town for good.
The daughters of Charles the Cheesemonger were still very much around, however, and as the offspring of a man in trade and one who, despite his early death, had enjoyed quite a full working life, they were fairly well-breeched compared to the daughters of their Uncle John.
Charles's daughter Sarah had made a prudent marriage, and quite late in life, too: the ceremony at St John's had taken place on her thirty-fifth birthday, with sister Mary as witness.
All four of Charles's children who married were to do so by licence; that suited two of them — Elizabeth in Frome and then Benjamin in London — who were in a bit of a hurry, but in Sarah's case there was maybe a hint of Nonconformist protest against having banns read out in a church which she did not attend.
Her new husband, William Chinnock, had affiliations with the Zion Chapel on the corner of Catherine Hill and Whittox Lane, and had been baptised there as an infant in 1789.
A wheelwright at marriage, he had subsequently made a successful career in the building trade, and by the 1830s was rated on no fewer than six houses in Gore Hedge — almost a third of the street.
Sarah's sister Mary was to remain the spinster of the family, but seems to have been equally comfortably-off; when times were hard and shops were perpetually falling vacant through lack of trade in the 1820s, Mary dodged around from one location to another like an enterprising little businesswoman.
She was running a milliner's shop in the Market Place as early as 1822, thence to King Street, along from the Three Swans Inn and the infant school, followed by a brief spell in Cheap Street, where she was paying a rate of 9d. and an additional amount for ‘Stocks’ by virtue of her fleeting partnership with someone called Grant.
Then off to North Parade in 1833, where two ‘Miss Titford's’ followed the same business as milliners, the other, Elizabeth, being almost certainly Mary's niece, daughter of her brother Benjamin who had died in London in 1816.
Finally a return to King Street in 1836; eight years later Mary died at her sister and brother-in-law's house in Gore Hedge, aged sixty-four.
Mary and Sarah's comparative affluence was by no means typical of conditions in Frome in the 1820s and 1830s, however, William Cobbett, visiting the town in 1826, the year John Titford's wife Ann died, talked with a perverse kind of delight about the ‘irretrievable decay of the place’; four years later it was the turn of a Bridgwater grocer, Thomas Clark, to write of Frome in his journal in the following terms:
…a dreadful distress prevailing and consequent depression…the people are working for a very pittance — 5000 persons on the poor book in Frome — very inadequately relieved…
Among those on the poor list were the daughters of John Titford; their brother William, a mason of Whittox Lane, had died in 1822, and by the November of 1824 his widow, Sarah, was being paid 2s. a fortnight by the overseers.
In 1826 she was joined by her sisters-in-law, Sarah and Ann, who had just lost their mother; the poor relief ‘Extras’ list granted them 1s. or 18d. a week for at least the next three years.
So John Titford's daughters, like himself and his wife, needed the parish dole in order to survive.
Young Sarah stayed on in her parents' house behind the hill, only one of a number of poor people in that humble street.
In 1835 she teamed up with two other pauper girls, Eliza Johnson and Ann Yerbury, and between them they occupied three tenements belonging to Thomas Edwards on Naish's Street.
The Trinity Area, a serviceable enough place to live in the 17th century, was fast becoming a slum for the destitute.
Whittox Lane was, if anything, poorer than Naish's Street, and it was here that John Titford's eldest daughter, Ann, moved in 1828 — probably to join her sister-in-law, Sarah.
All three Titford sisters — Ann, Sarah and Mary — were together in Whittox Lane when the census man called in 1841, and all three, poor relief or not, were engaged in some kind of gainful employment as ‘wire dappers’ or ‘wire setters’.
Ten years later it was a slightly different story: only Sarah and Mary appear in the census, Ann having died that very year, aged sixty-nine.
Times must still have been hard down Whittox Lane, though nearly all its inhabitants seem to have been employed in some way or another — most of them in the clothing trade, alongside Mr. Middleditch, the Badcox Lane Baptist minister, and Charles Dyer, 23, a coal miner.
The Titford girls were on the east side of the street, on the right-hand side going down from Badcox.
But Sarah and Mary were growing old; by May 1855 Badcox Lane Chapel was taking upon itself the responsibility of arranging home visits to Mary, who was sick with diarrhoea, and were paying 1s. per month to help her out.
Her cousin Elizabeth of Dorking's £20 legacy was to arrive just too late to be of any comfort to her, and she died in the September, aged sixty-five.
Sarah, left alone, had the dubious distinction of being the last of all the Titfords in Frome.
A family line which had begun with a marriage of 1625, seen good times and bad times, sent its bright young sons to London and married its daughters into many a Frome family was seeing here, in Sarah, its last torch-bearer.
Poor Sarah, as she lived into her seventies, can hardly have felt like much of a torch-bearer; during her childhood in the 1780s and '90s Titfords had been thick on the ground — as had many families she now saw no more.
Those days had passed, and she only had the Chapel for consolation; even they, alas, got her name wrong — were the three sisters so alike that no-one could decide who was who?— and when sickness payments to her started in November, 1857, she was erroneously entered as ‘Mary’.
By February of 1859 they had rectified their mistake — but by then Sarah was past caring.
The last Frome Titford died at Whittox Lane on 18 October 1860, aged 76, and a chapter in our history closes with her.
W. C. T. (1772–1828)
Frome, Somerset, and London
SILKEN PURSES AND SOWS' EARS
There was also the magnet of London and many families had adventurous members who moved into the capital during the period from about 1775 to 1825, some considerably raising their financial and social status in doing so.
Gerald Hamilton-Edwards:In Search of Ancestry 
If this were a study in local history we should now, of course, be looking ever more closely at the ups and downs of everyday life in Frome.
But our focus is primarily upon people, not places as such; the male survivors of the next generation of Titfords succeeded in wrenching themselves away from the town which had been home for their ancestors for over a hundred and seventy years — and we have no choice but to follow them.
What is in many ways remarkable is that the family had stayed in Frome as long as it had.
Even more remarkable, perhaps, that this branch of the Titfords was to make only two significant moves from one place to another in the entire 400-year period from 1547 to 1947: first leaving Bratton for Frome in 1625, then settling in London from the late 1790s onwards.
The population of the capital grew dramatically in the 18th and 19th centuries, just as it had done in the 17th, and despite the fact that its death rate was higher than the national average.
Even the most cursory examination of the census returns for London from 1841 onwards will reveal the extent to which those born in country towns or villages chose — or were forced — to seek employment or advancement in the big city.
Those who made the journey to London might have done so for a variety of reasons.
Most significantly, the impact of the Agricultural Revolution and the extensive enclosures in rural parishes during the late 18th and early 19th centuries drove the young and healthy away from home in search of work and the possibility of keeping body and soul together.
The lucky or plucky ones got out, leaving the older generation, all too often, to see out their days as paupers on the parish.
Poverty was not only rampant in the country villages, though, as we know only too well.
Almost an entire generation of Titfords in Frome was increasingly destitute from the 1780s onwards; in a town which had depended heavily upon the wool industry for its prosperity for so long, the innate conservatism of the local clothiers left them unable to respond to changing times and new technology.
Cardmaking was a declining trade, savage winters and poor harvests had sent prices soaring, and England was eventually trying to cope with the ravages of a war-time economy.
This is the background against which we must see the departure of William Charles Titford for London.
His own father, Charles the Cheesemonger, was neither a cardmaker nor a pauper, and we can hardly suppose that any loss of common rights through enclosures had had any direct impact upon his family as it had upon so many others.
Nevertheless, the lad had reasons enough for his departure: by the late 1790s his mother was dead, his father solvent but none too rich, and his aunts, uncles and cousins all paupers or on the verge of becoming such.
Had he stayed, there was every chance that he might have been forced eventually to join the Militia — a thing few Titfords would face with relish; but most  significant of all, perhaps — apart from his obvious inner resilience and entrepreneurial spirit — he had the singular advantage of having well-off relations to latch onto in London.
A journey to the capital in the late 18th century can scarcely have been as harrowing an affair as that made to Kent by William the Emigrant in 1711.
A fast stage-coach could now cover over a hundred miles in a single day, good roads and weather permitting, though comfort was not necessarily to be looked for and there was an outside chance of ending up with a foul-mouthed and drunken coachman for the length of the journey.
Assuming he could not afford the luxury of a high-speed post-chaise, William Charles may have taken one of the coaches which left the George in Frome for the Bell Sauvage in Ludgate Hill on Sundays, Tuesdays and Thursdays at 3 o'clock in the afternoon.
That would have cost him £1 7s.
Alternatively, he could always have chatted up one of the drivers of Middleton & Co. 's waggon, asking if there was a bit of spare room for an extra body when they left for the King's Arms in Holborn on a Sunday evening or a Monday morning.
Failing that, perhaps Webb's would take him to the Castle Inn in Wood Street, if he spoke to them nicely?
Speaking to people nicely may well have been William Charles's greatest worldly asset, one which would enable him to make a living in the great metropolis, for all his lack of more specific skills.
His story as it unfolds is at times scarcely credible when we think back to the way things were in Frome in the 1790s.
By 1798 he was already comfortably settled as a linen draper within the hallowed precincts of the City of London, and had the fact entered in the commercial directories accordingly; Titford and Barwick might be consulted for your drapery needs at 77 Bishopsgate Within, situated at the end of Suttons Court opposite the Marine Society Offices.
The man who collected the sewer rates in Bishopsgate was quick.to notice a change of ownership at no. 77; striking out ‘Joseph Ready’ in his book, he substituted ‘Titford’instead — that would cost W. C. T. 6s. 8d. per annum, whether he liked it or not.
At 26, then, young William Charles ('Call me Charles…') had magically catapulted himself into the lower echelons of the Establishment — all achieved, we may suppose, with the help of a good head for business, a degree of energy and flamboyance and an ingratiating style with customers, especially ladies?
Could we have seen W. C. T. at work in his shop, we might well have appreciated the importance of a silver tongue.
Two foreign visitors to London in the late 18th century spoke with wonder of certain City shops with their ‘shop-fronts with large glass windows and a glass door’.
Maybe William Charles's premises were designed in that style?
Inside, Titford and Barwick could apply the soft-talk while lining their elegant pockets with silver.
One account of an 18th-century visit to a draper's talks of the proprietors as being ‘…positively the greatest fops in the kingdom’.
The customer was confronted by three partners; two of them ‘…were to flourish out their silks’, while the other was to be ‘gentleman usher of the shop’, complete with the necessary patter:
This, madam, is wonderful, charming.
This, madam — ye Gods! would I had 10,000 yards of it!…
Fan me, ye winds, your ladyship rallies me!
Should I part with it at such a price, the weavers would rise upon the very shop.
Was you at the Park last night, madam?
Your ladyship shall abate me sixpence…
Perhaps W. C. T. was never quite up to this level of verbosity?
He must have had charm, nevertheless, not to mention a broad Somerset accent which may have added to his own special brand of eloquence.
Some drapery establishments were plain, if expensive: Parson Woodforde, paying a call on one in Southampton Street in the October of 1786, was £13 6s. worse off after he had paid for ‘…table linnen, muslin, a piece of Holland, cravats, etc.’.
At the upper end of the scale came those shops which bewildered members of the public — those who could    afford it all — with an astonishing range of merchandise: Dutch ratteens, duffles, frizes, beaver coatings, kerseymeres, forrest cloths, German serges, Wilton stuffs, sagathies, namkeens, Silasia cambricks, Manchester velvets, grograms, double allapeens, silk camblets, barragons, Brussels camblets, princes stuffs, worsted damasks, silk knitpieces, gattias, shagg velvets, serge desoys and shalloons.
And was there anything else, Madam?
31.
Part of the City of London, 24 May 1799.
William Charles Titford ran his linen draper's business from 77 Bishopsgate Street, at the end of Sutton's Court between the Vine Inn and the Four Swans Inn, from 1798 to 1806.
Titford and Barwick, let us guess, ran an altogether more humble establishment than that…
Nevertheless, however humble the business, the City did not take kindly to outsiders trading within its boundaries; William Charles had a bit of bureaucracy to sort out before he could feel safe and settled.
He needed, essentially, to become a Freeman of the City of London — and the most direct route for him, considering he had served no appropriate apprenticeship, was to buy himself into a livery company first.
The Weavers' Company would do as well as any other in the circumstances, especially since his cousins, as silk weavers, were already members of it.
So we read in the minutes of the Court of Assistants of the Worshipful Company of Weavers, London, for Tuesday 2 January 1798: ‘William Chas.
Titford of Bishopsgate Street, Linen Draper, was made free by Redemption on the Recommendation of Mr Lum’.
Dear Mr. Lum — who had been admitted to the Weavers' Company himself in 1787 — had agreed to recommend his friend William Charles Titford, and the deal went through as a freedom by redemption — that is, by virtue of payment — rather than by apprenticeship or patrimony.
 William Charles was then half-way there; the next stage was to take along a piece of paper certifying this aforesaid freedom, and present it to the Chamberlain's Office as part of the procedure for achieving full freedom of the City.
The whole thing didn't take very long; just over a year after his freedom of the Weavers' Company had been approved, William Charles Titford, Linen Draper, ‘Son of Charles Titford of Frome, Somersetshire, Cheesemonger,’ became free of the City, ‘…paying unto Mr Chamberlain for this City's use the Sum of forty six shillings and eight pence’.
William Charles's sponsor was no less a gentleman than ‘Robert Peckham Esquire this City's Justice for the Borough of Southwark’, who was allowed to present three men to the said honour.
Well, Peckham may have recommended him, but it fell to the new Freeman himself to pay his own 46s. 8d.
And that should give us food for thought; while his uncle William in Frome, amongst others, was receiving poor relief at the rate of between 1s. and 4s. per fortnight, here, in the same year of 1799, the nephew-made-good was handing over what amounted to about a year's dole payments to join an exclusive club in the metropolis.
The order of the Court of Aldermen to admit William Charles to the City freedom is dated 15 January 1799; just over two weeks later his brother John, the brave little Frome volunteer, died of his consumption back home.
Further privileges lay in store for W. C. T. as a member of the Weavers' Company — though nearly every entry in his name subsequently is confused by his double Christian names: even the document granting him his Freedom of the City had to insert ‘William’ in front of‘Charles’with a caret mark, and as far as the Weavers were concerned, he was really ‘Charles William’.
So ‘Charles William Titford’ joined the Livery of his company, being ‘cloathed’on 14 July 1801, and promising to ‘pay the fine’(a resounding £10).
Four years later, in 1804, we find that ‘Charles William Titford and Daniel Slamp…’ were elected to be two of the Company's stewards,
…to find and provide one third part of the entertainment on next St James' Day each unless they shall severally pay the usual fine of £15 each in lieu of serving the said officer at the next court…
We are talking here, of course, about amounts of money that the uncles, aunts and cousins back in Frome could only have dreamed of.
William Charles had very definitely arrived on the scene.
How had all this opulence come our young man's way?
There are essentially two reasons, of which the first is the munificence of W. C. T.'s London cousins.
Just as fate had been unkind in many ways to those Titfords who had stayed in Frome throughout the 18th century, so it had been a firm friend to the descendants of William the Emigrant after his arrival in Kent.
This branch of the family had had all the material success which their poor Frome cousins lacked, together with the necessary altruism to help out as best they could.
Well, it was mainly altruism; to an extent the relationship they had with William Charles, the poor relation up from the country, was a symbiotic one.
The London Titfords made silk in Spitalfields; and a draper cousin could help sell it for them.
32.
Minutes of the Court of Assistants of the Worshipful Company of Weavers, Basinghall Street, London, 2 January, 1798.
‘William Chas.
Titford of Bishopgate St. Linnendraper was made Free by Redemptn. on the recommendation of Mr. Lum’.
33.
The Gentleman's Magazine.
A list of ‘Marriages and Deaths of remarkable Persons’ includes the marriage of William Charles Titford and Anne Edgar on 21 June 1799.
The silk trade itself had hit very hard times in the mid-1790s; a contemporary ballad reflects its catastrophic decline:
For in Spitalfields and Shoreditch, likewise Bethnal
Green,
Such decay and distress was seldom ever seen
Wives and many children, their mouths to be fed
Some forc'd to sell their furniture, and even their bed,
Some gone for soldiers, some the streets they parade
In a low occupation, by the loss of their trade.
Within a few years a temporary revival was on the way, however, and William Titford, grandson of William the Emigrant, was achieving a fair degree of success as a partner in the silk-manufacturing business of Cotes, Titford and Brookes, then operating in Union Street, Bishopsgate.
He was already a person of some eminence in Nonconformist circles, too; he and his Methodist wife had enjoyed the distinction of being married by John Wesley in 1774, and by 1799 he was himself a deacon in the General Baptist movement.
His own son, Richard, was contemporary with William Charles, and William senior was also acting as a surrogate father for his brother Isaac's son, a certain William Jowett Titford.
Three ‘cousins’ in the broadest sense — W. C. T., W. J. T. and Richard — thus formed a kind of ‘Titford trio’in the City.
So much for one reason why William Charles had had the wherewithal to prosper so quickly in his new surroundings; but there was another, just as vital to his continuing success — he had made a prudent marriage.
The Gentleman's Magazine for 1799 was pleased to announce the wedding of ‘Mr William Charles Titford of Bishopsgate Within to Miss Anne Edgar of Gough Square, Fleet Street.
Youngest daughter of the late Jos.
Edgar of Yately, Hants.’.
Gough Square was no backwater — Dr. Samuel Johnson had lived there a few years before — and a Gough Square lady must have been a good catch for an impecunious cheesemonger's son.
The formalities were gone through — including, in this case, the obtaining of a marriage licence; the bachelor of St Ethelburga's parish made an allegation that he knew of no lawful impediment why he should not marry the girl from St Dunstan's in the West, and it was there that they became man and wife on 21 June 1799.
So 1799 was a signal year for W. C. T. in more ways than one: he was now a respectable businessman with a respectable wife, and a Freeman of the City to boot— what can they have thought of all that back in Pig Street, Frome?
Any account of William Charles's doings in the City during the early 19th century would be incomplete without some mention of his illustrious cousin, William Jowett Titford.
No ordinary man, he; with a good education behind him, coupled with a strong religious fervour, he would eventually achieve a degree of fame by compiling a treatise on the botany of North America, called Sketches towards a Hortus Botanicus Americanus .
His father, Isaac, a gentleman with more than a little of the rogue about him, was in Jamaica during the closing years of the 18th century, taking refuge there, it would seem, after a bankruptcy of 1779.
Styling himself ‘Dr. Isaac Titford’, he had been commissioned surgeon (not by any means so prestigious a profession then as now) in the first battalion, Sixtieth Royal American Regiment, and had lived for a while in Virginia; he was also giving his enterprising spirit    full reign out there in the West Indies, fathering the odd quadroon or two, dabbling in the slave trade, a postmaster at Spanish Town, a partner in a firm of druggists in Kingston and the owner of a coffee and pimento plantation.
34.
Title page, William Jowett Titford's Hortus Botanicus Americanus.
From the copy now in the possession of Mr. Tony Titford of West Horsley.
In 1802 William Jowett was to sail to Jamaica to help sort out his father's affairs, having acted until then as an accountant for his uncle William at Cotes, Titford and Brookes.
Shortly after his arrival in Spanish Town he wrote to his cousin William Charles, informing him that: ‘…some of your shawls sold for 200 and 300 per cent.profit…’, but adding:
…before they were all sold, a quantity of the same sort came up to town at half the price, so that the rest remained on hand.
This is to request that you will send me no more goods unless ordered.
Just a friendly letter between cousins…
Being undersold out there in Jamaica was to be only one of William Charles's problems as time went by: after a period of increasing success as a linen draper and mercer, he was eventually beset by financial problems, occasioning a move northwards from Bishopsgate to Finsbury Place, Finsbury Square (on the corner of Chiswell Street), together with a reproof from William Jowett, who lost no time in admonishing his cousin in a letter to Richard Titford from Jamaica, dated 28 April 1806:
Sorry for W. C. T., but thought three things dangerous to merchants and tradesmen, too much and too long credit, borrowing too much on discount, and extending the trade too much and going out of depth.
Sound advice, indeed.
W. C. T. had been busy in other ways too, fathering a series of children; three at least were to die young, and he took them for burial to his cousins, Baptist Chapel at Worship Street, Shoreditch.
There the register-keeper was well and truly confused, since he not only referred to children of ‘Charles William Titford, Linen Draper, Bishopsgate Street’— a nomenclature which we are used to by now— but also made an error when it came to wife Anne's name — she appears as ‘Mary’.
A degree of bewilderment is perhaps to be expected, after all: in 1805, for instance, there were two Charles Titfords buried at Worship Street — the one, son of Richard and Mary Ann, the other, son of Charles William and…well, ‘Mary’ would be a  forgivable error?
Of the surviving children of William Charles and Anne, five were baptised together on the same day (10 July 1817) in their father's original parish at the miniature City church of St Ethelburga, Bishopsgate.
There were two sons: John, the elder, became a solicitor's clerk, dying as a bachelor in Lambeth in 1862, while his brother Joseph, a house painter settling in Hoxton, assured the continuity of the Titford line by having a number of male children by his wife Elizabeth,née Griffiths.
Two of the three daughters of William Charles were to find husbands for themselves.
1841 saw the marriage of Mary to Samuel Wates, a clerk from Greenwich, at the Denmark Place Baptist Chapel in Lambeth.
Sarah, with a similar taste for a Nonconformist ceremony, took on an engineer by the name of William Parfitt at Westminster Congregational Chapel in 1846.
Their wedding was conducted by the Rev. Samuel Martin, father of Charles Trice Martin, who himself was later to achieve fame by writing that most valuable of reference works,The Record Interpreter .
Rev. Samuel himself, son of a Woolwich shipwright, had chosen to work in Westminster, then ‘…one of the most socially unregenerate districts of the metropolis’, where his ‘eloquence and steady devotion to his work attracted a large congregation’.
Not only was Sarah Titford's wedding celebrated in a ‘socially unregenerate’ part of London — it also featured a bride who gave her place of abode on the marriage certificate, ominously enough, as ‘Millbank Prison’.
Not, we may hope, as a guest of Her Majesty?
The last of William Charles Titford's children, Emely Sophia, born in 1819, nearly saw the 20th century.
A spinster in her seventies and employed as a housekeeper at the time, she died in Bishopsgate Street on 17 April 1898.
Her will makes a careful list of most of her very ordinary possessions; perhaps the most valuable, sentimentally and financially, goes to Samuel Wates, in the form of ‘Uncle John's silver watch’— possibly the last remaining  memento of her deceased brother.
Emely Sophia had outlived her father, William Charles, by almost seventy years.
When we left him he was a linen draper and furniture warehouseman in Finsbury Square; by 1818 he had made his final move to Windsor Terrace, an elegant row of houses on City Road, having by then become a silk manufacturer like his cousins.
He died 10 years later, on 20 June 1828, in nearby Wellington Street — just two days short of his twenty-ninth wedding anniversary, and a mere two weeks after the death of his pauper uncle, John Titford, in Frome.
He was buried at that most busy of London churches, St Luke's, Old Street, leaving a widow who would run a little milliner's business in Soho before dying, 23 years later, in Westminster.
An appropriate valedictory comment on W. C. T. might be that he underwent a dramatic rags-to-riches transformation, conveniently abandoning the Dissenting zeal of his ancestors in the process.
It does look, after all, as if respectability posed the greatest of all threats to the survival of Nonconformity; the son and grandson of Baptist believers as he was, cousin to a family of ardent devotees of the Worship Street Chapel, William Charles appears to have paid little more than passing lip-service to the cause.
All the evidence seems to indicate that he had become a half-hearted Anglican — perhaps that was a safer way, after all, of establishing yourself as a respectable tradesman than anything which smacked in any way of revolt or radicalism?
Or maybe he picked up good trading contacts from Chapel and Church alike, just as it suited him?
Whatever fire he may have had in his belly, it hardly seems to have been the religious fire of his Frome  forebears .
The pure flame of radical Christianity, we might say with the example of the Titfords before us, would be lucky indeed if it burned brightly for as many as three generations.
William Charles had no doubt been a success in his own terms, for all that.
He had also enjoyed a longer life than his father; his younger brother Benjamin, to whom we now turn, was not to be so lucky.
Ben the Outrider (1786–1816)
Frome, Somerset, and London
SHOREDITCH WORKHOUSE
…
When the humble outrider astride his saddle bags, goes his rounds for fresh orders, to dealers and chapmen in the country…
from the Oxford English Dictionary 
It is high time we renewed our acquaintance with young Benjamin Titford, William Charles's younger brother.
When we met him last he was a mere lad down in Somerset, gazing in wonderment at troops of militia, itinerant theatre companies and a larger-than-life basking shark.
His was, in many ways, an inauspicious start to life: an 18th-century guide book could say of Frome:
The situation of the town is pleasant — the surrounding country being agreeably diversified with hills, valleys, large enclosures, and fine woods; and having the seats of many nobility and gentry…
but that has a touch of the rose-coloured spectacles about it; Wesley was not so impressed with the town when he first preached there in 1753 in what he called a ‘dry, barren, uncomfortable place’.
Young Ben Titford was born and raised in smelly, noisy Pig Street — a lively enough corner of the world, perhaps, but not the healthiest of places for all that.
No fewer than seven of his siblings had died there — five of them before their first birthday.
He had lost his mother before he was 10, seen the departure of William Charles for London shortly afterwards, then witnessed the death of his consumptive brother John, followed by that of his father.
By the middle of 1802, as the family house and shop passed into other hands, Ben was left alone with only sisters for company; Elizabeth, the eldest, had very recently married, and little brother must have been in imminent danger of succumbing to the petticoat government of Mary and Sarah.
If that didn't ensnare him, then the Militia might, as he grew older: there was a brief hiatus in the war with France from 1801 to 1803, but by the following year Napoleon was massing his army of invasion on the cliffs at Boulogne.
The Military Training Act of 1806 — the year after Trafalgar — was to provide for 200,000 troops to be raised by ballot, a measure which prompted serious riots in Frome seven years later.
This Act of 1806 may well have given young Ben the final push he needed: in that or the following year he packed his bags for good, waved his loving sisters a fond farewell, and set off for London, fame and fortune.
As it happens, he wouldn't be arriving at the best possible moment: William Charles, 14 years his brother's senior, was finding his own fame and fortune rather on the wane just at that time — he didn't need those supercilious letters from William Jowett in Jamaica to remind him of that.
Nevertheless, it looks very much as if he was able to help young Ben out a bit: probably by employing him as a commercial traveller in his own drapery business.
Ben is described variously as a ‘merchant's clerk’ and as an ‘outrider’, itself a dialect term used extensively in Somerset and elsewhere to describe a tradesman's travelling agent — a meaning it still carried in New Zealand, for example, well into the 20th century.
No doubt this draper's ‘Rep’ would have cut a bit of a dashing figure in the big city in his way, replete with some of the family charm and salesmanship which we have assumed    to be one of the hallmarks of William Charles himself.
His would not have been the only provincial accent to assail the ears of Londoners at the time, but at least it would have lent his speech a touch of bucolic appeal, with its rolling Somerset post-vocalic ‘r’ sounds and a liberal sprinkling of ‘v's for ‘f's and ‘z's for ‘S'S.
35.
‘Ben The Outrider’(l786-l8l6).
Artist's impression by Richard Scollins, l983.
All of this was enough to attract one person in particular: a London girl, seven years his senior, called Elizabeth Hasted.
He may have met her while doing business with her father Robert, a tea dealer in Crutched Friars, or her brothers, who were all coopers in Stepney; sales talk for the men, but softer words for the lady — one who was shortly to become his wife.
The very mention of Stepney and Whitechapel to a 20th-century ear suggests cramped housing, urban poverty, the cheapest property available on the ‘Monopoly’ board.
Yet it hadn't always been so.
Stepney in the late 18th century was becoming what the Northern Heights — Highgate and Hampstead — became later, namely, an early form of London suburbia.
In the closing years of that century the eastward spread was beginning: there was already some development east of the Tower of London, including the later-notorious Ratcliff Highway and the docks area at Wapping, Shadwell and Limehouse.
That apart, Whitechapel Road and Mile End Road ran into open fields, and the ancient parish church, St Dunstan's, was in an entirely rural setting.
From 1800 the street pattern which lasted in essence until the blitz of the Second World War was rapidly growing.
The austere but imposing Hawksmoor tower of St George's in the East rose above its riverside parish and the bustling London Docks, and to the north St Mary Whitechapel rubbed uneasy shoulders with the Union Street Independent Chapel, both standing opposite the Whitechapel workhouse and down the road from the London Hospital and the famous Whitechapel Bell Foundry.
It was to this area that the Hasteds had come at the very beginning of the 19th century; previously their home had been in the City, in the parishes of St Katherine Coleman and St Olave, Hart Street, but like many of their contemporaries they made the pilgrimage east.
A short pilgrimage, to be sure: John Frederick and Thomas Hasted set up in business as coopers in Well Close Square and, later, in nearby Princes Square.
Well Close Square was elegant and private, fed by Shorter Street in the north and Neptune Street in the south, but with narrow alleys leaving it diagonally at its four corners.
The houses, many of them partly timber in construction, were fine products of the rising artisan class, to which class the Hasteds undoubtedly belonged.
Before making this move east into Stepney, John Frederick Hasted had married in 1803 a young lady by the name of Sarah Hunt, with his sister Elizabeth acting as a witness; the ceremony took place at the City church of All Hallows by the Tower (also known as All Hallows Barking).
Elizabeth was to return to the same church for her own wedding five years later; she and young Benjamin Titford were married there on 24 January 1808.
Matters had not  proceeded entirely without the odd hitch or two for the young couple — mainly because the bride was heavily pregnant with a child, one conceived during the long dry summer of 1807.
Ben and Elizabeth found themselves doing what many others did in a similar predicament — rather than wait for banns to be read, they married by licence.
For him it meant a brief wait until he was of the appropriate age of 21, in December 1807; barely a month later he was off to Doctors' Commons in St Paul's Churchyard to sign an allegation ‘…that he is of the Parish of All Hallows, Barking, London, a bachelor…’ and ‘…that there is no lawful impediment…’before being issued with a licence by the Archbishop of Canterbury's Faculty Office.
Thence to the church, two days later.
Standing at the corner of Great Tower Street and Seething Lane, in the very shadow of the Tower of London, All Hallows must have been as impressive a building then as it is today: one of the oldest parish churches in the City, it has always had close links with the Tower itself, and was used as a place of burial for many an unfortunate wretch executed    on the nearby scaffold.
It had been lucky enough to have survived the ravages of the Great Fire of 1666, when its tower acted as a vantage-point from which Samuel Pepys could stare in horror at the extent of the blaze.
William Penn, who founded Pennsylvania, was baptised at All Hallows, and John Quincy Adams married there in 1797; he was later to become the sixth president of the U.S.A.
36.
Marriage bond, l808.
Issued by the Faculty Office of the Archbishop of Canterbury in London.
Benjamin Titford's probably-fictitious fellow bondsman is a certain ‘John Thomas’.
At least John Quincy Adams left the clerk his personal details after the ceremony, unlike one couple married there in 1650, who went away and ‘…gave not their names’.
In the circumstances, Benjamin Titford might have been tempted not to leave his name in the parish register, either, as his bride came gingerly down the aisle bearing his as-yet-unborn son and heir.
One may imagine William Charles tut-tutting in the front pews: ‘To think that young brother o’ mine, Ben, would disgrace us all by getting Bob Hasted's daughter in the family way…silly young shaver…'.
Charles the Cheesemonger had signed his marriage certificate with a cross — a common enough occurrence, in the event, even among those who could read and write if they put their minds to it.
But one of Charles's achievements was to ensure that all his children who reached adulthood, male or female, could at least sign their names; his daughter Elizabeth had produced a most business-like signature at her marriage in 1802 and, here at All Hallows, Benjamin signed with a flourish, above the rather more demure attempt of his new wife.
Witnesses were Joseph Morrice, the register clerk, and Dorothy Sebbon, but no Hasted signed except the bride.
Were her family offended at this shot-gun marriage?
Hardly, one would think, since such occurrences were by no means rare at this period, and in any case they came to the rescue in every possible way.
A few years later it would be Elizabeth's brother Samuel who would step into the breach at a time of crisis, as we shall see, but in 1808 it was Thomas Hasted, as the newly-weds skirted round the northern edge of the Tower and established themselves just inside the parish of St Mary Whitechapel.
Thomas, Elizabeth's eldest brother, was then living at 11 Chambers Street, Stepney, an 18th-century thoroughfare consisting of about seventy houses in all.
Those on its northern side had ample yards or gardens abutting Great Prescott Street, which itself gave onto Goodman's Fields.
It all lay a stone's throw from the Tower and the docks, and the housing in the surrounding area was punctuated by small workshops, timber yards and warehouses, along with the East London Theatre just across Rosemary Lane, and the Royal Mint to the south-west.
The lists of names of those assessed for the Whitechapel sewer rates for the period — yes, there was some rudimentary sanitation!— reveal the extent to which immigrants into the area consisted not only of young lads up from Somerset, but included, amongst others, Jewish families for whom East London would be a place of shelter, away from persecution elsewhere.
In nearly every street in Whitechapel there was a Levy or a Cohen, an Abrahams, Moses or Grossman — sometimes living together in one area, sometimes striking out on their own.
In Chambers Street in 1810, for example, Mr. Isaac was nicely settled in alongside the very English-sounding Chas.
Taylor, Geo.
Bannister, Richd.
Morris and our man Thomas ‘Halstead’ or Hasted.
It was here in Chambers Street that Benjamin and Elizabeth Titford were living — probably, we may guess, as guests of brother Thomas at no. 11 — when they took their little son for baptism at St Mary Whitechapel in the March of 1809, a few days short of his first birthday.
He had been born just over two months after the marriage, and they named him Charles Benjamin after his paternal grandfather and father respectively.
By the time another male child followed the first, almost exactly a year later, it was time to perpetuate the maternal grandfather's Christian name.
Robert Hasted must have been more than usually proud, then, of his daughter Elizabeth's second son, Robert Titford.
Born on April Fool's Day 1809, young Robert was destined not to be baptised until he was  13 years old; his sister Elizabeth, the next of Ben and Elizabeth's little brood, was similarly left unbaptised until six years after her birth in 1811.
She had entered the world in the January of what would prove to be a notorious year down in Stepney: a series of brutal murders was to take place on Ratcliff Highway, a major road which ran to the south of Well Close Square and right past St George's church itself.
It must have been a worrying time for Titfords and Hasteds alike, not to mention the rest of the inhabitants of the densely-populated riverside parishes; the victims of the killer — or rather the remains — were laid to rest in a corner of St George's churchyard, while the murderer himself, who eventually committed suicide, was buried with a stake through him at the top of Cannon Street where the newly-built Commercial Road crossed.
Violence at home, terrible as it was, could be seen as little more than a reflection of what was then happening on foreign shores.
From 1812 to 1815 Britain was fighting a war on two fronts, against what were essentially two cradles of a new democracy: France and the former American colonies.
Bad harvests, meanwhile, had once again forced wheat up to famine prices, and the ‘outbreak of peace’ after the Battle of Waterloo in 1815 was to herald what C. P. Hill has referred to as ‘one of the grimmest periods in modern British History’.
The population of England and Wales was undergoing a further massive increase — nothing short of a fifty per cent rise in the years from 1801 to 1831 — and the effects of the recent Agricultural and Industrial Revolutions hardly needed a post-war depression to make matters even worse for the poor.
Yet a depression there was, with a vengeance, as the labour market was flooded with returning soldiers and sailors and prices fell dramatically.
The Government could scarcely have been more out of touch with the people at large, and was still, in any case, terrified that Jacobinism might even then give rise to a revolution at any moment.
Keen above all to protect the interests of the country's farmers, and abandoning the doctrine of laissez faire in a period of crisis, parliament moved with alacrity to pass the Corn Law of 1815.
With grain prices kept at an artificially high price thereafter, the further impoverishment of those already poor was the inevitable result.
Down in Stepney, Benjamin and Elizabeth Titford's last child was born shortly before the end of the war, on 10 October 1814.
Time, at last, to call a baby boy after father himself, so this was to be Benjamin Titford, junior — destined to become a silversmith by trade, and a bit of an entrepreneur like his uncle William Charles.
Just as the post-war economic depression set in, so it signalled its own personal tragedy for the Titford family: on 25 February 1816, Ben the Outrider died, aged barely 29.
By then the couple had moved east to Chapman Street, part of the new housing development in the neighbourhood of St George's in the East; it was here at the nearby parish church that Benjamin was buried five days later, the ceremony being conducted by the rector.
No cause of death is given, but we may make an informed guess, for all that, that a man whose elder brother had been carried off by consumption was himself the victim of that ‘white plague’ which accounted for one-third of all deaths in the early years of the 19th century.
Cause of death would have been of purely academic interest to the deceased man's widow.
Elizabeth was in an unenviable position: here she was, at the age of 36, with young children on her hands and no husband to provide the necessities of life, at a time when Social Security was undreamt of and the country was in the grip of an economic crisis.
Things could hardly have been worse for her.
The only minor consolation was that prices had fallen just after the war, though that situation was not to last long.
The general climate of the times was all too apparent as riots broke out in Spa Fields in London in late 1816, followed in due course by the March of the Blanketeers, the Pentrich Rebellion in Derbyshire, the Peterloo Massacre and that desperate attempt to kill the entire cabinet known as the Cato Street Conspiracy.
Elizabeth Titford must have thought that a London in which mobs could go on a looting  spree in the City was no place to raise her young daughter.
She had enough on her hands trying to bring up the boys, and the simplest expedient would be to get the little girl down to Frome, where her deceased husband's sister and brother-in-law, William and Sarah Chinnock, could provide her with a decent upbringing.
So it was duly arranged, and Uncle William and Aunt Sarah took their little niece for baptism at their recently-rebuilt Zion Chapel in Frome in 1817, just across the road from the Badcox Lane Baptists.
The chapel register records the birth, registration and christening of six-year old Elizabeth Titford, ‘…daughter of Benjamin and Elizabeth Titford of St George's in the East, Middlesex’.
In times of crisis, as we have already seen when Mary Titford arrived in Frome from London in 1757, families or individuals could be quite surprisingly mobile.
Elizabeth's sons could stay with their mother, at least for the time being.
They were all still at Chapman street in April 1818, when Benjamin junior was baptised at St George's, after which Elizabeth upped and left for Shoreditch and the parish of St Leonard's, where at least one of her brothers was then living.
The Hasteds no doubt did what they could to help their bereaved sister, though their best turned out to be insufficient to save her as time went by.
One brother of  hers , at least, rallied to the cause — Samuel Hasted, younger than his sister, who was a cooper living in Bermuda Street, Stepney, a small row of eight houses just off Commercial Road.
In 1822 Elizabeth's son Robert was baptised at the Mile End Old Town Zion Chapel on Union Street, built by devotees of Lady Huntingdon's Connexion; the young boy, then 13, may well have been staying with his uncle Samuel at the time, the latter having married three years previously.
The Countess of Huntingdon's Methodist Connexion, founded in the mid-18th century, was yet another Calvinistic organisation, we may note with interest; what with Robert Titford being baptised at one of their chapels, and his sister Elizabeth having been registered with the Zion congregation in Frome, Calvinism seems once again to have cast its shadow across the family, even into the 19th century.
Elizabeth Titford, the mother, must have needed a bit of Christian faith herself as she grew older and struggled to live through the hard times which were a mark of the 1820s with its long and painful inflation.
By hook or by crook, and with the assistance of her brother Samuel and her in-laws, she had provided for her children in times of personal and national distress.
But the struggle must have taken its toll on her, until the time came when she needed help herself.
Any chance of aid or succour from her brother-in-law, William Charles Titford, would have been swept away by his death in 1828; but two years earlier than that, Elizabeth's name appears in the registers of Shoreditch Workhouse.
The English Poor Laws, first effective from the late 16th century and radically revised in 1834, had always proved a headache to those who administered them.
The problem has a modern ring to it: how do you balance the necessary provision of aid to those really in need with the risk of supporting malingerers on the parish rates?
The more populous the parishes became, the more diffuse the community grew, the more acute the problem: no longer did the overseers or the ratepayers know everyone receiving relief, and it was then far from an easy task to sort out the needy from the charlatans.
The workhouse — institutional rather than‘outdoor’ relief — was one way of controlling the help given to paupers; but demands that such institutions should pay for themselves had a hollow ring to it — many of the inmates were there because their skills were not needed in declining industries, so they could hardly be set to work profitably once they were taken within its walls.
Yet despite Charles Dickens et al .,
workhouses were not all the dark satanic mills of legend.
They acted as hospitals for the sick and the elderly; as houses of refuge for widows, like Elizabeth Titford; as a maternity home for unmarried mothers; and as a place of respite for men temporarily unemployed.
Above all, they educated and eventually apprenticed   young paupers, ensuring in theory that they themselves should not in turn need poor relief in adulthood; thus Shoreditch had a so-called Nursery at Enfield specifically for the care and education of destitute children.
37.
Admissions Register, Shoreditch workhouse, 1826.
Elizabeth Titford, aged 48, spent just three days in the workhouse during the August of 1826.
She would return…
(GLRO P91/LEN/1336.)
Elizabeth's stay in 1826 was a short one; admitted on 22 August, she was discharged three days later, on 25 August.
Discharged, perhaps, but not for good.
Her presence in the workhouse in itself seems an odd occurrence; it was hardly as if she had no-one to turn to — any one of her brothers must have been in a position to help when help was needed.
She might have had a brief illness best treated outside the home, or it is possible that the balance of her mind was disturbed in some way.
But another quite plausible explanation presents itself: here was a lady whose role in life was changing, whose function as a mother and whose status — if we may call it that — as a widow were becoming things of the past.
To be a spinster was one thing; to be a married woman with or without children, or a recently-bereaved widow, all were recognised and acceptable roles in society.
Yet Elizabeth had been a widow for over ten years, and her children were very nearly off her hands; it is quite possible that her brief sojourn in the workhouse was part of an attempt to give her life a new direction and meaning — perhaps she was there as a helper, a visitor, a counsellor to those in need, or even as a missionary spreading the gospel of Christianity in general or that of the Lady Huntingdon's Connexion in particular.
The fact that she would return to the same workhouse 10 years later was in itself not untypical; many genuine helpers in such institutions may have had it in the back of their minds that one day they would become the cared for, rather than the person doing the caring, as old age took its toll.
Old age did, eventually, take its toll on Elizabeth; she was on the Shoreditch Workhouse register again by March 1837 — and a very populous place it was by then, too, in the wake of the 1834 Poor Law Amendment Act.
The 1841 census lists five hundred or so inmates, including Elizabeth Titford, who is described as being a needleworker.
Eight years later  she was still there, by then paralysed and helpless, as a virulent epidemic of cholera swept through London.
It was the paralysis which caused her death in the end, or so the doctor was to certify; she died there in the workhouse, aged 70, on 12 September 1849.
Her lifetime had spanned five reigns.
Robert the Mariner-(1809–1839)
London
DEATH IN HONDURAS
Now longe moot thou saille by the cost,…gentil Maryneer !
Chaucer:The Prioress's Tale 
Elizabeth had done all she could in the circumstances to provide the best possible start in life for her sons once her husband had died.
There were some risks to life and limb, however, over which she had no control; how could she ever have guessed that she would outlive her son Robert by almost exactly 10 years?
Robert Titford's life was destined, like that of his father, to be a tragically short one; the boy from the dockside parish whose early years must have been spent in an atmosphere redolent of the sea and ships, old tars and tales of high adventure, chose to make his living on the ocean waves.
And it was those waves which were to carry him, steadily and inexorably, to a far-distant grave.
By 1832, and then aged 23, Robert was already a mariner, living at John Street, Stepney, with his wife Eliza; they had married the previous year in his mother's adopted parish, St Leonard's, Shoreditch — he a bachelor and she a widow.
Robert's own Christian name, as we know, had come from his maternal grandfather, Robert Hasted, and he passed it on to his second child, Robert Edward; thereafter the same name would continue in that branch of the family until well into the 20th century.
The marriage lasted only a few years, cut short by the death of Eliza; when Robert returned to the same altar at St Leonard's in January of 1837 as a widower, he must have had more than a flash of déjà vu .
His new bride, a spinster in her thirties called Elizabeth Shaw, would bring him one further child before being left a widow.
A new character must enter the drama at this stage: not a human being, but a ship: the Orynthia .
She it was who would carry Robert half-way around the world on more than one occasion, until, in the end, she returned without him.
The Orynthia was a bark of 318 tons; built at Chepstow in Monmouthshire in 1823, square-rigged and with three masts, she measured 100 feet in length, and 27 in breadth, with one and half decks and a square stern.
She was carvel-built with flush planks, and — as a pièce de résistance — she sported a woman's bust as a figurehead.
Quite an impressive sight, we may suppose, as she pitched and tossed in full sail across the Atlantic with fifteen or so mariners on board.
The 1835 Merchant Shipping Act stipulated that agreements and crew lists be filed with the Register Office of Merchant Seaman; the master was to make a list of his men, and submit it within 48 hours of returning to a U.K. port.
Thus it is that we know as much as we do about the Orynthia and her voyages in the late 1830s.
Robert Titford was already a member of the ship's company when the Orynthia docked back in England in mid December, 1836.
And he had a bit of business to attend to: within three weeks he was in Shoreditch — getting married, as we have seen.
Just time for a quick honeymoon followed by a few fond farewells, and the intrepid sailor was off again on board his old ship on 17 February, leaving his second wife to look after her newly-acquired stepchildren, Elizabeth Eliza and Robert Edward, in his absence.
A neat arrangement, to be sure, from his point of view, as he returned to his all-male environment once more.
John Lawton was master for this voyage, fresh from another ship but prudently bringing his own cook with him: it fell to Robert Titford to be first mate.
There were 15 men on board, ranging in age from 17 to 54, and all English: five ordinary seamen, a steward, a boatswain, two apprentices, a carpenter and a sailmaker, alongside the master, his two mates and the cook.
These were not all strangers to Robert: four had previously served aboard the Orynthia , including the second mate, William Tilson, nine years his senior.
The destination — as so often with this ship — was Honduras in Central America, quite a rich source of exports to England at the time, including the mahogany which was used for so much 19th-century furniture.
Captain Lawton and his men seem to have had a fairly trouble-free time of it, because all 15 of them were duly discharged back in London after the seven-month voyage.
But ships are too valuable to lie idle for very long, and Robert barely had a month in which to re-acquaint himself with his new wife and pat his young infants on the head before he was leaving John Street and Stepney again — through Limehouse into Poplar and aboard the Orynthia in West India Dock.
The master had changed: William Cox, the oldest man aboard at the ripe old age of 54, was not merely the ship's captain — he also owned a half-share in her.
Five ex- Orynthia men, including Cox himself, feature in the crew of 16, while among the newcomers was young George Groves, a 15-year-old Portsmouth lad on his first voyage.
They all did what they had to do — a trip to Honduras again, via Madeira — and were safely back home on 11 June 1838.
Robert seems to have had a special affection for the Orynthia ; whereas many mariners came and went as the whim took them, he stuck to his old ship.
Anyway, there was promotion in it: when we next come across him, less than a year later, he has risen to the giddy heights of master, taking over from William Cox.
And so Robert Titford, Master Mariner, took over his first command.
There were 15 crew members, as usual, but they were a bit of a mixed bag this time, including a Scot, an Irishman, a seaman from Nova Scotia and a character born in ‘Zamalia’ by the name of John Saula.
Five of the crew had remained loyal to the Orynthia , though Robert only had one mate to rely upon — and that was a situation which would be little short of a recipe for disaster, as things turned out.
We can make a pretty fair guess as to how much the ship's crew were paid on such a trip as this: a surviving Schedule ‘A’ Crew Agreement for the same ship four years later reveals that a seaman could expect to earn £2 per month, the cook and steward slightly more, the carpenter £5 10s., and the first and second mates £6 and £4 10s. respectively.
The Times for the morning of Wednesday, 29 May 1839, announced that the Orynthia was cleared outward with cargo for Demerara and Honduras; the woman's bust figurehead was leading her brave boys away from home on the long voyage south-west.
The Atlantic crossing was over by 12 July and the Orynthia had arrived in Demerara, a one-time Dutch settlement which had been absorbed into British Guiana in 1831.
Here a coastal lowland is backed by a belt of forest before the ground rises to the Guiana Highlands.
But any charm the scenery may have had was lost on one member of the crew: James McKeatling was taken sick in the far-from-healthy climate, and was left on shore.
Worse was to follow.
They were still at Demerara two weeks later when the cook was drowned; the next day — by ominous coincidence or not — John Saula, the man from ‘Zamalia’ was thrown into prison.
We can only guess whether inter-racial bickering — or even rows over bad food!— might explain such a bizarre two days' events.
Whatever may have been the cause, the whole thing was all too much for 18-year old Francis Burke, the youngest man on board: on 31 July he left the ship, thus reducing its crew to 11 men.
Robert Titford, we may imagine, must have wondered what he had done to deserve all this.
After some uneventful voyages over the years, and at least seven previous masters, the    Orynthia seemed to have turned into a hornets' nest.
There was nothing to do but carry on, severely reduced in numbers as they were, and without a ship's cook.
They set off along the coast of  Venezuela and Colombia, south to Panama, past Costa Rica and Nicaragua, until finally they reached Honduras, their intended destination.
38.
Crew list, the Orynthia, 1839.
A chapter of disasters here culminates in the death of Robert Titford, the ship's master, at ‘Rattan’ off Honduras.
(PRO BT98/376.)
The independent republic of Honduras had been created a year previously, in 1838, having once been part of Spanish America; its fertile coastal plains surround a mountainous interior, rich in forests, and it just manages to have a 40-mile strip of southern coastline on the Pacific to complement its much longer Caribbean seaboard.
It was to this Caribbean coast that the Orynthia came — or limped, perhaps.
It was an unhealthy enough place to be even at the best of times, swampy and malaria-ridden; any Europeans trading there would have been only too aware of the risks involved, and the depleted crew of the Orynthia , overworked and probably ill-fed, must have been as vulnerable as they could possibly be.
Just off the northern coast, on the island of Roatan in the Islas de la Bahia group, lay one of the country's northern ports.
And here, thousands of miles from home and loved ones, the master of a ship in a state of disarray, Robert Titford fell sick of a fever and died.
He was 30 years old.
A total of five extra crew were taken on board over the next three months, including a new master, Edward Barker; he found a ship's company of nine men — Robert Gray, the steward, having died a day after Robert Titford.
One more man left on 4 November, but Barker managed to bring the rest back home, arriving on I February 1840.
The Orynthia had been away for eight months; and only one member of the returning crew, we may not be surprised to hear, decided to risk a voyage in her again — George Groves, the boy apprentice.
The Orynthia lived on, despite it all — off to Honduras again in March, 1840, where this time it was the cook who ended up in prison: William Rhodes took her out to Fernando Po, Ascension and India in 1841, and William Cox was master again on a voyage to the Cape and Burma in 1843, in which year he sold his half-share to Henry Johnson, a City merchant.
In 1845 she was re-registered in the names of a ship-owner, a farmer, a master mariner and a sailmaker, and began a new life in Newcastle upon Tyne.
Family tradition — that fund of oral folklore which passes on half-garbled stories, legends and rumours to succeeding generations — has it that one Titford died as a pirate.
We might be doing Robert Titford's memory a disservice to imagine that his disastrous voyage to South and Central America — his first and last as a master mariner — had any such sinister backdrop.
But the crew agreements for merchant ships involved men in an undertaking ‘…to conduct themselves in an orderly, honest, careful and sober manner…and to be obedient to the lawful Commands of the Master…’ .5 Something, somewhere in the story of that series of events in 1839 give us cause to doubt whether the Orynthia 's crew obeyed such injunctions to the letter.
Suspicions of foul play or insurrection must remain, if only as suspicions.
But we must return to Stepney, and Elizabeth Titford,née Shaw.
Her lot had not been a happy one: the husband whom she had only ever seen for a few precious weeks in all since their marriage had now left her a widow, without support and with a child and step-children to fend for.
In Frome in the late 18th century, we may remember, the women had died young, leaving their bereaved husbands with youngsters to care for; here in London that burden was to fall on young widows instead.
It was to be Samuel Hasted the cooper, that most bountiful of men, who would come to the rescue of a lady who was, after all, only his niece by marriage.
The census of June 1841 finds Elizabeth living in Uncle Sam's house in Bermuda Street, together with her stepson Robert Edward, and her own daughter Selina.
By ensuring that young Robert Edward would live to father the next generation of Titfords, Elizabeth had made her contribution  to the survival of that branch of the family.
When her daughter Selina married Alexander Cowley, an optician, she found lodging with them, earning money as a dressmaker; it was in their house in Skidmore Street, Mile End, that she died in January 1873, aged sixty-seven.
Benjamin the Silversmith (1814–1879)
London
THE VICTORIAN SELF-MADE MAN
That me spute with gold smythis, and silver smythis …
Wyclif.
Wisd .
xv.9
In the December of 1844, shortly after his thirtieth birthday and five years after the death of his brother Robert, Benjamin Titford had his portrait painted in water-colours by G. J. Adkin.
There he sits at a table, a confident and debonaire man-about-town, a bachelor with even a touch of the dandy about him.
He stares out at us with steely blue eyes, his hair neatly twisted into one dark curl on his forehead; he's sporting a smart black frock-coat with a neatly-buttoned waistcoat and a full cravat anchored down with an ornate jewelled pin and chain.
Here, then, seven years into the young Queen's reign, with the national economy on the upturn, is the typical aspiring Victorian gentleman bearing all the outward signs of success.
He was by no means unusual for his place and time: there were not a few London families in the mid-19th century who were busy accumulating all the paraphernalia that seemed to give them a gilt-edged claim to middle-class respectability — the portraits, the studio photographs, a family bible, ornate gravestones, even the odd crest and Latin motto.
Benjamin's modest but handsome little portrait seems to want to relay a message to us: I may not be blue-blooded, it says, but please don't for a minute put me down as any kind of manual labourer — I belong to the established and rising ranks of the artisan middle-class.
And so he did.
The accumulated bric-à-brac of status which graced many a Victorian family parlour, tucked away on a mahogany table behind the aspidistra, was so often important to.the owners precisely because they felt rather less than secure about their own ranking in an increasingly volatile and uncharted class structure.
There were other reasons for insecurity, too: no matter how much material prosperity had come a family's way, there was still every chance that illness or a premature death might send them all back down a snake at a much faster speed than they had been able to climb up a ladder.
It takes three generations to make a gentleman, they say; but the sons and daughters of impoverished immigrants into London in Victorian times were only one remove from their humble roots elsewhere — every reason, therefore, to collect around themselves the trappings of grandeur.
Everyone who could was playing this confidence trick on his neighbour — a sophisticated pretence that one's family was, or had been, one of the noblest in the land.
Supreme in this field were the members of another branch of the Titford family, at that time recent arrivals in London from their home in Wylye, Wiltshire.
William Titford, furnishing undertaker, funeral-carriage master and featherman, would provide his clients with a first-class funeral for the princely sum of £29.
For that — according to one of his advertisements of 1867 — you would get a hearse and two coaches with four horses each, plus all the necessary equipments, shell, lead coffin, outer case (handsomely finished) covered with velvet or fine cloth, with enamelled furniture.
And William and his family  sported the Titford arms, listed in Burke's General Armory as: ‘Gules.
Three lions heads erased or.
Crest: A demi lion rampant or’.
A Latin motto completed the package, though the family could never decide which sounded better —‘Cui debeo fidus ’ or ‘Suscipere et finire ’— and ended up using either according to taste.
This William Titford then, surely, must have been a scion of one of England's noblest houses?
Not so.
He had his little ancestral secrets, as follows: his great-grandfather, also a William, had been buried as an 80-year-old pauper in Wylye in 1806 after a lifetime spent as a humble shepherd, and his own father, James, was to die in St Pancras Workhouse in 1862 at the end of a lively career which had included being an agricultural labourer, a french polisher, a clothes salesman, a catsmeat dealer — and a pauper.
None of that prevented father, like son, being buried beneath the imposing family crest and a resounding ‘Suscipere et finire ’.
It behoves us to be sceptical, then, about Victorian genealogical status symbols; frequently there is an inverse proportion between the degree of pomp and the humble nature of the ancestry.
Benjamin Titford, we must say, was not quite as elevated socially as he appears to be in his water-colour portrait; or rather, he had only recently become so — which was good enough, after all, for any Victorian member of the nouveaux-riches .
Benjamin's mother was lying paralysed in Shoreditch Workhouse even as the portrait was being executed, and he himself had only been saved from abject poverty after his father's premature death by the generous good offices of his uncle, Samuel Hasted.
And so we return to that familiar Good Samaritan, Uncle Sam.
He had come to his sister Elizabeth's rescue in her time of trouble, contributing almost beyond the call of duty; he had already done what he could to help his young nephew Robert — now what of Benjamin?
In 1829, as the lad approached the age of 14, decision time was coming; if Benjamin had any yearning to go to sea like his brother, he seems to have kept it quiet, but there was every need to find him a safe and secure job with prospects.
And so it was that he gained his passport to that respectability which lay so easily on his shoulders by the time his picture was painted: he would be apprenticed.
For seven years he would live in Bloomsbury, learning a trade from Daniel Jones of Broad Street, pawnbroker, silversmith and general salesman.
His master would provide instruction, sufficient meat and drink, lodging and other necessaries, leaving Uncle Sam to find wearing apparel and to organize washing and mending.
The terms sound harsh, not to say positively feudal: Benjamin was to serve his master faithfully, keep his secrets, gladly obey his every word.
He should neither do damage to Mr. Jones, nor be slow in warning him of any impending danger; fornication, marriage, gambling and the haunting of taverns or playhouses was strictly proscribed, and generally a monastic restraint was to be observed in all things.
Yet all turned out for the best: on 20 July 1836, Daniel Jones returned Benjamin his indenture, only too pleased to inscribe on the back of it the fact that he had appreciated the boy's seven years with him, and making him a generous gift of five pounds in the process.
Craftsmen with an eye to the future like Benjamin would be quite likely to make fairly late marriages — there would be a lot of saving up to do first, and the better established one was, the better the chances of attracting a lady of some substance.
So at the beginning of 1846, 10 years after his apprenticeship had finished and then aged 31, Benjamin Titford was still a bachelor — but only just.
He was practising his trade as a silversmith, living in Cornhill in the City.
The street was full of goldsmiths and silversmiths and their assistants and apprentices at the time: Messrs. Cook, Ive, Sarl, Hyams and others all appear in the commercial directories for that year, along with the tobacconists, Fribourg and Treyer, whose shop in Haymarket has persisted almost as an anachronism into the 1980s.
It was high time for Benjamin to get married then — he had waited long enough.
His choice was a certain Elizabeth Augusta Josephine Parkes, daughter of Ebenezer Parkes of     Fetter Lane, a brass-rule maker for the printing trade.
Quite a nice catch for him, we might think, though who was catching whom exactly may not be so easy to determine — many a man, according to a rather cynical 19th-century doctor, was ‘bounced into marriage’.
What does seem strange in retrospect is the choice of church the couple made for their wedding: the Parkeses had strong Nonconformist tendencies, though they had baptised young Elizabeth in an Anglican church, St Dunstan's in the West.
But the marriage of Benjamin and Elizabeth took place neither there, nor in the City where he was then living, but back in the parish where he had been born: St George's in the East, Stepney.
Things had changed slightly down there, however; a new parish, that of Christ Church, Watney Street, had been carved out of the ever-more-populous St George's, and it was at this recently-dedicated Christ Church that the couple were married on 22 March 1846.
39. (right) Benjamin Titford, silversmith (1814–1879).
From a watercolour by G. J. Adkin, 16 December 1844, in the possession of the author.
40. (below) Benjamin Titford (1814–1879): Apprenticeship Indenture.
Young Benjamin is apprenticed to Daniel Jones of Broad Street, Bloomsbury ('Pawnbroker, Silversmith and General Salesman') for seven years, 18 February 1829.
This was indeed an odd location for Benjamin and Elizabeth to choose: there were, to put it mildly, more fashionable places in London to celebrate one's wedding.
Dickens, writing in 1850, has this to say about the district around Watney Street:
The houses in the Eastern St George's are almost all small, and the streets and alleys form a sort of labyrinth — a tangled web of dingy structures — in, s and outs, and twisted meshes of lane and alley, having only one feature in common, that feature telling of poverty…not always squalid…but ever displaying the presence of a population of the humblest means — one in fourteen of the whole population of the parish are paupers.
Surely such a spot offers few inducements for its selection as a place of permanent abode…an area of Jews, thieves, rags, filth, foul smells, and wretchedness.
Deliberately choosing to marry in an area full of paupers — Benjamin might just have well have been in Frome!
There were those, however, who decided by a quite conscious effort of will to involve themselves in the day-to-day life of such humble if not squalid areas of London; one such man was Rev. William Quekett, about whom Dickens was here writing in his article, ‘What a London curate can do if he tries’.
William Quekett was living in fashionable Well Close Square in the 1840s — a few doors away from John Frederick Hasted, Benjamin Titford's cousin — but his real work lay in the poor courts and alleyways of the parish at large, where his dedication and Christian charity had made him a legendary figure.
He it was who had pressed for the creation of Christ Church parish, and he became its first incumbent; Benjamin and Elizabeth had the singular distinction of having him officiate at their marriage — poor surroundings, then, but in the presence of a minister of great reputation.
Filling in the details on the marriage certificate may have proved a problem for Benjamin: his mother was now past hope in the workhouse, and his father had died when he himself was less than two years old.
What to put for ‘Father's profession’?
Possibly Mr Quekett came to his aid: it would be a simple matter to consult the parish registers for St George's until they found the bridegroom-to-be's baptism in 1818, son of Benjamin Titford of Chapman Street, ‘Outrider’— and so the entry reads on the marriage certificate.
A new Benjamin and Elizabeth Titford were, in a sense, rising out of the ashes of the old; they and their children — Benjamin James, William, Henry Joseph, Charles Frederick and Emily Jane — will be our companions on the next stage of our journey.
We have made mention in passing of mobility within the context of a family's history: both the ups and down of social mobility according to circumstance, and the more obviously-apparent geographical moves people made to ensure their own survival or to better their lot.
Benjamin Titford had managed to clamber up the social ladder, as we have seen — rising, in the process, higher than his impoverished cousins in Frome had done.
But he was also exceptionally mobile in territorial terms, too, albeit within the confines of London itself.
For thirty years after his marriage Benjamin hardly let his feet touch the ground before he was on the move again — giving us over a dozen different addresses for him during his lifetime.
Those moves themselves were very probably not unrelated to the family's  general social mobility — the two would co-exist, especially for an entrepreneur like Benjamin, who would seek to better himself whenever and wherever he could.
Whether he was changing his job, dabbling in accommodation suitable for lodging houses or seeking a larger or smaller house to suit an expanding and then a contracting family, the silversmith-cum-general salesman-cum-lodging-house keeper-cum-commercial clerk-cum-clerk to a manufacturing jeweller-cum-collector to a goldsmith-cum-writing clerk never seemed to settle for long in one place.
Benjamin and Elizabeth's first home was in a rather unusual location for them: Titfords in general rarely seem to have favoured areas of London south of the Thames as a place to live, but here was a brief exception.
Benjamin James, the couple's eldest child, was born at 5 Liverpool Street, Walworth — in the parish of St Mary Newington, then in Surrey.
The Victorians, of course, for all their virtues, had an edge of prudery which made them condemn in public that which they were busy practising in private .
Births in a family which pre-date a marriage or follow it by only a very few months were increasingly common and apparently quite acceptable in the late 18th century; here in Victorian London, however, the suspiciously early arrival of little Benjamin James (on 11 December 1846 — rather less than nine months after the marriage) was regarded, it seems, with a touch of disquiet.
At least, it was so by those who were to write up family notes at a later date: the year of birth would be coyly laundered to read ‘1847’, thus ensuring that a rather harmless skeleton stayed in its cupboard for a while.
Whatever may have prompted Benjamin and Elizabeth to pay this visit to Walworth — a chance of staying with some of the Parkes family, perhaps?— it was not to last long.
They would feel happier north of the river like everyone else; Islington seems to have been their favourite suburb, and that was where they had moved to by the time the next child arrived, three years later.
William was born on Monday 9 April 1849 — the only one not to bear a middle Christian name, but then, of course, there had been William Titfords galore back to the 17th century, so the boy was in good company.
A rapid look at The Times newspaper for this Monday in April might give us just the slightest inkling of the minutiae of English life on a most ordinary of ordinary days: Dickens was completing David Copperfield ; Bass's India Pale Ale could be had for 33s. per 18-gallon cask; Hampshire Breakfast Bacon would cost you 7½d. by the half side, while Captain Reid's ‘Walls End’ coal was 19s. a ton.
And the Royal Institution of Great Britain in Albemarle Street was that day announcing that there were to be eight lectures given by Mr. Faraday on Static or Franklinic Electricity, to commence on 21 April.
Nothing very special here, then, to herald the arrival of little William; but just as that year brought in the new, so it took away the old: Benjamin Titford the Outrider's widow Elizabeth, 70 years old and paralysed, died in Shoreditch Workhouse on 12 September.
We have noted already the fact that her passing coincided with a most virulent attack of cholera: no fewer than two thousand people in London succumbed to it in one single week in that September of 1849.
Suggested cures were legion, and one correspondent wrote to the newspaper concerning the closure of the graveyards at Spa Fields, St Botolph Bishopsgate and St Thomas, Golden Lane, suggesting that the ground in each case be covered in quicklime.
In the event, St Bride's Burial Ground was closed, along with a nearby well contaminated by the sewer in Bride Lane: as the said well, used by soda water manufacturers, was not very deep, there was every fear that ‘the solution of dead men's bones would be more concentrated and injurious to health’.
An understatement, indeed.
Mercifully, Islington was not the disease-trap that nearby Shoreditch was, and the Titfords were spared the fate of many of their fellow citizens.
In any case, they had moved from their Islington address — 14 James Street, St Peter's Street — to 140a High Street, Hoxton Old Town, by 1852, in which year a third son, Henry Joseph, was born.
Hoxton was thriving with small businesses, and Benjamin was showing the first signs of a schizophrenic uncertainty about what his official professional title should be: the commercial directories for 1853 list him as a General Salesman, while Henry Joseph's birth certificate plays safe with ‘Silversmith’.
Of course, a birth certificate allowed a man to be a bit flamboyant, while the directory, which might bring him trade, needed to be perfectly honest about what he was up to …
In general, apprenticed originally as a silversmith as he was, Benjamin would always return to this professional description when all else failed.
There was a certain entrepreneurial spirit about our man; he seems to have had an eye for the main chance, and at no time more so than in 1854, when he left behind the delights of Hoxton and begun a brief flirtation with the idea of running a lodging house.
And he did so at what must have been a very fashionable address: 36 Wilmington Square, Spa Fields, peopled with Esquires and seemingly rather an unlikely location for such an enterprise.
In 1852, two years previously, there was a certain Samuel Baker Morris, Esq., living at no. 36; by 1856 it was occupied by Charles Hilton Lawrence, Esq.
But in between Benjamin Titford was offering beds for the night to paying guests.’
It may well have been fun while it lasted, but we might guess by now that the Titfords would not stay long in Spa Fields, any more than they had anywhere else.
Just long enough, in the event, to baptise William and Henry Joseph at St Andrew's, Holborn (in the September and October of 1854 respectively), before returning to Islington and altogether less salubrious surroundings.
Number 4 Brays Buildings, Lower Road, Islington, was the decidedly seedy-sounding location for Benjamin's new enterprise: ‘Miscellaneous Repos’…
Can it really have been much more than an up-market doss-house?
Their immediate neighbours were Joshua Burn, a grocer, at no. 6, and James Bradnam, butcher, at no. 5; one can only hope that Mr. Bradnam kept his slaughterhouse at a decent distance from his retail premises — the very special aromas of a butcher's and a grocer's shop must have been enough to discourage many a potential guest at Miscellaneous Repos, without the sound of dying cries from butchered beasts.
Number 4 had not always been a lodging house; just as several families, like the Titfords, were constantly on the move from place to place, so many an individual house or shop would see a very rapid turnover of occupants.
George Benjamin Coaffee, a dyer, had previously shared 4 Brays Buildings with William Bolding, a fringe manufacturer; later, in 1851, George Cowton was running a milliner's business there with three assistants.
Yet the kind of premises favoured by small-time craftsmen look as if they were not so suitable for a spot of Miscellaneous Repos; by the October of 1856 the Titfords were on the move yet again, this time to 15 Penton Street, Clerkenwell.
From then on the family would continue to take lodgers to help supplement its income, but very much on an ad hoc basis and on an altogether more modest scale.
Nevertheless it had been at Bray's Buildings, stench or no stench, squeals of slaughtered beasts or no squeals, that one of the most fascinating of Benjamin's children had entered the world.
On 17 April 1856, shortly before they left for Clerkenwell, Elizabeth gave birth to a boy whom they named Charles Frederick.
His life would take him far away from Bray's Buildings as the years went by, searching for adventure on the high seas, visiting in reality places his parents could only have dreamed of.
Charles's birth was registered fairly late in the day: a certificate wasn't issued until 3 October, by which time Elizabeth was pregnant for the fifth and last time.
If they were wishing for a girl by then, their prayers were answered: Emily Jane was born in Penton Street on 31 May 1857.
Father was then 42, mother thirty-five.
Over the next few years, as the children grew up, Benjamin and Elizabeth began amassing their typical Victorian store of family  mementoes .
Chief amongst these would be the photographs which could be displayed in ornate frames for all to see, or tucked away more  discreetly in leather-bound, gilt-edged albums.
Each member of the family had his or her picture taken at least once: there, recorded for posterity, is father Benjamin, leaning back comfortably in a chair just as he had done when sitting for Mr. Adkin all those years before, still wearing his favourite ring on the little finger of his right hand.
Young Charles Frederick, photographed while still in his teens, seems generally ill-at-ease as he poses in what appears to be a borrowed long coat.
He is making a commendable effort to appear nonchalant and relaxed, despite the oversize top hat in his hand and the obtrusive stunted tree and rustic stile provided by the photographer, Mr. G. Diviani, in his Holloway Road studio opposite the Caledonian Church.
Later photographs of Charles and his brother William would show two men-about-town in their twenties.
E. C. Russell, also in business in Holloway Road, managed to catch the confident suavity of the pair of them, and this time Charles is in full frock coat and waistcoat, with the merest hint of a beard on his face, as he rests his arm with a convincing air of relaxed dignity on an animal skin rug.
Young teenagers were growing into young men.
So much for the photographs.
Another essential item then very much in vogue was the family bible; the Titfords duly acquired one, ornately gilded and standing in its own glass-topped case, and proceeded to enter births, marriages and deaths as they occurred.
At about the same time, however, there was someone, somewhere, who was more than usually interested in chronicling Titford family details from past generations: a sheet of pale blue paper watermarked ‘1860’ was covered with names and dates by some mysterious hand, and eventually found its way into Benjamin's own papers.
One side of the sheet lists the children of Charles the Cheesemonger, starting with the birth of William Charles in 1772 and appending a few dates of death for good measure.
There is no mention anywhere of the fact that these were brothers and sisters, nor that they were born in Frome; that has been for us to establish later.
On the reverse are details of the marriage of William Charles to Ann Edgar at St Dunstan's in the West, together with their offspring.
Who had gone to the trouble of making such notes?
The most likely candidate seems to be Benjamin's cousin John, son of William Charles.
He was 55 years old in 1860, living in Lambeth as a bachelor — perhaps with nothing much else to interest him at the time?
A few scribbled legal notes are crossed out at the top of the paper — and John was a solicitor's clerk, after all.
Benjamin must have been more than a little interested by all the information this sheet of paper contained, principally because he had scarcely known his own father, who had died before he was two years old.
We, too, are eternally grateful to the compiler — would that more people had followed his (or her?) example!
The 1861 census gives us the chance to meet Benjamin and Elizabeth at yet another new location: 7 St Thomas's Street, Islington.
He was then 46, a clerk to a manufacturing jeweller, while Elizabeth was only thirty-eight.
Benjamin James was a young teenager of 14, William 11, Henry Joseph eight, Charles four and Emily Jane three.
Their new abode was in a small, intimate street of 26 houses; the Titfords in the male line were second generation immigrants from Somerset, but their neighbours there in Islington consisted of families who had been born anywhere other than London — a cosmopolitan mixture of Geordies, Lancastrians, people from Essex, Suffolk, Shropshire, Kent, Wiltshire, Somerset and Norfolk.
These people followed a variety of occupations: there was a G.P.O. messenger, a solicitor's clerk, a manufacturer of waterproof leather, a lithographic printer, and a comb manufacturer.
A few houses in the street even boasted servants.
At no. 6 lived Anne Knight, a widow born in Horningsham, Wilts., where, by coincidence, a number of Titfords had been baptised in the mid-17th century; no. 8 contained the Tomlinson family, a hay salesman's bookkeeper from Norwich; George Childs at no. 10 described himself grandly as a ‘Landscape Painter’, and at no. 14 a lady called Mary  Archer was in business as a private lodging-house keeper, assisted by Eliza Wade, her 17-year-old servant from Stepney.
One man further down the street was a Somerset-born commercial traveller for a draper — very much like Benjamin's father, Ben the Outrider — and Henry Budeler at no. 13a, assistant to a law stationer, had been born in Frome almost exactly at the time when Ben, senior, was leaving that town for London.
The Titfords, it seemed, had not given up the Miscellaneous Repos business for good: an unmarried Scottish lady in her sixties, Jessie Grieve, was staying with them as a lodger; what little she may have paid in rent would have been very useful, no doubt , as a means of eking out the family income.
The year 1861 ended on a sombre note for everyone; in December Albert, the Prince Consort, died at the age of forty-two.
Although he had been a sobering and restricting influence in a Germanic way upon the Queen, she took to wearing black immediately after his death and, in a sense, appeared never to cease mourning for him until the day she died.
Within a few days of Prince Albert's death, young Henry Joseph Titford, aged nine, fell ill with tubercular bronchitis.
In an age before antibiotics, any doctor must have felt particularly helpless in such a case; the situation worsened during the winter months and into the spring, until in late April peritonitis and meningitis set in.
Within six days, on 3 May 1862, the young boy died, Benjamin declaring as he applied for a certificate that he had been present at the death.
What, then, of life and death in a typical Victorian family, compared with the way things had been a hundred years previously?
What we already know of the Titfords can serve as a model: Charles the Cheesemonger in the late 18th century had 13 children, seven of whom died in infancy; his grandson, Benjamin the Silversmith, had reduced the number of offspring to five, and would live to see all but one reach adulthood.
The conclusions are obvious enough: that there was a tendency among some Victorians to have fewer children where they could arrange it that way, and that improved medical care, hygiene, sanitation and living conditions generally were improving life-expectancy and helping to eradicate infant deaths.
These remarks, as they stand, are sweeping generalisations based upon the narrowest of samples; nevertheless we know with the wisdom of hindsight that the trends in question were definitely there in the 19th century and would become even more obvious in the 20th — that families  would be smaller, and that the survival rate would improve dramatically.
In so far as it was possible to control the number of children they had, a significant number of Victorian parents were beginning to do so — if only because of the simple fact that the fewer sons and daughters there were, the more could be done to give each of them a good start in life.
They would be better fed, better clothed — even better educated — while their parents were alive, and better pleased with their legacies once those parents were dead.
Having fewer children, of course, gives rise to a situation which so many 20th-century parents will understand only too well: that one minute there are young babies in the house needing constant attention, while the next, in the twinkling of an eye it seems, Darby and Joan are staring around an empty house and having to re-learn the art of living with each other all over again.
This was the case with Benjamin and Elizabeth.
The 1861 census enumerator had caught the family at the height of its expansion; 10 years later they were down to two children, one of whom would be leaving home very shortly.
Of course there had been time for two moves in the interim.
First to 31 Richard Street, off Liverpool Road in Holloway — rarely, we note, did the family flit any great distance — and then to more modest accommodation at 12 Lennox Road, Stroud Green Lane, Upper Holloway.
The census for April 1871 gives us Benjamin, aged 56, ‘Clerk to a silversmith’; Elizabeth, aged 47, Charles Frederick, then 14, and Emily Jane, thirteen.
The Titfords were  sharing the house with William Parker, a 28-year-old warehouseman with a Manchester and Bradford merchant, born in Devon, and his wife Louisa, aged 21, from Greenwich.
Where had the two other Titford boys gone to by 1871?
Three years after the death of little Henry Joseph, in January 1864, William had been put apprentice to a gold-engraver in Clerkenwell, while Benjamin James, the academic star of the family, had gone off to Cheltenham two years later to train to be a teacher.
That left Charles Frederick at home with Mum and Dad — but not for long; by the end of 1871 he, too, was serving his apprenticeship in Haymarket with a goldsmith.
This was the artisan middle-class family consolidating itself: make sure that the boys learn a craft or enter the professions, marry the girls off as well as you can — give them all, as they say, a better chance in life than you ever had yourself.
Benjamin must have been well-pleased with his little brood: Benjamin James and William were both married by 1872, and soon brought him a series of grandchildren.
Charles Frederick was the odd one out in this respect — his feet were far too itchy to allow him to settle down into any sort of domesticity, and he would prove the fact in a dramatic enough way by sailing off around the world as soon as the opportunity presented itself.
By June 1879 Benjamin the Silversmith was terminally ill with cancer of the abdomen; in the earlier part of the century that would have meant admission to the workhouse or protracted and difficult nursing at home.
A mark of how things had changed was that there was now a hospital to which he could be admitted: there in the University College Hospital in Gower Street he made a will on 7 October witnessed by his old friend Edward Humberstone.
He left his monies in the New 3 per cent Bank Annuities and the London Provident Savings Bank, Moorfield, together with the proceeds from the sale of his household furniture and effects, plate, linen, china, books, pictures and other chattels to be divided equally between his four children.
The total estate came to just under six hundred pounds.
Benjamin died there in Gower Street on 10 October 1879, death from cancer and exhaustion being certified as the cause by J. M. Briggs, M.R.C.S. Consistently inconsistent to the end, he is given as a ‘Silversmith’ on the will, but as a ‘Writing Clerk’on the death certificate; just for good measure we are also given a final address for him to add to our collection: 355 Edgware Road.
It fell to William, the only son left in London, to prove the will, which he duly did on 22 October at the Principal Probate Registry; the body was laid to rest at Abney Park Cemetery, Stoke Newington, grave no. 66,417.
A year later William Titford, our old friend the undertaker from Wylye in Wiltshire, would be buried in the St Pancras Cemetery at East Finchley.
Here, in the suburbs of the Metropolis, members of the extended family whose ancestors had parted company down in Wiltshire as long ago as the late 16th century found neighbouring resting places.
Benjamin Titford's material and social success during a lifetime spanning 65 years could not match that of William the Undertaker, but he had done very well for himself, for all that.
No freehold property is mentioned in his will, but his goods, chattels and savings constituted quite a nice little nest-egg for his sons and his daughter — and was not ambition for one's children one of the marks of a Victorian middle-class man?
Whatever social class we ascribe to Benjamin the Silversmith will be open to some degree of misinterpretation; it has been said that ‘The sixty years of Queen Victoria's reign were above all the sixty years of the middle-class man’, and we could apply that statement to our man's ability to consolidate and improve upon his standing in society.
We can but suppose that he practised the middle-class virtues of Samuel Smiles — those of hard work, thrift and sobriety — and embodied the very quintessence of what we would speak of today as the Protestant Work Ethic.
Benjamin was clearly an ambitious and careful man, neither  dissolute nor spendthrift, and was probably very conservative in every way; he had made himself respectable in Victorian terms, generating enough of a cash surplus by a lifetime of hard work and good fortune to build up that stock of 3 per cent Bank Annuities and accumulate a healthy balance with the London Provident Savings Bank.
Few of his Frome ancestors had ever been so lucky, and nor had his father; if death or disease did not rob a 19th-century artisan of his earning power, he had, as we see, the luxury of earning more than he needed to spend.
Middle-class values and a middle-class bank balance do not in themselves guarantee a man any specific social status, however.
It would seem more useful to reserve that much over-used tag of ‘middle-class’ for those higher up the social and financial scale than Benjamin — those who lived in larger houses with servants, who sent their children to public schools and could afford a day at the races or a night at the opera, suitably dressed.
Benjamin and Elizabeth and their family belonged, in effect, to what we might choose to call the ‘comfortable working class’; they benefited from the general rise in Britain's prosperity in Victorian times — cheaper food and clothing, better sanitation, faster transport, more substantial housing — but their money still had to be earned, had to be worked for.
Benjamin's income came from any one or more of a series of sources, as we have seen: at times he earned wages as a silversmith or a clerk; he also dabbled in the retail trade as a general salesman, and picked up some spare cash from his boarding houses.
All of that placed him very safely above London's poor manual labourers — but it should not persuade either him or us that he had achieved social parity with the genteel and leisured classes.
The name of one person, we may notice, was conspicuously absent from Benjamin's 1879 will: that of his widow, Elizabeth.
She may have had some capital of her own, though many a wife in Victorian times was little better off as one man's wife than she had been as another man's daughter:
Until the passing of the Married Women's Property Act the husband's marriage vow, ‘with all my worldly goods I thee endow’, was ironic.
In fact the reverse happened.
A newly-wed husband legally acquired all his wife's real and personal property, and he could dispose of it exactly as he thought fit.
There are numerous examples in English wills throughout the centuries of men who were careful to make provision for their widows by insisting that children who inherited some property would allow their mother to stay somewhere comfortable for the rest of her life.
Where such stipulations were not heeded, a Chancery case might well follow, if the wronged party could afford such a luxury.
Benjamin Titford, by contrast, must have trusted his children to see that Elizabeth was fairly dealt with — and his trust appears to have been justified.
Benjamin James was away in Somerset, and William had a family to accommodate, so the two unmarried children, Charles Frederick and Emily, set up house with their mother at 50 Cumberland Street, Barnsbury.
Most of the neighbours were craftsmen of one sort or another — a shoemaker, a signwriter and a builder appear in the commercial directories for 1881 — though at least one master mariner was using Cumberland Street as his land-base at the time.
The Titfords were a little different — Charles Frederick had decided to use his share of father's estate to set up a modest retail business, one which his mother and sister could contribute towards when he was in London himself, and one which they could perhaps handle efficiently without him when he departed on his sporadic travels around the world.
The 1881 census tells the story: Charles F. Titford was a ‘Potman and Tobacconist’, with Emily as his ‘Assistant Tobacconist’ and mother as a general ‘Assistant’.
To help matters along, boarders had been resorted to once more: a warehouseman from Hammersmith and a wheelwright from Norfolk were helping the Titfords pay the bills.
One widow and four unmarried people were sharing  the little house, and still they had to find room for the customers who wanted an ounce of tobacco or a portion of snuff.
We shall tell the full story of Charles Frederick Titford in due course; enough for now to say that he would be outlived by his widowed mother, who was 80 when she died at 24 Warner Street, Lower Holloway, on 4 March 1902, ‘Widow of Benjamin Titford, Commercial clerk’.
She was buried, like her husband, at Abney Park Cemetery.
Benjamin James (1846–1905)
London and Curry Rivel, Somerset
THE VILLAGE SCHOOLMASTER
Where there's muck, there's brass, as the saying goes — and there was plenty of brass around during the early years of the Industrial Revolution in England for those with the skills and the enterprise to go looking for it.
Mucky hands and a fat bank balance would be a way of life for the first generation of nouveaux-riches manufacturers; but with a bit of care the brass itself could be used to buy their children out of the world of muck altogether.
There were ways of consolidating and improving upon the status acquired by being a rich and successful industrialist — like providing a solid and traditional education for one's sons, and a prudent marriage for one's daughters.
In a rather odd way, 19th-century public schools were just as ideally suited for the fathers of gentlemen as they were for the sons of gentlemen.
In other words, three generations might take a family from hard toil through private education to gilt-edged respectability.
All that was fine as far as it went, but it would often mean, as the 19th century wore on, that work associated directly with industrial processes tended to be looked down upon.
In Germany, by contrast, technical education was well advanced, and Napoleon had had the foresight to create institutions of excellence which would provide France with its future engineers, agriculturalists and the rest; but many an English self-made man would want to see his offspring succeed in altogether ‘cleaner’ and more respectable fields, making their mark as doctors, lawyers, Oxford classicists or even politicians.
For that reason alone some historians would even argue that Britain's decline as a manufacturing nation was already underway within a generation of the onset of the Industrial Revolution itself.
The Titfords, as we know only too well, were very far from being rich and powerful tycoons; nevertheless, the trend we have just outlined was at work in a much more modest way even in their fortunes as time went by.
From the moment the family moved to Frome in the early 17th century and gave up being subsistence farmers with a complementary craft skill or two under their belts, they had been involved in one way or another with the world of industry — be it as manufacturing craftsmen or as retailers.
Now, with Benjamin James Titford, the eldest son of Benjamin the Silversmith and Elizabeth, we encounter a craftsman's son who would establish himself as a member of the professional classes — by becoming a schoolmaster.
The training undergone by aspiring teachers in the 19th century was of a fairly rudimentary kind, and the financial rewards at the end of it all were nothing like those accorded to successful lawyers or doctors.
Nevertheless, the job was beginning to carry its own very real status; Benjamin James would be the first member of his branch of the family ever to have a ‘career’ in anything like the modern sense of the word.
Not for him the path of apprenticeship followed by his two younger brothers — at least, not quite.
He had started off in a modest enough way as a schoolboy like so many others — but at a time when education had not yet become compulsory; what he did have was both the brains and the parental support to turn his flair for learning to good effect.
In the year in which he had been born, 1846, the Secretary of the Education Committee — a certain James  Kay-Shuttleworth — had introduced a system of apprentice schoolmasters; the trainee had to be at least 13 years old, be able to read with ‘fluency, ease and expression’, write neatly and accurately, and understand the essentials of arithmetic and the system of weights and measures.
If he was based at a school governed by the Church of England, then the Catechism would have to be recited, and some examination by a priest would be necessary.
This was an attractive scheme, not least because both the pupil-teacher and the headmaster or headmistress were paid for their trouble, and was very probably the route which Benjamin James followed.
At the age of 19 he sat the Queen's Scholarship Examination, which he would have to pass if he wished to pursue any form of teacher-training after the initial apprenticeship.
All went well, and he was duly admitted to St Paul's College in Cheltenham from the Islington Trinity National School, having been awarded a Queen's Scholarship, second class.
The Cheltenham course was one he completed to the College's satisfaction, and as he left as a qualified master his first thought was to return home to North London, at least for the time being.
For a brief spell he worked as headmaster of the Cattle Market School, St Luke's, Holloway.
That gave him the chance to exercise one of his talents, as a teacher, but he was also a bit of a musician, and soon established himself as the organist at the parish church in Holloway.
Whatever might his Frome ancestors have thought of a Titford playing for Divine Service in an Anglican place of worship!
Teaching and organ-playing gave Benjamin James (hereinafter simply ‘Benjamin' for the sake of conciseness) the wherewithal to leave one place for another if he wished to — they were skills more marketable over a wide area than those of his father, for example, who presumably relied upon local contacts and reputation in order to earn a decent living.
There was probably nothing particularly distasteful about working at Cattle Market School in Holloway — despite its rather down-to-earth title — but Benjamin sought greener pastures, nevertheless.
In 1868, a mere two years after he had first begun his course in Cheltenham, he left London and his family again — for good, this time.
Many Titfords over the years, we know, have uprooted themselves from one place to go and settle elsewhere.
Benjamin's case, though, was subtly different: for the most part family emigration seems to have been prompted at least as much by the need or the desire to leave one place as it has been by the yearning to live somewhere else.
Bratton was abandoned because making a living there was proving increasingly difficult; William Charles and Ben the Outrider left Frome partly because it was fast becoming a town in recession.
Yet already, with Benjamin the Silversmith, we have noticed a change: he moved around London as often as he did not because life was proving difficult where he was, but because customers or lodgers might be more easily found just round the everlasting corner.
Finally comes Benjamin James, the professional man with a career to build.
Teachers seeking advancement have traditionally had to be mobile — much more so than their legal or medical colleagues; there is everything to be gained by arriving as an unknown quantity in a new school — promotion will usually attend such a move, and all the unfortunate errors perpetrated in one's early years can be left far behind.
Benjamin James Titford may or may not have made his fair share of mistakes as a young teacher; but when the chance came of running his own show in a conducive environment, he took it with alacrity.
Family historians very soon become aware of the rather bizarre and uncanny way in which people's lives can bring them circling back to places which have strong connexions with their own forgotten ancestry.
Certain locations can evoke in us a very strong sense of ‘belonging’, of déjà vu , almost as if the spirits of our long-since-departed  forebears still walked the streets.
It should hardly surprise us, then, that Benjamin decided to settle in Somerset: not in Frome, admittedly, but in Curry Rivel near Taunton, where he replaced Charles Thomas Price as headmaster of the village school.
That brought him within a mile or two of Stoke St Gregory, down the steep incline and on to the Levels, where a family of Titfords  had once made their home as long ago as the end of the 16th century.
Almost certainly unwittingly, Benjamin was returning to the land of his far-off kindred.
Curry Rivel sits on a low ridge nearly two hundred and seventy feet above sea level; not high ground, to be sure, but high enough to afford panoramic views all around over the low-lying Somerset Wetlands.
To the south there are the Dorset Heights looking over Hamdon Hill and the Windwhistle Ridge; to the west stands the Wellington Monument, almost on the Devon border; northwards there is a fine view of the Quantock Hills with the Brendons to their left and the Mendips to their right; eastwards lie the Wiltshire Downs and a view of King Alfred's Tower at Stourton.
On a clear day the Black Mountains of Wales can even be made out to the north-east.
Seductive country, then, to charm a young London schoolteacher away from the semi-rural but crowded northern suburbs of the capital.
Benjamin, we may say to his credit, seems to have taken to Curry Rivel like a fish to water, and would stay there until the day he died.
Other forms of seduction were also at work on him as it happens, and on I October of the year of his arrival in the village he married Edith Mason, youngest daughter of Henry Rice Mason of Godmanchester, Hunts., a cabinet-maker.
Benjamin was then 23 years old, described on the marriage certificate as the son of Benjamin Titford, ‘Jeweller's Assistant’.
The rather handsome Perpendicular church of St Andrew in Curry Rivel where the ceremony took place was soon to become a familiar enough place for Benjamin, as he took over as its organist to complement his work as the local headmaster.
North of the churchyard itself lay the Old School Room, built in 1828 at.a cost of £127 8s. 4d.; it served its purpose very adequately until the passing of the 1870 Education Act, at which time decisions about the future had to be made.
Elementary education was to be provided for all children in England and Wales; now did the village want a new church school, or would it prefer a board school, one which would be secular and undenominational?
Debate in Curry Rivel became heated on the issue; so much so, that a committee of villagers, including Benjamin James Titford himself, was appointed to decide what to do.
They discussed and they reached a conclusion; as a result a new church school — Curry Rivel Parochial School — was built in Church Street in 1876, the year in which the first of two Acts was passed making school attendance compulsory.
Described in the commercial directories as a ‘voluntary school’ and doubling up as a Sunday school, it was intended for 180 children, and sported Benjamin James as its first headmaster.
He would teach the senior pupils with the aid of an assistant mistress, leaving the little ones lower down the school to learn their early lessons from children older than themselves — this was the ‘monitor’ system, widely adopted and potentially very successful.
By 1883 the Titfords were living at 2 Mount Terrace, Curry Rivel, where Benjamin was supplementing his income — a trick he had learned from his father?— by acting as an insurance agent for the ‘Lancashire’.
Even professional men, it seems, would dabble in a bit of commerce if it helped pay the bills.
The new school suffered from a degree of excess capacity for quite a number of years: by 1894 the average attendance was 109, Miss Harris acting as assistant mistress; she was shortly replaced by Benjamin's daughter, Minnie Titford, and they were joined by Miss Maud Reading, the infants' mistress, as the average attendance rose to a hundred and twenty.
Benjamin and Edith were to have no fewer than nine daughters in all, three dying in infancy, and just one son.
Not only was the boy outnumbered in this predominantly female household — he had the additional problem of having to contend with a rather cumbersome and unusual first Christian name: Marwood James Henry Titford had presumably been named as such by way of homage to the vicar of Curry Rivel, the Rev. Charles Marwood Speke Mules.
It was typical of Benjamin James, as it happens, to go in for such a touch of   harmless sycophancy to please his friend the vicar; he had very soon become, as we might have guessed, a respectable pillar of the Curry Rivel establishment.
4l.
Benjamin James Titford (1846–1905) with his wife, Edith, and six of their children.
Curry Rivel, Somerset.
A Titford family photograph taken in the early 1890s shows husband and wife with five daughters and young Marwood, the girls in neat smocks or severe black dresses, the son in an Eton collar, and every one of the group looking his or her most miserable Sunday best Those photographers who made a speciality of enticing young ladies to say ‘prunes’ and ‘prisms’to bring out their charming dimples, called ‘watch the birdie!’with much gusto or tried ‘cheese!’in the hope of a smile would have had a rough time indeed with severe-looking Benjamin James and his wife and children.
Victorian studio portraits, of course, rarely show us smiling or happy subjects; but as master of the local school, church organist, registrar of births and deaths, secretary to the Women's Friendly Society, stalwart of the Langport branch of the Ancient Order of Foresters and the local cricket club, Benjamin James must have felt the burden of responsibility resting heavily on his shoulders — and it shows in his face.
Were he to defend himself, no doubt he would surprise us all, but the overriding impression we get of him in retrospect is that he had fallen all too readily into the role of the squire's man, the vicar's buddy, the stern schoolmaster.
Such is the price a silversmith's son may have had to pay to achieve  respectability in a Victorian village community.
As things turned out, Benjamin just lived beyond the Victorian era and into the Edwardian: on Sunday 3 September 1905 he was in church about to play the organ for a children's service when he collapsed.
The vicar managed to catch him before he fell to the floor, and he was removed to his home, where he died on the Friday morning, 8 September.
A moving obituary in the Langport and Somerton Herald declared that ‘…no death within recent years has created such a universal expression of regret’.
He was clearly very highly regarded in the district, and his funeral was even attended by a representative of the London Titfords in the person of Ernest William, the deceased's nephew, son of his brother William.
They had not entirely forgotten him back home, then, although he had been away 37 years.
A brass plaque was duly struck in Benjamin's memory and mounted in the church near the organ, where it may still be seen:
In Memory of Benjamin J. Titford. 37 years organist and schoolmaster of this parish.
Died, September 8th, 1905.
Aged 58
Even as this story is being written, in the 1980s, one man can still remember that far-off funeral of 1905, though he was only five at the time:
Coo!
I remember sneaking from school to watch old Titford's funeral procession and standing under the chestnut trees and thinking how beautiful the singing in church sounded.
No doubt it did.
And so impressed was this man by the occasion that, having lived away from Curry Rivel for many years, he returned late in life to be re-married there — because of his cherished memories of the village in all its beauty on the day ‘Old Benny Titford’ was buried.
More mundane events followed that moving funeral: the deceased had died intestate, and Letters of Administration were granted to Edith, the widow, on 25 September, there being £130 in effects.
Edith was to live on until 1928, dying in Bath.
Benjamin had just lived long enough to see the first of his children married: Ella Frances May Titford's wedding had taken place on 26 August 1905, in that very church in which her father was to collapse eight days later.
What kind of men were a village headmaster's daughters marrying at that period?
Ella's husband, John Miles Smith of Wick, near Curry Rivel, was an engineer, the son of a signalman.
Twenty years old as she was, Ella had beaten her big sisters to the altar: Alice Maud, the eldest, waited a further two years before marrying Frank Foote, a clerk in Godsell's Brewery in Stroud, Gloucestershire, in which town she herself had served an apprenticeship with a ladies' hairdresser in High Street.
They named their eldest son Benjamin, after his maternal grandfather, and she would tell the young lad when he grew up of how she had been taught piano and organ by Benjamin James her father, there in that big house in Curry Rivel where they used to hang hams or sides of bacon in the huge chimney piece.
The next sister, Elizabeth Marian Edith (‘Bessie’) married Alf Davidge, a silk-buyer trained at the ‘Cavendish House’ department store in Cheltenham, who then took up employment at Debenham's in London, near St Paul's.
Alf and Bessie lived in Cricklewood, and would receive visits from time to time from Bessie's sister Minnie who, having worked alongside her father at Curry Rivel School for a while, later became headmistress of a similar but smaller establishment in Newton St Loe, Somerset.
There she lived in the school house and had charge of a little brood of no more than eight or nine children.
Never very healthy, she nevertheless managed to live on well into retirement, and was 74 years old when she died at Alf and  Bessie's house in 1951.
That leaves two sisters.
Octavia Gertrude (‘Gertie’) went rather farther afield for a husband: to Norwich, in fact, where she and Frederick William Foxwell, manager of the Livingstone Hotel , Orford Hill, were married at St Peter Mancroft church in 1911.
She was    later to run a ladies' outfitters in nearby Gorleston, on the Suffolk coast.
Lillian Victoria was the last to marry; she had found her way down to Cobham, in Surrey, where she became the wife of Wilfred Arthur Edlin, a widower working as a dairyman.
42.
The obituary of Benjamin James Titford.
From the Langport and Somerton Herald, 1905.
So we have the nine daughters of Benjamin James Titford: three died young, one remained a spinster, three were Edwardian brides, two married during the early years of the reign of King George V. Their lives would take them far apart from each other and from Curry Rivel itself — yet they would remain a close-knit family, for all the physical distance which separated them.
Twentieth-century developments in communications — be it the faster postal service, the telephone, telegrams or improved road conditions and means of transport — would enable far-flung relations to keep in touch with each other with an ease at which their ancestors might have marvelled.
Only one of Benjamin James's children would prove more than usually difficult to communicate with as time went by: young Marwood James Henry, a strangely elusive character in many ways.
He surfaces in different places from time to time: there he is at St Mary's church in Finchley, North London, witnessing the marriage of sister Bessie and Alf Davidge in 1907, then appearing as if from nowhere to perform the same function for Gertie and Frederick Foxwell in Norwich in 1911.
Four years later, like so many of his generation, he was sucked into the tragically wasteful conflict of the First World War, serving — for reasons best known to himself — as a soldier in the Canadian Army.
He had the singular good fortune not to die in the trenches, but the experience undermined his health severely for all that.
More than a hundred years after John Titford, the Frome volunteer, had died of consumption, Marwood was afflicted with the same disease under its more modern and bland title of ‘T.B.’.
Medical advice suggested he should live in a drier and sunnier climate — so he did.
As the war ended he got himself married in Long Ditton, Surrey, to a girl named Madeline Fowler, daughter of George Fowler, a traffic manager.
Time at last to rid himself of the name ‘Marwood’ for good and all: he told the officiating minister, Alfred Martell, to write him down as ‘James Henry Titford’.
His mother and sister Ella were there to act as witnesses.
It was to be fond farewells all round.
The newly-weds were to live further from home than any Titfords on their side of the family had ever done before.
This chapter began with a young teacher from London moving to Somerset; it ends with his son and daughter-in-law seeking a new life in California.
Marwood James Henry was the only male descendant of Benjamin James, and he and Madeline were to have no children; only through Benjamin James's brother William would the Titford name continue in this particular branch, and his story comes next.
William the Gold-Engraver (1849–1918)
London
A STEADY INCOME
His eyes are like the over-tired eyes of an engraver 
Dickens:Our Mutual Friend 
William Titford's elder and younger brothers were each well-travelled in their own ways: Benjamin James had settled in Somerset soon after his brief spell in Cheltenham, and Charles Frederick was to see more of the world than almost any Titford before or since.
William himself, by comparison, seems to represent a remarkable degree of geographical stability: he was born and died in Islington, seems to have travelled but little, and apparently lacked either the desire or the need to move house every few years as his father had done.
In a sense he was the fixed point around which others revolved.
Benjamin the Silversmith provided young William with the same kind of solid foundation in life from which he himself had benefited: on 7 January 1864 an apprenticeship was arranged with Frederick William Ashdown, a gold-engraver of I Green Terrace, Clerkenwell.
For five years William would be instructed in the art of ornamental gold-engraving; Mr. Ashdown's side of the bargain was to provide meat, drink and lodging, leaving the boy's father to find wearing apparel and arrange for washing and mending to be done.
Further, in consideration of £20 paid to his master, William was to be allowed a modicum of pocket money: 6d. per week for the first year, 1s. a week for the second, 2s. a week for the third and 3s. a week for the fourth.
The indenture was duly signed by all parties and witnessed by Edward W. Humberstone of Leather Lane, Holborn.
William completed his five-year stay in Clerkenwell successfully; by the time it was over his brother Benjamin James was already down in Somerset and Charles Frederick was coming up to the age when he, too, would become an apprentice.
William's best plan now would be to get himself established in a job, save up a bit of money, then get married and move into his own little house.
He must have been an eligible enough bachelor: the son of a fairly prosperous artisan family, trained as a craftsman, and quite a handsome chap into the bargain.
Neither William nor Charles Frederick had quite the severity of countenance which one associates with Benjamin James: William in his twenties had a pleasant and confident face, with a full mouth which he would allow to be overgrown by a drooping and slightly unkempt moustache in later years.
His hairline at that age was receding at the parting, giving every intimation that he might be bald one day; not so, in the event — photographs of him as an older man show clearly that same hairline, looking very much the same as it had in the days of his youth.
For all the choice of possible brides he may have had, William picked one very near home indeed: when he married in 1872 at St James, Clerkenwell, it was to his own cousin, Mary Ann Keziah Parkes, daughter of James Parkes, brass-rule maker — himself the brother of William's mother Elizabeth.
Mary was then an attractive dark-haired lady, slightly plump, with swept-back hair falling into ringlets — full in the face, and quite striking in appearance.
Her third Christian name was, of course, a good Nonconformist one with a    biblical pedigree, that of the second of Job's daughters — but then Mary Ann Keziah was, after all, the granddaughter of the impressively-named Ebenezer Parkes.
43.
William Titford (1849–1918).
44.
Mary Ann Keziah Titford (1849–1930).
William was aged 22 at this time, with his wife a year younger; they began their married life in that same rather elegant location that Benjamin the Silversmith had chosen for his early forays into the boarding-house business: Wilmington Square, Clerkenwell.
By 1875 they had moved around the square from no. 2 to no. 24 — a rather conservative little change of home which was maybe typical of them.
And William was a very careful man, we may be sure: while they were still at 24 Wilmington Square, and he was still only in his twenties, he had the foresight to arrange for a Titford family grave at Abney Park Cemetery in Stoke Newington.
Burial in a churchyard was becoming a thing of the past in central London from the 1840s onwards; space was too precious, and the task of burying the dead was taken over by non-denominational cemeteries run largely on a commercial basis.
Abney Park in     North London was a convenient site for the Titford family — fairly close to home, extremely spacious, and with a certain degree of Nonconformist tradition.
The only slightly unnerving experience for any Titford mourners attending a funeral there would be the prominent sign dominating the entrance which read: ‘Titford and Co.
Undertakers’.
The cousins up from Wylye were doing a brisk business at Abney Park.
45.
Abney Park Cemetery, Stoke Newington.
From Rev. Thomas B. Barker, Abney Park Cemetery (London)(1869).
Many Titfords from a number of family branches found their last resting place at Abney Park.
46.
Burial certificate, Abney Park Cemetery.
William Titford had paid five guineas during the 1870s for the exclusive right of burial in his chosen plot.
William paid his five guineas to the Abney Park Cemetery Company, Ltd., in exchange for ‘exclusive right in perpetuity’ of burial in a plot of ground 6′ 6″ by 2′ 6″ — no. 62,076, square L9.
Members of the family would be buried there until the 1940s, thanks to William's generous gesture.
No man as prudent as William Titford would have paid out good money for a family grave unless he had some firm evidence that there would eventually be some bodies to put in it.
Well, there were: by the time they left Clerkenwell William and Mary Ann had already produced four out of their five children — all boys.
Little Horace Charles was carried off by pneumonia at the tender age of eight months, but Ernest William, Henry James and Herbert George were healthy young children crawling or toddling around those rooms in Wilmington Square.
The last child, Grace Beatrice, would not be born until the family had moved to 17 Brunswick Place, but once she had arrived we cannot but notice an almost uncanny similarity between William's family and that of his father: each consisted of four boys followed by a girl, with the third child dying in infancy.
Certainly there are no profound conclusions to be drawn from that fact, except to note that various forms of contraception were beginning to be practised from the 1870s onwards, with a steady decline in the national birth-rate apparent during the following decade.
William was only 34 when his last child was born, while his father had been 43; perhaps some form of contraception did account for William and Mary Ann stopping short at those four children?
Either that, or they may have practised the oldest and surest method of them all for preventing unwanted pregnancies — abstinence from sexual relations.
That is their secret, and will remain so; it behoves us not to pry, only to speculate in passing.
The family move to Brunswick Place, near the junction of City Road and Old Street, took place in 1879 — but just before, rather than after, the death of William's father Benjamin.
The Titfords were more than lucky, in a sense, to have picked up their legacies from Benjamin's will in that year, since the nation as a whole was suffering from a period of deep depression following a boom which had peaked six or seven years before.
Charles Frederick, we know, had used his capital to set up his little tobacconist's business in Cumberland Street; Emily Jane probably used hers to swell her bottom drawer, and William…well, in a moment of cavalier abandon, he dabbled in running a chandler's shop there in Brunswick Place.
An odd move, to be sure, at a time when prices were falling — and in a rather smart street, too, where such a venture would not be guaranteed to make him instantly popular with the neighbours, as customers came in one door and noisome smells came out of another.
Of course it was only an experiment and didn't last long: by 1884 the Court Directory for London lists William as an engraver once more— this generation of Titfords seemed to lack the heart for such enterprises, which had been the speciality of their father, Benjamin the Silversmith.
Brunswick Place itself was definitely rather an up-market location, as the 1881 census makes clear.
Admittedly there was more than a hint of urban overcrowding two doors away from William at no. 21, where a glove cutter, a walnut-veneer repairer and a book finisher were living with their families — but that was exceptional.
The Titfords' immediate neighbours boasted domestic servants: two of them to look after a boot manufacturer and his wife at no. 15, and just the one to attend to the needs of a photographer and his stepdaughter who were living on the other side.
William and Mary Ann Titford enjoyed no such luxury — but then they were among the youngest people in the street, and their daughter     Grace Beatrice, born in 1883, would have been the only baby crying down Brunswick Place in that year — much to the consternation of the local worthies, no doubt:
I rue the day these wretched Titfords ever came to live down here — couldn't they have stayed over in Wilmington Square?
I can't sleep at night for that baby crying, I can't breathe in the daytime for that stench of tallow coming out of their back door — and one of his customers brushed me into the dusty street the other day…
47. 1881 census: Brunswick Place, City Road, London.
William and Mary Ann Titford are living with their family at no. seventeen.
(PRO RG/393.)
48.
Loving Memory card for Elizabeth Titford (1822–1902).
The printer has had problems with the spelling of ‘Augusta’…
A final comment on Brunswick Place in the 1880s would need to mention its peculiarly equivocal position as regards local government.
There would have been a time when most small city streets would have come clearly within the jurisdiction of one parish; nothing so simple for Brunswick Place — it lay within the civil parish of St Leonards, the municipal ward of Hoxton New Town, the parliamentary borough of Hackney, the urban sanitary district of Hoxton, and the ecclesiastical parish of St John's.
Come back the old English parish, all is forgiven...
We began by saying that William Titford moved house comparatively infrequently, and within a fairly limited area; he and Mary Ann found new accommodation only once more in their married life together — as the children grew up and left home the parents moved to 48 Freegrove Road, Holloway, just off the Caledonian Road.
They were settled there as early as 1899, and it was from that address that the only one of their children to marry — Henry James — set off on his wedding day, 8 September 1902.
Indeed, he could almost have walked the short distance to Arundel Square Congregational Chapel, as could his bride, Margaret Archibald, from nearby Ringcroft Street.
William and Mary Ann were there in all their glory, as we might expect: he with a spotted waistcoat and flamboyant flowery buttonhole, she with an expanse of fur on her head and around her shoulders.
William lived on for a further 16 years after that, into the reign of George V and the First World War.
That war, like its successor in 1939, had its civilian as well as its military casualties, and William Titford was one of them.
He was 68 years old in the early months of 1918, when the experience of living through an air-raid proved too much for his system and he suffered a stroke.
He was admitted to Islington Infirmary, unable to speak, and yet desperately trying to convey a message to his daughter-in-law Margaret.
He kept stroking his own hand, then bursting into tears at his inability to communicate; was it, as Margaret supposed afterwards, that he was trying to say that he had a second bank-book which they needed to find?
If so, they never found it; William died intestate on 4 March and Letters of Administration were granted to Ernie, the eldest son; the gross value of the estate was just over £564, with the net value of the personal estate standing at £43 12s. 4d.
Well, perhaps there had been a second bank-book, after all?
William, we may remember, had thoughtfully provided himself with a burial plot many years before: so square L9, grave no. 62,076 it was, as he was laid to rest at Abney Park.
Once again a widow was to outlive her husband — how very different from the experience of those 18th-century Titford wives, worn out after years of child-bearing and dying in their fifties if not before!
Mary Ann settled back into widowhood in Freegrove Road, this time at no. 17 with her two unmarried sons and one unmarried daughter.
Sometimes they would all venture out to visit Henry James and Margaret in Bowes Road, New Southgate, where the grandchildren would try to suppress their giggles at hearing the mixture of voices as the grown-ups sang round the piano-'Come, Birdie, come and live with me', ‘Just a song at twilight’, ‘Down by the mill’ and other contemporary favourites.
Mary Ann had a beautiful voice even into her seventies, Ernie and Henry James both sang in choirs, and Bert played the piano and the violin: between them, then, they had all the raw material necessary for a good evening of typical early 20th-century home entertainment.
Granny's visits to Bowes Road would always be very much appreciated by her little granddaughter Doris, if only because of the teatime treats which would attend such  occasions; as she took the old lady upstairs to dispose of her coat, Doris would whisper: ‘We've got blackcurrant pie today because you're here; we only ever have it when you come…’.
These visits to New Southgate were, of course, reciprocated as the grandchildren paid a visit to Granny in Freegrove Road; stopping off at Beale's on Holloway Road for chocolate fingers on the way — a great treat — they would go to the side entrance of no. 17 and ring the bell.
‘Who is it?’ would come a voice from the passageway within, as Granny called through the grating: ‘Walk in, please…’.
Then would come tea up in the parlour — winkles, usually, extracted with a pin — as the young visitors gazed around the cluttered but tasteful room with its ubiquitous red plush and velvet and its ruby glass and ornaments with glass-drop clusters.
Mary Ann was blind during the last few years of her life, and it had the quite understandable effect of making her very emotional; she only had one set of grandchildren, and she made such a fuss of them: ‘My Siddy’, she would say, as she stroked her young grandson's cheek with tears in her eyes.
‘Siddy's’ fiancée, Beth, would cut and set her hair for her in the late ‘twenties, but by the time the couple married in June, 1930, Granny was very near the end.
She died in the December of that year, joining her husband in the family grave; many letters of condolence were received by Ernie at Freegrove Road, including one from Cousin Alf Davidge of Cricklewood — the husband of Benjamin James's daughter, Bessie.
That link with Curry Rivel was still not quite forgotten.
The role of memory and reminiscence in family history research should never be underestimated.
The case of Mary Ann Titford,née Parkes, is fairly typical in this respect: her grandchildren, still alive in the 1980s as this story is being written, remember her well, though she had been born as long ago as 1849.
Human memory in this case carries us, in a way, over a span of history lasting nearly a hundred and forty years.
Whatever can a person like Mary Ann, born in the early years of Victoria's reign, have thought of England in the 1930s?
Cultural and social eons had passed, in effect, and William Titford himself, also an early Victorian, could never have predicted in his wildest nightmares that his death would be hastened by bombs dropping from the sky.
It must be a tribute to the resilience of these people that they lived so long and survived through it all.