

Greater expectations
The Future Development of Auditing,issued by the Auditing Practices Board, is the most important attempt to bridge the expectations gap that has ever been made by the British profession.
Yet even if all its recommendations were implemented, the gap would still remain.
The expectations gap is a complex phenomenon, and it is caused as much by financial reporting problems as it is by auditing ones.
For example, if users hold excessive expectations about whether accounts can indicate subsequent financial collapse, that will create an expectations gap regardless of what auditors can or should do about it.
Similarly, if accounting standards are in disarray, that will create a gap too, again regardless of anything that auditors might do.
Whose job it is to sort it all out, varies from problem to problem.
A rough guide to the allocation of responsibilities is shown in the diagram.
Within its defined area of activity, the APB's paper (see p 88), provides a comprehensive reform programme.
It proposes, among other things, that auditors should report on ‘the proper conduct of the company's affairs’ and on ‘future risks attaching to the company’and be responsible to ‘a wider interest group’than the shareholders, and that shareholders should play a more active part in auditors' appointment and remuneration.
This is a bold manifesto and the APB will expect it to receive careful criticism from all interested parties.
Doubts have already been raised about the cost of the proposals, about possible legal difficulties and about shareholders' willingness to play the role assigned to them by the APB.
Many of the proposals will require further, detailed development and will need the support or consent of, variously, the Government, the ASB and industry.
The major audit firms have also expressed serious reservations about some elements in the APB's package that appeared in exposure drafts last May on going concern and an extended audit report.
And a few auditors fear that the APB's proposals will raise expectations that cannot be fulfilled, leaving the expectations gap bigger than it was before.
The APB also notes that ‘before the role and scope of audit can be widened…a solution must be found to the financial threat posed by risks to auditing firms arising from litigation in the current legal framework’, but does not ‘state a preference’ for any of the possible ways of dealing with the problem.
The APB is right to draw attention to this issue, but the strategy of ‘linkage’ may be an untenable one.
If the Government refuses to do anything about auditors' liability, will it be credible for the APB to refuse to pursue its proposals on the role and scope of audit?
We doubt it.
The Future Development of Auditing deserves to provoke a fundamental debate.
But the APB cannot bridge the expectations gap on its own.
The ASB, the UITF, the Review Panel, and the individual accountancy bodies, particularly as regulators of the actual performance of auditors, and of course the audit firms themselves, must all play their part.
technical summary
The future development of auditing
The Auditing Practices Board has issued The Future Development of Auditing: a Paper to Promote Public Debate (p 88).
Its proposals include:
The purpose of an audit should be defined as being ‘to provide an independent opinion to those with an interest in a company that they have received from those responsible for its direction and management an adequate account of: the proper conduct of the company's affairs; the company's financial performance and position; future risks attaching to the company.’
Proper conduct —‘auditors should report to shareholders on whether the company has acceptable financial and other relevant risk management controls…’
Financial performance and position —‘the auditor will need to be more closely associated with the entire range of information contained in annual reports and other public documents issued by companies.’
Future risks —‘there should be a cultural shift in the audit so that it looks forward as well as backward’.
Auditors should be responsible to a wider interest group than the shareholders.
But ‘before the role and scope of audit can be widened to respond to the needs of ‘stakeholders’ in companies, a solution must be found to the financial threat posed by risks to auditing firms arising from litigation in the current legal framework.’
There should be ‘more active involvement of the shareholders in matters regarding the audit’.
Comments on the paper are requested by 31 March 1993.
Cadbury Committee
The Committee on the Financial Aspects of Corporate Governance has issued a Code of Best Practice (p 94).
The committee recommends that the boards of all listed companies should comply with the code and encourages as many other companies as possible to aim at meeting its requirements.
The publication of a statement of compliance with the code, reviewed by the auditors so far as compliance can be objectively verified, is to be made a listing requirement by the Stock Exchange.
Exemption of prior transactions
The Accounting Standards Board has issued a statement setting out its policy on the applicability of accounting standards to transactions that had been entered into before the standard had been issued.
The general policy is that the provisions of accounting standards should be applied to all material transactions irrespective of the date at which they are entered into.
Where appropriate, however, the ASB will consider incorporating an exclusion for transactions that took place prior to the promulgation of the standard.
Copies of the statement are available from the Accounting Standards Board, Holborn Hall, 100 Gray's Inn Road, London WC1X 8AL.
Accounting for capital instruments
The Accounting Standards Board has issued FRED 3,Accounting for Capital Instruments .
The exposure draft's proposals include:
Capital instruments should be classified as liabilities if they contain an obligation to transfer cash or other resources.
Shareholders' funds should be analysed between amounts attributable to equity interests and non-equity interests.
Convertible debt should be separately disclosed.
It should be included in liabilities until such time as it is actually converted: conversion should not be anticipated.
If the holder has an option to redeem at a premium, that premium should be accrued over the period to the earliest date at which the option can be exercised.
Minority interests in subsidiaries should be analysed between equity and non-equity interests.
Liabilities should be classified as current or non-current according to their strict contractual maturity, except where the same lender is firmly committed to refinance the debt on the same terms.
Liabilities should initially be recognised in the balance sheet at the amount received, less any issue costs.
The finance cost should be allocated to accounting periods so as to achieve a constant rate on the amount outstanding.
Comments on the exposure draft are requested by 15 March 1993.
Copies are available at £5, post free, from Accountancy Books, PO Box 620, Central Milton Keynes MK9 2JX: phone 0908 668833, ext 3227/3228.
The exposure draft will be printed in full in the next issue of ACCOUNTANCY .
SSAP 15 amendment
The Accounting Standards Board has issued an amendment to SSAP 15,Accounting for Deferred Tax .
The amendment is based on FRED 2 (see p 96), and comes into immediate effect.
Copies of ‘Amendment to SSAP 15 ‘Accounting for deferred tax’ are available from Accountancy Books: price £1.50, post free.
The full text of the amendment will be published in the next issue of ACCOUNTANCY .
True and fair override
The Accountancy Standards Board's Urgent Issues Task Force has issued Abstract 7,True and Fair View Override Disclosures .
The abstract gives guidance on the intrepretation of the statutory requirement to give particulars of any departure from the Companies Act 1985 accounting provisions in order to give a true and fair view, together with the reasons for any such departure and its effect.
The abstract is effective for accounting periods ending on or after 23 December 1992.
Copies of the abstract are available from the ASB.
The full text will be published in the next issue of ACCOUNTANCY .
Application of abstracts
The UITF has issued a statement on the application of its abstracts (p 9).
The statement says that ‘it is important when applying UITF Abstracts to be guided by the spirit and reasoning, as set out in the individual abstracts, so as to achieve their underlying purpose’.
The statement gives two examples of the unsatisfactory application of Abstract 3,Treatment of Goodwill on Disposal of a Business .
Copies of the statement are available from the ASB.
Second opinions
The Institute has issued a new statement,Second and Other Opinions , in its Guide to Professional Ethics (p 101).
The statement says that where a member's opinion is sought on the application of accounting standards or principles to specific circumstances or transactions of an entity of which he is not the auditor, he should ensure that he has access to all relevant information, he should contact the auditor to provide an opportunity for the latter to bring to his attention any relevant facts and, given his client's permission, he should provide a copy of his opinion to the auditor.
Specialist valuations
The Institute has issued amendments to Integrity, Objectivity and Independence in its Guide to Professional Ethics (p 101).
The amendments require that a firm should not audit a client's financial statements where they include the product of a ‘specialist valuation’ carried out by it.
Pepper v Hart
In Pepper v Hart , the House of Lords held that the benefit to be assessed on teachers at Malvern College in respect of their children's education there should be the marginal cost to the school of providing the education, less any contribution the teachers made (p 85).
The decision sets a precedent for the interpretation of legislation generally by referring to ministerial statements at the time the relevant legislation was introduced.
letters
Lifeline to members
Sir,— We are all well aware that the harsh effects of the present recession are being felt by the accountancy profession to a degree that is certainly unprecedented in my memory.
Your readers may not be aware that the Institute is providing much appreciated support to members who have suffered redundancy, with all the personal and career problems that follow in the wake of such an upheaval.
The creation of Job Clubs for redundant members is providing a most valuable lifeline to help them to solve the problem of coping with the trauma and making a constructive approach in the search for employment.
As a member of the West Yorkshire Society's Club, which was formed in September last year, I can testify to its role in raising morale and the efficacy of one's personal presentation; and there is one particular aspect which I feel must be placed on record.
The help, encouragement and advice we have received from the Institute, including the president on his recent visit to Leeds, from John Seear (who provided the initial impetus), from the president and committee of the West Yorkshire Society of Chartered Accountants, and particularly from the Society's administrator, Joyce Cawthra, have been heartwarming.
Some of us have found the jobs we sought; some have found renewed enthusiasm and enhanced skills for the search; others are even now joining to take advantage of an organisation that is getting into its stride for greater efforts: but all of us send our very sincere thanks to all who have helped us when we needed them.
Keep the audit, save the practice
Sir,— I understand that the Auditing Committee have received only 100 responses to their technical release on the abolition of the audit for small companies.
I find this incredible in view of the fact that there are some 9,500 general practitioners who will be directly affected by this proposal.
Do these general practitioners not realise that they are about to see a major drop in their incomes?
Not only will they have less work to do on their limited company clients, but as the limited companies will no longer need to use chartered accountants, they will be free to go to cheaper unqualified accountants.
The possibility of some form of compilation report has been mooted, but there is a strong case against this which may prevail.
The argument goes that such a compilation report would require some work to be carried out, but the problem of defining how much work would create insurmountable difficulties.
Accountants' reports on unincorporated businesses' accounts are currently referred to as ‘audit reports’ by many, including many banks and other lenders.
Lenders often refer to the need for ‘audited accounts’ when referring to the affairs of unincorporated businesses.
Therefore, any form of report which by virtue of the qualifications of the reporter was intended to provide some comfort to readers of accounts would be regarded as a quasi audit report.
Once you have this, you have an audit.
You cannot carry out half an audit.
Therefore, the compilation report will not survive the course.
Faced with the economic reality of the option to cut costs by using a cheaper, unqualified accountant (however false an economy this may be), many limited companies will move away from member firms.
But very few people seem to care.
Add to this the threat from Europe of the need to be a member of an authorised body to provide tax advice and carry out tax work (central to the survival of the small practice), and the fact that the Institute of Chartered Accountants does not have the qualifications to become such a body (less than 15% of members are actively involved in tax matters), and we have potentially the demise of the small firm.
The General Practitioner Board was set up to represent the interests of general practitioners.
I was privileged to be invited along as an observer at the latest meeting at which the question of the small company audit was discussed.
My impression was that the members of the GPB were very concerned about the matter, but unfortunately no formal policy decision arose from the meeting and no action plan was devised.
The discussion was opened by Chris Swinson, chairman of the Financial Reporting and Auditing Group, who basically told us that it was a foregone conclusion and after hearing views of those present, told us all to stop whingeing about the matter and to accept the situation.
It is clear to me that as this only affects a small proportion of the membership and there are good strategic reasons for the larger firms to back the proposal (eg the demise of the smaller practice), unless general practitioners take action now they will only have themselves to blame when their incomes fall and the value of their practices diminishes.
The working party have taken the view that the small company audit is unnecessary and have virtually accused us of being parasites.
The business community benefits greatly from the close involvement of chartered accountants in its affairs and there are a lot of good reasons why the audit should be retained.
Although comments were requested by 30 November 1992, the process is by no means over and I therefore urge all members with a view on this matter to write without delay to Desmond Wright, Secretary to the Auditing Committee at Moorgate Place.
Depression in the profession
Sir,— The December 1992 issue of ACCOUNTANCY made particularly depressing reading for me.
Having qualified three years ago I am now asking myself, was it really worth it?
First, J F Peters points out (p 6) that the Professional Conduct Committees are focusing on matters of petty rule contravention.
Quite so, and I wonder if monitoring visits add value to a firm and its operations?
I doubt it, given my firm's experience.
Second, I read ‘What future for small firms?’(p 25)— a most unbalanced article on a fundamental topic.
May I suggest, sir, that where items on sensitive matters are included in your publication, an even and well-argued case is made?
I am considering the acquisition of a small firm in the near future.
I have a right to constructive, balanced comment from my Institute's periodical.
Next, I read Financial Reporting Standard 3 and I note a dissenting view.
How embarrassing!
If a government minister dissents then he's out, for the sake of the government's credibility.
I have always felt that the ASB's function is to pronounce, not prevaricate.
This failure to reach a public consensus can do nothing but damage for the profession.
If my sons want to train as chartered accountants, I shall do everything in my power to persuade them otherwise.
president's page
Audit regulation — an annual review
A January president's page provides an ideal opportunity to look both back over the past year and forwards to the new.
For auditors, 1992 will no doubt be remembered, at least in part, for the first full year of audit regulation.
The ‘new’ audit regime, heralded by the Companies Act 1989, had its first anniversary in October 1992.
While not everyone welcomed the regime with open arms, it is opportune to reflect on its effectiveness and to weigh up the costs and benefits of regulation of the profession by the profession.
It would be splendid if I could state that audit regulation had solved all the profession's problems, that all audits were now models of perfection, carried out by accountancy paragons.
Unfortunately, we have some way to go before we reach that happy condition.
But the new regime has encouraged many firms to review their audit procedures and make changes and improvements where necessary.
Some firms have chosen not to seek audit registration, some were turned down, and a few have had registration withdrawn from them.
It is too early to form a complete picture of those firms that are registered.
Although the regime is over a year old, routine monitoring, which is the main source of information about the state of auditing, only started in April 1992.
From data that is available, I am pleased to say that early messages are encouraging.
It is clear that firms are taking the regulatory regime seriously; nearly all have taken steps to comply with audit regulations.
Improvements in firms' procedures were deemed necessary in many of the firms the Joint Monitoring Unit (JMU) visited, but in many cases firms were already implementing them by the time of our visits.
During the year, the Institute has been disseminating lessons learned from monitoring, through courses, newsletters and articles.
Key messages include the need to plan audits adequately, to record audit work performed and to maintain adequate quality assurance procedures.
The Institute, too, has taken the lessons on board.
Our regulatory committees, and the JMU, have been reviewing and refining their processes and procedures with a view to making them more efficient, timely and cost-effective.
One of the questions I am occasionally asked is ‘Why does the Institute bother?’
Audit regulation by the Institute, so the argument goes, is costly for the firms registered, intrusive, divisive, and, above all, does little to reassure the public that audits are properly conducted.
Of course, what some people mean is ‘Let's rewrite history and delete Part II of the Companies Act 1989’.
So why should the Institute continue to regulate auditors?
Because, at the end of the day, professional regulation is in the best interests of both auditors and the public.
And it is working.
Even with only limited information, it is clear that auditing has taken on a new significance in many firms.
The need to carry out ‘proper’ audits has been spelled out to firms, and those that do not do so run the serious risk of losing their right to act as company auditors.
The costs of regulation would arise whether the Institute or some other body was responsible.
The Institute, at least, has the advantage of significant input from volunteers.
Their costs, in lost chargeable hours, are borne by their firms rather than by registered auditors as a body.
The audit regime has teeth and, through refusing to register some firms and imposing conditions on others, the Institute has demonstrated that it is not afraid to bite.
A large part of its ability to regulate effectively stems from the fact that it is auditors, with their full understanding of the realities of an audit and of practising firms, who are involved in the regulatory processes.
The Institute's mix of auditors and lay members on regulatory committees ensures that regulatory decisions are taken fairly in the public interest and due attention is given to the interests of the firm.
As firms, their clients and the public feel the full effect of the Institute's efforts to raise standards, public confidence in the Institute as regulator will increase.
And as confidence in the regulatory arm of the Institute increases, so too will the Institute's reputation as an all-round professional body, with consequent benefits for all members, not just auditors.
We are determined to make a success of audit regulation.
We are committed to making any changes that may be required to ensure that we can and do regulate effectively.
I am confident that by January 1994, as the Institute reviews the second year of audit regulation, we shall be able to demonstrate that professional regulation is working and is working well.
Of course, it is not just audit regulation that has been under scrutiny in 1992.
Audit itself has been under review, too, with the publication of The Future Development of Auditing: a Paper to Promote Public Debate , by the Auditing Practices Board (APB).
The report challenges many of the professional verities and calls into question many of the attitudes the profession has struck in recent years.
I warmly welcome the opportunity to debate the many forward-looking suggestions the APB has put forward.
I believe that it is only by going back to the basics and debating questions such as‘What do you want from the audit process?
To whom should auditors owe a duty of care?
Should audits be expected to detect every fraud?’ that we will have any chance of dealing with the expectations gap that has surrounded the audit.
The Institute will be devoting considerable time and effort, in the coming months, to taking a leading role in the consultation process and preparing a coherent and comprehensive response to the important issues the APB has raised.
Whatever specific recommendations finally emerge from the APB, changes, both to the audit and to auditing, would appear to be inevitable.
Happy New Year!
news
AUDIT REGULATION
Too early for conclusions
A large number of firms the Joint Monitoring Unit visited last year are failing to meet one or more of its criteria for good audit procedures, according to the first annual review of audit regulation.
Only 11 firms, out of the 138 registered with the English Institute that the JMU visited in the year to 30 September 1992, achieved ‘yes’ answers to all 13 questions.
Of the others, most (103) failed on the questions relating to audit planning, recording and control, and quality control procedures.
However, given the relatively short time the audit regulatory system has been in place, the review says that there is no reason to be greatly concerned.
‘The highest single total of ‘no'’ answers arises from a lack of cold or continuous review procedures which firms are required to establish and maintain in accordance with the Audit Regulations.
‘As most firms were still in the process of establishing procedures, it is not surprising that these procedures were not yet subject to review.
This does not indicate that firms are not carrying out adequate audit work but that appropriate quality control and quality assurance procedures are not in place in all cases.’
Indeed, if there is one conclusion that can be drawn from the first year's experience of audit regulation, it is that so far there is insufficient evidence to judge the quality of the service registered auditors provide.
Certainly the weaknesses so far identified do not indicate any general shortfalls in the quality of audit work, the review says, but until the JMU has carried out more inspections and increased its database of information, it is too early to be more definitive.
The review was jointly prepared by the English, Scottish and Irish Institutes for the DTI in accordance with their status as recognised professional bodies (RSBs).
It also shows that 10,200 firms are now registered with the three bodies, of which 160 firms audit listed companies; however, only 20 audit more than five listed companies.
90% of registered firms have four or fewer partners and 68% are sole practitioners.
Most of the JMU visits so far have been to practices of this size.
Since the regime began, the English Institute has withdrawn registration from nine firms, usually as a result of lack of fit and proper status, lack of technical competence or failure to comply with the PII regulations.
31 firms either were not or ceased to be eligible for registration.
1,200 firms applied for but did not proceed to registration.
The Review notes an increase in the number of complaints against registered auditors, but puts this down to growing recognition of the Institute as a regulatory body.
The Institute also received its first complaint about the way it has fulfilled its role as an RSB: this has been passed on to the Institute's ombudsman Anthony Surtees for review.
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Profession faces a regulation cookbook
David Tweedie and the Accounting Standards Board have made it clear that they are losing patience with companies — and their auditors — that bend the rules by interpreting the letter of pronouncements rather than adhering to the spirit.
In characteristic style, Professor Tweedie is determined to stamp on loose interpretation now, before the issue gets out of hand, and is not beyond threatening to throw an encyclopaedia of rules at the profession if it cannot be trusted to follow the spirit of the ASB's principles.
‘This is a crunch issue,’ he told ACCOUNTANCY .
‘Does the profession — preparers and auditors — want the new regime to give them principles on which they can use their professional judgment or are they looking for a cookbook?
We have to get away from the idea of saying ‘Where does it say I can't do this?’ to ‘What is the spirit of this?’, and observe the latter.’
The ‘crunch’ was signalled by an UITF unusual statement issued by the ASB, drawing attention to the loose interpretation by ‘a small minority’of companies of one particular Urgent Issues Task Force ruling, Abstract 3, on the treatment of goodwill on disposal of a business (see ACCOUNTANCY , February 1992, p 112).
‘As with accounting standards,’ says the statement, ‘it is important when applying UITF Abstracts to be guided by the spirit and reasoning…so as to achieve their underlying purpose.
Abstracts are intended to be as concise as the nature of a particular topic being dealt with allows and not to be detailed rule-books dealing with every conceivable circumstance.’
Abstract 3's intention was for companies to include, in their calculation of a gain or loss on disposal of a business, any goodwill previously written off against reserves.
But it has proved far from popular, as Company Reporting , the monthly review of financial reporting, has pointed out.
‘Not all companies,’ it said, ‘have the stomach for including goodwill in their losses-on-disposal calculations.’
The ASB has highlighted two methods of dubious interpretation used by a few companies so far.
One is to present the goodwill debit in the p&l account separately from the profit or loss on disposal.
The other is to imply, by crediting before the deduction of dividends an amount equal to the goodwill component, that profit for the period is calculated after the goodwill release.
A number of companies have gone to great pains to point out to the shareholders that the goodwill adjustment does not affect the company's net asset value, but Company Reporting named a number of companies that have actively avoided showing the full extent of losses on disposal.
Enterprise Computer Holdings, for instance, in its p&l account to 31 March 1992, includes ‘purchased goodwill previously written off against reserves’, cancelled out a few lines later by an equal and opposite amount under ‘reinstatement of goodwill written off above’.
The accounts, audited by KPMG Peat Marwick, were not qualified.
And it is the auditors who should be most worried by the UITF statement and Professor Tweedie's warning.
He undoubtedly expects them to lead the way to more responsible reporting; if these discrepancies continue, they will be among the first in the boxing ring.
Ironically, Ernst & Young chose almost the same moment to issue a plea for a simplification of the rules governing disclosures in company accounts — if this ASB warning is not acted on, the result could be exactly the opposite.
The UITF has issued Abstract 7, covering the disclosures that should be made when a company has exercised the true and fair override.
The ASB also announced that changes based on the proposals in FRED 2,Amendment to SSAP 15 — Accounting for deferred tax (see this issue, p 96), have been adopted with immediate effect.
Copies of the amendment are available, price £1.50, from Accountancy Books at the Institute.
Tweedie: Threatening
AUDITING PRACTICES BOARD
The debate on auditing is underway
The Auditing Practices Board's discussion paper on the future direction of auditing (see p 88) has been given a warm welcome by most of the profession, and the debate which it hoped to stimulate is already underway.
The paper should prove to be ‘a powerful stimulus’ to discussions, the Institute said, while the ACCA welcomed it as ‘an important contribution to the expectations gap debate’.
But there is also a vociferous minority that sees the paper as ‘unrealistic’, ‘impractical’ and ‘an overreaction’to pressures brought on by the recession and the corporate collapses that have come in its wake.
And they are concerned that the media and the public will take the proposals floated in the paper as cast iron and expect the APB to implement them all.
The paper,The Future Development of Auditing,was drafted by a working party headed by John McFarlane, managing director of Citibank UK.
It is based on responses from interested parties who were invited to give a critical appraisal of the current state of auditing and suggest possible solutions.
Not surprisingly, the paper says, the responses indicated that ‘the present scope of the audit and the legal framework in which it is conducted militate against auditors successfully meeting the needs of shareholders and others with an interest in the audit process’.
‘The issues raised are so important and fundamental that an effective response is required by the auditing profession, rather than merely attempts to justify the status quo.’
The APB believes that the starting point for the future development of auditing must be a fundamental redefinition of the purpose of the audit.
It proposes that auditors should provide an independent opinion on: the proper conduct of the company's affairs; the company's financial performance and position; and future risks attaching to the company.
This would cover reporting on, inter alia, financial and other risk management controls, fraud and other illegal or irregular acts, basic ethical standards of corporate behaviour, information included in annual reports and public documents, and a summary of the principal assumptions and judgments the directors made in preparing the financial statements.
Auditors should also be required to report to a wider interest group than just the shareholders.
These ‘stakeholders’ could include bankers, customers and suppliers, potential shareholders, employees and even government departments.
The APB recognises that companies will have to bear the additional costs of expanding the audit's scope, but says that these will be borne more heavily by riskier companies.
The paper also says that auditors' independence of management has to be enhanced and the focus sharpened on their responsibilities to shareholders.
It believes that audit committees and the obligatory rotation of audit partners may not go far enough to convince the public of their independence, and suggests that shareholders should be more involved in appointing auditors, determining the scope of the audit, and in the decision to obtain other services from the auditing firm.
If the auditors' role is to be expanded, however, the APB recognises that there has to be more than just shareholder involvement.
A change in the law on joint and several liability, in particular apportionment of liability, is required.
APB chairman Bill Morrison stressed that the paper was the ‘first stage in the debate, not the conclusion’, and many of the immediate responses on publication welcomed it as such.
But there were a number of criticisms as well.
Ernst & Young thought that the APB had not given enough weight to the collateral changes which would be required, the timescale involved in the changes, and the very substantial costs which would arise.
Institute Council member John Corrin spoke for a number of members in business when he said that ‘after Cadbury, it is one of the daftest papers I have ever read’.
Stella Fearnley, a lecturer at Southampton University, agreed.
She said the paper was impractical.
‘The response of the APB has been an overreaction.
It seems to be creating an environment where whatever rubbish an investor puts money into, he will be guaranteed his money back.’
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Cadbury code to be implemented
From 30 June this year, all publicly listed companies will have to include a statement in their annual reports indicating that they comply with the Cadbury code of best practice (see p 94), or giving reasons for areas of non-compliance.
Failure to do so will result in public censure by The Stock Exchange.
The code, which deals with the structure and regulation of boards, the role of non-executive directors, and reporting and controls, is the central recommendation in the finalised Cadbury Report, published last month.
It is seen as fundamentally important to ensuring good corporate governance.
‘The planks on which the code is based,’ Sir Adrian Cadbury said, ‘are the need for disclosure and for checks and balances.
‘Disclosure ensures that all those with a legitimate interest in a company have the information which they need in order to exercise their rights and responsibilities towards it.
In addition, openness by companies is the basis of public confidence in our corporate system.
‘Checks and balances guard against undue concentrations of power and make certain that all the interests which boards have a duty to consider are properly taken into account.’
The Committee has shied away from recommending any sanction more drastic than public censure, such as delisting, for failure to include the statement of compliance, and it is to rely on shareholders to use their influence to ensure compliance with the elements of the code.
‘Compliance statements present shareholders with a ready-made agenda for their representations to boards,’ Sir Adrian said.
‘We are, in effect, relying on market forces to turn our recommendations into action.’
Legislation, he said, would not solve the problem of compliance with the code because it would be all too easy to meet the letter rather than the spirit of the law.
But he did not dismiss the idea and added that a new committee would be set up in June 1995 to examine how far compliance with the code and the report's other recommendations had progressed.
Sir Adrian Cadbury: Market forces will ensure compliance
FRC
Dearing predicts rough ride ahead
Sir Ron Dearing, chairman of the Financial Reporting Council, has predicted that 1993 will be ‘a crunch year’ for his new financial reporting regime and the Accounting Standards Board in particular.
Writing in the FRC's second annual review, Sir Ron warns that ‘the next year will be a controversial one for the ASB and one in which the Board will need strong support’.
He adds that he would be surprised if industry, already hit by the recession, ‘was not anxious about the prospect of accounting changes, the general effect of which will reduce the opportunities for carrying costs below the line’.
By the end of 1993, according to the review, the ASB will have issued the final two draft chapters of its Statement of Principles — including probably the most controversial chapter, on valuation.
ASB chairman David Tweedie says in the review that the chapter will raise the question of ‘whether or not financial reporting should move gradually towards a system of valuing assets on a more regular and consistent basis or should revert to a system of pure historical cost’.
A standard on asset valuation has not been ruled out.
This year the ASB will tackle what is probably the most contentious issue in financial reporting — goodwill.
Theories developed for the ASB by a team headed by the Institute's director of research, Professor John Arnold (see ACCOUNTANCY , June 1992, p 35), are already being tested and the ASB is hoping to issue a discussion or exposure draft within six months.
Discussion or exposure drafts are also planned on mergers and acquisitions, acquisition accounting (an effect of which could be to reduce the amount of goodwill shown in acquisitions) and related party transactions.
Elsewhere in the review, Sir Ron applauds the continuing success of the Review Panel and highlights an ongoing problem for the Urgent Issues Task Force.
‘We have been disappointed,’ says the review, ‘that issues have not been coming forward for a ruling before positions have been taken.
It was principally for that purpose the Task Force was conceived.’
The overall impression left by the review is a plea for continued support.
Quoting Machiavelli's prediction on what could happen to anyone committed to bringing in change, Sir Ron warns that ‘whenever those who are hostile have the opportunity to attack, they do it like partisans, while the others defend lukewarmly, in such wise that the innovator is endangered along with them’.
ETHICS
Clamp-down on specialist valuations
Auditors will no longer be allowed to audit specialist valuations — such as actuarial valuations and valuations of brands, intellectual property and other intangible assets — that have been prepared by their own or an associated practice in the UK or abroad.
The new rule, which comes into operation on 1 February, does not apply to valuations of shares prepared under s 108, Companies Act 1985, before the allotment of a public company's shares otherwise than for cash.
The move to clamp down on specialist valuations is another step in the campaign by the Chartered Accountants Joint Ethics Committee to ensure that auditors are seen to be independent.
As the guidance points out, ‘there are occasions where objectivity may be threatened or appear to be threatened by the provision to an audit client of services other than the audit’.
The change has strong support from the Department of Trade and Industry, the Bank of England, the CBI and the 100 Group.
However, following consultations, CAJEC decided to leave valuations relating to pension matters out of the guidance for the time being, until the outcomes of the Goode report and pending EC legislation are known.
A working party of actuaries and accountants, under the chairmanship of Sir Robert Smith, will develop appropriate guidance.
CAJEC has also finalised its revised guidance on opinion shopping.
This requires firms that are approached for a second opinion to contact the auditor to see if there are any relevant facts that they ought to know.
If the client refuses to let them communicate with the auditors, then they should turn the job down.
The guidance, which does not apply to generic opinions relating to litigation, expert testimony and assistance provided to other firms and their clients jointly, also comes into operation on 1 February.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Davis calls for new panel
Roger Davis, head of audit at Coopers & Lybrand, has called for a corporate governance panel — similar to the City's Takeover Panel — to be set up to ensure that the voluntary system of corporate governance, recommended in the Cadbury report, is effective.
Without it, he warns, the Cadbury proposals will be ignored by those companies that most need attention, and the business community will end up with a vast, expensive, bureaucratic institution like the US Securities and Exchange Commission imposed on it by government (see also this issue, p 58).
‘My great fear,’ he told the Society of Conservative Accountants last month, ‘is that we will be back in just the same position again in the next recession.
A new generation of entrepreneurs will have grown up.
A new generation of bankers who weren't around last time will be encouraging them to overreach themselves.
‘The statement of compliance with the Cadbury Code will be reduced to the sort of anodyne stuff you sadly read about the employment of disabled people in directors’ reports.
At least that is one scenario and I hope I am wrong.
But I have no confidence that I am.’
The voluntary approach, he said, could work if the City, and in particular institutional shareholders and lenders, had a mechanism to focus their role in encouraging better governance.
The panel that he envisaged would be made up of their representatives and would provide them with a forum to air concerns.
It would develop the Cadbury code in a non-legalistic way, review audit qualifications of public interest companies, and question the auditors and other parties involved in the governance process.
His idea was dismissed as unworkable by Sir Adrian Cadbury.
‘I feel that it could be boxed in by bureacracy and not make much contribution to a company's performance.’
New year, new start.
Former BDO Binder Hamlyn national managing partner Chris Swinson has finally decided to settle down after six months acting as a freelance trouble shooter and litigation expert.
He joins Stoy Hayward this month as an equity partner in the forensic accounting and litigation support department, where he will specialise in professional negligence work.
‘It's a good move,’ he told ACCOUNTANCY.
‘Stoys are a good, strong, independent firm.’
He said that he had enjoyed working on his own behalf, but felt that staying out of the profession would not be sensible in the long run.
He will continue to study for his external law degree at the University of London, but does not intend to train as a barrister — an idea that he toyed with for a while.
Nor will he be standing for election as Institute vice president this year.
‘Too much has happened in the last year,’ he said, ‘and too much change around a candidate is not wise.’
Meanwhile, the fallout from his hasty departure from BDO Binder Hamlyn continues with the news that he has issued a writ against the firm in connection with a compensation claim.
Current senior partner John Norton described it as ‘a totally unwarranted action’, and added that any proceedings would be vigorously defended.
OPENNESS
Opening up disciplinary hearings to move slowly
The Institute has taken a further tentative step towards opening up its disciplinary hearings to the public, with a recommendation that the Professional Conduct Department should first experiment with fuller reporting of disciplinary cases.
In a detailed paper on the issues involved in opening up disciplinary hearings, the PCD asked at the December Council meeting for guidance before moving forward.
The PCD saw three options for the Institute: to keep arrangements as they now stand, with private hearings followed by limited reports; to make open hearings the rule, but granting the tribunal discretion to close all or part of the hearings in specific circumstances; or to allow open hearings on the request of the accused or in matters of public concern.
In its report, the PCD pointed out that ‘there is no single route to openness’ and suggested alternatives to full public meetings.
Its preferred approach was more informative reporting of disciplinary and appeal committee hearings — until now it has only released details of the charges the accused has been found guilty of, and the final ruling.
There is little doubt within Council that more openness in disciplinary matters is both desirable and necessary.
As former president Mike Lickiss said, ‘the mood of the 1990s is not the mood of the times our rules were written’.
There is, however, concern over a number of points, particularly that sensationalised reporting of cases would damage the Institute and its members.
Brian Currie's proposed amendment, that the PCD move in stages towards openness beginning with more comprehensive reporting — and taking further steps when the Institute has experience of how the reporting works in practice, received strong support.
‘That first step may well achieve our objectives,’ he said.
The amendment was eventually passed by 11 votes.
Opening up hearings to the public would require a byelaw change, but the PCD has already implemented the move to more informative reporting.
‘I have no doubt that this will work,’ Brian Harris, director of professional conduct, told ACCOUNTANCY .
‘The question is whether it will satisfy all the requirements of openness.’
The Disciplinary Committee lost no time in expanding its reports of hearings, issuing for the first time details of the chairman's comments in the case of Michael Jordan, senior partner of Cork Gully, and Richard Stone, head of corporate finance at Coopers & Lybrand, who were found guilty last year of accepting the appointment of administrator to Polly Peck in spite of a continuing professional interest between PPI and C&L.
The pair were fined the maximum £1,000 and ordered to pay £1,000 costs.
Neville Sims, chairman of the committee that heard the case, said in the statement (see p 99) that while the case was not easy to decide, ‘in our opinion the relationship between the individuals in Coopers, Asil Nadir and PPI constituted a clear continuing professional relationship, and had you made proper inquiries before accepting the appointment, that this would have been clear to you’.
Mr Sims added that ‘there has been no satisfactory explanation for the information put before court [in Coopers’ petition to act as administrator]being so inadequate'.
TAXATION
Lords give landmark ruling
Employees who benefit from inhouse perks, such as concessionary travel facilities or free sports or entertainment tickets, will only have to pay tax on the marginal cost of concessions, rather than on the average cost charged to the public, following the House of Lords' ruling in Pepper v Hart (see also this issue, pp 22 and 85).
By ruling in favour of the appellant, a schoolmaster at Malvern College, whose two sons were educated there at a concessionary rate, the Lords have avoided what has been described as an ‘administrative nightmare’.
Had the Inland Revenue won, it would have affected so many employees — tax practitioners claim hundreds of thousands — that the Revenue would have had to set up a special unit just to cope with the paperwork.
Each case would have had to be worked out individually and the cost, in time and resources, to employers, employees and to the Revenue itself would have far outweighed the amount of tax recouped.
Pepper v Hart centred on the amount of tax that classics master John Hart and a number of his colleagues should pay on their sons' subsidised places at the school.
The Revenue claimed that tax should be assessed on the full cost of the places, while Mr Hart argued that it should be assessed on the extra costs, such as meals and laundry, the school incurred as a result of having an additional pupil.
The lower fees he paid, he said, were more than enough to cover these extra costs.
The High Court and the Court of Appeal both ruled in the Revenue's favour; the House of Lords decided, however, that, where the law is obscure, ambiguous or could lead to an absurd result, and a clear statement about the intention of the law was made by a minister or promoter of a Bill,Hansard could be consulted.
When the relevant Finance Act was being discussed in 1976, the then Financial Secretary to the Treasury, Robert Sheldon, referred to teachers' children educated at fee-paying schools and said that the benefit would be ‘assessed on the cost to the employer, which would be very small indeed’.
In other words, the Lords said, Parliament intended that teachers should be taxed only on the marginal cost.
The Lords ruling was hailed as a landmark by tax practitioners around the country.
Touche Ross tax partner Maurice Parry-Wingfield spoke for many others when he called it a ‘victory for common sense’ and urged the Revenue to leave well alone and resist any temptation to change the law.
GUINNESS
Lord Spens acquitted
Lord Spens FCA , the former managing director of corporate finance at Henry Ansbacher, has been acquitted of all charges arising from his involvement in the Guinness takeover of Distillers in 1986.
The ruling came nine months after the Serious Fraud Office abandoned the prosecution against Lord Spens and his co-defendant Roger Seelig.
Speaking after the hearing, Lord Spens said that he had been ‘staggered at the degree of malevolence shown to all Guinness defendants by the prosecuting and other authorities, with the exception of the police’.
PRICE WATERHOUSE
$338m damages award struck out
The $338m damages an Arizona jury awarded to Standard Chartered against Price Waterhouse in the US has been struck out, and a retrial ordered by the same judge who presided over the original trial.
The record damages were awarded against PW over its 1985 and 1986 audits of United Bancorp, an Arizona bank which SC acquired for $335m in 1987.
Shortly after the acquisition, various dubious loans came to light and, after incurring heavy losses, Standard sold United for £207m.
After the award, PW requested that the judge review the verdict on several grounds, including misdirection of the jury.
According to PW, the jury were so confused by the end of the 11-month trial that they awarded the damages to United, rather than to SC.
Judge Sticht decided to grant the firm a retrial because, he found, the jury's verdict was so ‘irreconcilably inconsistent’ as to be ‘blatantly erroneous’.
PW senior partner Shaun O'Malley welcomed the news and said that the affair underlined the critical need for tort reform in the US.
It is ‘a system that is clearly out of control, that threatens to destroy firms and that, if left unchecked, will seriously impair the competitiveness of US industry in the global marketplace’.
TOPP
Report raises doubts over current approach
High costs, unsuitable study patterns and the need for substantial senior management involvement in administration are discouraging companies from signing up for TOPP — the Institute's two-year old training outside public practice scheme according to a recent internal report.
And although the scheme has achieved its initial objectives it presently has 85 students at 11 organisations with the majority at the National Audit Office the Institute ‘may need to re-examine its general approach to industrial and commercial organisations’, if it hopes to extend the range of its training opportunities.
A survey of 17 major organisations that had shown interest in joining TOPP, but had later decided not to go ahead, found that although many were still enthusiastic and hoped to set up a scheme at some time in the future, several of them saw cost as a major deterrent.
Companies that had previously been prepared to pay the Institute's tuition fees, which are higher than for other professional qualifications, now queried it.
Under the Institute's standards, for example, training organisations are expected to pay for the students' first examination attempt.
Others questioned the ‘extra commitment and expense’ involved when setting up, administering and supervising a TOPP scheme.
At present, the Institute's application procedures and strict supervision requirements mean that senior management has to offer a substantial amount of time and commitment.
In terms of study leave, some organisations were not convinced that the Institute's minimum requirement of 20 weeks was necessary.
Indeed, ‘when students training for other accountancy qualifications do not require the same study provisions,[it creates]an unwelcome two-tier system of trainees’, the report says.
In addition, the present pattern of block-release that is ‘ill-suited’ to the needs of many organisations, causes ‘considerable disruption’.
This makes it difficult to place students in ‘responsible line management roles which make up a valuable part of their training as chartered accountants in business’.
A number of organisations said that they would ‘prefer a more flexible system’ of training as opposed to the ‘detailed requirements’of the Institute's training office authorisation system.
This would allow them to ‘demonstrate the high standards of training which they could achieve within the framework of their own individual organisations’.
Also, taking into account a 100 Group survey and a brief note on the view of organisations already authorised to train, the report concludes that although the ‘TOPP schemes established so far are providing excellent training opportunities for those students who are committed to a career in a non-practising environment’, the Institute may need to review its approach if it wants to increase the range of its training opportunities.
SECURITIES INDUSTRY
Auditors urged to inform
Auditors are being encouraged to inform the Securities and Futures Authority of any serious irregularities they come across while auditing SFA member firms, under a new initiative developed following discussions with the Institute.
Although it is not compulsory for auditors to do so, the SFA believes that they will want to ‘provide feedback on audits that they have completed’.
Geoffrey Turner, the SFA's director of membership and regulatory services, told ACCOUNTANCY : ‘Lord Justice Bingham in his BCCI report recommended that a statutory compulsion be placed on auditors of banks to blow the whistle to the regulator.
‘Our solution to the similar situation in the securities industry is a practical self-regulatory cooperative one.
Both we and the Institute think it will be very effective.’
Under the new initiative, the SFA will regularly brief auditors on areas of concern, particularly those it wants the auditors to pay special attention to.
It will also explain new rules and how the SFA wishes auditors to monitor compliance with them, as well as existing rules where, in the SFA's experience, problems are most likely to arise.
The briefings will take place on an informal basis, however, and will not be specific to individual firms.
On occasions when the SFA feels that the auditors should be informed of specific concerns about a member firm, a tripartite meeting between the SFA, the member firm and its auditor will be arranged.
The secondment of accountancy employees to the SFA is also being encouraged.
OFR
Proposals worry 100 Group
The 100 Group of finance directors is concerned at the Accounting Standards Board's proposals for an Operating and Financial Review.
Speaking at a recent Financial Times conference on financial reporting in the UK, Nigel Stapleton of Reed International, chairman of the 100 Group's technical committee, disclosed that the ASB had received about 100 responses to its draft proposals issued last April.
Although the responses were generally supportive, ‘practically everybody expressed some reservations and about a third expressed serious reservations about particular features’.
The 100 Group's submission expresses concern that ‘the proposed requirements are very extensive…and are likely to prove onerous, not only in preparation, but in the degree of care and verification that will be necessary.
‘A rough estimate is that an OFR as proposed might require 10 or more printed pages of information…
This is likely to deter all but the most committed from full compliance.’
Mr Stapleton added that he thought ‘the ASB might be trying to run to the perfect OFR a little too quickly’.
The ASB now has a working party considering the responses.
Revised proposals, or a final statement, are expected by the summer.
Presentable quips.
Insolvency practitioners may have been the butt for the majority of jokes in this year's Christmas caption competition — they accounted for 20% of the record number of entries — but David Murphy, an Irish Institute industry student based at The Queen's University of Belfast, has become this year's triumphant winner without mentioning any of them.
Mr Murphy's caption —‘And you said JMU inspectors were above reproach’— wins him a magnum of champagne and the original Tony Holland cartoon.
Runners up were Manchester Metropolitan University's stalwart entrant Roy Lee-Faulkner with one of his 18 entries: ‘Now he's made everyone else redundant he wins all the rounds of pass the parcel’; and David Jones, finance director of FCO Ltd with: ‘Now I know that the recession's hit the profession.
A year, ago he would have had a junior to carry that lot.’
SAVINGS & LOAN
Ernst & Young's $400m bargain
Ernst & Young in the US has paid $400m in settlement of its outstanding savings & loan-related disputes with the government.
And in spite of the size of the amount, most firms agree that the settlement is a bargain for E&Y.
E&Y or its predecessors audited around 400 of the 2,500 savings & loan institutions that collapsed over the past decade, costing the US taxpayer billions of dollars.
The bodies given the task of recovering some of the lost money, most notably the Resolution Trust Corporation and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, made it clear more than a year ago that the thrifts' auditors and advisers would be first in the firing line leading many accountants to accuse the government of targeting them as ‘deep pockets’.
The US Big Six firms estimate that around 9% of their yearly revenue goes towards litigation-related costs, and a sizeable part of that amount is attributable to savings & loan cases.
Few of the top firms have been left untainted by the thrift industry's collapse, and huge rulings against firms are becoming increasingly common.
In the case of one S&L alone, the Lincoln Savings & Loan, three firms, Deloitte & Touche, E&Y and Arthur Andersen, all settled a civil action out of court for $7.5m, $63m and $30m respectively.
They all denied any responsibility and claimed that litigation costs forced an early settlement.
The RTC still has multimillion dollar suits outstanding against many firms, including a $400m claim against AA filed in August last year (see ACCOUNTANCY , September, p 16).
E&Y has had more than its fair share of clashes with the RTC and FDIC.
It paid the RTC $41m last year over its work on the Lincoln S&L and faced a $560m claim over Arthur Young's work on the Western Savings Association of Texas.
Four claims filed against the firm in Tennessee amounted to $255m.
The $400m settlement, which will be split between the RTC and the FDIC, took eight months to negotiate and resolves all outstanding claims relating to thrifts that failed before 25 September 1992.
E&Y's chairman, Ray Groves, called it ‘the only realistic solution to an endless stream of lawsuits that would have been even more expensive to defend’.
$300m will be paid by the firm's various insurers and the remainder by its 2,000 partners, most probably over the next few years.
‘E&Y's financial future remains sound,’ added Mr Groves.
As one of the conditions of the settlement, three E&Y partners will be barred from auditing similar institutions in the future, and several more will be forced to take extra training.
The US profession has come out in support of E&Y and many firms recognise that, with the number of outstanding suits, the amounts involved and the rising cost of litigation, the settlement is a bargain.
The settlement does not, however, protect E&Y from civil suits filed by former investors in S&Ls — the $63m it paid in connection with Lincoln arose from a civil suit.
The jury in that instance ordered the remaining defendants to pay $2.1bn in damages.
FEE INCOME
Slow growth for firms
KPMG Peat Marwick, the second largest firm in the country, has reported virtually static fee income growth for the year.
KPMG's fee income to 30 September 1992 rose just 1%, from £484m to £488.8m, which compares with a 12.3% growth rate over the previous year.
Fees from corporate recovery, unsurprisingly, showed the largest jump, from £44.5m to £55.5m, while fees from audit and accounting and management consultancy both fell slightly.
The number of partners fell by three during the year and the number of professional staff by 789.
Worldwide, KPMG increased its fee income by 2.3% to $6.154bn.
While Price Waterhouse's UK fee income for the year to 30 June 1992 was also unimpressive (up just 2% to £395m), turnover in the rest of Europe grew 14% to £442m.
Although the UK figures would have shown a fall in income without the rapid increase in corporate recovery work (up 31% to £40.1m), growth in the rest of Europe was stronger in the traditional areas of audit and business advisory services (up 12% to £274m) and tax consultancy (up 8% to £93m).
PW's overall European results (up 8% to £837m) still leave it the smallest of the Big Six in Europe.
Worldwide, the combined firm reported a 4.4% increase in income for the year to $3.8bn.
Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu also announced its results recently, reporting a 7% increase worldwide for the year to 30 September 1992 to $4.8bn, as did Coopers & Lybrand, which managed a 7.4% rise to $5.3bn.
US LITIGATION
Firm wins first audit countersuit
BDO Seidman has won what is believed to be the first successful countersuit by an auditor against a former client.
An out-of-court settlement for an undisclosed amount ended 14 years of litigation for BDO.
It began with a fraud at Cenco Inc, a Chicago-based medical products company, for which a number of officials were later convicted.
Cenco settled with its investors for $11m over the affair, and then issued a writ against its auditor, Seidman & Seidman.
Cenco blamed Seidman, which had already settled with Cenco investors for $3.5m, for failing to detect the fraud.
Seidman in turn sued Cenco, claiming the company fraudulently induced it to give clean audits.
Cenco was later bought by Manor Health Care, which settled with BDO Seidman last month.
Coopers & Lybrand is the only other large firm known to have filed a countersuit against a former client — the firm is still involved in an acrimonious fight with Phar-Mor (see ACCOUNTANCY , October 1992, p 11) that has seen writs flying in all directions.
Andrew Sansom.
The Association is still reeling from the news of the unexpected death of its chief executive and secretary Andrew Sansom at the end of November.
Mr Sansom was 55 and had worked with the ACCA for 18 years, the last four as secretary.
‘We are deeply shocked by Andrew's death,’ ACCA president David Bishop said.
‘He was more than a colleague; he was also a wonderful friend.’
Deputy secretary Anthea Rose has stepped in as acting chief executive while a replacement is found.
Mr Bishop said that the ACCA was in the process of looking at the job's terms of reference within the context of the ACCA's future strategy and would be contacting headhunters shortly.
NO HATCHET MAN
Senior partner of a top 20 accountancy firm is as far as anyone can go in public practice.
So what possesses a man who has reached that pinnacle to swap a prestigious City office for a charity based in one of the more dubious London suburbs?
Gerry Burton's announcement in April last year that he would not be seeking re-election as Kidson Impey's national senior partner caused more than a few raised eyebrows.
So his decision a few months later to join the Women's Royal Voluntary Service as its first chief executive was probably enough to stupefy many of his peers.
The automatic reaction might be to assume a disagreement with Kidsons.
Absolutely not the case, says Mr Burton.
‘I had never, ever thought of leaving the profession until I was approached by a firm of headhunters in October 1991.
The job they had didn't interest me, but it set me thinking.
I was 53 then and senior partner of the 11th largest firm in the country.
Was it right for me to assume that I would remain senior partner until retirement?
I quickly came to the conclusion that it was not.’
So, after 37 years in the profession, essentially with the same firm, Mr Burton began to look elsewhere.
‘Between October and January I thought through what I wanted to do, and came to the conclusion that it had to be a change and it had to be something I was interested in, which really came down to working with people.
I told Kidsons that I didn't think it was right that I should seek re-election, which was coming up on 30 April, and left it at that.’
In July last year came the news that the WRVS was looking for its first chief executive.
‘My first reaction was ‘meals on wheels’,’ he laughs, ‘but then I found out what a big organisation it was and that what they did appealed to me.
‘The reaction from my clients and business contacts was tremendous — perhaps some of them wish they had done the same — and one senior partner from the Big Six wrote and told me that his mother had been a great friend of Lady Reading, the WRVS's founder, and that until he was 15 he thought all women dressed in green!’
The WRVS was founded during the Second World War and has around 150,000 volunteers (13% of whom are men) providing a variety of services in the community.
Most recently, its members were supporting the emergency services with food and drinks during the Windsor Castle fire.
An 18-month Home Office review of the service recommended the appointment of a chief executive to help increase business efficiency.
‘They were nervous of me to begin with,’ says Mr Burton.
‘They were afraid I was going to do a hatchet job, being from the City, but I haven't found an instance where I would want to get rid of anyone.’
To guard against the danger of becoming ‘insular’, he also plans to take up some non-executive directorships.
But, he says, the WRVS comes first and, two months into his appointment, he has visited every WRVS division in the country and seems to be enjoying himself immensely.
‘I'm definitely less stressed because I don't have to do the four things I was no good at — timesheets, billing, chasing debtors and doing my expenses!’
LITERARY MOVER
Changing career is something that most people think about at one time or another, but comparatively few actually take the plunge — let alone sign up as full-time mature students.
Three years ago, Kevin Kavanagh, a small practitioner from Denham in Buckinghamshire, decided to do exactly that.
He joined the profession after taking his A-levels and qualified with City firm Limbeers in 1978, moving on to Littlejohn Frazer as a group audit manager.
It was here that he met his future wife, Jan, and the pair eventually set up their own practice.
This successful arrangement was still in operation when they saw an article about mature students at Manchester College, Oxford in late 1988.
‘It just said: ‘Are you mature, are you over 25, have you studied recently and would you like to come to Oxford University?’,’
Kevin recalls.
He had studied literature with the Open University for three years, and already planned, albeit theoretically, to complete an honours degree and go on to do some postgraduate work.
After half an hour's discussion, Jan and he decided that he should ring up and see what was on offer.
‘It just seemed like a ridiculous idea but I thought it was a nice place to go and have a look around,’ he admits.
Instead, he found that the whole matter ‘snowballed’.
‘I went, sat the exams, got interviewed and got the place.
It was just too good an opportunity to miss.’
Satisfied that it was ‘more than possible’ for the Kavanaghs to survive, they moved to a house near Oxford and he began to study.
Since then they have had three children — Helen and Katie, aged two, and Molly (named after James Joyce's character Molly Bloom) aged one.
Kevin gained his English Language and Literature degree last June.
Looking back on the course, Kevin, now 39, denies that there were any particular problems in being older than the majority of his contemporaries.
‘As long as people were willing to argue about literature, I really didn't care what age they were,’ he says.
‘I didn't have any antagonism either from me or against me.’
However, as someone who identified with the student movements of the late 1960s, he was saddened to discover that present economic conditions meant ‘normal’ younger students were less willing, or able, to stand up for ‘issues’.
‘People are much more concerned with getting a job when they finish, which I understand,’ he says.
‘My feeling is that the younger students are caught in a double bind between a lack of jobs if they leave and a squeeze on higher education if they stay.
Basically, they're in an impossible position so radicalism is a waste of time — unless it's on a very large scale obviously…
Their chance to do anything but keep their head down and hope it all goes away, is hopeless.’
Today, Kevin is studying for a thesis-based part-time MA with Warwick University, since the British Academy, which funds some post-graduates, could not afford to cover his DPhil place at Oxford.
The topic — cultural materialist Raymond Williams — remains the same, and Kevin hopes that completing the MA will encourage the Academy to fund him later.
In the future, he hopes to pursue a career as a university lecturer, concentrating on subjects such as the rise of the novel and 20th century drama.
Theoretically he does not intend to go back into practice as an accountant, but, he concedes pragmatically, ‘at the end of the day, with a family, I might just have to be one, whether I like it or not’.
Gerry Burton: From timesheets to women in green Kavanagh: Novel decision
IN BRIEF Costly cheer
Here's a cheery thought for all those recovering from over-indulgence on Christmas fare and moaning about the cost.
You're probably far better off than your Danish equivalent.
A survey by Employment Conditions Abroad shows that a three-course meal for two celebrating the festive season with a glass of wine and coffee, in a medium-priced restaurant, would have cost the Danes £62.60 in hard earned krone.
That's £21.46 more than it would have cost you, if you had dined out in the UK.
And if they'd bought their true love a compact disc as a Christmas present, it would have cost them £16.73, compared with the UK's £12.78.
Even worse, if they'd fancied a bottle of Bell's whisky to toast in the New Year, it would have cost them £23.04, almost twice the UK price.
The canny ones, of course went to Greece.
There the meal cost £29.35, the disc £12.86 and the whisky £7.06.
Christmas harmony
The most entertaining Christmas card to land at ACCOUNTANCY 's office last month came from City firm Blackstone Franks.
Four sides of horribly familiar Eurospeak announced a new EC ‘Xmas Card Simplification and Harmonisation Directive’, establishing a Christmas Card Regional Unemployment Directorate under the supervision of Germany's Bundespost.
From 1997, it says, all Christmas cards will be harmonised, subject to a phasing-in period which allows member states to opt out of certain features.
So, for instance, you could either have your cards in German (or another language) and can have as an illustration reindeer (prancing, not prancing, or roasted), French sheep or Jacques Delors.
Prince needs help
The Prince's Youth Business Trust, which gives grants and loans to disadvantaged young people hoping to start their own businesses, is looking for volunteer business advisers prepared to give up a few hours a month to help the youngsters get their projects off the ground.
Anyone interested should write to Ted Salmon at the Trust, 5th Floor, 5 Cleveland Place, London SW1Y 6JJ.
Wilkin the Beacons
Raising £12,000 for charity in a recession demands imagination and determination, two characteristics that the Amersham practice of Wilkins Kennedy have in abundance.
Not content with a simple sponsored walk or 24-hour swim, 11 of the office's self-confessed couch potatoes intend to hike across the Brecon Beacons between 29 and 31 January.
As well as climbing a total of 4,000 feet — there are four peaks to scale — they will complete an evening rope walk, orienteer for their supper and abseil down a 90-foot (usually frozen) waterfall.
Support comes from a team of three experienced climbers and a paramedic.
The group — which intends to donate all proceeds to Cancer Research, the MacMillan Nurses and the Special Baby Care Unit — is looking for sponsors, and are more than willing to wear sweatshirts with logos on them.
Potential sponsors should call Denise Summers on 0494 725544.
Take a chance.
There is a particularly cold-blooded tycoon lurking in Coopers & Lybrand's head office — Ian Brummer, a ‘ruthless’ computer manager, cleaned up at the first City Monopoly Challenge, virtually bankrupting everyone else in sight.
The event, which raised over £30,000 for Children with Leukaemia, saw stars from Drop the Dead Donkey and The Bill fighting with City all-comers for hotels on Old Kent Road and often going directly to jail.
Ian led Coopers to second place in the team event, losing by £30 to Abbey National, before sweeping the board in the individual event.
‘I normally go for the Vine Street set,’ he divulges, ‘but I didn't manage to get that in the final.
It all came down to the last throw the lady who came second had three houses on Park Lane and Mayfair but I threw an 11 and sailed right past!’
Ian did not collect £200 for his efforts, but picked up a deluxe Franklin Mint Monopoly set.
Chinese changes
China's finance minister Liu Zhongli has announced that on 1 July 1993 China will adopt new rules relating to corporate financial affairs and new accounting standards.
These will allow Chinese enterprises independent decision-making powers for the first time and allow them to compete with each other in the marketplace.
‘This action is a measure of significant importance in building a socialist market economic system in China,’ Mr Liu said.
The move will bring China more into line with international practice.
Unorganised crime
Money made from theft is not taxable, an Ontario court has decided, unless the thief steals on a regular basis and therefore can be considered to be in ‘business’.
According to a report in the Financial Times of Canada , the court ruled that the man concerned was not in the business of being a thief and so the cash he had stolen was not ‘income’ for the purposes of the law.
‘The notion of ‘business’,’ it said, ‘implied repeated activity, and a degree of organisation which had as its aim the realisation of profit’.
Anti-parking drive
The Australian Institute has joined an increasingly aggressive campaign against President Keating's ‘ridiculous’ plans to tax employee parking spaces.
Under new fringe benefits proposals that could raise A$120m a year, the government intends to tax employer-provided spaces where there is a commercial car park within 1km.
The institute, along with other industry groups, argues that the proposals could force companies to move outside city centres, where there are fewer commercial car parks.
Ancient mariners
Any accountants with deep-rooted sea-dog tendencies might be interested to hear about the Accountants' Sailing Challenge, to be held in Poole Harbour on 28 May.
Teams of between three and five people, one of whom must be a competent helm, will race vintage 1938 ‘Redwing’ sailing boats in a day-long regatta.
Ten firms will take part, and Price Waterhouse, KPMG and Ernst & Young are among the accountants to have shown an interest.
The entry fee is £500+VAT.
More details from Joshua Ritchie on 0202 672641.
Champagne Charlotte
Champagne makers Veuve Clicquot are again asking for nominations for business-woman of the year — previous winners of the award include Prue Leith and Anita Roddick.
Last year's winner was Phyllis Cunningham, chief executive of the Royal Marsden Hospital.
The winner will receive a bottle of champagne on her birthday every year and will have a vine named after her in the Veuve Clicquot vineyard.
Nominations, which should be backed up with as much information as possible, should be sent to the Veuve Clicquot Award, Freepost, London E1 9BR by 31 January.
The winner's nominator wins a dozen magnums of champagne.
Preferred perk
A non-contributory pension is the benefit most prospective employees look for when considering a job offer, according to a KPMG survey.
Although 70% of the 135 individuals questioned said they would prefer an equivalent salary increase to most benefits, given a choice of perks, the non-contributory pension narrowly defeated a company car as favourite.
The benefits considered least important were the amount of holiday and an expense account.
UK business news
18 NOVEMBER — 15 DECEMBER 1992
Jobs.
British Petroleum is to cut 9,000 jobs worldwide by 1995, in addition to 11,500 jobs already due to go by next year.
The Royal Bank of Scotland is making 3,500 redundancies over the next five years.
British Rail is to cut 5,000 jobs, Blue Circle 550, Barclays Bank 3,000, Royal Ordnance 1,300 and IBM UK 1,000.
Telecommunications.
First half profit before tax rose by 23% to £160m at Vodafone and by 8% to £378m at Cable and Wireless, whose figure was once again helped by strong results from Mercury which reported a 36% increase in trading profits to £94m.
TV.
Revenue from video cassettes pushed up Carlton Communications' profit before tax by 15% to £102.3m in the year to 30 September 1992.
Music.
EMI Music's strong profits helped first half profit before tax rise by 11% to £105.2m at Thorn EMI.
Electricity.
First half profit before tax rose by 10% to £201m at National Power, by 16% to £95m at Scottish Power, by 11% to £37.1m at Norweb, by 66.4% to £40.6m at Scottish Hydro-Electric, by 69% to £26.1m at Eastern Electricity, by 43% to £29.7m at South Wales Electricity, by 23% to £30.3m at East Midlands Electricity, by 35% to £37.1m at Manweb and by 24% to £33.4m at Midlands Electricity.
Sugar.
Poor weather in the US contributed to the first fall in profit before tax at Tate & Lyle for 14 years.
The figure for the year to 30 September 1992 was £189.5m (v £230.8m).
Beer.
The Government cleared the proposed merger of Allied-Lyons' and Carlsberg's UK brewing and wholesaling businesses.
The joint operation, Carlsberg-Tetley, will have an 18% share of the beer market.
Profit before tax at Bass rose by 16.5% to £501m in the year to 30 September 1992.
Catering.
Forte sold Gardner Merchant to a consortium led by CinVen for £342m but will still keep a 24.8% share in the business.
Food.
Interim profit before tax rose by 24% to £68.4m at Northern Foods.
Glass.
Pilkington reported a first half profit before tax of £15.1m (v £50.6m).
Cars.
November new car sales rose by 6.3% to 106,902 and new commercial vehicle sales rose by 15.3% to 15,920 compared with the same month in 1991.
Ford plans to increase car prices by between 4 1/2 % and 10%, blaming the increase on sterling's devaluation and cost increases.
Airlines.
Although first half profit before tax rose by 22.7% to £227m at British Airways, second quarter profits fell from £176m to £136m.
BA chairman Lord King said that the prospects for the rest of the financial year were still uncertain.
Business services.
First half profit before tax at BET fell by 43% to £40.5m.
Gas.
British Gas reported a 9.5% increase in third quarter losses before tax to £282m.
Profits over the nine-month period fell by 34% to £633m.
Construction.
Trafalgar House reported a loss before tax of £30.3m in the year to 30 September 1992.
Last year's profit before tax of £122.4m was recently restated as a loss of £38.5m when its property write-downs were taken through the p&l account instead of reserves.
Property.
London & Metropolitan further reduced its losses before tax in the first half of this year from £14.96m to £4.44m.
Rosehaugh went into receivership with bank debts of about £350m.
In the year to 30 September 1992, profit before tax at MEPC fell by 23.5% to £109.6m.
Mortgages.
Losses before tax rose from £47.9m to £146.4m in the year to 30 September 1992 at National Home Loans.
Materials.
First half profit before tax rose by 14.6% to £27.5m at BPB Industries; eps fell from 3.9p to 3.7p.
Courtaulds announced a 9% fall in interim profit before tax to £88.8m.
Banks.
In the year to 30 September 1992, bad debt charges of £401m forced the Royal Bank of Scotland's profit before tax down to £20.9m (v £57.7m).
In the same period, profit before tax fell by 40% to £64.6m at Yorkshire Bank and by 9% to £59m at Clydesdale Bank.
Rodney Galpin is retiring from his position as chairman and chief executive of Standard Chartered; he will be replaced by Patrick Gillam, currently deputy chairman.
Insurance.
In the nine months to 30 September 1992, profit before tax at Willis Corroon fell by 31.6% to £60.9m, and Commercial Union returned to a profit before tax of £6.1m (v £42.4m loss).
RHM.
Ranks Hovis McDougall's board recommended the £935m takeover offer from Tomkins after announcing a 38% decrease in profit before tax to £92.6m for the year to 5 September 1992.
Tomkins has now secured its bid.
Conglomerates.
Tiny Rowland, Lonrho's chief executive, has said he will sell half of his 15% stake in Lonrho to Dieter Bock, a German financier; the deal will cost £50m.
Mr Bock will have the option to buy the other half after three years when Mr Rowland is expected to retire.
Computers.
Alan Sugar, chairman of Amstrad, lost his battle to take the company private again.
A total of 58.7% of shareholders voted against Mr Sugar's proposal to buy back the shares.
Distribution.
Christian Salvesen reported a 12% increase in interim profit before tax to £40.4m 
Retail.
Argyll Group reported a first half profit before tax of £205m (v £178m).
In the year to 29 August 1992, profit before tax at Kwik Save rose by 9% to £110.6m.
Gerald Ratner resigned as head of Ratner's UK jewellery business.
He said that, because of the negative press coverage he had attracted, his departure would be in ‘the best interests of the group and the people working in it’.
analysis
PEPPER V HART
Welcome to the 20th century
The profession has hailed the recent ruling in favour of the taxpayer by the House of Lords in Pepper v Hart as a landmark decision and a victory for commonsense.
This is not so much because John Hart, the Malvern College schoolmaster, and his nine colleagues would have otherwise found themselves paying a hefty tax bill on the concessionary school places given to their sons eight years ago; nor is it so much because of the thousands of other employees who would also have faced tax bills for other concessionary benefits.
What Pepper v Hart does is bring to an end an anomaly most lay people would not have believed existed: that the courts, when trying to interpret the meaning of statutory provisions, have not been allowed to take into consideration Parliamentary debates and the legislators' intentions during the passing of a Bill.
In John Hart's case, his appeal to the House of Lords against the decisions of the High Court and the Court of Appeal would have been dismissed by four to one, had proceedings as related in Hansard not been allowed as evidence.
In fact, the Lords agreed to consider whether reference to Hansard could be made and held a second hearing on that point.
As Lord Bridge of Harwich said: ‘I was one of those who were in the majority at the conclusion of the first hearing of this appeal in holding that s 63 of the Finance Act 1976, construed by conventional criteria, supported the assessments to income tax made by the Revenue on the appellants…
If it were not permissible to take account of the Parliamentary history of the relevant legislation and of ministerial statements of its intended effect, I should remain of that opinion.’
In fact, the judges have only their predecessors to blame for the prohibition or exclusionary rule: they made it up.
It started out as a means of protecting Parliamentary privilege and was probably first stated as a principle back in the 18th century by Willes J in Millar v Taylor .
Since that time, it has become steadily more unbreakable, to the point where the courts were not even allowed to consider reports, written by Commissioners, on which legislation was based.
The rule has been slightly relaxed over the last few years, although only in relation to secondary legislation; it has also been breached from time to time by a number of judges, not least by judicial free spirit, the former Master of the Rolls, Lord Denning.
Not surprisingly, it was this rule on which the Revenue rested its argument that the taxpayer should be taxed on the full amount of the benefit, even though it was aware that at the time the 1976 Finance Bill was being debated, the then Financial Secretary to the Treasury, Robert Sheldon, expressly stated that the benefit of a school place given at concessionary rates to the child of a teacher at that school would be ‘assessed on the cost to the employer, which would be very small indeed in this case’.
As Mr Hart himself asked in a letter to The Times : ‘In the face of so pellucid a Parliamentary intention, how was it that the Revenue not only thought it worth while to try it on, but actually found two courts to agree with it?’
He has every right to ask and, thanks to a victory of common sense, the Law Lords saw fit to admit his Hansard evidence.
My Lords, welcome to the 20th century.
COUNCIL
Unexpectedly open
Council's papers, though not its proceedings, seem to be proving more open than the Institute ever intended when it introduced its sunshine policy last summer.
Two of the supposedly confidential papers before the December meeting of Council quickly found their way into the press.
The first was a confidential report on the progress of TOPP (see p 14), which appeared in the following week's Accountancy Age .
Then, the day after that leak, the Financial Times ran a story headed ‘Accountancy firms fall short of standards’, based on a confidential report to the DTI on the first year of audit regulation (p 9).
The report to the DTI was due to be published shortly anyway, so, on the face of it, its premature appearance may not seem too important.
But government departments do not like premature appearances of confidential documents addressed to them.
They could embarrass ministers, which is a kind of sin against the Holy Ghost.
The DTI, therefore, will not have been overjoyed.
Leaks also prejudice proper coverage in the press.
Papers and journals not privileged to receive the leak feel less inclined to give room to a story that has already appeared somewhere else.
Often, of course, the story is so important that they have to cover it, but it goes against the grain to be sweeping up behind another paper's scoops.
Every organisation leaks, and the recent leaks of Council papers may not be repeated.
But if they become a normal event, all papers prepared for Council will have to be written with a much wider audience in mind.
AUDITING
Who is the client?
The Auditing Practices Board wants auditors to stop calling the companies they work for ‘clients’.
In its paper,The Future Development of Auditing (see p 88), the APB says that ‘auditors are appointed by the shareholders, not the directors.
The colloquial use of the word ‘client’ by auditors when referring to the company conveys the wrong relationship…‘
This is an odd remark, because, when auditors refer to the company as ‘the client’ they are not just using a loose colloquialism, they are being legally precise; the company is the client.
The Institute's Members Handbook says so in statement 1.306: ‘The auditor's client is the company.’
ACCOUNTANCY checked with three lawyers.
David Mace of Lovell White Durrant said that the company is a client, but he also thought that ‘the shareholders as a sort of amorphous body are certainly clients…
But they're a very peculiar sort of client.’
David Arthur of Barlow, Lyde & Gilbert also said that the company is the client.
‘It is the company with which [the auditors]contract.’
But he added that the auditors ‘owe duties to the shareholders as a corporate body, which isn't the same as having the shareholders as clients, but it's not that far removed’.
Stephen Tester of Cameron Markby Hewitt also agreed that the company is the client.
He added: ‘At the moment, there is severe doubt about the extent to which auditors owe any responsibility to shareholders at all.’
If these opinions leave any room for doubt, there is always Lord Justice Bingham in the Court of Appeal in the Caparo case: ‘The auditor…naturally, and rightly, regards the company as his client.’
The colloquialism, in fact, is to say that the auditor is appointed by the shareholders.
Ss 384 and 385 of the 1985 Companies Act say that the auditor is appointed and his remuneration fixed by ‘the company in general meeting’.
Bingham: The company is the client
brought to account
BILL MORRISON, CHAIRMAN OF THE AUDITING PRACTICES BOARD
Where the old badger is coming from Bill Morrison's motto in life is ‘never volunteer, never refuse’, a policy which has landed him in some of the hottest seats in the profession, as he tells Julia Irvine
Imagine, if you will, the cricket ground at Hamilton Crescent, Glasgow, on a dreary grey day.
The fine drizzle that has been falling all afternoon has not been enough to stop the match between Scotland and Ireland, but enough to keep the crowds away.
The benches are empty except for a solitary figure sitting huddled in a mackintosh, watching with fierce concentration.
It's a sight that Archie Hunter, senior partner of KPMG Peat Marwick's Scottish practice, will never forget.
For the solitary figure, whose commitment to the game he loves kept him glued to his seat, oblivious to the elements, was Bill Morrison, currently Peat's deputy senior partner and chairman of the Auditing Practices Board.
And it's an example of the commitment which the man himself brings to everything he does in both professional and private life.
Mr Morrison is not a man who shirks from controversial issues.
He has, he says, a motto in life: never volunteer, never refuse.
And in his 36 years in the profession, this approach has landed him several of the hottest potatoes going: campaigning for the British Institute proposals from the Scottish side; merging his firm Thomson McLintock with Peats; introducing graduate intake only at the Scottish Institute; working on the Likierman report on professional liability; and, last but by no means least, heading up the then newly-formed APB at a time when, in the public view, auditing was becoming increasingly discredited.
‘I've had controversy all my life,’ he says.
‘Rough, tough, fighting all the way.
I've taken on all these issues because I believe in them and because someone has to do them.
But I don't worry about being a loser and I'll tell you why.
If you take on the big issues and the people won't follow, then at least you can say you have tried.’
Mr Morrison joined the profession, he says, because in 1956 ‘accountancy seemed to be a life-long opportunity’.
In fact, his phenomenal memory for facts and figures (he has been known to correct Scottish former international rugby players on the score at half time of matches they had played in), combined with a genuine interest in people, made him ideal for the part and, from the day he joined TMcL a year before qualifying, his career took off.
He says he's not a proud man but he'll pass you his watch, adding cryptically that ‘the front's for sale, the back isn't’, and you'll discover from the inscription that it was a gift from TMcL for gaining distinction in his final exams in 1961.
It was at TMcL that he first met his one and only ‘accountancy’ hero, James Dowling, the then senior partner —‘one of the finest men I have ever met and arguably the best accountant Scotland has ever seen’.
Mr Dowling took the young Morrison under his wing as a ‘kind of PA’, giving him the benefit of his own wide experience in all aspects of the profession —‘something that would just not be practical nowadays’.
In so doing, ‘he gave me experience, opportunity, leadership and clear sight about where I ought to go’.
He has never forgotten the lessons he learnt at that time.
His personal loyalty to clients, for example, became a byword in Scotland, as Sir James McKinnon, currently head of Ofgas and vice-president of the Scottish Institute when Mr Morrison was president, recalls.
‘Even when he was Institute president, he never let anything go.
Some people give up their work and float through the year, but Bill didn't.
His briefcase just got heavier and heavier!
He is totally dedicated to his clients.’
Former ICAS secretary Eric Tait agrees.
‘Not only was he doing all that, but at the same time he was taking his firm into the merger with Peats.
He has the most immense reserves of resilience and strength.’
The grounding Mr Morrison received at James Dowling's feet stood him in good stead.
In 1966, at the age of 28, he was made a partner in the Glasgow office, and in 1974 he became joint senior partner of both Glasgow and Edinburgh with John Kirkpatrick (later chairman of the International Accounting Standards Committee).
Six years later, in 1980, he moved south of the Border to take on the role of TMcL's UK managing partner and promptly landed himself in his first hot seat.
He says he accepted the job in five minutes and only thought about it afterwards.
It was a difficult move, he admits, not because he did not want to leave Scotland ‘if you're happy, it doesn't matter where you are, and if you're unhappy it doesn't matter where you are’— but because ‘a Scotsman coming to London to run the national firm isn't everybody's cup of tea’.
He refuses to elaborate except to add that ‘it was rough-housing all the way’.
Certainly some of the tension came from implementation of a restructuring programme.
In 1985 the firm changed from a federal structure of 12 individual practices into a single unit — a process that had taken more than three years to achieve.
As he later admitted in an interview with CA Magazine , ‘I said to someone at the time, I never again want to conduct a debate lasting three years without once being able to raise my voice’.
Within a year of the restructuring, he was again running with another controversial issue: merging the firm with Peats.
‘That was hard, hard work.
But I didn't have a single partner who said to me afterwards that in a corporate sense I'd done the wrong thing.
‘Our motivation was international.
We had Europe, they had North America and other parts, and it was a very sensible thing to do.
In fact, of all the mergers, it has worked out best of all.
And I'm proud of that.
You know why?
I'll tell you the crunch point of it all.
We were of unequal size: the larger one had to be fairer and the smaller one realistic.
And we had that.
And that's what made it work.’
Once the firms' merger was in place, Mr Morrison took up the thorny issue of rationalising the accountancy profession.
His experience as president of the Scottish Institute had led him to believe that the way forward lay in joining forces with the English and Welsh in a single British Institute of Chartered Accountants, and in 1989, he spearheaded the Scottish side of the campaign.
Although the attempt ended in failure, he is not bitter and has continued to devote time to Scottish Institute affairs — unlike some of his other campaign colleagues.
Sir James McKinnon says he has nothing but admiration for the way in which Mr Morrison bounced back.
‘When the proposals failed, I gave up on the profession and have not set foot in the Institute since, but it is characteristic of Bill's commitment that he has carried on regardless.’
‘His attitude towards Scotland runs very deep in his character,’ adds Mr Tait.
‘He's what I would regard as a sensible Scot someone who doesn't wear Scotland on every part of his clothing, but he's deeply interested in the Scottish Institute in terms of its members.
He's like a bulldog, he won't let go.’
Perhaps it was inevitable that when the Auditing Practices Board was set up in 1991 in the ashes of the old Auditing Practices Committee, Mr Morrison's name should spring to mind as its first chairman.
It would not be an easy sinecure and the job specification called for someone not only with wide experience in the profession and a clear understanding of the issues at stake, but also a cool head and tough hide in the face of the increasing political and public interest in auditing.
Mr Morrison says that he took on the job ‘because they said that it would be difficult but it had to be done and that's what appealed to me’.
In fact, he totally underestimated the difficulties he would have to face: in the 18 months since the APB was set up, the economic climate and spectacular corporate failures such as BCCI and Maxwell have left the public baying for auditors' blood, and, although there has been a honeymoon period — somewhat extended recently by publication of the McFarlane Report — the pressure under which the new body has had to work has been intense.
Mr Morrison admits that it has been a ‘very, very uphill struggle’.
‘It's all hard work, it's all sweaty.
Don't let me kid you, it's very, very hard grind and not many people would do it.
We've had stick and cane and praise all mixed up but you've got to ride through it.’
What has sustained him throughout, he says, has been the support of the top 20 firms and, crucially, the presence of non-practitioners — who make up half the membership — on the board.
‘The APB would never have made it if it had all been practitioners.
The non-practitioners have been absolutely tremendous.
John McFarlane, Donald Brydon, the Katherine Howards, the Iain Dobbies, they've made it for me.’
Having non-practising members who, in many instances, have no experience apart from being on the receiving end of audits, has brought a breath of fresh air and realism into board discussions.
They are more sympathetic to the public perception of the audit and tend to cut through its more arcane aspects.
‘I'll try and give you an example.
When I used to be involved in the old days, people used to say: ‘I'm from Coopers, I'm from Peats, and this is the way we do it'’.
Well, the non-practitioners have no interest where you're from, so nobody mentions it and the issues are much clearer.
And the non-practitioners say, look, wait a minute, this is what we ought to be doing.
It's terrific.
I've never seen anything like it in all my life.
If I'm proud of anything, I'm proud of being chairman of the APB.
It's a terrific team and to be chairman of that team is something very special.’
That element of realism has been evident in the papers issued by the APB over the last year, in particular those on expanding the auditors' report and going concern, but nowhere is it more clearly shown than in the recently published The Future Development of Auditing (see also this issue, pp 10 and 88).
The working party, which was headed by John McFarlane, managing director of Citibank UK, took the unusual step of sending out a questionnaire to 90 leading individuals from sectors with an interest in auditing — the business community, auditing firms, academics, regulators and major shareholders asking for their views on three key points: the concerns facing auditing today; the action required to resolve those concerns; and the future direction of auditing.
The replies (from 60 of those contacted) suggested, the paper says, that ‘there is concern among users that the present scope of the audit and the legal framework in which it is conducted militate against auditors successfully meeting the needs of shareholders and others with an interest in the audit process’.
‘The issues raised are so important and fundamental that an effective response is required by the auditing profession, rather than merely further efforts to justify the status quo.’
As a result, instead of sweeping the criticisms under the carpet, as has happened in the past, the document takes a more positive stance.
It dismisses the argument — previously relied on by the profession — that the public needs educating about the scope of the audit; instead, it embraces all the criticisms, whether justified or not, and asks the world what it wants the Board to do about them.
‘This is the first stage of a debate,’ Mr Morrison stresses, ‘it is not a conclusion.
We could work on a paper like this for ever and never conclude anything.
So we are anxious that as many people as possible enter the debate.
We consider the consultation to be critical.’
There is a caveat, however.
If auditors are to be asked to take on greater responsibilities, there has to be a quid pro quo.
‘What we have said in the McFarlane Report is that people are calling for the earth, we can't give it all but we can give them a substantial part.
In return, there are two things which are absolutely crucial.
The first is management's and shareholders’ participation, and the second is a change in the law of joint and several liability.’
This collateral change, in particular legislative reform, he says, is crucial to the success of the APB's efforts to meet users' needs.
Otherwise auditing as a career will become even more unattractive to prospective members than it is already.
He admits that even he would have second thoughts about joining the profession in its current state.
‘If you were sitting where I'm sitting, getting claims every day — and here I'm talking about the firms at large, not Bill Morrison personally, you understand — you wouldn't want to know, would you?’
The paper also shows what a shrewd operator Mr Morrison is when it comes to manipulating the publicity machine.
His policy, he says, is to outwit the snipers by biding his time: ‘Aye, that's where the old badger is coming from.
Individuals who are wise don't seek a high profile.
There's a machine gun out there waiting to get you.
Therefore you keep your profile low until the sniper runs out of bullets.
Then you act.’
So, there were no leaks or speculative articles about the paper's contents and publication was deliberately timed so that it arrived on news desks ahead of the finalised Cadbury Report.
If it had come out at the same time, it would have been submerged, and if it had come out afterwards it would have been seen as merely reactive.
‘I said to the people who were tinkering with the drafting ‘Stop: we're not trying to complete the circle.
We're putting something out for public debate and we've got to get it out now.’
It was a killer, but we had to do it first.
I was single-minded on that point.’
Second, it was written by a working party headed by John McFarlane, which meant that the non-practitioners were seen to be playing a prominent role in the APB's activities and encouraging widespread debate.
Their imprimatur also gave the elements which could be interpreted as letting the auditors off the hook, such as the question of lessening liability exposure, more credibility than would otherwise have happened had they been drafted by auditors.
Third, since the APB wants to ensure that the debate which it intends the paper to stimulate does not get confined to the Big Six and a few others, it is to go on a whistlestop tour of the country over the next three months, holding discussion meetings with interested parties.
‘It will be tough, it won't be particularly agreeable, but that won't worry me.
Nor will we win the war, but we will make progress.
What someone said to me the other night is that you've got 75% of it and that's good.
I consider that high praise.’
And the other 25%?
‘Well, they don't like the bit about taking a view of the future.
It's the star-gazing assumptions, critical risk, that's difficult: they think it's good but we won't get it.’
That other people think the job has been well done is far more important to him, he says, than the fact that it was done by him.
‘It never worries me what people think of me, personally.
I get hassled when they disagree with what I'm saying but not hassled in the sense of ‘you're an awful fellow’.
What I measure by is what I do and the measurement is by others, not by me.’
But underneath all the tough-talking, cryptic statements and pipe-lighting that allows him time to carefully think out his replies, there is another Bill Morrison, a schoolboy at heart, who is happiest sitting in the stands at Lord's or Twickenham swapping cricketing and rugby stories, who idolises sporting heroes like cricketers Denis Compton and Gary Sobers, four-minute miler Roger Bannister, and former rugby international Gerald Davies, and who is in a fever of excitement over the arrival of his new MG RV8, a ‘reincarnation of the old MGB’, only ‘more powerful, more comfortable (I hope) and certainly more costly’.
There are countless stories about his enthusiasm for trains, from his few moments on the footplate of the Flying Scotsman to David Tweedie's interview for a job at TMcL largely spent in discussing a mutual interest in the LNER.
There's also the soft side, the Bill Morrison who is reduced to tears by Harry Secombe —‘I'd love to be as good as him’ and the Bill Morrison who confesses in an unguarded moment that as an epitaph he'd like the description that appeared in a recent Times leader about him: ‘a man they can trust’.
‘To be honest, that jumps me up, Julia, it really jumps me up.’
I've had controversy all my life.
Rough, tough, fighting all the way.
I've taken on all these issues because I believe in them and someone has to do them.
But I don't worry about being a loser — if you take on the big issues and the people won't follow, then at least you can say you have tried
Individuals who are wise don't seek a high profile.
There's a machine gun out there waiting to get you.
So you keep your profile low until the sniper runs out of bullets.
Then you act.
growth in the recession
BOOM AMID THE GLOOM Even when times are bad, they're good for somebody
Nigel Cope
It's an ill recession that blows nobody any good.
The financial markets may be in retreat and the pound may be on a slippery slope, but it's not just the insolvency practitioners and bailiffs that are doing well; some companies in sectors as diverse as retailing, restaurants and medical equipment are also doing more than just make ends meet.
Many of these are young companies.
Debt-free and so not hampered by high interest rates, they are nimble enough and liquid enough to take advantage of the recession.
They can get good deals in the property market — on shop rents or factory space, buy companies at knock-down prices or from the receiver.
Or they can pick up cut-price plant and equipment, or computer systems.
It is a buyers' market.
This is not new of course.
In the last recession some companies — now very well known — used the slump either to start on the acquisition trail, like Williams Holdings and Hillsdown Holdings, or to grow from big to huge, like Hanson and BTR.
Williams Holdings is perhaps the classic example of the vulture purchaser.
Legend has it that Nigel Rudd was watching Magic Roundabout with his four year old son when he finally decided that the recession was too good an opportunity to miss.
The year was 1981.
He brought in colleague Brian McGowan as his partner and went looking for an acquisition vehicle.
The pair alighted on W Williams, a quoted foundry business that was on its last legs and, with City backing, went shopping.
They started off with two BMW dealerships, then in 1982 made a £3m bid for Derby-based Lea Foundries.
The rest, as they say, is history.
Messrs Rudd and McGowan motored through the recession snapping up bargains and transformed Williams Holdings into a FTSE 100 company.
They were not alone.
Harry Solomon orchestrated Hillsdown Holdings' first big purchase in 1982 when he paid £39m for Imperial Foods.
Hanson made its first big UK acquisition in 1981 when it bought Berec, the maker of Ever Ready batteries.
And in 1983, BTR swallowed Thomas Tilling, itself a conglomerate with sales in excess of £2bn.
It is no coincidence that in the current recession, the big boys have been active again, though with mixed success.
Lord Hanson bought a 3% stake in ICI but ultimately abandoned his takeover plans, acquired Beazer and made an unsuccessful bid for Ranks Hovis McDougall, defeated by his protege at Tomkins, Chris Hutchins.
Williams Holdings tilted at Racal — and missed — and BTR gobbled up Rockware and Hawker Siddeley.
Now others — though on a more modest scale — are emulating their tactics.
Kevin D'Silva, interestingly a former director of Hanson, is building a medical equipment business from the wreckage of an old, ailing Scottish textile company.
Philip Wilbraham has built a group quickly by taking advantage of lower prices, Philip Ames is buying up cheap high street sites for 4 Play Records and Roger Myers, who has already built and sold one restaurant group, is now doing it all again.
All four are having a good recession.
Mr Myers, 45, has good reason to be pleased with himself.
A former accountant who used to work in the music industry with Tony Visconti (David Bowie's producer), he now has a hit of his own with the quoted company The Pelican Group.
The group consists chiefly of 13 branches of the swish brasserie Cafe Rouge (unit number 13 opened in Whiteley's, the Bayswater shopping centre, in November), as well as the Cafe Pelican in the West End.
The company's most recent results, to the end of March, show a pre-tax profit of £453,000 on sales of £6m, an impressive performance when, all around, belts are being tightened.
It is success for the second time for Mr Myers and his long-term business partner Karen Jones.
They met in 1979 when Ms Jones was working as a waitress in The Peppermint Lounge, a lively eaterie Mr Myers had developed.
They later formed Theme Holdings with Peter Langan, opened three restaurants, floated the company on the stock market in 1987 (value £6m) and sold it two years later for £18m.
The first Cafe Rouge opened in March 1989 in Richmond, Surrey and the themed restaurants have steadily expanded across London.
They are distinctive, comfortable and the food is good.
The decor is French cafe style with walls covered with continental posters and prices ‘ideally pitched for difficult times’, according to Mr Myers.
‘People don't want to spend £25 on a meal.’
The average spend in his restaurant is £10 to £20.
Asked to explain why his chain should be doing so well when so many others are going to the wall, Mr Myers points to stringent management.
‘It's easy to think up a good idea for a restaurant.
Sit down for half an hour and anybody can do it.
The whole reason why they succeed or fail is management.’
Cafe Rouge is very strong on cash and stock control systems.
Mr Myers receives weekly management reports from each restaurant.
‘Monthly isn't good enough,’ he says.
‘Any deviance from the budgeted profit and there is an immediate investigation.’
While Mr Myers keeps a tight rein on accounts, budgeting and property deals, Karen Jones, the group's operations director, checks all is well with Cafe Rouge's main product: the food.
Not one to shirk the product testing, she eats in the restaurants five times a week and, on some occasions, has a chef cook the entire menu for her.
As for the future, Cafe Rouge plans to stick mainly to London, though Mr Myers mentions Oxford, Cambridge and Brighton as possible locations for new restaurants.
‘But if we feel we are opening new locations just for the sake of it, we'll start another chain,’ he says casually.
Kevin D'Silva, 42, is another professional manager for whom success this recession is second time around.
A graduate of Manchester Business School and a former director of a Hanson subsidiary, he led a management buy-in of a medical equipment company in 1981.
He grew it, merged it with an American company, then a few years later, having developed a multimillion pound empire, cast around for a new challenge.
He alighted on a Scottish textile company, G&G Kynoch, in 1990.
It was a shell company, with a rag bag of textile businesses run by the Kynoch family.
‘It was on its back and hurting,’ remembers Mr D'Silva.
The figures were grim.
In 1990 the company lost nearly £1m, pre-tax, on sales of £44m.
At the Kynoch family's invitation, Mr D'Silva joined the board as chief executive with a mandate to move the company out of textiles and into the field he knew best medical devices.
Over the next two years, Mr D'Silva bought seven medical companies, specialising in areas such as contamination control equipment and sterilisation and disinfectant equipment.
At the same time the textile division was pared down, leaving Kynoch with one small wool company in Shetland (also up for sale).
The name was changed to Kynoch Group (George Kynoch, now an MP, is still on the board).
The figures were transformed too.
The bottom line for 1991 showed a pre-tax profit of £851,000 on sales of £18m; the interim results to 30 June 1992 showed a pre-tax profit of £380,000 on sales of £6.9m.
Now Mr D'Silva is confident.
‘The companies we have today are capable of delivering 15% turnover growth a year.
They are highly cash-generative and we can use that cash to buy smaller add-on companies.
It's not a zoom stock, it's not going to double every year, but it will grow.
Obviously if we were in a contracting sector then we would not be doing so well.
But we chose this sector because it is growing.’
On the subject of managing in a recession Kevin D'Silva sounds very much like Roger Myers.
‘We are good at developing markets and we manage our cash extremely well,’ he says.
‘We have a small headquarters [just Mr D'Silva and a finance director]and management responsibility is decentralised and pushed down the line.’
Sales figures are sent to headquarters every week and the managing director of each operating company is responsible for hitting the targets.
‘If they don't, we give someone else a chance.’
There are several other groups of managers who have recently moved into shell companies, with the view to picking up good deals in recession-hit markets.
One pairing to watch out for is David Hudd and Nick Irens and their new quoted vehicle, Vardon.
Mr Hudd, a former director of Kunick (whose activities ranged from fruit machines to nursing homes), and Mr Irens, former finance director of First Leisure, alighted on shell company Winchmore in March.
The pair changed the name to Vardon and announced that, with City backing, their strategy was to build a conservatively financed leisure group concentrating on mass-market, low-ticket visitor attractions and leisure interests.
‘We felt that the prices of leisure assets were at last reflecting their true value,’ says Mr Irens.
In less than a year the pair have already made significant progress.
They paid Kunick £5.6m for the London and York Dungeons in March.
Then in September they paid £10m for Sea World, a group of eight marinas up and down the coast from Weymouth to Oban.
Visitor attractions such as the dungeons and marinas will only form one leg of what Nick Irens and David Hudd plan to be a three-pronged business.
Other areas of interest include bingo and ten pin bowling centres, which would bring Mr Irens into competition with his old employers.
‘We'll see,’ he says.
Though he hopes to double the size of the group he does not plan any further acquisitions until the spring, preferring instead to work on ensuring that the Sea Life businesses are fully integrated into the group.
‘I will not allow borrowings to get out of control,’ he says.
‘I would rather forgo a very attractive acquisition if it would mean stretching the balance sheet.’
Philip Wilbraham has enjoyed similar success to Mr Irens, building a group quickly in the recession by taking advantage of lower prices.
His quoted boiler maintenance and power generator service company, Prospect Industries, achieved profits of £3.5m on sales of £30m last year.
Not bad for a company that didn't exist four years ago.
Mr Wilbraham, who is only 34, had been working for the family shipping and engineering business until it was sold in 1987.
He then started looking around.
‘I was looking for engineering companies to invest in and manage,’ he says.
‘The initial plan was to put companies together and bring them to the market.’
In the end he achieved his last object first.
In 1989, Tace plc, the electrical machinery and equipment manufacturer, demerged three of its engineering businesses.
Mr Wilbraham, together with one of the Tace managers Don Hammond (managing director, components), and James Carr (now finance director) stepped in and acquired them for a consideration of £4m.
They changed the name to Prospect Industries, set up their headquarters in Hull and built a company specialising — as the annual report puts it — in ‘cleaning Britain's power’, particularly in the recently privatised electricity industry.
Mr Wilbraham acquired five businesses within 15 months.
Four were modest purchases all of less than £500,000.
Lintvalve Electronic System, an acoustic leak detection equipment company, was bought in December 1991; Greenbank Industries (abrasion resistant products) in April 1992, Complete Oil and Gas Services (pipe fabrication) in June and Davenport Holdings (cooling tower technology) in July.
But the key purchase was the acquisition for £14.5m of Dunn International in May 1991.
Dunn, which is based in Burton-on-Trent, specialises in maintenance work in the electricity industry.
It also has contracts to maintain nuclear plants such as the one at Hinkley Point.
‘Dunn was attractive to us because it was a service company with good cash flow and good management,’ says Mr Wilbraham.
Dunn became the core business around which the group was built.
With a core business in place, Mr Wilbraham sold the original Tace businesses for £6.5m in November last year and Don Hammond moved across to Ptarmigan, the purchaser.
Ptarmigan seems to be following a strategy similar to that adopted by Mr Wilbraham in 1989.
It must also qualify as one of Britain's oddest public companies.
Prior to buying the engineering companies, it consisted of a mixed bag of companies, including three hotels in the Peak District, Staffordshire and Lincoln, a company making artificial flowers and children's hats, a children's book publisher and a company that cleans and processes pig and sheep intestines into sausage casings.
It made a loss last year of £775,000 on sales of £3.2m, following a loss the previous years of £2.6m on sales of £4.5m.
Its strategy is to acquire engineering companies in niche markets and dispose of existing businesses to reduce borrowings.
The recession has clearly presented good buying opportunities to Prospect Industries though Philip Wilbraham denies he is a vulture purchaser who has been picking up bargains on the cheap.
‘I wouldn't say we had bought things at knock-down prices,’ he says.
‘The businesses we have bought have not been in trouble.
But we have benefited from the general lowering of prices.
I feel quite confident about the future.’
Further along the same track as David Hudd, Nick Irens and Philip Wilbraham is Paul Lever.
A former director of Williams Holdings he knew all about vulture purchasing from his days with Nigel Rudd and Brian McGowan.
Tipped off by Harry Solomon of Hillsdown, Mr Lever moved in on Spong Holdings, an ailing shell with a stock market listing in 1989.
He changed the name to Lionheart and began buying businesses on the cheap, some from distressed sellers, others from receivers.
He built a new business in areas such as paintbrushes and retail display systems.
He even bought one business from Hanson — shower maker Croydex for £7.7m — and another from his old employers, Williams.
‘The recession gave us a window of opportunity,’ he said at the time.
For a while it looked like a model performance.
In the first 18 months, Mr Lever turned an £845,000 loss into a £17,000 profit on sales of £17m.
But more recently things have been difficult.
With its dependence on consumer spending, Lionheart has found that, though it may be an easy time to buy businesses, generating sales is more problematic.
While profits jumped to £2.6m in the annual results announced in March, interims in August posted £1.1m for the half year to the end of June.
‘Aspirations of profit growth have turned into concentration on profit protection,’ says Mr Lever.
Instead of looking for more acquisitions, he is focusing on greenfield development in the bathroom and houseware sectors.
‘It is frustrating but we have got to look at developing the market in a different way,’ he says.
‘We may learn something from this recession.’
Further evidence that it is not all plain sailing for individuals seeking to make their mark in this recession is provided by the experience of Graham Chapman, latterly finance director of fashion retailer Kookai.
Kookai is a French company with more than 400 shops across Europe (including around 250 in France).
It only brought its colourful range of clothing (aimed at the younger end of the ladies fashion market) to Britain in December 1990.
Since then it has opened another nine shops — all in London and planned to have 30 within two years.
‘We're building a chain at a time when you can do good deals on the rent,’ said Mr Chapman.
‘We are getting substantial rent-free periods and are being offered large capital contributions’— a sum paid by the landlord to the tenant, usually for shopfitting to entice customers into the mall or high street.
Kookai's sales last year were £10m, on which the company is currently breaking even.
That might not sound very healthy, but in the recession-ravaged high street, not to be losing your shirt puts you ahead of most.
And, as Mr Chapman thought, Kookai was taking the long-term view.
‘We've got expensive computer systems and expensive professionals on board that can cope with a large chain of shops.
We're setting up the administration to cope with the chain that we are building.’
However, in spite of Mr Chapman's optimism, an administrator was appointed in late November and the company put up for sale.
The company itself was still going strong, but its backers changed.
The original owners could not sustain the necessary level of investment so the company has now been sold.
But the chain was trading as usual and Mr Chapman's outlook remained buoyant: ‘The business has been going from strength to strength.’
However, Kookai told ACCOUNTANCY in early December that the new backers and Mr Chapman have parted company; he has left Kookai.
The going seems better for Philip Ames, a chirpy Lancastrian, who is also expanding a retail chain at a time when so many others are either shrinking or going bust.
Mr Ames is head of 4 Play Records.
Since founding the chain in 1988 he has expanded it to include 17 concessions in Debenhams department stores and 20 high street shops.
‘Normally we would never get the pitches [sites]and the deals we are getting,’ he says.
‘We are taking advantage of the market.’
Now 48, Mr Ames realised at an early age that the nine to five routine was not for him.
‘I didn't want a proper job like an accountant,’ he says.
‘I wanted to get involved in the music business.’
He started working on a market stall selling records in his home town of Nelson, Lancashire in 1961 and never looked back.
When the owner of the stall ran into difficulties, Decca Records, the main creditor, agreed to a takeover by Mr Ames, who guaranteed to pay the outstanding debts.
He later opened a shop in Rawthenstall (between Burnley and Manchester) and slowly expanded to 12 shops — all called Ames Records — in the north west of England.
Then, in 1982 a certain Richard Branson came knocking on his door.
Virgin was interested in the Ames group and took a majority shareholding.
For six years Mr Ames rather enjoyed himself.
‘I wasn't restricted by the usual small business constraints,’ he says.
‘Virgin didn't exactly have a bottomless pit of money but it was very different.
I could become a creative retailer.’
Mr Ames expanded the chain further to 44 shops and then, in 1988, Mr Branson dropped the bombshell — he sold all the smaller shops to Our Price Records to concentrate on Megastores and the planning of Virgin Airways.
But what Mr Branson had either forgotten about, or Our Price was not interested in, was the small chain of concessions within Debenhams.
Philip Ames approached Richard Branson to see if he was interested in selling them.
He was, and for the sum of £1m, Mr Ames found himself running his own business again.
‘I don't work very well as a passenger.
I have to be the pilot.’
With his new chain — 4 Play Records Mr Ames decided to try different things.
He had video walls and what he describes as ‘a rawness.
We tried to create an exciting environment for people’.
When the recession hit, Mr Ames modified his approach.
Instead of trying to compete head on with the likes of Our Price and HMV, he moved down-market, stocking cheaper CDs and tapes at prices starting at £2.99.
‘We still have the current chart stuff at competitive prices, but we've also got 2,000 CDs and videos at less than £4.99,’ he says.
‘OK, it might be Chuck Berry or Hits of the 60s , but it's cheap.’
It seems to be working too.
Sales for the year ended 31 August 1992 were £12m with pre-tax profits of £246,000 (drained, says Mr Ames, because the group is funding the expansion programme).
He is aiming at 100 stores, has added extra warehousing space and has even (briefly) considered expanding into eastern Europe, an idea he has since gone cool on: ‘I was interested in Prague, but the Germans seem to have taken over.’
For Messrs Ames, Myers, Wilbraham, Hudd and Irens and the shell company specialists like Messrs Lever and D'Silva, this recession might be a period that, unlike most, they will be able to recall fondly as a time when they grew their businesses.
Profits may be modest so far (though the Pelican Group's results are excellent), but if these companies can achieve growth in the worst recession in living memory, what might they do in a boom?
Kynoch Group: Kevin D'Silva is creating the culture for growth
Legend has it that Nigel Rudd was watching Magic Roundabout with his four year old son when he finally decided that the recession was too good an opportunity to miss
Philip Ames: Creating raw and exciting business environments
Kookai: It's not all plain sailing on the journey from rags to riches
Philip Ames realised at an early age that the nine to five routine was not for him.
‘I didn't want a proper job like an accountant.
I wanted to get involved in the music business’
Pelican Group: Stringency is on Roger Myers' menu
It's easy to think up a good idea for a restaurant.
Sit down for half an hour and anybody can do it.
The whole reason why they succeed or fail is management
Vardon: Sea World is a recent acquisition for Messrs Hudd and Irens
I will not allow borrowings to get out of control.
I would rather forgo a very attractive acquisition if it would mean stretching the balance sheet
Lionheart: Paul Lever is building a new business in areas such as retail display systems, but generating sales is difficult
audit fees
FEES ON A DOWNWARD SPIRAL Audit fees look likely to continue falling in 1993
Neasa MacErlean
The most controversial change of auditors of the past two years took place at Prudential Corporation.
In the course of a beauty parade, Price Waterhouse took the audit from Coopers & Lybrand, but agreed to do it for 14% less.
The move provoked a prolonged debate about the pricing of audits.
Some commentators, however, believe that some of the most important points were lost in the shouting.
Price Waterhouse, it seems, was not just investing in the Prudential by dropping the audit fee by 14%.
The firm was investing in the whole insurance industry.
At about the same time, Price Waterhouse won the Guardian Royal Exchange audit.
In a matter of a few months the firm moved from being an outsider in the specialist insurance audit market (having about 15% of the top insurance companies, measured in terms of premium income) to being one of the two market leaders.
The firm now has a market share of 27%, second only to Coopers & Lybrand which has 30%.
There could hardly be a better time to move into insurance auditing.
Corporate finance specialists see insurance as one of the few growth areas in Europe in the short and medium term.
The 14% drop in the audit fee earned Price Waterhouse the nickname ‘Half Price Waterhouse’.
But Prudential finance director Michael Lawrence says that the bids put in by all the firms on the tender shortlist were ‘virtually all of an allness on fees’.
Defining ‘lowballing’ as underbidding the market price, Mr Lawrence says: ‘The closeness of the tenders suggests there was no lowballing.’
Mr Lawrence believes that the market price for auditing can fluctuate just as the price for bananas can go up and down.
Tendering is ‘a good way of testing the market and finding the market price’, he says.
Since the major component of auditors' costs — the salaries bill — is going down in many firms, it is not unnatural that the audit fees themselves are also reducing.
In their last financial years, only 39 FT-SE 100 companies' audit fees increased above the rate of inflation; 25 companies' audit fees were cut from 1990 to 1991; 30 companies paid the same amount; and the fees of six increased at a level below the rate of inflation.
Overall, audit fees for the FT-SE 100 grew by only 1.3% in 1991 — compared with a 2% growth rate in 1990 and 11% in 1989.
ACCOUNTANCY spoke to some of the companies whose audit fees showed the largest declines.
The most common reasons cited for cutting audit fees were reducing the number of external auditors and beefing up the internal audit departments.
Five companies reduced the number of firms carrying out their audits.
(Three of these companies were unravelling the complexities of the Coopers-Deloitte-Touche-Spicers merger/demerger —‘a nuisance to us’, according to one financial director.)
Five companies also said that they had enhanced their internal audit.
Four companies said they had reduced their fees by putting the audit out to tender.
Other reasons given were the sale of subsidiaries, tightening controls on costs and improving the structures and systems of group companies.
None of the companies was reluctant to talk: cutting the audit fee is a popular subject.
Pearson — the publishing-to-oil conglomerate — gives a wide range of answers when asked how it cut its audit fees by 18% from £2.2m in 1990 to £1.8m in 1991.
The North American audit was put out to tender (and won by Arthur Andersen).
Fees for the rest of the world's audit were renegotiated with Coopers & Lybrand.
Following the Coopers merger with Deloittes, Pearson had found itself with three firms of auditors — Deloitte & Touche and Arthur Andersen in the US and Coopers & Lybrand in the rest of the world — a situation it found cumbersome and expensive.
In North America the audit fee was further cut by taking advantage of a US ruling that allows a group of companies to be treated as one company for the purposes of audit materiality levels.
In the UK auditors are required to set the materiality level by reference to each individual limited company in a group.
Group financial controller Anthony del Tufo says that the 18% reduction in the audit fee correlates, more or less, to an 18% reduction in the audit workload.
He says: ‘You can only reduce the level of fees by reducing the work.
We don't believe that with a professional firm you can get discounted fees.’
To compensate for the reduction in the ambit of the external auditors, Pearson has increased the role of the internal auditors.
In the past only two of the group's nine divisions had an internal audit function; now all of the nine divisions are subject to internal audit discipline.
‘We haven't overall reduced our costs,’ says Mr del Tufo.
‘But by transferring from external to internal costs, we've got a far more focused resource.’
Royal Insurance — which reduced its audit fees by 13% from £2.55m to £2.22m — also cut the cost by enhancing the role of its internal audit department and by cutting the number of external audit firms from two to one.
Coopers & Lybrand now audits the whole of the Royal Insurance global network, including the US interests that were once the domain of KPMG.
The sale of some companies — the Belgian subsidiaries, for instance— has cut down the need for audit, as have some reorganisations.
The substantial Royal Nederland former subsidiary used to be audited as part of Royal International, the holding company.
It is now only an associate of Royal International, having become part of the three-way joint venture, Epic, set up with German and Italian insurers and is audited separately.
The Granada Group gives similar reasons for its 13% cut — a simplified group structure and a reduced number of acquisitions and disposals in the group.
Granada also points to a ‘more tightly managed’ audit by KPMG and the increasing sophistication of IT systems which, in their turn, reduce the labour-intensive nature of the audit.
English China Clays highlights tight cost control as a major reason for the 31% drop in its fees.
‘The auditors are treated no differently to other suppliers of services,’ says a spokesman for the finance department.
The total drop in the audit fee of £0.7m is made more dramatic because of the fact that in the previous year the audit fee covered a 15-month period.
Both Arjo Wiggins Appleton (27%) and NFC (20%) cite use of the tender mechanism as the main reason for reducing their costs.
After a series of mergers, Arjo had ended up using nearly all of the Big Six to audit some part of its international operations.
After the beauty parade, the audit was awarded to Coopers & Lybrand.
Finance director Tony Isaac believes that the 27% fall in the audit fee to £1.1m is also attributable to ‘moving internally into having a more uniform set of management reports’.
NFC, for its part, stayed with its original auditors, Ernst & Young, after putting out the audit to tender.
The fee, however, fell by 20% to £800,000.
This was the first time that the audit fee had been put out to tender but finance director Trevor Larman says: ‘Whether it's diesel fuel or trucks, we will always seek a quote.’
Both Coats Viyella (32%) and Bass (33%) reduced their audit fees by cutting the number of firms used.
A client of the old Spicer & Oppenheim firm, Coats Viyella has now reduced its auditors to just one, Touche Ross.
Bass now has only two auditors — Ernst & Young and Touche Ross having cut the ties with Arthur Andersen, the auditors they acquired with the US acquisition of Holiday Inn.
General Accident attributes some of its 15% audit fee drop to exchange rate fluctuations on the audit fees (as do some of the other companies).
It too has made some disposals of companies during the year, has reduced the number of operating subsidiaries by amalgamation and has raised the pro-file of its internal audit team.
KPMG has audited the company for years, but a General Accident spokesman says they ‘wouldn't rule out’ the idea of going to tender.
Most of the companies appear to believe that further productivity increases were possible in the audit.
Graham Ward, the Price Waterhouse partner on the Prudential audit and vice-chairman of the Institute's Auditing Committee, says: ‘The more efficient a company's accounting function might be, the less time it should take to do the audit.’
The finance director of one of the companies says he believes that the productivity increases attributable to IT are coming to an end: ‘Auditors are getting more productive — but it can only go to a certain level.’
Productivity increases on the audit might be easier to make among smaller companies where the potential for more assistance from the company's staff is generally greater.
Michael Biles of Robson Rhodes advises companies to agree an audit timetable before-hand with the auditors and then to stick to it.
It is ‘only rarely’, he says, that the accounts are fully completed when the auditors arrive.
Geoff Barnes of Casson Beckman believes that there would be fewer problems about audit fees if the audit was regarded as a more useful exercise both by members of the public and by business: ‘As a profession we spend far too much time looking back and not enough time looking forward.’
He suggests, for instance, that the auditors should be asked to comment on a statement of working capital produced by the directors.
The debate on lowballing and reducing prices will soon move to another stage when the Chartered Accountants' Joint Ethics Committee publishes the follow-up to the discussion paper,Predatory Pricing.
That paper found no hard evidence linking predatory pricing and negligent auditing.
What there is evidence of, however, is the hardship that some auditing firms are causing themselves by feeling forced to put in dangerously over-competitive bids.
Many in the profession have their own example to quote of a rival firm bidding 20% to 50% under the otherwise going rate.
David Temporal of consultants Hodgart Temporal — who specialise in advising accountancy and law firms — believes that auditors will have to become more sophisticated in their approach to pricing and billing.
He says: ‘Firms are facing a crisis in profitability.
They need to manage profitability better.’
Some observers say that charging on the basis of hours is too simple a method to be used exclusively in the increasingly complex business of auditing.
‘Value billing’ should, in theory, be a consequence of the value-added auditing service that most firms claim to have offered for several years.
From this perspective, 1993 looks likely to be another year of substantial audit fee cuts.
But Mr Temporal says: ‘We're going to see some major difficulties.
Many firms have just been hanging on.
They can't continue making these investments.
There's going to be a shake-out.’
You can only reduce the level of fees by reducing the work.
We don't believe that with a professional firm you can get discounted fees
Pearson: Pruning the auditors back
Many in the profession have their own example to quote of a rival firm bidding 20% to 50% under the otherwise going rate
small business
PRESERVED FOR PERFORMANCE A century-old suburban music venue, threatened with demolition, has been successfully, even triumphantly, restored, thanks to its board's prodigious fund-raising activities and faithful support from the community.
Hester Thomas
Blackheath Concert Halls, built in 1895, attracted the great names and popular artists of the day, including Clara Butt, Sir Ernest Shackleton, Harry Lauder and George Bernard Shaw.
By the 1930s, as cinema became more popular, the Halls' fortunes waned.
In 1939 the Ministry of Works requisitioned them and they were in government use until 1976.
Soon after, demolition was threatened, and the Blackheath Preservation Trust stepped in to purchase them.
In 1983, a new charity, The Blackheath Halls, was set up with the goal of raising £450,000 to begin restoring the building.
The Halls finally reopened on 15 December 1985.
The Recital Room, which seats 220, has since become established as an excellent venue for solo performances, recitals, chamber ensembles and jazz groups.
The Webster Room, which can seat around 60, is used for art exhibitions, talks, seminars and group meetings.
The Halls are run by a shoestring staff: three full-time and five part-time.
The general director, Evvy Edwards, was recruited to administer the Halls in 1990.
She had previously worked as one of the three founders and directors of the London International Opera Festival.
The board of 14 voluntary directors are all local people who, as board director David Quarmby — whose daytime job is joint managing director of Sainsbury's explains, ‘share an enthusiasm for the arts’.
The Halls' purpose is not simply to attract musicians such as Nigel Kennedy and Courtney Pine.
They also serve the local community, with exhibitions of local artists' work and educational music sessions.
According to Jack Ladeveze chairman of engineering group Industrial Partners and a board member — the Halls have always run on a shoestring.
Making a profit is extremely hard work.
In 1989 they had a deficit of £9,000 on a turnover of £85,000.
By 1990 turnover had increased to £150,000 and they had made a profit of £32,000.
In 1991 turnover again grew, to £200,000, on which the Halls broke even.
The problem is that their ‘product’— primarily concerts — cannot attract enough box office income to cover their overheads.
Ironically, the Halls' major income in 1992 has come not from audiences but from recording companies.
The Great Hall is let out on a daily rate to companies such as Deutsche Grammophon and EMI for classical music recordings.
The second largest income is provided by other forms of external hire — whether for art exhibitions or concerts.
And they also attract a reasonable income from their own events.
However, every Halls-run concert has first to surmount the hurdle of gaining sponsorship or underwriting.
Other income comes from the bar and catering, and subscriptions and donations from the Friends of Blackheath Concert Halls.
Like many institutions that live in a permanently impecunious state, Blackheath Concert Halls rely greatly on goodwill.
Take the auditors, for example.
In 1983 Philip Hollins, audit partner at accountants Hacker Young, was asked if his firm would act as the Halls' auditor.
He accepted.
‘The spirit of the thing was to contribute in kind,’ explains Mr Hollins.
Hacker Young advised that the Halls should opt for the dual status of charity and limited liability company.
As a charity the Halls do not pay corporation tax on profits.
‘The limited status limits our liability,’ says Mr Quarmby, ‘and gives us a legal framework.’
The reopening of the Halls in 1985 was just the beginning.
Because of the size of the Recital Room, the Concert Halls could only appeal to limited groups of musicians.
The Great Hall, in too poor a state for public performances, was, nevertheless, attracting record companies.
If it was restored, its recording facilities could be improved and it could be made suitable for public use.
In 1990, the Halls embarked on an enormous fund-raising programme.
The aim was to find £600,000 to restore the Great Hall.
By summer 1991 the workmen were in.
A staggering £300,000 had been raised from local people and businesses, some of it in the form of covenants.
Mr Quarmby describes himself as going ‘cap in hand to the recording companies and asking them for advance rental income’.
Subsequently, the Baring Foundation, the Wolfson Foundation and the Foundation for Sport and the Arts provided £250,000, which will cover all the debts from this phase of building.
The Great Hall reopened in October 1991.
The floor has been relaid and the room has been insulated for sound and completely renovated.
It is now suitable for recordings and public performances.
However, while orchestras and audiences may happily gather in the Great Hall, there are limited front and back of house, catering and toilet facilities.
To rectify this and to make sure the Concert Halls can promote themselves as a fully-fledged venue, the board has decided to embark on the final refurbishment step.
It is now looking to raise a further £900,000 to improve facilities.
The Halls are appealing to charitable foundations, businesses, corporations and local people for further support.
Progress to date is regarded as satisfactory.
Sponsors for this year include Citibank, Grant Thornton, Drivers Jonas, Turner Kenneth Brown, Domaine, Drouhin & Associates, Marks & Spencer and the Woolwich Building Society.
Anyone who is interested in working with or supporting the Blackheath Concert Halls should contact Evvy Edwards on 081-318 9758.
The Great Hall: Now suitable for recordings and performances
FRES/recruitment
TAXING TIME FOR JOB-SEEKERS A few taxation jobs are available for those with the right specialist skills and knowledge
Flavia Hawksley
Despite being hit by the recession slightly later than their auditing colleagues, the recruitment market for general taxation specialists has now been stagnant for a good 12 months.
Hundreds of chartered accountants have been made redundant and with the surfeit of candidates competing for vacancies, employers have been able to reduce salaries in some cases.
People who six months ago might have been on £25,000 a year are now prepared to accept considerably less.
‘They phone and say they'll accept £20,000 and two months later they'll ring again and say £18,000,’ says Lisa Wilson, partner in Portsmouth-based Accountability Recruitment.
This leaves those who are holding out for more in a very unfavourable position.
But the story is not the same everywhere.
It is hard to find a general salary trend in this month's FRES (Federation of Recruitment and Employment Services Ltd) survey on taxation.
Both the highest and the lowest salaries awarded vary considerably.
The figure printed in the table gives the average in each area.
A blank signifies no new placements.
In London, salaries have increased over the past six months, which to some degree reflects the calibre of the person sought within each grading.
Recent vacancies have also tended to be for rather more senior personnel, quite often specifically seeking out prospective partners, and some have offered salaries of over £70,000 for the right person.
So although, broadly speaking, taxation jobs are few and far between (as can be seen from the table there has been no movement at all at assistant manager level in several areas) there are still excellent jobs available for those with the right specialist skills and knowledge.
‘Clients are looking for people with specific skills and are very choosy,’ says Tony Jackson, consultant for taxation recruitment specialists Beament Leslie Thomas.
‘There is a demand for chartered accountants with corporate tax experience relating to the financial sector.
There are also opportunities for people with expertise in remuneration and compensation issues,’— bonus schemes in good times and redundancies in bad!
Mr Jackson adds that salaries are much more performance-related than in the past.
While some people have had pay freezes, others have had increases over the inflation rate.
For candidates with a more generalist knowledge, the market has remained very depressed in London and the South East, while the North has been less badly hit by the recession.
Because of this many more people are looking further afield and a significant number are considering relocation.
This in turn has made the South more competitive and in some cases has had a positive effect on salaries.
As unemployment rose in 1992, redundancy ceased to be a taboo subject.
There are two reasons for this.
First, it is quite obvious that there are a great many first-class candidates who have been made redundant.
Second, most people who are in work are keeping their heads down and not looking for a new job, so there is less competition from those in work.
Most FRES members support this view, saying that there is little evidence of discrimination against candidates who have been made redundant.
The story in Portsmouth is rather different, however.
Lisa Wilson says that many of her clients have said very firmly that they are ‘not interested in anyone who's been made redundant’.
One of the reasons for this, she explains, is that quite a lot of the small and medium-size firms in her area (Hampshire, Dorset and Sussex) do not want to recruit from the Big Six where most of the redundancies have been made.
‘These firms want people with a more general practice background, who can talk to their clients in their own language, not someone who's done the audit for three large plcs.’
She also adds that there is still a feeling among recruiters that it is the poorer quality staff who are the first to go, however much she tries to emphasise that this isn't necessarily the case.
‘We have a very large number of people who've been on our books for between a year and 18 months and they are quality staff, people who would have been snapped up within 10 days, three years ago.’
She confirms that there are still vacancies at a higher level.
‘Good senior taxation staff are still relatively hard to come by.’
Quite often they have to be found from other regions.
Although the message is fairly depressing overall, it is not altogether hopeless.
But, unless you have a particular skill, it is essential to be flexible on both location and salary.
According to a survey by recruitment consultants Challoner James, 40% of employers reduced their accountancy staff during 1992 and 71% do not anticipate recruiting any new staff before June.
Instead of keeping headcounts up in case of an influx of work, firms are resorting far more to the use of temporary staff.
People who six months ago might have been on £25,000 a year are now prepared to accept considerably less.
They phone and say they'll accept £20,000 and two months later they'll ring again and say £18,000
holidays
1993: THE YEAR OF THE SKI?
Since tour operators printed their ski brochures, the pound has lost around 15% of its value against most other European currencies and the US dollar — ski holidays will never be as cheap again
Dave Watts
Many of us will find skiing an irresistible lure in the coming season — all of the big operators and many of the small ones are honouring no-surcharge guarantees; and there has been heavy early season snow.
Where the snow falls
Despite early snowfalls throughout the Alps, the best way to ensure good snow for your holiday is to aim high — especially if you are going in March or later.
Resorts with plenty of skiing over 2,000 metres and, preferably, with a glacier, are generally snow sure.
These include, for example, Zermatt, Saas Fee and Verbier in Switzerland; Val d'Isere, Tignes, Les Arcs and Les Deux Alpes in France; Zell am See (and Kaprun), Hintertux and Solden in Austria.
There are also lower resorts with especially good snow records such as up-market Lech and Zurs in Austria and duty-free Livigno in Italy.
And others have huge amounts of artificial snow facilities such as Selva in Italy or immaculate piste grooming that maintains the snow in good condition such as Meribel and Courchevel in France.
But the place for reliable natural snow, abundant artificial snow and unbeatable piste grooming is the US.
It also has another couple of big plus points.
The service is tremendously friendly and efficient and it has some of the best ski schools in the world (with instructors who speak English).
And a 10-day holiday here needn't be more expensive than a comparable one in Europe.
Vail and Aspen in Colorado are the ideal resorts, with the most popular currently being Breckenridge, again in Colorado.
What's on offer
There are well over 100 tour operators in the ski market, offering everything from true luxury to bare minimum price holidays.
At the top of the market, Inghams (081-785 7777) has a ‘Luxury Ski’ brochure, featuring the top hotels in the Alps.
For those who can afford the £2,910 for a peak period February fortnight, Badrutt's Palace Hotel overlooking the frozen lake in St Moritz offers the ultimate in Alpine luxury.
But there are many more affordable and comfortable holidays in Inghams' brochures too, with good four-star hotels typically costing £400 to £550 for a week's half-board holiday out of peak season.
Other operators offering up-market holidays include The Ski Company (071-730 9600), which has some of the most beautiful and best furnished chalets in the Alps, including one in Meribel with a sauna, gym, outdoor hot tub and satellite TV as well as the standard phone and fax.
Gourmet food, accompanied by vintage claret and preceded by champagne, comes as standard.
It likes to rent its chalets to whole groups travelling together for £500 to £1,000 each half-board — not cheap but a bargain for what you get.
Ski Scott Dunn (081-767 0202) also aims for high standards in its chalets with treats such as tea in bed every day and a champagne breakfast once a week.
Powder Byrne (071-223 0601) specialises in quality hotel holidays in Switzerland and — for the first time this season — Lech in Austria.
Expect to pay between £500 and £1,000 for a week depending on when and where you go.
It also offers powder skiing weeks off-piste with a local guide in Klosters and Grindelwald for £199 to £295 on top of the holiday cost.
Another company that specialises in off-piste courses and even ski touring staying at different hotels or in mountain refuges — is Fresh Tracks (081-335 3003).
More affordable
If you want to ski this year without breaking the bank, there are plenty of ways you can trim costs without slumming it.
Self-catering is an obvious one.
Inghams, for example, is offering a two-bedroom apartment with a huge living room overlooking the Matterhorn in the four star Hotel Ambassador in Zermatt in mid March for just over £300 for a week each, if it's occupied by six people.
You get free use of all the hotel's facilities such as swimming pool and sauna.
Trimming costs even further is easy if you're willing to pack yourselves in like sardines as the French normally do.
Enterprise (061-831 7000), for example, has prices from £150 to £200 each in mid January for four people in a studio or six in a one bedroom apartment.
It's also worth taking a look at French self-catering specialist Touralp's brochure (071-602 1952).
Most small Austrian villages have a fine selection of bed and breakfast gasthauses that offer simple but immaculate rooms.
Thomson (021-632 6282) and Neilson (0532 394555), for example, have wide selections for around £200 to £300 a week.
If you are taking small children, lots of operators now offer special creche facilities.
They include, for example, Ski Esprit in chalets (0252 616789), Mark Warner in chalet hotels (071-938 1851) and Ski Hillwood in two small Austrian villages (081-866 9993).
Made to Measure (0243 533333) has just brought out a ‘Family Skiing’ brochure featuring child-friendly hotels in France, Switzerland, Austria and the US.
Driving to a bargain
Driving yourself to the Alps rather than taking the tour operator's flight has a lot of attractions.
You avoid the airport crushes and delays and the interminable transfers driving need take no longer than flying in many cases.
You can choose to drive out on the Friday and back on the Sunday, so giving yourself eight days' skiing rather than six if you fly.
Driving (and lunch on the way) can be fun and, if you're self-catering, give you the chance of stocking up with cheap local food and drink on the way.
When you're in the Alps, having a car allows you to drive to different resorts if either poor snow or long queues in yours is a problem.
And if there are four of you, driving can be cheaper than flying.
Taking account of ferry fares, petrol, road tolls and insurance, it shouldn't cost four more than £100 each — and many tour operators give discounts of more than this if you don't take their flight.
But however you make your journey, do it this year — it will never cost as little!
FAIR WEATHER ON THE FAIRWAYS Don't let Britain's winter climate deprive you of the game.
Try a golfing holiday on the Continent
Melanie Simmons
Golf in the British Isles can be quite an unpleasant experience in the dead of winter.
If you are lucky enough to get a few rays of sunshine, you are still faced with the possibility of playing on frosty fairways in sub-freezing temperatures and having to pack your clubs away by 4pm when visibility declines.
So if you are a die-hard player who can't stay away from the golf course during the winter months, why not try a golfing holiday on the Continent?
The climate is certainly milder, the atmosphere more relaxed, the golf unbeatable and the prices surprisingly low.
There really is no better way to spend a long weekend, or indeed an entire week, during winter, than in the warm sun of Portugal's Algarve, Spain's Costa del Sol or the cooler — though still very comfortable — French region of Calais.
The best, and most complete, winter packages are available through the specialist golf holiday groups.
Companies such as Longshot Golf Holidays (0730 268621), French Golf Holidays (0277 261004) and Sovereign Golf (0293 599909) are just a few of the primary agents that offer competitive winter packages.
Among the favourite destinations are the fairways of the alluring Algarve, which have been providing pleasure to British golfers for more than 20 years.
Great golf, a warm winter climate and top-notch accommodation, have contributed to making this area of Portugal a classic golfing venue.
Longshot offers innumerable golf packages to some of the best courses on the Algarve.
For instance, when golfers stay in the Forte-owned five-star Dona Filipa, one of the most luxurious hotels on the south coast, they can play, free, on the affiliated championship courses of San Lorenzo and Penina.
In addition to the free golf, a week's holiday (seven nights), including return flight, car hire and cancellation insurance can be had for anything from £595 to £729 a person between 2 January and 31 March.
Longshot offers a similar package at the renowned Quinta do Lago estate from £248 a person for as many nights.
Another part of southern Europe continually at the forefront of the golfer's mind is the Costa del Sol.
With a steady growth in demand have come more outstanding courses, and with that, more incredible offers.
Sovereign Golf offers reduced green fees when staying at the Suites Hotel.
Each golfer can stay at the former home of the Domecq family, one of Spain's famous sherry dynasties, for seven nights in January for £319, inclusive of flights and breakfast.
While there, you have the opportunity to play the Golden Triangle of Spanish golf at the following rates: San Roque £16.50 a day, Valderrama £44 a round and Soto-grande £33 a round.
As with any pre-booked golf holiday, you should confirm your tee-time on booking and perhaps check the travel time from the airport to the desired hotel — this will not only save time, but unwanted aggravation as well.
For a quick journey to the Continent, France is an unbeatable destination, particularly when golf is involved.
During the off-season, French life proceeds at its most natural, inviting pace, and what is more, travel generally is less expensive and the golf courses less crowded.
French Golf Holidays offers an exciting range of complete golf packages across the Channel.
One of the best examples of a reasonably-priced winter weekend is a two-night stay at the three-star Le Bristol Hotel in Le Touquet, near Boulogne, with three days' golf at the celebrated courses of Le Touquet, Hardelot and Wimereux, plus return cross-Channel Seacat travel with your own car, all for an incredible £145 a person.
Like most package holidays, this includes breakfast at the hotel, but any other meals are additional to the quoted price.
So treat yourself this winter: take a golf break on the Continent.
You'll be glad you did.
Driving off to greener pastures
ACCOUNTANCY'S HOLIDAY SURVEY
Is this workaholism run riot?
According to ACCOUNTANCY 's holiday survey, 44% of accountants leave a contact number while they are away and, of those, 78.3% said that they were sometimes called, while 5% were frequently contacted.
Despite this, 93.1% said they come back from holiday feeling refreshed and relaxed.
But for some it only lasts until they reach the office — 31% felt that their work was not taken care of properly while they were away.
But they do want their time off: even though 58% of accountants are entitled to over 25 days' holiday, the majority still felt they deserved more.
Ironically, however, of those 71% of accountants who would like to have more holiday entitlement, 42.7% didn't even manage to use all of the time they were due at present.
Of those surveyed, 58.6% preferred to take one or two long breaks as opposed to several short weekend breaks.
According to Cary Cooper, professor of organisational psychology at UMIST, this is not such a good idea.
He says that when people return to work after a holiday there is a lot of disruption and decreased productivity as a result of ‘holiday infection that contaminates everyone around the person who has been away’.
When people take shorter breaks there is less build-up and excitement before and after the holiday, resulting in less disruption.
According to Professor Cooper, this type of break is also more beneficial to employees as they can take time off when they need it most.
A total of 40.7% of respondents chose their last holiday on the basis that they had done the same before and enjoyed it; 19.7% went somewhere where they had always wanted to go; and 17.9% went on a word-of-mouth recommendation.
European holidays, package holidays and short breaks in the UK are the most popular vacations with accountants.
Skiing is enjoyed by 14.5%.
So, how much are accountants prepared to pay for their fortnight in the sun?
Quite a lot it seems: 44.1% spent between £500 and £1,000 a person on their last holiday and 22.1% spent between £1,001 and £2,500.
Only 8% spent less than £200 a person.
Some accountants, however, are not content with the way they spend their holiday time.
Of those whose ideal holiday differs from the kind they usually take, the majority said they would like to go further afield, for example, to Australia, the Far East, Asia or the US for four to six weeks.
‘If someone could find a round the world trip lasting six months, I would happily go,’ commented one accountant.
But would he want to be contactable by his office or clients en route?
Penang: Further afield
SHORT, SWEET AND RELAXING For the busy professional, weekend breaks may be more feasible than longer holidays.
A package can come into its own here, saving time and trouble
Peter Carty
In mid-winter in the UK, some areas of great natural beauty come into their own.
The barren splendour of the Lake District, for example, is no longer obscured by summer hordes.
Rainbow Holidays has several options for the area.
For instance, a night and half board at The Red Lion, a 17th century coaching inn at Grasmere, is available for £46.
Forte has several two- or three-night leisure breaks packages on offer.
Staying at the Swan Hotel in Grasmere, for example, will set you back £74 a night, inclusive of breakfast and dinner.
Packages that include rail travel are available from Superbreak Mini-Holidays.
More details of packages from these three companies are available through travel agents.
It is possible to escape from the British winter without going too far afield.
Center Parcs offers short breaks at its Sherwood Forest and Elveden, Suffolk sites.
The domes that dominate these holiday villages are maintained at sub-tropical temperatures, and there is a full range of sporting and other facilities, mostly on site.
The villages are particularly convenient for families with young children.
A two-person apartment in Elveden Forest would cost £137 for a weekend during most of January.
This does not include meals.
More information from travel agents, or by ringing 0272 244 744.
A weekend break in London provides a good opportunity to take full advantage of the sales, perhaps combined with a visit to the theatre.
Several companies provide packages, including Rainbow, Superbreak Mini-Holidays and Forte.
For those who want to flee the country altogether, several companies offer week-end breaks in continental Europe.
This can be a good time to spend a couple of days in one of the cities: the weather is not crucial, museums and art galleries are less crowded and there's more elbow room in restaurants.
Paris is a favourite destination, and Time Off has a large selection of packages to choose from.
Including travel by coach and ferry from London, two nights with breakfast in a one star hotel in a double room with bath costs £109 (£167 by air).
The cheapest deals of all are self-drive holidays.
Paris Travel Service offers two nights, including channel crossings, from £49.
At the other end of the spectrum, Time Off has a two night package by air, with accommodation at the luxury Hotel Lancaster, for £368.
Another company offering similar packages is Thomson, with its ‘CityBreaks’.
Two nights in a basic standard hotel, with breakfast and a cruise along the Seine thrown in, are on offer for £115 a person for a shared room.
The corresponding price is £175 in its most luxurious band of hotels.
Ask travel agents for more details of what's on offer from these companies.
Packages are available to many other European cities: Amsterdam, Dublin and Prague are on Time Off's list, and Thomson can get you to Barcelona, Berlin, Rome and Vienna among others.
Travelscene, another company in this market, extends the range to Copenhagen, Lucerne, Monte Carlo, and Salzburg.
Other companies doing city breaks are British Airways Holidays, Air France Holidays, Cresta Holidays and Kirker Travel Ltd.
And for the really adventurous there are opportunities to go much further, even for just a weekend — though it may be sensible to add on a day or two.
Time Off has breaks in New York on offer and Thomson lists Moscow and Reykjavik.
The Lake District: Wander lonely without the summer crowds
report writing
TOWARDS A READABLE REPORT Accountants' lives are full of reports, those they produce themselves and those imposed on them by others.
It's worth learning how to write one well
Greville Janner
When did you last read a first class, well-prepared report by an accountant?
For that matter, how many accountants have been trained in the art of report writing?
It is a subject that should be taught, but it is usually learned through trial and error the writer's errors and the readers' trials.
All reports should be carefully planned, so you should first examine source material.
Ask yourself if you have completed similar reports in the past to the new one now required.
Perhaps a similar report has been written by a colleague and is retained on a word processing disk.
It is always worth keeping reports on disk because parts may be cannibalised and adaptation is much easier using a word processing system.
There is a danger here in that some of the material contained in a past report may be outdated, so look out for this and revise where necessary.
A further danger is that adaptation may mix different individual styles and make for poor reading.
Nevertheless, it should be rare to have to draft a common report from scratch.
Do read other reports, including those of competitors, that are available.
For example, parts of a report on one medium-sized company in the plastics industry may contain data relevant to your report on the industry, and creative swiping is common in business, provided your report is internal.
Such liberties are not allowed in external publications because of copyright law.
The next point for consideration is the time factor.
Like nature, good report writing requires decent gestation.
You need to jot down the main purpose, headings, ideas…then build your structure before you begin.
Even the magic word processor cannot solve the problem of afterthoughts, which are likely to alter a complete structure.
When drafting your notes, do think about whether you have provided the report recipients with what they want to read or what they want to consider.
Good sales people look to their markets and expert speakers at their audience.
You must always keep your reader in mind because he or she is the true reason for writing the report.
Forget this and your report will fail.
It is important to ask who will read the report and when will it be read.
Though you may be aware of the distribution list, reports are often passed to people not on that list.
The introduction has to paint a picture — it must give a solid reason why the report has to be considered, so the background of the subject matter is the core of the introduction.
This should also include information for potential readers who are not familiar with the subject matter.
A good report, like a fine speech, should be properly structured.
It needs a firm beginning, a detailed and carefully prepared centre that passes logically from item to item, and an ending that rounds it off.
The ending is in three parts: a summary, conclusions and the recommendations.
This is usually the only part of a report where opinions should intrude.
Remember that a report is not a collection of assumptions.
It is essentially a compilation of known facts, without intrusion of personal opinions or beliefs.
What you think is not important, and is rarely relevant in the main body of the report.
Your view may materialise at the end as an opinion based on those stated facts and be fitted into the recommendation section.
So do not deviate by mixing your opinions with the facts.
Get a deadline and prepare to meet it.
Take your notes and your structure, giving yourself time for second and later thoughts.
But the earlier you do so, the greater are your prospects of success.
Style is as crucial to the accountant's report as it is to (for instance) the job application.
Reports are commonly prosaic, dull, pompous and patronising and written with selfish disregard for the reader.
Be careful when writing: reports are for others, as an aide-memoire is for ourselves.
Each should be designed for its recipient, but remember that other eyes may see it.
Just like an interviewee, the report writer should look to appearances.
It is best to have a uniform house style for all reports, particularly if they are going to clients or influential people outside your firm or company.
The overall design of your reports is an important part of your marketing effort.
Your report must be a quality product, both in appearance and in content.
Once the first version of the report has been drafted it can be proof-read and amended.
It is essential that it should be proof read by at least one other person.
As part of the process, all figures and calculations should be checked more than once.
This includes checking the numbering and lettering of paragraphs for consistency throughout the document.
So much for writing reports.
I hope for your sake that those who provide them for you are as careful in following the rules as you should be when creating your own.
Use good English — which normally means: the shorter the words, the better.
Avoid jargon, where possible.
If your missive is addressed to your colleagues, then jargon may be acceptable shorthand.
If the report is directed to less privileged and well-informed mortals, either avoid it or explain it.
Keep a dictionary and a Thesaurus at your side.
Both will help you to find the precise word you need and to lighten your readers' darkness with vivid analogy.
Do not use unoriginal language as a cloak for unoriginal thought.
Do not despise the striking simile or the pointed metaphor.
Use humour and wit as weapons.
But do not hurt or humiliate.
Remember (again) your words may reach unexpected eyes.
If the report has to be in a statutory format (eg a long form report) check the required format while drafting to avoid amending later.
Beware of sentences that are too long.
If you are writing on a complex topic a reader can easily become confused.
STYLE POINTS
personal finance: house purchase
MORTGAGES NOW The housing market is running at half the volume of four years ago, but borrowers need to look carefully at what's on offer from lenders
Barbara Ellis
Net mortgage advances by building societies hit a 10-year low in September 1992, at £446m.
The societies, plus Abbey National — which became a bank when it floated in 1989 — currently have a market share of about 85%, with banks and centralised lenders such as The Mortgage Corporation accounting for most of the remaining 15%.
Four years ago, the respective market shares were roughly 50/50.
This huge swing has been partly assisted by exactly the factors that are slowing house buying: a flight into deposit-based saving after the 1987 crash and fear of unemployment during the recession.
Building societies were able to exploit their retail savings resources to keep a constant competitive presence in mortgages, while the banks and centralised lenders acted more sporadically, dodging in and out of the market with limited-run special offers.
Lenders in general often appeared to be financing the tempting rates offered to first-time buyers at the expense of existing borrowers.
For example, Abbey National kept existing borrowers waiting until December 1992 for a lower rate that was on offer to new homebuyers in October 1992.
A Martian arriving in Britain in late 1992 might have gathered from window-stickers along the high streets that mortgages were cheap and plentiful.
But earthlings attempting to borrow found a different reality.
First-time buyers have been the target of the most numerous offers.
A typical example is the ‘first-time buyer guarantee package’ from the National & Provincial building society (phone: 0800 446600).
With its variable mortgage rate at 8.5%, as we go to press the N&P is offering first-timer mortgages at rates of 5.95% (equivalent to an annual percentage rate of 8.8%) or 6.25% (APR 8.9%) fixed until 1 January 1994.
The lower rate applies where loans represent 90% or less of the property valuation — the higher rate to loans of between 90% and 95% of valuation.
The society makes it a condition of the first-timer loans that borrowers buy buildings and contents insurance from the society and charges a £150 arrangement fee for the loan in all cases.
‘Certainly, building societies are making enormous profits out of building and contents insurance cover,’ says Caroline Blackman of mortgage brokers John Charcol.
‘People don't often change their buildings and contents cover once they have got it it tends to be something they pay and forget about.’
So inertia keeps the insurance in place long after the societies' compulsory term has expired.
‘I would always tell people not to be too sensitive to the special offer mortgage rate but to look at the long-term history of how the lender treats borrowers and at all the extra fees attached,’ says Ms Blackman.
She points out that a 2.5 percentage point saving on the mortgage rate might easily be cancelled out by expensive compulsory insurance and a steep arrangement fee alone.
The borrower might get an even worse deal if the lender also insists on selling an endowment policy of some sort to back the mortgage.
Most of the high street banks and the top 10 building societies are tied agents, and so can sell only one brand of insurance policy.
Indemnity insurance is another hidden cost.
Since burning their fingers on 100% lending that flared into bad debt, lenders have been insisting that customers borrowing more than 70% to 75% of property value make them a present of an insurance policy against default.
A homebuyer borrowing 95% of the valuation on a property worth £60,000 would typically face a bill of £600 to £900 or 1% to 1 1/2 % of the valuation to protect the lender against loss.
Premiums are as steep as this because insurance companies got their underwriting spectacularly wrong three years ago: in 1991 they lost £1.2bn on mortgage indemnity.
The result is that first-time buyers now have to find at least 6% of the valuation to put down in advance.
Because lenders will not go beyond 95% loans, the cost of indemnity insurance can no longer be added to the mortgage and is collected up front.
Homebuyers are also paying the price for insurance company ineptitude over unemployment cover.
After a rush of claims during the recession, insurers jacked premiums skyward: to between £5 and £6.50 per £100 covered.
They also halved payouts and even began sending out loss-adjusters to check on claimants.
Self-employed people will now find it almost impossible to buy unemployment cover for mortgage payments.
‘The whole nature of that part of the market is that as soon as the insurers found they had claims, they stopped the product rather than trying to build the book sensibly,’ says Caroline Blackman.
Taking all such extraneous factors into account, Ms Blackman says her recommendation to first-time buyers is to look for capped rates, noting the five-year cap at 10.65% offered by the Leeds Permanent (0532 438181).
For borrowers who have built up a sizeable stake in their property, she points out that the Cheltenham & Gloucester (0452 372372) has reversed the usual lender's practice of offering bigger discounts on larger loans.
The C&G is offering its best discount of 2% on loans below £60,000 and up to 60% of property valuation.
The discount, running for one year, comes off the C&G base mortgage rate of 8.5%, producing a rate of 6.5% for the first year and an annual percentage rate of 9.3%.
The C&G is also unusual in offering its discounted rates without any compulsory insurance or endowment product attached as a condition.
At London & Country Mortgages (0800 373300), the mortgage broking subsidiary of Chase de Vere, Philip Cartwright predicts that most mortgage business will continue to be in remortgaging through the winter.
A former building society manager, Mr Cartwright suggests some golden rules for people in search of a remortgage:
Always check whether your present lender can offer an improved rate, possibly charging only a nominal fee.
Get written details of all fees involved — valuation, land registry and the cost of indemnity.
Check your existing lender's redemption charge before signing up for a replacement loan.
And also find out whether your existing lender will charge for supplying references to a potential new lender.
Make sure that switching lenders will not result in any loss of mortgage interest relief.
Multiple mortgage relief on a single property or relief on home improvement loans taken out before 5 April 1988 can be lost if a new loan is taken out.
Watch out for the extra costs of low rate mortgages
BRICKS AND MORTGAGES Homebuyers should make the most of their freedom to tailor a mortgage to suit their needs
Warren Terry
Deregulation of the financial markets undoubtedly fuelled the 1980s credit boom as institutions competed fiercely to lend money.
While, with hindsight, this caused an un-sustainable level of borrowing and contributed to the collapse of the residential property market, the increased competition has placed the consumer in an all-powerful position when choosing a mortgage and how to repay it.
Few lenders now insist on taking a formal charge over a life assurance policy.
In the past, this practice effectively promoted endowment contracts as borrowers were encouraged to combine protection with investment.
Indeed, some lenders are no longer concerned with how the mortgage is repaid.
Given that buying a home is the largest financial commitment most people will ever make, the freedom now available to tailor mortgages to individual requirements should be exploited to the full by borrowers and advisers alike.
Probably the most significant development in the mortgage market in recent years is the introduction of the interest-only facility.
Now available through an increasing number of lenders, such as Cheltenham & Gloucester Building Society (phone 0800 272131).
This type of mortgage is notionally of a term of 99 years and merely requires the borrower to pay the interest at the prevailing rate.
It is therefore particularly valuable for the self-employed person who, in the early years of trading, would find it the ideal vehicle for minimising costs or raising working capital at a low rate of interest.
Obviously, repayment of the loan at some future date, particularly at retirement, will be desirable, so the borrower should make provision for this sooner rather than later.
It could also be appropriate for the professional investor who simply wishes to take advantage of cheap borrowing.
Whatever the individual circumstances, this facility liberates borrowers, perhaps in conjunction with their financial advisers, to make their own repayment arrangements.
The repayment mortgage is the traditional method of arranging a mortgage where capital is repaid by level monthly instalments together with interest.
It has proved extremely effective over the past few years.
Since the rate of repayment is reviewed only once annually, quite often the effect of mortgage rate rises has been delayed for some months, allowing the borrower to prepare for the increased cost.
Also, a combination of poor investment returns and shrinking property values has meant that steadily reducing the debt has proved prudent, particularly where borrowers have elected to move to a cheaper property.
This type of mortgage is usually arranged in conjunction with decreasing term assurance — a specialist in this area being Norwich Union (071-867 0131)— the cheapest possible form of life cover.
It seems particularly suitable for first-time buyers or highly mobile individuals, where the level of debt could prove more important than the possible future value of an investment plan such as an endowment policy.
Repayment within the specified period is guaranteed.
The endowment mortgage has become the most common form of loan, where life assurance protection and saving for repayment of the mortgage are conveniently combined.
In making a payment of interest to the lender and a contribution to a life assurance company, the debt remains constant and the borrower is offered the prospect of a maturing policy that will not only repay the mortgage but also provide a lump sum.
However, such benefits depend on the investment returns achieved on the contributions to the endowment policy and there is no guarantee that these will match expectations.
More often than not, though, given the long-term nature of the contract, the projected benefits are realistic.
To receive the full benefit of the policy, therefore, it must be held to maturity, particularly since the first two years' premiums are largely taken up in charges.
So this type of mortgage is most suited to individuals who are able to plan ahead with confidence.
An added protection benefit can now be included within the endowment policy, which provides for mortgage repayment in the event of the borrower's falling prey to critical illness.
(An insurance company catering for this is AXA Equity and Law on 071-588 6026.)
Similar in concept to the endowment mortgage, the PEP mortgage offers compelling tax advantages.
In contrast to endowment policies, which are invested in funds that are subject to corporation tax on realised and unrealised gains, investments in a personal equity plan grow free of tax.
All things being equal therefore, the ultimate encashment value of a PEP should be far greater than an endowment plan, and provide the investor with a greater surplus after repaying the mortgage.
However, PEPs do not include life assurance cover and those with dependants should take out a separate policy, at additional cost.
It seems sensible to adopt a low-risk investment strategy for the PEP, perhaps investing in UK unit trusts or investment trusts rather than individual shares; again, it requires investors to take a long-term view.
Murray Johnstone (041-226 3131) is well-known for the low charges on its PEP plans.
The setting-up costs of a PEP are far less than for an endowment policy, so, investment conditions permitting, early encashment should not prove penal.
The most tax efficient way of repaying a mortgage is the pension mortgage.
Again, interest payments are made to the lender and investment contributions to a third party.
It is tax efficient since premiums invested in a pension not only grow free of tax but also qualify for full tax relief.
Contributions to the pension are targeted so that on retirement the tax-free cash sum, 25% of the fund value, is sufficient to repay the mortgage.
Although in terms of outgoings this type of mortgage is the most expensive, it arguably provides the best value since, having repaid the mortgage, the balance of the pension fund (75%) is applied to purchasing an annuity giving a guaranteed income for life.
This type of mortgage is only available to those in non-pensionable employment, since, in order to secure the tax-free cash sum, contributions must be made to a personal pension plan, and is really only suitable for borrowers who are within 25 years of their preferred retirement date.
Clerical Medical (071-726 4256) has a plan of this type.
But note that a personal pension plan cannot be surrendered early for cash.
The freedom now available to tailor mortgages to individual requirements should be exploited to the full by borrowers and advisers
health
CRUSADE AGAINST THE CORONARY There are no miracle cures for heart disease — but some of the risks are avoidable
Trisha Greenhalgh
The human heart beats continuously from three weeks after conception until the moment of death — about three thousand million contractions.
But it achieves this solid reliability at the expense of productivity.
The efficiency of cardiac muscle (the ratio of useful work done to fuel energy burned) is 10% to 15%, compared with 25% to 30% for skeletal muscle and 40% for the average car engine.
That doesn't leave much margin for error.
While you can lose half your liver, one and a half kidneys and most of your toes before you get a noticeable drop in performance, a mere 20% fall in resting cardiac output will make you feel as though you are climbing Everest without oxygen.
Small wonder, then, that heart disease kills a quarter of us and leaves another third chronically disabled.
It is not, in fact, the heart itself that tends to fail, but its blood supply.
The heart's own oxygen does not come directly from the blood within its chambers, but from a separate system of small blood vessels that encase the heart muscle like a net — the coronary arteries.
By far the most frequent cause of irreversible damage to the heart muscle (commonly known as a heart attack) is a complete blockage in one of the coronary arteries — a coronary thrombosis.
A partial blockage (stenosis) can lead to the early warning symptoms of fatigue, breathlessness, or a cramp-like chest pain on exertion (angina).
Partially stenosed coronary arteries can often be re-bored using a hi-tech version of the pipe-cleaner known as a balloon catheter, so named because it can be blown up at the appropriate moment to expand the narrowed segment.
A more definitive operation involves building a ‘bypass’ around the blockage using bits of surplus blood vessel from other parts of the body.
This is known as a coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) or ‘cabbage’ in the trade.
CABG is now the most common non-emergency operation in the US.
The stuff that furs up coronary arteries must be one of the most lethal substances known to man.
Its official name is atheroma, and its three main ingredients are platelets, the tiny blood cells that are the raw material for any blood clot; fibrin, a stringy protein that forms a three-dimensional mesh to entrap the platelets; and cholesterol, which binds the whole lot together and sticks it to the sides of blood vessels.
Sugar (which makes platelets stickier) promotes atheroma formation; aspirin (which makes them less sticky) and the female hormone oestrogen (which diverts cholesterol into more benign activities) protect against it.
Smoking increases the level of fibrin (or, strictly, of its precursor fibrinogen) in the blood.
This means that if you are a male diabetic smoker with a high cholesterol level, your blood tends to churn out atheroma like a Jersey cow makes cream.
Let's hope you don't also suffer from high blood pressure (which increases both the rate of atheroma build-up and the heart's workload) or obesity (which also increases cardiac workload).
The biggest risk factor of all is an inherited predisposition, which is why life insurance salesmen run a mile when they hear that your dad died of a coronary at 35.
Compared with these major risk factors, the contribution of life stress and the much-ridiculed ‘coronary-prone’ or Type A personality (aggressive, ambitious, restless and excessively concerned with time and deadlines) to a person's coronary risk profile is small.
Very high alcohol intake increases your coronary risk, but a small amount — say a glass of wine — may protect, as may hard water (goodness knows how) and sunshine.
Racial factors also play a part — Asians have a 50% higher risk than Caucasians or Orientals.
Vigorous exercise for 20 minutes three times a week will approximately halve your chances of coronary thrombosis, as will getting rid of your spare tyre, cooperating with treatment for your raised blood pressure, and giving up smoking — even if the experience counts as a major life stress!
Certain drugs — such as aspirin, beta-blockers, and cholesterol lowering drugs — benefit some people but not others.
Don't ask me why, ask your doctor.
Now for the cholesterol controversy.
Evidence is mounting against the received wisdom that interfering with a person's cholesterol intake can reliably alter his or her destiny.
All those who have been sticking religiously to their macrobiotic diet sheets while dreaming wistfully of soft boiled eggs and buttered soldiers can probably breathe again (but watch this space).
Unless your cholesterol level is off the scale (by which I mean approaching double figures when measured in millimoles per litre), the degree of change in absolute coronary risk that you can bring about by dietary measures is spitting in the wind.
This is partly because eating foods you don't like (and avoiding those you do) day after day is nigh-on impossible, and partly because your personal cholesterol level is as normal and natural for you as your shoe size, so your body has various feedback mechanisms to keep it at that level.
Having said that, a diet low in saturated fat protects against several other potentially fatal diseases — notably diabetes, breast cancer and gallstones — but that is a subject for another day.
For one victim in five, the first manifestation of heart disease is sudden death.
Coronary risk factors are multiplicative, not additive, so if you already have one or two unavoidable risk factors, the last thing you should do is assume that the sword of Damocles is irrevocably poised above you and reach for another cigarette.
But if you wait for the cholesterol advice pendulum to complete its swing, you can probably tuck into a cream doughnut instead.
Taking heart from a check-up
absence control systems
ABSENCE MAKES THE COMPANY POORER There are sound business reasons for UK companies to manage absenteeism, but many of them are still complacent
Lesley Bolton
‘Absenteeism is like fungus.
It thrives in dark corners.
The more you leave it alone, the more it spreads.’
So says Andrew Serjeant in The Missing Workforce .
There is no doubt that, in the UK, absent workers are a major issue.
In 1991, an Arthur Andersen survey on absenteeism estimated that some 1m employees are absent from work every day and that the problem costs industry over £6bn a year.
Before the recession, businesses were better able to absorb the problem.
But now, in the main, companies are leaner and fitter; they have pared down their operations in order to survive.
When employees fail to turn up for work today, it can often cause huge management headaches, particularly in labour intensive industries where absence may require reallocation of production line work and potential bottlenecks in the system.
‘If companies are getting leaner, absenteeism becomes a big problem and cracks soon begin to appear,’ says Tarquin Desoutter of Arthur Andersen.
‘All those measures taken to make the company leaner — lay offs and so on— can be countered by absenteeism.
It should be a board-level concern in any company.’
Quantifying the direct costs of the problem is relatively straightforward — the salary cost of the individual plus overtime or replacement costs.
Indirect costs are more subjective, and, as the Andersen survey points out, ‘have a wider implication for the competitiveness of the firm’.
Any measurement of the problem —‘an essential precursor to effective action’— is dependent on access to accurate information, but AA found that ‘the introduction of computer-based monitoring systems has not gone hand in hand with the development of reporting and management systems’.
‘The number of companies that don't have the right picture is amazing,’ Mr Desoutter says.
Where absenteeism does become a focus of management attention, there are very tangible improvements.
One company in the food processing and distribution market claimed that it experienced a 50% reduction in absenteeism from 8% to 4% over a three year period.
When accurate information is available for analysis by management, trends and patterns in absenteeism will emerge and appropriate action can be decided on.
Does absenteeism relate to particular individuals, or to individuals under a particular supervisor; are there problems with specific buildings, branches or departments; is it more prevalent on a Monday or after Bank Holidays? and so on.
In Absent from Work , a survey by recruitment consultants Alfred Marks, 40% of companies say high levels of absenteeism were caused by poor management and 35% low job interest or motivation — both issues that could be addressed by an effective change in company policy.
Where sickness rates are high it might be in both employers' and employees' interests for the company to introduce private health cover, where swift treatment may mean an earlier return to work.
Low job interest and morale could be improved by introducing pay incentive schemes, for instance.
The most important aid to establishing absenteeism patterns is the introduction of computer-based monitoring systems.
Of course many companies, particularly in manufacturing industry, will have been using ‘time and attendance’ systems for some time.
These can be as basic as manual clocking in and clocking off mechanisms.
However, these are much more sophisticated these days and the basic information collected on the shopfloor can be down-loaded to payroll systems and to absence monitoring modules to provide the personnel department with instantaneous information about who is in.
Networked systems allow this information to be accessed even across diverse locations and sites.
Midland Software's recently launched Delphi Absence application, part of its Delphi suite of personnel systems, was developed in conjunction with one of the high street banks.
‘They approached us right back at the sales stage,’ says Stewart Shepherd, marketing director.
‘It was a good opportunity for us to develop the application as part of the contract.’
Although it was developed on an IBM mainframe, the same business requirements have been taken and the package is available on IBM's AS/400, on Unix and on ICL mainframes.
Absence monitoring, which can operate as part of Delphi's integrated human resource management suite, allows users to record all periods of employee absence, detailing durations and reasons for absence, such as holidays, lieu days, jury service, compassionate leave, study leave, examinations, Territorial Army and sickness.
It can be customised to fit the individual customer's specific company or employee holiday and sickness entitlements, and a suitable reporting system installed.
Delphi Absence then generates both individual and employee reports, and group reports which analyse absence type, frequency and pattern.
Although Midland Software has always had an absence monitoring module, Mr Shepherd identifies two reasons for the new approach reflected in Delphi Absence.
First, there is a punitive element; to ‘catch out’ the offenders.
But second, and more important, is the positive element of companies' wanting to monitor absence for more paternalistic reasons.
Delphi collects the data to plot the absence trends which, once established, the company can then take positive steps to help employees.
As David Laking, managing director of Peterborough Software, a major supplier of personnel systems, points out: ‘People are a company's greatest asset.
In the majority of companies staff are very expensive.
If there is a problem with an employee's attendance, counselling is the first option because it is more expensive to sack someone, particularly at the professional level, and have to go out and recruit a new employee.’
Peterborough, whose users include Marks & Spencer, Reuters and Exxon, has a range of solutions for use on IBM mainframes, IBM AS/400, ICL mainframes, open systems and PCs.
It does have a time and attendance system, called Unistar, but this is sold and supported through Smart Systems.
‘UniStar just collects data from the shop-floor, which then feeds into payroll and personnel management systems for analysis,’ he says.
Peterborough's PS 2000 absence management system provides instant access to detailed information on all absence, giving the user an opportunity to effectively control and monitor the heavy costs and increase profitability.
It helps management build a complete picture of various types of absence, and to identify potential abuses.
When Harwood Consultancy became involved in personnel software during the eighties, absence monitoring was ‘about booking holidays and planning absences.’
But ‘personnel managers are now more concerned with productivity and meeting budgets, and maximising efficiency.
As a result they are more demanding.’
Harwood Personnel, a PC-based system, runs on any IBM or PC compatible system and on any DOS compatible network.
The system is flexible and fits in with the user's way of working.
John Wilman Ltd (Coloroll), took on Harwood Personnel in September last year after agreeing special rules with its union.
Lateness is strictly monitored over rolling 20-day periods, while unauthorised absence is carried forward over three months.
Both these requirements needed special records and reports.
The company had been working with DBase III, but without much joy, simply because of the system's relative inflexibility and technical complexity.
Harwood Personnel is based on Q&A, the database and word processing system.
It is easy to work with, not just for the end user, but also for the programmer, which meant Harwood could tailor systems quickly to meet particular requirements.
The user also benefits from the system's adaptability, which allows ad hoc reports to be produced quickly.
Matthew Wauchope, sales director at Imago Systems, which supplies integrated human resource management applications for use on mainframes, minis and multi-user PCs to medium to large-size companies, also stresses the need for very functional systems that can be tailored to meet different users' requirements.
‘Users might want to record certain analysis codes against each transaction, for example road accidents,’ he says.
‘All our users have complex requirements.’
Imago's users include Hotpoint, Gallaher, Taylor Woodrow and the Yorkshire Building Society.
Many employers allow their staff to work on a flexi-time basis which, while providing staff with an obvious perk, can be an administrative nightmare for management.
However, well-managed, it is a useful management tool for reducing absenteeism.
By giving staff flexibility to attend to private matters more easily during the working week, it raises their levels of motivation and morale, thus producing lower levels of absenteeism.
One software company, Data Collection Systems, has a dedicated package — called Core Control — for monitoring flexi-time.
The system offers a fast and reliable method of electronically collecting attendance ‘clockings’ for immediate analysis by any managers authorised to access the system.
By defining work patterns for each employee, the system knows when to expect attendance.
Any deviations from the normal hours worked are clearly highlighted in automatic exception reports.
Derwentside District Council installed the system on its IBM AS/400 in November 1991.
It covers 550 staff across the board, from the finance department, through to housing, in 12 remote sites.
These are linked back to the head office.
‘In the past it was difficult to get the data and identify any absenteeism problems,’ says chief information officer Alan Hodgson.
‘Before we had the system, sick cards and payroll were the best method we had of monitoring absenteeism.
‘Flexi-time was seen as a staff perk, but the new system gave us, management, something back.
It allows us to set numerous codes for different types of absence, such as dentist's appointment, doctor etc.
We have divided the council's activities into cost centres and the system allows us to instantly analyse the information in tabular form.
‘Each cost centre manager gets a detailed report, and the chief officer gets a summary broken down into cost centres.
‘When we got our first serious analysis from the system in January 1992, there was a minor panic at the amount of sick days reported, although it was not quite so bad when we analysed the figures further and found that one employee's long-term sickness was affecting the averages.
‘We found that there was a lot of problematical sickness in the non-certified days, ie a lot of people were coming back to work just before they needed a doctor's certificate.
The system picks up these sorts of problems straightaway.’
In its geographical analysis, the DCS system also picked up a problem with a particular building.
‘We had one building where staff always complained of being sick, with suggestions that it might be a case of sick building syndrome.
This is where geographical analysis can be useful.’
With some modifications by DCS, Derwentside's system is able to account for staff who go out on appointments, such as health inspectors.
Such employees are designated ‘business users’ and assigned a special code on the system indicating that they are out on business.
‘The beauty of the system is that the information is there instantaneously and there is no more scrapping around with bits of paper,’ says Mr Hodgson.
The technology for monitoring absenteeism is there for the companies that want to take control of what can be a major expense and loss of competitive edge.
But as Tarquin Desoutter says: ‘A lot of companies still only pay lip service to the area.’
And even if they do collect the information, a lot of them ‘fall down’ because they don't act on it.
‘At the end of the day, a system is only as good as the user wants it to be,’ says Peterborough Software's David Laking.
1m employees are absent from work every day and the problem costs industry over £6bn a year…
It should be a board-level concern in any company
Flexi-time can be a useful management tool for reducing absenteeism
The British Chiropractic Association estimates that backpain alone costs UK business £3.5bn a year in lost production
electronic data interchange
TIES THAT BIND The adoption of electronic data interchange looks set to forge closer relationships between customers and suppliers during the 1990s
Alison Classe
Electronic data interchange, or EDI, is another of those information technology concepts that, after politely lurking in the background for a few decades, is suddenly forcing itself on our attention with unmannerly persistence.
The concept has been around for at least 30 years; the American Hospital Supply Corporation was receiving electronic purchase orders from the hospitals it supplied in the early 1960s.
Although there are plenty of small traders around to whom EDI still means nothing, BT predicts that within two to three years over 50,000 firms worldwide will be using it.
Electonic data — or document — interchange differs from electronic mail in that information is exchanged in the form of structured ‘documents’ adhering to some standard understood by both sending and receiving computers.
The use of such standards means that information can be exchanged in a concise and, with any luck, unambiguous format.
Compared with manual exchange of documents, the advantages of a reliable EDI system are in terms of labour saving and reduction of errors.
Invoices go out on time and they can't get lost in the post or mis-filed.
Compared with the exchange of data on magnetic tapes, EDI speeds up the process dramatically.
It's an enabling technology for concepts like zero-defects and just-in-time inventory management.
The benefits of EDI have tended to be unevenly distributed, however.
Smaller companies who want to do business with, say, motor manufacturers or DIY retailers often have very little choice about whether or not to adopt EDI.
Some large customers will offer their suppliers incentives to do so, but more often they will offer ultimata: they set deadlines by which their suppliers must convert to EDI if they want to continue to be their suppliers.
Apart from the hassles of implementing EDI, suppliers may lose out because they tend to find themselves bearing the cost of holding the stocks which previously were held by their customer.
These woes are compounded by an acute form of a problem that besets most branches of computing and telecommunications — the need for a universally accepted standard.
Of course, for early EDI users, getting two computers, one's own and one belonging to a trading partner, to talk to one another , was quite enough of a challenge, without worrying about other people you and your partners might want to communicate with some time in the future.
These early users decided their own message formats and communication conventions.
With the accelerating spread of EDI, generally agreed EDI standards are becoming an urgent requirement.
If your business needs to deal with n different ‘trading partners’, you don't want to have to send messages in n different formats, or subscribe to several different networks.
Yet, to a large extent, this is what companies have had to do.
An IT supplier at a manufacturing company which supplies DIY retailers says: ‘We have PC software that allows us to receive orders from people like B&Q and Wickes via the Tradanet network, and we're experimenting with sending back invoices that way.
However, we're also starting to deal with other types of retailers such as the mail-order houses, and that will very likely involve us in different messaging standards.
If we can make EDI work effectively everyone will benefit, but getting going is a pain, frankly.’
Life is slowly becoming a little easier.
The process began with the emergence of standards for individual businesses such as the automotive industry, where the pan-European standard is known as Odette.
However, many organisations need to talk to partners in a range of different industries.
The recognition that a general-purpose standard was needed led to the appearance of X12 from the American National Standards Institute (ANSI).
Although there's a high degree of X12 compliance in the US, in Europe the preferred standard is EDIFACT (see Panel 1 — SITPRO).
X12 is expected to converge with EDIFACT by 1994, which will streamline international EDI communications.
At present, suppliers still need to face up to the fact that different customers may have different EDI requirements.
Software vendors such as Telesmart are doing their bit to help by providing software to sit between users' applications and the various EDI networks (see Panel 2 — British Gypsum).
Increasingly, links between different network services are being made available by the service providers.
BT recently announced that it was providing interconnection between its EDI Net and the EDI services of AT&T and IBM, bringing the total number of interconnections available to EDI users to 24 worldwide.
Those links enable EDI users to communicate with one another even if they've opted to subscribe to different networks.
In this way, we're starting to get away from the dangers associated with monopolistic suppliers and purchasers, because it's less easy for large organisations to circumscribe their trading partners by making them use a particular EDI network.
Large organisations that want to do business via EDI can provide valuable assistance to their trading partners in getting online.
Retail giant Sears, known for what the company itself has described as an ‘aggressive’ stance on EDI, has been encouraging its suppliers to adopt EDI at a rate of 200 a month.
It has helped them to do so, providing PC software, training and communications links.
Recently, Sears in the UK announced a plan to provide its suppliers with a direct link to Sears' high street shops, such as Selfridges, using BT's EDI Net and Global Network Services (GNS), BT's managed data network providing links to over 100 countries.
The specially-tailored solution, Ensemble, allows marketing data as well as orders and invoices to be exchanged.
Sears says that because its solution conforms to general rather than inhouse standards, suppliers using Ensemble will be able to use the same approach to trade with other partners, so that the proprietary ‘lock-in’ is avoided.
Sears is using EDI in pursuit of a ‘quick response’ strategy, whereby the process of restocking its retail outlets becomes more of a science and less of an art.
Through collecting up-to-the-minute information on what is selling and what isn't, and then making it available to suppliers via EDI, it becomes possible to achieve a stock replenishment process that is highly responsive to customer demand.
On the one hand, suppliers will deliver only items that are explicitly requested by the stores, and on the other they will be privy to market data and forecasts, so that they can plan their manufacturing activities accordingly.
The result should be to reduce both parties' costs of stockholding, argues Sears.
Given that a large part of Sears' business lies in the fashion area, responsiveness to the whim of the customer is particularly critical.
‘The sooner we can indicate to our suppliers that a particular style or colour isn't selling, the better for both of us.
It means we can all be concentrating on the winners, not the losers,’ says a Sears spokesman.
As EDI becomes more sophisticated, less obvious uses for the technology are coming along.
Digital's HostBridge for DEC/EDI Application Services is an approach to integrating computer systems from different vendors, specifically IBM mainframes and DEC VAXs, into a single architecture.
The objective is to enable them to move EDI messages around the organisation and also, via the VAX, to exchange EDI communications with their trading partners over a range of different networks.
‘In a big group like ours, probably 80%–90% of our communications are internal to the group,’ estimates Tage Nordin, manufacturing systems manager for Ericsson Radio Systems AB in Stockholm.
Ericsson is currently implementing HostBridge, with live running planned for spring 1993.
It's being used to integrate Ericsson's computer applications: to pass all kinds of data, in batch mode, between computer systems running on various platforms.
Instead of having to write a customised interface each time a new inter-system link is required, Ericsson will be able to use HostBridge's standard mechanism to transport the data.
Mr Nordin says: ‘When you make an international phone call, you don't worry what network or exchange or lines your voice travels over — you just use a logical address, the telephone number, to reach the person you want to talk to.
This is the same philosophy — you separate the physical side of the communication from the logical side.
You can pass any type of information around — financial, technical, administrative, we don't care.
If there's a standard message format, we'll use it, otherwise we'll create one.’
Mr Nordin is finding that, using a standard package, introducing EDI is technically simple, but poses some management challenges.
‘It's difficult for people to accept that they can't interfere with the transfer of data once it's automated.
Information system people suddenly become a lot less important in this context.’
Girish Naik, UK marketing manager for business communications with DEC, says that Ericsson's use of HostBridge illustrates a requirement typical of many large organisations, which are likely to have acquired a mishmash of software and hardware over the years.
‘You might have a sales order processing system sitting on one computer; once an order has been processed, it sends a message to an inventory system on another computer, which checks whether the item is there, and if it is initiates the shipment, or if not may request the supply of the item by sending a message to a third system.
Some companies have tackled the task of connecting their different systems via electronic mail, but EDI is increasingly being used.’
Among smaller firms, it's possible that Customs changes with respect to the single European market may accelerate the take-up of EDI.
From 1 January 1993 border controls on intra-EC movements of goods were relaxed, but some of the information previously collected at the frontiers instead has to be submitted in the form of monthly returns to HM Customs & Excise.
The information is needed for the compilation of trade figures as well as for VAT calculations.
A surprising number of traders, not to say software houses, still appear to be in a state of blissful ignorance about the new requirements.
When they realise their predicament, BT is hoping to step into the breach, taking advantage of Customs' willingness to accept the returns over EDI.
BT has developed a range of new software, including both packages that will help customers either to type in the data for the returns and tailored solutions to retrieve the data automatically from existing accounting systems.
The information will be passed to Customs over BT's EDI Net service.
BT sees this as an opportunity for companies ‘to get started in EDI’.
Obviously, BT's hope is that once they're hooked, companies will adopt EDI for talking to their trading partners, as well as to Customs.
The single market is sure to have some impact on EDI use, but the main motivation for adopting EDI in the lean 1990s is competitive pressure.
Large companies can't afford unnecessary stockholding or paperwork, and they are going to press their trading partners to ensure that they don't have to.
The result is likely to be closer relationships between customers and suppliers, which could be good news: Japanese companies such as Honda Motor tend to choose a few preferred suppliers and stick with them, rather than playing the field, and this policy seems to have paid off handsomely.
Whatever the pros and cons, for many companies there will be little option.
As a Sears executive told a recent EDI conference: ‘Getting on the EDI express doesn't guarantee success, but staying off, I think, will ensure failure.’
EDI: Cutting waste paper
Getting on the EDI express doesn't guarantee success, but staying off, I think, will ensure failure
EDI: needs unambiguous message formats
1: SITPRO
SITPRO, the UK's ‘Simpler Trades Procedures Board’, has been working on EDI standards for two decades.
It published an early EDI ‘syntax’ in 1978, and this formed the basis for subsequent standards including TRADCOMS, as well as for a European standard, UN/GTDI.
Subsequently, SITPRO and ANSI, the American standards body, collaborated on the development of an international standard, EDIFACT, at the behest of the United Nations.
SITPRO now participates in the continuing definition of the standard as a member of the UN's EDIFACT committee.
Other related activities include membership of a westen European EDIFACT board and support for the British Standards Institution's EDI activities.
SITPRO has developed Interbridge, a ‘translator’ software package for converting data from application programs into a variety of EDI formats, and converting incoming EDI data for loading into applications.
For £250 a year, EDI users can subscribe to SITPRO's EDIFACT Service, which provides a comprehensive guide to implementing the UN/EDIFACT standard, with regular updates as new message types are developed.
SITPRO can be contacted on 071-287 3525.
2: BRITISH GYPSUM
Some EDI users tackle the problem of having to satisfy the disparate requirements of a variety of trading partners by adding a software element which allows them to generate and read in messages in a variety of formats.
British Gypsum, part of BPB Industries plc, is the UK's largest supplier of plaster products (of which BPB as a whole is Europe's largest supplier).
The company started to use EDI about three years ago, using what information technology manager Paul Cooper describes as a fairly basic interface to Tradanet.
‘Some of our major customers were talking about EDI, and we realised that if our competitors were offering the facility and we weren't it would score against us.
We were market leaders and were determined to stay market leaders.
‘But we didn't want to go in with a heavy commitment at first; we took a PC and wrote our own very simple software to deal with incoming orders.’
The EDI software wasn't really integrated with British Gypsum's other corporate systems; it was limited in function, and geared to a particular EDI network, Tradanet.
Even with these limitations, the home-grown system brought British Gypsum benefits that made it want to take EDI much further.
‘EDI gives you increased efficiency and accuracy.
We know, for example, our invoices are going to reach our customers’ systems accurately, so queries, misunderstandings and discussions are minimised,’says Mr Cooper.
In spring 1992, with a view to expanding its use of EDI, the company adopted a package called Atlas EDI from software company Telesmart.
British Gypsum was able to implement Atlas inhouse, though it received what Mr Cooper describes as ‘professional’ support from Telesmart.
Atlas's purpose is to sit between the corporate systems and the EDI network, allowing messages to be generated to various standards and in various formats.
This means that adding new customers is suddenly much less of a problem, since Atlas allows electronic trading over virtually any EDI network.
Each night, all British Gypsum manufacturing sites send details of sales to a central accounting system, which processes the transactions and passes invoices to Atlas.
Atlas then generates invoice EDI messages in the appropriate format for each customer.
Quoting the saying that the way to eat an elephant is one bite at a time, Mr Cooper explains that the company is gradually converting more and more document types to electronic processing.
‘Customers’ orders, as well as invoices, can be processed via the EDI network and Atlas; we expect the number of customers wanting to transmit orders in this way to increase substantially over the next two years.
We've also introduced electronic debit and credit notes.
‘Now we're looking to encourage our customers to send remittance advices electronically so we can post them straight into the sales ledger, and eventually we'll ‘close the loop’ as regards other documents too.
By picking off the documents that form the basis of the customer-supplier relationship one at a time, we can understand what we're doing and become very effective very quickly.’
While some British Gypsum customers were eager to use EDI, others have been less quick off the mark, but the company is doing some proselytising.
‘We pass on knowledge to our trading partners, telling them what we see to be the benefits, and what some of our other customers have found to be the benefits.
Atlas EDI offers a very cost-effective and flexible way of getting started in EDI; the biggest cost is to develop or acquire routines to import data from their other computer systems.
We haven't come across anyone yet who's had to spend an horrendous amount on implementing Atlas.’
Mr Cooper identifies as the major single benefit of EDI a closer relationship between supplier and customer, rather on the Japanese model.
‘It lets us enter a more open dialogue, for mutual benefit.
Whereas we used to have what you might call an across-the-table relationship with our customers, now we can claim to be sitting on the same side of the table.’
EDI gives you increased efficiency and accuracy…queries, misunderstandings and discussions are minimised
CORRECTION
Piers Cooper the author of New Ways to DIP into Information (see ACCOUNTANCY , November 1992, pp 62-63), is a managing consultant with Touche Ross Management Consultants.
what's new in accounting systems
WHAT'S NEW IN ACCOUNTING SYSTEMS
EC VAT returns
After 10 February many company finance directors may find themselves liable to criminal proceedings — the penalty for traders with EC imports/ exports over £135,000 a year who make late or inaccurate Intrastat returns.
Many of the large suppliers of accounting software have modified their offerings to help users meet the new requirements, and there are also a number of packages emerging dedicated to automating compliance with the new EC customs and VAT requirements.
Trade-Track can be used stand-alone or integrated with existing systems to capture, where possible, relevent existing data.
The package produces the two reports required for all import/export activity between EC member states:
ESL — the EC Sales list
SSD — the Intrastat report
Facilities are also available to generate consignor, consignee, product sales, country sales and country purchases reports.
Additional features include audit trails, currency conversions (using both Customs' monthly rates and users' actual sterling values) and consolidation of returns.
Trade-Track requires a PC-compatible with DOS 3.0 or higher.
A licence for single PC and/or PC network use costs £900.
Further details: Phone Fernhart on 081-658 7833 for further details.
EC Manager has also been designed to help traders produce the necessary reports and fulfil their obligations with the minimum of time and effort.
It is available in two formats:
EC Customs Manager — for traders with EC imports/ exports over £135,000
EC VAT Manager — for traders with EC imports/ exports under £135,000.
This does not include the Intrastat module.
EC Manager is DOS-based, but runs on top of Lotus 1-2-3 v3.0 or upwards.
Customs Manager costs £495 for a single user, VAT Manager, £195.
Additional network users are charged at £95 each for up to eight network users.
Phone Adaytum Systems on 0272 215555 for further details.
Companyline
Six of the world's major rival providers of financial information (Dun & Bradstreet, Disclosure, Moody's, Extel Financial, ICC and Hemmington Scott) have joined forces to set up Companyline.
It will allow instant and easy access, on computer screens, to the financial reports and results of 4.5m companies in over 40 countries, and is believed to be the largest integrated online database of its kind.
This corporate information will be available via Maid (Market Analysis and Information Database) Systems, and will be fully integrated with Maid's existing services Researchline and Newsline, which provide access to research reports and business news from over 4,000 newspapers and journals from 40 countries.
Phone Maid Systems Ltd on 071-253 6900 for further details.
Computer disasters
Due to the late arrival of many entries, the deadline date for the Computer Nightmares Competition (see ACCOUNTANCY , November 1992, p 61) was extended to December 14 1992.
Professional Standards Committee
A SOFTLY SOFTLY APPROACH Technical excellence is the continuing aim of the Professional Standards Committee
Chris Hordern
The Professional Standards Committee has changed its spots.
When a report on its activities last appeared in ACCOUNTANCY as long ago as December 1983, the committee formed part of the Institute's Professional Conduct Department, providing it with a means of reacting to complaints of a technical nature without invoking the full panoply of investigatory and disciplinary procedures.
The year 1989 was a watershed, since the professional climate was changing and there was a clear public expectation that the Institute should adopt a higher profile in dealing with technical matters, especially those involving public interest cases.
The Dearing Committee's recommendations had been accepted and the new Companies Act saw the creation of the independent Financial Reporting Council with its own Review Panel.
In addition, the Institute's own regulatory processes were extended to encompass new responsibilities in audit review.
Such changes re-emphasised the advantages of the Professional Standards Committee's role.
Being less official than the Review Panel and the Institute's Practice Regulation Directorate, it was better able, in a firm but cooperative style as an Institute committee and speaking member to member, quietly to ‘promote’ and ‘encourage’the adoption of the highest technical standards.
To strengthen this role, it was decided to transfer the committee to the Technical Department in 1989, thus further emphasising the premium placed on technical excellence.
The move provides several benefits:
Work can, to a greater extent, be proactive rather than reactive.
The department's wide expertise in technical matters can be drawn upon more easily.
Matters can be raised with members from a technical or advisory point of view without the adversarial nature of the disciplinary processes immediately being brought into play.
The committee also continues to act as adviser to the Professional Conduct Department on the technical aspects of disciplinary complaints.
The Institute's initiative in providing this service to its members has the support of the Review Panel and the Department of Trade and Industry, as well as the Auditing Practices Board and the Accounting Standards Board.
Such bodies recognise that there are very few listed companies whose financial statements do not involve an Institute member either as preparer or auditor.
This provides the Institute with a unique influence in the maintenance of technical standards.
The Financial Reporting Council's Review Panel is an autonomous body constituted entirely outside the accountancy profession.
The Professional Standards Committee is an Institute committee.
It follows that it is possible for a member to have the same problem raised by both bodies more or less at the same time.
Although to date it has happened only twice, I recognise, as the committee's chairman, that this is not satisfactory and it is the committee's practice in such situations to suspend its own enquiry immediately.
The committee's enquiries involve many types of organisation, including building societies, partnerships, housing associations and working men's clubs, in addition to listed and unlisted companies.
Its membership is drawn from a wide range of expertise, embracing representatives of the major firms, small practices and business.
It has no powers of its own, acting rather as a technical antenna through which individual members can discuss difficult areas and reconcile conflicting views.
Obviously such discussions may extend further than mandatory requirements dictate and indeed, from time to time, emerging issues have merited reference through the appropriate channels to the Accounting Standards Board or to the Urgent Issues Task Force for further consideration.
So how does the committee operate and what happens to the results of its deliberations?
Matters for consideration arise from a variety of sources including direct correspondence, press comment, liaison with The Stock Exchange and referrals from other Institute committees.
Having corresponded with the member or members concerned, the committee looks at the facts it has obtained and expresses a technical opinion, which it may follow up in various ways.
Cases considered during the past year have been concluded as shown in the panel.
Accountancy has never been an exact science and, while grey areas exist in the general application of its principles, the Professional Standards Committee will continue to play a role.
While members have occasionally expressed surprise at the committee's sudden appearance in the front line, their cooperation has demonstrated the value of a discreet forum for discussing and resolving difficult problems outside the disciplinary processes.
Long may it flourish!
Chris Hordern is a member of Council and chairman of the Professional Standards Committee
women in accountancy
DEACON GRAY
A very natural practice
Many people would balk at the thought of setting up a new business during a recession; but to embark on a new accountancy partnership when half of it is about to have a baby would surely cause the strongest to flinch.
Not so Sandra Deacon and Claire Gray, who launched Deacon Gray on 1 August last year, three months before the birth of Claire's second baby.
‘I took a week off,’ says Claire with an alarmingly capable smile.
‘I took three weeks off with the first.’
Considering how long the formation of Deacon Gray had been in the pipeline, the eventual timing might seem strange.
But to Sandra and Claire, long standing friends who both manage to exude competence and equanimity from every pore, it was entirely natural.
The pair met at the London office of Armitage & Norton, which merged with Saffery Champness in 1986.
Claire joined the firm from Bristol Polytechnic, where she studied accounting and finance, but Sandra had taken a more indirect route.
‘I went straight from school to the Inland Revenue,’ she says.
‘I worked for three years in the Collector of Taxes department, which was really just shuffling papers and asking for money.
I had to speak to accountants, asking for information and so on, and they always seemed to be out at lunch, whether it was 10 in the morning or five in the afternoon.
Of course they really were avoiding me, but at the time I thought it was true and it sounded great!’
She wrote to three or four firms she had had contact with and was taken on by a small partnership in Orpington.
‘I was their first student.’
After qualifying, she joined Armitage & Norton in 1985, where she met Claire, and they hit it off straight away.
‘Sandra didn't have any experience in auditing, so I taught her how to audit, even though I wasn't qualified then,’ remembers Claire.
‘We got on very well together and have done ever since.
It became a standing joke that we would eventually work together, and then one day it became serious.
It just took us a long time.’
Claire left Armitage & Norton just before the merger, joining Coopers & Lybrand's small business department.
‘The variety of work was much wider — I did a lot of work with business plans.
And they were a good bunch of people, but the down side was that Armitage & Norton was much more friendly and accessible.’
Claire had always planned to set up her own practice and she left Coopers in December 1989, when she was expecting her first child.
‘I wanted the freedom of working for myself.
I felt I had gained enough experience and as I was having the baby it all tied in together.’
But wasn't it a risk setting up alone at a time when you wouldn't be able to work continuously?
‘Wrong assumption!’ she laughs.
‘I worked from home and took Elliot with me to see clients.
He slept almost continuously at first so I could work almost as normal.
If he woke up, I'd feed him and take him around the block until he dropped off again.’
Meanwhile, Sandra had stayed on with Saffery Champness after the merger.
‘I moved over to auditing and I think I was very lucky because I was promoted quite quickly.
I stayed there until 1990.’
Then she, too, set up her own practice.
‘I had always had private clients in my spare time and they were gathering momentum,’ she says.
‘I had a full-time job at Saffery Champness and then crammed another day's work in.
I did that for 18 months, leaving Safferys at seven and not getting home until midnight.
I had to make a decision.
My grass roots were general practice and I liked talking to people and solving problems, but as you get promoted within a firm you lose that personal contact.
I thought that if I never tried it on my own, I would always wonder whether I could.’
Sandra's husband, a typesetter, offered her a room at his offices in central London, which cut her costs right down.
‘The costs are the biggest bar to people setting up on their own but I could use his phones, his photocopier, computer, telex, even his secretary to begin with.’
Saffery Champness also proved very supportive, allowing her to gradually wind down her hours, first to four days a week, then to three and two, before she eventually left.
‘They were excellent.’
The firm still refers clients to Deacon Gray and Sandra goes back there from time to time for training courses.
Two years after Sandra set up on her own, Claire joined her.
‘I feel that we have been working together for much longer,’ says Sandra, ‘because even when we had our own businesses we would ring each other up for advice.
If I ever had to qualify an audit report, I'd run it past Claire first.
We always regarded it as a partnership, we just hadn't made it official by telling the Institute or the Inland Revenue.’
‘I had warned my clients that our joining together was imminent,’ says Claire.
‘I already used this office occasionally.’
Claire now works from home, coming into the office once a week and seeing clients on two more days.
‘That's how I plan to keep it at the moment.
Although I work at weekends and evenings, a couple of days on my own with the kids works out just right.
It's a happy balance between running a family and a business.’
They have a wide range of clients, from artists and photographers to electricians, and are planning to expand — they are already looking for new offices.
They have one more qualified member of staff, a mother who works part time.
‘She felt pressurised that she would be expected to be as career-orientated as she was before having the baby,’ says Sandra, ‘so she works with us because we are relaxed about it — if she doesn't want to work on Wednesday, that's fine, she can work on Friday instead.
Who cares?’
They say they have never encountered any problems in being an all-female firm; if anything, they find that a lot of their male clients find it easier to talk to a woman about their finances.
And although Claire says that she likes the idea that they are women and promotes that image, they do not want to be seen as a peculiarity.
‘We are not together because we happen to be two women,’ says Sandra.
‘We are together because we get on well.’
Sandra Deacon (left) and Claire Gray: Planning to expand
finance & investment
REGIONAL BREWERS
Cider outperforms beer
The brewery sector as a whole has underperformed the stockmarkets in recent months as the recession has deepened within the pub trade.
The eighth annual Directory of Regional Brewers, Pub Operations and Cider Makers , from Robert Fleming Securities, notes that ‘in many instances, bar prices have simply risen by more than the consumer is prepared to spend’.
On a one-year view, the authors recommend Boddington, Devenish, Greenalls and Wolverhampton & Dudley as buys among the larger companies, and Burtonwood, Gibbs Mew and Shepherd Neame among the smaller ones.
For the first time the annual incorporates details of the leading cider makers.
UK cider sales have risen from 46.5m gallons in 1980 to 76.8m gallons in 1991, and the annual records that sales were up again in 1992.
Flemings believes that the cider industry is poised for excellent growth at the (higher margin) premium end of the market.
It rates HP Bulmer a buy and believes that the forward-looking price-earnings multiple on Taunton Cider's shares is justified by the prospects.
‘Cider is a good area at the moment,’ says co-author Philip Shaw, ‘and is likely to remain so for some time.
This product is enjoying a reasonable degree of marketing spend it never had before.’
The research publication also contains details of the new independent pub operators — such as Enterprise Inns, Paramount, Pubmaster — which often acquired pubs when the majors were reducing their tied outlets to comply with the Beer Orders.
Besides providing detailed information about regional brewers listed on the stock market, Flemings again publishes brief details about the outer fringe operators, many of which are privately owned.
Examples are W H Brakspear & Sons whose Henley brewery is ‘renowned for the quality of its draught beers’, T D Ridley & Sons of Chelmsford, Essex ‘many connoisseurs rate Ridley's as some of the finest cask conditioned beers available in Britain', and Wadworth & Co of Devizes, Wiltshire which has a ‘highly regarded ale portfolio, led by the renowned 6X’.
Over the past four years the companies with the highest annual average growth in pre-tax profits per share (excluding property and other capital items) are Joseph Holt 17%, Morland 16%, Mansfield 16%, Adnams 14%, Hardys & Hansons 14%, Wolverhampton & Dudley 12% and Greenalls 11%.
NEW ISSUES
Flotation still a positive step
KPMG Peat Marwick believes that flotation on the stockmarket remains a positive step for a range of companies.
In the firm's New Issues Statistics — July-September 1992 , it sees three main areas the majority of flotation candidates will come from: MBO companies seeking an exit for their investors, funds to repay debt and the flexibility to raise equity finance to fund further growth; the demerger of listed companies' subsidiaries or divisions where it is apparent that the parts will be valued higher than the whole; and the traditional private companies which have hitherto provided the bulk of flotations.
In the third quarter of 1992 experience was mixed: July saw a number of well known names such as MFI, Anglian Windows, The Telegraph, Taunton Cider and Kenwood coming to the market, but September was poor as the UK left the ERM and the recession continued.
During the first nine months of 1992, 47 companies obtained a full listing and only five a USM quotation.
For 1991 the respective numbers were 81 and 10.
Surprisingly, Peats does not detect any marked rise in the average market capitalisation of companies joining the Official List since 1984.
The firm is optimistic about smaller companies' floating.
‘There is still a place for the right smaller company to come to the market.
It must demonstrate high quality management, have excellent growth prospects and be prepared to invest time both before and after flotation in keeping its investors informed.’
While private investors may be cautious about new issues, institutional demand is apparently holding up.
‘The London Stock Exchange has sensibly indicated that it will view sympathetically applications by companies to reduce the amount of an issue which needs to be offered to the public.’
From 1 January 1990 to 30 September 1992, Peats topped the list of reporting accountants on flotations with 41 London listings and eight USM issues, followed by Coopers & Lybrand (30 listings, five USM), Ernst & Young (24 listings, five USM) and Price Waterhouse (21 listings, five USM).
Meanwhile the London Stock Exchange appears to be about to announce the closure of the USM, which was started some 12 years ago to help smaller, growing companies obtain equity finance.
Changes in the listing rules have diminished the advantage of obtaining a USM quotation.
The Stock Exchange is expected to issue proposals allowing USM companies to move more easily to a full listing.
UNIT TRUSTS
Fidelity's new stabiliser concept
Fidelity Investments (0800 414161) claims its Stabiliser Growth Range of unit trusts, covering the UK, European, US and Japanese stockmarkets, will remove much of the volatility from investing in equities.
Each fund aims to provide most of the upside potential of the relevant stockmarket but to reduce the downside risk considerably by using futures and options.
Minimum investment in each fund is £1,000 (£100 subsequent).
Charges are initial 5.25% and annual 1.5%.
Fidelity Controlled Risk UK Fund will have an estimated gross yield annually of 5%, paid twice a year.
NATIONAL SAVINGS
New rates apply
From 7 December, National Savings has made available new issues of Savings Certificates, Capital Bonds and Children's Bonus Bonds at lower rates.
The 40th issue of National Savings Certificates provides a guaranteed tax free return of 5.75% a year compound (v 6.75% on 39th issue), if held for five years.
The minimum purchase is £100 and the maximum holding £5,000.
The 6th index-linked National Savings Certificate gives a guaranteed tax-free return of 3.25% (4.5% a year on 5th issue) compound on top of index linking if held for five years.
Minimum purchase is £100 and the maximum holding £5,000.
Holders of matured Savings Certificates or Yearly Plan Certificates can reinvest up to £10,000 in each issue in addition to the normal holding limits.
Series G Capital Bonds offer a gross return of 7.75% a year (v compound, 9% Series F) if held for five years.
Issue E Children's Bonus Bonds give a tax-free guaranteed return equal to 7.85% a year compound (v 9.1% issue D) over the first five years.
The variable rate of the Investment Account fell to 6.25% a year (v 7.25%) on 26 November 1992.
The variable rate on Income Bonds is 7% a year (v 8%) from 26 December 1992.
The General Extension Rate is 3.75% a year (v 5.01%) from 1 December 1992.
This applies to most matured fixed interest Savings Certificates issues.
The higher rate for the Ordinary Account will be 3.75% a year (v 5%) from 1 January.
The standard rate for balances under £500 remains at 2.5% a year.
The first £70 of interest earned is tax free.
Further details are available at most Post Offices or from Department of National Savings (071-609 9442).
SMALLER COMPANIES
Investing with less risk
A new way of investing in smaller companies that reduces the risks involved is to buy shares in the recently launched Hoare Govett Smaller Companies Index Investment Trust.
HGSCIT, which raised £28m early in December 1992, broadly aims to match its performance against changes in the capital value of the Extended Hoare Govett Smaller Companies Index (excluding investment trusts).
The trust will be passively managed by Broadgate Investment Management, a subsidiary of Hoare Govett, and will include the shares of more than 200 companies in its portfolio.
No holding in any one company is expected to exceed 2% of the portfolio's value.
Between 1955 and 1991 the Extended HGSC index, assuming the reinvestment of gross income, produced an annualised return of over 18%, outperforming the return from the Financial Times — Actuaries All Share Index.
But in 1989, 1990 and 1991 the Extended HGSC Index underperformed, as it did in 1992 up to the date when this issue went to press.
Nevertheless, commentators believe that the cuts in UK interest rates and a revival in the economy could lead to better performance by smaller company shares.
In general, smaller companies are more dependent on the UK than their larger counterparts.
At the start of 1992 there were 1,377 companies in the Extended HGSC Index (excluding investment trusts) and they had a total market capitalisation of £45bn.
The highest individual company capitalisation amounted to £216m.
The company will be managed so that the ordinary shares will qualify for inclusion in a general personal equity plan.
A further advantage of the new index investment trust is that dealings in its shares are expected to be more liquid than in the individual shares of many smaller companies.
Also, the spread of investments will reduce the impact of individual companies' corporate insolvencies.
Hoare Govett is a leading UK institutional stockbroker that is now a subsidiary of ABN AMRO Bank, the largest bank in Holland.
LLOYD'S
Syndicate runoffs
The Chatset Guide to Syndicate Runoffs November 1992 reveals that, including Lioncover as one syndicate, there are 102 syndicates with 162 open years.
The problems generally come from US asbestos and pollution claims, errors or omissions or professional indemnity, personal stop loss and estate protection plans.
If all the syndicates were to be fully reserved on a basis on which Names could be confident of not being called for further sums, Chatset estimates that reserves of £1.5bn would have to be increased to £3.5bn.
The guide includes articles about the problems of runoffs.
‘Lloyd's has to decide whether, as Names die or become unable to pay, the risks can be assumed by the Society as a whole or whether the maxim of ‘Each for his own part’ is strictly applied.
In this case, the amount of the default by an individual Name would be passed back to the Policyholder,’ it says.
Copies are available, price £45 (US$68), from Chatset Ltd, PO Box 661, London SW1W 8HX (071-823 6980).
STOCK MARKET
Execution-only over the phone
Sharemarket, a new division of Manchester-based stockbrokers Gall & Eke, runs a telephone execution-only service in shares and fixed interest securities.
For ordinary shares, preference shares and convertibles, the dealing charges are: up to £1,000 consideration £10; £1,001–£1,667, £15; £1,668–£45,000 0.9% with a maximum of £45; and over £45,000, £22.50 plus 0.05%.
For gilts and other fixed interest securities the costs are up to £15,000, £15; and over £15,000, £30.
Sharemarket also operates a unit trust discount service for investors who have made up their own minds.
Clients who buy through this service will receive a quarterly newsletter.
Telephone Sharemarket on 061-237 9443 for full details.
WHAT'S AROUND
Index trusts.
Together with a cash trust, Legal & General offers a range of index trusts that covers the world's main markets.
The trusts available are Legal & General UK Index Trust, US Index Trust, European Index Trust and Japan Index Trust.
The trusts use stratified sampling whereby major stocks in an index are fully replicated and smaller companies sampled to match the performance of the chosen index.
Minimum investment is £1,000.
Phone 071-528 6200 for full details.
Protection plans.
Hill Samuel Life provides three protection plans.
Priorities Plus combines life assurance with critical illness cover; Independence offers critical illness cover on a fixed term basis; and Priorities is a pure life cover plan.
Cover can be increased automatically at 5% or 10% a year to give protection against inflation.
Call 081-686 4355 for further details.
Cover for trustees.
Charities trustees can now obtain insurance protection from Frizzell Professional Indemnity (071-489 1888).
The Trustees Liability Policy, underwritten at Lloyd's, indemnifies trustees against loss arising from wrongful acts and from any alleged negligence.
Premiums start at a few hundred pounds for an indemnity limit of £100,000 and rise to tens of thousands for larger international charities.
Cash unit trust.
N M Financial Management (0705 827733) has launched N M Sterling Deposit Fund, a cash unit trust that pays interest at money market rates on a minimum investment of £500.
Initial gross yield is estimated at 6.6%.
There is no initial charge; the annual management fee is 0.4%.
Help for professionals.
Permanent Insurance's Business Expenses Policy covers either the cost of a loan or the cost of fixed business expenses in the event that a professional person is unable to work through illness.
The benefit can start either four, 13 or 26 weeks after the policyholder is incapacitated and payments continue for 52 weeks.
Call 0392 445555 for full details.
Fixed rate bond.
Skipton Building Society's Imperial Bond Third Issue pays 8.5% gross (6.38% net) on balances of £5,000 or more.
The rate is fixed until 30 June 1993.
Thereafter, the rate is guaranteed to be at least 1.5% higher than the gross variable rate payable on the £5,000 Sovereign Shares Account.
For further information phone 0756-700500.
Fixed rate mortgages.
West Bromwich Building Society (021-525 7070) is offering homebuyers a fixed rate mortgage of 6.99% fixed until 1 January 1996.
The arrangement fee of £150 can normally be added to the loan.
WBBS building and contents insurance must be taken out.
Telephone banking.
From 1 December 1992, NatWest Bank's Business Line offers small businesses a 24-hour telephone banking service.
This is fully automated and costs £10 a quarter.
A telephone statement enables the last 25 recorded transactions to be read back on the phone.
Further details from any NatWest branch.
Investing in Korea.
County NatWest Korean Growth Fund (071-374 3132) aims for long-term capital appreciation from investment in Korean listed shares.
The fund will be managed with Lucky Investment Management of Korea.
Baring Global Fund Managers (071-628 6000) have launched Baring Korea Trust, which also seeks to obtain capital growth from investing in Korean companies.
Both trusts see the Korean economy recovering in 1993 and believe that the longer term outlook for Korea is excellent.
economic trends
Hope springs — but not for the moment The outlook for the housing market is modestly optimistic — but any initial pick-up will be in higher turnover, not in higher prices
The current downturn in the housing market has now lasted for three years — four in some parts of the south — and house prices have fallen further than at any time in modern UK history.
Housing turnover has collapsed to levels not seen in a generation — and in just two months, September and October, house prices fell by 4%, enough to virtually wipe out the deposit the first-time buyer could normally expect to pay.
Moreover, the areas where prices have fallen furthest, in the south of the country, are those where the market is weakest — in London and the south east house prices have fallen by over 9% in the last 12 months.
In other words, the price mechanism has not yet been able to form a support for the market.
Yet with base rates down by three percentage points to 7% since sterling's exit from the ERM, and a further reduction to 6% likely in the New Year, mortgage rates are set to fall to their lowest level for 25 years.
This, together with the fall in house prices over the last three years, means that mortgage affordability should fall to a 20 year-low.
In his Autumn Statement, the Chancellor also announced a £750m package to buy up to 20,000 unoccupied homes in an attempt to reduce the overhang of unsold properties on the market.
The sharp fall in turnover of the last few years means that many people who might otherwise have entered the housing market currently remain outside it.
This potential demand is estimated to be of the order of 600,000, and if it becomes clear that the housing market has bottomed out and house prices are rising once more, it could provide significant support to the housing market.
So will lower mortgage rates and house prices be enough to attract the first-time buyer back into the market and bring about the long-awaited recovery in house prices?
To try and answer this question, it is necessary to look in more detail at the anatomy of the current slump in the housing market and assess why it has been so much more severe than previous downturns.
In my view, the uniqueness of the current downturn can be almost entirely attributed to the fact that the post boom adjustment in the ratio of house prices to income has not come, as in the past, in the form of real house price declines and rapid nominal income growth, but instead via a sizeable decline in nominal house prices.
This has created two entirely new problems.
First, the enormous acceleration in repossessions, which exceeded 75,000 in 1991 and were projected to reach some 70,000 in 1992.
In the period 1990-92 there were more repossessions than in the whole of the 1980s.
The continued flood of repossessed properties on to the market is depressing prices, which in turn is making it difficult for the building societies and other lenders to take the normal escape route for those who are unable to keep up their payments — the sale of the house.
The combination of repossessions and building companies' inability to sell their newly built homes has resulted in an estimated 200,000 properties standing unoccupied.
Thus, while the Government's scheme to purchase some 20,000 properties will help reduce the overhang of unsold properties, it is unlikely to provide a significant boost to the market as a whole.
Second, as a result of the large declines in nominal house prices, a large and growing section of the population is now in the ‘debt trap’— the mortgage is bigger than the house's current market value.
Indeed, our research at Morgan Grenfell indicates that some 1.5m households may be caught in that trap, with the vast majority concentrated in the southern half of the country.
Such people are unable to move because to do so would require them to make good a substantial deficit on the mortgage.
For example, consider a person who bought a house for £80,000 in 1988, with a mortgage of £75,000, who has since seen the price of that property fall to £65,000.
That person would be unable to move to a similarly priced property without repaying the £10,000 deficit on his current mortgage, finding a deposit for the new property and paying the stamp duty on the new property.
Furthermore, to obtain the new mortgage, another mortgage indemnity premium would be payable, although this can usually be added to the new mortgage.
The decline in the housing market is causing further problems in itself.
Although survey data continues to point to a substantial majority of young people aspiring to home ownership, they are likely to remain outside the property market all the time prices continue to decline.
This is the classic problem of an asset market where prices are falling — why buy now if the asset is going to be cheaper in the near future?
It is all the more so in the housing market because of its highly geared nature.
To get on to the housing ladder, the first-time buyer has to find a deposit of 5% or more of the property price, and with a typical housing price/income ratio of three times, this can represent 15% or more of annual income.
Yet, given the rate of decline of house prices in the south over the last year, this deposit would be wiped out in just six months.
As such, it is natural for these buyers to stay out of the market until they are sure that prices have hit the bottom and are beginning to rise.
Thus a spiral has developed where falling prices deter purchasers, which further depresses prices.
Furthermore, the costs of entering the housing market have risen substantially.
While in the late 1980s it was comparatively easy to secure a highly geared mortgage, these are far less easily available today.
Indeed the 100% mortgage, commonplace in the boom, is now virtually extinct, with 95% frequently the maximum available and in many cases substantially less.
Even if a relatively highly geared mortgage can be obtained, the cost of indemnity insurance on such mortgages has doubled or even tripled since the boom.
The reintroduction of stamp duty in August, which is the equivalent of 20% of the deposit required for a 95% mortgage, has only served to aggravate the problem.
These structural problems will act as a major constraint on any potential recovery in the housing market.
However, the further house prices fall, the cheaper housing becomes, particularly in comparison with renting.
The slump in the housing market has certainly dented the view of house purchase as an investment, but the desire to buy remains strong and the quality and availability of private rental stock continues to be limited.
Thus at some level of prices and mortgage rates, buying a home will once again become attractive.
The question is whether prices and mortgage rates have fallen far enough to ensure that this position will be reached in the near future.
As I noted above, mortgage affordability is likely to fall to a 20-year low this year and while entry costs into the housing market have risen since the boom, they remain low in historical terms.
To obtain a mortgage in the 1970s, it was often necessary to be able to pay a 10% or 20% deposit on the house.
As for prices, one of the best guides to the relative cheapness of housing is the ratio of house prices to incomes.
In the past, the housing market has bottomed when this ratio as approached 3.25.
With house prices likely to have fallen by around 5% in 1992, a further decline in prices of 2%-3% this year would be sufficient for this traditional trough to be reached.
There are, therefore, some grounds for modest optimism that the slump in the housing market may come to an end this year, although prices are likely to fall by as much as 3% or 4% from current levels before stabilising.
Moreover, any initial pick-up in the market is likely to be revealed in higher turnover rather than higher prices, because of the overhang of unsold properties and continued repossessions.
Only in 1994 are prices likely to begin to rise and then probably by no more than 5%.
commentary
Good corporate governance needs a helping hand Without some form of supervisory body, the Cadbury code's good intentions will not be translated into reality
Roger Davis Coopers & Lybrand
Corporate governance is a topical theme — but one which is topical too late.
Once again it has been left to a recession to catch out those who overstretched themselves in the boom years.
And to catch out those in the financial and wider communities who encouraged them to do so.
Again, we are reminded too late that the risks associated with high short-term rewards are often unacceptable for a public company.
So what do we do to prevent history repeating itself?
How to improve governance to enhance the competitiveness and entrepreneurial spirit of British industry?
And how to prevent personal financial loss for the ordinary person, caused by the minority which overreach themselves, or are criminally inclined?
It is the last question that is my theme, because that is where the spotlight currently falls.
Coopers & Lybrand's insolvency team has analysed the reasons for the many unnecessary corporate failures it has recently dealt with.
There are few surprises.
Weaknesses relating to board control included: an over-dominant and over-ambitious chief executive or executive team; inadequate or biased information given to the board, infrequent board meetings or inadequate recording of board decisions; imbalanced boards in terms of skills; strategies based on short-term share price rather than solidity of real earnings; and inadequate systems of financial control.
The team also found that companies had allowed their financial exposure to get out of control through, for example, complex dealings exploiting inconsistencies in regulatory regimes, complex financing arrangements which proved awkward to manage when difficulties arose, and failure to change policies in response to changing economic conditions.
But, perhaps most important of all, companies had shown themselves unwilling to admit to failure or believe bad news, leading to deeper difficulties.
This environment not only encourages incompetence but also facilitates fraud.
Fraud essentially occurs for two reasons — inherent criminal intent or the resort to deceit and plunder in a vain attempt to salvage a crumbling empire.
Obvious, perhaps, but it would be a serious mistake to think that the lessons will have been learnt by the next bull market.
Last month the Cadbury Committee published its finalised report on corporate governance.
On the surface, nobody could quarrel with its conclusions; Cadbury has done an excellent job in producing a basically sensible code of good practice.
I suggest that it would now be best for everyone to concentrate on its merits and on its implementation.
But that, of course, brings me to the fundamental question: how will the code be made to stick where it is most needed?
And frankly, Cadbury has not answered that question.
Will it be quietly forgotten in the next boom period (whenever that might be)?
Is it just naive to hope that a voluntary system will work?
Shouldn't we bite the bullet now and legislate, as many are suggesting?
I was struck when I attended the first conference on corporate governance after the draft Cadbury Report was published.
The great and the good of the City spoke.
Each in turn welcomed the voluntary approach.
Each in turn looked to others in the audience to help enforce it.
By the end nearly every City institution had looked to others.
The buck was already being passed again before we had even started.
My fear is that we will be back in just the same position again in the next recession.
A new generation of entrepreneurs will have grown up.
A new generation of bankers who were not around last time will be encouraging them to overreach themselves.
The statement of compliance with the Cadbury code will be reduced to the anodyne stuff you read about employing disabled people in directors' reports.
I hope I'm wrong, but I have no confidence that I am.
So would it be more realistic to accept that a voluntary system is doomed and legislate for compliance?
Legislation would not, of course, be just a requirement to comply with the code.
It would mean effectively establishing a Securities Exchange Commission lookalike to monitor it.
I go back to where I started, by examining what has gone wrong, before arriving at a possible way forward.
In the past, many of those with a responsibility for encouraging good governance have shown at least an absence of discouragement to management excesses.
I cast the net wide of those who can encourage good governance, from institutional shareholders, to major lenders, to The Stock Exchange, the media, politicians and many more.
And yes, the auditor too.
The alternatives
It is shareholders who, at least in theory, appoint the chairman and should ensure a balanced board and therefore have perhaps the primary role in enforcing the Cadbury code.
But I have some sympathy for the institutions' view that their duty is to their policyholders and they cannot be expected to double up as company regulators.
And that is why some of their more prominent members are now asking for an SEC.
But be warned.
Once we have created a great bureaucracy, it will be there forever.
The SEC in the US has not stopped corporate scandals, but it keeps an army of lawyers busy.
Is that what we really want, before we irreversibly lurch into it?
The alternative, and it might be effective, would be to legislate for two-tier supervisory boards.
But this would be at a great price for the many to deal with the problems of the few.
There is another option which, strangely, has not been debated — something rather more flexible that would be worth trying first.
As I said, all the City institutions have a role to play in ensuring that the voluntary code sticks where it is most needed.
The problem is that there is no mechanism to focus that role.
It was in that kind of environment that the Takeover Panel started its life from small beginnings and with a light touch.
A very British but effective solution.
If a voluntary system is to be at all effective, we need a voluntary proxy for an SEC.
I propose, therefore, the voluntary establishment of a Corporate Governance Panel.
It would comprise representatives of all the City institutions, but particularly institutional shareholders and lenders.
Rather like the Takeover Panel, it would operate with a soft bark, but a much more powerful bite when needed.
The panel would provide a point of reference for institutional shareholders, other City institutions and auditors to air concerns.
It would respond to concerns referred to it, rather than being naturally intrusive, and so would operate more effectively than an SEC.
It would progressively develop the Cadbury code of conduct in a non-legalistic way by learning lessons from corporate wrong-doing.
Again, it would adapt much faster than a legal body.
I also envisage that it would review all audit qualifications of public interest companies and refer them as necessary to other statutory regulatory bodies.
It would also question the auditors and other external parties involved in the governance process, where need be.
As an example close to home, it would be a sanction much more powerful than an SEC if, as head of audit of my firm, I was called in to that panel to be told that if my firm wanted the institutional shareholders to vote their proxies in favour of our being reappointed auditors to this or that company, we would have to mend our ways in some respect.
The idea needs a lot of working up, of course, but far less than an SEC, and I really believe that it would be worth doing.
Audit regulation — one year on There is a mixed response to audit regulation after one year's experience
Stella Fearnley and Michael Page
Audit regulation began on 1 October 1991.
A survey of members we carried out at that time indicated concerns about the costs of implementing regulation, particularly in relation to the audit of smaller companies (see ACCOUNTANCY, January 1992, p 21).
Interest in the subject remains high, with the regulatory bodies now submitting their first year reports to the DTI.
About 10,200 firms have registered with the English and Scottish Institutes, and 1,000 with the ACCA.
Last year's survey was carried out with a group of practitioners at an audit regulation meeting run by the Southern Society, and in view of the continuing concerns about regulation, we repeated this exercise with 160 practitioners who attended a similar meeting in October 1992. 64 responses were received, some of which represented one response from several representatives of the same firm.
Of those responding, 34 were from offices with fewer than three partners, of whom eight were sole practitioners with no other staff; 31 respondents were from offices with fewer than 10 staff.
To start with the good news, 77% of respondents believed that audit regulation had improved the quality of auditing in their practices.
This had mainly been achieved by improved standards of recording work done and quality control.
Typical comments were: ‘Standardised documentation and therefore standard quality’, ‘More attention to recording work done’, ‘Written evidence stresses requirement for better organisation’, ‘Better planning and more partner involvement’, ‘Focused attention on essential areas and cut out unnecessary work’, ‘Focuses attention on principles’ and ‘Committing audit evidence to paper’.
Sadly, however, 95% of respondents thought that their clients had not perceived any benefits, with one or two adding the comment ‘except higher fees’.
As might be expected from the above, the most extensive changes to be made were in procedures for recording audit work.
Changes had also been necessary in quality control procedures and audit methods, and less extensive changes had been needed in practice management and staff training.
However, a number of respondents specifically mentioned that training staff in new documentation and audit procedures had been their biggest headache and the largest single item of cost.
Other problems arose in standardising approaches within firms through audit manuals and audit programmes, and convincing older partners of the need to comply!
The question of whether the compulsory audit for small companies should be retained is one on which the views of practitioners dealing with small companies particularly deserved to be heard.
It is well known that the DTI is concerned about the impact of regulation on very small companies.
We sought practitioners' views on which small companies should be exempted.
Last year 72% of our sample believed in abolition: this year that proportion had increased to 81%.
Few respondents wanted a minimal exemption.
They were offered the three alternative thresholds taken from the Institute's recent consultative document and only 18% opted for the VAT registration limit (turnover £36,600); 47% were in favour of the VAT cash accounting limit, and 35% opted for the EC small companies definition.
The DTI is believed to be considering lifting the audit requirement for companies below the VAT registration limit.
While this would involve a significant number of companies and save their audit fee costs, it is arguable whether it would reduce the overall cost of regulation for small audit firms, since few practices would be able to deregister and eliminate their regulatory overheads.
Respondents felt that safeguards should be introduced where exemptions were granted: 67% thought that only wholly owner managed companies should be exempted, 85% believed that minority shareholders should have the right to require an audit, 76% wanted a compilation report prepared by a qualified accountant, and 86% wanted a statement by the directors acknowledging responsibility for the accounts.
Regulation cost continues to be an issue.
Last year's estimates of set-up costs for firms with three or fewer partners amounted to £2,794.
With the benefit of hindsight, these are now estimated at £4,900, comprising expenses of £1,220 and lost chargeable time of £3,680.
Recurring fixed costs were estimated at £3,400 (£1,000 expenses and £2,400 lost time).
We were surprised at the continuing estimates of fixed costs, as we would have expected a minimal time investment after the first year of familiarisation, but given that training was identified as the major cost, it may be that this forms the bulk of the continuing cost.
However, we were encouraged by the fact that estimates of audit costs for individual jobs were down.
Respondents estimated an uncharged fixed cost per audit of £200 arising from compliance with audit regulation, and a variable cost of £100 per £100,000 of company turnover (lower than the £175 estimated last year).
Firms are bearing a significant amount of cost themselves.
They had been able to recover only 10% of their set-up costs and 28% of their recurring costs in chargeout rates.
Furthermore, they were getting back only 62% (1991 — 52%) of the additional costs of individual jobs.
These results should be treated with a little caution, as the group surveyed is not statistically representative of the total population of practitioners throughout the country, and the costs estimated may not be based on detailed analyses of time and expenses.
Nevertheless, some trends are discernible.
Practitioners are bearing most of the costs of regulation themselves.
This may be due to the economic climate, but also the harsh reality of trying to justify fee increases to clients whose perception of the audit service has not changed.
Opinion against retaining the small company audit has hardened.
Most respondents supported abolition of the audit requirement below a turnover threshold of £300,000, subject to safeguards for the protection of minority shareholders.
It is very clear that smaller firms are taking regulation seriously.
Investment in training has increased and our respondents believe that the quality of their audits has significantly improved by a better focusing of audit effort and improved recording of audit evidence.
This is very encouraging.
However, we have two concerns: first, a number of respondents equated better files with better audits — this may satisfy the regulators, but does not necessarily indicate any improvement in the underlying quality of professional judgment; second, audit regulation is a costly process for smaller audit firms and some costs are being passed on.
At this stage it is difficult to assess whether the potential benefits to accounts users which may arise from improvements in audit judgments and financial reporting as a result of regulation can be justified against the costs, particularly at the smaller end of the market.
On these issues only time and further research will tell.
Inland Revenue one, taxpayers nil The proposals in the latest Inland Revenue consultative paper benefit the Revenue rather than the taxpayer
David Furst Clark Whitehill
Many of the proposals in the recent Inland Revenue consultative document,A Simpler System for Assessing Personal Tax (see ACCOUNTANCY, December 1992, p 129), have come as a welcome step towards simplifying the tax collecting process — not least the proposed ending of the schedular machinery of assessment and the introduction of a self assessment system for individuals.
However, the manner in which professional and other partnerships are to be taxed, and the equity and practicalities, both from a firm's and its advisers' viewpoints, appear not to have been thought through as thoroughly as one might have hoped.
This is disappointing in the light of the representations made to earlier consultations.
The new consultative document develops the concept of the current year basis of assessment and has dropped the alternative accounting period basis that was previously considered.
The current year basis is simple: the current complex opening and closing provisions disappear, as does the necessity to submit continuation elections on any partnership change.
In essence, a new unincorporated business will pay tax in the tax year in which its first accounting period ends (rather than the year in which it commences trade under the present system), but will pay tax on at least a full year's profit in the tax year in which it ceases to trade.
The same treatment is afforded to partners who join and leave existing partnerships.
This has two important effects.
First, an individual may well have no taxable income in the first year of his self-employment and a bunching of income on ceasing self-employment.
This will be particularly pertinent where the retirement is early in the tax year and is followed by a return to Sch E employment.
Second, under the proposals, established partners who anticipate retiring after the five-year transitional relief has expired will pay tax in respect of a greater period of time than they have actually been a partner.
Again, this will particularly hit partners in firms with year ends early in the tax year.
The document's dismissal of this problem indicates a lack of understanding of the position.
In practice, those firms with accounting dates early in the tax year will no doubt change their accounting date to one later in the tax year, say 31 March, during the transitional period, to overcome this difficulty.
I wonder if it is desirable that the Revenue, either indirectly as above, or directly by their alternative proposal of ‘fiscal accounting’, should dictate a business's year end?
I am not aware of any other countries where this happens.
It seems to show a fundamental lack of understanding on the Revenue's part of the commercial considerations involved.
For instance, an effectively compulsory change of year end could affect a firm's billing cycle, which may have been agreed with clients: this would no doubt have cash flow consequences for both firm and client.
Many businesses are genuinely seasonal.
It can hardly be sensible, say, to require a sheep farmer to produce accounts to 31 March in the middle of the lambing season.
Tax law should not be introduced without proper consideration of the commercial fundamentals.
The document proposes that each member of a partnership be assessed personally on their share of the partnership profits, rather than on an assessment on the firm for which all are jointly and severally liable.
This presents practical difficulties.
The Revenue will have to collect tax from each individual partner.
The firm will need to decide whether partners' drawings should be paid gross without allowing for any tax reserve, or, alternatively, whether to withhold tax which is not a partnership liability, but an individual partner's liability.
No doubt some partners would object — and legitimately so — to the latter route and, I suspect, in a number of cases several would not put aside sufficient for their tax payments in the former.
The current year basis of assessment is not an actual basis of assessment unless a 31 March year end is selected, and therefore tax retentions will remain complex to calculate.
Inevitably, from time to time, there will be items claimed as deductible in tax computations, the validity of which is not free from doubt.
In a partnership any adjustment to original provisions and submitted computations would need to be communicated to each partner and his or her adviser, and adjustments made for each partner to payments on account.
The time and cost of dealing with this from the Revenue's, the taxpayers' and agents' viewpoints should not be underestimated.
The not altogether clear provisions regarding audit, finality and certainty mean that adjustments could well take place long after a partner has left a firm.
If that departure has not been wholly amicable and an adjustment arises which increases an individual's tax liability, there is the prospect of prolonged discussions with former partners and possibly problems of collectability as far as the Revenue is concerned.
A move away from the preceding year basis of assessment is long overdue and should be welcomed by all.
It is a fundamental change for the better, but the Revenue needs to ensure that there are no major commercial disadvantages in the replacement system for businesses.
Responses to the consultative document must arrive by 31 January 1993.
All practitioners and affected taxpayers should take this opportunity to influence what is the most significant change to the UK taxation system since the introduction of corporation tax and capital gains tax in 1965.
Otherwise we will be left with a system that meets the Revenue's commercial needs at the taxpayer's expense.
readers ask
Not a VAT invoice
I have received a number of requests recently from clients who have been sent claims for payment which, while clearly including a VAT element, contain the words ‘this is not a VAT invoice’.
Given the need to adopt tighter billing and credit control procedures, how might this form of billing be applied by practitioners?
Practitioners, such as accountants, generally supply services.
The analysis below only concerns supplies within the UK.
The VAT Act 1983 s 3(2) (b) provides that anything, which is not a supply of goods but is done for a consideration, is a supply of services.
S 4(3) provides that, subject to s 5, a supply of services generally takes place when the services are performed.
However, if before that time the supplier issues a tax invoice or receives payment, then to that extent the time of supply (also known as the ‘tax point’) is the earlier of when the invoice is issued or payment received (s 5(1) and (10)).
Section 5(9) states that Customs may make regulations with respect to the time of supply of services for a consideration the whole or part of which is determined or payable periodically (known as ‘continuous supplies of services’).
The VAT (General) Regulations 1985 (SI 1985/886) reg 23(1) fixes the tax point for such services as the earlier of the receipt of payment and the issue of a tax invoice.
Thus the date(s) of performance of such services is irrelevant.
Also if the accountant stops supplying such services to a client this does not apparently in itself fix the time of supply.
Thus the supplier may issue a fee note (sometimes known as a payment request note or a pro forma invoice) rather than an invoice containing all the requirements of a tax invoice (as specified in reg 13(1)).
Thus the fee note should definitely exclude the supplier's VAT registration number and not show any amount as VAT, ie the invoiced amounts should be VAT-inclusive and make no reference to VAT other than stating ‘This is not a tax invoice’.
The VAT guide (Notice No 700 (1991 edition)) para 56 states that these words should be ‘clearly marked’, ie not in small print at the very bottom of the document.
When payment is received the supplier should usually then issue a tax invoice within 30 days of the time of supply if the client is a taxable person (reg 12(1) and (5)).
The supplier must account for the related output tax in the return for the period which includes the date of receipt.
This can delay paying the output tax to Customs.
The practitioner can and probably should ask Customs to confirm in writing that the fee notes are not tax invoices, which is important because Customs can recover from the supplier any VAT shown on his invoices (VATA 1983 Sch 7 para 6 (1)—(3)).
S 48(1) defines invoice as any document similar to an invoice.
A similar result may be achieved if the practitioner is able to use the cash accounting scheme, although he may thereby defer any input recovery if he does not pay his suppliers promptly.
However, an accountant's professional work does not always amount to a continuous supply of services.
One-off assignments, such as many bankruptcies, project evaluations and ad hoc consultancy, are in fact often not continuous supplies of services.
Here, if the accountant issues his tax invoice within 14 days of performing the work (s 5(2) and (3)), the time of supply is the invoice date or, if sooner, the date he received payment (s 5(1)).
Continuous supplies of services normally include regular planning and compliance work, bookkeeping, accountancy and auditing.
BJ Rice & Associates (LON/91/1370) No 7471 illustrates that the provision on continuous services brings danger as well as an advantage.
The appellant firm provided tax consultancy and accounting services and registered for VAT in October 1986.
In 1991 it received payment from a client for work done and billed (but without a VAT charge) prior to October 1986.
Customs successfully assessed it for VAT on the payment (supply) because the time of supply was the date of receipt in 1991.
There was no tax invoice because the firm was not registered when it billed for the work.
Such a client may accept a supplementary invoice for an additional 17.5% if it can reclaim it all.
In The Austin Co of UK Ltd (LON/91/1990) No 7981 the appellant reclaimed input tax on documents which contained many of the particulars required by reg 13(1), but each of which also contained the words: ‘This is not a tax invoice and must not be used for tax input tax credit purposes.
A tax invoice will be sent to you on receipt of payment of the amount due.’
The tribunal decided that these words bound the supplier and recipient.
This was because VATA 1983 Sch 7 para 7(1A) authorises Customs to issue a notice precisely specifying necessary VAT records.
Their Notice No 700 has the force of law when stating in para 56 and 69(a) that the words stop the document from being a VAT invoice.
Taking advantage of the rules increases the administrative burden.
However, some users have multi-copy stationery.
The top copy shows no VAT registration number, ‘blanks out’ the VAT details so only the VAT-inclusive amounts are visible and states ‘This is not a tax invoice’.
Entitlement to income
My stepfather died at the end of November 1991 and under his will my mother was left the life interest in the income arising from the sum of £60,000 with the remainder to my stepbrother.
The £60,000 was finally invested in September 1992 and the income will now be sent to my mother as it arises.
Has my mother any entitlement to income on the £60,000 as it was being gathered in by the solicitors and prior to it being handed over to the investment adviser for the purchase of the securities agreed by the trustees?
She is a bit upset that she has had to wait almost a year before receiving any income.
In law, a personal representative cannot be required to distribute assets or make payments of legacies under a will within one year of death.
This is known as the ‘executors' year’ but applies also to administrators.
This period applies regardless of any direction contained in the will to make a payment earlier.
The object of the executors' year is to protect the personal representatives from demands for immediate payment but it is not to be relied on to cover undue delay in dealing with the estate.
In a gift such as this ie ‘to A for life with remainder to B’, A is not entitled to interest in respect of the executors' year (see Re Whittaker [1882]2 Ch D 657).
If the personal representatives delay distribution without sufficient cause beyond the executors' year, a pecuniary legatee as in this case is entitled to interest at 5% a year on the principal sum.
The only beneficiary who is entitled to receive sums immediately from the date of death is a life tenant of the residuary estate which is not made clear in the question the reader asks.
This was laid down in Allhusen v Whittell [1867]LR 4 Eq 295) but the rule is often excluded in wills and if so it does not apply.
Benefit of pool car
A small limited company which is run by a husband and wife, who are the sole directors, runs a car which to all intents and purposes is a delivery vehicle.
It has been considered to be a pool car.
The vehicle fulfils the conditions laid down under s 159 ICTA 1988 excepting clause 2(c).
Each evening the wife takes home a company car and the husband drives home the delivery car.
The reasons for this we consider to be legitimate business affairs.
First the vehicle cannot be left in the car park attached to the business premises because of the severe vandalism which takes place in the local area.
Also it cannot be left inside the premises each night without a good deal of work to rearrange the production floor to accommodate it.
The vehicle is left in the premises when the managing director goes on holiday.
Following a recent PAYE audit the officer concerned would not accept that this vehicle is a pool car because of the factor just described above.
As a consequence he is assessing the managing director's wife to car benefits.
We would welcome your comments on this position and particularly as to whether taking the vehicle home could be described as legitimate business reasons.
We mention also that once the vehicle is at the managing director's home, no private use is made of it whatsoever.
We believe this situation is relatively common with small businesses.
We hold out little hope in this case, unless the Inland Revenue grants a special individual concession, or, on appeal, the General Commissioners decide in favour of the director's wife on the basis of the unusual facts appertaining.
After all, both directors go home to the same address in two different vehicles, and the reasons for taking the delivery car home, on the facts, are more than valid.
Presumably the husband (director) is charged a benefit on the company car, and the wife (director) is charged on the ‘delivery’ car to prevent a second benefit being charged on the husband.
This is not entirely clear.
S 159(2) (C), ICTA 1988 is quite specific in stating that availability as a pool car is only granted if ‘it was in that year not normally kept overnight on or in the vicinity of any residential premises where any of the employees was residing, except while being kept overnight on premises occupied by the person making the car available to them’.
Basically, the taxpayers are facing possibly ‘bad’ law which makes no provision for the special facts of their own case — which must be repeated many times elsewhere, particulary in, say, Northern Ireland.
The only statutory ray of hope is the phrase ‘except while being kept overnight on premises occupied by the person making the car available to them’.
It might be bending the law, but could the director and his wife be said to be ‘the person making the car available to them’?
The directors of the company ought also to investigate the consequences flowing from the decision for tax purposes with regard to Class 1A national insurance contributions.
Problems with client company
We have a client owner — a managed company with a year end of 31 March — with the following problems.
An invoice raised in April 1991 related to the first stage of contract payment on a verbal order given by the customer in March 1991, ie the first payment was due from the customer on approval of the order.
Documentation from the customer shows however that the order was not recorded until June 1991.
As Scots law applies, the Inspector is simply contending that the profit was earned in March 1991.
A maintenance contract covering the calendar year 1991 was not issued under invoice until April 1991.
Again the Inspector is seeking to assess the portion applicable to the first three months in the year to 31 March 1991.
The directors extracted motor vehicles from the company in March 1991 and declared dividends to cover the payment due to the company.
On enquiry the Inspector contends that as the transactions were not recorded in the accounting records in March 1991, no cognisance can be taken of the dividend, and he is therefore seeking to raise a s 419 assessment.
We are not happy with this position in that the Inspector appears to accept that while the formality of recording the transfer of motor vehicles to the directors was not processed through the accounting records, he is by implication accepting that they were recorded, in order to have the directors' loan accounts overdrawn while ignoring the dividend.
A case of ‘having your cake…‘.
The directors are unable to provide formal evidence of dividend declaration but they can produce a directors’ minute recording the transfer.
We contend that audit adjustments were made properly to reflect the situation at 31 March and that they do not come under TR720, which the Inspector is contending.
It is necessary to examine the company's Articles of Association to ascertain the procedure for the declaration of dividends.
Is it mandatory for the company to determine the dividends and their date of payment in general meeting?
Even if the client company has adopted Table A (Companies Act 1948, Sch 1 or Companies (Tables A-F) Regulations 1985) without modification, para 7 of the Institute's Technical Release TR 720 of 30 September 1988 regarding Tax implications of certain payments to directors should be brought to the Inspector's attention.
That para states that as a result of the decision in Re Duomatic Ltd (1969) 1 All ER 161, if, on some occasion other than the annual general meeting, the shareholders agree to remunerate the directors with certain sums, then that agreement has the same force as a resolution passed in a general meeting.
In this instance the directors are presumably the same as the shareholders, and the intention was, undoubtedly, to effect the motor vehicles' transfer and payment of the dividend on exactly the same date to avoid a loan account debit and a s 419 assessment.
Subject to any provisions of Scots law, with which we are not acquainted, this point should be put to the Inspector of Taxes, although the absence of a formal record relating to the dividend admittedly weakens the case.
The reader does not indicate the nature of the client company's business.
However, from the facts given it seems that, based on normal accountancy principles, the Inspector must be incorrect in assessing the profit based on the date of order when this was in advance of the delivery of goods or performance of service.
From the facts given, the earliest date of taxability would appear to be April 1991.
Depending on the sums involved, it may be beneficial to take both of the issues further, subject to obtaining prior counsel's opinion.
taxation
ALL THE PRESIDENT'S TAXMEN On the campaign trail, the next US president promised that high earners could expect to pay more tax — and foreign-owned companies much, much more — if he won the election.
And now he has…
Terry Symons
Bill Clinton's vow to make foreign businesses pay ‘their fair share’ of US taxes, set against the backdrop of the need to raise $300bn of extra revenue between 1993 and 1996 to fund his domestic growth programmes, could mean substantial new tax burdens on British businesses investing in the US.
As part of a package of corporate ‘loophole closers’, Clinton claims that he will raise $45bn over four years by combating ‘tax avoidance’ by foreign-owned corporations and branches that shift profits outside the US, largely by juggling with transfer prices.
Transfer prices are those charged within families of companies for goods, services or intangibles.
Clinton maintains that foreign-owned firms set these prices artificially high in order to reduce their US taxable income.
The Treasury and the US Congress have provided Clinton with some statistical support for this perception, but not for the revenue estimate.
President Bush's Commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) stated in recent Congressional hearings that 72% of foreign-controlled corporations operating in the US pay no US taxes.
The US Treasury released a study showing that in 1988 US-controlled foreign corporations reported $890bn in revenues and paid more than $25bn in taxes to foreign governments.
In contrast, in the same year foreign-controlled corporations in the US had revenues of $825bn, but paid only $7bn in US taxes.
Treasury Department sources have stated that, at most, $3bn annually could be raised by augmented enforcement of the existing transfer pricing rules.
Even the minimum tax proposal described below was estimated by the Joint Congressional Committee on Taxation as likely to raise only $1bn over four years.
Private sector economists have openly ridiculed the $45bn figure.
Despite this Clinton is expected to increase the IRS staff allocated to transfer pricing cases and prohibit former government employees from negotiating with government agencies within their responsibilities for five years after leaving office.
In part, this is to prevent former high-ranking IRS and Treasury Department officials handling foreign firms' transfer pricing cases.
With the additional staff available, Clinton maintains that transfer pricing abuse can be remedied, and the additional revenue raised, without any change in the existing law but through a better and enhanced mechanism for the enforcement of the internationally accepted arm's-length standard for transfer pricing.
This, however, begs the question of what the arm's-length standard is.
The draft transfer pricing regulations the IRS issued earlier this year caused a storm of international protest; they are widely thought to introduce a different notion of what is ‘arm's length’ from that generally accepted by other tax authorities.
Although the draft rules may be toned down in theory, overseas tax authorities are well aware of their likely effect and Clinton's intended enforcement.
The US is not the only country with economic problems that is looking to transfer pricing to provide additional tax revenues.
Japan, Australia, Korea, the UK and Germany have all introduced new rules, allocated extra resources to transfer pricing, or both.
The impact on the long-term development of the world economy seems likely to be depressing.
This is presumably not Clinton's intention, but illustrates short-term advantages taking precedence over long-term objectives.
One piece of good news is that Clinton has stated that he will not go as far as a recent legislative proposal, which would have required certain foreign-owned firms and branches to report a minimum amount of US taxable income.
The proposed minimum was to have been 75% of the average taxable income of a US company in the same industry segment as the foreign-owned firm.
Under this proposal, loss-making companies would have been required to pay taxes broadly similar to their more profitable US competitors!
Clinton has not made his position clear on the proposal — introduced (but not enacted) in each of the last three Congressional sessions — to impose US tax on the capital gains of 10% or more foreign shareholders of US businesses on sales of shares.
The Bush administration was vocal in its opposition to the proposal and, backed by massive lobbying by foreign governments and investors, defeated it early in each legislative session.
However, like the transfer pricing initiative, this proposal could be attractive to the Clinton administration for its ‘tax fairness’ hue as well as the potential for raising substantial revenue from a non-voting constituency.
For companies in countries such as the UK, where the tax treaty with the US does not prohibit the imposition of such a tax, the costs of disposal of a US business would certainly mount.
One aspect of Clinton's growth plan is a ‘targeted’ investment tax credit of 10% of the increased costs of investment in qualifying plant and equipment over the amount of such investment in prior years.
Also included are investment incentives for certain enterprise zones and a 50% capital gains exclusion for sales of shares of small companies held for five years.
Finally, Clinton has vowed to eliminate the tax benefits of ‘runaway plants’(transfer of manufacturing operations — and US jobs — to less costly offshore jurisdictions).
Some commentators have taken this to mean an overhaul of US taxation of profits earned offshore.
Few details of this most Clinton-like of plans have been released so far.
Clinton has scheduled an economic conference of 100 economists and business leaders for 14 and 15 December.
Details of his tax package and growth proposals will not be finalised before the conference, if then.
The 103rd Congress reconvenes on 5 January and the president takes office on 20 January.
On 26 January he must give his State of the Union address in which he will outline his major tax proposals.
He must submit a budget during the first week in February, which should further clarify his revenue needs and sources.
Despite Clinton's hopes for action within the first 100 days of his administration, it is more realistic to expect legislative hearings during March and April and the earliest Congressional action on any legislation in May or early June.
And though the protracted battles between Congress and the Bush administration which have been waged in recent years are unlikely, Clinton's proposals could be changed significantly by Congress prior to enactment.
He's calling the tune on taxes now
photocopier contracts
CONTRACTS TO PRINT MONEY?
Many thousands of the photocopiers currently in use in the UK are rented under a system that the Campaign to Clean Up Copier Contracts was launched to fight
Peter Carty
‘Although I terminated my business, I had to keep the photocopier going,’ says Anne Orchardson.
‘I was paying the bulk of the rental from my salary that I was earning elsewhere.
They wouldn't finish the agreement.’
She had to keep up rental payments which finally mounted up to £570 a quarter — regardless.
Mrs Orchardson's business — Right Type Office Services — provided a typing, photocopying and wordprocessing service mainly to churches, small businesses and individuals.
As her business grew, the first copier she had rented from Clydesdale Office Equipment was not equal to the demands made on it, and Clydesdale recommended replacement with a more powerful machine.
The new agreement was different; it was a cost-per-copy contract.
The catch was that the cost per copy assumed a much larger rate of copying than actually took place in the business.
‘That's where I really lost money,’ says Mrs Orchardson.
She went out of business in April 1990 but, because the contract specified a minimum term of three years, only stopped making payments last May.
Even after the last quarterly payment there was a termination payment of £250.
Mrs Orchardson's contract was really with the finance company involved with the deal, Sabre Rentals Ltd.
And as far as Sabre is concerned, the contract was fair and clearly stated.
Sabre has stressed that it had no formal link with Clydesale Office Equipment, which has now closed down.
As a result of horror stories like this one, the Campaign to Clean Up Copier Contracts was launched in February last year.
So far, it has received more than 2,000 complaints.
Many of them have been about cost-per-copy or ‘copy-plan’ contracts.
Frequently recurring criticisms of the contracts are that they are of up to nine years' duration, they contain hidden annual increases, that the costs of settling old agreements are added to the undisclosed capital value of new equipment, and that the total cost of a contract is not disclosed.
Users cannot switch to other suppliers while a contract is in place, even if the service turns out to be too expensive or otherwise unsatisfactory.
The Campaign argues that copy-plan contracts are anti-competitive and open to widespread abuse.
It estimates that there are at least 150,000 photocopiers in use on copy-plan contracts in the UK, and that the whole photocopier industry is worth more than £1.2bn and increasing at between 5% and 25% a year.
The Campaign is lobbying for reforms that it thinks are needed to end what it sees as largescale use of misleading sales techniques used by the photocopier industry.
Its key aim is to get the Government to extend to companies and other organisations the same level of protection available to private individuals under the Consumer Credit Act.
Companies are not regarded as individuals under the Act and are therefore unable to break contracts once signed.
Crucially, they cannot take advantage of the two week cooling-off period available to individuals.
In October the Campaign met Baroness Denton, minister for small businesses and consumer affairs at the Department of Trade and Industry, to highlight copier contract problems.
In November it asked the Office of Fair Trading to revoke the consumer credit licences of three companies offering copy-plan schemes.
Substantial amounts of evidence were collected from hundreds of victims of unfair contracts.
The organisations behind the drafting of most photocopier contracts are the finance companies that fund the deal, rather than the actual rental company or dealer.
The industry body for many of the companies behind the leasing of photocopiers, the Finance and Leasing Association, has taken steps to curb excesses on the part of its members.
It has released guidelines on what it calls ‘sales aid leasing’ that should help stop future contract abuses and is assisting the Campaign with individual cases of misrepresentation.
However, the Association represents only around 80% of the finance and leasing industry, and many of the largest operators in the photocopier sector are not members.
And many contracts signed before the guidelines came into effect last April still have years to run.
Malvern-based chartered accountant Alan Kay is helping with a detailed investigation of the activities of certain copier companies that are widely criticised for malpractice, as well as the leasing companies that finance them.
Mr Kay is compiling a database collating information on the various tricks and deceptions used: the goal is to enable victims to take action to reduce excessive commitments.
‘It is vital that victims combine together to negotiate and to get the authorities such as the Office of Fair Trading, the DTI and the police to take the appropriate action,’ Mr Kay stresses.
But a sensitive approach to staff involved is important.
‘If you find that you or your client is a victim, then make sure that you have some sympathy with the member of staff who was tricked,’ he says.
‘He or she is one of very many.
It is a good idea not to shoot the messenger or fire the witness whose evidence may be essential to any renegotiation or complaint to the authorities.’
What advice would he offer to those thinking of installing new photocopying facilities?
‘Not to sign any of the standard cost-per-copy agreements without getting an opinion as to whether or not it's a fair arrangement.’
He also emphasises the importance of making sure that all arrangements and variations of agreements with suppliers are accepted by the leasing company ultimately behind the deal.
This one's innocent.
But beware
students
STIMULATED TO STUDY There's no escaping the long hours spent alone with your notes — but there are variations that could even prove enjoyable
Anita Monteith
Everyone who has ever taken an exam will remember that feeling of complete and utter boredom that overwhelmed them from time to time.
Absolutely anything is preferable to sitting down to read through your auditing notes for the umpteenth time.
I suppose there are those who enjoy a good evening's revising; but there can't be many.
Whichever of the tuition centres you currently attend will undoubtedly have issued you with a standard package comprising study packs, outline revision notes, practice questions and exams, at the very least.
It is important to appreciate at the start that this must represent the core of your studies, and that completion of this, as set, will almost certainly ensure a successful exam result.
For many, however, a fresh approach to studying, together with a little extra help, can make a tremendous difference.
There are many ways in which you can help yourself without incurring extra costs, either on your own or with a small group of friends.
Books — there are many excellent text books available, which often give a different perspective.
They may have been written with a wider audience in mind and are therefore easier to read than, for example, some of the accounting standards.
It may be possible to find such books in your office, or to arrange to borrow them from a public library.
Your tutors can suggest books that may be relevant to you.
Marking — persuade a fellow sufferer to read through some of your answers to written questions, which you should work under exam conditions.
It's always easier for someone else to see where you've missed the point.
Is your work legible, and is it written in good English?
This is a useful exercise for the person reading it, too!
Another useful exercise involving friends is sharing the task of preparing synopses of articles.
Each one of perhaps a group of four should prepare a brief summary of an article of general interest.
You each then provide the others with a copy of the notes, and then give a five minute explanation of the key points.
A good bottle of wine to finish with is the reward!
Host a quiz night for your fellow students.
If you enjoy games, why not compile a list of objective test questions to use in Trivial Pursuits?
I understand from some of my students that their OT banks were also a useful source of questions for playing ‘Strip accountancy’.
Who says accountants are boring?
Make more use of your tutors — compile a list of queries and then arrange to see a tutor for help.
There are a number of other possibilities, if you are willing to incur the additional expense.
Audio cassettes are an interesting alternative to endless reading.
They have the advantage of being easy to carry around, and with care can be used anywhere — in bed, on a beach and so on(but not in a meeting with a client).
Suppliers include Financial Training (phone 081-960 4421) and Business Training Network (0734 340020).
Tutorials on disk are the latest way to get to grips with problem areas.
You may find that your firm has already bought a set of these, in which case they will be available through your training department.
All that you need is the use of a PC, and you can study at your own pace.
(Tutorials on disk are available from Financial Training.
Double Plus Software (0481 710353) has announced that it will be launching tutorials on disk in March.)
Multiple choice questions are also available on disk.
These can be an entertaining way of testing yourself, and some of the more sophisticated products can be made to generate batches of questions for a paper at random, just to add to the challenge.
(Available from the same sources as tutorials on disk.)
You could always attend some of the evening or weekend tutorials run by the tuition centres and, in London, by the Chartered Accountants Students Society of London (071-490 0680).
If you find a particular topic hard to understand, then this is always a good way to solve the problem.
It also means that you've spent a productive few hours studying, which is a major contribution to your weekly workload.
Finally, if the cost of any of these options seems prohibitive, perhaps you could share with friends, or maybe ask your employer to contribute; perhaps as recompense for excessive overtime worked, or a reward for a successfully completed audit.
Happy studying!
Tutorials on disk are the latest way to tackle problem areas.
You may find that your firm has already bought a set of these, in which case they will be available through your training department
auditing
THE AUDITOR'S ON-GOING CONCERN The APB and the Cadbury Committee want to extend auditor responsibility.
What difference would that really make?
David Gwilliam
Most firms that collapse or fall into financial difficulties have not had their financial statements qualified on a going concern basis.
Critics of the auditing profession have frequently cited that fact as evidence that the profession is failing in its duty to the investing public.
For example, in their Fabian paper Accounting For Change , Austin Mitchell and his three co-authors refer to Polly Peck, Sock Shop, Coloroll, Parkfield, British and Commonwealth, Sound Diffusion, Rush and Tompkins, and Johnson Matthey as examples of companies that collapsed within weeks of receiving an unqualified audit report.
The persistence and weight of this criticism was no doubt one of the pressures that led the Auditing Practices Board to place ‘going concern’ high on its list of priorities, and in May 1992 an exposure draft proposing new auditing standards in this area was issued.
Later that month the draft report of the Cadbury Committee on Corporate Governance was published, calling for directors to report explicitly on whether a business is a going concern and for auditors to report on this statement.
I shall review here the nature and purpose of the going concern qualification and, in this light, discuss whether any further extension of auditor responsibility as proposed in the new standards and by the Cadbury Committee is likely to be beneficial.
A going concern qualification on a company's financial statements is, in effect, an assertion made at a point in time about the distribution of future cash flows associated with the bundle of assets that comprise that company.
Certain of these cash flows may be highly predictable, for example the outflows associated with fixed interest debt; others may be very difficult to predict, for example those associated with fluctuating commodity prices or those that depend on the vagaries of consumer taste and fashion.
When a significant proportion of the distribution of future cash flows is negative, then auditors may choose to signal this by means of a going concern qualification.
The accuracy of this qualification as a predictor of failure will be determined jointly by the auditor's ability to assess the distribution of future cash flows and the nature of that distribution.
To illustrate this, let us consider three hypothetical firms A, B, and C. The assets that comprise firm A have a 10% chance of producing a cash inflow of £1,000 at the end of a given time period and a 90% chance of producing cash flows of zero.
Firm B's assets have an 80% chance of producing a cash inflow of £125 and a 20% chance of producing zero, while C's have a 20% chance of producing an inflow of £460 and an 80% chance of producing £10.
For firm A a going concern qualification would correctly predict failure nine times out of 10 (taking zero net worth as a proxy for failure), but would be spectacularly erroneous one time out of 10.
For firm B a going concern qualification would correctly predict failure only one time in five, while for firm C a going concern qualification would never be ‘correct’ in this sense, even though four times out of five investors in C would see a very substantial diminution in their wealth (assuming an investment based on expected present values).
Clearly, even in situations where the distribution of future cash flows is known to the auditors, then a going concern qualification's ‘accuracy’ as a predictor of failure will depend on the nature of this distribution and the point at which the auditors decide that the possibility of failure is sufficiently high to be signalled to investors.
If the going concern qualification's role is to signal the distribution of the likely cash flows, further questions arise.
Is such a signal necessary?
And are auditors particularly well qualified to provide such a signal?
Most finance texts would suggest that purchasers of assets via the financial markets are entering a fair game in that the market will price assets according to expectations of future cash flows incorporating some risk discount (albeit one likely to reflect systematic risk, ie after taking the opportunity for portfolio diversification into account, rather than the total variance of the returns).
Provided that the game is fair and given that the majority of investors hold diversified portfolios, as of course the dominant institutional investors do, then it is debatable whether extensive additional audit work is justified to provide the relatively small numbers of undiversified investors with information about the likely variance of cash flows.
This argument is strengthened by a body of evidence that suggests that these very small investors would be most unlikely to read, let alone interpret correctly, such information if it were to be provided in the audit report.
Although the above analysis does not require that the distribution of future cash flows be known with certainty (as they were in our example above), it does imply that there is no new information in the qualification.
If in fact the auditor's assessment of the distribution of the future cash flows conveys new information to the market, then this will have some impact on prices as the market reassesses the appropriate discount for risk.
Many would argue that, in a real world of heterogeneous expectations, market imperfections, and asymmetrical access to information between managers and investors, the market is most unlikely to be able to price assets fairly in the manner in which finance theory suggests.
If, however, the market is able to absorb information about the risks attached to future cash flows from other sources, for example the work of financial analysts, then the role of qualification is marginalised to that of informing unsophisticated investors about risks, the knowledge of which has, unbeknown to them, already been built into the pricing of their securities, but which might possibly cause them to consider whether they should diversify their portfolio or change its composition.
Opinions differ about whether the going concern qualification does have incremental information content.
In the US, the Cohen Commission's influential report suggested that: ‘There is no reason to believe that independent auditors are more likely to predict whether a company will liquidate than they are able to predict the outcome of any other uncertainties…
’ Some studies have made unfavourable comparisons between the going concern qualification's predictive ability and failure prediction models based on financial ratios or other publicly available information.
But US studies have suggested that incorporating the knowledge of the going concern qualification into these models does in fact improve their predictive ability.
A priori, it would appear that auditors' knowledge of their client company, their powers of access to internal information including forecast information, and their direct relationship with company management should mean they are uniquely placed to make judgmental decisions about the likelihood of company survival.
It is this ‘inside’ nature of the information contained in a going concern qualification that greatly enhances its value to users of financial statements.
Even if one accepts that auditors are capable of providing information about business risks that is useful to investors and other parties, it is questionable whether the benefits of extending the auditor's role in this direction are likely to outweigh the costs.
These costs will include direct costs in terms of additional auditor input as envisaged by the requirement of the proposed new standards that the auditor should actively investigate a client company's going concern status.
There may also be other costs if, for example, the qualification message adds to rather than reduces uncertainty or if the market misinterprets the message.
This could happen in a number of ways; one possibility, which often looms large in discussion of this topic, is that of interdependence between the qualification itself and the distribution of the cash flows.
Such a problem would not arise in the perfect capital market scenario sketched out above (although if the qualification provided new information about the distribution of cash flows, there might be an interdependence between the qualification and asset prices) but if in the real world the qualification caused investors and creditors to withdraw funds, refuse lines of credit or otherwise alter their behaviour, then the qualification might indeed be a self-fulfilling prophecy.
Such concerns are most apparent in the case of financial institutions but have also arisen in other contexts.
For example, in the celebrated Royal Mail Steam Packet case (R v Kylsant and Morland (1931) 75 Acct LR 62) it was argued in court that if the accounts or the audit reports had shown the enterprise's true financial position, it would have encouraged competitors to engage in predatory pricing so as to drive the company out of business.
A robust response to the argument that the business's continued existence should be the auditor's overriding concern was provided nearly 100 years ago by one of the Appeal Court judges hearing the London & General Bank case (In re London and General Bank (No 2)[1895]2 Ch 673).
The following exchange took place with respect to the appropriate form of audit report:
Lopes LJ:Speaking for myself, I think it ought to have been in that form, and probably a little bit stronger.
Cohen (counsel for the defendant): Well, make it stronger and you will ruin the bank…
Rigby LJ:Seeing that you repeat that so often, why not?
If a bank was in such a position that it was to end, what is the necessity for it to go on?
More important problems are posed by the inevitable subjectivity associated with estimates of future outcomes and the absence of any yardstick by which the auditor can determine at what point the perceived variability in cash flows is such that it should be drawn to the attention of shareholders and other interested parties.
In consequence, the message contained within a going concern qualification may merely confuse users of financial statements.
Ideally, investors need complete information about the likely cash flow distribution, whether or not it encompasses the possibility of failure.
Although accounts preparers and auditors may implicitly formulate distributions of expected outcomes in determining accounting numbers, they are notably reluctant, and indeed may not be able, to make explicit the distributions underlying their point estimate figures.
Even for the much more limited requirement of a qualification based purely on whether a significant proportion of the likely distribution of outcomes gives a negative net worth, there must be some implicit formulation of a distribution and a cut-off percentage.
But it is debatable whether this could be explicated in any meaningful way.
Professional guidance has, perhaps of necessity, made no attempt to provide any form of quantification other than the requirement that the auditor should be reasonably satisfied that the going concern basis is appropriate.
In such circumstances the signals being offered to investors are extremely fuzzy, and may differ significantly dependent on the interpretation of each particular audit firm.
A final problem lies in the present perception of the going concern qualification's role and in the nature of the auditors' relationship with their client company's management.
Rightly or wrongly, the investing public, and others, do not see going concern qualifications as purely objective assessments of the distribution of future cash flows designed to aid investors in their portfolio choice.
They see them as having wider connotations, which may include casting doubt on both management competence and the financial statements' integrity.
For these reasons, client managements are unlikely to welcome a going concern qualification, and their concerns may well be reinforced if such a qualification restricts management freedom of action, possibly by allowing debt covenants to be activated, restricting the freedom to pay dividends, and so on.
It may well be that risk-taking companies are managed by risk-taking individuals with powerful personalities.
Such individuals are likely to react adversely to anything they perceive as criticism of either their company or themselves, and may react by penalising the auditor by directing lucrative consultancy contracts elsewhere or even changing auditors.
There is ample evidence in Department of Trade and Industry reports and other quasi-judicial investigations of the weakness of auditors and audit firms in dealing with such high-profile individuals.
Implementation of the Cadbury proposals to enhance the role of non-executive directors, and to ensure that all listed companies have an active audit committee will strengthen the auditor's position vis-a-vis client management.
But it may be that more fundamental changes to the present institutional arrangements for audit will be needed before we can realistically expect auditors to be proactive in assessing and reporting on business risk.
How can future cash flows be predicted with sufficient accuracy for a qualification?
Do well-informed diversified institutional shareholders need such a signal?
Does the qualification give incremental information?
Will the benefits of extending the auditors' role outweigh extra costs?
Are cash flows adversely affected by the qualification?
Where should a cut-off point for making a signal lie?
Can auditors be more active in reporting risks, given their present relationship to management?
A going concern qualification on a company is an assertion made at a point in time about the distribution of future cash flows associated with the bundle of assets that comprise that company
There is ample evidence in DTI reports and other quasi-judicial investigations of the weakness of auditors in dealing with such high-profile individuals
PROBLEMS WITH GOING CONCERN
property company restructuring
PROPERTY-RELATED DEBT: A MAP OF THE MINEFIELD The good news about property-related debt is that there are many ways to deal with it; the bad news is that a lot can go wrong in the process
Peter Busby
Property-related debt, and thus property company debt restructuring, is beset by two problems.
First, falling values erode security margins, leading to breaches of covenant and discomfiture for lenders.
Second, actual or projected rental income may fail to materialise.
This leads to interest expectations not being met — in itself a breach of covenant — and interest being capitalised, which further erodes the security margin.
These factors cannot be controlled by either the borrower or the bank, so creative restructuring will be necessary if the property company is to survive and avoid bad debt.
Long-term solutions, which could involve agreed workouts and profit participations, require input from all the company's professional advisers.
One weapon, available elsewhere in the world but not yet in England and Wales, is the convertible mortgage, whereby debt is transformed into equity in the underlying property asset.
Participating mortgages, formerly thought to be unenforceable, can now be used.
But with all of the many options, there are still a number of craters and unexploded mines that need to be avoided, whether restructuring or, instead, a lender is to take control with a view to minimising loss.
New money for old?
The simplest option may be to leave the debt outstanding, extend the payment terms, and take new security or a variation of security.
However, from a legal point of view, it is often better to pay the old debt and create a new one (see below).
Balancing the tensions can be complicated, both legally and commercially.
What will be the effect of new debt on the bottom line, for both the property company and the lender?
Are losses being taken and shown on the profit and loss account or balance sheet?
In either case, is extra security changing a contingent liability into an actual one, requiring further disclosure under SSAP 18?
What further contingent liabilities are being assumed elsewhere in the group?
All these questions must be answered before a deal can be struck.
As part of restructuring, the company may be asked for new security, charges on rental streams, new floating charges or inter-company guarantees.
However, if the old debt is left in place rather than replaced by new money, ss 238, 239 and 245 of the Insolvency Act 1986 need to be considered.
A charge can be a transaction at an undervalue, as can inter-company transfers.
Guarantees, new charges, and inter-company transfers can all be preferences.
New floating charges can be voided if new money is not introduced.
A clear analysis of what is to happen, and of all aspects of the proposed transaction, needs to be addressed in the light of these sections of the Act.
Once all these points have been cleared, everything is ready — apart from other creditors, who can completely upset a restructuring by petitioning for a winding-up.
Searches of the Companies Court registry need to be made.
If there is a petition, and winding-up ensues, then s 127 of the Insolvency Act 1986 will void the restructuring, leaving a lender unsecured if it took place after the petition.
If the petition is advertised, more creditors may jump on the bandwagon.
The lender may find itself having to pay other creditors to safeguard the reconstruction.
The restructuring borrower may have to go to the bank for more money to pay out other creditors, but these pay-outs themselves could be preferences, and thereby voidable, so selective payment of creditors can be dangerous.
Suppose the restructuring cannot occur, what can a lender do?
The primary remedy is always to sell, but in the current climate, there may not be a market.
So what constructive action can a lender take?
One possibility is to take the loss now, in the current balance sheet, when everyone is feeling pain.
It all depends, of course, on the relative size of the loss, and the size of the property portfolio within a lender's balance sheet, but the problems with holding the pain until later are manifold.
For example, auditors may require a revaluation for the balance sheet to be stated to show a true and fair view; or there may be considerable delay before the market improves.
Depending on when property was charged, its value may be over-inflated, so a sale in the future could still realise a substantial loss, while, in the meantime, this area of the balance sheet is dead.
Recycling
Recycling is an alternative to restructuring, and involves a new partner or borrower.
By finding a friendly ‘joint venturing’ purchaser — and also providing him with development finance, if necessary — an old debt can be written out and a new one incurred.
Debt ageing is avoided, but, again, auditors may worry about overvalues.
Should there be a new valuation?
If so, can it support the necessary level of borrowing (or even an acceptable level of borrowing) to ensure that the pain is minimised in the recycled debt?
The new borrower will insist on some element of non-recourse.
How will this show up, and what security cover will it need?
Take it on board Here, the property is sold to a development or investment subsidiary of the lender.
The debt is brought to an end, but the asset is brought into the lender's group (but not the lender itself unless the sale goes through a receiver).
This also enables any eventual profit to be kept in the long term, avoiding the problem that if it is retained, any eventual surplus would have to go back to the borrower.
Restructuring is always complicated.
In property company restructuring, the nature of the securing asset and, in particular, its illiquidity, can render it even more complex.
More than ever, clear thought and sound professional advice is required.
Bricks, mortar and potential debt
accounting issues
An urgent response on post-retirement benefits The ASB's second exposure draft is a response to a recommendation made by the UITF
On 9 November 1992 the ASB issued the Urgent Issues Task Force's Abstract No 6, which gives guidance on the accounting treatment and disclosure of post-retirement benefits other than pensions (see this issue, p 98).
The UITF concluded that such benefits are liabilities that should be recognised in financial statements in accordance with the accruals and prudence concepts of SSAP 2,Disclosure of Accounting Policies , and the Companies Act.
The Task Force also concluded that such benefits share many of the characteristics of pensions and that the principles of SSAP 24,Accounting for Pensions Costs , are applicable.
SSAP 24 has introduced, and UITF 6 will introduce in future, major changes in the way in which the long-term and somewhat uncertain obligations in respect of post-retirement benefits are treated.
The obligations, particularly where they are not funded by a scheme financially independent of the company, carry very significant deferred tax implications.
When SSAP 15,Accounting for Deferred Tax , was issued in 1978 (and indeed when it was revised in 1985), the normal practice in accounting for pensions and other post-retirement benefits was to adopt a cash basis, and consequently there were few significant deferred tax implications.
Under SSAP 24 and UITF 6 these long-term obligations are accounted for on a full provision basis, even though in many cases it is likely that they will continually roll over, and it has been argued that it is difficult to justify a prohibition, as SSAP 15 would otherwise require, on the related deferred tax being treated on a similar basis if it, too, continually rolls over.
A number of commentators have pointed out the inconsistencies in the approaches adopted by SSAPs 15 and 24.
In addition, consultations over the last year have indicated that both SSAP 15 and SSAP 24 are high on the list of standards that should be subject to a comprehensive review.
Accordingly, the UITF recommended to the ASB that an amendment be made to SSAP 15 to remove the inconsistency, pending a comprehensive review that will take place in due course.
This is the first time that the UITF has made such a recommendation to the ASB, which accepted it, and on 9 November issued FRED 2,Amendment to SSAP 15 (see p 96).
FRED 2 proposes a limited amendment (the insertion of three new paragraphs) to SSAP 15 that will permit companies, where they consider it appropriate, to use the same basis of accounting for the tax implications of pensions and other post-retirement benefits as for the obligations themselves.
Thus, if implemented, notwithstanding the other requirements of SSAP 15, companies may use either the full provision or partial provision basis in accounting for the deferred tax implications of post-retirement benefits accounted for in accordance with SSAP 24 and UITF 6.
At present, this option is not available under SSAP 15, with the result that companies are not able to take into account, at the time the provisions for the obligations are set up, the tax relief that will be received when the benefits are actually paid.
FRED 2 also proposes that the policy adopted should be disclosed, and draws attention to the requirement to apply the normal rules governing the recoverability of assets in those circumstances in which a company is contemplating the recognition of a deferred tax asset in respect of a provision of post-retirement obligations.
The ASB believes that leaving this inconsistency uncorrected would inhibit proper accounting for long-term post-retirement obligations.
Since the amendment is a limited one, and the need for action is urgent, the period of consultation on FRED 2 has been kept short.
It is proposed that it be effective immediately following its publication in final form.
Securitisation — the view from the sharp end A vociferous opponent of the ASB's original securitisation bulletin now sees more merit in its new approach
When the Accounting Standards Board produced its securitisation bulletin in October 1991, it is no secret that Barclays argued strongly against it.
This was partly because its proposals would have put an end to the prospect of the very benefits that securitisation should bring (because the Bank of England would have had difficulty in applying its own regulations for securitisation), and partly because the accounting treatment proposed seemed to us inconsistent.
The position that we have held (and continue to hold) is that the focus should be on retained recourse, which we would generally expect to write off, and on the retention of significant benefit in relation to the expected performance of assets.
The ASB's latest proposals are a refreshing change of direction.
The new ‘linked’ approach has been described in the media as an elegant solution.
The Bank has not given a formal ruling on this method of presentation from a capital adequacy perspective.
Provided that this is favourable, we at Barclays believe that for the most part this approach will not stand in the way of efficient securitisation.
Having said this, and without wishing to appear a persistent critic, I do have to say that in some key respects the new proposals have yet to provide a satisfactory framework for the securitisation of assets.
In a few areas the proposed treatment will considerably undermine the main purpose of the forthcoming Financial Reporting Standard, namely to reflect the substance of transactions in assets or liabilities.
Derecognition, a word that is new to me and perhaps also to the English language, can be achieved only if the amount of benefit and risk retained by the seller (not always the originator as seems to have been assumed) is insignificant or immaterial (on a case by case basis).
The question of what is significant has been at the heart of much recent discussion, but is not addressed in the ASB's proposals.
The criterion for concluding that no significant benefit or risk is retained seems in fact to be that absolutely no benefit or risk remains.
When this absolute test is not met we are told that significant benefit or risk remains.
This strange logic leaves little room for the subjective assessment that the ASB says will be necessary to determine whether derecognition is appropriate.
It is therefore little wonder that the ASB states that derecognition will be rare.
My own opinion is that derecognition is a reasonable treatment if the downside is limited to a fixed monetary amount or actuarial analysis shows that the expected outcome would result in no significant upside compared to the sale price.
The fact that highly improbable circumstances could result in significant upside potential should not affect the presentation.
A securitisation will qualify for a linked presentation even though the seller retains significant risk on the underlying mortgages (even with little potential upside), provided (among other things) that claims against the seller are limited solely to the assets securitised.
The net asset presented will show the extent of maximum possible loss.
I find the Bank of England's rather more strict treatment of recourse more convincing.
Under the ASB approach, if the seller bears the first £5 of losses on £100 of securitised assets, a net asset of £5 is shown.
The Bank would require £5 to be written off at the time of sale and if the £5 was not injected as cash on day one, would even disallow the sale treatment.
I think the Bank is right and that the ASB should consider whether its approach is more appropriate.
It has been market practice in asset-backed transactions for there to be a mechanism whereby transactions can be mopped up when the balance of performing assets falls below a given level, usually 10% of initial principal.
The Bank has concluded that an option to clean-up (ie buy back) this residual part of a securitised portfolio should not jeopardise a full regulatory sale.
The ASB considers that the face value of these assets should be kept on the balance sheet for the life of the transaction (which would then affect the regulatory treatment of this portion).
It seems to me that, in this matter, the ASB risks a serious distortion of the substance of the transaction, as the clean-up is primarily a matter of administrative convenience.
The continuation of the securitisation when there is less than 10% remaining is quite simply impractical.
And it must be stressed that the clean-up option is just that, an option.
An accounting presentation that does not, in effect, distinguish between recourse and an option to buy-up the residual 10% of performing securitised assets seems to me misguided.
In the US, mortgage-backed securities apart, credit card securitisation represents arguably the most important segment of the asset-backed securities market.
In its brief comments on the securitisation of revolving assets, the ASB is proposing a framework that is likely to render the securitisation of credit card balances so onerous as to be unworkable.
If the logic behind the proposals was accurate, I would have no objection to them, but I do not believe it is.
The ASB proposals seem to imply that card portfolios should not be looked at on a portfolio basis and that the laws of large numbers do not apply.
As this principle is recognised in the way that card businesses are accounted for normally, this is an area that clearly needs further consideration.
This approach, denying credit card securitisation a linked presentation even when it would qualify for a sale under regulatory guidelines (and therefore obstructing such a regulatory sale), is most unfortunate.
It is important to banks that accounting guidelines do not prevent the efficient financing of loans.
It is equally important to banks that the rules cannot be abused.
After all, banks stand to lose far more if new rules are open to widespread abuse.
The Bank is among the most rigorous of banking regulators when it comes to analysing and evaluating risk.
The ASB should have due regard to its views.
A question of analysts, earnings and unfudgeability Following FRS 3, an analysts' committee is to look at ways of measuring companies' earnings
The Institute of Investment Management and Research (IIMR, formerly the Society of Investment Analysts) has set up a sub-committee under my chairmanship to decide on the calculation of an earnings figure which can be used for the per-share calculation and for price/earnings ratios.
The sub-committee will aim at a methodology.
It is unlikely that we shall come up with a mechanical formula — in quite a number of cases, judgments will be necessary; but I would be surprised if the guiding principles did not lead to pretty definite answers in the majority of cases.
The main point of our work is to establish earnings that reflect the company's performance.
The word ‘maintainable’ is not ideal, but it does indicate the underlying principle involved, that the company has a capacity to produce wealth over time, and the idea of the earnings number is to reflect that capacity in the year in question.
The arguments in favour of useful earnings figures have been put forward by Bob Bradfield in his dissenting view on the Accounting Standards Board's FRS 3,Reporting Financial Performance (see ACCOUNTANCY, December 1992, p 135).
Many of Mr Bradfield's arguments have a definite validity and certainly demonstrate that the bottom line in the p&l account, as it will be delineated by FRS 3, will be a questionable earnings number: for example, if the profits and losses on the sale not only of assets but of businesses are included, it could hardly be anything else.
That does not mean to say that the bottom line in the FRS 3 p&l account does not have some value: but I would argue that the figure should be called ‘net income’ rather than‘earnings’.
When FRS 3 comes into force next June, there will be a gap on the question of the figure for maintainable earnings; it is this gap that the methodology to be proposed by the sub-committee is intended to fill.
Indeed, there is a powerful school of thought within the profession of financial analysis that earnings per share indeed the figure for earnings itself — is an analytical tool, and, therefore, that analysts have a very significant contribution to make in the calculations involved.
In Germany the quasi-official formula for the calculation of earnings figures is produced by the German analysts rather than by companies.
While admitting that it was originally the understatement of German earnings which led to this move by the German analysts, in this we nevertheless have a model on which to work.
At the same time as the IIMR has set up the sub-committee on earnings per share in this country, at the European level analysts have set up a small monitoring committee in order to ensure that the work by analysts in the different legal and accounting jurisdictions is coherent.
It will be valuable if our definitive document could be in place by the time FRS 3 comes into force on 22 June 1993.
Well before then, I would hope that we can issue interim guidelines for comment.
Finally, perhaps I could add a postscript to Brian Singleton-Green's comments on my papers on Unfudgeability and Earnings (see ACCOUNTANCY, November 1992, p 23).
I believe that not only the ASB but accounting jurisdictions all around the world have now introduced an unfudgeable bottom line in p&l accounts; and one can understand why.
But it was certainly not my intention to say that the ASB in general and on other accounting questions was moving towards unfudgeable figures: indeed, the indications are that they will continue to ask companies and auditors to make judgments so as to distinguish case from case.
As Institute president Ian Plaistowe said very wisely in his letter to the Financial Times , we should work towards recording similar events in similar ways; my point was simply that we do not want to record different things in similar ways, and that is where judgment will come in: for example, some securitisations are valid, others not.
To argue always for unfudgeability is to argue for form over substance with all the waste of capital that entails.
accounting solutions
Minority interest
A company owns 60% of a loss-making subsidiary with net liabilities.
The parent company has issued a legally-binding letter of support to the subsidiary.
How should it treat the minority interest in this subsidiary in its financial statements?
In this situation, the calculation of minority interest gives rise to a debit balance in the balance sheet.
Under SSAP 14, such a debit balance would only be recognised if there was a binding obligation on minority shareholders to make good losses incurred that they are able to meet (para 34).
FRS 2, which replaces SSAP 14, takes a different approach.
It requires recognition of a debit minority interest whether or not the minority shareholders have a binding obligation to make good the losses incurred.
FRS 2 argues that not setting up a debit balance ‘would obscure the comparison between the assets and liabilities attributable to the minority interest and those attributable to group interests both during the period when the accumulated losses accrue and afterwards, if the losses are then made good by later profits’(para 81).
It explains that accumulated losses do not, of themselves, necessarily require funding by the parent and that a debit balance does not represent an amount receivable from a minority, but rather the net liabilities attributable to the shares the minority shareholders hold in that subsidiary.
However, FRS 2 makes it clear that the group should provide against the debit minority interest where there is a commercial or legal obligation, whether formal or implied, to make it good.
Any provision made against the minority debit balance should be set directly against the minority interest amount in the p&l account and in the balance sheet.
In this particular situation, a letter of support would indicate a legal or commercial obligation, and so provision should be made against the debit minority interest recognised in the consolidated balance sheet.
The provision would be reversed when profits attributable to the minority shareholders started to make good the losses that were made earlier.
Subsequent valuation of a pension scheme
A company's year end is 31 March.
The actuarial valuation on initial adoption of SSAP 24 showed a surplus of £200m, and the company elected to incorporate it as an asset on its balance sheet.
On the actuary's recommendation, it decided to eliminate the surplus by suspending contributions to the scheme for the four years from 1 April 1989 to 31 March 1993.
After that, the contributions are equal to the regular cost of £50m a year.
The average remaining service life of employees in the scheme at 31 March 1989 was 10 years.
A valuation at 31 March 1992 revealed a surplus of only £20m, so the contribution holiday is curtailed and a contribution of £30m is to be made in the year to 31 March 1993.
How should the new surplus be shown in the accounts to 31 March 1993?
The original surplus of £200m arose on 31 March 1989.
Because the company did not contribute to the pension scheme during the period from 1 April 1989 to 31 March 1992, the prepayment at 31 March 1992 is £50m (£200m reduced by regular cost of £50m in each of the three years).
Of the £50m prepayment, though, only £20m is now recoverable by reduced contributions.
Normal prudent accounting principles require that the prepayment should be written down to £20m where it can be seen that it will not be fully recoverable (see also CA 85, Sch 4, para 23).
If this approach is followed, the shortfall of £30m (£50m — £20m) would be charged to the p&l account.
This would, however, be contrary to SSAP 24, which requires gradual rather than immediate recognition of experience differences, and does not discriminate between surpluses and deficiencies.
Also, SSAP 24 does not require a pension deficit to be incorporated in the balance sheet, whether on first application of the standard or as a result of subsequent actuarial valuation.
Therefore, under SSAP 24 the shortfall of £30m would be written off over the average remaining service life of the employees in the scheme.
Assuming that the service life stays the same, the charge to the p&l account for the year ending 31 March 1993 would be £53m (£50 + £30/10) and the prepayment in the balance sheet at that date would be £27m (£50m — £53 + £30).
Had the company elected to spread the initial surplus forward, the shortfall would have been sheltered, because the majority of the surplus would not yet have been released to the p&l account by the time of the next valuation.
In fact, there would be a provision of £90m (regular cost of £50m less annual variation of £20m, for each of the three years) still to be released to the p&l account.
Either of the above methods, immediate write-down of the pension fund asset or spreading of the new variation, would appear to be acceptable, although many prefer the treatment specified in the standard.
In that situation, the company should also give a note that analyses the balance sheet figure between the surplus remaining in the scheme, which at 31 March 1993 would be nil, and the total of unamortised variation of £27m.
Unlet office space
Due to internal reorganisation, a company has recently vacated one of its leasehold buildings.
The lease has 10 years still to run.
The company is unable to sub-let the building.
Is any provision required, and if so, how should it be measured?
The company has a continuing obligation to pay the head-lessor for the rents due under the lease, but it may not be able to recover any of that cost in the future unless it can find a sub-lessee.
Normal accounting principles require the company to make provision for the onerous lease, because it is effectively a liability that may have no corresponding economic benefit in the future.
Although the liability will be settled over a number of years, the future payments represent a contingent loss at the balance sheet date.
SSAP 18 requires that ‘a material contingent loss should be accrued in financial statements where it is probable that a future event will confirm a loss which can be estimated with reasonable accuracy at the date on which the financial statements are approved’(para 15).
The difficult area is the measurement of the provision required.
The amount of the provision would depend on a number of factors such as: the length of the expected period during which there will be no sub-lessee; the amount of rental any sub-lessee could be expected to pay in the prevailing market conditions; the amount that the company would have to pay to dispose of the lease; and the intentions of management regarding the vacant space.
Any provision should also take account of the obligations in respect of other running expenses, such as business rates.
In some situations, it may be appropriate to record the provision on a discounted basis.
There would also, of course, be deferred tax considerations.
reports & accounts
CASTLE COMMUNICATIONS
Conservative but realistic approach
Castle Communications (the audio and video group) has introduced a number of accounting policy changes in its accounts for the year ended 30 June 1992.
They are designed to bring the accounting treatment of certain assets into line with the cash impact and to present a more realistic view of the balance sheet.
Castle now carries audio copyrights under intangible assets at directors' valuation instead of at cost less amortisation.
It instructed Coopers & Lybrand's finance — business valuations group to undertake a formal valuation of the Pye record label and Bronze catalogues.
The basis of valuation was the rights' economic value in their existing use within the group's business.
In the light of this advice, and using conservative growth rate assumptions, the directors have valued these catalogues and the other audio copyrights on the balance sheet at £12m, which represents a surplus over depreciated cost of £8.9m.
The group's total intangible assets come to £13.922m, and total fixed and current assets to £24.869m.
In future Castle will only make provision for amortisation of audio copyrights for permanent diminution in value.
A formal valuation will be undertaken periodically for balance sheet purposes.
Castle continues to value video copyrights on a historical cost basis because its catalogue has only been built up over the last two or three years and there is less earnings experience on which to base a valuation.
Work in progress previously represented certain costs, such as sleeve design and mastering, which are incurred before a title's first release.
They were written off against unit sales over the royalty periods.
Castle has now decided that it is more prudent, and in line with the practice followed by many companies in the sector, to write off such costs at the point of first release of a new title.
It has also decided to expense items such as sleeves, labels and packaging; these were previously included in stocks.
The previous policy on licensed rights was only to record amounts actually paid under licence agreements on the balance sheet as advance royalties.
Now Castle also includes obligations to make further payments under existing agreements, which were previously only noted as commitments in the notes to the accounts.
The p&l account for 1990/91 and the balance sheet at 30 June 1991 have been restated to reflect these changes, as has the five-year record.
The effect of the changes in origination costs and consumables account has been to reduce pre-tax profit significantly below levels previously reported, in particular in the years 1989/90 and 1990/91, when the group accumulated heavy origination costs in developing a video sell-through catalogue and product base.
In the year ended 30 June 1992, the group pre-tax profit would have been £120,000 higher (1991 — £1.23m higher) under the old basis.
In his chairman's statement, Terry Shand explains why the group has taken the opportunity to overhaul the presentation of the annual report and accounts and to include operating and financial reviews.
‘It is intended that Castle's reporting should be high quality and conform to prevailing best practice,’ he says.
The changes in accounting policy are fully described in the financial review.
PROPERTY COMPANIES
Land Securities wins award again
For the second year running, Land Securities has won the annual Stoy Hayward Property Accounts Award.
According to Hugh Jenkins, chief executive officer of Prudential Portfolio Managers and chairman of the judging panel, ‘in particular, the panel was impressed by the extent of the review of operations, the depth of portfolio information, the detailed analysis of borrowings and the clarity with which the accounting policies are stated’.
The judging panel is concerned that under FRS 3, income from property companies' revenue activities and results of capital transactions in their investment properties will be combined at the pre-tax level.
It would prefer to see the income from the rental stream plus trading activities kept separate from the results of disposals of investment properties.
It would also be better, in the panel's view, if there were ‘a separate revenue and capital account, which distinguishes between realised and unrealised’ gains.
Also commended this year are the accounts of Brixton Estate, Great Portland Estates, Capital & Counties, A & J Macklow and MEPC.
However, overall the panel was disappointed by the lack of improvement in property company financial reporting.
The Stoy Hayward Property Accounts Awards, which were established in 1989, aim to highlight areas for improvement in property company financial reporting, as well as rewarding the company publishing the most informative annual report and accounts.
GPG
No longer qualified
GPG's interim results for the nine months ended 30 June 1992 — contained in the circular sent to shareholders following the lifting of the London Stock Exchange suspension — receive an unqualified audit opinion from Coopers & Lybrand.
The group's results for the year to 30 September 1991 were qualified.
Under chairman Sir Ron Brierley and new management, GPG has been restructured and is now an investment holding company with a diversified range of strategic interests in a number of businesses.
It is changing its financial year end to 31 December.
The letter from Coopers & Lybrand included in the circular says that the 1990/91 financial statements were prepared in accordance with FRED 1.
Certain items that would be classified as extraordinary under SSAP 6 were classified as exceptional: as a consequence, they showed earnings per share on a different basis from that required by SSAP 3.
The Financial Reporting Review Panel informed the company that substituting the proposed requirements of an exposure draft for those of an existing accounting standard was not acceptable; but it took no further action, since FRS 3 was expected shortly.
Coopers' letter adds: ‘We confirm that, if FRS 3 had been in effect at the date of signing the audit opinion on the 1991 financial statements, and the relevant reclassifications had been made, together with the adjustment for goodwill described above, the audit opinion would not have been qualified.’
GPG is changing its name back to Guinness Peat Group.
DE LA RUE
Who's first with FRS 3?
De La Rue, the security printing and payments systems group, has become one of the first companies to announce results under FRS 3.
It used the standard for its interim report published on 10 November 1992.
FRS 3,Reporting Financial Performance , issued last October, should be adopted by companies as soon as possible, and regarded as standard for financial statements relating to reporting periods ending on or after 22 June 1993.
De La Rue chairman Peter Orchard comments: ‘This does not have a major effect on the results of the company for the half year of for the previous year, but it does have the consequence of increasing marginally our earnings per share in both periods as the result of including within ordinary activities certain items previously classified as extraordinary.’
In the six months ended 30 September 1992, the group includes in profit on ordinary activities before interest and tax of £40.4m (v £30.9m), profit on the sale of and termination of discontinued Colombian business of £1.8m (v nil).
Notes 2 and 3 to the interim p&l demonstrate how the profit before tax and earnings per share have been affected by the implementation of FRS 3.
A statement of total recognised gains and losses, as required by FRS 3, shows that the profit for the half year of £32.6m is boosted by currency translation differences on foreign currency net investments of £3.2m to produce total recognised gains and losses for the period of £35.8m.
The interim statement also includes a group balance sheet and cash flow shatement.
BOC (industrial gases, health care, vacum and distribution) has longbeen in the vanguard when it comes to introducing new accounting policies.
The group's preliminary results for the year ended 30 September 1992 (and the report and accounts to be issued on 16 December 1992) reflect FRS 3 and the new goodwill accounting requirements issued by the Urgent Issues Task Force.
The operating profit of £410.9m is redefined to exclude exceptional items.
Specified exceptional items are shown in the group p&l account.
They comprise: a goodwill write-off on disposal of the Glassrock (home health care) operation in the — US £117.1m (BOC stresses the charge is balanced by an equal credit to reserves and there is no effect on shareholders' equity or cash flow); reorganisation and disposal of Glassrock — profit £14m; reorganisation of health care division — £25.4m; and profit on the disposal of fixed assets from continuing operations £1.6m
BOC discloses turnover and operating profit of businesses acquired during the current year.
In the past it had provided information on the results of disconitnued acquisitions as now required by FRS 3.
To help users, BOC has made available unaudited schedules that show past published information restated on to the new basis.
These cover the years 1988 to 1991 and on a quarterly basis for 1991 and 1992.
At the bottom of the group P&L account, BOC gives two eps figures: 19.34p based on published profit for the financial year, and 44.15p before the goodwill write-off.
Courtaulds (the international chemical material group) has applied FRS 3 in producing the half year figures for the six months ended 30 September 1992; it has also restated the prior year comparative figures on the same basis.
The group operating profit of £92m is increased by net profit on sale or termination of discontinued operations of £2.2m, less provision for loss on operations to be discontinued of £1.9m, to produce profit on onrdinary activities of £92.3m before interest and other income.
At the foot of the statement, the comparative halfyear and first full year figures are reconciled to those which were originally published.
The investment banking group S G Warburg has taken account of FRS 3 in its sic-month interim report to 30 September 1992.
The consolidated p&l account is set out on the alternative format, with separate columns for continuing and discontinued operations.
In the summary, Warburg gives the eps of 11.9p actual and diluted 11.5p, plus eps on continuing operations — actual 17.4p and diluted 16.5p.
ALBERT FISHER
Spotlight on treasury
Albert Fisher (food distribution and services) devotes a section of its financial review by finance director Ian Quinlan to treasury.
As well as indicating the net surplus cash at 31 August 1992, this also reveals that cash is invested in short-term deposits.
‘Such deposits are spread between a number of deposit takers.
The spread and allocation of these deposits are reviewed on a regular basis by the finance and banking committee,’ the review says.
Albert Fisher also discloses that, in addition to the gross cash deposits referred to previously, it had substantial unused committed and uncommitted facilities at 31 August 1992.
This is the first year Albert Fisher has included a comprehensive review of the financial position by the finance director.
The Prudential has recently called for greater disclosure of treasury matters by listed companies.
A working party is being set up by the Association of Corporate Treasurers, in conjunction with the Association of British Insurers, NAPF and the ASB, to devise appropriate levels of disclosure.
Pharmaceutical group Wellcome's report and accounts for the year ended 29 August 1992 also has a section on treasury in the directors' review of operations and finance.
During its last financial year, Wellcome strengthened its treasury team, undertook more active foreign exchange management plus selective hedging of forecast exposure to net trade and intra-group foreign exchange operations, and traded more than $1bn in foreign exchange in the UK.
The group claims that the increased activity has been accompanied ‘by tightly controlled policies, standards and procedures for the UK's foreign exchange and money market dealing activities’.
RECENT RESULTS
Lloyds Chemists.
The retailer, distributor and manufacturer of pharmaceutical, medical and related products takes in its group balance sheet the value of pharmacy licences as the difference between the existing use and the alternative use valuations of the licensed chemist property portfolio.
Surpluses arising on valuation are taken directly to reserves.
At 30 June 1992 pharmacy licences had a net book value of £33.05m (v £21.3m).
The licensed chemist property portfolio was valued at the year end by Chesterton.
South African Breweries.
The interim statement for the six months ended 30 September 1992 includes a cash value added statement.
The half year report claims that this adds useful insight to the participation of the various key stakeholders to the distributable cash value generated inside the group.
Also contained in the report are a cash flow statement and balance sheet.
TSW.
As a result of the loss of its franchise to broadcast from 31 December 1992, the independent television contractor has changed the basis of accounting in its half year results to 30 June 1992 from a going concern to a closure basis.
Features of the change include the £4.524m of extraordinary debits; £3.855m estimated decreases in value of properties held on long leases and equipment and liabilities relating to commitments on property held on short leases; and £1.206m other provisions less tax relief of £537,000.
professional briefing
STANDARDS
IAS on cash flow accounting
The International Accounting Standards Committee has published a revised version of IAS 7,Cash Flow Accounting.
This supersedes IAS 7,Statement of Changes in Financial Position.
The revision follows the increasing emphasis placed by users of financial statements in many countries on historical cash flow information as an indicator of an enterprise's performance and future sources and uses of cash.
The IAS requires the cash flow statement to report the inflows and outflows of cash and cash equivalents during the period.
The cash flows should be classified by operating, investing and financing activities, and the components of cash and cash equivalents should be disclosed and reconciled to the equivalent amounts in the balance sheet.
The IASC has also issued an exposure draft of a proposed statement,Retirement Benefit Costs,which incorporates a number of changes agreed in the July 1990 Statement of Intent on the comparability of financial statements.
E 47 establishes a benchmark treatment that the cost of retirement benefits in a defined benefit plan should be determined using an accrued benefit valuation method.
However, under an allowed alternative treatment, a projected benefit valuation method may be used.
Copies of IAS 7 and E 47 are available, price £5, from the IASC, 167 Fleet Street, London EC4A 2ES.
Survey of European accounting
The Federation des Experts Comptables Europeens has published its annual survey of European accounting,1992 FEE Analysis of European Accounting and Disclosure Practices.
Copies are available, price £60, from Routledge, 11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EE.
CITY REGULATION
Revisions to the Yellow Book
The London Stock Exchange has extensively rewritten The Listing Rules (formerly known as the Admission of Securities to Listing or the Yellow Book ).
The idea is to make the text clearer and help advisers who use the book by improving the layout.
The draft version for comment incorporates practices and interpretations that have become established over the years and includes some new provisions.
There will no longer be a requirement to include an accountant's report in listing particulars or circulars unless there has been a significant change in the company's financial position within the last three financial years, or its accounts in any of those three years have been qualified.
Instead, a comparative table of financial information must be included.
Any firm which can demonstrate the appropriate experience will be able to act as sponsor to a company applying for listing.
Previously only a member firm of The Stock Exchange could act as sponsor.
A listed company will be able to send shareholders summary particulars in place of full listing particulars in a takeover, rights issue or open offer, but it will still have to publish full listing particulars as well.
The new book clarifies the treatment of the rules on the classification of transactions and spells out more fully the information required in the case of transactions with related parties (previously called Class 4 transactions).
Written comments on the draft should be sent by 12 February 1993 to Nigel Atkinson, Head of Listing, London Stock Exchange, London EC2N 1HP.
The Stock Exchange plans to publish revised listing rules in May 1993 so that they become effective in July 1993.
Guidance for derivatives markets
The Securities and Investments Board has issued guidance to the derivatives markets on what forms of trading are proper and what is a proper market for the purposes of s 47, FSA 1986.
Consultative paper 66,Draft Guidance on Proper Trades and Proper Markets in Relation to On-exchange Derivatives , price £5, identifies what, in the SIB's view, is a proper trade and goes on to consider proper markets.
The SIB has also issued guidance release 3/92,Incentive Schemes in Relation to On-exchange Derivatives , price £2, which mentions certain principles that the Recognised Investment Exchanges are expected to observe when introducing incentive schemes.
Comments on the consultative paper should be sent to the SIB, Gavrelle House, 2-14 Bunhill Row, London EC1Y 8RA by 29 January.
Changes to Investors Compensation Scheme
The Securities and Investments Board proposes a £50m contribution to the Investors Compensation Scheme for the proposed Personal Investment Authority.
The thresholds for other SROs are: Imro £18m, SFA £51m and SIB-regulated firms £5m.
Consultative paper 64,Investors Compensation Scheme: Proposal for a Cross-Contribution Threshold for the PIA,assumes that the PIA's likely membership will comprise all current Lautro members, most current Fimbra members, some Imro members and some firms regulated by the SIB.
Copies of the consultative paper, price £5, are available from the above address.
Chartered surveyors
The Securities and Investments Board has welcomed the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors' decision that its members should be authorised via membership of the Securities and Futures Authority, rather than the RICS seeking recognition in its own right.
It considers that this move is in line with the policy of simplifying the regulatory system.
Futures and options in the US
The Securities and Investments Board has issued consultative paper 65,Proposed Rule Changes to Address Extension of Permitted Marketing Activities by UK Firms in the US , which is necessary to allow UK firms to utilise the extension granted by the US Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
Copies can be obtained, price £5, from the SIB at the address above.
WESTMINSTER UPDATE
One-off waiver of penalty
Companies House has bowed to pressure from MPs and the business community and agreed to send ex gratia payments to companies that were forced to pay a late filing penalty after their accounts for the period to 30 September 1991 were delivered to Companies House on 31 July 1992.
The waiver follows widespread misunderstanding of the term ‘months’ for the purposes of the period allowed for laying and delivering accounts.
However, the concession will not be repeated.
In future, companies will be expected to meet the deadlines as interpreted by Dodds v Walker.
This means that a company with a financial year end of 28 February will be required to file its accounts by 28 September if it is a public company, and by 28 December if it is private.
Summary statement proposals criticised
The Institute has again warned the Department of Trade and Industry that its proposals for summary financial statements are too prescriptive.
The Institute told the DTI in October that the language used in the proposed statement was too complicated, and in its formal response to the DTI's consultative document on the subject, the Institute has repeated its point.
The Institute calls for more flexibility in the regulations governing summary statements, as the technical language that is currently prescribed defeats the point of issuing a shorter, less complicated statement to shareholders.
Copies of the response, FRAG 36/92, are available free (send sae) from the Publications Department at the Institute.
Foreign companies' filing
Draft Companies House guidance for foreign companies operating in the UK may not be clear enough for the companies to be sure they are acting within the law, according to the Institute.
Under new proposals, companies incorporated in other EC member states will have to file certain details with Companies House if they have a ‘branch’ in the UK, while non-EC companies will have to file if they have a ‘place of business’here.
In a letter to Companies House, the Institute points out that the different filing regimes would complicate matters.
Copies of the letter, FRAG 35/92, are available free (send sae) from the Publications Department at the Institute.
The Institute also expressed its concerns about the new legislation in its response to a Department of Trade and Industry consultative document in September (see ACCOUNTANCY , November 1992, p 100).
EC Partnerships Directive
The Department of Trade and Industry has issued a consultative document covering the amendments to UK law necessary in bringing the EC Partnerships Directive into force.
The Directive's aim is to ensure that partnerships that are used as a vehicle by limited liability companies are not exempt from the accounting requirements of the Fourth and Seventh Directives.
The Directive is not expected to be enforced before 1995.
Copies of the document,Implementation of EC Partnerships Directive,are available free from Companies Division, DTI, Room 519, 10-18 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0NN.
Comments should be sent to the same address by 22 January.
Insolvent Partnerships Order
The Department of Trade and Industry has issued a consultative document proposing changes to the Insolvent Partnerships Order.
The aim of the proposed changes is to make the Order more user-friendly.
The DTI proposes extending the current company voluntary arrangements and administration procedures to partnerships as well as implementing some procedural changes in dealing with insolvent partnerships.
Copies of the document are available free from the Insolvency Service, Room 703, Bridge Place, 88/89 Eccleston Square, London SW1V 1PT.
Comments should be sent to the same address by 26 February.
Capital adequacy
Independent investment advisers will not now have to hold Ecu50,000 of capital under the Investment Services Directive.
This was agreed by EC finance ministers on 23 November 1992 in Brussels.
However, independent advisers will only be exempt from the minimum capital requirement if they simply pass clients' orders and payments on to dealers, do not deal in shares directly on their client's behalf, and are subject to a proper ethical code.
Prompt payment code
Following the success of its Code of Prompt Payment Practice (see ACCOUNTANCY , April 1992, p 50), the Confederation of British Industry has published a full list of its supporters, now numbering over 400.
The booklet, entitled Prompt Payers — a Guide , provides companies with an immediate check on their customers' commitment to prompt payment and includes a copy of the code itself.
Copies are available from the CBI, Centre Point, 103 New Oxford Street, London WC1A 1DU.
Commercial Debt Settlement Bill
A Bill, which would allow companies to charge interest on commercial debts that remain unsettled after 30 days, has received its second Reading.
Introduced by MP for Langbaurgh Michael Bates, the Bill establishes a statutory rate of interest to be charged in accordance with rates of interest imposed by the courts.
This, Mr Bates said, would remove the financial incentive for businesses to delay payment of bills.
The Bill also seeks to amend the Companies Act to require all plcs to publish their settlement periods of accounts and invoices in their annual reports.
Pension registry service
The Occupational Pensions Board is running a free and confidential pension finding service.
Begun in 1990, the service — which has an 87% success rate — has already helped 8,000 people find their pensions.
Further information, both for pension schemes that have not yet registered and people interested in locating missing pensions, is available from the Office of the Registrar, PO Box 1NN, Newcastle-Upon-Tyne NE99 01NN.
Abuse of market power
The Department of Trade and Industry has published a Green Paper aimed at strengthening the law to curb anti-competitive practices.
Abuse of Market Power — Consultative Document on Possible Legislative Options,considers practices such as companies' refusal to supply or the driving out of competitors through loss-making pricing, to be anti-competitive.
Three main options for reform are considered: strengthening existing legislation; introducing a prohibition system; or operating a combination of the two.
Copies of the paper are available, price £5.70, from HMSO.
Comments are requested by 12 February.
WARNING!
Bogus fax and telex directories cost British business £300,000 a year, according to the Association of British Chambers of Commerce.
The Association has released a list of bogus directories, such as the Classified Euro-UK Fax Directory Amsterdam, International Telefax Directory — Zurich, International Telex/Fax Directory — Brussels, and International Yellow Telefax Pages Brussels.
It warns that few such publications actually exist and that order forms apparently offering ‘free entry’ to the directory contravene the Unsolicited Goods and Services Act and are therefore not legally enforceable documents in this country.
Despite this, many British companies are pressured for payment of such ‘invoices’ and threatened with a European credit blacklist.
LAW Edited by Denis Keenan
Statutory Instruments
Charities
SI 1992/2355 (£1.05).
These Regulations,which are now in force , deal with the Charity Commissioners' appointment of a receiver and manager of a charity's property and affairs following an inquiry under s 6 of the Charities Act 1960 (as amended by the Charities Act 1992).
The Regulations enable the Commissioners to require the person appointed to give security and to determine his remuneration.
They also give the Commissioners power to remove the person appointed and provide for him to make reports to the Commissioners.
Companies
— SI 1992/333 (£1.05).
This Order has brought into force s 17 of the Criminal Justice Act 1991, so that the statutory maximum fine for various infringements of the Act's provisions, referred to in Sch 24 of the Companies Act 1985, has been increased from £2,000 to £5,000.
— SI 1992/2452 (£2.30).
These Regulations, which are entitled The Companies Act 1985 (Accounts of Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises and Publication of Accounts in Ecus) Regulations 1992 (see also ACCOUNTANCY , December 1992, p 13), came into force on 16 November 1992.
The major provisions allow companies the option of producing their accounts in Ecus in addition to the currency in which they are drawn up.
The thresholds for small companies are increased to not more than £2.8m for turnover and not more than £1.4m for the balance sheet total, although the number of employees remains the same at an average of 50.
The thresholds for medium companies are increased to not more than £11.2m for turnover and not more than £5.6m for the balance sheet total (the number of employees also remains the same at an average of 250).
The thresholds for small and medium sized groups are also increased.
The small group turnover is now not more than £2.8m net (or £3.36m gross) and not more than £1.4m net (or £1.68m gross) for the balance sheet total.
The number of employees remains at an average of 50.
The medium group turnover is now not more than £11.2m net (or £3.44m gross) and not more than £5.6m net (or £6.72m gross) for the balance sheet total.
The number of employees is still an average of 250.
The Regulations correct two minor defects in the Companies Act 1985 whereby certain small and medium-sized companies were technically unable to file abbreviated accounts.
They also restore small companies' exemption from the requirement to disclose auditors' remuneration in the abbreviated accounts.
This was accidentally removed by the Companies Act 1989.
There are also modifications to the requirements of Part VII and Sch 8, CA 1985.
The Regulations will apply to accounts for financial years ending on or after 16 November 1992, and there are transitional provisions to enable companies to take early advantage of the new thresholds.
Single-member companies
In the September 1992 issue of ACCOUNTANCY 
(see p 110) we reported that The Companies (Single Member Private Limited Companies) Regulations 1992 had come into force, and referred to the various aspects of company and insolvency law that had been changed to accommodate the single-member company.
However, we might not have made it clear that the regulations make no change in s 283 of the CA 1985.
This provides that a company must have a secretary and that a sole director cannot also be secretary.
It follows therefore that if the sole member is also a director, he or she cannot be the secretary.
So a single-member company may of course have one member, but will normally need two officers, ie the member/director and another person as company secretary.
LAW CASE REVIEW Edited by Denis Keenan
Ruling given on set-off against BCCI
In the September 1992 issue of ACCOUNTANCY (see p 111), we reported a case before the Court of Appeal in which the Court was asked to make a declaration as to whether MS Fashions Ltd and MS Fashions (Wholesale) Ltd could be required to pay to Touche Ross, the liquidator of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, the whole of a combined overdraft of £600,000, or whether a deposit with BCCI by Mr Sarwar of £300,000, which had been used as a security for the overdrafts, could be set off against the sum of £600,000 under Rule 4.90 of the Insolvency Rules 1986.
Touche Ross had demanded the repayment of the whole of the combined overdrafts.
The Court of Appeal gave a declaration that the set-off could be made (see MS Fashions Ltd and Others v Bank of Credit and Commerce International SA, The Times,23 June 1992).
The matter has now come to the High Court for an Order that this is the position and the High Court has ruled that companies and directors are entitled to set off deposits they held at BCCI against company overdrafts (see Financial Times , 28/29 November 1992).
The decision is expected to have widespread implications in connection with liquidators' attempts to recover other bank debts with UK companies.
As far as BCCI is concerned, it is understood that a very high proportion of the loans made by BCCI have some sort of deposit associated, and this will obviously make a substantial difference to the amount which can be claimed on behalf of BCCI.
No extra rights for shareholders
The Stock Exchange was successful in the Court of Appeal recently.
The Court decided that shareholders of a company were neither entitled to be notified about an impending decision of The Stock Exchange committee on quotations to cancel a company's listing nor to apply to the courts to challenge such a decision.
The quotations committee had decided to cancel Titaghur plc's listing in which Else (1982) Ltd, Leonard Brealey and Gerard Thomas were all shareholders.
The shareholders applied for judicial review of the decision and the Court had ordered a reference to the European Court of Justice for a ruling on the proper construction of Art 15 of Council Directive 79/279/EEC.
The Stock Exchange committee appealed against the order (see R v International Stock Exchange of UK and Ireland, ex parte Else (1982) Ltd and another: R v same, ex parte Thomas, The Times,2 November 1992).
The Court of Appeal had to consider the Directive's purpose.
The Directive's objective was to coordinate conditions for the admission of securities to official Stock Exchange listing, with the aim of establishing a common market in securities.
This was to be achieved by coordinating the listing conditions in member states, and thus to provide similar protection for investors at Community level and to enable EC-wide listing of member state securities.
The Directive permitted a right to apply to the courts against decisions by the relevant national authorities without restricting the exercise of discretion by those authorities.
It was argued on behalf of the shareholders that the Directive was intended to protect all investors and that they would be prejudiced if they were not notified in advance of the intended cancellation of Titaghur's public listing.
The Master of the Rolls in the Court of Appeal rejected these arguments and said that the purpose of the Directive was to co-ordinate the authorities' discretion in member states and not to provide additional protection for investors.
The Directive was concerned with relations between competent authorities which were responsible for protecting the interests of investors and companies.
There was no right of recourse to the courts in respect of suspension and refusal of listing and no right in respect of cancellation.
The Court thought that such rights would restrict the authorities' discretion, and the job of circularising all shareholders with the relevant information prior to cancellation would be too expensive and difficult.
In addition, since the Directive did not define investors, it seemed conclusive to the Court that it was not intended to give them enforceable rights.
The appeal was allowed.
Varying the terms of a will
If it is intended to vary the terms of a will it is usual to use a deed of variation.
However, a recent case decides that this degree of formality is not essential (see Crowden and Another v Aldridge and Others, The Times , 30 November 1992).
Maurice Henry Farrington died on 3 August 1987.
He left an estate of some £90,000.
He had made a will about 21 years earlier and in it left a legacy of £100 to Mrs Violet Peppercorn.
She was his housekeeper who had been employed by the family for 52 years.
She lived in a bungalow provided for her and at the time of Mr Farrington's death was receiving £2.50 per week for her services and paying £1.50 a week inclusive of rates for the bungalow.
The residue of the estate was divided equally among all Mr Farrington's first cousins living at his death.
There were 16 of them and they were all defendants in this case.
Mr Crowden and Mr Abblitt, the plaintiffs, were the executors of the will.
It appeared that 12 cousins were at Mr Farrington's funeral.
Mr Crowden told them of the terms of the will and suggested that Violet's legacy seemed a poor reward and that it might be improved.
The 12 cousins then decided that Violet should have £5,000, the testator's chattels and the freehold of the bungalow.
They signed a memorandum which read: ‘I agree that the terms of the late Mr Farrington's last will be varied so as to give Mrs Violet Peppercorn all of Mr Farrington's personal chattels together with the freehold bungalow at 27 Washingly Road, Folksworth, of which she is currently tenant (tax-free) and to give a tax-free legacy of £5,000 to Mr and Mrs Arthur Peppercorn.
I am prepared to enter into a deed to formalise this gift.’
There were then spaces for signature, address and date.
Arthur Peppercorn was Violet's husband.
Later in the afternoon, one of the cousins, a Mrs Gladwyn, told Mrs Peppercorn: ‘You'll be all right, Violet; we have looked after you.’
Later on that day another cousin told Violet that the bungalow would be hers and finally Mr Crowden spoke to her and told her that she would be entitled to keep the bungalow and the personal chattels, and receive a legacy of £5,000.
The remaining cousins signed their copies of the memorandum, either on the day of the funeral or within a few days afterwards.
Sadly, however, towards the end of 1987 the generosity of four of the cousins faded.
They had second thoughts and eventually challenged the legal effectiveness of the memorandum.
Certainly, if the memorandum could be regarded as a contract, there might be difficulties because the transaction was not supported by consideration.
If, alternatively, it was a gift then it was incomplete, since the transfers of property had not been made and it might be said, therefore, that the cousins could revoke the incomplete gift.
The judge found, however, that it was a direction to the executors varying their obligations in the administration and distribution of the state and neither a contract nor a gift.
In other words, it was a form of variation.
He also found that on their face, the memoranda were intended to be immediately effective documents.
They began with the words: ‘I agree that the terms of the late Mr Farrington's will be varied…
‘. When the signatories said that he or she would be prepared to enter into a deed to formalise the situation, they were not postponing the legal effect of the document or reserving a final view but merely saying that they would be willing to do so if required, ie record in a more formal way the transactions which had already been made.
There was intention to create legal relations because they wanted to tell Violet about it immediately and two of the cousins did so with the support of the others.
Accordingly, the judge made a declaration that the devolution of the testator's estate had been varied in terms of the memoranda.
Comment.
As the law stands, anyone who has an interest in an estate under the terms of a will or by operation of intestacy rules can vary that interest within two years of the deceased's death.
Deeds of variations were orginally known as deeds of family arrangement because they were generally used to re-arrange assets within a family so as to cover circumstances not foreseen by the deceased when the will was made.
The term ‘deeds of family arrangement’ is not now quite so appropriate because they are increasingly used as tax-planning vehicles, and they will continue to be effective unless the Government repeals those provisions in the Inheritance Tax Act 1984 that permit the variations.
— SI 1992/2051 (£2.30).
The Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 1992, came into force on 1 January 1993.
They are made under the EC Framework Directive on Health and Safety at Work and are the first in a series of new regulations designed to improve health and safety management (see also ACCOUNTANCY , November 1992, p 104).
A guide to the Regulations,Management of Health and Safety in the Workplace Approved Code of Practice , is now available from HMSO (£5).
EMPLOYMENT
Statutory Instruments
Health and Safety at Work
— SI 1992/2792 (£1.90).
The Health and Safety (Display Screen Equipment) Regulations 1992, came into force on 1 January 1993.
Under the Regulations, workstations introduced on or after 1 January 1993 will have to conform to the Regulations immediately, but existing workstations or those installed on or before 31 December 1992 will have until the end of 1996 to comply.
The Regulations apply only where computer screens are habitually used by one or more employees as a significant part of daily work.
The employer's main duties are to assess display screen equipment workstations and reduce any risks that are discovered; ensure that workstations satisfy minimum requirements in terms of the display screen itself, the keyboard, desk and chair, working environment and task design and software; plan work on display screen equipment so that the user has breaks or changes of activity; and to provide information and training for display equipment users.
Users are also entitled to eye and eyesight tests and to special spectacles where normal ones cannot be used.
A guide,Display Screen Equipment Work: Guidance on Regulations [ref L 26], is available from HMSO (£5).
— SI 1992/2793 (£1.50).
The Manual Handling Operations Regulations 1992 came into force on 1 January 1993.
They apply to any manual handling operation which may cause injury at work.
They cover not only the lifting of loads but also lowering, pushing, pulling, carrying or moving them, whether by hand or other bodily force.
A guide to the Regulations,Manual Handling: Guidance on Regulations [ref L 23], is available from HMSO (£5).
— SI 1992/1752 (£3.55).
These Regulations update and replace The Health and Safety (Fees) Regulations 1991.
They fix or determine the fees payable by applicants to the Health and Safety Executive in respect of a variety of applications for the approval of plant, equipment or protective equipment.
Some, but not all, of the fees are increased.
Various Regulations have been brought into force at different times, but all were in force by 2 November 1992.
Health and Safety fines
The maximum fines payable by companies or individuals prosecuted for breaching parts of the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 have been increased sharply.
The maximum fine in a Magistrates' Court for breaches of ss 2 to 6 of the Act and of other sections relating to breaches of improvement notices, and prohibition notices or court remedy orders, has risen to £20,000 and all other breaches of the Act or subordinate Regulations and other relevant legislation now incur a maximum fine of £5,000 (previously £2,000).
The maximum fine in the higher courts is, and always has been, unlimited.
The Wages Act 1986
In the overview of the provisions of the Trade Union Reform and Employment Rights Bill 1992, which appeared in ACCOUNTANCY 's December 1992 issue (see p 128), the reference under Wages Councils to the repeal of Part II of the Wages Act 1980 should have referred to the repeal of Part II of the Wages Act 1986.
tax briefing
TAX Compiled by Chris Greene and Christina Maddalena of Clark Whitehill
New capital allowances
New proposals on capital allowances were announced in the Chancellor's Autumn Statement.
A 40% first year allowance is available for expenditure incurred on plant and machinery between 1 November 1992 and 31 October 1993.
The relief will be available instead of the 25% writing-down allowance available for the year in which the expenditure is incurred, with the balance being written down in future years at 25%.
Businesses will be able to disclaim all or part of the new allowance if they wish.
For this purpose, expenditure is treated as incurred when the obligation to pay for the asset becomes unconditional.
However, where the period of credit allowed is longer than four months, the date on which the bill is payable is the date the expenditure is incurred.
The rule for pre-trading expenditure which deems such capital expenditure as incurred on the first day of trading will not apply in determining whether the expenditure was incurred in the year ending 31 October 1993.
The new allowance will apply to all plant and machinery except cars, other than taxis, short-term hire cars and mobility allowance vehicles for the disabled.
Most assets acquired from connected persons, or sold or leased back or acquired with the sole or main purpose of claiming the new allowance, will also be ineligible.
A new 20% initial allowance will be available for industrial and agricultural buildings that currently qualify for writing-down allowances, provided that they are constructed under a contract entered into between 1 November 1992 and 31 October 1993 and they are brought into use for the purposes of a qualifying trade by 31 December 1994.
Relief for 20% of the building's cost will be available in the tax year in which the expenditure is incurred.
Allowances that are given, based on an intention to bring the building into use by 31 December 1994, will be withdrawn where this condition is not, in the event, met.
The balance of relief will continue to be given annually at the rate of 4% of the original cost of the building from the tax year in which it is brought into use.
In cases where the expenditure is incurred in the same year in which the building is brought into use, both an initial allowance and a writing-down allowance will be available.
Businesses will be able to disclaim all or any part of the initial allowance if they wish.
Expenditure will qualify for the new 20% initial allowance if it is incurred under a legally binding contract made in the year ending 31 October 1993, and the claimant was contractually committed to the expenditure by that contract.
Expenditure a person incurs by exercising an option in a contract is not expenditure incurred under that contract.
It is expenditure incurred under a new contract made when the option is exercised.
Such expenditure will qualify for the initial allowance where the new contract meets the conditions set out above.
Late partnership elections
The Board of Inland Revenue will accept late partnership continuation elections in certain situations, which were recently clarified by Financial Secretary to the Treasury Stephen Dorrell.
The election avoids the cessation and commencement bases applying in assessing profits to tax when a person leaves or joins a partnership.
An election made after the two-year statutory time limit, but as soon as possible given the circumstances, will be accepted if it is made because a relevant and uncorrected Revenue error has resulted in the partners or their agent being misled about whether the requirements of the legislation have been met.
A late election will also be acceptable where at a crucial time one of the signatories or a signatory's agent was unavailable for unforeseeable reasons (such as a serious illness) and there was no one else who could reasonably be expected to stand in the agent's shoes.
If there was some other difficulty in obtaining all the required signatories to the election within the time limit and the Revenue had been notified of this and that each of the signatories had decided to make an election within the time limit, a late election will be accepted.
A late election will not be admitted outside the statutory time limit if the delay is due to: oversight or negligence on the part of a partner or his agent; because one of the parties to the election temporarily refuses to sign it; or because the delay is deliberate to give the parties the opportunity to determine its effect on their tax liabilities.
Late group relief claims
A claim for group relief will be accepted outside the statutory two-year time limit where one of the following can be demonstrated: the Inland Revenue contributed materially to the failure to submit a timely claim; for reasons beyond his or her control, a person vitally concerned in the making of a claim was not available at a crucial time; for reasons beyond the claimant company's or its agent's control, the need for the claim could not have been perceived before the time limit expires, and the claim was made as soon as reasonably possible in all the circumstances.
To have a late claim considered, a company should apply to the inspector as soon as reasonably possible in the circumstances.
A late claim will not be accepted where the delay is due to: oversight or negligence on the part of the claimant company or its agent; failure without good reason to compute the necessary figure; and a desire to avoid establishing the claim pending clarification of the effects of making a claim on other tax liabilities.
These details were given by Financial Secretary to the Treasury Stephen Dorrell in a written reply to a Parliamentary Question, and are effective from 23 November 1992.
Blanket continuation elections
A ‘blanket’ partnership continuation election, covering all future partnership changes, will be accepted by the Inland Revenue, provided conditions detailed in a new Extra Statutory Concession are met.
When there is a change in partnership membership, and at least one person is a partner both before and after the change, for the purposes of assessing profits to tax, the trade is treated as having ceased and a new trade commenced unless an election is made under s 113(2), TA 1988.
S 113(2) requires the election to be signed jointly in respect of each change by all those who were partners both before and after the change.
This strict rule is now relaxed by concession.
Under the new Extra Statutory Concession, the conditions for a blanket election to be accepted are that the firm must have at least 50 partners (or fewer if at least 20 partners are not resident in the UK), and new partners must add their names to the election.
In addition, the Board of Inland Revenue must be indemnified by the people who were partners immediately before the first change, and by anyone joining the partnership on that or a later change, against any loss of tax arising on a partner's claim that the election does not strictly comply with the provisions of s 113(2) and that the cessation basis should have been applied.
A blanket election will continue to apply until such time as the partners (or a partner) give notice that they wish to withdraw from the arrangement.
Official rate of interest falls
The ‘official rate’ of interest has fallen to 9% with effect from 6 December 1992.
The rate is used to calculate the tax charge on beneficial loans to directors and employees earning £8,500 or more a year, including gross expense payments and the value of benefits in kind.
The rate has been reduced from its previous level of 9.75% in accordance with an undertaking made in the 1991 Budget to keep it broadly in line with mortgage rates.
NIC on directors' current accounts
The Department of Social Security has clarified the National Insurance contribution position of directors whose personal bills are paid by their employing company and who then reimburse the company by reducing the credit balance of their loan/ current accounts.
Provided there is clear evidence of reimbursement, and there are sufficient funds in the loan/current account to meet the cost of any personal bills the company pays, there will be no liability for NICs.
But, in the case of an overdrawn loan/current account, liability for NICs will normally arise on the amount by which it is overdrawn.
In contentious cases, an NI inspector may require verification of the evidence of reimbursement, and that there were sufficient funds in the loan/current account at the relevant time.
In such instances, it will be incumbent on the company to provide the evidence, and to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the inspector that this was indeed so.
Where NICs have been paid which, in the light of this latest interpretation of the rules, ought not to have been paid, application may be made by writing to: the Contribution Agency Refunds Group, Department of Social Security, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE98 1XY.
A full explanation of why it is believed that contributions have been over-paid, the amount and the period involved, and the names and NI numbers of the people concerned should be included.
Appeal listings
Inspectors may now list corporation tax delay hearings from 12 months after the end of the accounting period, rather than 15 months as before.
The change is to encourage companies and tax practitioners to meet the 12-month filing requirement for accounts and computations from the outset of Pay and File next October.
Under the new regime, companies will be liable for automatic penalties for late filing.
The Revenue will not regard a backlog of work on the submission of accounts and computations for earlier periods as a reasonable excuse for the late delivery of a company's first return under Pay and File.
Interest on unpaid tax reduced
From 20 November 1992, the interest rate on unpaid tax and repayment supplement for income tax, capital gains tax, development land tax, corporation tax (including advance corporation tax), petroleum revenue tax (including advance petroleum revenue tax), supplementary petroleum duty, Stamp Duty Reserve Tax, and on tax charged by an assessment for the purpose of making good to the Crown a loss of tax wholly or partly attributable to failure or error by the taxpayer, is reduced from 7.75% to 7%.
The rate of interest for tax paid late or repayments of inheritance tax, capital transfer tax, and estate duty is also reduced from 6% to 5% from 20 November 1992.
Revised interest factor tables used as ready reckoners by tax offices to calculate repayment supplement and interest on overdue tax have been published by the Inland Revenue to take into account the revised rate of interest.
Employee scholars
The Inland Revenue has announced an increase in the tax-free amount employers may pay to employees for periods of attendance on full-time educational courses (including sandwich courses).
The limit, as from 6 April 1992, is £7,000 a year (previously £5,500).
A scholarship, exhibition etc held by a person receiving full-time instruction at a university, college, school or other educational establishment is exempt from income tax under s 331, TA 1988.
Inland Revenue Statement of Practice, SP 4/86, extends the spirit of this section to cover payments made by employers to employees for periods of attendance on a full-time educational course, including a ‘sandwich’ course at a university, technical college or similar educational establishment.
Conditions to be met are that the employee must be enrolled for at least one academic year with actual full-time attendance to average at least 20 weeks a year, and the rate of payments (excluding university fees etc payable) must not exceed £7,000 a year or the equivalent monthly or weekly rate.
Additionally, the rate of payment must not exceed that which an individual in similar personal circumstances would receive as a grant from a public awarding body.
Where payments exceed these limits, they become fully taxable.
Institute Budget representations
The Institute's Tax Faculty has made its 1993 Budget representations to the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
There will be two Budgets in 1993 — one in the spring (at which the representations are primarily aimed), and the second in December.
The proposals are intended, in particular, to encourage the inflow of investment to the UK and address matters relevant to the current recession.
The Tax Faculty proposes that measures should be taken to make the UK a more attractive area for foreign investments; in particular, the current situation whereby double taxation relief can result in surplus advance corporation tax should be changed.
The problem can be very acute where a UK intermediate holding company holds shares in foreign companies, and dividends are paid to the foreign parent.
The Tax Faculty reiterates its earlier proposed solutions that the group income provisions should be extended to include dividends paid to a parent resident in another member state and that dividends derived by a UK intermediate holding company from an EC subsidiary should not attract ACT if the ultimate parent is not located in a member state.
Furthermore, dividends received from companies resident in other member states should be exempt from tax altogether.
Another issue seen as an obstacle to investment is that of capital contributions made to a company not ranking as part of the base cost of the shares for capital gains purposes.
Any such contributions do not therefore act to reduce subsequent gains on disposal.
It is suggested that, as in the US, this should be a means of injecting share capital into a company without going through the formalities of a share issue.
A number of suggestions are also made to make it more attractive for overseas companies to employ non-domiciled nationals.
For instance, beneficial loans supported by borrowings in the currency of a non-UK domiciled employee's home country where low interest rates may prevail should not be assessed.
Similarly, no assessment should be made on an employee for entertaining expenses paid by an employer not trading in the UK.
It is also suggested that the taxability of removal expenses where a foreign national comes to the UK but does not dispose of his or her existing house should not be taxable.
Matters referred to in relation to the current recession include the provisions for companies to carry back trading losses.
It is suggested that applying losses to the preceding three years on a ‘first in, first out’, rather than the existing ‘last in, first out’, basis would decrease the possibility that companies are not able to carry back losses to periods in which profits were made.
The Faculty also calls for group losses surrendered (within a ‘75% group’), which cannot be relieved in the same accounting period, to be allowed to be carried back to an earlier accounting period.
Other proposals concern the carry-back of unrelieved charges on income, and the carry-forward of terminal losses against income by individuals.
Losses on disposal of onerous assets, for example a lump sum payment made by a lessee to vary an onerous lease, should be allowable against trading income.
Consideration is requested for allowing a capital gains tax loss on a qualifying loan to a trader to be set against income, thereby encouraging investment in new businesses.
Repeating calls made in representations submitted in December 1991, the Faculty is suggesting that the taxation of disposals of assets for a deferred consideration should be reformed, so that tax on chargeable gains is payable only when cash is received.
The tax treatment of interest paid and received, in particular the need to remove the distinction between short and annual interest, and between banks and other lenders, is also referred to again.
Repeating submissions made in December 1991, it is further suggested that the requirements for a property to be let for 26 weeks out of a 52-week period — before an individual is allowed a deduction in respect of interest on a loan to purchase the property — is too restrictive in the present state of the property market.
In view of the recession, time limits for claims and elections should be relaxed by one year, perhaps by concession.
In particular, the time in which to make a claim to carry back surplus advance corporation tax should be extended from two to six years.
On the subject of rollover relief, it is proposed that the Inland Revenue should give advance clearance of extensions to the three-year reinvestment deadline, or the deadline should be extended to five years.
Classes of assets to which the roll-over provision apply should be amended to include shares in family companies.
Further consideration is recommended on the subject of removing tax disadvantages that arise on disincorporation, a problem that has been highlighted on several previous occasions.
As well as making various suggestions for changes to the VAT regime, problems were perceived where shares received from unapproved share option schemes have become valueless.
The faculty suggests that assistance given to ex-employees finding new employment should be tax free, and that the Revenue should have discretion to grant exemption certificates to building subcontractors where a company has become insolvent for bona fide reasons.
Copies of Tax 16/92 are available free (send sae) from the Publications Department at the Institute.
More gross interest
Building societies can now pay interest gross to the following: a company (including an incorporated association such as a club or society); a health service body; the trustees of a unit trust scheme; and the holders of certificates of deposit issued in paperless (‘dematerialised’) form.
Regulations also remove the need for people who are not ordinarily resident in the UK to make separate declarations to their building society both to receive their interest without deduction of tax and to exclude the interest from returns made to the Inland Revenue.
The Statutory Instrument,The Income Tax (Building Societies)(Dividends and Interest)(Amendment No 2) Regulations Act 1992, SI 1992/2915 (£1.05), which effects these changes, applies from 14 December 1992.
Company cars Institute response
The Institute's Tax Faculty has published its response to the Inland Revenue's consultation document, issued in July 1992, on the reform of the income tax treatment of company cars.
The Faculty believes that the scale charge should be based on manufacturers' retail list prices, provided the Revenue publishes an annual list of such prices.
It should be recognised that there are problems not addressed by the consultation document, for example extras, widespread discounts, imported and second-hand cars and frequent price changes.
If the Revenue is unwilling to publish an annual list, the only practicable alternative is to base the charge on the cost of the car, since it would be burdensome to expect employers to work out this information for themselves.
Banding is acceptable, but some of the bands are too wide and a further band within the £12,500 to £19,499 range should also assist in reducing the adverse impact on cars in the higher price range.
The lower scale figure should continue for older cars: although the current four-year break period is acceptable, consideration might be given to using a period of three years.
There is no need for special rules for classic cars, but if it is considered that such rules are required, the most appropriate method is to determine the benefit by reference to the cost to the employer rather than original price.
The Faculty sees no logic in basing the fuel scale charge on cost and therefore supports the continuation of the present system.
As regards commencement dates, the Tax Faculty considers that if, as it suggests, a list of original list prices is published, an April 1994 commencement date seems reasonable.
If not, however, the change should be delayed until April 1995.
Copies of the Faculty's response, Tax 18/92, are available free (send sae) from the Publications Department at the Institute.
TAX CASE REVIEW Compiled by Chris Greene and Christina Maddalena of Clark Whitehill
Reference to Parliament
The benefit to be assessed on teachers at Malvern College in respect of their children's education there was held to be the marginal cost to the school of providing the education, less any contribution the teachers made.
The House of Lords reached this decision in Pepper v Hart [1992]STI 1026 by referring to ministerial statements at the time the relevant legislation (s 63, FA 1976) was introduced.
The taxpayers were the bursar and nine assistant masters at Malvern College.
Their sons were educated at the school at one fifth of the fees normally charged, under a concessionary scheme.
The taxpayers were assessed to income tax on the cash equivalent of an amount equal to the cost of the benefit less the amount made good by the employee under s 61(1), FA 1976.
S 63(2), FA 1976 defined the cost of the benefit as an amount of any expense incurred in or in connection with the provision, including a proper proportion of any expense relating partly to the benefit and partly to other matters.
Accordingly, the amount assessed was computed by the Inland Revenue to include a proportion of the school's overheads on an average cost basis.
The taxpayers appealed.
The Special Commissioners found in favour of the taxpayers.
The expense the school incurred in educating and maintaining the taxpayers' sons did not add to the school's general costs but was equal to the additional cost involved in so doing — such as meals and laundry.
The fees the taxpayers paid fully covered such cost and thus any benefit was reimbursed.
The decision was subsequently reversed on appeal to the High Court.
The Court of Appeal similarly dismissed the taxpayers' further appeal.
Before the House of Lords, the issue was whether the benefit to the taxpayers should be computed on an average cost basis including a proportion of the school's overheads, or on a marginal cost basis, as the taxpayers claimed.
An additional question was whether in construing s 63(2), FA 1976, their Lordships could refer to Parliamentary proceedings at the time the legislation was introduced.
Having withdrawn the original proposal to tax in-house benefits on the open market price charged to the public, the Financial Secretary gave assurance that in a number of specific cases benefits would continue to be taxed as before, and in the specific case of school teachers paying concessionary school fees, the charge would be nil or very small.
Allowing the taxpayers' appeal, Lord Justice Browne-Wilkinson held that in construing a piece of legislation, reference to Parliamentary materials, subject to any question of Parliamentary privilege, is permissible where three criteria are met: the legislation is ambiguous or obscure, or leads to an absurdity; the material relied on consists of one or more statements by a minister or other promoter of the Bill, together if necessary with such other Parliamentary material as is necessary to understand such statements and their effect; the statements relied on are clear.
Having established that reference to Parliamentary material as an aid to statutory construction could be permissible, Lord Justice Browne-Wilkinson considered whether the case in question fell within these criteria.
He found the taxpayers' argument that the wording in s 63 meant marginal cost, and the Revenue's argument that the wording meant average cost, finely balanced.
The statutory words were capable of bearing either meaning and there was thus an ambiguity or obscurity.
On the second and third criteria, he was satisfied that the Parliamentary material that was introduced was a clear statement by a responsible minister stating the effect of the ambiguous words in what became s 63, FA 1976.
In his view, the minister's responses to questions asked at the time the legislation was proposed were consistent with the interpretation that the words ‘the expense incurred in or in connection with’ meant that the provision of the benefit would produce a charge to tax on the additional or marginal cost only.
Given that reference to Hansard was permissible, the taxpayers' appeal was allowed.
However, if such reference was not permissible, there was no option but to give effect to the literal meaning of the words and dismiss the appeal.
The final issue before the Court was whether, in looking at Parliamentary material, the Court breached Parliamentary privilege.
Lord Justice Browne-Wilkinson said that it is now apparently accepted that it is for the courts to decide whether a privilege exists and for the House of Commons to decide whether such privilege has been infringed.
He continued: ‘In the absence of a claim to a defined privilege as to the validity of which your Lordships could make a determination, it would not in my view be right to withhold from the taxpayers a decision to which, in law, they are entitled.’
Lord Keith, Lord Ackner, Lord Oliver and Lord Bridge concurred, as did Lord Griffiths, who delivered a judgment in favour of relaxing the existing rules considerably on reference to Parliamentary material.
The Lord Chancellor, Lord Mackay, concurred with allowing the taxpayers' appeal on the grounds of statutory construction alone.
He was not in favour of relaxing the rules on reference to Parliamentary material on the practical ground that this would substantially increase litigation costs.
Comment.
The case is significant in that it establishes the principle that the courts may refer, subject to specific criteria, to Parliamentary material when construing legislation.
The principle applies not only to taxing statutes but all forms of statute law.
However, the new ruling will be relevant only when the court is satisfied that the law is ambiguous or obscure.
Until this point is established, reference to Parliamentary material will not be appropriate.
It remains to be seen whether the Revenue will seek amendments to the legislation in next year's Finance Bill.
If such changes are introduced, in-house benefits such as directors' dining rooms, sports facilities and so on will be a significantly less attractive means of providing benefits to employees.
The immediate consequences of the decision are subject to any Revenue statement as to how it will proceed in future.
Subject to that reservation, where an assessable in-house benefit has been computed on an average cost basis, but the liability has yet to be agreed for whatever reason, the amount assessable should be recomputed on a marginal cost basis.
Liabilities for benefits that were agreed on the average cost basis will not be recomputed, however.
The principle that they were agreed on the understanding of the law at the time will apply.
Any new in-house benefits an employer provides should be computed on a marginal cost basis.
One transaction, two agreements
Stamp duty was payable only on the consideration for the acquisition of a partly developed site and not, in addition, on the purchaser's payments to the developer for completing the construction under a separate development agreement made at the same time as the sale agreement.
Chancery Division so held in Prudential Assurance Company Ltd v IRC [1992]STI 925.
On 18 October 1989, the Prudential entered into two agreements with the developers of a freehold site.
Under the first, a sale agreement, the Prudential agreed to acquire a freehold property.
Under the second, a development agreement, which provided for the property's development by the developers, the Prudential agreed to pay certain building costs.
A deed of transfer was executed on 18 October, whereby the developers transferred the land in question to the Prudential.
At the time much of the construction work had already been carried out.
The Prudential was assessed to stamp duty on the consideration for both the land and all building works on the grounds that the two agreements were a single commercial transaction, the substance of which was the sale of the developed site to the Prudential by the developers.
The Prudential appealed, contending that there were two contracts and that stamp duty was payable only for the land and the works completed on 18 October 1989.
The Vice Chancellor, Sir Donald Nicholls, allowing the Prudential's appeal, said that the subject matter of the sale had to be identified.
In doing so, it was necessary to consider the transaction's commercial substance and also the shape or form the parties had chosen for it.
If the parties had genuinely chosen one route rather than a different route, stamp duty would be assessable accordingly.
The transaction's commercial object was that the Prudential would acquire a development being carried out by the developers with funds provided by the Prudential.
However, the transaction by which the end result was sought could not be characterised as a sale of land with finished buildings thereon.
That manifestly was not the transaction's legal shape.
On 18 October 1989, the Prudential had agreed to purchase the land and the conveyance was completed immediately.
The £6.1m paid was consideration for the site and the existing partly-constructed buildings.
The further sums payable by the Prudential were paid under the development agreement not for the sale but for the performance of the developer's obligation to complete the development.
The sale agreed and completed was thus for the land and buildings as they were at that time.
Such reasoning was consistent with the case law and the Prudential's appeal would be allowed.
VAT Compiled by John Brown and Tony McLaughlin of Ernst & Young
Repayment supplement review
Customs are reviewing the VAT repayment supplement regime and are seeking views from all interested parties.
Currently, a supplement should be paid if a repayment is not made within 30 days of Customs' receipt of the return.
Customs' enquiry time is not included when calculating whether the repayment is delayed by more than 30 days.
Since 16 July 1992 (Royal Assent of the 1992 Finance (No 2) Act), such enquiry time has included Customs making internal enquiries; previously, however, the time had to be on enquiries with the trader, rather than on internal enquiries, following the High Court decision in L Rowland and Co (Retail) Ltd (see ACCOUNTANCY , November 1992, p 108).
Views on the repayment supplement regime should be submitted, by 15 January 1993, to VAT Central Unit, RS Review Team, 7th Floor, Alexandra House, Victoria Avenue, Southend-on-Sea, Essex SS99 1AA.
Insolvency working party
A working party whose members are drawn from the Society of Practitioners of Insolvency, the Institute, the Scottish Institute and the Law Society, is looking into the future VAT control of insolvent traders.
One of the aims, within the framework of the taxpayer's charter, is to speed up the allocation of payments to creditors.
The terms of reference are ‘to identify procedures that serve the interest of both business and Customs for the control of insolvent VAT registered traders and to make cost recommendations’.
The working party is expected to report by the end of March 1993.
Property: input tax recovery
The High Court has upheld the VAT Tribunal decisions in the cases of Briararch and Curtis Henderson , involving properties used, or to be used, to make supplies of different VAT liabilities.
The High Court has confirmed that in such circumstances input tax recovery should be apportioned.
Typically, this will benefit builders and developers who intend to make a taxable supply of property, but who, in a troubled property market, make short-term exempt lettings before making the taxable supply.
Customs had tried to use a ‘first supply’ argument that the exempt supply prevented recovery of VAT on all construction and development costs but, following the High Court ruling, apportionment is allowable.
The apportionment should reflect the exempt and taxable (including intended taxable) use of the property.
Customs are considering a change to the law to block input tax recovery based on intended usage.
Person constructing status
The Scottish Court of Session upheld the Edinburgh VAT Tribunal decision, in the case of Link Housing Association Ltd , that ‘person constructing’ status does not diminish with time.
The Association had constructed properties in the past which were let to tenants, with the right to buy.
Where a property was sold following a period of letting, Customs had argued that the Association no longer had a ‘person constructing’ status and was not, therefore, entitled to claim input relief on property selling costs.
The courts have upheld the right to VAT recovery on such costs.
Customs are not appealing.
Self-supply: tenants' fitting-out costs
Since 1 August 1989, developers of certain non-residential buildings have been liable to a self-supply charge on properties used for exempt purposes.
The self-supply provisions define a developer as anyone who constructs or orders or finances the construction of such a building, and the provisions apply to certain reconstructions, enlargements and extensions.
VAT on a self-supply is due on the cost of the land and standard rates construction costs.
Sometimes such costs are incurred by a party other than the developer, typically where the tenant completes the fitting out of the building.
If such costs are incurred in calculating a self-supply charge, tax could be paid twice.
The law is now being changed so that tenants' fitting out work will not be included in calculating the developer's self-supply charge.
Customs are revising their Notice 742A, Part III of which describes how the self-supply provisions work.
Relief for items ordinarily installed in domestic housing
The relief from VAT on new domestic housing does not extend to items that are not ordinarily installed by builders.
Items not ordinarily installed are therefore standard-rated.
These include domestic electrical gas appliances (except space or water heating appliances), carpets and fitted furniture (other than kitchen units and work surfaces).
Previously, extractor fans and smoke detectors were considered to be items not ordinarily installed but, since 1 October 1992, extractor fans and hard-wired smoke detectors installed in new housing to comply with Building Regulations are eligible for zero-rating.
This concession by Customs follows an amendment to the Building Regulations on kitchen and bathroom ventilation and fire safety.
It is worth noting that Customs are reviewing the current range of exclusions to those items ordinarily installed in new housing that can be relieved from VAT.
Fish bait
Many food-stuffs and animal feeds are zero-rated, with a number of standard-rated exceptions.
In the past, fresh fish used as bait has been standard-rated, on the grounds that it is not intended for human consumption.
As a result of presentations from fishermen's associations, Customs have reviewed their policy on the liability of fresh fish used as bait, and have decided that such fish can be zero-rated.
The new policy, introduced on 1 October 1992, zero-rates fresh fish used as bait which is of a kind used for human consumption, and is fit for human consumption when it is supplied.
Other types of bait, such as maggots and lug worms, remain standard-rated.
The single market
Now that we are in the European Single market, the need for additional statistical reporting by VAT registered traders is on us.
Customs themselves predict that the introductory costs of meeting the single market requirements will be about £100m to British companies.
This cost should be off-set by the savings, estimated at £450m in the years to 1996 (it should be remembered that the current single market arrangements are intended to be replaced by a tax system based purely on the country of origin, to be introduced in 1997, subject to the unanimous agreement of EC member states).
Customs have estimated that the system introduced on 1 January 1993 will abolish the need for about 10m Customs declarations, which represents a saving to British business of approximately £175m each year.
In addition, the single market should avoid delays in the transport of freight, and the need for additional stocks to be held to cover a shortfall because of the lack of certainty of delivery times.
The annual cost of submitting the periodic statistical returns is anticipated by Customs to be about £40m.
Tax representatives
Businesses required to register for VAT in the UK that do not have a business establishment here may now appoint, or may be directed to appoint, a tax representative to account for UK VAT on their behalf.
Tax representatives are jointly responsible for the overseas businesses' tax liabilities, although it is the overseas business, rather than the tax representative, which is seen to be registered for UK VAT.
Customs guidance on tax representatives' responsibilities, and the registration requirements, are contained in Public Notice 725,VAT: The Single Market and VAT information sheet 1/92,VAT: Overseas Businesses and Tax Representatives .
UK businesses registrable for VAT in other member states, where they have no establishment, will need to appoint a tax representative in those countries, or consider registering there.
Intrastat thresholds
The threshold whereby traders are required to submit supplementary statistical declarations (SSDs) is £135,000 for both despatches and arrivals.
If a business only exceeds the threshold for arrivals of goods and not despatches, then SSDs are only completed for arrivals; similarly, if the threshold is only breached for goods despatched, then SSDs only need to be completed for despatches.
The threshold will be renewed annually, to be set in October of each year, and effective from 1 January of the following year.
A special office has been established by Customs to manage Intrastat in the UK, with the aim of maintaining the register of Intrastat traders and ensuring compliance.
The address is Intrastat Managing Branch, Tariff and Statistical Office Branch 8, HM Customs & Excise, Portcullis House, 27 Victoria Avenue, Southend-on-Sea, Essex SS2 6AL.
Businesses identified by Customs as needing to complete SSDs should have received a copy of the Intrastat Classification Nomenclature,which provides classification codes for goods to be recorded on the SSDs.
It is anticipated that about 300,000 traders will be required to complete SSDs.
Default interest
On 6 November 1992 the rate of default interest was reduced from 9.25% to 7.75%, and on 6 December 1992 it was cut again to 7%.
audit regulation
DISCIPLINE WITH REGULATION The Institute's Audit Registration Committee has a dual purpose: to regulate and monitor the registration of auditors
Brian Currie
One of the tests I brought with me when I joined the Audit Registration Committee (ARC) as chairman last June was the question: ‘What would be done differently if regulation and monitoring were being conducted from outside the Institute by an external regulator?’
An important question, because if somebody outside the Institute would perform the task differently, we must be prepared to answer the question ‘Would that way be better or lead to better results?’
In fact, during my first few months, I have not been able to identify any major differences between the procedures that the Institute has set up in response to the Companies Act and those that I would expect from an ‘external’ regulator.
In fact, I have inherited a structure that has been well thought out.
It reflects a cross-section of the profession, both in terms of location and size of firm represented.
The chartered accountant members, qualified in auditing and therefore well-equipped to understand the technical and professional issues raised by the new regime, are augmented by four non-accountant members.
The role played by these independent members is to represent the wider public interest.
They monitor the fairness and effectiveness of the specialists' deliberations, while also taking part in the decision-making.
In its early days the role of the ARC and all its resources were directed to processing applications and registering auditors.
By December 1992 the Institute, as a Recognised Supervisory Body, had registered 9,196 firms.
This figure is never static: firms cease to practise, firms start up, they decide that registration is no longer required, or they merge with someone else.
While still dealing with a steady flow of new applications, the committee has now become more concerned with its main tasks of monitoring compliance with the regulations, and considering whether firms and partners satisfy the requirement of being ‘fit and proper’.
As part of this work the committee must consider any complaints against members.
It also follows up, in the same way, cases identified through the press or public comment where questions are raised about the adequacy of a firm's audit procedures.
By their very nature these cases will be the major public interest ones and will probably involve the larger firms.
Several such cases may be in hand at any one time.
When the Institute was recognised as a supervisory body in August 1991, John Redwood, Minister for Corporate Affairs, outlined his views of the new regime's objectives.
‘It will be judged on its success in raising audit performance,’ he said.
Complaints and any other concerns have to be followed up promptly.
‘In many instances all that will be needed will be advice on the improvements necessary and a check later to ensure that they have been made’, while more serious problems need firm action.
The ARC always keeps this advice clearly in mind.
Complaints and justice
The committee takes seriously the need to be fair and just in everything it does.
It could never take regulatory action on the basis of a criticism or a complaint alone.
Natural justice requires that a firm should have an opportunity to answer any criticism before a decision is made.
When a complaint is received the committee generally seeks further clarification from the firm.
Sometimes it has been satisfied that no further regulatory action is required.
In other cases the committee has asked the Joint Monitoring Unit (JMU) to visit the firm, usually to review its audit procedures.
This type of visit provides information to help the committee reach any necessary decision.
Meetings with the JMU and reading and discussing its report should in most cases help the firm to identify any weak areas and to develop better procedures.
If there are procedures that need improvement, one reaction of the committee to a JMU report may be to ask the practice to undertake to set up or to maintain certain procedures or to change other specific arrangements.
In this way the audit regime has the positive effect of improving professional standards.
In a small number of cases the JMU's evidence has been such that the committee has decided the firm should not be registered, or that registration should be granted, but with restrictive conditions (where, for example, a partner may be precluded from acting as a ‘responsible individual’).
A firm may also be restricted for a period from accepting certain types of new appointments without the committee's consent.
People still think that the JMU does the regulating, but this is not the case.
Only the ARC takes regulatory decisions.
The JMU acts as its senses, its eyes and ears, and reports back to the committee on its findings.
Firms have the right to apply for a review of the committee's decision.
The Review Committee is made up of individuals with no previous connection with the audit registration process.
To date, three cases have been through this process.
In two of them the ARC's decision to withdraw registration was upheld.
In the third the Review Committee granted registration, but with restrictions.
Firms can appeal against any Review Committee decision but, so far, this has not happened.
While the ARC places the emphasis I have described on the need to be fair, and to help firms to operate effectively within the new regime, it takes its regulatory role very seriously and the public interest is always paramount.
This is accepted and welcomed by the majority of members.
Every member I have spoken to believes it is in all our best interests to maintain the profession's high standards and to remove from the register any auditor who has little or no regard for them.
Discipline and regulation
How do the Institute's disciplinary arrangements interact with the Institute's role as a regulator?
Complaints are usually received by the secretariat in the Professional Conduct Department (PCD).
If it receives one about a member who is a partner in a firm of registered auditors, a copy of the complainant's letter is sent to the ARC, which will consider whether this should have any effect on the firm's continued registration.
In some cases the committee decides that it can see no immediate implications for the firm's continued registration.
The PCD secretariat then carries the investigation forward with the provision that, if the matter proves to be significant enough to be referred to the Investigation Committee, the ARC will be informed so that it can consider the case further.
In other cases the committee may decide that the complaint raises questions that need to be addressed immediately.
In such cases the committee may ask the firm for explanations or it may ask the JMU to visit the firm to find out whether there are any procedural difficulties or weaknesses that need to be remedied if its registration is to continue.
The difference between the Institute's disciplinary role and its regulatory role should become clear at this point.
Its disciplinary role is to investigate and, if necessary, assign penalties for past disciplinary offences.
The aim of the regulator is to minimise the chances of a recurrence of the deficiency.
It follows that firms may receive two letters from the Institute about the same complaint, approaching the issue from different angles and with different objectives.
Wherever possible the Institute attempts to keep the amount of correspondence to a minimum.
Future directions
My policy, which I believe the committee accepts, is that our regulatory process should be such that any other committee or body appointed to replace us (should that ever happen) would adopt the same procedures because they were unable to see a better, fairer way of doing things.
Having created the process, it is now time, in the pursuit of excellence, for us to begin to refine it.
It needs to be made:
more economical, particularly in its use of the time of volunteer members;
more clearly and widely understood so that there is no confusion about our procedures; and
more efficient, particularly in our response time.
We must eliminate backlogs.
It is clear (and quite natural) that in the rush to set up such a massive process, capable of handling 10,000 registrations, there is some unevenness in the processing.
Our production lines need balancing.
Finally, we need to analyse our results more clearly.
Much of the committee's and the JMU's perception of the profession to date has been derived from early visits set up in response to doubts created by registration information and by JMU visits in response to complaints.
There is a danger that this provides a distorted view.
The situation is analogous to the testing of heavy goods vehicles by the Department of Transport.
‘More than 50% of lorries overloaded or defective in roadside checks!’ run the headlines in the press.
Of course anyone who has ever attended one of these checks knows that the vehicle examiners, with practised eyes, pull into the checks those lorries carrying the tell-tale signs of overloading or defects.
The results are not a random sample of the vehicles on the road at all.
The headlines are misleading.
As the JMU random visit programme goes into its second year we need to find better ways of isolating the representative results from those of the reactive, com-plaint-led, visits, and learn to interpret them statistically to build up a reliable picture of the auditing profession, its strengths and weaknesses.
This will enable us to reach better and more cogent conclusions about the future needs for monitoring and regulation that we will be able to share with the public and with the DTI.
These tasks form an important part of the Audit Registration Committee's future development.
The committee takes seriously the need to be fair and just in everything it does.
It could never take regulatory action on the basis of a criticism or a complaint alone
People still think that the JMU does the regulating, but this is not the case.
Only the ARC takes regulatory decisions.
The JMU acts as its senses, its eyes and ears
research and development
INDUSTRY AND THE CITY: IS R&D THE KEY?
More company accountants are aware that the City needs better information on R&D — which augurs well for an improved dialogue between industry and the City
Bill Nixon, Elin Sundgaard and Don Sinclair
There is broad agreement that a major cause of Britain's relatively low spending on long-term investment and civil research and development (R&D) stems from poor information flow between companies and the City.
In the past few years many disparate organisations have appealed to industry to improve information dissemination about R&D.
The recommendation of the House of Lords Select Committee on Science and Technology 1986, that ‘legislation should be introduced to require companies to disclose their R&D expenditure in their annual accounts’ led to the prompt revision of SSAP 13,Accounting for Research and Development .
For accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 1989, ‘large publicly accountable companies’ are obliged to disclose the amount they spend on R&D.
This disclosure requirement, in turn, made possible a recommendation in June 1990 by the Innovation Advisory Board (set up under the aegis of the Department of Trade and Industry) that a ‘UK R&D scoreboard by sectors and companies’ should be drawn up.
However, the level of information on R&D required by SSAP 13 is minimal, and calls for companies to provide more information still persist.
A review of SSAP 13 by the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants in January 1992 expressed the view that: ‘SSAP 13 (Revised) was a relatively small step towards requiring companies to disclose more information about their plans for the future.
The figure that many companies disclose allows trends over time to be identified but does little to provide a more detailed appreciation of its commitment to investing for the future.’
A report of the Institutional Shareholders' Committee in April 1992 noted that ‘most companies do no more than comply with the very limited disclosure requirements of SSAP 13 and some do not even do that.
How then can shareholders hope to make judgments about long-term prospects?’
A survey just completed, sponsored by the Board for Chartered Accountants in Business (the BCAB) and the Institute's Research Board, sought to obtain the views of company accountants on many of the R&D accounting and disclosure issues raised by these developments and recommendations.
Responses were received from 109 companies that, in total, account for almost 70% of the total R&D expenditure reported by companies in the 1992 R&D scoreboard.
Of these 109 companies, 77 are listed on the London Stock Exchange and 91 fall within the scope of SSAP 13 (Revised).
The overriding message that emerges from the survey is that accountants in industry share to a considerable degree the City's view (as exemplified by the Institutional Shareholders' Committee) that reporting companies need to devote more efforts to improving the information provided on the nature of R&D expenditure and, in particular, its contribution to performance.
By contrast, the accounting treatment of R&D appears to be a non-issue for most company accountants; they almost universally support the present practice of immediate write-off of all R&D expenditure.
The aggregate responses to the Innovation Advisory Board's original recommendation for a UK R&D scoreboard indicated 49 supporting it, 22 against it, with a sizeable number (35) neither agreeing nor disagreeing.
Sectoral differences suggest that there is a strong positive correlation between the intensity of R&D in a sector and support for the scoreboard.
Of the 22 respondents who did not support a scoreboard, 20 took the trouble to spell out the reasons for their objections.
A dominant concern related to the difficulty of ensuring meaningful comparability because of wide variations in how companies interpret the requirements of SSAP 13 (Revised), with regard to both the activities to be included in R&D and the costs to be attributed to them.
Another concern related to the difficulty of providing information on the productivity of the R&D expenditure incurred.
One respondent said: ‘The amount of R&D expenditure is one thing, the effectiveness of it is quite another matter.’
This concern probably contributed to the very large number (69%) that agreed with the view that companies will have to devote more effort to providing improved information about the value to the business of R&D expenditure.
The Institutional Shareholders' Committee suggested that information relating to the proportion of current sales attributable to products introduced in the last three to five years would, with other data, provide a helpful indication of the return earned on R&D.
The claim of ICI chief economist, Richard Freeman, that ‘R&D intensive companies often do not have a market rating appropriate to their future profitability,’ is central to the debate on institutional and managerial short-termism.
In the survey, 62 respondents (57%) agreed with Mr Freeman; 11 (10%) disagreed.
However, there were again interesting differences between sectors.
Support for Mr Freeman's claim is non-existent in the health care sector (six respondents) and low in chemicals (four of the 11 respondents agreed).
But the service sector (nine respondents), which included several small R&D intensive companies, expressed a 78% agreement; electrical and electronics sector companies (16 respondents) also strongly supported it (69%).
The contrasting sectoral viewpoints (especially the health care and electronics sectors) may reflect differences in the quantity and quality of information provided by companies in the respective sectors and the technical ability of analysts and investment decision makers to evaluate the R&D information provided.
A dominant theme of the respondents' comments on the market's rating of R&D-intensive companies is the need to improve communication in order to enhance capital market efficiency.
The fact that R&D-intensive companies in some sectors may not perceive their market rating as appropriate to their future profitability is ‘a symptom of a communication problem’(pharmaceutical/health care company); an inappropriate market rating is due to a ‘failure of communications rather than a failure in accounting’(metals and mining sector company).
The survey shows a broad agreement among company accountants that ‘the bare figures [on R&D]will not be enough’.
It suggests that the information flow on R&D from industry to the City is very likely to improve.
corporate treasury
CORPORATE FINANCING POLICY: THE POTENTIAL FOR CONFLICT Management would never rely on suppliers for advice on procurement policy.
So is it dangerous to ask the bank for financial advice?
Derek Ross
Most purchasing decisions are based on an internal assessment of business needs, a specification of the product or service required and some competitive procurement process.
Often, however, financing decisions are based on a less rigorous methodology.
In particular, many companies rely on their bankers' advice on the type of finance appropriate for particular circumstances, even though the adviser may also be the supplier of the funds.
If the potential conflicts of interest are to be managed it is best for the business to specify first precisely what form of finance is required.
This will depend on the company's corporate financial strategy, including the five key liability features:
gearing and the effect on the equity risk profile;
the profile of the maturity of the debt;
the interest rate exposure, ie whether the interest expense should be fixed, variable or some more complex combination of features;
the foreign currency mix;
documentation and covenant management.
In the past, companies were limited by the types of finance available in the market.
Now, however, these risk management features can be separately engineered with a toolkit of financial instruments, so that a borrower can usually raise finance with liability features that closely match what the business needs.
The company should therefore engineer the debt not only to match these general business needs, but also to optimise the legal, corporate tax, and maybe even the accounting disclosure implications.
When this process is complete the banks or capital markets can then be approached to provide the finance and any appropriate financial instruments to meet the company's specification.
Many companies are not sufficiently aware of the conflicts of interest that can arise in practice.
As an example, assume that a credit rated business currently borrowing, say, up to £100m in the short-term variable rate markets decides simultaneously to lengthen the maturity and fix its interest rate exposure.
Assume further that the company decides to make a straightforward 25 year fixed rate £100m sterling Eurobond issue.
The bond will be priced by the issuing bank at a spread above the reference gilt which is the 9% of 2008.
The spread is estimated to be, say, 160 basis points above the gilt but will not be known for certain until issue day.
In arranging the facility the company would appoint a lead manager who would undertake at least to:
price the bond at a spread above the refence gilt;
underwrite the bond for a fee of, say, 5/8 %;
advise on documentation and covenants;
act as primary distributor of the bond;
trade the bond as market-maker on its own account.
This corporate issuer must review this range of activities carefully to ensure that the risk of underpricing the bonds is minimised.
All issues of securities will inevitably involve some judgment of price.
In the Eurobond example the spread over the gilt can be judged from the trading level of bond issues of similarly rated companies with similar documentation and covenants.
The company ought therefore to be able to form a reasonable view on the price obtained.
The judgment becomes more subjective, however, if the issue is into less well-populated areas of the yield curve and for more complex instruments.
Particular care needs to be exercised with securities such as convertibles and warrants.
In these circumstances the company would be wise to obtain access to appropriate option pricing software to satisfy itself on pricing.
In recent years there has been an enormous increase in the range and complexity of capital market instruments.
Many have complex option features, related not only to the share price — as with warrants and convertibles — but possibly to interest rates and/or foreign exchange rates if the instrument includes issuer call or investor put features.
These features can be difficult to price; even if mathematical models are prepared, pricing will still be sensitive to certain inputs to the model, most importantly subjective estimates of future volatility of financial variables such as the share price, interest rates or foreign exchange rates.
There has also been significant criticism of companies that have entered into transactions that were unsuitable for their needs and that increased their financial risk.
Some companies even faced insolvency as a result.
A good example was the problems faced with premium put convertible instruments.
Many weak companies were attracted into these by the low interest charge, but when the share price did not perform they were then faced with huge, and sometimes non-tax deductible, interest premiums to pay.
The key problem with the instrument was that its financial features responded to changing circumstances by increasing funding risk rather than reducing it.
This was because if the business did perform well the instrument took on equity features, when in these circumstances straight debt would have been the desired financing to maximise shareholder value.
Alternatively, if the company fell on hard times, the instrument took on not only a debt, but a highly onerous debt feature when the company's need would have been for equity.
It is also common to reward banks with success fees.
Sometimes such advisers may act for companies to handle the securities issues needed to consummate another transaction, such as an acquisition.
In these circumstances the treasurer should ensure that the bank's desire to complete the transaction does not influence its advice on the pricing of the securities.
Naturally, treasurers will normally restrict their dealings to top quality financial institutions.
These institutions will have their own professional codes of conduct and can therefore be expected to avoid conflicts of interest.
Nonetheless, early recognition of the potential for conflict, before the bank becomes heavily involved in the deal, will reduce the chance of misunderstanding and the risk of criticism by any party.