

A fate worse than a cookbook
Competition has its disadvantages.
Many suspect that it has weakened auditors' ability to take a strong line with directors.
This does not mean that they conduct their audits negligently or sacrifice their independence by condoning accounting treatments that are demonstrably wrong.
But it does mean that, faced with options ranging from what is merely arguably right to what the auditors believe to be best, their critics are convinced that auditors will in practice settle for the arguably right if that is what the directors prefer.
Worse, as part of their service to the client, the auditors may take the lead in suggesting accounting treatments that put the brightest gloss on events.
This state of affairs is the effect of competition among auditors.
If one firm takes a stand against an accounting treatment that other firms allow, that firm will be at a competitive disadvantage.
Gresham's law then takes effect.
Bad accounting drives out good.
There are two ways of tackling this problem: strengthen auditors' independence or have an immensely detailed cookbook of accounting rules.
David Tweedie, the chairman of the Accounting Standards Board, has already warned that the ASB will follow the cookbook approach if companies and their auditors continue to comply with the letter of the rules rather than with their spirit.
But it is possible that auditors are trapped by their competitive environment, and so are unable to heed Professor Tweedie's warning even if they wanted to.
If this is so, then we shall almost certainly get a cookbook, and the standard-setters will be doomed forever to the thankless task of blocking, after the event, all the ingenious but undesirable accounting schemes that the wit of man can devise.
The cookbook approach is plainly a second-best, and reformers may therefore be driven to look again at auditors' independence.
The ideal solution here would be to shift effective power in matters of auditors' appointment and remuneration from the directors to the shareholders.
The Auditing Practices Board's The Future Development of Auditing suggested first steps in this direction.
But institutional investors' reaction so far has been unenthusiastic or even hostile, and without their support the APB's ideas will never get off the ground.
Indeed, when small shareholders in Trafalgar House dared to show an active interest in the reappointment of the auditors, the institutional shareholders' votes were promptly thrown in to ensure that the power of decision remained with the directors.
This is bizarre.
If the institutions remain so determinedly uninvolved, those who seek radical solutions will have to look elsewhere, possibly to an independent regulator who would appoint auditors and fix their remuneration.
Unfortunately, even this threat may be ineffective, if auditors are as constrained by their competitive environment as some believe them to be.
We hope that auditors will prove their critics wrong.
If they do not, and if the institutions remain inactive, then auditors face something much worse than a cookbook.
technical summary
Continuing Professional Education
The Institute has issued revised guidelines on CPE (p 122); they came into effect on 1 January 1993.
The guidelines state that ‘The Institute expects that all members will demonstrate…a commitment to CPE based on these guidelines.’
CPE is compulsory for:
Members admitted on or after 1 July 1978 who seek entitlement to practise.
Those applying for fellowship.
Those supervising training in training offices and postqualification training offices authorised by the Institute.
Members working in the reserved areas of audit, investment business and insolvency.
The guidelines distinguish between structured CPE (eg courses) and unstructured CPE (eg private study).
They state that ‘A reasonable target [for CPE]can be expressed as an average of 150 points year on year — with three points being recorded for each hour of structured CPE and one point for each hour of unstructured activity…members for whom CPE is compulsory should aim to achieve at least 40% of their CPE…through structured activities…
’ The guidelines give examples of structured and unstructured CPE and of activities not considered to be CPE.
Directors' liability: Road Traffic Act
Under s 21 of the Road Traffic Act 1991, which has now been brought into force, it is an offence for an officer such as a company's director or secretary to fail to give the name of a driver of one of the company's vehicles where an offence has taken place in connection with that vehicle (p 94).
Dormant companies: auditors
Dormant companies that do not want to appoint auditors are now able to use the written resolution procedure (p 95).
Cheque guarantee cards
A County Court has decided that a paying bank is under no obligation to pay a forged cheque even though it is supported by the bank's guarantee card (p 95).
Changes to PEPs
New rules governing the definition of a ‘non-qualifying’ unit or investment trust have been announced (p 98).
Uprating of SSP and SMP
New rates of Statutory Sick Pay and Statutory Maternity Pay apply from 1 April 1993 (p 97).
Health and Safety at Work
The Workplace (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations, The Provision and Use of Work Equipment Regulations 1992 and The Personal Protective Equipment at Work Regulations 1992 all came into effect on 1 January 1993 (p 97).
Life assurance companies: capital gains
Implementation of the charge to capital gains on an annual deemed disposal of life offices' holdings in authorised unit trusts, and interests in certain offshore funds, has been postponed for a year (p 98).
Employee share schemes
Companies under the control of a jointly owned company (JOC) will be able to join in approved share schemes run by either of the JOC's parent companies under a newly revised extra-statutory concession (p 98).
Market makers' IHT relief
Proposed new inheritance tax rules for market makers on the new London International Financial Futures and Options Exchange have been announced (p 98).
Stamp duty and VAT
The Institute's Tax Faculty has issued guidance notes on the interaction of stamp duty and VAT (p 99).
Tax on overseas insurers
The Finance Bill 1993 will contain provisions concerning the taxation of overseas life insurance companies' UK branches (p 99).
Non-resident trusts
The Institute's Tax Faculty has issued a guidance note setting out its correspondence with the Inland Revenue about Statement of Practice SP 5/92,Non-resident Trusts (p 99).
Pay and File
Copies of the new return form for Pay and File are now available (p 100).
The new system for assessing and collecting corporation tax comes into effect for accounting periods ending on or after 1 October 1993.
‘V & A’ list
Measures have been announced to increase the benefit to the public from works of art and other objects that have been granted conditional exemption from inheritance tax (p 100).
Appeal agreement rectified
It has been held by the High Court that an agreement to settle an appeal made under s 54, TMA 1970 was subject to the ordinary laws of contract and that it was therefore subject to rectification where, because of a mistake, the agreement was not in accordance with the parties' intentions (p 100).
Late appeal
The High Court has upheld earlier decisions that an appeal was not within its jurisdiction if it was not transmitted to the High Court within 30 days of the appellant's receipt of the Special Commissioner's statement of the case (p 101).
Challenge to Revenue powers
The High Court has held that it has jurisdiction to hear an originating summons on the question of the Inland Revenue's right to demand information where the taxpayer had no statutory right of appeal against the demand, and a failure to comply would result in a penalty (p 101).
VAT, triangulation and the single market
EC finance ministers have agreed that an intermediary in a triangular supply of goods can opt to have its customer in the country of destination account for VAT on the intermediary's behalf (p 102).
letters
Divisive proposals
Sir,— I write to draw attention to an inaccuracy in the headline and the first paragraph of your report on the consultation document for specialist designatory letters in your December 1992 issue (Specialists to get Institute recognition , p 11).
At the end of the debate on the document, the Institute's Council did not endorse the proposals but only the publication of the report for consultation purposes.
I, personally, am not convinced that the proposals should be adopted, although I appreciate the competitive pressures that have prompted them.
I believe that the proposals will prove divisive and will reduce the value of the qualification ‘chartered accountant’ by confusing the public with a plethora of additional quasi-qualifications and designatory letters.
I also believe that designing further examination streams to determine the relevant specialist fields would be a waste of resources and, if implemented, would risk leading to two streams of membership.
Fears for the client
Sir,— I read with disappointment the letter from Mr Marshall, which you headlined ‘Keep the audit, save the practice’(ACCOUNTANCY,January, p 6).
It is disappointing that Mr Marshall seems to be more concerned with his own status and position, and indeed, wealth, than the position of his poor client.
I had not felt that trade unionism had yet reached the accountancy profession, but it appears that Mr Marshall's requests are akin to the worst excesses of the trade union movement.
One of the reasons why my partner and I disposed of our practice some years ago was the fact that the new legislation, particularly relating to investment business and the proposed audit regulations which were to come into force, was making practices less profitable, as it was impossible to pass all these extra costs on to the client.
Has it not possibly occurred to Mr Marshall that, without the audit, one could reduce one's prices significantly and, if one is efficient, make rather more profit, providing clients with a service that they in fact desire?
Show me one small businessman who happens to be a director of a limited company, who actually requires 15 pages of nonsense that he does not understand, when his annual accounts are prepared.
The only pages that the average small businessman is interested in, and indeed, understands, are the non-statutory accounts, notably the detailed profit and loss account.
Clients who receive competent and efficient service will not depart to a ‘back-street’ accountant.
They are readily aware of the need to provide their bankers, and indeed the Inland Revenue, with a reputable and qualified ‘name’.
If the audit regime were removed, it would mean that most small practitioners would no longer need to suffer the burden of being registered auditors, with the commensurate savings that would arise in terms of regulatory fees, penal professional indemnity insurance and time.
Most of all, however, the concern should be with the client.
It is no wonder that the profession is held in such low esteem, when accountants put themselves before their clients.
Good reasons to audit small companies
Sir,— Mr Marshall surely misses the point when he suggests (ACCOUNTANCY , January, p 6) that general practitioners will see a major drop in their incomes if auditing is abolished for small companies.
The additional fees which this firm earns from pure audit, as opposed to accounting, taxation and other services, are nowhere near enough to cover the additional costs of regulation and both we and our clients would welcome abolition.
Our clients are inevitably personal tax clients who own their companies and who want the accounts prepared correctly without having regard to such new-fangled notions as materiality.
They employ us to carry out this work, to negotiate on their behalf with the combined forces of the Inland Revenue and Customs & Excise and to advise them on a multitude of matters from advertising costs to wage negotiations.
They expect us as a matter of course to advise them if they should be taking advantage of their inheritance and capital gains tax exemptions and to ensure that the share capital structure of their companies is maintained to ensure they are not in control for any tax-related purpose, but can still ensure young Harry is kept in his place.
These are activities which we would be unable to perform without a detailed knowledge of their personal circumstances, and trying to persuade them auditing is even necessary or that anything has changed since Uncle Albert's day, is nigh on impossible and certainly not an adequate reason for an additional fee.
As for being concerned that we shall lose fees if auditing is abolished for small or, as I prefer to think of them, proprietary companies, the opposite is the case.
We are more likely to lose the substantially greater related fee income if we decide not to continue auditing and are thereby forced to pass the affairs of these clients to those firms who wish to be auditors.
Whether they will look after our type of clients in the way they are used to being looked after is of course a different question.
Certifieds' training route is a formal one
Sir,— I read with interest the article in the December 1992 issue entitled ‘What future for smaller firms?’(p 25).
It was gratifying to hear that these firms find the certified route suits their training needs.
However, I was concerned to read the remarks attributed to sole practitioner Geoffrey Day in which he observes that firms which ‘train certifieds' do not have to be formal training offices.
This statement is misleading.
Since 1 October 1991 firms which train ACCA members and students for the Recognised Professional Qualification and Practising Certificate are required to be registered with the Association as Approved Training Practices.
Approved Training Practices are monitored by the Association on a five-year cycle and are required to comply with guidelines designed to ensure the high standards of certified accountants in public practice and maintain the flexibility of the ACCA qualification.
All auditing firms were notified of this scheme in 1991.
I hope that this will clarify the situation for your readers while in no way putting them off the certified training scheme.
A congeries of clients
Sir,— I was delighted with your piece ‘Who is the client?’
(ACCOUNTANCY , January, p 22), drawing attention to the McFarlane paper's slip in saying that ‘the colloquial use of the word’ client’by auditors when referring to the company conveys the wrong relationship…’.
I assume that this was bad editing.
There is nothing colloquial about the auditor calling the company his/her client.
Of course the company is the auditor's client and of course the good auditor always remembers that the company is his/her client.
For it is the company and the company alone which can stand as proxy for the underlying clients, its stakeholders (and in particular the shareholders, who are the prime stakeholders).
It is only the company itself which can take action against the auditors to remedy any damage which auditors' negligence may have caused to the stakeholders.
I assume that McFarlane meant to refer to the truly colloquial and certainly prevalent use of the term ‘client’ to refer to the client company's directors or management.
No auditor can conduct an audit which is both effective and efficient unless he/she has a good working relationship with the client company's directors, but it is crucial that the auditor remembers that it is not the directors who are the client, but the company itself.
Surely that is the point that McFarlane should have made?
And it is a point that needs to be rammed home to directors even more firmly than to auditors.
Shared fears for the small practitioner
Sir,— I was relieved to read Mr Marshall's letter ‘Keep the audit, save the practice’,(ACCOUNTANCY , January, p 6) because it tells me that there are others who share my fears for the small practitioner.
Expressing such views requires courage because it would appear to be taboo to talk about protecting fee income.
If my experience is anything to go by some readers will write claiming Mr Marshall is selfish.
But Mr Marshall is correct (selfish or not) in predicting the demise of the small practice if the compulsory audit for small companies is abolished per se.
Most of the limited company clients I have came to me because I am a registered auditor.
My fees are competitive but I cannot compete with the ‘sweat shops’ run by unqualified accountants who can bash out a ‘set of accounts’for £200.
Our Institute must find a way to defend our interests in the matter of fee income while appearing to be concerned for the public interest as well.
The Law Society did this.
They fought tooth and nail to protect the solicitors' monopoly of conveyancing but eventually compromised by not objecting to licensed conveyancers.
Likewise, our Institute must lobby to ensure that, if change has to come, then only registered auditors or at least members of the Institute are permitted to sign the compilation report.
Like the Law Society it can use the genuine argument that its members are highly qualified and governed by a strict code of ethics which ultimately is to the benefit of clients.
If our Institute is unwilling to do this then it should at least campaign for legislation to restrict the use of the description ‘accountant’ in public practice to only qualified accountants with a practising certificate.
The small practitioner has been frightened by the spectre of the JMU into throwing the baby out with the bathwater.
Like Mr Marshall I urge all members who share our views to write to Desmond Wright without delay.
What small companies need is relevant advice
Sir,— By and large the services of practising chartered accountants to their clients are about 5% of any real value and 95% conformity to legislation — audit, taxation etc.
The accountancy profession was built on providing practical service to emerging industries, before the audit requirements, and at a time when audit requirements were somewhat minimal.
The partners of the firm with which I trained and qualified in South Yorkshire — and probably about 130 years old now — were very much involved in the establishment of the coal mining industry, steel works, newspapers and breweries (among others) in that particular area.
Very much practical help.
Surely accountants should be seeking to give their clients value for money and if the audit of a small company is deemed to be of very little value, then how can we in all conscience — justify the charging of substantial fees for such a service.
Better to offer the client a service which is more relevant to the day-to-day running of the business and its profitability (or perhaps more correctly these days, the business's survival).
As regards competition from unqualified accountants, this is the problem in most markets.
A client must have a free choice.
We must endeavour to convince clients that better quality service has to be paid for and to justify the fact that we are able to provide that better quality service.
An unjust attack on Big Six auditors
Sir,— I was stunned by some of the implications in Tom Lee's article in the December 1992 issue of ACCOUNTANCY (p 102).
For instance, does Professor Lee believe that professional accountants should not also be commercial?
Does he believe this stricture should also apply to lawyers, doctors and dentists?
And if accountants are not to be commercial, who is it who will regulate their fees, incomes and salaries?
I was also surprised that Professor Lee should suggest that the paper issued by the Big Six seeks to ignore possible links between business and audit failure.
To me, this link appears widely discussed and much researched, albeit inconclusively.
Perhaps the discussion paper is making points that have been obscured by a dust storm of other allegations about the auditing performance of the Big Six.
If Professor Lee or others can devise a blueprint for government regulated auditors with financial and business skills to serve the public interest in a way he feels the Big Six do not, he should be aware of a (minority) view in these firms that auditing is a high risk, low reward business which is uninteresting by comparison with certain other activities.
However, the majority view is that the public are well served by highly-skilled professionals trying to manage the increasing risks associated with the type of work at the commercial and spiritual hearts of their livelihoods.
president's page
The future development of auditing
The Institute can take pride in having, as part of its reform agenda, facilitated the formation of the Auditing Practices Board, which has recently published a Green Paper on the future development of auditing.
For this allows a rare chance to re-examine the role and scope of audit in tomorrow's world.
I believe we should all warmly welcome this opportunity to debate the role of audit; it gives the users of audit services the opportunity to have their say and it should make a major contribution to dealing with the expectation gap.
Some commentators have pointed out that, as cannot be said of the Cadbury Committee's report on the financial aspects of corporate governance, much legislation would be needed to implement the Green Paper's proposals.
But this should not be seen as a criticism; the role and scope of audit is somewhat narrowly defined in law, and any change is almost bound to have legal ramifications.
In relation to corporate governance and in the different field of financial reporting, the legal framework is less restrictive and allows much more opportunity for organic development.
It follows that the APB's findings, once the consultation period and subsequent deliberations are over, will have to be strong enough to convince the legislators of a public interest need to make changes.
The APB is not only looking for comments on its proposed redefinition of the role and scope of audit.
It also seeks views on the persons or groups of persons whose interests should be specifically recognised in the audit process, on the preferred method of achieving greater independence of auditors and facilitating greater involvement by shareholders and other stakeholders in the audit process, and on the longer-term mission of the auditing profession.
Nobody will deny that these are complex issues, and that the difficulties surrounding some of them have caused earlier efforts to bring about reform to founder.
It is to be hoped that this will not deter commentators from making their contribution to the debate, particularly against the background of recent corporate scandals over which auditors have been criticised, often unfairly, and against a backcloth of rapid change in the ways of doing business generally.
The Green Paper points out that the pace of change in auditing has been slower than will be required.
It suggests that a more responsive system of governance will be required, to lead, coordinate and implement the necessary changes.
Stimulating debate
Some of the Paper's suggestions will strike some observers as strange or unworkable.
But that is what Green Papers are for — to stimulate debate.
In the context of taking opportunities to improve communication and coordination the Green Paper states that: ‘this may lead to the establishment of a means of coordinating all aspects of the auditing profession, for example a single over-arching body for audit governance.’
This is a new idea that receives just this one reference in the paper.
It is true that there are a few minor anomalies in the existing structures.
For example, the Joint Ethics Committee is a body of the three Institutes of Chartered Accountants alone, whereas the APB is a CCAB sponsored and funded organisation, albeit one with considerable operational independence.
However, I think that with proper coordination it should not be hard to ensure effective working between the bodies.
I do not believe that these anomalies are sufficiently important to justify further organisational tinkering, to the detriment of the APB's ability to get on with its work.
Under the heading of ‘involving shareholders', the paper suggests, as one method, the establishment of a standing ‘audit panel’ to represent the shareholders of all listed companies, possibly modelled on the Takeover Panel.
The panel could provide a forum for both shareholders and auditors to air concerns that might arise in relation to audit appointments and corporate governance or other issues arising from the audit.
It would only respond to matters referred to it.
It has been rare for shareholders to raise concerns with company boards on audit matters, probably because they are not well-informed and because their priorities are elsewhere.
Applications to the panel by auditors might be equally rare, since these could be seen as acknowledging a failure to establish an effective (and durable) professional relationship.
As with the ‘over-arching body for audit governance', a new bureaucracy should be created only on the basis of clear evidence of need.
It will be interesting to read of companies' and auditors' reactions to this proposal.
Further, it is good to see the importance of the problem of litigation against auditors expressed so firmly.
As the paper states, a solution to this problem must be found if the progressive developments suggested for auditing are to be achieved.
An Institute working party is currently re-examining the issue with a view to moving the arguments further forward.
Finally, may reactions to the paper come thick and fast from all quarters!
It is a golden opportunity to influence the future scope and nature of auditing.
news
ABUSE OF MARKET POWER
Swingeing fines could apply to firms
The largest accounting firms could be on the receiving end of proposed new penalties to prevent abuse of market power including fines of up to 10% of turnover — if they are found to be using predatory pricing.
According to Institute Council member and chairman of the Professional Conduct Directorate Pat Brenan, the Big Six are now so huge and control such a large share of the UK listed company audit market that any behaviour judged to be anti-competitive would invite the attentions of the Office of Fair Trading.
Under the new proposals, currently out for consultation, the consequences of that could be extremely serious.
The proposals are contained in the DTI Green Paper,Abuse of Market Power , which considers the case for legislative change to prevent abuse of market power by individual companies and partnerships through anti-competitive or exploitative behaviour.
Anti-competitive behaviour is defined as ‘conduct aimed at other companies/partnerships operating in the market, including practices seeking to prevent new entry or drive out competition through loss-making pricing’.
It also says that the Government is considering whether it would be possible to frame a prohibition to cover situations in which a small number of companies or partnerships control a market and abuse their joint market power, without recourse to a restrictive agreement or collusion.
The Government's preferred option would be to introduce a prohibition system, under which the Director General of Fair Trading would investigate alleged breaches.
Appeals against his conclusions would be heard by an independent tribunal, which would be able to impose penalties of up to 10% of turnover (although initially this would be limited to £1m).
Applications for larger penalties would be to the High Court.
‘I know it is only a discussion paper,’ Mr Brenan said, ‘but there are serious concerns about these matters, and, in my opinion, it is a clear pointer to the stance we should be taking from an ethical viewpoint.’
Loss-making tenders, in the hope of earning larger fees through selling other services to the client, are an abuse, he said.
‘If that kind of abuse gains headline attention, then I believe there would be a tide flowing that would be very difficult to hold back.
So, in their own interest, the firms should be very careful that the finger is not pointed at them, that they are not seen to have acted in a way that abuses their power and cuts across their independence and integrity.’
Pat Brenan: Loss-making tenders are an abuse
ETHICS
Firms divided over partner rotation
Firms are divided over proposals requiring audit partners to be rotated every seven years to ensure that they do not develop too cosy a relationship with their clients.
‘We are not convinced of the need for the rotation of audit partners,’ says Grant Thornton, in its response to the consultative paper issued by CAJEC.
‘The involvement of a second partner should provide a sufficient safeguard to ensure the objectivity of the audit, even for listed and other public interest companies.’
Pannell Kerr Forster goes further.
It says that rotation of partners does not demonstrate independence.
‘The audit report is signed by the firm and not the individual partner, and therefore we believe that a higher level of independence is not demonstrated where the same name appears on the audit report year on year, whether or not there have been changes in the composition of the audit team.’
The firm says that compliance with the audit regulations, through intra-firm quality controls and annual file reviews by an independent partner, would be far more effective.
‘Rotation of audit partners will, in our opinion, increase costs without increasing benefits either actual or perceived.’
The CAJEC document, issued last November (see ACCOUNTANCY , December 1992, p 11) proposed the rotation of audit partners, not only because it would help avoid situations that could lead outsiders to question the auditor's objectivity, but also because it would give the client the benefit of a fresh, objective scrutiny and new ideas without losing the benefit of the knowledge of the business that the audit firm had already acquired.
Most firms remain unconvinced by anything except the perception of independence argument.
And it is on this basis alone that they support the change.
Arthur Andersen, for example, says that the risk that a long-standing association with a client may impair objectivity is perceived, rather than actual, but concedes that something needs to be done ‘so that others do not perceive that objectivity can be compromised’.
BDO Binder Hamlyn is a staunch supporter — not surprisingly.
It has been practising rotation internally for a number of years.
But, if the supporters are agreed on the principle of rotation, they disagree over the detail.
Most would like to see the auditor's period away from the audit in question extended from the proposed two years (which, as Touche Ross says, ‘could lead to this guidance being perceived as a cosmetic exercise'), but cannot agree over how long.
Some want the rotation requirement to apply to all companies, regardless of the problems that would cause for smaller practices; others want it kept to listed and other public interest clients.
Some want the requirement to apply to the engagement partner alone, while others — like Touche — want all the audit partners involved rotated.
Meanwhile, CAJEC secretary Jack Maurice is wading through the 400 plus pages of the ‘88 and rising’ responses he has received — a record for any ethics document — and wondering how he is going to satisfy all the conflicting demands.
The London Society's response takes issue with the ‘current piecemeal approach to audit regulation and independence matters’.
It says that these and the auditors' liability problem should be dealt with together: they are closely linked.
‘Not to do so,’ it warns, ‘could well produce a hybrid which does disservice to the profession.’
JOINT DISCIPLINARY SCHEME
JDS decision causes controversy
Despite a lengthy investigation into the affairs of 10 accountants connected with the Lloyd's reinsurance scandal in 1982, the Joint Disciplinary Scheme has decided not to apportion blame to any of them, prompting calls from some quarters for change to the regulatory regime.
A Committee of Inquiry produced three separate reports, each dealing with members involved in the affairs of Alexander Howden Holdings, Minet Holdings and PCW Underwriting.
The first exonerated Victoria Head, now of BDO Binder Hamlyn, and Richard Green, formerly of Arthur Young, while the other two reports came to the conclusion that, after so much delay and considering the age and state of health of those under enquiry, no fair enquiry could be held.
As a result, no finding could be reached on the professional conduct or competence of members Neal Ashman, Brian Chapple, Gordon Macdonald, Peter Benzikie, Michael Birmingham, Patrick Reynolds, John Risbey or David Williams.
The accountants had made it clear to the Committee that they did not accept the findings of the DTI reports (which formed the basis for the inquiry), and that documents they would need to deal further with the matter were no longer available.
The JDS's decision and the delay in making it has had serious repercussions for the profession, following as it does the unpopular decision to fine two Polly Peck administrators only £1,000 each (the maximum possible at the time of the offence) over conflicts of interest.
‘After all this time, it would be possible to think that the verdict is unimportant, but it is very important,’ said Labour MP for Great Grimsby Austin Mitchell.
‘It is another failure of self-regulation and if this goes on, the manufacturer of whitewash for use by the JDS is going to be the only viable British industry left.
‘The Institute is making a career of closing the stable door after the horse has bolted.’
The Institute claims that it acted as quickly as possible in the circumstances because the DTI did not publish its reports until 1990.
That was eight years after the Lloyd's scandal — involving tens of millions of pounds being syphoned off into directors' pockets — erupted.
The reports, which criticised the accountants, were referred to the Institute in August 1990 and a committee of inquiry was appointed by the JDS executive committee in May 1991.
The report has taken 20 months.
The decision means that the JDS will have to absorb over £100,000 already spent in legal costs.
‘In the circumstances, it would have been folly to set up another [earlier]inquiry which would only have hindered those already in progress,’ said JDS head Sir Anthony Wilson in a letter to the Independent .
The JDS has to apply the regulations in place at the time of the alleged offence, Institute professional conduct director Brian Harris said.
‘The situation is quite different today because the Institute is now the regulator of auditors.
If we are aware of a criticism of a firm, we will investigate immediately, whether there is a DTI inquiry or not.’
Mr Harris also said ‘with absolute certainty’ that any adverse findings by the JDS would have been overturned by the courts.
But that isn't good enough for Mr Mitchell, who calls for a new regulatory regime.
‘You cannot have the Mafia regulating the Mafia,’ he said.
Mitchell: Calls for new regime
POST QUALIFICATION SPECIALISATIONS
Demand for audit faculty grows
Auditors could become the next Institute grouping to form a faculty, if interest in the idea continues to grow.
But there are several obstacles that such a faculty would have to overcome before it could go ahead.
A major decision would have to be taken on whether to include financial reporting as well as auditing.
Most auditors would argue that the two cannot be separated.
(‘To have auditing without financial reporting is the left hand without the right hand,’ says Auditing Committee chairman Martin Scicluna); however, this gives rise to serious concerns that, by creating one faculty for the two disciplines, the Institute's raison d'etre would be undermined.
Some members also believe that setting up a faculty would be tantamount to handing auditing on a plate to those critics of the profession who have called for auditing matters to be placed under independent control.
Faculty supporters counter that the faculty would still be within the Institute and that the benefits would far outweigh the potential risk.
As one senior chartered accountant pointed out, the faculty would open up the whole system, raise the technical standard of auditing, and provide a centre of excellence to help people improve their skills.
And if the faculty chose to go down the specialist qualification route, he added, it would go some way towards restoring credibility in the auditing profession by ensuring that standards are raised.
Supporters are also encouraged by the success of the three faculties — and, in particular, of the Faculty of Taxation.
As Mr Scicluna pointed out, ‘If you turn a committee into a faculty, it gives it a new lease of life, a breath of fresh air, and it thinks about its role a bit more purposefully, as we have already seen from the Tax Faculty.’
In the light of growing evidence that the duty to report chartered accountants for breaches of regulations and other misdemeanours is putting Institute members off seeking help from other chartered accountants, the Institute is to consider setting up a confidential advisory scheme, possibly at district society level, which would be run along lines similar to the ‘confessional’.
FINANCIAL CRISIS
Members resort to IVAs
There has been a sharp escalation in the number of chartered accountants resorting to individual voluntary arrangements to try and resolve their financial crises and avoid bankruptcy the number of IVAs more than doubled last year.
According to Institute statistics, it was almost unheard of for a member to go into an IVA until two years ago, but in 1991 23 IVAs were reported, last year the number soared to 56, and by half way through January, the 1993 total was already into double figures.
The recession has made small practices particularly vulnerable, as they lose fee income through clients' going out of business; nor do they get paid for work in progress, says Ernst & Young insolvency practitioner Alan Lovett.
Many firms are also highly geared, having borrowed to expand their businesses in the 1980s' boom and now, with incomes falling, interest payments are almost impossible to meet.
To make matters worse, practices that were valued at twice gross recurring fees a few years ago are now being sold for half recurring fees.
So if a member borrowed to buy a practice for £200,000, he might now be able to sell it for only £50,000.
Bye-law 76 makes members liable for disciplinary action when they enter an IVA, but whether the Investigation Committee refers cases to the Disciplinary Committee or not will depend on a member's attitude to the arrangement, rather than on its causes.
Members are questioned about how much money they owe their creditors and whether everything possible is being done to repay them, such as selling off assets.
‘It may be that the Institute ought to take a stricter line in future and that more disciplinary action will be taken,’ said Investigation Committee secretary Gordon Porter.
‘Should we allow a member who has narrowly avoided bankruptcy to keep on calling himself a chartered accountant?’
However, so far the attitude has tended to be sympathetic — it is not, after all, in the creditors' interests to exclude a member and thereby reduce earning potential.
AUDIT REGULATION
Smaller practices fail the test
The experiences of the ACCA and the Association of Authorised Public Accountants during their first year as recognised supervisory bodies have confirmed the importance of the strict audit regulatory regime imposed by the 1989 Companies Act.
The two bodies' first annual reports to the Department of Trade and Industry reveal an alarmingly high proportion of registered firms which have failed to meet the standards set by audit regulation.
The Scottish, Irish and English Institutes disclosed similar findings in their joint report, published in December (see ACCOUNTANCY , January, p 9).
Of the 297 monitoring visits carried out by the ACCA in the year to 30 September 1992, only 134 firms (45%) were found to be satisfactory; 139 firms (47%) failed either because they had poorly developed quality controls over audit work or because some of their audit opinions were questionable; and a further 23 firms (8%) were considered to be ‘potentially in breach of audit regulations or the ACCA's professional conduct rules, to such an extent as to warrant immediate action’.
Examples include a member who was in partnership with an individual who had a criminal conviction for fraud; four members who had been charged with criminal offences; a bankrupt; and a member who had been disqualified as a company director.
Of the 23 cases, two members were excluded from ACCA membership, four firms had their auditing certificates withdrawn, five agreed to relinquish all audit appointments, and three cases were resolved satisfactorily.
Nine cases are still pending.
In addition, 59 firms have been warned to expect a follow-up visit within two years.
As the three chartered Institutes found when they visited registered members, the single most pervasive problem among ACCA firms was the quality of recording audit work.
ACCA's registered members comprise 75% sole practitioners and most of the rest are firms of two or three partners.
As its report says: ‘While large practices often have a culture and management structure which requires planning, evidence and conclusions to be committed to paper, smaller practices do not’.
However, the experience so far, it concludes, is that firms are in the process of improving their procedures, and with guidance and a tightening of enforcement procedures, ‘the existing regulatory arrangements will achieve a major and continuing improvement in standards’.
A similar pattern is reflected in the AAPA's report.
The AAPA's membership covers 1,100 individuals who are authorised as auditors by the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry under the Companies Act 1967, most of whom work as sole practitioners.
It has 554 registered members and firms, which are monitored on its behalf by the ACCA.
Of the 49 visits carried out during the year (42 routine, seven investigative), four were satisfactory, 13 reasonable, 25 not  satisfactory and seven unacceptable.
Again, the major problem was failure to record work adequately, but the AAPA is confident that standards will improve.
ADAM & CO
KPMG faces litigation threat
KPMG Peat Marwick is under threat of litigation from Edinburgh-based private bank Adam & Co, which lost £21m in un-authorised foreign exchange dealings last year.
The bank revealed in September 1992 that it had lost more than twice its capital on behalf of a single client because of two foreign exchange dealers in the London branch who acted like ‘inexperienced gamblers at the roulette table', according to chairman Sir Charles Fraser.
A principal shareholder came to the rescue, injecting £21m, but the ensuing crisis of confidence lost the bank £30m in deposits and people are still waiting to see what structural and corporate changes will be made to safeguard future operations and ensure stability.
KPMG was asked to resign as auditor in November last year because of the board's ‘loss of confidence', but it refused to accept the request because shareholders might have inferred that it acknowledged criticism of its audit work.
The firm therefore used its legal right to seek reappointment by a letter to shareholders claiming that when the losses were identified last August, audit work for the year (including enquiries into the London dealing operation) was still in progress.
Further, KPMG alleges in the letter that the control mechanisms that were in place were not properly operated by management, and KPMG's recommendations for them to be strengthened were accepted but not fully implemented.
KPMG would not comment at the recent agm.
Ernst & Young became the new auditors.
Adam & Co managing director James Laurenson disputes that KPMG's recommendations were not properly implemented and says that the letter to shareholders was simply ‘their first line of defence in case of litigation’.
He adds that legal advice has indicated that there is a prima facie case against the auditors, but the decision on whether to take legal action will be made by a committee of two non-executive directors.
‘We hope they will reach their decision as soon as possible, because it is not the sort of thing we like to have hanging over us.’
TRAFALGAR HOUSE
Touche faces shareholders' fury
Touche Ross faced the wrath of Trafalgar House's shareholders at a stormy agm last month, following Trafalgar's restatement of its 1991 results.
Trafalgar came within a hair's breadth of being the first company to be taken to court by the Financial Reporting Review Panel last year (see ACCOUNTANCY , November, p 10).
The accounts were eventually brought before the Review Panel, which took exception to Trafalgar's decision in the 1991 accounts to revalue and transfer a number of commercial properties from developments for sale, under current assets, to tangible fixed assets.
The revaluation resulted in a £102.7m write-down, set against a revaluation reserve of £84m.
The Urgent Issues Task Force subsequently published a ruling specifically aimed at preventing such a practice, but Trafalgar House, after taking legal and independent accounting advice, consistently refused to bow to Panel pressures to restate its accounts.
It eventually capitulated days before the Panel was due to exercise its right to apply to the courts for a forced restatement of the accounts.
The company then voluntarily restated its accounts, turning a £122.4m profit into a £38.5m loss.
The 1991 accounts were not qualified by Touche Ross, and as Review Panel procedures dictate, the firm was reported to the Institute over the affair.
At Trafalgar's agm though, the shareholders had their turn.
At the 2½ hour meeting, private shareholders raised persistent questions over the auditors' and the directors' actions.
‘What did the auditors think they were doing when they signed off the accounts?’ asked one shareholder, while another accused TR of acting more like ‘the directors' poodle’than the shareholders' watchdog.
Alan Clements, Trafalgar's chairman, persistently repeated the company's view that the accounts ‘were right at the time they were published', a view supported by David Jenkins, Touche's partner in charge of the audit.
The company took the decision to restate the accounts, Mr Clements added, when it became clear that the delays and uncertainties involved would not be in the shareholders' best interests.
A resolution to reappoint Touche as auditors was initially narrowly defeated on a show of hands, forcing a full poll which showed 281m (mainly proxy votes from institutional shareholders) in favour, and 490,000 against.
Clements: Defended Touche
WORKPLACE 2000
Help others to help themselves
A nationwide network offering advice to professional women on a range of issues, from sexual harassment in the workplace to setting up childcare arrangements, was one of a number of imaginative proposals to emerge from Workplace 2000, a lunchtime meeting held by the Institute last month.
The career support scheme, which would be voluntary, would put people seeking advice in touch with others who had already experienced their particular problem and could give them the benefit of their knowledge.
Other topics might include moving from practice into industry, part-time working or going back to work full time while caring for a young family.
If the scheme goes ahead and is a success, it could be widened to include women in other professions, such as the law.
The lunch was attended by 50 women chartered accountants who had responded to an article,Making the Most of a Vital Resource (see ACCOUNTANCY , October 1992, p 76), in which Institute Council member Susan Gompels explained the aims of the CCAB's Women in Accountancy Group.
‘We had two objectives,’ Ms Gompels told ACCOUNTANCY .
‘First, we wanted to know whether this was a long-term demand we had tapped into and the answer was undoubtedly yes.
And second, we wanted to set in place initiatives by those who had identified a need.
‘These ranged from lunch clubs to linking into existing networks, to setting up new ones, courses, a proposed conference, newsletter material and, most importantly, a database and exchange.’
Another idea is to garner from the experience of those present what the obstructions are, how they can be side-stepped, and produce a guide to best practice aimed at employers.
‘It's a chance to understand why women are not making it up the professional or corporate ladder,’ Ms Gompels added, ‘which does seem to be a waste of such a valuable resource.’
Further details on Women in Accountancy or Workplace 2000 from Penny Mitchell on 071-628 7060.
RECRUITMENT
Student numbers fall again
The number of students who have entered chartered accountancy training contracts since the start of the 1992/93 academic year has fallen back to around 1982 levels, according to the Institute.
However, the rate does seem to be slowing.
Although the statistics are incomplete, the fall is likely to be around 15%, compared with 24% in 1991/92.
‘The figures reflect the state of the employment market,’ said education & training director Phil Armitage.
‘It does not mean that chartered accountancy is not attracting as many people as before — demand is still as high, but there just aren't the training places available.’
Mr Armitage is not concerned by the fall from a record 7,000- plus students a year in the mid-1980s to around 4,000 today.
With hindsight, he says, training offices wildly over-recruited during the 1980s.
‘So now we've got a double whammy: the firms' short-term needs are less and there is arguably plenty of provision for those needs from the ranks of newly qualified members who, as students, went into training contracts in 1987, 1988 and 1989.’
He added that the Institute would be monitoring the situation to ensure that, when the UK economy starts to grow again, it would be able to meet the need for accountants.
The reduction in training places over the last two years has also meant that firms can now pick the cream of the universities' output.
In the early 1980s the percentage of graduate intake with first or upper second degrees was around 45%.
This rose to 50% in the mid 1980s, but in 1991 it shot up to 55%.
The latest statistics, for 1991/ 92, show that it leapt again to 65% and preliminary estimates for 1992/93 indicate that it has gone even higher.
As Mr Armitage puts it: ‘We may not be hitting the quantity, but we are certainly getting the quality.’
GUINNESS
Spens sues Bank and Ansbacher
Chartered accountant Lord Spens, the merchant banker who was forced to resign over the Guinness Affair in 1986, has issued writs against the Bank of England and Henry Ansbacher, his former employer.
The first alleges that the Bank induced Ansbacher to force his resignation, and the second is against his employer for breach of contract by forcing him to resign.
The writs have been filed at the High Court and must be served within the next three months.
The statement of claim has not been finalised yet but Lord Spens says that he will be disappointed if it is less than £2m.
He adds that the case is likely to take three years to sort out.
Gompels: Support demand
14
EQUALITY
Slow progress so far
The message of Opportunity 2000 — the business-led initiative to get more women into top management by the year 2000 is not filtering down to many line managers, according to the campaign's first year report.
‘In one organisation, line managers were unaware of a goal statement which had clear implications for them,’ it says.
Half the line managers interviewed thought Opportunity 2000 had been communicated ineffectively or not at all.
Although involvement in its aims was welcomed by many organisations, others ‘spoke of mixed reactions or resistance’.
And a few companies found their senior women were suspicious rather than supportive.
Some felt patronised.
However, in a foreword to the report, Lady Howe, the campaign's chairman, stresses that the initiative is a long-term one and that it is only beginning to get underway.
The first year has also been one of ‘severe recession with rising unemployment, and Opportunity 2000 members have not been immune’.
The campaign, which last year was joined by the Institute and numbers only five accountancy firms among its members, aims to promote cultural change in organisations.
‘It has accelerated progress in changing out-dated organisational attitudes and has reinforced the need for employers to treat equal opportunities as a mainstream business issue,’ says Lady Howe.
CIMA, an original signatory, reports that in the first year it has ‘set up an informal network to encourage women to stand for office on the Council’.
At Coopers & Lybrand, women are benefiting from ‘objective appraisals which, for example, follow assignments or precede promotion to associate and principal associate’.
One of the eight set goals of the NHS, the largest employer of women in Europe, is to increase the number of qualified women accountants.
The slow progress of the campaign to put women into top executive positions is borne out by the results of an Economist survey carried out while compiling the 1993 Crawford's Directory of City Connections .
During 1992 the number of women joining the boards of UK listed companies did rise slightly, but only to 0.54% of all directors.
However, there are now five women managing directors or chief executives (out of 1,347 companies) compared with only three (out of 1,370) last year, although this is counterbalanced by the loss of three female chairmen, bringing their numbers down to just two.
Women in USM companies are doing rather better.
The ratio of men to women board directors there has risen by half a point to just under 2%.
The news outside the boardroom is more cheerful.
During 1992, the proportion of female to male company secretaries and investor relations officers rose by 1.5% to 7% and by over 4% to 17% respectively.
EIICHI SHIRATORI, CHAIRMAN OF THE INTERNATIONAL ACCOUNTING STANDARDS COMMITTEE
IASs must be used, pledges new chief
When trainee certified public accountant Eiichi Shiratori sent in his application for a job with Arthur Andersen and the promise of his first trip outside Japan, he had no idea what an important step he was taking.
That application form put him on the ladder, not only to the top of the Japanese profession, but to international recognition — on 1 January this year he took over the chairmanship of the International Accounting Standards Committee.
Yet at the time, he admits, he saw it merely as a way to travel, learn the ropes and then set up in business on his own account.
‘For two years after college graduation, I worked for one of the small local accounting firms.
Then in 1960 Arthur Andersen came to Japan with the intention of setting up an office and wanting to hire young Japanese CPAs to train in the US before the office was opened.
So I applied.
They received close to 250 applicants and picked up five.
‘At that time, the Japanese economy was very bad, we didn't have money and it was a kind of dream that we would be able to spend a couple of years outside Japan.’
After 18 months training with AA in Chicago, Mr Shiratori returned to Tokyo to help set up the new office.
As part of the deal with AA, he was required to stay with the firm for the same period of time that he had spent in the US.
‘Many Japanese are nationalistic, so even I, when I decided to join Arthur Andersen, thought that after 18 months or two years I would leave and open my own office.
At least, that was the thought I had, but for some reason I must have found it very nice because I stayed for 30 years!’
Mr Shiratori rose rapidly through the ranks: in 1971 he joined AA's worldwide partnership and three years later was made managing partner of the Japanese operations.
AA's investment had certainly paid off.
His audit clients included a number of major Japanese companies which had raised finance overseas and needed to prepare their financial statements in accordance with US GAAP.
He also acted as auditor for a number of major international joint ventures.
Two years ago, Mr Shiratori left the firm, after agreeing to help out an old friend who was ill by becoming CEO of IONA International, a family-run cosmetics business.
It was, he laughs, a novel experience.
‘There were lots of things I didn't know about, like advertisements, commercial films, catalogues.
I enjoyed that.’
His friend recovered and on 1 January this year Mr Shiratori stood down as CEO.
He has stayed on as a special adviser and in April will start teaching at his alma mater, Chuo University.
Both jobs will give him time to ‘catch up with this international chairmanship’.
‘You see, many of the accounting issues people talk about at IASC or outside Japan are new to me,’ he jokes.
‘I have to understand what the problems are and why they are arguing about them.
And all the literature's in English and that takes time!’
In fact, Mr Shiratori has been one of Japan's representative's on the IASC since 1984 and is well versed in all the issues; he is also well aware that he has taken up the reins of office at a critical time for the IASC.
For the last three years, it has been working flat out on its comparability project, to reduce the number of alternative accounting methods allowed in its international accounting standards.
Successful completion of the project is crucial, for on it rests recognition by IOSCO, the representative body for stock exchanges worldwide, of financial statements prepared in accordance with IASs.
His primary task as chairman, he says, is to ensure that the IASC's efforts do come to fruition.
‘The IASC has spent almost 20 years in developing basic standards and it is unfortunate that they have not been used in practice.
During my term, I want to make every effort to ensure that they will be used.
So my main task is to persuade IOSCO to endorse them.’
He says he will target the US Securities and Exchange Commission in particular.
London already recognises IASs, so if the SEC agrees to allow non-US companies to use them, he argues, Tokyo and the rest of the world will follow.
Endorsement by IOSCO would not only enhance the IASC's credibility but could give it the opportunity to expand its work.
Funded by its member bodies, the Committee works on an extremely tight budget and cannot afford to undertake all the work it would like to.
A task force set up two years ago to raise extra money from international business has enabled it to more than double the number of support staff to five (last year it raised £300,000).
However, persuading companies to pay out in a worldwide recession is hard-going, and the IASC cannot rely on such an uncertain source of funding.
IOSCO's seal of approval would automatically increase corporate interest in the IASC's future work.
Greater financial resources would enable the IASC to satisfy some of its critics.
The US and the Anglo-Saxon countries, for example, complain that it spends too much time and makes too little progress on basic standards, which they see as of benefit to developing countries alone.
What they want is a quick response facility to deal with emerging issues, and if the IASC is not prepared to do it, they will take it on themselves.
This worries Mr Shiratori.
If anything, he says, the IASC could be accused of focusing too much on countries in Continental Europe and Japan, rather than on the Third World, in an effort to put the framework of basic accounting standards in place.
‘Because of lack of human resources and money, we cannot meet the needs of the US and Anglo-Saxon countries, although we would like to.
So what we are aiming to do is to set up more joint projects, like the one on financial instruments, where we have been working very closely with Canada.
‘Now the US, the UK, Canada, the Netherlands and Australia have decided to join together to discuss accounting issues.
They want to share common problems, to deal with emerging issues.
The first meeting takes place in April and we are invited along as observers.
What concerns us is that if those things are done outside the IASC's control, it threatens to undermine our credibility.
Without the resources, though, there's not much we can do.’
But Mr Shiratori refuses to be downhearted.
After all, his month-old appointment has already had beneficial effects back home in Japan.
‘I don't know whether it's coincidental,’ he says, ‘but there was a big article on the front of the Japanese equivalent of the Financial Times saying that the government has decided to improve financial reporting standards.
The first meeting takes place this week and I am asked to make a presentation to the Committee which was set up by the minister of finance.’
He says that it is the first time the Japanese governent has expressed interest in the IASC's work.
‘The government is very cautious — they say they are only talking about domestic accounting principles — but this is a big step forward.’
PHILIP HARDMAN
Impossible to replace
Tributes have been pouring in following the death of Grant Thornton's senior tax partner Philip Hardman on 4 January at the age of 56, after a long fight against cancer.
‘Not only was he the outstanding leader of our tax practice,’ said Grant Thornton managing partner David McDonnell, ‘he was also the architect of its development in the early days.
To us the benefits, apart from his obvious public profile and his very great technical knowledge, were his ready association with the problems and the thought processes of smaller and medium-sized clients which are particularly our market place.
So the loss is very great.’
‘He was the most generous person that I have ever met in terms of being prepared to share his ideas, his contacts, his know-how,’ said Peter Wyman, chairman of the Institute's Tax Faculty.
‘Most people are possessive of the things they see as being their competitive advantage, but Philip would share it with anybody.’
Mr Hardman joined Grant Thornton in 1961, after qualifying in Bolton — his birthplace — and working for Cooper Brothers.
Long involved in Institute affairs, he headed its Taxation Committee from 1978, became a Council member in 1988 and was a founder member of the Tax Faculty when it was set up in 1991.
He was also a regular contributor to Radio 4's Moneybox programme from its inception in 1977, and joined David Dimbleby's panel of experts every year commentating on the Budget.
Mr Hardman was renowned for his sense of humour, as his contribution to an April Fool's Day edition of Moneybox , shows: ‘There's case law, so far as the setting up of a trust for a cat is concerned, or a dog, or a parrot or a monkey, but you don't have to have specific legislation in the Taxes Act because the normal rules follow.
For example, if the trustees pay money out for Blacky's kittens — and a well drafted will trust will include the kittens as beneficiaries — any amount paid to the kitten or on behalf of the kitten for food, and so on , will be eligible for a tax repayment on account of the kitten's personal allowances.’
Mr Hardman also had a tremendous capacity for work — as people are now finding out, they are having to replace him, not with one, but with several people.
‘He was a workaholic,’ said Mr McDonnell.
‘He came into the office right until the last days of his illness.
Although one lists other interests in his life like Bolton Wanderers Football Club — frankly he devoted 99% of his time to his work.
Holidays to him were carrying on studying tax matters and that really was relaxation to him.
Throughout all the time I knew him, he had no other interest in life that even vaguely approached the study of taxation.’
‘There is no replacement,’ Mr Wyman says.
‘He was the best known and most respected tax person of his generation.
We are not going to see the likes of Philip Hardman again.’
New top dog.
Eugene Freedman (above left), head of Coopers & Lybrand US, has replaced Brandon Gough (right) as chairman of the world's fourth largest accountancy firm.
Mr Gough is now sitting in the European chair vacated by John Bullock who retired in October last year.
‘This is an exciting and challenging time to take on responsibility for leading the firm,’ Mr Freedman said.
‘New markets are opening up while mature markets are changing in complexity and demand.’
The new chairman will be putting into action the firm's $4m internal study of international strategy that was developed last year.
Although the firm claimed that the general theme of the report was consolidation rather than expansion, Mr Freedman's appointment has coincided with the announcement of a glitzy TV ad campaign in the US, to be premiered during the US Superbowl at a cost of $2m.
The whole year's advertising budget for the US firm is $10m.
Mr Freedman said that the aim was to create a platform to propel the company into the future and promote services such as planning and consulting rather than just accounting, to help clients boost their profits.
Way to go, Mr Chairman.
US LITIGATION
$55m suit for E&Y
Just days after paying out $400m in a record settlement, Ernst & Young is facing another claim, this time for $55m.
E&Y paid $400m to the Resolution Trust Corporation and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation at the end of last year, as full and final settlement of any outstanding claims relating to its work as a savings and loan auditor (see ACCOUNTANCY , January, p 15).
Huge though the payment was, it was widely regarded as a bargain, partly because most of the bill was met by insurers and partly because the amount was a fraction of the outstanding claims against the firm.
But the settlement does not protect E&Y from suits from other quarters.
One week after the settlement was announced, West Virginia's insurance commissioner filed a $55m suit against the firm, claiming negligence and breach of contract in its audits of the state's health insurance plan, Blue Cross and Blue Shield, which collapsed in 1990.
The writ also accuses the firm of conflicts of interest, fraud and conspiracy.
E&Y vehemently denied the allegations, saying it had provided adequate warning of the plan's collapse, and claiming that the suit was filed in order to deflect criticism away from the insurance commissioner.
MEMBERSHIP
Accountant jailed
The case of the chartered accountant who has just been found guilty of a serious reckless driving offence only came to the Institute's attention by chance, when an Investigation Committee member heard about it on the radio.
In fact, William Bates is no longer entitled to call himself chartered accountant as he let his membership lapse when he did not pay his dues last year.
He is therefore now outside the Institute's jurisdiction.
Mr Bates, of Brackley, Northants, hit and killed a scientist on a bicycle on his way back from a business meeting in London where he had been drinking wine and sherry, the Court heard.
He left the scene after the accident and was later arrested at his home.
He has been sentenced to two years in prison and given a five-year driving ban.
JAPAN
AA poaches EY affiliate
Arthur Andersen has joined up with Asahi Shinwa, Ernst & Young's Japanese affiliate and the second largest auditing firm in the country, in an arrangement that will probably result in a merger.
Japan has been a problem area for E&Y since its merger in 1989.
The Ernst & Whinney and Arthur Young affiliate firms, Showa Ota and Asahi Shinwa, were at the time the third and fourth largest auditors in Japan, with fee incomes of around Y10bn each.
The Japanese Ministry of Finance blocked a merger between the two firms on the grounds that the combined firm would control more than 25% of the market.
The two firms continued to act as member firms in E&Y International, but a full merger has never been possible.
Arthur Andersen established the Japanese International Network, serving Japanese-based companies in other countries, in 1983, and also has its own inhouse operation in Japan itself, which is known as Inoue Saita Eiwa and brings in a fee income of around Y20.5bn a year.
At the moment, Asahi Shinwa is officially only affiliated to AA International, but there are no obvious barriers to an eventual merger and the two firms are already thought to be holding discussions.
Asahi Shinwa, which reported a fee income of Y16.3bn in 1991, announced at the same time that it would be terminating several international joint ventures established with E&Y International.
E&Y will continue its affiliation with Showa Ota.
VOLUNTARY ACTION
‘The chance of a lifetime’ didn't arrive at the most convenient moment for Helen Dobson (seven months into a new job) but when it came she grabbed it, in spite of the fact that it has left her biting her nails about future career prospects.
In March, rather than flying around Europe as project accountant for Limpac packaging, she will be in India working with Tibetan refugees on a healthcare project run by the independent charity Action Health 2000.
It all started, she explains, when her husband Robert was offered a voluntary posting on the Cambridge charity's dental care programme in Dharamsala in the foothills of the Himalayas, where 15,000 Tibetans have been living in exile since the Chinese invaded their country.
Their displacement, says Helen, has caused a crisis in dental health because people started eating refined foods and sweets, rather than their traditional Tibetan roast barley flour and dried yak meat.
To compound the problem, there are no places for Tibetan students at Indian dental schools.
‘Action Health usually only deals with healthcare professionals, so they didn't really know what to do with me,’ she laughs.
In fact, she will have to carve her own niche when she gets there and discover where she can be most useful at Dalek Hospital, where the unit is based, without treading on anyone else's toes.
‘I'm going to be working there for nothing, so I don't want to be taking a job away from a local who would be paid for it.’
Her first challenge will be trying to account for the project's funding, providing health statistics and setting up a new bookkeeping system for the hospital that is simple enough for people to use when she has gone.
Helen will also be keeping an eye on the job market while she is away and praying that employers will see her experience in a positive light.
‘At least I will be using my skills while I'm abroad, not just bumming round the world for a year!’
‘Other accountants shouldn't dismiss the idea of doing something like this,’ she adds.
‘Charities need professionals in financial services, not just medicine.’
This project is in urgent need of funding.
Cheques can be made out to Action Health 2000 and sent to the charity at The Gate House, 25 Gwydir Street, Cambridge CB1 2LG.
NEW YEAR HONOURS
Auditing Practices Board chairman Bill Morrison was among 12 accountants recognised in the New Year Honours list.
Professor Morrison, deputy senior partner at KPMG Peat Marwick, was awarded a CBE for services to accountancy.
Three accountants were knighted in the list: Paul Nicholson FCA , chairman and managing director of Vaux Breweries; John Raymond Johnstone CA , chairman of the Scottish Forestry Commission; and CIMA's John Thomas, head of the Defence Export Services Organisation of the Ministry of Defence.
Brian Herring FCA was awarded the MVO , and CIPFA's Jo Carey, a former member of the European Court of Auditors, became a CMG .
Three more accountants were awarded CBE s: Martin Gibbeson Taylor FCA , vice chairman of Hanson; John Scotford, a CIPFA council member and treasurer at Hampshire County Council; and Arthur Richard Cole-Hamilton CA , former chief executive of Clydesdale Bank.
David Shutt FCA was awarded an OBE for political services, as was Richard Griffin FCA , of Ernst & Young, for services to British commercial interests in the Netherlands.
Brian Edmunds FCA , secretary of the London Society of Chartered Accountants, received an MBE .
Finally, Pannell Kerr Forster's Sally Gunnell, who is not an accountant, received an MBE to place alongside the Olympic gold and bronze medals she won last year (see ACCOUNTANCY , September 1992, p 12).
A very busy man.
Ian Brindle, Price Waterhouse's senior partner, has joined the Accounting Standards Board.
He replaces Elwyn Eilledge, Ernst & Young's senior partner, who resigned in October last year because of the pressure of other commitments.
Mr Brindle, a former chairman of the Auditing Practices Committee, joins the Board for a three-year term.
PW's technical partner, Graham Stacey, is already a member.
‘He is very much a live wire, and he has great courage,’ said David Tweedie, the ASB's chairman, who was chairman of the APC when Mr Brindle was deputy chairman.
‘One of the things that attracted us to him is that he is someone who is willing to stand up and speak against something that he believes is wrong.’
Helen and Robert Dobson: Heading for the Himalayas
Sally Gunnell MBE
Bill Morrison CBE
IN BRIEF 
ACT now
Advance corporation tax is a tax on trade which penalises exporters, makes them reluctant to invest abroad or repatriate their profits, and makes Britain an unattractive location for international operations.
If it were abolished, it would act as a stimulus to exports and the Government would find Britain's ‘alarming’ trade deficit reduced.
So says tax expert Barry Bracewell-Milnes in a new report,An Act Against Trade , published by the Adam Smith Institute.
ACT amounts to double taxation because it is a further tax on dividends paid in Britain from profits already taxed abroad.
It should be replaced with a tax credit for shareholders that reflects the tax already paid.
Although this could cost the Exchequer £250m a year, the total benefit to UK companies would be much greater and ‘an important distortion in the market as between exporting and non-exporting industries would be removed’.
(See also p 24).
Big winners
It seems as if the top 10 firms are walking off with all the prizes these days — literally.
Of the 17 trainees who won prizes or a place in the order of merit in November's PE1s, all but three came from the Big Six, and the others came from BDO Binder Hamlyn and Stoy Hayward.
Arthur Andersen trainees performed best: they took first, second, sixth and ninth places and won five prizes.
Ernst & Young came next with five places and three prizes.
Coopers' two entries made joint tenth place, PW had an equal fourth place and two prizewinners, and KPMG made seventh place.
Viva Italia
Angelo Caso, an Italian accountant from Milan, is the new president of the Federation des Experts Comptables Europeens, which represents the accountancy profession in Europe.
Elected by the FEE General Assembly last December, he took over from Edouard Salustro of France who had held the position for two years.
Dr Caso is also a part-time professor at the Universities of Brescia and Bocconi, a member of the Milan Fiscal Commission, and an adviser to the Italian Ministry of Justice on the implementation of EC company law directives.
Lonely hearts bandwagon.
OK, so 043 Changing Notions of Accountability in the Probation Service may not be the most riveting subject to work around, but full marks to the Institute's Research Board for effort.
In its 130-page publication on the subject, an aspiring paperback writer has seen fit to throw in quotes and subtitles taken from famous Beatles' songs, which is apparently intended ‘to disrupt the close relationship between the thinkable and speakable and to think the otherwise unspeakable’.
Pardon?
Some of the quotes turn out to be particularly apt —‘I'm fixing a hole where the rain gets in', for example, ‘Help!’ or ‘Listen, do you want to know a secret?’.
Others verge on the bizarre — what, for instance, is the significance of: ‘A love like ours could never die'?
Sadly, a few favourites are ignored altogether — finding some relevance in ‘We all live in a Yellow Submarine’ or ‘I am the Walrus', it seems, was beyond even the Research Board.
Coopers' fees up
Coopers & Lybrand has reported a 7.4% rise in its worldwide fee income to $5.3bn for the year to 30 September 1992.
Coopers is the fourth largest international firm, behind KPMG, Ernst & Young and Arthur Andersen.
Only AA has reported a larger rise in fee income so far, at 12.7%.
Towards 2000
President of the Board of Trade Michael Heseltine is to give the opening address at Communicating 2000, a conference organised on behalf of the International Association of Financial Executives' Institutes (IAFEI) by the Financial Executives Group at the Institute.
Keynote speaker will be Sir Paul Girolami, chairman of Glaxo, and there will be panel sessions on corporate reporting and management towards the millennium, worker participation, the use of Ecus in corporate accounts and banking towards 2000.
The conference, which will take place on 4 June at Chartered Accountants' Hall and costs £399.50, is open to anyone.
Further details from Brian Rose at the Institute.
Unspeakable Acts
Have you ever tried to read an Act and ended up wondering why Parliamentary draftsmen seem to delight in complicating even the simplest provision?
It's a problem that so enraged Martin Cutts of Words at Work that he took up a challenge to rewrite one.
His discussion paper,Unspeakable Acts?, contains a revised version of the Timeshare Act.
‘The original Act,’ he says, ‘uses long sentences, confusing words and unclear layout.
One sentence, which must appear on all right-to-cancel notices given to timeshare customers, is 102 words long.’
His version uses words such as buyer and seller instead of offeror and offeree, and reduces the average sentence length from 36 words to 24.
Hence, the Act's ‘The offeree's giving, within the time allowed under this section, notice of cancellation of the agreement to the offeror at a time when the agreement has been entered into shall have the effect of cancelling the agreement', becomes ‘An agreement is cancelled if the customer gives the seller notice of cancellation within the time this section allows’.
Cosmopolitan quest
Are you female, aged 23-35, with a degree or equivalent professional qualification, a good working knowledge of French and at least one year's work experience?
If so, you could be in line to win a place on a 10-month MBA course at INSEAD, courtesy of Arthur Andersen and Cosmopolitan magazine.
The two have got together to relaunch Cosmo 's High Flyer Award and AA has agreed to pay the winner's course fees and living expenses to a total of £23,000.
Other prizes include a weekend business course at AA's West London training centre.
Application forms are contained in February's Cosmo .
Home alone
The news of the near fatal stabbing of WPC Harrison in Liverpool has focused attention again on the vulnerability of women to physical violence, particularly during their working lives.
With this in mind, investment services group Cannon Lincoln (081-902 8876) has published a free safety guide,Suggestions on Personal Safety for Professional Women .
The guide contains commonsense recommendations covering situations such as meetings in strangers' offices and homes, walking home alone and car breakdowns.
Subs alert
Don't get thrown out of the Institute for forgetting to pay your subs, which were due on 1 January.
Last year 1,050 people lost the right to call themselves chartered accountants because they didn't stump up by 30 June.
There are still 45,000 subscriptions outstanding and since the cut off is now 31 March, there could be even more casualties this year (see p 119).
Most of the non-payees cannot claim unemployment as an excuse, says members' registrar Bob Russell.
‘But if members tell us they are in dire straits, without a job, gone bankrupt, and the wife's run off with the milkman, then we will move heaven and earth to help them.
If they tell us nothing, what can we do, look into a crystal ball?’
Members are also reminded that from 1 January they have to have a practising certificate.
However small a member's practising income, certificate and professional indemnity insurance will still be needed.
UK business news
16 DECEMBER 1992 — 19 JANUARY 1993
Recession.
Business failures rose by 31% to 62,767 in 1992, according to Dun & Bradstreet.
The sharpest increase of 46% was in the South East outside London.
Figures compiled by Touche Ross, which did not include personal bankruptcies and corporate liquidations, showed that the number of companies passing into receivership or liquidation fell by 10% in 1992.
Technology.
US aerospace group McDonnell Douglas has agreed to sell its UK-based McDonnell Douglas Information Systems to a group of UK investors for an undisclosed sum (rumoured to be at least £200m).
Conglomerates.
First half profit before tax rose from £43.75m to £47.07m at Tomkins in spite of sales falling by 3.2% to £575.5m.
Retail.
Tesco plans to buy the 90-store Catteau supermarket chain in France, for £175.6m.
Asda announced a first half profit before tax of £54.8m (v £68.8m loss) which was helped by exceptional gains of £8.7m (v provisions of £78.9m).
Airedale Holdings' banks put the company into administrative receivership and have taken control of its subsidiary, the kitchens retailer Magnet.
Airlines.
British Airways' plan to invest in a 44% stake in USAir collapsed.
The deal was blocked by a dispute between the UK and US governments over liberalising air services between the two countries.
However, BA is now expected to announce a revised partnership deal in which it would gain a 20% stake worth about $340m.
After a two-year legal battle, Richard Branson and Virgin Atlantic won libel damages of £610,000 from British Airways over its ‘dirty tricks’ campaign.
Britannia Airways is cutting 560 jobs and buying new aircraft worth £250m in order to make its fleet operations more efficient.
Travel.
Owners Abroad and Thomas Cook Group announced plans of a possible link-up between the two tour operators; but then Airtours launched a £221m hostile bid for Owners Abroad.
The offer is dependent on Owners Abroad shareholders not accepting the terms of the proposed link with Thomas Cook.
Concern has been expressed over the bid which, if successful, would make the UK travel industry a duopoly with Airtours and Thomson as the market leaders.
Leisure.
George Walker, former chief executive of Brent Walker, was arrested and charged with the theft of £12.5m from the company.
Mr Walker and former finance director Wilfred Aquilina were also charged with two counts of false accounting relating to the thefts.
Rank Organisation announced that profit before tax fell from £250.5m to £230.1m in the year to 31 October.
Aerospace.
British Aerospace is about to finalise a £240m joint venture with Taiwan Aerospace to manufacture and develop regional jets.
Water.
First half profit before tax at Wessex Water rose from £39.8m to £44.3m.
Security.
In the year to 30 September, profit before tax rose by 65% to £54.5m at Securicor.
Electronics.
First half losses before tax fell from £28.8m to £10.9m at Ferranti International.
However, chairman Eugene Andersen said that the company was still at a very critical stage.
Electricity.
First half profit before tax rose by 52% to £39.5m at Northern Electric; the company announced it would reduce its tariffs by an average of 2.7% from 1993.
Yorkshire Electricity, which also wanted to ‘share the results of our good performance between our shareholders and our customers', reported first half profit before tax up 28% to £42.5m and announced a rebate for tariff customers of £5 each.
Banks.
Barclays Bank has written off £240m of debt attributable to the property company Imry; it is one of the largest individual debt write-offs in the UK.
In the year to 31 October, profit before tax at TSB Group was £43m (v £47m loss).
The group made a £597m charge to cover possible bad debts.
Building societies.
According to UBS Phillips & Drew, building societies survived the downturn in the housing market better than expected in 1992; the brokers forecast that falls in pre-tax profits will average only 7%.
Nationwide announced that 300 redundancies will be made when it closes 58 of its 361 estate agency branches.
Cars.
In the first 20 days of December, car sales were 30% higher than over the same period in 1991.
Ford of Europe announced that it is to make over 10,000 job cuts by the end of 1993, about 40% of which are expected to be in the UK.
Property.
Exceptional items of £184m relating to write-downs on the company's property, increased Stanhope Properties' losses before tax from £77.4m to £215m for the year to 30 June.
Drinks.
Guinness is closing five distilleries at United Distillers in Scotland which will result in 700 redundancies.
Chemicals.
Wassall made a £113.2m hostile bid for Evode which then entered into discussions with Laporte about a recommended bid of above £1 a share.
Laporte won the battle with a £129.4m offer and Wassall responded by abandoning its hostile bid.
Construction.
Lilley asked to be put into receivership after a financial rescue package did not receive full  support from its bankers.
The group collapsed with debts of over £80m.
The receivers, Price Waterhouse, hope to sell most of the businesses.
Tarmac is to cut 273 jobs and reduce its housebuilding operation by 20% in order to cut working capital by £100m and reduce overheads.
Correction.
Leeds Permanent Building Society's profit figure for 1991 was £190.2m, not £290.2m as stated in the December 1992 issue (see p 22).
analysis
ADVANCE CORPORATION TAX
Strangling the multinationals
British industrialists are getting agitated about an £8bn interest-free loan that they've made to the Government.
In fact, they'd like some of it back.
The interest-free loan is unrelieved advance corporation tax.
Essentially this arises because relief for ACT is limited to ACT on dividends paid out of profits that have borne UK corporation tax, which generally means profits made in the UK.
Dividends paid out of profits remitted from overseas, therefore, generate unrelieved ACT.
As British companies have become more international in their operations and UK profits have disappeared in the recession, the problem has grown dramatically worse; about 40% of British listed companies' profits now come from overseas.
‘It's like being caught in the jaws of a vice,’ says Andrew Jones, head of tax consultancy and compliance at Ernst & Young.
‘I can think of one client where almost 90% of their income is generated outside the UK.
Including ACT, they pay more UK tax than they make money in the UK.
That's a fairly serious problem.’
Marginal tax rates of over 100% and the sheer size of the unrelieved ACT mountain are leading to increasing pressure on the Government from industry.
The Institute of Directors has made a submission to the Chancellor of the Exchequer arguing that ‘the UK should take immediate unilateral action to resolve the problem’.
Michael Lawrence, chairman of the 100 Group of finance directors, told ACCOUNTANCY that the Group had raised the matter with both Michael Heseltine, the President of the Board of Trade, and Stephen Dorrell, the Financial Secretary to the Treasury.
‘And we are continuing to be extremely active [in lobbying]in the period up to the Budget…
Mr Heseltine has confirmed to us that he is going to talk to the Chancellor on this matter, and I believe he has done so’.
The argument for change is not just about cash.
It's also about jobs, corporate finance and internationalisation of industry.
One way out of the problem for companies is to increase UK taxable profits at the expense of overseas taxable profits by transferring costs overseas.
And transferring costs usually means transferring jobs.
As Mr Lawrence points out, ‘moving things like research facilities overseas’ is the type of solution that some companies are now adopting.
The UK is also highly unattractive as a place for US or Japanese corporations to site their European holding companies.
Andrew Jones comments: ‘If you are looking from outside Europe at where you would logically base your European holding company, the UK doesn't even rate a mention.
Principally because of ACT, there is no way that you could have a UK company over a European group.
It would strangle them.’
The risk of unrelieved ACT also affects companies' financing decisions.
It adds to the cost of dividends and so to the cost of raising capital from shareholders.
As Mr Lawrence explains, ‘it's tilted the balance in favour of borrowing rather than going to shareholders…
It distorts the way that companies are structuring themselves’.
Unrelieved ACT also provides an obvious disincentive to profitable investment overseas.
Some see this as a benefit.
John Barnsley, director of tax services at Price Waterhouse, argued in a recent letter to the Financial Times that ‘the tendency of the ACT system to encourage profitable investment in the UK rather than overseas might be seen as helpful, with the UK in recession and 3m unemployed’.
But globalisation means that companies have to invest where they can produce cheapest and at the best quality and where they can earn profits.
Investing in the UK because of the UK tax disadvantages of investing overseas is a road to competitive ruin.
As Andrew Jones says, ‘ACT is discriminatory, and it discriminates against the kind of companies that, generally speaking, are good for Britain.’
Tax problems generate tax avoidance devices.
There are plenty of schemes designed to solve the ACT problem on the market at the moment, although Philip Doyle, a tax partner at Arthur Andersen, warns that ‘a large number of them we probably wouldn't recommend to our clients!’
He adds: ‘There's a specialist unit at the [Inland Revenue]looking at the question of how to attack the schemes.
Obviously it's a real cost to the Revenue if it loses the ACT.’
In fact, the Institute's Tax Faculty is worried that the Revenue is going too far.
Faculty chairman Peter Wyman told ACCOUNTANCY:‘We are very concerned that the Revenue has started to use some of the anti-avoidance legislation to stop people doing what they might legitimately do to try to minimise their ACT problem.’
Cost is at the heart of the matter for the Government.
Michael Lawrence says that the Government accepts there is a problem and that ideally something ought to be done about it: ‘It's now just a question of what can be afforded’.
The answer is almost certainly very little.
The Government currently has to find about £1bn a week to finance its deficit.
It needs that £8bn interest-free loan.
The 100 Group appreciates this and would be grateful for even a small gesture in the Budget, ‘maybe with some indication that there could be more to come later', Mr Lawrence suggests.
The favourite ‘modest’ solution is to remove the restriction on the offset of ACT against the corporation tax liability.
At the moment the restriction is 25/33, ie the maximum offset against a £33 corporation tax liability is £25 ACT.
Industry would be delighted to see the restriction removed; This is the ‘33/33’ or ‘£ for £’solution.
The 100 Group would support it.
John Barnsley in his letter to the FT supports it.
Roger White, senior tax partner at KPMG, says that it's what he would do if he were Chancellor.
But Mr White is sceptical about what will actually happen.
‘I think Norman Lamont has probably got to say something about ACT in the Budget.
Whether he'll do anything is another matter.’
He thinks that the likeliest area of ACT reform is the provision of a friendly UK base to act as a holding company for the European operations of UK or Japanese companies, allowing profits to flow through to the ultimate parent without the imposition of an ACT barrier.
Mr White notes that there is ‘quite a strong lobby [on this question], especially by the Americans.
I'd be somewhat hopeful we might get something on it.’
If that's all we get, British industry won't be terribly happy about it.
ACT is discriminatory, and it discriminates against the kind of companies that generally speaking are good for Britain
Michael Heseltine: Talking to the Chancellor
brought to account
MICHAEL GARNER, FINANCE DIRECTOR, TI GROUP
Low profile player in a high profile game Michael Garner is one of the handful of people who decide what standards the profession should adhere to.
He is also, he tells Liz Fisher, finance director of a company that survived the threat of bankruptcy to complete a dramatic turnaround
The seven part-time Accounting Standards Board members, while not exactly household names, will be familiar to many accountants.
There's Ian Brindle, Price Waterhouse's senior partner, Sir Bryan Carsberg, the Director General of Fair Trading, two high profile technical partners from the Big Six, and Donald Main, finance director of Forte.
Another member, Bob Bradfield, of Cazenove & Co, has achieved (relatively speaking) star status since his dissenting view was published alongside FRS 3.
But Michael Garner, finance director of the TI Group, has managed, whether deliberately or not, to remain resolutely low-profile, both in his work as one of only two finance directors on the ASB, and in TI itself.
He is rarely mentioned in the press references to TI tend to go hand-in-hand with the name of its chairman and chief executive, the recently knighted Sir Christopher Lewinton.
This is the more surprising since TI has had its share of accounting policy-related spats over the years, with commentators most usually questioning its method of acquisition accounting.
But more recently, TI is gaining a reputation for its disclosures over and above the requirements that, in the words of one analyst, ‘set a precedent for other companies to follow’.
The credit for that must go to its finance director.
Mr Garner joined TI in 1979, after a brief but colourful climb up the industrial ladder and having discounted the idea of becoming a professional trumpeter —‘I don't think I could have stood the strain’.
He qualified with Deloittes purely as a step into industry: ‘Public practice was never on my agenda,’ he says.
His first job outside the profession was with Imperial Tobacco.
‘The company had a very cosy club atmosphere, which I found quite difficult to cope with in terms of what I saw as a lack of professionalism.’
He left to ‘join the real world’ at Plessey, as executive assistant to its managing director, Michael Clark.
‘The job he offered me was a sort of general factotum, a personal troubleshooter, but he wanted someone with a financial background.
It was a tremendously interesting job but clearly not one you could do for very long.’
The pair agreed that he should do the job for two to three years, and would then expect to move to another, more senior position.
But what might have marked the beginning of a distinguished career in Plessey was cut short when he was headhunted.
‘I was getting to the end of the three years when I was approached by Amalgamated Metal.
I talked to Michael Clark about it and he agreed that there was no way Plessey would be able to match the salary, so I left.’
His first position as finance director proved to be a rough ride.
Amalgamated Metal, a ‘rag bag of commodity trading and industrial activities', was quoted, but 51% of the shares were owned by the Patino family, who had strong ideas of what their finance director should be doing.
‘The first time Jimmy Patino, who represented family interests on the board, came to a meeting, he read me the riot act about how of every £1 I was talking about, 51p was owned by the family, and of that 51p, 25p of it was his.
‘The difficulty was that the chief executive was very pro-commodity trading, which I rapidly became averse to because I saw it as just another form of playing the casinos.
So I had the problem of trying to protect the family interests when their own chief executive was a real punter.’
His problems were solved three years later when he was again headhunted, this time to join TI.
The group, however, was then almost unrecognisable from the one that has just recently burst back into the FTSE 100.
‘It was like turning the clock back to Imperial Tobacco in many ways — it was even sleepier from an internal control point of view — but to be fair, that was why I was hired.’
Apart from the original steel tube companies, TI then owned all manner of subsidiaries, such as Raleigh bicycles, Creda, Russell Hobbs, machine tool companies and auto component businesses, many of which had no connection with the core businesses at all.
‘The bunch of businesses we had completely lacked direction,’ he says.
There were, however, more pressing problems to be tackled.
‘The board reporting, for instance, was a complete mess.
It would receive a thick folder every month with a whole collection of random financial data — I can't even call it information.
So the first thing I did was distil it down to seven pages of figures accompanied by seven pages of narrative, designed to make sure that the board was properly informed.
That went down very well.’
But before long, the company found itself in the midst of the early 1980s' recession, an event that, by Mr Garner's own admission, nearly finished TI off for good.
‘TI almost died,’ he says.
‘There were so many commodity businesses trying to make a living out of exporting, so when sterling strengthened as it did, our commodity activity was priced out of existence.’
A ‘dramatic retrenchment’ and the closure of some manufacturing facilities could not stop TI falling into losses in 1981.
‘It was all hands down making sure we didn't run out of cash,’ he remembers.
‘We devised some pretty crude mechanisms for extracting cash from the operating companies every quarter — we didn't even bother to classify it as dividend or interest or repayment of loans, we just took the cash away from them and told them to manage with less.
We took about £150m out of them over a couple of years.’
The strategy saved the company from ruin when, in 1982, British Aluminium, a 58%-owned subsidiary, got into difficulties of its own.
‘There was great concern over whether the BA board could be found guilty of trading while knowingly insolvent if it carried on.
There was no way we could put TI money into the company, we couldn't justify doing that to the shareholders because it looked to us as though BA was going to go under.
‘We managed to sell it as a going concern, but got next to nothing for it and had to take a massive write-off.
Then we had to go to the banks and change our covenants, which were based on TI's net tangible assets, which in turn were damaged by the write-off.
If we hadn't taken that cash out, that is, if borrowings had been £150m more than they actually were, we probably wouldn't have got those covenant changes and the whole group could have gone under.’
The crisis made TI realise that it needed a radical change of direction if it was to survive in the future.
After a period under a caretaker chairman, the board's non-executive directors — who have always had a powerful voice within the company decided that the group needed a ‘drastic, kill-or-cure remedy’ under a new leader who would have the strength to develop a new strategic direction.
In 1986, Christopher Lewinton was appointed as chief executive with more or less a free hand to do whatever he felt necessary.
Since then, TI has sold 28 wholly- or partly-owned subsidiaries and acquired more than 20.
‘He wasn't interested in numbers, he used strategic analysis as the basis for fundamental decisions, which was the biggest change I had to get used to.
I remember that within 10 minutes of our first conversation, Christopher asked me how I would feel if we closed down the Birmingham head office — his view was that the way to change the company's culture was to close the headquarters and start again somewhere else.
I said that would be fine by me.
And at the end of the first week he asked me how I would feel if we sold the domestic appliances businesses (the most profitable part of the group at the time), and I said I didn't know how he had got to that so fast, but that it was fine with me.
I think we got off on the right foot.’
Today, Mr Garner is the longest serving board member, and the only one to see TI through both recessions.
The selling of the domestic appliances businesses was a major step and not an obvious one at the time, since, according to Mr Garner, ‘everything in TI was a disaster apart from domestic appliances’.
‘But,’ he adds, ‘strategically, if you stood back and asked yourself if domestic appliances was a good business to be in, the answer was no, it wasn't.
The market was beginning to internationalise and our business was starting to look like a minnow in a very big ocean.
We were going to be swamped.’
Russell Hobbs, Tower Housewares, Creda, Raleigh and three other businesses were sold within the chairman's first year.
Only 20% of the business that existed in 1986 still forms part of the group today and the group has increased its market capitalisation over that time from £250m to £1.3bn.
‘We have a much smaller selection of highly focused businesses in strong leadership positions in narrowly defined niche markets.
We have also fundamentally changed our manufacturing philosophy rather than manufacture here in the UK and sell abroad, we now, on the whole, manufacture where our markets are.’
Until last year, TI had two main businesses — John Crane engineered seals and Bundy fluid carrying systems, both of which were world leaders in their fields and boasted multi-million pound turnovers.
But last year TI launched a well-documented hostile takeover of the aerospace and electronics company, Dowty.
‘We did not go into that lightly,’ says Mr Garner.
‘We tried for the best part of 18 months to get Dowty to agree to a friendly deal, but both the old chairman, Lord Harrowby, and the new chairman, Roy Roberts, refused.
We knew that sooner or later someone was going to buy it and there comes a point when, if something is going to add value for your shareholders, you should contemplate doing it on a hostile basis.’
TI was well aware of the risks of mounting a hostile takeover — the £497m bid for Dowty was the first it had attempted since its joint bid for British Aluminium in 1959.
The PR dangers were summed up early on when one analyst was quoted as saying that the bid was akin ‘to mugging an old age pensioner’.
‘One of the things you learn in an exercise like that is that the odds are stacked very much against the aggressor.
Many institutions have a policy of supporting the incumbent management wherever possible and will only be persuaded from that by some very special reasoning.
Then there is the inertia factor of the private shareholders who don't want to rock the boat at all.’
TI also took the unusual decision to try a one-shot approach over a short timetable, rather than the more conventional series of increasing offers.
As it turned out, it managed to gain 60% acceptances, but while the actual fight was brief, it was bitter, with Dowty accusing TI of dubious accounting practices and TI throwing back aspersions of weak management.
The bid drew the attention of the Takeover Panel, and Burson-Marsteller, Dowty's public relations advisers, were censured for suggesting to various newspapers during the bid that Dowty's profits would rise considerably in the future.
Repercussions over Dowty are still re-verberating through TI today, almost nine months after the bid was declared unconditional.
Dowty's profits proved to be considerably less than the figures mentioned during the takeover, leading to suggestions that TI had been ‘lumbered’ with Dowty something TI furiously denies.
‘There has been a lot of bad news on aircraft building programmes since we bought Dowty,’ says Mr Garner, ‘but we had effectively discounted all that in our acquisition financial modelling.
We bought Dowty knowing that we were at a low point in the aircraft build forecast, that was part of the reason for the timing.
You have to look at quality of earnings over the next decade, not over the next year.
Time will tell.’
But in the aftermath of the bid, while suggestions that TI paid too much for Dowty were still flying around the City, the group won praise and respect from many analysts when it released a detailed account of the provisions it would be making in connection with the takeover — £87.1m in all, of which £41m represents asset write-offs and £46.1m additional expenditure that TI will have to incur.
The figure was well below City estimates and one analyst went as far as to say that the detailed announcement ‘deserves to set the standards for all’.
TI's announcement, says Mr Garner, was in direct response to its experience of three years ago, when it attracted heavy criticism over its acquisition and goodwill accounting techniques — in spite of the huge amount spent on acquisitions, the substantial rationalisation costs involved were rarely charged to the p&l account.
‘We got our fingers burnt there,’ he admits.
‘The analysts finally said that what we were doing was not the problem — the problem was that we made it look as though the truth was being dragged out of us.
That was why we were so upfront about Dowty.’
The ASB is due to consider acquisition accounting later this year, but Mr Garner says that what it is currently proposing ‘will not be a problem for us because it will not make any difference to the end product, just the presentation’.
Goodwill, one of Mr Garner's pet projects and the subject, he believes, that got him noticed and invited to join the ASB, is also on the agenda.
TI's long-standing policy on goodwill is to show gross shareholders' funds, followed by the goodwill written off and net shareholders' funds in the balance sheet.
The ASB is conducting research at the moment into whether a permanent diminution could be measured, a solution Mr Garner says he could ‘live with', but if that cannot be successfully implemented, he hopes that TI's method will be the one companies fall back on.
‘Anything but amortisation!’
He says he was ‘hesitant’ about joining the ASB —‘I thought I might be too much of an amateur’— but clearly enjoys the meetings.
TI was one of the first companies to include a cash flow statement in its accounts, and it will implement FRS 3,Reporting Financial Performance , in its 1992 accounts.
However, he says, he does not feel pressurised to ‘test’ ASB rulings before anyone else.
‘We have always had a policy of implementing standards as quickly as possible.’
As one of only two finance directors on the board, the question of conflicts of interest must arise — only last month the ASB complained that companies were not following the spirit of its pronouncements.
Possible conflicts were discussed within TI, he admits, and ‘we decided in principle that TI would come first’ but, as yet, he has not disagreed vehemently with anything the ASB has produced.
In fact, he is very much of the school of voluntary best practice leading the way.
‘Companies do have to compete in the financial marketplace, they do have to gain support of institutions and analysts, and if you can develop a reputation for high quality reporting, it all helps.’
For the moment, TI has certainly won the favour of many a fickle analyst.
It is most frequently described these days as ‘the second largest engineering group in the UK', but does it have ambitions to be number one?
‘I'm not sure that we haven't been at some point,’ says Mr Garner.
‘But we don't attach much store to who is the biggest.
We'd rather make money.’
It was all hands down to make sure we didn't run out of cash.
We took about £150m out of the operating companies over a couple of years
The PR dangers were summed up early on when one analyst was quoted as saying that TI's bid for Dowty was akin to ‘mugging an old age pensioner’
Michael Garner: Upfront on disclosure
THE RESTRUCTURED LOOK
TI's interim pre-tax profit for the six months to 30 June 1992 stood at £50.2m on a turnover of £471m, slightly less than the comparable 1991 figure (£54.2m on a turnover of £441m).
The eagerly awaited 1992 results, due to be published next month, will include Dowty's results for the first time and should answer many questions about the health of the aerospace company.
The dramatic succession of disposals from the TI Group, following Sir Christopher Lewinton's appointment, has been completed and in 1991 the group's entire £900m turnover came from continuing operations, whereas in 1987, £394m came from continuing operations and £462m from discontinued operations.
British manufacturing
REVOLUTION IN REVERSE It's a century and a half since Britain brought about an industrial revolution and dominated the age of steam, iron and the mechanisation of textile manufacture.
The subsequent decline has lasted nearly as long
Alan Purkiss
Perhaps William Blake must bear part of the blame.
In stamping the image of the ‘dark, satanic mills’ on English consciousness, he articulated a deep-rooted aversion to industry that has persisted to the present day.
‘When you see people weeping as they sing the swelling choruses of Jerusalem ,’ says Peter Morgan, director-general of the Institute of Directors, ‘you're listening to people who hate everything about industry and have a bucolic dream — and who are also Fabians, and see business leaders as slave-drivers.’
It is not necessary to put the matter in quite those terms to recognise that the British have always preferred using industrial products to getting involved in making them.
‘The engineer and the manufacturer in Britain are still perceived as having dirty hands,’ says Andrew Robb, finance director of Pilkington, the Merseyside-based glass-maker.
‘Manufacturing is seen as not quite an acceptable career for educated people.
In Germany, an engineer is highly thought of, a valued member of society.’
With a few obvious exceptions — most notably the highly successful chemical and pharmaceutical industries, which profit from Britain's strength in laboratory science — industry has failed to attract the country's top talent, which has preferred the City, the professions and academe.
It has been a crucial weakness.
Sir Christopher Lewinton, who in recent years has transformed TI Group into one of Britain's most successful specialist engineering companies, pointed out recently that only a fifth of UK university graduates go into manufacturing industry, compared with a third who choose financial services.
‘The culture of many manufacturing firms remains hesitant and averse to innovation and risk-taking because too few of our brightest and best are involved,’ he said.
‘Get people right, and your quality, your profitability, your financial performance and your whole competitive stance will also come right.’
The results of not doing so are all too obvious.
A trade deficit in manufactured goods, unthinkable until recent times, has become normal.
The trade balance, after oscillating between surplus and deficit in the 1970s, has stuck obstinately in the red since 1981.
Productivity, despite an improvement of three fifths in the 1980s, remains only 71% of Germany's, 66% of Japan's and 57% of US productivity.
The Government is fond of pointing out that output rose 20% between 1981 and 1991, but it is setting the starting point in the trough of a recession to suit itself.
If 1975 is taken instead, the increase was only 10%, compared with 50% in Germany, 70% in the US and almost 180% in Japan.
A tendency for manufacturing to fall as a percentage of gross domestic product seems to be common to all industrial societies.
Economists point out, however, that in the UK it has shrunk so much — from 30% in 1970 to 21% today — that critical mass has been lost.
Last year, in the depths of the worst slump for 60 years, Britain's trade gap was running at £1m a month.
Though the companies that remain will no doubt respond to increasing demand when the upturn comes, imports could be sucked in faster and the trade gap widen.
‘The problem in Britain,’ says the chief economist of a leading car manufacturer, ‘is that we no longer have a sufficient supply base, all-round, to meet demand.’
The recession of 1980/81 hacked down hundreds of shambling and inefficient UK manufacturers, and destroyed 2m jobs.
But it was only accelerating a process of contraction that had begun decades earlier.
One by one, once-powerful industries have succumbed to overseas competition: shipbuilding, cars, lorries, motorcycles, clothes, shoes, household appliances.
The present slump has also hit manufacturing hard, though companies are undoubtedly more efficient and better able to cope than they were 10 years ago.
A recent report from the Confederation of British Industry,Making it in Britain , points out that output has declined by 8% since 1990.
In the same period, investment dropped by a quarter, and some sectors, such as machine tools and forgings, have seen a 30% to 40% fall in domestic orders.
The number of manufacturing jobs has fallen by 11% and now stands at about 5m.
The slump has coincided with the collapse of communism and the end of the Cold War — good news for the world but a mixed blessing for the UK economy.
Defence has accounted for 11% of UK manufacturing output and is one of the few sectors in which the country is still a world leader.
True, exports have done quite well.
After falling from 18% to 7.6% of world trade in manufactured goods between 1960 and 1985, they picked up to 8.7% by 1991.
Spurred on by the collapse of home demand, UK companies increased exports by 5% in 1991 and by a further 3% in the first half of last year.
Within the overall picture, too, are many successful companies that jib at being tarred with the brush of failure and decline.
Brian McGowan, chief executive of Williams Holdings, the acquisitive industrial conglomerate, says: ‘Certain highly visible forms of manufacturing — shipbuilding, steel, automotive — have declined.
But many others, which tend to be more niche, specialised and smaller businesses, have done very well in world markets.’
Manufacturing matters, for all the fashionable 1980s chatter — from ministers as much as anyone else — about ‘post-industrial society’.
Manufactured goods account for half of UK consumer spending and 70% of exports.
As long as prices and quality are right, they are internationally tradable; by contrast, only 20% of services are tradable.
‘Until you can make something and then sell it,’ TI's Christopher Lewinton argues, ‘no wealth has been created.
Financial services, on the other hand, are only enabling mechanisms.’
Mark Radcliffe, a former TI director who recently stepped down as head of the CBI's national manufacturing council, adds: ‘The balance of trade must be a measure of success and competitiveness.
Economists say it is not terribly relevant because the financial flows are 20 to 50 times as great.
But I don't know how you can run a country on frothy money, and I would argue that Black Wednesday was a classic example of that sort of thing going wrong.’
Ron Garrick, managing director of Weir Group, the Glasgow-based engineering concern, argues: ‘There is a lot of evidence that in the world's most successful economies the obvious example is Japan — there is a strong correlation between growth in manufacturing and overall growth.’
Many industrialists concede that a large part of the responsibility for British companies' lame performance must lie with management.
‘It's almost entirely a matter for management,’ says Martin Taylor, deputy chairman of Hanson, the industrial conglomerate and one of Britain's biggest companies.
‘It's management's responsibility to find new ways of producing better products.’
The IoD's Peter Morgan adds: ‘It's only in companies' boardrooms that decisions are made or not made, opportunities taken or lost.
To the extent that we have fallen behind, generation after generation, you have to look to the boardroom.’
Pilkington's Andrew Robb points to Japanese managers' philosophy in running plants efficiently.
‘Triplex, one of our companies producing automotive glass, supplies Nissan.’
he says.
‘When Nissan says it wants 100% quality, it means it doesn't want a single failure.
Traditionally, when a British company said that, it meant it wanted 90%.
There's a big difference.’
It is not all sackcloth and ashes.
The Government is the target of a drumfire of criticism for its hands-off approach to industry in the 1980s.
‘They couldn't have cared less if the whole of manufacturing industry had disappeared,’ says Weir's Ron Garrick.
‘That wasn't their problem.
Services were going to save us.’
Chris Haskins, head of Hull-based Northern Foods, adds: ‘Under the Thatcher regime, it was always: the market will determine everything and all we'll do is control the money supply.
That was clearly a catastrophic way to run a modern mixed economy.’
Lord Young's abolition of ‘sponsorship departments’ for particular industries at the Department of Trade and Industry, which deprived the ministry of detailed sectoral knowledge, was symptomatic of an attitude.
No industrialist argues for direct intervention and subsidies by government, along the lines of Labour's ill-starred Industrial Reorganisation Corporation of the 1960s, but plenty advocate hidden subsidies, in the form of a preferential tax regime, extra incentives for investment or more public funding for research and development.
‘Until 1984, we had our corporation tax affairs biased in favour of manufacturing and against the service industries,’ says Chris Haskins.
‘With 100% tax allowances, manufacturing companies effectively paid very little tax — 12% or so.
That was broken with the 1984 Budget, which cut corporation tax from 42% to 35%, but reduced 100% capital allowances to 25%.’
He believes the tax system should be skewed in favour of manufacturers.
‘All the others — the Germans, French, Dutch, Americans do it.
It seems unbelievable that we should be out of line.’
Manufacturers complain that their international competitors generally receive more state support and that other countries take a more cavalier attitude to the notion of fair trade.
The CBI points out that UK corporate taxes, at more than 4% of GDP in 1989, are more than double the amount of state aid to industry.
In Germany, France, Spain and Italy, by contrast, state aid exceeds the tax take.
Patrick Minford, professor of economics at Liverpool University, a leading free marketeer and monetarist, and one of the ‘seven wise men’ recently appointed to advise the Treasury, points out that complaints of unfair subsidies within the EC should be addressed to the Brussels competition authorities.
But when such practices occur elsewhere in the world, he feels, UK companies might have no option but to accept it and adjust.
‘You can make representations to governments, but if that fails, you're really in the cold, you've just got to contract and go into something else.’
Others find that line of argument too bleak.
Leslie Gunde, chief economist at GKN, the vehicle components and engineering group, maintains that certain strategic industries are crucial to the economic well-being of the country.
If unfair overseas competition causes them to dwindle, holes appear in the fabric.
Another target for attack is City pressure for short-term profit flow, which is said to handicap industry's ability to invest in plant and equipment and R&D.
Richard Freeman, chief economist at ICI, is in no doubt.
‘I think it has affected corporate behaviour quite a lot.
You'll get cries of innocence from all over the City, of course.
But the results are clear if you compare performance in Germany and Japan with that in the UK.’
The CBI points out that UK dividends, as a percentage of post-tax profits, have been consistently higher than elsewhere, reaching more than 70% last year, compared with 54% in the US and under 35% in Germany and Japan.
In the 1980s, dividend growth in Britain averaged 12% a year, against profit growth of 6% and capital investment growth of 2%.
In his influential book,The Competitive Advantage of Nations , Michael Porter of Harvard Business School concludes un-equivocally: ‘The structure of the British capital markets has contributed to corporate goals that do not support investment and innovation.’
Germany's universal banks, which often take equity stakes in industrial companies, are frequently cited as an example of how finance and industry can enjoy a longer-term, more constructive, relationship.
But Brian McGowan of Williams Holdings is unimpressed.
‘I think our system is better, he says, ‘in that it makes us efficient.
British manufacturing businesses of the less visible type — with turnovers of £100m, say — are probably the lowest-cost producers in the world, in many cases.
That is partly a result of City pressure to perform.
Many German businesses are woefully inefficient; they are allowed to be because there isn't the pressure to produce profits, there isn't the pressure to pay dividends.’
He believes City short-termism can be exaggerated.
‘You can't, perhaps, take a 10-year view, but you can — as long as you have a decent strategy, and explain it — take a two or three-year view.
It is not fair to say the City will only look at it six months at a time.’
Whatever industry's difficulties, the days when ministers implied that Britain no longer needed to make anything are past.
The advent of Michael Heseltine at the DTI unleashed a torrent of words on the Government's new, active approach.
Eight sponsoring divisions at the ministry have been re-established — for chemicals and biotechnology; steel, metals and minerals; vehicles; aerospace; electronics and electrical engineering; mechanical engineering; textiles and retailing; and telecommunications and posts.
A new international competitiveness unit has been set up and is expected to issue its first report shortly.
‘Since the reorganisation,’ says ICI's Richard Freeman, ‘we as a company have had tremendous support from the DTI, in a way that I can't remember in the past 10 years.’
The ministry has, in short, begun to act more like the ‘champion of UK industry within government and internationally’ that the CBI says it should be.
That is the least that is needed if the ambitious targets the CBI's national manufacturing council set are to be met.
To catch up with its rivals, UK industry must, the CBI believes, achieve productivity increases of at least 5% a year through the rest of the decade, double investment in plant and machinery per employee, and capture an extra 1% of world trade, worth £10bn a year.
The roots of the UK's industrial decline go back a long way, certainly more than a century.
The IoD's Peter Morgan identifies four stages in industrial history: the ‘British age’ of steam, iron and the mechanisation of textiles; the ‘German age’of electricity, organic chemicals and the internal combustion engine; the ‘American age’of mass production; and the ‘global age’of semiconductors and consumer electronics.
‘Britain's performance has been worse in each succeeding phase,’ he comments.
The illusion that the country was performing adequately persisted, however, well into the second half of this century — partly because the empire provided protected markets for products that were not good enough for the most advanced countries, partly because of the accident of victory in two world wars.
The Cambridge historian Correlli Barnett, in The Audit of War , shows how the inadequacies of British industry in the Second World War were masked by the huge flow of equipment free of charge from the US under the Lend-Lease programme.
Even an undoubted success such as the Spitfire fighter demonstrated the productivity gap between Britain and Germany; the airframe of the mark 5c version of the aircraft needed 13,000 man-hours to build, compared with 4,000 for its German equivalent, the Messerschmitt 109g.
Mr Barnett has also described how the public school ethos that emerged in the latter half of the last century was suffused by a contempt for technology and ‘trade’.
That worked together with the prejudices of the ‘practical men’ who built Britain's early industries — often with little scientific or technical background — to ensure that industrial management remained mediocre.
Classics-based education for the elite went hand in hand with neglect of education for the bulk of the population.
The superior quality of the German workman was being remarked on more than a century ago.
British industrial operatives remained educationally backward, locked in primitive tribal attitudes and prey to narrow-minded and destructive trade union militancy.
The continuing failure of the UK education system in the past 25 years to provide industry with skilled and conscientious labour to match that of Germany, Japan, Italy, South Korea and elsewhere, needs no particular emphasis.
Japanese companies such as Nissan, setting up in the UK, have been startled to discover that production employees sometimes need tuition in basic mathematics.
Today, the chemical and pharmaceutical industries, with their strong commitment to R&D, run a trading surplus of almost £5bn.
Aerospace is another big export earner; it contributed £16bn to the overall UK trade balance in the 1980s.
Mechanical engineering, too, runs a surplus — to the tune of £1.8bn in 1991.
All other sectors are in, or near, deficit — food and drink, and footwear and clothing, hugely so.
(Chris Haskins, of Northern Foods, points out that Britain has not fed itself since the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846.)
Building materials are currently running a small surplus, but imports far outstripped exports in the housing boom of the late 1980s and can be expected to do so again when the construction industry picks up.
Motor vehicles, which accounted for almost a third of the UK trade deficit in 1988, are closing the gap — thanks partly to the Sunderland factory established by Nissan.
The arrival of Honda at Swindon and of Toyota at Burnaston, near Derby, should put Britain back into surplus on vehicles by the end of the century.
TV sets and video recorders are already in surplus, thanks again to Japanese inward investment.
The CBI points out that 40% of Japanese and US investment in Europe in the 1980s came to Britain.
Now it is worried that, despite the reality of the single market, the flow will slacken if the country does not sign up for Maastricht.
‘If we don't join the European Community in full, I fear for our future,’ says Mark Radcliffe.
Manufacturers continue to demand more help from the Government in the shape of increased capital allowances (already raised by Chancellor Nigel Lamont from 25% to 40% in the last Autumn Statement), some form of relief from advance corporation tax and cheaper export insurance.
‘One thing that's hurting us is ACT,’ says Pilkington's Andrew Robb.
‘The Government encouraged us to invest overseas and build international business.
But when we generate profits abroad, and want to pay some dividends to our shareholders, we are told: sorry, you'll have to offset those against your UK profits only; which we can't do.
The problem is getting worse, because UK companies are becoming more international.’
The Export Credits Guarantee Department's short-term insurance business was sold to the Dutch company NCM at the end of 1991.
Cover for credits extended over more than two years, however, stayed with the ECGD, and manufacturers involved in project business claim their insurance costs have sometimes doubled.
‘By pushing the boat out unilaterally,’ says Weir Group's Ron Garrick, ‘the Government has put us at a severe disadvantage compared with our German and American counterparts.
For a country that's got a balance of payments problem, that seems a bit stupid.’
City pressure for dividends and capital growth is unlikely to abate, nor are banks able to follow the German example and take equity stakes in manufacturing companies.
Although the Bank of England does not forbid them to do so, such stakes would have to be wholly written off against capital.
It has occasionally been suggested — notably by Lord Alexander, when he became chairman of NatWest in 1990 — that the Bank might take a more relaxed view, to help industry.
The Old Lady has shown no signs of obliging.
On the general economic policy goals the Government should pursue — low inflation? low interest rates? particular exchange rates against the dollar or Deutschmark?— opinions diverge.
‘Above all, we want stability,’ says Brian McGowan of Williams Holdings.
‘It is difficult to plan for 15% interest rates one year and 8% the next; or inflation of 2% one year and 10% the next.
It doesn't, in my view, matter dreadfully whether inflation is 2% or 6%, as long as it more or less stays at one level or the other.
It's the same with interest rates; as long as they stay within a relatively narrow band, we can plan ahead.
But if you start putting down investment in new plant and equipment when interest is at 8%, and you find in a year's time that you're paying 15% — and so are your customers, and they're not buying — it screws the numbers up.
If you think that could happen, you probably decide not to invest.’
The IoD's Peter Morgan is convinced that inflation is the key target.
‘Interest rates you have to live with,’ he says, ‘but if you seriously set out to manage inflation by using interest rates to control money supply, those rates will not become extreme.
And if you are successful, and you have a productive economy, the exchange rate will slowly harden.
We've managed to run our economy so that the pound has always been teetering before it fell; the successful economies have been run so that the currency had to be suppressed.’
After so long a period of remorseless manufacturing decline in the UK, to hope for a reversal might seem wishful thinking.
But all is not lost.
If clear focus on global market niches is the watchword for the 1990s, Britain's 43 companies in the latest Fortune 500 ranking of the world's largest companies — more than Germany or France — are reason for hope.
So is the fact that both outward direct investment (which averaged 2.8% of GDP in the 1980s) and inward direct investment (1.7%) are exceptionally high; both betoken internationalisation.
One thing is certain: if Britain continues to produce less than it consumes, we shall not enjoy living standards comparable to those of our more efficient rivals until we join William Blake in heaven.
The British have always preferred using industrial products to getting involved in making them
Will the wheel of industry turn full circle?
One by one, once-powerful industries have succumbed to overseas competition: shipbuilding, cars, lorries, motorcycles, clothes, shoes, household appliances
Rawlplug fixings: Williams Holdings doing it for themselves
Peter Morgan: Worse and worse
When Nissan says it wants 100% quality, it means it doesn't want a single failure.
Traditionally, when a British company said that, it meant it wanted 90%.
There's a big difference
Machine tools: A 30% to 40% fall in domestic orders
After so long a period of remorseless manufacturing decline in the UK, to hope for a reversal might seem wishful thinking.
But all is not lost
Pharmaceuticals (above) run a £5bn trading surplus and the UK electronics industry is the 4th largest in the world
MINISTERING TO INDUSTRY
From his fastness at the DTI in London's Victoria Street, industry minister Tim Sainsbury gives the impression that he is satisfied with himself and the world.
‘British industry is far more productive, far more competitive, better managed and with better industrial relations, in a better tax climate than at the beginning of the 1980s,’ he told ACCOUNTANCY , ‘so it is better placed to benefit from economic recovery.’
He dismisses the widespread belief among manufacturers that the Government has not done enough to help them, with: ‘Oh well, that's human nature, isn't it?’
Not that he is smug.
‘We have a very difficult world recession,’ he explains.
‘What has made it particularly difficult, for manufacturers of all sizes, but most of all for smaller ones, is that it has gone on for a long time.
In those circumstances, governments tend to get blamed.
I think sometimes people have an exaggerated idea of what government can easily achieve.’
The almost universal impression that the Government, until recently, thought making things no longer greatly mattered is a misunderstanding, he says.
‘It wasn't the message that was coming from Government, but undoubtedly it was the message that, to a greater or lesser extent, was received by quite large areas of manufacturing industry.’
The impression arose, in his view, not because of anything ministers said, but because the Government began privatising and stopped handing out subsidies to smokestack activities, so that its role in running industry diminished.
He believes statements by John Major and Michael Heseltine have made clear that ‘manufacturing is appreciated and is important’.
Lord Young's abolition of the DTI's sponsoring divisions for particular industrial sectors stemmed, Mr Sainsbury maintains, from the Government's withdrawal from its previously dirigiste role.
‘It took a few years before one saw that the contact with, and knowledge of, industry, the dialogue, needed to be restored.’
He concedes that the new sector organisations called into being by Mr Heseltine last July are not yet up to speed.
‘The slowest bit is getting in the secondees from industry.’
The minister stresses manufacturers' improved performance in the 1980s.
‘People don't understand that,’ he says.
‘They say: look at our trade deficit.’
(Of course they do; it shows that the British buy more products than their industries are capable of supplying.)
Media concentration on the bad news of the hour has obscured undoubted successes, Mr Sainsbury points out.
‘Take the vehicle industry.
If ever an industry suffered from an industrial relations voodoo, that was it.
It has been transformed, but nobody notices.’
Arguments that the UK enforces the rules of fair trade too scrupulously compared with its trade rivals do not impress Mr Sainsbury.
‘You don't persuade people to stop breaking rules by starting to break them yourself.’
The world is becoming more open, he says, with both tariffs and non-tariff obstacles coming down.
‘We've totally removed them in a single market, but there are still elements of harmonisation to be completed.
The competition commissioner is always going to have cases of’ is this an illegal state subsidy or isn't it?’
He is hopeful that EC public procurement directives, some of which came into force on 1 January, with more due in July, will bring more business for British companies.
‘We have been ahead of the game, compared with most, because British industry is more used to competition for domestic public works.’
Tim Sainsbury: Making things matters
Transformation of the UK car industry: No voodoo from the robots
careers
COULD YOU TAKE THE DIRECTOR'S CHAIR?
There's no natural career progression to group finance director.
A wide range of skills is needed and a lot comes down to the the individual's character
Flavia Hawksley
For many chartered accountants, the path to becoming finance director is exceedingly difficult.
While there is a natural career progression through to finance controller or even finance director of a subsidiary, the jump to group finance director is enormous.
‘A lot of people get stuck at financial controller level,’ says Charles Austin of recruitment consultants Harrison Willis.
‘It is difficult to make the transition because the normal prerequisite of a finance director is that they must have had board level experience and as a financial controller reporting to a director it's very difficult to get that.’
Moreover the two jobs are, in a sense, completely different.
While the controller or finance director of a subsidiary will spend most of his or her time working on the financial accounts, and can excel at the job by being a good housekeeper, the group finance director, often number two to the chief executive, plays a large part in the running of the company and therefore needs a considerably wider range of skills.
‘Finance directors need the ability to see things from a non-financial perspective, as well as being creative, spontaneous and commanding respect and confidence,’ says Charles Macleod of recruitment consultants Robert Half.
But as they do need the financial background too, finding a suitable candidate to take on the finance director role, particularly of a large organisation, can be a problem and it's not unknown for a company to invest considerable time and money in training someone specially for the job, though it is rare.
One such company took a finance director of a subsidiary out of the business for a whole year, sent him to Harvard for an abbreviated MBA and to work for a merchant bank in the City.
After the year's training, he was brought back into the company as group finance director.
Unless you are fortunate enough to work for a company that recognises this need, there are basically two options available for that initial promotion.
One is to become finance director of a subsidiary, gaining subsidiary board level experience (though it may then be difficult to make the transition to group finance director).
The other is, having worked as financial controller for a large company, to become finance director of a much smaller one.
Of course these are generalisations and actual placement always depends on the individual.
‘It's the character that pushes someone on to that level,’ advises Mr Austin.
‘In addition to being confident and able to run a company as well as the financial division, they must have a good knowledge and understanding of the company's business, the market, the competitors and be able to maintain a strict sense of control and discipline as well as take a longer-term view in terms of strategy and business development.’
For those who fit the bill the rewards can be considerable and usually reflect the size of the responsibility.
The downside is that, unlike financial controllers, directors can, technically speaking, be held liable for negligence and consequently sued.
In contrast to auditors, however, historically, this hasn't happened very often.
It need not be a problem if companies take out directors' liability insurance or agree to meet defence costs, if necessary.
Salaries vary enormously.
They may start at around £27,000 to £40,000 for companies with a turnover of up to £20m.
As the company increases in size, the benefits package may increase to say £45,000 for a small plc and up to £90,000-plus for a medium-sized plc.
For the very large corporations, six figure salaries, ‘starting with a two or a three’ are not unusual.
Some earn more than £500,000.
On top of the basic salary there may be numerous other benefits, including share options, profit shares, bonuses, cars, and so on.
However, with the prolonged recession, many finance directors have been made redundant.
‘Companies have taken out a tier of management to save money, appointing financial controllers as directors designate,’ warns Mr Austin.
‘If a finance director resigns, there's no longer the certainty the company will find a replacement.
It may try and cope without and make a big saving on salary payments.’
As a result, there are a lot of out-of-work would-be finance directors willing to work for much much less than their previous salaries, not that that appears to have had any effect on those in stable positions.
It seems that if they're lucky enough to be in work, they can still command good salaries.
GETTING THE NUMBERS TO LOOK AFTER THEMSELVES
Kevin Steeds was 29 when he became finance director and company secretary of a new company called Citigate.
That was five years ago.
Since then Citigate has grown substantially, now producing a fee income in excess of £7m, a turnover of between £15m and £20m, employing around 160 people and serving 250 clients, ranging from the London Stock Exchange to Taunton Cider and Kentucky Fried Chicken.
His previous experience stood him in good stead.
Even at the age of 14 Mr Steeds was in no doubt about his future career aims.
He wanted to train as a chartered accountant with the ultimate aim of becoming a managing director.
So, armed with a degree in economics and accounting from Liverpool University, he trained at Arthur Young's Bristol office, qualifying in 1982.
This, he says, gave him a good grounding.
The office was small enough to provide experience in a range of areas, covering a wide variety of companies from subsidiaries of large plcs to sole traders.
It also gave him his first taste of advertising as he worked as a junior on the flotation of Harrison Cowley, later to be taken over by Saatchi & Saatchi.
To gain some experience of a larger set up, he moved to AY's Business Service Group in London before leaving to become financial controller of various subsidiaries of Addison Consultancy Group plc.
He says he had an advantage in that Addison was comparatively small when he first joined.
‘I was lucky in that I was appointed as the group was beginning to take off so I had a very good relationship with the plc directors.
As the group grew to 2,000 people I still knew the key people and was able to approach them even in the latter days when I was one of many.’
This gave him an invaluable insight into the boardroom and helped to bridge the gap between financial controller and finance director.
After three years with Addisons, a proposed management buyout, for which Mr Steeds was to become finance director, fell through with the October 1987 crash.
Instead, around 35 employees decided to set up their own communications group, Citigate, which itself went on to acquire several subsidiaries encompassing advertising and design.
Because Mr Steed is number two to the group chief executive he says it is ‘very much a management role rather than an accountant's role — sometimes too much!’
But it does mean that the job is immensely diverse, with a lot of administration and only a small element of number crunching, which he seeks out as an extra because he likes doing it.
When asked exactly how he spends his time, he gives an example of one day.
He always arrives at his desk around 7.30am, giving him time to sign cheques and deal with some administration before the phones start ringing.
On this particular day he had a subsidiary board meeting at 9am, after which he dealt with phone messages and post.
At 11am there was a meeting with the Financial Times , followed by lunch with the finance director of Citigate's venture capitalist backer.
Then more correspondence and a meeting with some of the people who report to him, to review matters, look at management accounts and discuss staff management.
At 3.30pm he had a meeting with the auditors, to discuss accounts and tax planning.
From 6pm to 7pm he usually has a meeting with the group chief executive, and then informal meetings with executives who are still around.
If he has no evening business engagement he usually gets away between 7.30pm and 8pm.
He says he tries hard to keep his weekends for the family!
Although he still has a long-term ambition to become a managing director of a successful company, for the moment his main aim is ‘to help build Citigate into a top-quality player’.
And despite the recession, which has hit its competitors severely, Citigate has managed to do very well.
The secret to success, he says, lies in management.
‘I always believe if you get everything else right and provide a good quality service for good quality clients, then the numbers look after themselves.
Accountants need to understand the business, the people, the products and above all the marketplace and then relate that to the numbers.
If you get that right, everything else should be easy.’
AN INTERESTING AND UNIQUE ROLE
Michael Lawrence, now aged 48, has been finance director of the Prudential since the beginning of 1988.
Mr Lawrence joined Price Waterhouse with a view to a long-term consultancy career.
As a postgraduate physicist he had already had several requests for industrial consultancy advice resulting from his involvement in research into the behaviour of semiconductors, an area that was developing very fast.
But six years after qualifying he became a partner in Price Waterhouse and somehow never quite got into the pure consultancy side.
A significant proportion of his time had, however, been spent on government consultancy work which, he says, incorporated both his technical background and his professional training.
When he was approached at the end of 1987 to become the Pru's finance director he was tempted away, partly because the tremendous growth of PW had created ‘more of a loss of identity as individual partners’ and partly because it offered a new and exciting role.
‘We're seeing a number of very interesting challenges, both within the industry and within the organisation.
Being a member of the senior team that's addressing those issues I think gives me a much broader job than I would otherwise have continued to enjoy.’
He adds that he was fortunate with his timing at PW.
‘The experience I had as a partner would not be replicated today because of the increasing narrowness of individual roles.’
Although at the time he was ‘not a great fan of industrial specialism', his views have changed.
‘Now I'm very focused on making sure one's auditors and advisers are industry specialists.’
He emphasises the need for the finance director to relate well to the business.
‘Finance directors occupy an interesting and unique position.
They are probably more focused on the overall group position than any other executive director except the chief executive.
Therefore, in a sense, they are central people with a particular perspective.’
For this reason, says Mr Lawrence, it is vital for the finance director to have an extremely good relationship with the chief executive in presenting the external face of the corporation.
‘They should have a good reputation and be prudent accountants.
People should feel confident in the financial statements that they are probably quite instrumental in preparing.’
Because the finance director's outward looking role is very important, he stresses that it is very useful to be a non-executive director elsewhere.
His own choices are rather limited since the Pru owns 3.5% of the stockmarket.
So for him the public sector has proved useful and at present he is a non-executive director of the Defence Research Agency Council.
Mr Lawrence adds that he had no industry network and little background experience on which to base decisions, so he spends a lot of time getting to know people in the industry.
‘One often finds that the issues concerning you concern them as well and it's useful to be able to discuss them.’
For this reason, like most finance directors, he has a very full schedule with engagements on most evenings.
‘I regard from 8.20am on Monday morning to whatever time I get home on Friday evening as my working life, and my weekend as my family life.’
As he is also chairman of the 100 Group of finance directors and regularly speaks at conferences and meetings, his timetable requires the skills of a juggler if not actually a magician!
(See also ACCOUNTANCY , December 1992, p 26.)
personal finance: tax-efficient investments
TESSAS' TAX-FREE TERMS Tessas provide a popular, five-year, tax-free investment for savers
Barbara Ellis
Legend has it that Tax Exempt Special Savings Accounts (Tessas) originated in 1990 eve-of-Budget, back-of-an-envelope doodlings made up by John Major when he was Chancellor.
Because of this last-minute genesis, it took some time for the Inland Revenue to turn Mr Major's jottings into a workable form.
However, the rules made when Tessas were eventually launched in January 1991 have remained intact, apart from an extra-statutory concession in October 1992.
This allows personal representatives to invest on behalf of mentally incapacitated people in Scotland.
Anyone aged 18 or over can open one Tessa, to run for five years.
Up to £9,000 can be invested in total, with a maximum of £3,000 in year one, £1,800 in each of years two to four and £600 in the fifth year.
But account-holders who do not put in the maximum in any one year are not allowed to top up the account in the following or any subsequent years.
Interest is paid gross and the account remains exempt from tax provided all capital deposited stays in the account until the fifth anniversary of its opening, along with an amount equal to basic rate tax on all interest credited.
In other words, Tessa-holders are allowed to withdraw the equivalent of interest, net of 25% tax, from the account.
Anyone who withdraws more than net interest or pledges the Tessa as security for a loan immediately loses the tax exemption and has to pay tax on all interest credited up to that time as though it were income arising during the year when the withdrawal or pledge took place.
By March 1992, 3.64m people had opened Tessa accounts, depositing £10bn and therefore removing that much spending power from the economy for five years — a side-effect for which Mr Major might not wish to claim too personal a responsibility.
The split of Tessa money between banks and building societies is estimated at about 35%:65% in favour of the societies, with the Halifax Building Society and the National Westminster Bank widely perceived as the market leaders.
The Halifax says it has about 505,000 Tessa account holders, with an average first-year balance of £2,700, giving a total of around £1.4bn.
NatWest refuses to disclose any figures for its Tessa accounts or the number of holders.
People who open Tessa accounts tend to be in older age groups.
A savings and investment survey carried out by Financial Research Services (FRS) between October 1991 and March 1992 shows that approximately 60% of Tessas are opened by people aged over 45.
Account-holders are predominantly in the A, B and C1 social categories and mainly live in the South East or London.
FRS did not find any clear split between men and women.
When Tessas were first launched, an immediate objection raised was that people would simply shift money from one pocket to another.
This seems to be only partly borne out by institutions willing to discuss their experience.
The Halifax says that about 20% of the money deposited in Tessas was new money — the remaining 80% was transferred from other accounts already held with the society.
However, Save & Prosper, with about £175m held for 37,000 Tessa customers, says that only about 10% to 15% came from existing customers — about 85% is new to the group.
At Save & Prosper, 57% of the Tessa-holders are men and 43% women.
Just under 40% are retired, against 22% for the general population.
Paying 1% to intermediaries bringing in clients' money to its lump-sum only Tessas, Save & Prosper ensures loyalty by imposing a £50 transfer fee.
In the seven months to November 1992, it had lost only 300 out of 37,000 customers, mainly as a result of deaths.
Competition on interest rates has squeezed Tessa profit margins to around 0.4% gross, against the 1.3% to 1.4% usual on other banking products, according to S&P executive director Ian Lindsey, who points out that a number of institutions are consistently paying rates above the level of money market rates.
S&P sets its variable Tessa rate by reference to seven-day Libid (London inter-bank bid rate).
Each year, the group offers the choice of a variable-rate Tessa and an account with a rate fixed for one year.
At the beginning of the first year, the fixed rate was 13.25% at a time when the variable rate was 15.25%.
In 1992, the fixed rate was 9.25%.
Each time, investors who chose the fixed rate have come out about 0.75% to 1% ahead of the variable rate account-holders.
Mr Lindsey was predicting in early January that the majority of customers this year would probably opt for a variable rate, on the basis that they probably did not believe interest rates would drop very much further.
Mr Lindsey said that, from 5 January, S&P were offering a variable Tessa paying an initial 7.5%, against the fixed rate version at 5.875%, which is slightly higher than the average that S&P, as a group, has been forecasting for the financial year beginning in April 1993.
Some of the institutions at the top of the Tessa rankings may be unfamiliar.
Allied Trust, for example, was known until 1989 as the Allied Arab Bank.
In 1983/84, it came close to collapse after making heavy losses on loans to an Indian commodity group named Esal, which was involved in the subsequent collapse of Johnson Matthey.
People enquiring about the Allied Trust Tessa and the company's status are accurately told by employees that Tessa deposits are covered by the deposit-holders' protection scheme, which guarantees up to 75% of the first £20,000 of an investor's money if a bank fails.
Dryfield Finance of Yeovil, Somerset has been registered as a bank for the past 10 years and its Tessas are also covered by the deposit-holders' protection scheme.
Tessa money in building societies is guaranteed a higher level of protection: investors can count on the return of 90% of their first £20,000 if the society goes broke.
THEIR FAIR SHARE OF THE MARKET It wasn't until the legislation governing PEPs was relaxed that they really took off — but now investors are being attracted in droves
Mark Shanahan
Personal equity plans (PEPs) were first introduced in Nigel Lawson's 1986 Budget speech.
At the time they were aimed at promoting wider ownership of shares in UK companies, and carried an investment limit of just £2,400.
If you placed up to that amount in your PEP, the guarantee was that your return after the end of that tax year would be free of income tax and capital gains tax.
Unfortunately, there were so many restrictions — and charges were so high — that in their early years they never really took off.
Relaxations in the legislation governing them in both the 1989 and 1991 Budgets have made PEPs a far more attractive option — especially as a tax-saver — and investors have been moving into them in a big way.
The biggest year so far for PEPs was 1991/92; 640,000 new general plans were taken out, with 110,000 single company plans added to that following their January 1992 launch.
The total sum invested during 1991/92 was more than £2.5bn.
Why PEPs?
PEPs are mainly tax advantageous to higher-rate taxpayers and anyone likely to be liable for CGT.
But make sure that the charges on your PEP don't cancel out your tax savings.
Charges vary considerably according to the type of plan you select and the number of different investments you hold within it.
As well as an initial charge of up to 6% of your investment, there are annual charges — anything between 0.5% and 2%; dealing charges; withdrawal and transfer charges; and, to cap it all, VAT.
With all these charges you can see that PEPs aren't for short-term investors.
Indeed, to get the best return, you should be prepared to tie your investment up for at least three years.
And, as the value of shares can fall as well as rise, a PEP is no place for any money you can't afford to lose.
But if you're prepared to take the risk of equity investment for the reward of a tax-free return, a PEP could be just the right route for you.
You can put up to £6,000 in the 1992/93 tax year in a PEP that invests in a range of equities, and a further £3,000 in a single company PEP.
Your money can be invested directly in UK or EC equities or in unit trusts or investment trusts.
With some plans, you can mix and match.
Anyone aged 18 or over can hold a PEP as long as they are resident for tax purposes in the UK.
City wisdom suggests that you shouldn't put all your eggs in one basket, so for most people it is best to consider a single company PEP only after you've taken out a £6,000 general plan.
And remember, you don't have to put all £6,000 into the plan.
Some plans have minimum lump-sum investments of just £300 to £500, while Prosperity (phone 0800 521546) offers the regular savings scheme with the lowest monthly subscription I have come across at just £10 a month.
However, their initial charge is 6%, so it would take a while to get any return on your money!
Which PEPs?
With over 300 different PEPs on the market, and new ones being introduced all the time, finding the best one to suit your needs won't be easy.
You'll need to consider whether you want to invest for income, for growth, or for a combination of the two.
You'll also have to measure the charges the plan managers will levy against the plans' performance.
And, crucially, you'll need to decide if you want a discretionary (self-select) PEP where you take the decisions.
While the costs levied on the latter are generally lower (you only pay dealing charges), you'll need to do more of the work to get the best possible return.
Magazines such as What Investment carry regular articles on PEPs and all the weekend broadsheets publish news of any major launches.
But if you aren't prepared to wade through acres of news and advertising print, your financial adviser should be able to pick out a few plans that suit your needs.
Information on PEPs
One of the best sources of information on the PEP market is the Chase de Vere PEP Guide .
The 11th edition was published in January (£9.95; available from Chase on 071-404 5766), and gives detailed information on PEPs both by type and alphabetically.
For the first time, too, performance data is included.
PEP Guide editor Roz Barder is closer to the market than most, and she gave me her views on what to follow in 1993.
‘Perhaps the most important general feature is that providers are slashing their charges.
The market is very competitive and, with falling charges and improved performance, there are some very good deals around.
‘I think two product areas are worth watching.
First, tracker funds such as James Capel's Footsie Fund [0800 289505]are gaining in popularity.
Few experts can beat the market in the long run, so keeping up with it is a reasonable option.
‘Second, Legal & General [071-528 6793]has launched the first Guaranteed Down-Side Risk PEP.
I suspect this will prove popular, and there are likely to be a few copycat launches.’
Finally, PEPs aren't just for equity investors.
They're becoming ever more popular as tools to repay mortgages in place of endowment policies, while some of the more adventurous plan managers are also building PEPs into school fee and retirement planning.
It seems that personal equity plans are here to stay — even if not in the form that Nigel Lawson intended.
To get the best return, you should be prepared to tie your investment up for at least three years.
And, as the value of shares can fall as well as rise, a PEP is no place for any money you can't afford to lose
TAKING THE BES DECISION Business Expansion Schemes and enterprise zone property investments both bring valuable tax reliefs — but there are risks
Robin Dunham
Investing in BES companies or funds is an effective way to reduce your tax bill but whether the investments also prove profitable remains debatable.
A minority, such as Broadwell Land (property), Alan Paul (the hairdressing group), Special Eyes (opticians) and Tomorrows Leisure, have subsequently obtained USM quotations although Broadwell Land and Alan Paul have ended in receivership.
Talking to regular BES investors it is soon apparent that most have suffered from a trading company failing in its early days.
And the severity of the recession has made it difficult for those companies that have reached the end of the five-year period to find an exit route for their BES investors.
No wonder the BES assured tenancy schemes continue to be so popular.
The BES began on 6 April 1983 as the successor to the business start-up scheme, and will finally end on 31 December 1993.
Investment can only be in companies or funds that qualify under the BES rules.
There is a limit of £750,000 on the amount an eligible company can raise under the BES in any tax year, although for ship operating or chartering companies or assured tenancies the limit is £5m.
The investor, who must be resident and ordinarily resident in the UK, can obtain tax relief on up to a maximum of £40,000 invested under the BES at his or her top rate of tax.
Husband and wife are each entitled to invest up to the maximum of £40,000.
For shares issued after 18 March 1986 there is no CGT liability on their eventual disposal.
To retain tax relief the investor has to keep the BES shares for a minimum of five years.
The most popular period for BES investment occurs in the last three months of the tax year as investors begin to think about reducing tax liabilities; the early autumn sees a second surge as investors can claim up to half the tax relief for the previous year on investments made before 6 October (subject to a maximum of £5,000).
This assumes they have not used the full £40,000 in the previous tax year.
The publicly-available BES issues in the early months of 1993, and those scheduled for the remainder of the year, are expected to again be dominated by assured tenancy schemes, which invest in residential properties for letting under assured tenancies.
Homes for Eastbourne, sponsored by Matrix Securities, which quickly raised its £5m maximum subscription in 10 working days in late November last year, illustrates the potential demand.
As the most popular issues are likely to be quickly subscribed, rather than mention individual offers I include the names of some of the most active promoters of such schemes which will be pleased to keep readers informed: Johnson Fry (071-321 0220) which hopes to raise some £100m in 1993; Close Brothers (071-638 5500); Matrix Securities (071-734 8334); Neill Clerk (041-332 2055); Smith & Williamson (071-637 5377); Terrace Hill (071-734 4440); Sun Life (071-606 7788), Hodgson Martin (031-226 7644); and Capital Ventures (0242 584380).
Several recent assured tenancy issues featured non-recourse loans from banks to shareholders.
For investors searching for a non-residential property BES, publicly-advertised offers are less frequent.
Van Pieters, producers of high class traditional smoked salmon, managed to raise £240,000 in late 1992 to help finance the installation of new equipment.
Many such BESs are small and arranged on a local basis by accountants or solicitors.
The Local Investment Networking Company (LINC)(071-236 3000), sponsored by Lloyds Bank, BP and chartered accountants Levy Gee, circulates to investors details of possible investments in start-ups and growing businesses in their area and they can be arranged under the BES.
Tony Foreman, a tax partner in Pannell Kerr Forster, said the BES assured tenancy schemes with non-recourse loans provided a good return for top rate taxpayers; their 60p in the pound net outlay after tax relief was turned into 72p in as little as six months by a loan.
This was made even more attractive by a leading bank's guarantee to buy the properties back after five years.
According to Martin Haslam of Sussex accountants Keymer Haslam & Co, clients subscribed for some BES schemes, particularly from Johnson Fry.
The firm has recently arranged a small BES scheme to finance a local restaurant.
Chilton Taylor of Casson Beckman said clients were mainly attracted to the high profile, assured tenancy issues, although the BES was a useful source of equity finance from friends of directors or customers for private companies.
‘Why should investors risk money when they could obtain 20% returns from assured tenancy schemes with non-recourse loans and guaranteed by the bank?’ added Mr Taylor.
However, these schemes are quickly over-subscribed and can be difficult to put together because of the need for a bank guarantee.
Investment in commercial properties in enterprise zones within 10 years of the creation of the zone attracts 100% initial allowance.
Some complete buildings are advertised in the financial press although for most investors who cannot afford to purchase an entire building the way to participate has been through enterprise zone property unit trusts.
Inevitably the sharp drop in property values and the collapse of some property groups has highlighted the risks.
In contrast to the BES, investors have no limit on the amount they can invest in enterprise zone property.
In December 1992 Capital Ventures launched Cert X (the 10th Care Enterprise Realty Trust) to purchase industrial units to be built at Deeside Enterprise Park, Flint, north Wales.
A loan facility including a fixed interest rate option was available from the Bank of Scotland.
Enterprise zone property trusts are established to be held as an investment for a very long period (usually 25 years) and as Capital Ventures warns: ‘You may have difficulty in selling your investment before realisation of the underlying property…’
Pannell Kerr Forster's Tony Foreman cautioned that it was difficult to see an exit route from property zone trusts and wealthy clients were inclined to put £40,000 in the BES before considering such schemes.
Why should investors risk money when they could obtain 20% returns from assured tenancy schemes with non-recourse loans and guaranteed by the bank?
strategy
STRATEGIES FOR CORPORATE SUCCESS Survival in financial markets, where a company raises its capital, is achieved through success in the competitive markets where it makes its profits.
Choosing profitable competitive markets is the aim of business strategy
Alfred Kenyon and Shiv Sahai Mathur
When BAT Industries, ICI and others are divesting activities as raiders appear; when Courtaulds and Racal are divesting or splitting activities so as to focus on their core businesses; the time has surely come to think again about corporate and other strategies.
There is much discussion about conglomerates, whether the head office adds value, whether big or small is beautiful.
Markets
It is helpful to think of a business as operating in a number of different markets.
The two most important are its financial markets, in which it sources its funds, and its competitive commercial markets, in which it earns the returns the financial markets require.
It yields these returns mainly by targeting and serving profitable customers.
All other business functions are ancillary.
We cannot of course attract and keep customers if we do not produce what they want to buy, if we do not control costs, if we do not hire the right kind of people, or if we fail to motivate them.
However, none of these secondary functions of business can lead to success by themselves.
Unless customers buy what we produce, at prices that allow us to make a profit, our fate will be bankruptcy or takeover.
Independent survival is achieved in the financial markets through success in competitive markets.
The aim of business strategies is competitive success for financial success.
Companies and firmlets
We distinguish between the independent financial entity and the competitive units it owns.
The former we call the ‘company', even if its legal form is a partnership.
The latter we call ‘firmlets’.
The firmlets have competitive strategies, and the company has a corporate strategy (see Figure 1).
Why coin the strange word ‘firmlet'?
To avoid confusion with more familiar terms such as‘firm', ‘profit centre’ or even ‘strategic business unit’.
All these convey an organisational unit headed by a line manager.
By contrast we have in mind a unit for which , not by which , strategy is formulated.
Each firmlet offers a single offering to customers, an offering which has a unique set of potential customers and competitors.
If a professional office encounters different competitors in large and small insolvency work, then its insolvency practice is two or more offerings; the office is the company, insolvency work constitutes two or more of its firmlets.
Competitive strategy plans the positioning of the offering in relation to its customers and competitors.
That positioning is determined by the offering's ‘outputs’.
These are the attributes a choosing customer is aware of.
All other attributes are its ‘inputs’.
There is one competitive strategy for each offering, ie each firmlet.
Companies cannot compete: only firmlets can.
Competitive strategy has two weapons: price and differentiation.
The test of a competitive strategy is its profitability.
Corporate strategy plans the company's cluster of firmlets.
It determines what firmlets are to be added, retained or divested.
Managers commonly talk of ‘strategies’ that concern inputs rather than outputs.
They have to be concerned with inputs, because inputs are what they can control.
They cannot control outputs because they cannot control customers' or clients' mental processes.
Inputs, such as, for example , a ‘corporate capability', are often common to more than one offering, and very much a management concern.
Inputs are thus of great practical importance, but they are only the means, not the ends, of competitive endeavour.
We are reluctant for this reason to allow a category of ‘input strategies’.
Managers would do better to think of just two kinds of business strategy — competitive and corporate.
Figure 2 contrasts competitive and corporate strategy.
Corporate catalysts
Companies such as Hanson are often discussed as if they were conglomerates that successfully build up ‘unrelated’ clusters of businesses.
This is correct as a statement of fact, but not as an analysis of the logic behind their success.
The primary source of their superior financial performance is capital gains from acquiring corporate assets and activities that, under present ownership, yield less than their opportunity values, and disposing of them at their higher market values.
They also restructure, tightly manage and retain some of the acquired businesses, but that is a secondary source.
The capital gains from disposals finance further acquisitions and further capital gains.
Earnings per share rise partly because the retained businesses are managed profitably, but mainly because the extra earnings are bought with disproportionately few extra issues of capital or debt.
We call these companies ‘corporate catalysts’.
By transferring undermanaged assets to more effective use, whether internal or external, they perform a useful social function.
In their pure form they have neither corporate nor competitive strategies as defined above.
Corporate strategy tests
A successful corporate strategy must pass two tests.
Whether company C should own firmlet F, depends on:
1.
The better-off test.
2.
The competitive positioning test.
Our version of the better-off test asks two questions:
Does C's ownership of F make C more valuable?
Is C the best possible owner for F?
If F would be more valuable if it was independent or under another owner, then F should not be acquired; if C already owns it, it should be divested.
It is hard to understate the importance of divestment in corporate strategy.
F should not be retained when C is no longer the best possible owner.
The competitive positioning test asks whether F's value — in its own right and in C's cluster — is likely to endure after the initial year or two.
This second test — for robustness — is needed because commercial and industrial managers are generally reluctant to acquire firmlets expressly for early divestment.
Additions to a cluster can of course come about by internal investment in greenfield projects (such as an accountancy firm starting up its own insolvency practice), as well as by acquisition or merger.
What kind of cluster?
The fundamental issue of corporate strategy concerns cluster selection: what kind of firmlets should a company own, and more particularly, should these firmlets be ‘related’ or not?
C's ownership of F is the concern of corporate strategy and the subject of the better-off test.
So-called industrial logic has, for example, been used to justify the acquisition of a customer or a supplier.
However, that industrial logic, if valid, might justify no more than a contractual and competitive, arm's-length relationship between F and C. The better-off test is passed only if ownership is needed to achieve the extra value.
Two reasons for extending clusters have gone out of vogue: the need to get bigger, and risk diversification.
The 1980s saw much disillusionment.
Big is no longer seen as beautiful.
Nor is risk diversification.
The massive trend, from 1965 to 1980, towards diversification is now largely seen to have been a mistake.
Now in vogue are divestment, MBOs, and break-up bids.
The fashionable question ‘How does the head office add value?’ would be clearer if it asked, ‘When and why does a firmlet gain from being part of a company?’
One reason for switching attention to this relationship is the recognition that every head office/firmlet link imposes extra bureaucratic and motivational costs.
Of all those who propose diversifications to obtain cost savings, how many estimate those savings net, after these extra costs?
The relatedness issue
A great deal of diversification has been of a conglomerate, ‘unrelated’ nature, but it seems hard to find any justification for unrelated diversification.
We believe that empirical findings of value gains in unrelated diversifications are overstated because the results of corporate catalysts are included.
These results owe less to diversification of any kind than to capital gains in the market for corporate control.
Most unrelated diversifications would not pass the better-off test.
We have identified five forms of ‘related’ diversification that can pass the better-off test.
We have identified them after looking for relatedness along the entire value chain, including both inputs and outputs, that make up the offering.
We see no case for using industry classifications as a test of relatedness.
Industry classifications are an arbitrary statistical convenience of questionable strategic significance.
Valid cluster 1: core cluster .
Businesses that are either very capital intensive or in complex technology, or characterised by a long time-lag between investment and payback, need to have a well-informed head office.
They need it as an expert critic of their investment projects so that bad decisions can be nipped in the bud.
Fields such as biotechnology, chemical process plant operation and advanced electronic systems are clear examples of this.
If such businesses are independent and directly answerable to the stock market, any bad investment decisions would only become apparent after a very long time.
By then there would have been a major waste of resources.
A corollary of this is that the head office needs to have expert information and skills, needs to be an active participant in the formulation of strategies, and must therefore own a narrowly specialised core cluster of firmlets.
A unique feature of valid cluster 1 is that value is added by the head office/firmlet relationship.
F needs C. In the other four cases the gains are interfirmlet: C's other firmlet G needs F. The head office simply provides the roof of common ownership.
Valid cluster 2: shared costs .
This is the classical case of synergy, where economies of scale (or scope) enable several firmlets to share some fixed expense, capital investment, corporate capability or skill.
This is the most common case for diversification.
Valid cluster 3: vertical integration .
This consists of acquiring firmlet F, a supplier or customer to C's existing firmlet G, and is commonly justified on the grounds that the internalisation of such a relationship makes it more intimate, more dedicated, more secure and therefore more effective.
Vertical integration has caused a crop of disasters.
Properly applied better-off tests would have highlighted how the lack of competition in an internalised link imposes extra costs.
Can a captive customer get a competitive service?
Should the auditor design his own software packages?
Only market failure can justify vertical integration, for example where F is one of a limited number of sources of a critical supply, or where the supplier-customer relationship requires trust and secrecy which cannot be secured at arm's length.
Valid cluster 4: complementary goods .
This is the case where C's firmlet G markets an offering which is useless unless G's customers also have a secure source of what F offers.
It justifies C's acquisition of F if, again, there is market failure, ie if F is unique in supplying the complementary goods.
An example would be Sony buying a maker of Betamax videocassettes in order to ensure a continuing source to its customers who use Betamax videorecorders.
Valid cluster 5: buying a competitor .
The purpose of this is to gain market power so as to charge higher margins.
This could be done by a local newsagent buying his nearest rival, or the local sole practitioner accountant merging with his only rival.
Anti-monopoly regulation is not likely to stop this sort of move: entry remains unrestricted and the business is too small for regulators to intervene.
The place of market failure
In at least the last three types of valid cluster the motivation is to overcome or exploit some kind of market failure.
We have described the motive mainly in defensive terms.
We have also, however, shown that market failure can be handled aggressively, ie to create a disadvantage for a competitor.
The way forward
Action is never effective without straight thinking.
Managers should:
identify their firmlets;
evaluate the existing cluster and its validity;
divest what needs to go, and acquire what needs to be added;
make any desirable adjustments to the competitive strategies;
plan the necessary common inputs.
Competitive strategy has two weapons: price and differentiation.
The test of a competitive strategy is its profitability
Businesses that are either very capital intensive or in complex technology, or characterised by a long time-lag between investment and payback, need to have a well-informed head office
Singapore
FISHING VILLAGE SPAWNS TOTAL BUSINESS CENTRE With its stable government, advanced business services, first-world infrastructure, educated workforce and fast-rising GNP, Singapore seems likely to achieve the developed nation status it craves
Sarah Grey
Singapore is not much bigger than the Isle of Wight, it has no natural resources and its population only numbers 3m.
But it has become one of the big post-war economic success stories, with one of the world's most open trading systems and a business environment not far behind Switzerland, Japan and west Germany.
Once a sleepy fishing village, the Lion City (which is how Singapore's original Indian name translates) was claimed as a British trading post by Sir Stamford Raffles in 1819, and became a British colony in 1867.
Since colonial rule ended in 1959 the government has consistently adopted strong pro-business policies that have fostered rapid economic growth and infrastructural development.
The government's aim has always been to attract foreign investment; only its tactics have changed as the tiny city-state (639 sq km) matures and looks for more sophisticated investors to help it achieve the longed-for ‘developed nation’ status by 2030.
‘Total business centre’ is the new marketing catchphrase for Singapore, and with its stable government, advanced business services, first-world infrastructure, educated workforce and fast-rising GNP, who could argue?
Politically, Singapore looks set for a very stable and predictable future.
A democratic, parliamentary system of government has been set up with free elections at least once every five years.
The economy
Euromoney ranked Singapore's economic performance as the world's second best after Taiwan in the three years to 1992, based on the views of 34 economists from leading banks.
It is also rated the most competitive newly-industrialised economy by the World Competitiveness Report .
GDP growth has averaged 8.4% a year in real terms since 1960 in spite of the mid-1980s recession, which saw 3% negative growth.
At the same time per capita income rose from S$1,330 to S$22,867 in 1991, and unemployment has fallen from 11% to less than 2%.
The balance of payments has been in surplus every year but two, external debt is less than 1% of official foreign reserves, and inflation has averaged only 2.2% in the past five years.
The Singapore dollar is stable and has gradually strengthened against the pound and the US dollar (now standing at S$2.58: £1).
Interest rates have halved in the past 10 years to 5.75%, because Singapore's savings rate is so high that the banks are flush with funds.
And in the same period the government's tax revenue has more than doubled to S$12.1bn.
In spite of these remarkably positive indicators, Singapore is not expected to grow at the same rate in the 1990s.
‘We are now a much more mature economy,’ said the chief economist of a leading Singapore bank.
‘I expect a steady, more consistent growth rate of between 4% and 6%.’
Even the current world recession has left Singapore virtually unscathed because after the 1985/86 slump, the government worked hard to make the economy less dependent on single industries, such as electronics, or certain countries, such as the US.
It now does increasing volumes of trade with its ASEAN (Association of South East Asian Nations) neighbours (Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand and Brunei) and has diversified into a wider range of industries.
‘Even though many of the international investors face slowdown in their home countries,’ said Lee Suan Hiang of the government's Economic Development Board, ‘companies are relying on their investment in southeast Asia to maintain their growth levels, as this is the world's fastest growing region.’
Manufacturing
The manufacturing sector has grown 21 times in real terms since 1960, increasing from a 17.6% share of the economy to 26.9% in 1991.
In the 1960s the emphasis was on labour-intensive industries such as textiles and consumer electronics to employ the thousands of workers who had been left redundant by the withdrawal of the British.
But as skills levels and infrastructure improved in the 1970s and 1980s, higher value-added industries such as petroleum refining and precision engineering were attracted to Singapore.
Now that Singapore has virtually full employment, it has begun to move beyond production stage manufacturing and attract foreign investment in research and development and high technology industries such as aircraft assembly, material sciences, biotechnology and information technology.
With its ‘growth triangle’ project the government is actively encouraging the more labour-intensive industries to move their production facilities into Malaysia or Thailand, where labour is cheaper and more abundant, but maintain head office functions in Singapore, where communication and distributive networks are more efficient and treasury/ fund management facilities more sophisticated.
‘Singapore is not competing with these countries but promoting all ASEAN countries so that the region as a whole can offer the full range of resources and become a global economic power,’ said Mr Lee.
‘We want to make the whole pie bigger so there's more for us, more for them, more for everybody.’
This pragmatic policy has seen value added on manufactured goods jump from S$142m in 1960 to a massive S$23.131bn in 1991.
This sector's exports are now worth S$101.808bn, representing more than 50% of foreign exchange earnings.
Nor are there any signs of a slowdown, with investment commitments in manufacturing in 1992 expected to exceed the 1991 record of S$2.9bn.
Banking and finance
The banking and finance sector has grown more than 20 times in real terms over the past 30 years so that it now accounts for almost 20% of GDP, compared with 5% in 1960.
It initially developed to provide trade financing for the entrepot centre, but since the multinationals started to arrive in the 1970s it has developed into a sophisticated financial centre.
There are almost 140 commercial banks in Singapore.
Many of the internationals such as HongKong Bank and Standard Chartered run ‘financial supermarkets’ with the full range of services from business loans and leasing to merchant and private banking, treasury and trade finance, trust, stockbroking and custodial services, and bullion and futures trading.
Exchange controls were completely removed in 1978, and since then offshore financial activities have exploded — Singapore is now the fourth largest centre for foreign exchange trading in the world.
The total Asian Currency Unit assets of Singapore's offshore financial institutions grew from US$30.5m in 1968 to US$358bn in 1991.
To discourage speculation in the Singapore dollar, however, the Monetary Authority of Singapore, which functions as a central bank, has put limits on the amount of Singapore dollar deals that off-shore banks are allowed to transact.
Fee-based activities such as fund management have also taken off in Singapore because of its strategic location in southeast Asia's fast expanding financial markets.
Already 70 major financial institutions and several multinational manufacturing companies have established fund management arms there.
Singapore is also home to Asia's first International Monetary Exchange (SIMEX), which has been trading financial futures since 1984.
The system is linked to the Chicago Mercantile Exchange so that contracts opened on SIMEX can be closed on CME, or vice versa, without additional transactional costs to market traders.
The Stock Exchange of Singapore was incorporated in 1973 and electronic trading boards were introduced as early as 1982.
In the late 1980s a direct communications link was established between the SES and the National Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotation to enable Singapore investors to diversify their portfolios to include both US and European stocks.
The SES is also in the process of converting to scripless trading to maximise efficiency and help prevent fraud.
The SES also oversees a separate market, the SESDAQ, which provides an alternative listing, enabling small and medium-sized companies with good growth prospects to raise finance for expansion.
Business environment
In spite of the sharp rise in the costs of doing business in Singapore in the 1980s, many companies are still choosing it as their regional base because of the ease of doing business there: it has one of the world's most modern infrastructures, a free enterprise system with no foreign ownership restrictions, no exchange controls, few tariff barriers, a highly motivated and skilled workforce and attractive investment incentives.
‘In the late 1980s we were looking for somewhere to produce a whole stream of new products,’ said managing director of Glaxo Developments Alan Catterall.
‘Singapore was still the best place.’
Glaxo is spending more than S$200m on building a new multi-purpose facility to manufacture the active ingredients for three new medicines to treat nausea, asthma and migraine.
It is no accident, adds Mr Catterall, that the building project is ahead of schedule and within budget.
All Singapore's facilities are tailored to meet the needs of international business.
The government, for example, made the audacious decision to make English the official business language in spite of the fact that 76% of the population is Chinese, 15% Malay and 6.5% Indian.
Infrastructure
To say Singapore is ‘just like Switzerland’ is the biggest compliment you can pay a Singaporean.
The smooth and efficient running of just about everything, from the clean streets with their fast-flowing traffic to the rapid, air-conditioned S$5bn underground system (MRT) and luxury shopping malls, certainly bears that comparison.
Industrial parks now stand where pepper plantations used to be, modern buses have taken over from the rickshaw and Singaporeans now live in high-rise apartments rather than the traditional kampongs.
But in spite of Singapore's cosmopolitan image there is still a very Asian flavour, with the lively Chinese shophouses (where traders still work out their accounts on the abacus) and crowded markets alongside the gleaming modern high-rises of the international business community.
Changi airport is repeatedly rated as the world's best, and Singapore Airlines is often the business traveller's first choice.
A second airport terminal was opened in 1990 and there are plans to reclaim more land for a third and a fourth.
Air traffic has doubled in the last 10 years so that Singapore is now served by 57 airlines, linking it to 110 cities in 54 countries.
Singapore's location has also helped its port to become the world's busiest.
Another reason companies give for choosing to invest in Singapore is the availability of good accommodation and excellent schools, some specifically for expats.
Land, however, is a scarce resource and house prices have risen quite sharply over the past decade.
An apartment in a high-rise block might only cost S$100,000 but a detached bungalow is likely to be S$1.5 to S$2m.
The past year has seen office rents come down sharply in the Central Business District because of oversupply.
A year ago developers could command S$10/sq ft, but now some deals involve as little as S$5/sq ft.
To maximise efficient land use the government has made a careful ‘concept plan’ indicating what every inch of land is to be used for.
It also plans to increase the land area 15% through reclamation projects.
The government has a specific policy of keeping the cost of utilities down to help the business community maximise profits.
Telecommunications, for example, have been constantly upgraded in the past decade while charges are reportedly half what they were 10 years ago.
Workforce
If there's one constraint on foreign investment in Singapore, however, it's the availability of labour.
Because industrial growth has been so fast there is virtually full employment, with a particular shortage of staff at the clerical/secretarial level, since the new generation of university-educated Singaporeans is aiming for the higher paid jobs.
In the past, Singapore was able to draw on a ready pool of Malay Chinese to supplement its workforce, but with economies in the whole region growing so rapidly, skilled labour is at a premium and countries are doing all they can to hang on to their brainpower.
Singapore may have to look to China to help it meet its labour needs in future.
There is, however, a good supply of manual labour from neighbouring countries, and the government has recently relaxed its quota policy to allow more foreign labour for certain industries such as construction.
Education, training and skills development is another way in which the government attempts to meet demands for labour.
It has recently raised its commitment to education from 4% to 5% of GDP.
The work ethic of Singaporeans, Alan Catterall says, is second to none.
They have a powerful cultural drive to achieve, which makes them extremely diligent, effective and reliable workers.
The cost of employing workers in Singapore can be onerous, but most employers find that unit labour costs are still fairly competitive because productivity is so high.
Average weekly wages in 1990 were S$636 for professional, management and administrative staff, S$246 for clerical, sales and service staff and S$236 for manual workers.
It is also customary for employers to pay an annual bonus of at least one month's salary and to provide medical benefits.
Employers also have to contribute equivalent to 18% of a worker's salary to the Central Provident Fund (which provides finance for pension, healthcare, tertiary education and certain approved investments) and a further 1% levy for employees earning less than S$750 per month to be used by the government's National Productivity Board to fund skills training.
Because of the shortage of labour, investing companies have found that there is an ongoing need for training and retraining.
The cost is more than made up for by the fact that virtually no man-hours are lost through strike action.
Singapore's labour unions are uniquely pro-business and collaborate closely with government and employers.
The Economic Development Board, set up in 1961 to promote foreign investment in Singapore, offers a generous range of incentives, but its Lee Suan Hiang stresses that Singapore is ‘not just a tax haven’.
‘The key is not whether we give tax holidays but whether we provide an environment that allows companies to make a lot of profit.
Without profit companies are not taxed anyway and incentives become redundant.
The important thing is that the EDB removes the disincentives and acts as a one-stop agency for investors.
If there's any need for trouble shooting, we can do it, but Singapore is such an easy place to do business that typically investors don't need much handholding.’
Fiscal incentives are directed at any company that can contribute to the growth of the economy, but the EDB is especially interested in export-orientated, hi-tech, high value-added companies and service industries.
Preferential treatment is not extended to foreign investment in shipping agencies or travel agencies, and on the retail side joint ventures (51% Singaporean) are preferred.
Most new investors will qualify for pioneer status, entitling them to a five to 10- year tax exemption on company profits, depending on the project, and this can be followed by post-pioneer status for up to 10 years of only 10% tax.
Export-orientated companies are only taxed 3.1% on qualifying export profits and any capital expenditure in plant and machinery, factory building or acquisition of know-how or patent rights is up to 50% tax exempt.
There are also accelerated allowances for any capital expenditure on plant or machinery, tourist projects, and R&D.
Companies that set up their regional headquarters in Singapore are only taxed 10% on income from approved services, including trading in foreign exchange and offshore investments.
In addition, a new technology company's losses and capital allowances are tax deductible by the holding company (if incorporated in Singapore) for three years, up to 50% of the equity invested.
Other incentives include tax exemptions for increased income resulting from expansion, no withholding tax on interest payable on foreign loans and special exemptions for oil traders, international shipping, warehousing and servicing industries and international consultancy services.
The normal corporate tax rate is 31% and personal tax is calculated on a sliding scale, reaching a maximum of 30% for a taxable income of S$800,000 a year.
A S$200,000 taxable income, for example, is only taxed at 17.05%.
But the biggest incentive, concludes Mr Lee, is Singapore's 30-year track record of stable politics and social environment, a growing economy and an infrastructure tailored to the needs of international business.
‘Come and take a look,’ said Mr Lee.
‘Singapore's 3,000 foreign companies can't all be wrong!’
Singapore retains its Asian flavour
The government made the audacious decision to make English the official business language in spite of the fact that 76% of the population is Chinese, 15% Malay and 6.5% Indian
Singapore is not expected to grow at the same rate in the 1990s.
We are now a much more mature economy.
I expect a steady, more consistent growth rate of between 4% and 6%
Chinatown: Singapore street scene
multimedia and telecoms
SEE, HEAR, LOOK, LEARN Multimedia used to be described as a solution looking for a problem.
But today it is providing many useful applications in the financial sector
George Cole
Ask half a dozen people to define multimedia and you are likely to get six different answers.
For some it means a learning pack containing a work book, audio cassette and video tape; for others it is a technology that combines audio, television, computers and telecommunications.
It is the latter definition that is gaining the widest acceptance.
Today's multimedia systems use a computer to control and mix sound, video, text, graphics and animation on a computer or television screen.
Critics of multimedia say that it is a solution looking for a problem, but during the past few years it has delivered many useful applications, some of them in the financial sector.
Multimedia is now being used in training, point-of-information systems, communications and information storage and retrieval.
It can also enhance company reports and documentation; for instance, an insurance company claims assessor can examine diagrams, photographs, verbal notes and text on a desktop computer.
Others are using multimedia for building planning and maintenance; Andersen Consulting in the US is developing a database which contains video images showing the location of power cables, water pipes and telephone lines.
Market research company Inteco forecasts that the European multimedia market could be worth as much as £10bn by 1994.
Not surprisingly, the major computer, consumer electronics and telecommunications companies are hoping to grab a share.
As a result, much hype surrounds multimedia.
Elaine England, senior training analyst at Lloyds Bank says: ‘The worst thing you can do is fall in love with the gadgets and technology.’
Martin Sugden, communications director of Interactive Information Systems (IIS) adds: ‘The most important thing is not the technology, but what you can do with it.’
One of the most widely used multimedia systems in the financial sector is interactive video (IV), which uses a video disc player connected to a computer.
Companies such as Sony, Philips and Pioneer market a variety of IV systems; prices range from around £3,000-£5,000.
IV training packages cost around £1,000 to £4,000.
IV offers many advantages over conventional forms of training, such as computer-based training (CBT) and video.
Video tape is essentially a linear medium, but video discs can be explored through a variety of pathways.
This means that users can control the depth, pace and direction of their learning, which in turn can improve motivation.
Research suggests that IV can improve retention by as much as 40%.
Another benefit is that the use of moving video images and sound enables trainees to be presented with realistic situations.
There are hundreds of IV training packages, with the major suppliers being Premier, IIS and LaserMedia.
One of the best known packages is Account Ability,a guide to interpreting company accounts, produced by Price Waterhouse and Premier Productions (see ACCOUNTANCY , November 1988, p 162).
TSB is one company that has invested heavily in interactive video.
In 1991, the company moved from CBT to IV and bought 80 IV workstations and over 160 training packages.
The move surprised some who thought that IV was an ageing technology: ‘You need to be clear about the direction you and your customers want to go before investing in a system,’ says Neil Walker, TSB's senior training manager.
‘It's easy to opt for a system that's flavour of the month.
IV is a proven technology.’
The TSB's training courses include programs on leadership, customer care and presentation.
To make its investment cost effective, the TSB moves the IV systems around its 1,300 open learning centres — the TSB calls the IV workstations peripatetic learning centres.
Neil Walker says he is very pleased with how the system has been accepted, and so far, the IV workstations have been used by over 12,000 staff, amounting to 17,000 user hours.
The Bradford and Bingley Building Society is also using an IV package.
Called It's Their Home,the system has been produced by Convergent Communications.
It is being used in over 250 branches to provide staff with the skills to help customers facing financial problems, such as mortgage arrears.
The program enables users to analyse a model interview between a branch manager and a couple who have problems paying their mortgage.
Another module helps staff to counsel potential borrowers.
The Halifax Building Society uses IV to help its staff develop interpersonal skills in face to face and telephone interviews.
Royal Insurance has bought 75 IV workstations for its UK and Republic of Ireland branches and uses various programs, including Writing for Results,a guide to good business writing which has been developed by IIS.
National Westminster Bank recently concluded a pilot study using 18 IV point-of-information systems at 10 sites.
Customers used a touch screen to obtain information on mortgages, pensions and investments.
The pilot results were promising and showed that the POI systems were used an average of eight times an hour.
A growing number of multimedia systems are using CD-Roms, compact discs that store vast amounts of computer data.
A single CD-Rom can store 250,000 pages of typed text or thousands of images.
But a CD-Rom is more than just a giant data store; it provides a quick and easy way of finding information.
For example, one CD-Rom stores a year's supply of the Times and Sunday Times.
If a user wants to read all the news stories on say, Lloyd's insurance, he or she simply types in the name on a computer keyboard and a complete list of stories appears on the screen in seconds.
The user can then view items of interest and print out the most important ones.
PW has produced Researcher,a CD-Rom containing over 100,000 pages on auditing and accounting literature, including accountancy bulletins and financial regulations.
And software applications are increasingly available on CD-Rom.
The cost of CD-Rom drives begin at around £300, while disc prices range from around £50 to several thousands of pounds.
IBM markets a range of multimedia computers, while Microsoft and a consortium of companies have developed the Multimedia PC (MPC) standard, which converts a desktop computer into a multimedia machine.
Anyone with a suitably equipped IBM or compatible computer can convert it to an MPC by adding a sound card, CD-Rom drive and Microsoft's Windows 3.1 software (upgrade kit prices start from around £600).
Microsoft recently announced Video for Windows, which enables a desktop computer to display small video clips.
The company also markets Sound System, a £200 upgrade kit that allows users to speak to their computer.
Touche Ross is currently testing Sound System with the Excel 4 spreadsheet.
Users can make verbal annotations and even control the computer by voice commands, such as‘delete file’.
CD-Rom is an ideal system for data storage, but unlike IV, the discs cannot display full motion video.
And most training packages are still on IV.
That is why the Lloyds Bank open learning centres currently use a hybrid system consisting of an IV workstation and a CD-Rom-XA system.
The latter is an enhanced version of CD-Rom, with improved sound, graphics and video.
‘Our set-up enables us to use our existing materials and take advantage of emerging CD-Rom technologies,’ explains Elaine English.
‘It's a way of future proofing our investment in the existing technology.’
Compact Disc Interactive, or CD-I, has been developed by Philips, Sony and Panasonic.
It is known as a ‘plug and play’ system — a CD-I player simply plugs into a TV set (and, if desired, a stereo system) and is operated by a remote control handset.
Although a CD-I player is really a powerful computer, it has been designed to look and feel like a CD player or VCR.
This makes the format much friendlier to use than a desktop computer and keyboard.
CD-I players are relatively cheap; a basic machine costs £500, while a professional model with built-in floppy disk drive (which can be used to record the trainee's progress) sells for £899.
‘People have baulked at technology-based training because you have to pay a lot up front before you start getting the benefits of the system,’ says Stephen Weil, marketing manager of CD-I Training, ‘CD-I takes the hardware cost out of the equation.
People don't mind paying for good software because they can see the benefits of using it.’
CD-I Training packages cost £1,250–£3,450 and include generic programs on assertiveness and managerial skills.
In April, the company launches a CD-I version of Finance for Non-finance Managers,which includes units on balance sheets, profit and loss and cash flow forecasting.
The American microchip giant Intel has developed Digital Video Interactive (DVI) which enables a suitably equipped desktop computer to display full motion digital video.
The Swiss Bank Corporation uses 53 DVI systems for providing staff and customers with investment fund information.
The Dutch Institute for Banking and Stockbroking uses a DVI training program on savings and investments.
The trainee watches a video clip of a client needing savings advice, and can retrieve files and ask questions which are answered by the client.
The computer judges the trainee's advice and provides feedback.
Until recently, DVI microchips cost around £1,000, but Intel is now developing a cheaper version of DVI which uses software rather than chips.
Although multimedia is rapidly changing the way computers look and feel, it is in communications where it is likely to have the greatest impact.
The combination of multimedia systems and digital telephone systems like ISDN (see pp 54-57), which can simultaneously carry sound, text, video, data and graphics, will revolutionise desktop communications.
The buzz word is computer supported collaboration or CSC, which allows users to exchange various types of information from their workdesk.
CSC is much cheaper and more flexible than video conferencing, which requires special rooms and expensive phone lines.
A typical CSC workstation consists of a computer with a microphone and video camera.
This year, BT and IBM plan to market a £3,000 video phone card which fits into a PC.
Olivetti also plans to launch its Personal Communications Computer.
This will enable users to conduct live video conversations, send faxes and use a multimedia electronic mail service (with sound, pictures and text), and write messages or draw diagrams on an electronic white board.
Even with existing technologies applications are emerging in areas as diverse as shopfloor guidance, document filing and building planning and management.
So the increasingly widespread availability of ISDN and the relative low-cost of options like CSC and PCC will open the way for all manner of innovative applications in the future.
ABBEY NATIONAL GETS THE HABIT
In 1987, Abbey National's training programme utilised computer-based training and video tape.
During the first quarter of this year, the company will switch to CD-Rom-based systems at 1,000 of its sites.
Abbey National considered using IV, but decided to move to compact discs: ‘The problem was that we couldn't find an IV system that did everything we wanted,’ explains Julian Wakeley, manager for distance learning at Abbey National, ‘also, we didn't need full motion video.’
After running a CD-Rom pilot programme during 1989/90, Abbey National decided to invest in the format.
Mr Wakeley is enthusiastic about CD-Rom's potential: ‘It offers lots of advantages, it's cheap, safe and the discs can't be erased.
What's more, your training material is virus-free.
It's also an efficient distribution system.
We used to send floppy disks to 1,000 sites and there were lots of problems — people lost disks or couldn't find the work book.
A CD-Rom holds the equivalent of 1,000 floppies so you can put all your training programme on one disc.’
Abbey National does not use dedicated training workstations and the CD-Rom drives will be added to the company's existing Olivetti 386 PCs.
‘Dedicated machines are fine for some companies,’ explains Mr Wakeley, ‘but they take up floor space which could be used more profitably.
A dedicated machine can be an expensive luxury unless it's used regularly.’
Using existing machines also offers other benefits, he says.
‘It means that the introduction of any new technology is a seamless process: the training machine looks and operates in a familiar way.
If you're not careful you can spend hours training your staff to use a training system.’
This approach also offers economic benefits.
The cost of upgrading each workstation to CD-Rom is around £300, a figure that should be paid back in around three years.
‘We used to send out 35,000 floppy disks each year.
Using CD-Roms will save us around £120,000 a year and that doesn't include the added value that you get in terms of sound and pictures,’ says Mr Wakeley.
The company also saves costs by producing its CD-Roms inhouse.
Abbey National has its own CD-Rom pre-mastering system and sends the flnished disc to a pressing plant.
‘The advantage of having your own premastering system is that it's much cheaper and easier to correct mistakes at the early stage,’ explains Mr Wakeley.
‘The more preparation you can do, the cheaper the operation becomes.
It costs less than £2 to press a CD-Rom.
Pre-mastering system prices are plunging and you can buy one for well under £10,000.’
Abbey National also produces much of its training material inhouse which includes programs on company procedures, management systems, Securities and Investments Board regulations and test materials.
The feedback from staff has been very positive.
‘They like the idea of a one-stop shop for training material,’ says Mr Wakely.
Each of the 1,000 Abbey National sites will have only one or two training machines.
Mr Wakeley feels that it is not cost effective to use more machines: ‘You can't have all your staff training at the same time.
There are other duties to be carried out, for example, customers have to be served.’
Account Ability is one of the best known IV training packages
Ask half a dozen people to define multimedia and you are likely to get six different answers
Anyone with a suitably equipped IBM or compatible computer can convert it to a Multimedia PC
The combination of multimedia systems and digital telephone systems like ISDN will revolutionise desktop communications
OTHER MULTIMEDIA CONTENDERS
There are many more contenders in the multimedia market; some are available now; others will appear in the next year or two.
QuickTime.
This is produced by Apple Computer.
QuickTime enables desktop computers to display video in a small corner of the screen.
The picture quality isn't as good as that from an IV disc, but it is suitable for many business applications.
The advantage of QuickTime is that it is a software-based system; you don't need to add extra boards or cards to your desktop machine.
A number of CD-Rom producers are using QuickTime to add video clips to their discs.
You can also buy a QuickTime starter kit (£100) to produce your own multimedia material, although you will need extra equipment, such as a digitiser card and special software.
A version of QuickTime is also available for IBM and compatibles which use Windows software.
Contact: Freephone Apple.
Photo CD.
Developed by Kodak and Philips, Photo CD allows users to store up to 100 high quality photographic images on a CD and watch them on a TV set or computer screen.
Photo CD is ideal for putting pictures into computers and as a low cost, photographic database.
Kodak markets Photo CD players (prices start from £300) and a number of companies make CD-Rom drives that also play Photo CD discs.
Contact Kodak: 0442 61122.
Still Video.
This format uses an electronic camera that stores up to 50 still images on a tiny floppy disk.
The pictures are watched on a TV screen.
Canon says that Still Video is an ideal medium for multimedia presentations because users can mix photographs, text and graphics on a computer, record them on a still video disk and display them on a TV.
Still video camera prices start from £500.
Canon markets still video systems for IBM and compatible PCs and Apple computers.
Contact Canon: 081-459 1266.
Electronic Book.
Sony markets the Data Discman, a hand-held electronic book the size of a paperback and the weight of a bag of sugar.
Most units also have a small LCD screen.
Electronic Books use 8cm/3in CD-Roms that store around 100,000 pages of text.
Disc prices range from £25-£40.
The Electronic Book is designed as a portable information store and titles include travel discs, foreign language aids and restaurant guides.
Contact: Sony 0784 467000.
Amiga CDTV.
Developed by Commodore as a rival to CD-1, CDTV is now aimed at the educational/computer games market.
This is partly because relatively few businesses use Commodore computers.
Its best known business disc has been designed for Toyota's Japanese workers at the Derbyshire car plant.
Contact: Commodore 0628 770088.
In America, Tandy and Microsoft have launched the Video Information System (VIS)which uses Microsoft's Windows software.
VIS may reach Europe this year.
Also expected is a hand-held CD-Rom player developed by Apple and Toshiba.
These formats will be joined by others, including multimedia systems being developed by Apple and IBM.
A CD-Rom jukebox like Voyager (above) can store millions of pages of text and hundreds of thousands of images
HOTLINE TO THE FUTURE By the end of the century, the telephone will be just a telephone no longer— enter the personal communications centre
Lesley Meall
Although the telephone has become commonplace in most of our homes, and is essential to business, its principles are the same today as they were when Alexander Graham Bell invented it in 1876.
But while the telephone itself remains little more than an instrument for reproducing speech and other sounds at a distance, over the last decade we have seen dramatic growth in the availability and use of computers, modems and fax to transmit documentary and computerised information over the telephone network.
Its circuits now carry signals and data in a form that can be fed directly into processing equipment, enabling computers and other devices at remote points to communicate with each other.
In the last couple of years the number of connections for fax terminals alone has doubled, and is now around a million — and that's just in the UK.
As a result of this expansion, the similarly widespread growth of computer networks, and the ongoing increase in the use of telephones, the demand for lines continues to rise.
Indeed, it will soon be necessary to increase capacity by introducing a new numbering system: on Easter Sunday 1995 nearly every number in the UK will change — a ‘1’ will be inserted as the second digit in any number that starts with ‘0’.
The change will only apply to the fixed public switched telephone network existing cellular phones and the 0800 services will not be affected — but it will mean reprogramming systems from the simplest memory telephone to the most complex computer-integrated telephony network, and all of the digital exchanges that now cover most of Britian.
While advances in information technology have so far done little to change the telephone itself — give or take a few microchips and memories — it's easy to see that IT has had a dramatic affect on the underlying telecoms infrastructure, and the way we use it.
On the move
In its infancy the mobile phone was synonymous with that other eighties icon, the yuppie, but cellular usage is now at its highest in the construction industry, and large groups of the self-employed are becoming increasingly reliant on mobile communications.
Outside the US, the UK now has the highest number of cellular subscribers anywhere in the world, and by the year 2000 as many as 20% of the UK population are expected to be users.
What type of mobile phone they'll be using remains to be seen.
Choosing between the available options is already a potentially confusing and frustrating business (see panel: Mobile Options), and is about to become even more so.
The customer will soon be faced with a plethora of new services.
Away from analogue
At the moment, with the exception of Rabbit (see panel: Mobile Options), the services available to mobile phone users all have one thing in common.
Be they Cellnet or Vodafone they use analogue networks.
But the days of the analogue network may well be numbered.
During 1993 the UK will see the introduction of digital portable and mobile cellular networks.
Among other things, these networks will offer clearer connections and better sound quality, greater capacity and increased security — all calls made over Mercury Personal Communications' portable phone network, for example, will be digitally encrypted to make eavesdropping impossible — and extend the area covered to the Continent.
So, if you are fortunate (or clever) enough to be the proud possessor of an appropriate handset, you will soon be able to use it throughout Europe.
Digital telecommunication has much to recommend it over the analogue alternative, and the move away from analogue systems isn't restricted to the mobile networks.
Digital networks, in the form of ISDN (integrated services digital network) have been talked about for many years, and in mainly technical terms.
But most major countries have now digitised at least parts of their telephone networks, and international services are increasingly compatible.
So it is getting cheaper for carriers to connect their large customers via ISDN rather than leased lines or conventional analogue links.
In the UK, Mercury and BT both have ISDN offerings (see panel below).
BT has been spending £2bn a year on upgrading the country's telecommunications networks and exchanges from analogue to digital, and it can now offer dial-up end-to-end digital connections to over 90% of UK businesses and almost as many private households.
Now ISDN is a reality, the focus is moving away from the technology to its uses.
‘ISDN provides companies with the potential to extend client facilities and improve communications with other companies in a way otherwise only possible over established private networks', says Geraldine Morley, BT's ISDN marketing manager.
‘It offers clear business benefits.’
These include low-cost lines for data transfer and a cheaper alternative to packet switching, plus cheaper multimedia applications like videoconferencing and videotelephony.
In addition to facilities that will help ease the way for the increasing number of people using telecoms technologies to work from remote locations, ISDN will also bring us Group 4 fax.
One of the most exciting areas will be where computer packages and the information carried by ISDN's signalling facilities interact.
Where this involves a mix of ISDN and multimedia (see p 52), it will bring easy access to a combination of sound, text, video, data and graphics, and revolutionise desktop communications.
But even at the simplest level, the call line identification facility alone will not only improve communications and enhance the functionality of many office telephone systems, it will enable companies to offer a whole new range of personalised services (see ACCOUNTANCY , April 1992, pp 70-71).
Applications of special interest to accountants include voice annotated balance sheets and accounts, and remote auditing and stock taking.
The  possibilities of ISDN are enormous.
So much so that, in a recent US television interview, Apple's chief executive officer John Scully made a prediction that telecoms will dominate the next stage in the development of computing.
Mr Scully is probably right, and consequently not alone in his view of the future.
Unfortunately, despite recent reductions in the cost of ISDN connections (by both BT and Mercury), many potential users will still find the cost of adopting the relevent new technologies prohibitive.
Until the technology becomes cheaper and more widespread many potential applications areas may remain just that.
As Diana Gilbert, Ricoh's product manager for Group 4 fax wryly observes: ‘You can't expect the world to change overnight just because the technology is perfect’.
One application which will encourage the uptake of ISDN is videoconferencing.
Face to face
Videoconferencing has always been touted as a major use for ISDN.
But until very recently systems were generally aimed at the top end of the market, and the cost was high enough to make acquisition a major undertaking.
‘Over the last year and a half prices have tumbled quite dramatically,’ says Robert Ralphs, the product manager for videotelephony at Mercury.
‘Two years ago manufacturers were talking about at least £16,000 for a unit; now it's down to below £10,000.’
BT launched its low-cost (£7,500) VC7000 towards the end of 1992.
By comparison with other videoconferencing systems (which have been known to take over whole rooms) the surprisingly compact desktop VC7000 looks basic, but allows small groups of people to see each other and show documents and objects regardless of their location.
National Power was an early user, and the VC7000 is already in use in other major commercial and government establishments.
But the unit's low cost will ensure its future appeal within the small business community.
As Steve Maine, BT's director of visual and broadcast services says: ‘Traditionally, users of videoconferencing have been large corporations, but the VC7000 will enable smaller companies to reap the benefits of visual communication.’
BT describes the VC7000 as the lowest-cost videoconferencing unit in the world, and it does retail at a fraction of the price of many other systems: when GPT Communications Systems launched its new ‘Focus’ range of videoconferencing systems at the end of 1992, they cost upwards of £30,000.
Although the VC7000's £7,500 price tag will do a lot to increase the appeal of videoconferencing and videotelephony generally, it will still take huge reductions in price to give videotelephony truly widespread appeal.
In March BT will begin to market Europe's first international videophone for private users.
Manufactured by GEC-Marconi, it is portable and, unlike the digital videotelephony facilities currently on offer, the analogue Relate 2000 requires only a standard BT (or international equivalent) plug-in socket and mains electricity.
The picture quality isn't as good as the digital alternative, but the Relate 2000 costs significantly less: it will retail at the appealingly low price of £399 for one or £749 for a pair.
This will probably guarantee its widespread use by domestic and small business users.
A digital future
We live in an audio-visual age.
And thanks to television, we have become sophisticated viewers.
So, it's likely that the relatively low picture quality associated with analogue videophones will be an eventual source of frustration and disappointment for users.
But it would be foolish to dismiss it as nothing more than a gimmick.
It is more affordable and accessible than the digital alternatives, and despite its shortcomings it will do much to popularise the concept of videotelephony.
Analogue telecommunications networks and devices will become a thing of the past — eventually.
In the interim we will be faced with a bewildering array of options.
Domestic and business users will face some difficult choices, and there will probably be at least one battle resembling the Betamax vs VHS video debacle.
But we can be sure of one thing: before the end of the century we will see the telephone metamorphose into the mobile audio-visual communications centre it has long had the potential to become.
Advances in information technology have so far done little to change the telephone itself, but IT has had a dramatic affect on the underlying telecoms infrastructure, and the way we use it
Now ISDN is a reality the focus is moving away from the technology to its uses
1:MOBILE OPTIONS
Mobile phones are different things to different people.
At the most basic level, a cordless handset will use the same number as your standard fixed line, and will only operate within 100 yards of it.
In contrast, a truly mobile phone, like a car phone, can be used in most places because it is on one of the UK's cellular networks Cellnet or Vodafone.
There is even a hybrid of the two, the Rabbit system, launched in the UK during 1992 by Hutchison Telecom, one of the world's largest providers of mobile communications.
Rabbit can be used as a cordless phone in the home or office, and, via a digital technology called telepoint, will also function as a limited mobile — or portable — phone.
Mobile users can only use it to make outgoing calls, and must be near one of the 8,000-plus Rabbit base stations dotted across the country.
Despite these limitations, Rabbit can claim some advantages over other mobile phones currently available, especially when it comes to call quality and security, and international compatibility.
Hutchison has already launched a successful telepoint system in Hong Kong, and compatible systems exist in Germany, France, the Netherlands and Denmark, and telepoint systems are on trial in Italy, Belgium and Portugal.
Most people who use an analogue mobile phone have at some time been unhappy with the call quality, and an unfortunate few have experienced the unpleasant side effects of deliberate or accidental ‘eavesdropping’.
Digital signalling offers improvements in speech quality and very high levels of security.
At the moment, Rabbit's British-made GPT phone is the only digital portable phone widely available in the UK, and the telepoint network it uses is the nearest thing you can get to digital mobile telephony.
But this is about to change.
Later this year, Mercury will be launching PCN, its digital mobile phone service (see ACCOUNTANCY October 1990, pp 121-122), and competitive systems from Cellnet and Vodafone will be hot on its heels.
It's impossible to predict the eventual outcome of all of this competition, but the cellular operators will need to overcome some significant hurdles before British consumers (business and domestic) are entirely at ease with cellular phones analogue or digital.
At the moment the industry has an image problem.
Research indicates that customers are worried about call costs and do not trust the dealers from whom they currently buy their cellular phones.
In a recent survey, those asked to say which TV characters resembled their image of the cellular phone dealer nominated Del Boy from Only Fools and Horses , Arthur Daley from Minder and Dirty Den, late of Eastenders.
And a large number of cellular users consider themselves trapped by ‘unfair’ contracts that can't be changed without penalty.
A simple straightforward contract seems like a reasonable requirement, but it's a difficult one for service providers to meet.
Because, as the managing director of service provider Hutchison Telecom David Steadman admits: ‘Nearly three quarters of British business people haven't even heard the term’ service provider’.
But it's the service provider who actually bills them.’
There are only two network providers — Cellnet and Vodafone — and as their licences prevent them from dealing directly with end users, this role is fulfilled by the service providers.
These are independent companies who are responsible for providing customers with their mobile communications equipment and a range of services, and billing them for these products and services.
In the process of doing so, they bill the user for any Cellnet or Vodafone services that they use while making calls.
Service providers tend to specialise.
They may concentrate on car phones, or only offer short term rental facilities: British Airways, for example, offers mobile phones for hire and use within airports.
But the majority of service providers will also have appointed a group of dealers to sell and install equipment on their behalf.
To buy a phone you must go to a service provider, a dealer or one of the increasing number of retail stockists.
Selected branches of Comet, for example, can supply you with a Rabbit system plus a variety of Cellnet and Vodafone-based offerings.
But there are a lot of cowboys out there, and you cannot be too careful about whom you buy or rent your mobile system from.
Cellular usage is at its highest in the construction industry
2: ISDN
ISDN was designed in the mid-1970s as the telephone network of the future.
It can carry voice calls and transfer data or graphics on the same call, or it could carry a videophone call with a ‘reasonable’ quality picture.
International availability of lines is increasingly widespread, and in two years' time ISDN will become the standard business line offering from BT.
This will be an especially interesting time for accountants, as Andrew Baird, of specialist software company 4Sight Communications, explains.
Mr Baird is a chartered accountant who moved into the software business.
Among the applications he foresees are remote auditing, where accountants could get instant access to their clients' accounting systems via an on-line data link.
They would dial-up, go to whichever part of the system they need, and call off selected files, such as a list of debtors.
They could then analyse the data on their own computer: ‘Auditing remotely saves money and time, which is otherwise wasted by constantly going back and forth', he says.
Gerry Fletcher, of Comprador Communications, suggests voice-annotated balance sheets and accounts.
‘Imagine getting a client's accounts on your computer, with their voice explaining to you exactly what is going on and why.
You could look at the data, listen to the comments, then do some modelling yourself, add your own comments and then send it all back to them, on-line.’
Other accounting applications Baird and Fletcher suggest include year-end  reconciliations , electronic transfer of invoices, remote stock-taking using video terminals, and videoconferencing for discussions with senior management at a client.
Connecting a computer to ISDN is done via a terminal adaptor, which plugs into the computer on one side, and the ISDN phone socket on the other.
Alternatively, an internal ISDN card can be used for most desktop computers.
A major benefit of ISDN is that it is a dial-up service, just like the ordinary phone network.
So there is no need to pay expensive rental costs for dedicated lines which are only rarely needed — as on most corporate computer networks.
ISDN also provides high quality, fast transmission which can't be achieved using an ordinary modem connection the usual way to date to exchange computer data on an ad hoc basis.
ISDN technology has been tested since the mid-1980s, but it is only in the past 12 months that BT and its counterparts in other countries have had ISDN lines widely available.
BT and Mercury both offer competitive ISDN services, but despite dramatic price cuts during 1992, connections are anything but cheap.
BT offers two levels of service.
The basic service comprises two phone lines per connection.
The two can be used separately — only one line is needed for an ordinary conversation or data transfer — or they can be used together for applications that need a lot of line capacity, a videoconference call, for example.
The ‘primary rate’ ISDN provides a block of a minimum of 30 lines, and is mostly used by large firms which connect it to a telephone switchboard.
The lines can be used in groups of two or even four, to suit the application.
Mercury currently only offers a single level of service termed ‘primary rate’.
Both operators are currently battling it out by making special offers on their primary rate connection charges.
With a minimum of 15 lines per connection, BT's standard connection charges start at around £1,500 — ie £100 a line — plus an annual rental charge of £135 per line.
But from 1 January to 31 March the connection charge has been dropped to £25 a line, reducing the minimum charge to £375 plus rental.
Mercury's annual rental charge is £114 a year.
And although it usually charges £92 a line for connections (15 line minimum), it reduced its charges last year, and will be charging £26 a line until at least the end of February.
With these reductions BT and Mercury are hoping to make ISDN a viable alternative to an analogue business exchange line for the many small to medium sized companies who have previously found connection charges prohibitive.
Cost is naturally a key issue.
And, as Alan Spencer, an independent consultant specialising in ISDN, says, even the basic connection charge at its present level (£400) prevents many companies from installing ISDN.
‘I've got three phone lines, to convert one of them to ISDN costs me £400.
Am I going to do it?’
The connection charge for analogue lines was reduced under the Oftel review of BT's prices last July to £99.
Until recently, the patchy connections between the national ISDN services meant that international ISDN calls weren't practical.
However, international links are gradually being put in place by the phone companies.
ISDN services outside the UK are available in Australia, Belgium, France, Germany, Japan, Holland, Sweden, Switzerland, and the US, where the largest number of connections are in place.
Tim Duffy, European manager of US-based videoconferencing supplier Picturetel, believes that the links have now improved to the point where the service is acceptable to several European countries and the US: ‘Most products we sell today go on to ISDN.
That is different from one year ago’.
But international ISDN standards remain a problem area, especially in Europe.
Currently, all European networks operate to different technical standards.
In April 1989, a Memorandum of Understanding was signed by European carriers, which all agreed to install ISDN services to a common technical standard by 1 January 1993.
These standards have not been approved, and indeed, parts of the specification have not even been written.
The target date has now been moved to 1 January 1994.
Applications of special interest to accountants include voice annotated balance sheets and accounts, and remote auditing and stock taking
VIDEOTELEPHONY
If you buy the Relate 2000 you will only be able to use it to see the person you are calling if they are using a compatible model.
So although BT's pricing (£399) does cover single purchases, many aspiring users will need to acquire their Relate 2000's in pairs (£749).
Reciprocal arrangements exist for the sale of the Relate 2000 in the US, Japan, Singapore and Hong Kong, and other countries will follow shortly.
At the moment the only alternative to the Relate 2000 is the Videophone 2500, from the US giant AT&T.
But it is not yet available in the UK.
Because analogue videophones have to squash video and audio down telephone lines developed to carry just the latter, compression techniques are used to reduce the amount of information needed to create a video picture.
As yet, there is no agreed international standard for analogue videotelephony.
So the rivals have used incompatible technologies, and both aim to become the de facto standard.
EASTERN PROMISE Business telecommunications users in Eastern Europe can do pretty well what they want, provided they have the money
Alison Classe
Looking to economise on phone bills?
The ultimate answer used to be a move to the former East Germany, where some would-be subscribers had reportedly been waiting 23 years to have a telephone installed.
But it's too late now; there, as in most parts of what used to be the Eastern bloc, telecommunications are being upgraded post-haste.
In eastern Germany itself, subscribers are being linked via cellular or microwave radio to newly-installed digital networks, and similar patterns are emerging all over Eastern Europe.
These countries are recognising that a decent communications structure is a prerequisite for economic survival, and the western telecommunications companies, seeing Eastern Europe as a profitable market, are only too willing to lend a hand.
The result is that the countries are, in some respects, leapfrogging their more advanced neighbours.
Malcolm Duckett is director of European marketing with telecommunications equipment specialists Telematics International.
He says: ‘The initial expectation was that Eastern Europe would replay the last 30 years of telecommunications history in Western Europe, buying miles of copper cable and so on.
But in fact none of that is happening: they're going straight to the latest technology, and as a result are able to roll things out very quickly.’
BIS Strategic Decisions' group manager for the Central and Eastern Europe Continuous Information Service, Lynn Van Housen, agrees.
‘Things are starting to get much easier for the business person, although there's still a big difference between setting up in Budapest, or Warsaw, or Prague, compared with somewhere in the country, where you may still have a long wait for a telephone connection.’
She explains: ‘One of the first things that all these countries are doing — and we're just starting to see the benefits of this — is to install a digital overlay network linking key cities.’
Digital overlay networks (DONs) are an emergency approach to upgrading business telecommunications.
In recent years, telephone companies in Western Europe have been investing fabulous sums in replacing their old, analogue networks with digital ones.
Their counterparts in communist countries didn't have the resources, know-how or motivation to do so.
DONs can be a fast way of establishing links between major conurbations, often by means of fibre optics.
They may also be set up to carry international traffic, or for the use of particular organisations.
For instance, the Polish National Bank has a DON linking branches in around 20 major centres.
DONs offer the benefits of high-capacity digital communications, but can be accessed, if required, via existing analogue links.
The downside is that DONs, like other upgrades to the telecommunications infrastructure, are expensive, and these countries are not exactly cash-rich.
In virtually all cases the work is being done as joint ventures between eastern and western telecommunications companies; the World Bank is providing funding for some projects.
‘Once this backbone is in place, there will at last be capacity to link people into it.
And the target is going to be business people, whether local or foreign,’ says Ms Van Housen.
DONs are mainly for big cities, and those are not an ideal locale for every enterprise; manufacturing plants, for example, are clearly better sited where land is more plentiful.
To get round the problems of securing a satisfactory comms link out in the sticks, multinationals are acquiring VSAT links, provided by the local PTT or anyone else that can obtain licensing.
VSAT — very small aperture terminal — is a technology that enables satellite communications to be set up relatively cheaply and easily.
It can be used to transmit computer data to and from sites where conventional lines are not available.
More recent VSAT technology can also carry voice traffic, ie phone calls.
VSAT can use satellite antennae not much bigger than TV dishes and just as easy to install.
Mr Duckett says: ‘However poor the local infrastructure, with VSAT you can lay in the communications by literally packaging up the dish, putting it on a lorry and sending it to the site.
Then you just point it in the right direction, switch on, and it's done.’
For the large user, then, private networks, often involving satellite links, can offer a way round any deficiencies of the local telephone system.
Smaller companies that can't afford these luxuries can sometimes arrange to use spare capacity on the network of a nearby multinational.
Excellent though all this new technology sounds, no-one is pretending that the problems of the public telephone services in Eastern bloc countries have already been solved.
There is some way to go: in fact, BIS Strategic Decisions has estimated that $50bn plus will be invested in Eastern European telecommunications over the next decade — and that estimate excludes the former Soviet Union.
In the light of all this, the businessperson visiting Eastern Europe may approach the subject of phone-calls with some trepidation.
But in fact, he or she may well be in a privileged position.
‘Often, making a phone-call from a hotel is the easiest thing to do,’ says Ms Van Housen.
‘If you stay in the Marriott in Warsaw, for instance, you've got perfect communications.
There was a special switch put in by AT&T connecting high-end hotels and similar establishments, which pay a premium for the quality and capacity.’
The British Consulate in St Petersburg is currently located in the Grand Hotel Europe.
So the business traveller will have few worries — at least about international calls.
If you need to contact a local number, you will be subject to the same conditions as everyone else.
This, in fact, is becoming a general rule, according to Ms Van Housen: ‘As long as you want to communicate internationally there are ways to do it.
It's when you move from that to communicating domestically that you may be in trouble.’
Help is at hand.
Western PTTs are setting up in Eastern Europe, often initially to support their multinational clients' operations there.
So western business people contemplating putting a foot in Eastern waters can often tap a ready source of advice in their local communications companies — one that speaks their own language, to boot.
‘Our directive is to support multinational companies moving into Eastern Europe,’ says Andrew Gibson, BT's director for Eastern Europe, whose group welcomes enquiries from accountancy firms thinking of setting up there, or whose clients intend to do so.
It's very hard to generalise about this part of the world, says Mr Gibson.
‘Conditions depend on the exact location, and the infrastructure in the country concerned.
But since we are working very closely with the local telecommunications companies in those countries, we are in a good position to help.’
Some of BT's activities in the Eastern bloc countries centre on consultancy or training, but it's also able to provide some telecommunication links on its own account.
Recently, it installed an earth station for satellite communications in St Petersburg, and it's also establishing a joint venture there for the provision of international telecommunications services.
BT is also extending its Global Data Networking service (a managed data network) throughout Eastern Europe.
For major multinationals, BT can project-manage the implementation of a communications network, using both its own facilities and those of local telecoms providers.
It recently undertook such a project for a major oil company which was setting up shop in Moscow.
However difficult the local conditions, if you can afford it BT says it can almost always arrange a satellite link or other high-tech solution.
Smaller companies that are just experiencing difficulties getting a phone line are not going to want to pay that kind of money, but it may still be worth their while to get in touch with BT, given its extensive knowledge of and contacts within the former Eastern bloc.
Mr Gibson says: ‘What we can always do is listen to the problem and see if we can work out a solution.’
With links via cellular or microwave radio to newly-installed digital networks some countries are leapfrogging their more advanced neighbours
Calling St Petersburg is almost as easy as calling St Albans
WHAT'S NEW IN ACCOUNTING SYSTEMS
IBM '93
The largest IBM user exhibition and seminar event in the world will take place at the NEC, Birmingham from 2-5 March.
Phone 071-404 4844.
Financial software update
Datafile: Datafile Compact, Datafile Professional and Datafile Premier have joined Datafile Diamond (see ACCOUNTANCY , June 1991, p 100) in the Datafile Software range.
Datafile Compact (from £350) is aimed at the first-time/small business user, Professional (from £250 per module) is for the small-to-medium sized user, while the most powerful offering in the range, Premier (from £450 per module) is a complete management information system and includes its own applications generator.
The products all use an ‘open’ database to store information, so there is no need for conversion work when upgrading — users can move from one Datafile product to another, taking their database files with them.
For further details phone 051-709 0929.
Elite:Kewill-Omicron has updated the nominal ledger for its Elite package.
New features include the provision of analysis codes, apportionment, improved validation, better enquiry facilities, multiple budgets and an increased number of reports.
For further details phone 0932 248328.
Oracle:Release 9 of Oracle Applications features enhanced user financial reporting facilities for human resources, manufacturing and financial applications.
Oracle Alert is a strategic exception reporting tool that continuously monitors the financial database.
Electronic mail messages are sent to the terminals of relevant users, telling them when exceptional events occur.
Oracle Business Manager integrates Oracle Applications with PC ‘tools of the trade’ running under Microsoft Windows.
For further details phone 0344 860066.
Comet:Siemens Nixdorf has announced a new Eurotax module for users of its Comet financial management and accounting software.
It will enable organisations to conform fully with the EC directives on cross-border VAT payment, and comply with the resulting VAT payment and reporting requirements.
For further details phone 0344 862222.
Lawson:Ernst & Young is the first major accountancy firm to become an authorised implementor of Lawson Software's financial and distribution applications.
The firm will work independently with clients on the development and introduction of systems based on Lawson Software Products.
For further details phone Lawson on 0932 570600 or Vim Anand at Ernst and Young on 071-931 1882.
Software Kitemark
BSI Quality Assurance, the certification division of the British Standards Institution, has developed a new BSI Kitemark scheme for accounting software, in association with the Institute and KPMG Management Consulting.
The Kitemark on a product will indicate that it has not only been made to a published specification, but that it has been independently tested by BSI as well.
The scheme is for accounting software supporting general ledger, accounts payable and accounts receivable functions, and there are plans to extend it to cover payroll packages.
health
KEEP AWAY FROM THE EDGE Anyone who has just missed a bus is experiencing stress, but will get over it quickly.
Other kinds, though, can seriously damage your health
Dr Trisha Greenhalgh
Poor old Socks.
Bill Clinton's cat is suffering from stress, and a team of feline psychiatrists has been commissioned to try to alleviate the anxiety neurosis of America's most photographed pet.
Unsurprisingly, Socks was fine until his owner's presidential victory exposed him to the unwelcome attention of the world's media and turned his little world upside down.
‘Stress’ has no precise scientific meaning.
It is a term used by doctors, psychologists and — increasingly — employers to describe the tension arising from the interaction of an individual with his or her environment.
Certain people (and presumably certain cats) are more susceptible to stress than others, but given the right external environment, even the most phlegmatic individual would eventually succumb.
Until recently, most stress was attributed to life crises such as divorce, bereavement, or redundancy.
In the 1960s, Holmes and Rahe developed the Social Readjustment Rating Scale by asking 400 healthy people to rank 42 major life events according to the amount of readjustment each requires.
The scale gives life events a numerical score so you can tot up your own personal stress rating.
At one time, this rating was credited with almost as much scientific objectivity as a person's blood group, but now its use is generally limited to self-diagnosis questionnaires in Sunday supplements.
What Holmes and Rahe failed to recognise is that major life events are not what stress most of us most of the time.
Anyone who has torn round the house in search of a lost shoe while trying to get the kids to school will sympathise with the camel that collapsed under the weight of one more straw.
There is now a ‘hassles and uplifts’ scale with which ambitious social psychologists try to quantify everything from the down value of a lost shoe to the up value of a birthday card from an old friend.
In fact, it's probably not worth being all that scientific about it.
Try taking a holiday (I mean a real holiday; don't toss the mobile phone and a few unfinished reports into the suitcase with your flip-flops) and see if you feel better away from it all.
If you start getting twitchy towards the end, and develop a migraine the day you get back, that's probably as good an indicator as any that your stress level is affecting your health.
You would be unwise to ignore the warning signs.
Physical diseases associated with stress include high blood pressure, heart disease, stroke, migraine, peptic ulcer, eczema, psoriasis, and infertility, as well as all the alcohol- and smoking-related conditions.
Diabetes is not caused by stress, but stress can throw established diabetes out of control.
There is also evidence (albeit controversial) that stress makes some cancers progress more rapidly.
Stress-induced mental problems can be abrupt and dramatic; they include suicide attempts, irrational or violent behaviour, and the full-blown ‘nervous breakdown’ in which a person's thoughts and behaviour become sufficiently deranged to merit admission to a psychiatric hospital.
More usually, however, the mental effects of stress are subtle and insidious.
The commonest stress symptom of all is probably tiredness, which (in contrast to physical fatigue) is usually present on waking and does not get worse as the day goes on.
Other symptoms include chest pain (commonly left-sided, dull or aching, and unrelated to the degree of physical exertion; genuine heart pains are usually central, cramp-like, and brought on by exercise), headaches (particularly ‘tension headache’— a band-like pain around the head and back of the neck which begins a few seconds after waking and lasts all day, often accompanied by feelings of depression or despair), dizziness or light-headedness (which comes on when you are sitting still and never heralds a full-blown faint), tingling in the fingers or around the mouth (signifying panic-induced overbreathing), and a heightened awareness of bodily processes (such as blood rushing through your ears, a rumbling tummy, or the thumping of your heart inside your chest).
The best way to alleviate stress is to remove the stressor.
Don't overdo it though — the flipside of stress is boredom, stagnation and low self-esteem.
And don't just target the obvious bugbears (remember, ‘positive’ things like money, possessions, and opportunity can be stressful in excess).
However, if you find yourself in Socks' predicament, with little or no influence over your major stressors, here's my five-point psychological damage-limitation plan:
Stress-reduction exercises (the thousand and one forms of meditation, relaxation, and mental diversion) are indisputably valuable, though there is probably little to choose between the different methods apart from their cost.
Time management can reduce stress considerably.
Prioritise your tasks; leave for meetings in good time; remember the four Ds (do it, delegate it, decide when you're going to do it, or destroy it).
Worries are like home videos — they are much more stressful if you use the freeze-frame.
If you must worry, pursue your fears through to their logical conclusion.
Leisure time is not a perk.
Take all the coffee breaks, lunch hours, weekends and holidays that are owed to you.
Some enlightened companies now penalise people who don't.
Finally, be assertive.
Say no.
Ignore the phone.
Throw things in the bin.
If something would make your life easier, ask for it.
If someone empties their in-tray into yours, protest.
Well, Socks, I hope this helps.
And when you've finished with this article, pass it up the line.
Stressed out?
First, try a holiday
negotiating skills
TALKING YOUR WAY TO SUCCESS Good negotiating means that everyone comes away feeling they have won.
Listening, watching and keeping quiet are all important skills to develop
Jane Allan
How do they feel, those Acas teams, as they sit down to sort out yet another union/management dispute?
Weary, been-there-before — or is it a challenge?
And what does it matter to us, ordinary businesspeople, who have day to day jobs to do which certainly do not involve make or break run-ins with unions?
And what about those businesspeople who are trying to get a better deal for the new photocopier, settle a departmental dispute, win a new client, bring the audit fees down?
Are they about to waste time they haven't got, bound to lose or is it a challenge to them?
And does it really matter?
Well, you know it does, so what are you going to do about it?
Negotiation is at the heart of all big business deals and even the little ones too.
There's a simple rule — win:win.
Which means that both parties to the negotiation must feel that the outcome is good for them.
No one should feel a loser in any way.
Win: win is easily said, not so easily believed.
But if you don't achieve win:win, you've lost.
Maybe not today, but you've lost at some stage in the future when you least need to lose.
Learn to listen
All negotiators need to wear eight different hats.
Psychologist: able to understand the moods and read the minds of your counterparts, willing to make them feel good and capable of giving them what they want.
In other words a good listener.
MI5 agent: able to read your counterparts' innermost thoughts and know their hidden agenda.
Or, in other words, a good listener.
Skilled interrogator: able to extract from your counterparts all they know, especially that which they don't want you to know.
A good listener who knows the value of silence.
Thespian: able to play any role the counterparts need, and yet to keep your own feelings hidden.
A listener and a watcher.
Agony aunt: able to listen with sincerity to all the moans and groans, confidences and worries of your counterparts.
A really good listener who has infinite patience.
Teacher: able to show your counterparts the range of possibilities and the no go areas of life.
A listener who, when speaking, uses what he or she has heard.
Diplomat: able to say no without saying no; not able to say yes until it's certain; very good at saying maybe and keeping the peace.
Another good listener.
Comedian: able to laugh at the tension and blow it away.
Able to listen and stay calm.
I wonder if you have noticed a common thread here: listening.
To listen to someone is the greatest compliment you can pay.
Why?
Because it so rarely happens that we all treasure it when it does.
But listening does more than that, it gives you a chance to learn and to get things into context.
Which is why it always surprises me when people turn out to be such bad listeners.
The next time you are in a meeting, or even on a crowded train or at a social gathering watch what people do.
They don't wait in calm silence while someone else speaks.
No; they fidget, touch their hands to their mouths, make interrupt gestures and can hardly wait for that momentary pause which will give them a chance to get a word in edgeways.
And when the second person starts to speak, the first person goes through the same performance until there is a chance to interrupt and say: ‘To get back to what I was saying…’ or ‘This only goes to prove my point…’
These people are not listening: they are waiting to speak.
Quiz them and they won't be able to tell you what was said, but they will know what they intend to say.
Or consider the meeting to agree the audit fee, when the auditor can hardly wait to get his point across.
He taps his pencil up and down as he waits for the finance director to finish.
He's not listening, he's just getting impatient while he waits.
This auditor is about to lose any advantage he might have.
Some common misconceptions
Let me blow out of the water some of the common misconceptions about negotiations.
In negotiation, the person who is talking is in control — wrong!
The listeners are always in control because their counterparts will run out of things to say given time.
And that is the moment of weakness in a negotiation.
When both parties cease to speak you have hit deadlock — wrong!
People don't like silence, they feel a need to fill it and in filling a silence often say things they regret.
When a proposal or statement is followed by a period of silence, the person who breaks the silence loses — wrong!
The winner says, ‘I take your silence to mean that you are in agreement with me’.
So that's the first rule of good negotiating: learn to master the art of listening and to feel at home with silence.
If you are not sure you can cope, take an oven timer, turn it round to half a minute and wait for the bell to ring.
It will feel like an eternity, but you will have learned to handle silence for half a minute.
You need to learn to handle it for at least three minutes if you are to be any good at negotiations.
It will come, with practice.
Absorb and store information
Having grasped the use of silence you now have to quieten your own brain, stop it muttering away to itself about all the things you need to do and may forget, stop it reacting and getting on its high horse when all it needs to do is to absorb information and store it for future reference.
Here's how you do it.
Take a sheet of paper before going in to any negotiation and empty your mind onto the sheet of paper.
Write down all that is in your head buzzing around.
Now it's quite safe, you will not forget it and your brain is ready to receive information.
Next, use your ears to hear and your eyes to see: does the body language match the words or is there a hidden meaning?
Now apply the logic you are so good at: what are these people saying, why, how are they saying it?
Finally, write down the gist of what you hear; this stops you interrupting and means you don't have to rely on that useless thing, memory.
And this is how you write your notes.
Take a clean sheet of paper and use only the left hand side.
Write down only the nouns that you hear.
This means there will be time to get everything down but that your brain will have to work at full speed and concentration to analyse all the words.
While your brain is doing that it will be storing the words so that when you look at your sheet of nouns you will recall what was said for some while after it was actually said.
Of course it's tiring, but then what worthwhile activity isn't?
Human failings
Let us look at the problems every negotiator has to overcome.
Resistance to change.
You must have noticed how most people see change as a threat, something to deny.
It's the negotiator's job to make change seem a challenge.
A tendency to think one's own thoughts in preference to listening.
Wishful hearing.
The ability to hear what you hoped you'd hear rather than what the other person is saying.
Check and recheck: summarise and get confirmation of what you think you heard.
Making wrong assumptions.
Ask rather than make assumptions.
Those who never ask, never get.
Habitual secretiveness.
If you use secret gestures, such as hiding your papers or holding them to you, people will assume you have something to hide: use open ones and they will not try to read your notes or see your papers.
Taking things personally.
‘No’ doesn't mean ‘I hate you and wish you were dead and as a personal vendetta I refuse to let you have what you want', it simply means ‘no’.
Everyone has the right to say no, even your subordinate, so don't take it personally.
It is very unlikely it was intended that way.
The common thread running through the problems you have to overcome is human failings.
Set one machine to talk to another and they will strike a deal without any personal upsets or problems; humans, on the other hand, will show human failings.
Which means you have to come to terms with your own self.
Analysing yourself
What kind of person are you?
Hasty, critical, always in a rush, no time to prepare for the meeting?
Well, you may win, but your counterparts will think they've lost and so in the long run will you.
Slow down.
Do your homework.
Take time — haste only makes waste.
A ‘nice guy’ who hates to hurt people's feelings?
Perhaps you have noticed that they don't seem to feel the same way about you.
Or are you taking it all a little too personally?
You need to be more direct in negotiations.
Say what you want, what you think and how you feel.
Stick to nice neutral facts and make sure they come over clearly.
No one will take offence and you might secure win: win.
Oh, and I don't suppose you're any good at handling time either.
Time is a powerful negotiation tool, use it wisely, which means stay in control and don't waste time.
Solid, rock like, you don't move easily and you take things slowly but surely.
These are good characteristics, but you need to loosen up a little.
Look for the more creative solution — the tried and true don't always bring the best results.
Careful, detail-minded, you check everything at least once and probably twice.
You may not have noticed, but you cause a lot of conflict.
Although many accountants are like you, other people are not and they see you as procrastinating, irritating and time wasting.
Do not lose your thoroughness but try to be more timely.
Stand back from time to time and take a look at the big picture.
Try to use policies as guidelines, not hard and fast rules.
Checklists
At last here it is: the handy checklist.
All good negotiators have a checklist, something that makes sure they cover all the points in the best possible way.
This should be yours:
Define the problem.
This means you will have to focus your mind in two ways: the way you see the problem and the way your counterparts see it.
You must not lose your grip on reality, but you must think creatively.
This takes practice and time.
Try sitting the other side of your desk; it may sound crazy but it shows you the world from another angle.
First, you will want to define the problem for yourself, but later it is equally essential to define the problem at the actual negotiation — we might as well check that we are both talking about the same problem!
Open up to ideas.
You will need an open mind if you are to achieve win:win.
Try to prompt your mind into action with word cards.
These cards are plain 3in * 3in cards with one word on each.
Nouns are best.
Take the cards in turn and try to think them into the matter for negotiation.
For example, one card may carry the word BEAR.
Now try the following: bear with me — it'll make you take time; give him a bear hug — be nice to your counterpart; I can't bear it — you are taking this personally, stop.
This is an attempt to loosen up your mind and let it accept alternative ideas.
Of course, you'll want to keep your cards to yourself, but the free-ranging mind that results will go with you into the negotiation.
The best solutions are creative ones.
Identify the best solutions.
Note the plural.
If there is more than one answer, it will be easier to find one that is acceptable to both parties.
This is the time when your grasp on logic comes to the fore.
Consider all your resources — wisely, not optimistically.
Weigh up the alternatives as carefully as you can and draw logical conclusions.
The best way is to make a chart of each proposed solution and to look at the gains, losses and likely outcome for each.
Do it alone on a sheet of paper before the negotiation, or do it together on a flip chart or white board during the negotiation.
But whatever you do, do it and be seen to do it.
Transform your ideas into action.
It can never be win:win if the suggested solution never takes place.
So you need to write an implementation schedule, together.
You both need to follow up and follow through the plan you agreed upon.
What we are aiming for is commitment from both teams to the negotiation.
What I see as success in a negotiation is:
The outcome meets both parties' interests.
It is seen to be fair.
It was arrived at with efficient use of time.
Neither party feels at a disadvantage.
The solution will be implemented and it will last.
You now feel enhanced respect for your counterparts and are willing to work with them again.
So let me leave you with a few wise words.
What you don't ask for you don't get: always remember to ask for what you want.
Never slam a door in temper, you may need to come back through it in the future: kick yourself instead.
It's always better to sleep on something first rather than regret the outcome afterwards.
And finally, remember you have to live with yourself for the rest of your life: you only have to put up with your counterpart for a short time.
Negotiation is at the heart of all big business deals and even the little ones too.
There's a simple rule — win:win
‘No’ doesn't mean ‘I hate you and wish you were dead and as a personal vendetta I refuse to let you have what you want', it simply means ‘no’
Good negotiators also need to learn to master the art of listening — it's the greatest compliment you can pay
women in accountancy
LYNDA CORAL Planning for the pregnant pause
Although employment protection provisions have been in place for 18 years now, all too often reports of unfair dismissal cases are variations on the same theme: companies trying to get rid of pregnant employees in an effort to avoid extra expense and disruption to the working routine.
So it is particularly refreshing to come across one company that not only recruited its company secretary and main board director when she was four months pregnant, but also waited for almost a year for her to join full time.
‘They all knew I was pregnant, but it never seemed to be something they took into consideration,’ Lynda Coral recalls.
‘Right from the beginning my fellow directors have regarded me as part of the team and have been tremendously supportive.’
The job offer, however, was ‘a bolt from the blue', she says.
At the time, she was working for Stoy Hayward as a senior audit manager and was aiming to become the firm's first woman partner — an ambition she had harboured since the day she joined the firm as a trainee accountant in 1982.
‘I was being groomed for the role.
About a year before I left it was all discussed when I would be made a partner along with one or two other people who were being brought through.
And that had always been my intention.’
She was also handling an interesting portfolio including two public companies, one of which was a small USM quoted property investment company, Capital and Regional Properties, run by Martin Barber, Xavier Pullen and Roger Boy-land, all of whom had been in the property business together for 20 years.
C&R was ‘definitely my favourite client — no question about that’.
As an assistant audit manager, she worked on the accounting and reporting side during the USM placing in December 1986, and was involved in setting up the consolidation of C&R's US interests.
‘There is very much an emphasis on teamwork in the company, and that extends right through to the professional advisers.
After the placing, for example, they threw a huge party for the professional advisers downstairs at a local Chinese restaurant, and in early 1987, almost as a thank-you, they took the audit manager and me out to Chicago to meet the team there.
It was the first audit as a public company, so it was relevant to meet the auditors but not exactly essential!’
Shortly afterwards, Lynda was promoted to senior manager.
So in early 1988, with her career seemingly mapped out ahead of her, and newly pregnant, she was pretty contented.
‘In about April, C&R's finance director came to Stoy's for a meeting.
Roger suddenly launched into this discussion about how they'd identified the need for someone to join the team with a view to becoming a main board member; this person would effectively release him from a lot of the day-to-day public company responsibilities and the accounting, reporting and auditing areas, so that he could focus on being part of the entrepreneurial team, organising financing and liaising with the City.
He offered me the job.
‘At no time did any of them mention my pregnancy nor indeed question whether I would be coming back after maternity leave.
They never showed any sign of having doubts that I was going to give the total commitment required to be a full time board member.
It really did not seem to be a problem.’
Lynda says that she did think long and hard about changing careers — not least about the fact that as a Stoy's partner she could soon be drawing a six figure profit share, compared to the substantially lower salary she would get at C&R.
What decided her in the end was that the new job specification covered much of the work she had already been doing at Stoy's for C&R and she was loth to let it go.
‘I didn't think I could face the idea of someone else having the job,’ she laughs, ‘but it was also a great opportunity for me.’
Nor has she regretted the move: the day-to-day involvement is much more enjoyable than the ‘passive, almost backward-looking role in audit’.
Her first child, David, was born in January 1989.
Three months later she joined C&R on a full-time basis, although throughout her maternity leave she had been attending meetings and helping out on special project work.
Her fellow directors' supportive attitude has continued.
‘When I told Martin that I was 10 weeks' pregnant with my second child, he enjoyed telling people how clever I was because I'd arranged it between the interims and the final results!’
In fact, plans to slow down before going on maternity leave went out of the window when C&R became involved in its most significant transaction to date — the rescue and restructuring of another quoted property company.
This inevitably demanded long hours and late nights.
‘I remember a meeting with our corporate advisers in the City, 20 of us sitting round this huge boardroom table.
At around midnight, the chairman used my pregnancy — I was huge by then — as an excuse to break up the meeting: he said that even if no one else was tired, he thought we ought to disperse so that I could get my rest!
‘As a result of the transaction, our accounts came out later than anticipated.
So we held our agm about two weeks before the baby was due.
I'm the company secretary, so it was essential that I was there and, as our timetables kept being shifted, I could see Martin looking at me as if to say is she going to make it?
It did cause a lot of amusement.’
With positive support from her colleagues, Lynda has been able to successfully combine a career with bringing up a family.
But that support is unfortunately all too rare — she is disappointed, for example, at the lack of women at the same level as herself.
‘When I was at university, doing my professional training or in the early years of practice, I always worked with women women solicitors, women bankers and so on.
I find it disappointing now that when I go to a completion meeting, I am often the only woman there.
We get involved in joint ventures with other parties and again I am usually the only woman there.
That is a real shame.
‘I think it is very important to encourage younger women to see that it is possible to combine a career with having a family, that you don't miss out on your children — my son wakes up every Saturday so excited that it's the weekend, not because he doesn't have a lovely time during the week, but because there's nothing for him quite like his parents.’
Lynda and family: Enjoying the weekend together
finance & investment
FINANCIAL DATABASES
Blay's launches computerised guides
Blay's Guides, the financial information publishing company, has launched a new range of databases to help financial advisers offer their clients a wider range of advice.
Each of the five available databases — Regional Finance, Enterprise, Venture Capital, Factoring, and Commercial Mortgages — run on IBM compatible PCs, provided they operate on MS DOS 3.1 (or above) and have at least 5 megabytes of free disk space.
The database packages themselves, available on 5.25 or 3.5 inch disks, are simple to use and do not require staff training.
Any information the client is interested in can be printed off at any stage during the search.
Commercial Mortgage, which will eventually replace its well-known looseleaf counterpart, is updated weekly.
Intended to help prospective property purchasers find a suitable mortgage, it covers over 70 lenders, each with an average of eight schemes.
All are accessible via a range of criteria, including property involved, borrower status and loan amount required.
The database then brings an ascending list of basic percentage maximum loans to the screen, each of which can be viewed in more detail.
It also details property development finance sources.
Venture Capital, which is updated every quarter, covers over 170 companies and 230 funds.
It provides information such as contact names, addresses and phone numbers, the history of each company, minimum and maximum investments, and industry and geographical sectors.
Regional Finance, which will receive at least six updates a year, covers hundreds of grant and loan schemes from a range of public and private organisations, as well as alternative sources such as freeports, science parks and tourist boards.
Factoring, which is updated every half year, provides an analysis of the industry; a brief historical guide; details of all major factoring companies; the main institutions and regulatory bodies; and a checklist for those considering factoring.
Finally, the Enterprise database, updated every quarter, covers over 100 subjects of interest to a prospective small businessman.
It is designed as a ‘one-stop’ reference source, and topics include sector grants, setting up a business, premises, marketing, health and safety, licensing, redundancy payments and import and export.
Prices range between £145 a year (plus VAT) for the factoring database to £395 per year (plus VAT) for the regional finance database.
For details of introductory prices and multiple subscription discounts, contact Blay's Guides Ltd, Blay's House, Chalfont St Peter, Buckinghamshire SL9 9EW (phone 0753 880482).
UNIT TRUSTS
Retirement packages
Knight Williams, a retirement income specialist, has designed four unit trusts to meet the needs of those in or approaching retirement.
The new products aim to combine the tax advantages of unit trusts with the simplicity and flexibility of investment bonds.
The trusts are: Global Income & Growth Portfolio to provide income and capital growth; High Income Portfolio to give a high and rising income while maintaining capital value; Investment Trust Portfolio to achieve capital growth from a wide selection of investment trusts; and Continuous Income & Growth Portfolio, which seeks to minimise the risk.
Knight Williams is responsible for the trusts' overall investment strategy, while specialist fund managers (Mercury, Schroder, Barings, James Capel, GT, Perpetual, SGTR and Whittingale) are in charge of day-to-day management.
There is free switching between funds and to a Knight Williams managed bond should tax circumstances change.
The minimum investment is £500.
Charges are 2 ½%; management fee — this covers free tax reporting at the year end and quarterly valuation and investment reviews — and 6% as a front end charge.
For more information, ring 071-408 1138.
INVESTMENT TRUSTS
NatWest Securities bullish
NatWest Securities recommends that investors with underweight positions look for opportunities to buy marketable investment trusts with overseas weightings.
The brokers estimate a potential rise of 16.5% in trust sector assets to end December 1993, which implies asset outperformance of 7.9% relative to the FT-Actuaries All Share Index.
If discounts remain at around 14.5%, then asset outperformance will translate directly into price outperformance.
The assumptions are based on an end 1993 FTSE 100 level of 3,000 at best and a positive stance on the US dollar.
No credit is given for trusts' abilities to enhance returns through gearing.
SMALLER COMPANIES
A better year for thinking small
Investors, especially the big institutions, have started to search for value outside the top 100 UK stocks.
According to Credit Suisse Asset Management, smaller company shares could do well in 1993.
After previous recessions, smaller companies have recovered strongly, and 1993 should see some pick up in economic activity in the UK.
In the US, where growth is more advanced after the recession there, smaller company shares have performed strongly.
‘A major argument in favour of smaller companies is their potential to grow faster than large firms,’ declares Credit Suisse.
However, investing directly in smaller companies can be risky because of their volatility, the difficulty of dealings, and the frequent wide spreads between the buying and selling prices of the shares.
Credit Suisse recommends a specialised unit or investment trust as a much better way for the average investor to gain exposure to this sector of the market.
Buckmaster Smaller Companies unit trust, which is managed by a subsidiary of Credit Suisse called Buckmaster Management, is cited for its excellent long-term performance record.
INSURANCE
MAPIC issues claim warning
In its report and accounts for the year ended 30 June 1992, the Mutual Accountants Professional Indemnity Company (MAPIC) warns of a greater level of claims at a time when competition in the market has tended to depress rates.
Chairman Roger Pedder says: ‘While it may be hoped that the position will improve, members of the 1990/91 and 1991/92 policy years would be prudent to make provision for supplementary calls of 7% and 6% of the contributions for these years.’
In 1991/92 claims paid out totalled £519,520 (v £343,406); contributions from members increased to £2.297m (v £2.185) and the balance available for outstanding and unreported claims carried forward encouragingly rose to £2.254m (v £1.582m).
Membership rose to 836 firms (v 831).
Of the claims notified for 1991, tax again features prominently, especially errors in advice about CGT.
There was a handful of claims for alleged failure to detect fraud on audit.
INSURANCE
Shop locally for ‘ideal’ cover
If you want to check that your household and motor insurance is competitive, get in touch with a local independent insurance broker by dialling 0800 1235789 (0800 1235987 if in the Yorkshire, Granada, HTV or Scottish TV regions).
The 0800 I for Insurance scheme is the brain-child of Bernard T Down & Co, a Folkestone-based firm of insurance brokers that is responsible for managing the service.
Currently, some 450 intermediaries are linked to the service and this is expected to expand.
Brokers joining are charged an initial three month licence fee of £150 for each location, £60 a month that goes into a secure advertising fund, and 7p for each telephone enquiry.
Bernard Down himself believes that the service will help independents to fight back against the direct insurance writers.
‘We can ensure that the public has insurance cover ideally suited to their requirements,’ he says optimistically.
UNLISTED SECURITIES MARKET
PW probes USM closure
Price Waterhouse is contacting the managements of companies on the Unlisted Securities Market to find out how they feel about The Stock Exchange's plan to close the USM and its effective merger with the Official List.
The accountancy firm is concerned that, because the USM is out of fashion at present, its success during the 1980s will be forgotten.
‘Closure of the USM may prompt a rush of restructuring by USM companies that decide that this is the opportunity for an MBO or a delisting, or even to maximise shareholder value by break-up or sale, but the current recession may not be the ideal timing for any of these options,’ says PW's Nigel Crockford.
‘On the other hand, joining the Official List could have serious implications for many USM companies, such as the potential loss of inheritance tax reliefs and the need to ensure that at least 25% of shares are held by the public, rather than 10%, which has been permitted on the USM.’
Some commentators see The Stock Exchange's rejection of the option to relaunch and reposition the second market as a mistake, as it deprives new growth companies of a low cost source of equity capital.
Price Waterhouse intends to publish the survey's results shortly.
Stockbrokers Beeson Gregory believe the USM performed a valuable service by breaking down the barrier that, until 1980, meant that only sizeable businesses were considered fit for public company status.
‘The introduction of the USM encouraged the entrepreneur to think about venturing a stage beyond bank-financed expansion', say the brokers, ‘by tapping the equity market as a source of cheaper development capital and as a means of unlocking some of his personal wealth.’
To date, 857 companies have entered the USM, which reached its climax in 1988 when 103 companies made their debut.
But smaller companies suffered from the recession, and in each of the years 1989 to 1992 their shares substantially under-performed the shares of larger companies.
Only 15 companies joined the USM in 1991 and seven in 1992.
Many USM companies graduated to a full listing.
‘By comparison, there are 1,566 capitalised at under £100m and the maintenance of two markets covering smaller companies no longer makes sense', say Beeson Gregory.
The brokers note that representations are being made to the Treasury to enable USM companies that switched to the Official List to go on enjoying inheritance tax relief by extending this relief to all family-owned companies.
The brokers believe that the USM has served its purpose: ‘The well-run smaller company is here to stay.’
Beeson Gregory will in future guide smaller companies towards a full listing.
Some USM companies do feel neglected by the financial community, but the easing of the rules for transferring to a full listing may assuage them.
WHAT'S AROUND
High income.
The Life Association of Scotland's ‘Generator’ offers up to 9.86% for five years from a combination of a five-year temporary annuity and a PEP or unit trust investment.
Typically, one third of the lump sum will be invested in the annuity and the balance in the PEP/unit trust.
Minimum investment is £5,000.
For full details ring 031-550 5000.
Special offer.
All new regular premium executive pensions received by Prolific Life & Pensions (0539 733733) by 5 April 1993 will be eligible for an extra 2% allocation.
All new regular premium personal pensions and free standing AVCs received by Prolific by 5 April 1993 will receive an extra month's premium free.
European unit trust.
Albert E Sharp Fund Managers have launched AES European unit trust, which seeks long-term capital growth from a diversified portfolio of European Securities.
Minimum investment is £1,000; charges are 5% initial and 1 ¼ % annual.
Telephone 021-200 2244 for further details.
Charities.
Chartered Accountants Cohen Arnold & Co (071-734 1362) have now included, in a revised Charities Act 1992 booklet, a timetable for implementation of major provisions of the Act.
Copies are available at £3.
Business banking.
Lloyds Bank has published Services to Customers — Our 1993 Tariff for medium-sized commercial customers (annual turnover £1m-£25m).
This includes the bank's charges for the most commonly used services.
The object is to take the mystery out of the services provided.
Copies from any branch, or ring 071-626 1500.
Advice for currency borrowers.
Lavenham Treasury Consultants (0787 248092) provide a free evaluation and advisory service for currency borrowers.
The service will deal with problems such as: Is the loan being managed in the way envisaged?
How does the currency manager's performance compare?
Is there a choice of currency manager?
Protection for pension funds.
The Goodwins Pension Protector, underwritten at Lloyd's, combines liability and theft cover in a single contract.
An approximate indication of cost can be given over the phone on receipt of a few basic facts.
For full details, call 0252 544484.
Share option PEP.
The Inland Revenue Approved Employee Share Option Personal Equity Plan (or AESOP) from Reyker Securities is open to any individual acquiring shares from either an Inland Revenue-approved share option or share save schemes.
Shares may be transferred directly into this PEP without incurring a CGT liability.
The AESOP PEP is a single company PEP; shares transferred into it do not have to be quoted, as is usually the case with PEPs.
Charges are a subscription fee of £20 plus VAT, and an annual management fee of 1% plus VAT.
Ring 071-499 9097 for more information.
Emerging markets unit trust.
Stewart Ivory Emerging Markets unit trust aims for long-term capital growth from the world's emerging economies (mainly in Asia and Latin America).
These areas enjoy low-cost production.
Emphasis will be placed on identifying well-managed, financially sound growth companies in niche areas.
The initial asset allocation will be South Asia 10%, East Asia 25%, South East Asia 25%, Latin America 35% and cash 5%.
Minimum investment is £5,000 and the charges are 5% initial and 1.25% annual.
Ring 031-226 3271 for full details.
economic trends
A false dawn breaks over the high street Despite media excitement over Christmas trading, 1993 promises to be another difficult year for retail demand
The media has been in a frenzy over Christmas retailing.
Suddenly the headlines have been full of predictions of economic recovery.
That rare bird, the high-spending consumer, has been sighted in large numbers in its natural habitat, the high street, after too long away.
Thus the recession is over and we can all settle down to making money again.
In the middle of all this, the Burton Group's announcement that it was cutting 2,000 jobs came as rather a rude shock.
It has certainly reminded us that the decade is likely to be characterised by low growth and tight competition, and that retailers need to be positioned with a low cost base, flexible work-force and strong retail formats to meet the challenges of the next few years.
This time around it is not going to be the consumer who leads the UK out of recession.
The Government has explicitly stated that help is to be targeted on industry and in the face of a continuing trade deficit, the recovery is hoped to be export-led.
Given the burgeoning budget deficit, there is a very real likelihood of some form of tax increase in the Budget.
At least one of the following measures is in prospect: the removal of the upper earnings limit on National Insurance and/or an increase in the rate at which it applies; an increase in higher rate tax; some moves on reducing mortgage interest relief; over-indexing excise duties; an extension of VAT.
The last of these seems practically assured with the justification of EC harmonisation.
Books, newspapers and magazines look particularly vulnerable.
There are also fears about energy, but presumably the Government would look to the regulatory authorities to act on customer charges to mitigate the impact.
Food must escape this time, even at a lower rate, given the inflationary implications of levying a tax — not to mention the political sensitivities involved.
The Chancellor's flexibility to reduce interest rates much further, to soften the blow of tax increases, looks limited.
Action before the Budget in the absence of assistance from the Bundesbank looks unlikely.
Even though year-on-year mortgage costs are substantially down, there is little evidence that a recovery in the housing market is on the way.
Although houses now look cheap again, relative to average earnings, there are major constraints on demand still — even if the Chancellor resists the temptation to act on mortgage interest tax relief this time around.
Because the level of transactions was so high ahead of the slump in house prices, it is widely believed that there is a substantial number of homeowners waiting to sell when prices do start to recover.
To compound the problem, the all-important first-time buyer may be a vanishing species, partly frightened off by the fate of those who were saddled with huge mortgages in the slump, and partly reducing in number because of demographics.
The housing market impacts on consumer spending in two ways: directly, in that a higher number of house-moves brings forward purchasing of consumer durables and DIY products; and in a wider context, because as property values appreciate, homeowners become wealthier and therefore likely to spend more.
Given the amount of negative equity still locking in to the system, it may be instructive to look at the UK consumer's reaction to lower interest rates.
The trend there has been simply to pay off debt at a faster rate.
In real terms, UK consumer borrowing has been falling through the period of the recession, in contrast to the experience at the beginning of the last decade when credit was deregulated.
Finally, there is the continuing spectre of unemployment.
If the Burton Group, having already cut a substantial number of jobs in 1991, can find a further 2,000 (albeit balanced by the creation of 3,000 part-time jobs) surplus to requirements, when profits are already recovering, others across British industry are sure to follow.
Our expectation is that unemployment will continue to rise through 1993, probably peaking in the third quarter.
With this background, it is hardly surprising that consumer confidence remains close to rock bottom (see graph below) and the consensus forecast for consumer spending growth is at +1% for 1993, compared with -0.2% for 1992 and -2.1% for 1991.
Christmas bonus?
First, Christmas was two days later than in the previous year (because 1992 was a leap year) and fell on a Friday.
This is significant because, in effect, it added an extra week to the pre-Christmas trading period — the last Saturday before Christmas was almost a week before Christmas itself.
This meant that the year-on-year trading comparisons were distorted.
Consequently, many retailers in the run-up to Christmas were looking at poor weekly sales figures when compared with the same week in 1991.
Second, trading on Sunday was far more widespread in the month up to Christmas 1992.
Of the major retailers, virtually only Marks & Spencer, John Lewis and C&A stood firm and refused to open after Kenneth Clarke said that the Shops Act was in abeyance while it was subject to a European Court ruling.
Again, this served to distort the comparatives.
Finally, there was a frenzy of discounting before Christmas 1991, with a number of large chains effectively starting their sales before Christmas.
Analysis of spending patterns then was suggesting that consumers were beginning to get wise to artificial mark-downs and refusing to pay full price for merchandise.
Thus promotional activity last autumn was rather less visibly aggressive.
It may well be that the canny consumer, after benefiting from retailers' losing their nerve and going into early reductions in 1991, was waiting for the same to happen again.
It may also be relevant that the terrorist bombing campaign appeared, for the first time for some years, to be targeting shopping areas directly, as well as widening the net outside London.
This must have encouraged shoppers to restrict their high street visits to as few individual trips as possible.
In any event, the ‘extra’ trading week was spectacular for many retailers, and for those who started their sale on Bank Holiday Monday (28 December) the rewards were handsome.
This was predictable, though, looking back at historical evidence relating to a Friday Christmas.
Anecdotal evidence, however, suggests that the follow-through has been patchy, and very few retailers are assuming anything other than that the consumer has put away cheque book and credit cards and is unlikely to venture forth until confidence begins to build again.
The nature of Christmas spend would seem to bear this out.
Although December's new credit levels were substantially ahead, a number of retailers have suggested that cash payments accounted for a significant proportion of spend.
There are various possible explanations for this.
An obvious (if possibly fatuous) answer is that, rather than wasting money on potentially unwanted presents, people have given cash, which the recipients have rushed out to spend on reduced-price merchandise.
A new theory holds that the level of unemployment may provide a key.
Redundancies reached an all-time high in the third quarter of 1992, and, given the savings restriction on claiming benefits, there is an incentive to spend down to below this limit.
This could explain the surprising (given the stage of the economic cycle we are in) recent resurgence in consumer durables (including cars).
Whether it also explains the equally surprising surge in menswear demand is less clear.
It is our belief — shared by a number of retailers — that Christmas will prove to be yet another false dawn as far as reawakening consumer confidence is concerned.
Clearly, given the depths it has recently plumbed (as shown in the Treasury survey above), there cannot be much more downside even in the face of a tax-raising Budget.
However, there is, as we have shown, hardly any compelling reason why the consumer should decide to go out and spend in 1993.
If, as we have suggested, the consumer will instead be encouraged to continue to save, or pay off more debt, the growth in retail sales volumes could well be effectively zero.
Given that the amount of space devoted to retailing is at historical highs and still not showing convincing signs of contracting, competition is highly likely to intensify in the coming year.
However, as far as the retailers' 1992/93 profits are concerned, they have heaved a sigh of relief.
Even on expectations revised down after ‘Black Wednesday', volatile trading in most sectors had left forecasts looking vulnerable as Christmas approached.
Now most are facing a new financial year with a clean stock position.
The false starts of the last couple of years have forced a much more flexible approach to budgeting, management of the supply chain, staff scheduling and so on.
As a result, the retail survivors are now on an upwards profit trend despite the continuing contraction of demand.
When at last the consumer does rediscover the spending habit, those survivors should see a very satisfactory margin benefit.
commentary
Audit regulator dominance in the UK listed market A handful of firms, regulated by the Institute, dominate the top end of the UK audit market
Vivien Beattie and Stella Fearnley University of Southampton
The submission to the Department of Trade and Industry of the first annual reports by the audit regulatory bodies (see ACCOUNTANCY, January, p 9, and this issue, p 13), has focused attention on both the audit process and the regulators themselves.
These reports contain data about the structure of the UK audit market and, in particular, about those firms auditing listed companies.
We are currently engaged in a major study of auditors active in the UK listed company market from 1987 to 1992.
This study is based on a population of 2,079 UK domestic and Irish companies listed at May 1992, which comprises 1,664 continuing companies and 415 companies that have joined the market since 1987.
The first part of our study, which was reported in the October 1992 issue of ACCOUNTANCY (see p 13), demonstrated that over this five year period the combined effects of mergers among the large audit firms and voluntary auditor switches among listed companies had led to a significant increase in seller concentration.
By 1992 the top six firms had increased their share to 73% of our population's audits, compared with 53% five years previously, while the top 20 firms audited 90% of listed companies as opposed to 83% in 1987.
Our study identified 167 firms auditing this population of companies in 1992.
In this article we examine two further issues.
First, we relate the size of the audit firms (measured by the number of registered audit partners) to the number of audits they hold.
Second, we establish which recognised supervisory body is responsible for regulating these firms.
The audit firms
Table 1 (see below) shows the extent of involvement, and relative size, of all audit firms engaged in the UK listed company market.
Three Irish audit firms, each of which audited one Irish registered company, have been omitted from further analysis since they are not subject to UK audit regulation.
This brings the number of companies and audit firms down to 2,076 and 164 respectively.
The data about the number of audit firm partners (defined under the audit regulations as ‘responsible individuals') was obtained from the computerised public audit register as at November 1992 and from the institutes' lists of members.
The number of audits carried out by each firm was taken from our database at 1992.
The table also shows that there are only 20 firms with five or more audits, all but two of which have more than 20 partners.
Predictably, below the top 20 firms, it is the larger firms that have the greater number of listed clients, and there are no firms with fewer than seven partners acting for more than two listed companies.
It is interesting to note that there are 94 firms with only one listed audit client.
Perhaps surprisingly, four of these were identified as sole practitioners and four as two-partner firms.
The sole practitioners audited three companies with a full listing, and one company quoted on the Unlisted Securities Market.
Of the 90 other companies that were an audit firm's only listed client, 33 were USM companies and 57 were fully listed companies.
The first line in Table 1 identified 15 firms as exclusively joint auditors (out of a total of 28 joint auditors).
These firms' activities in the listed market are usually shared with a larger firm.
Table 2 presents an alternative analysis of the population by considering the total number of audits involved.
It can be seen that audit firms with five or more audits hold 90% of the market, with a further 5% of the market taken by audit firms with a single listed client.
The regulators
The second issue we consider concerns recognised supervisory bodies.
For each of the 164 active audit firms, we established from the audit register which of the recognised supervisory bodies (the ICAEW, ICAS, ICAI and the ACCA) these firms had chosen as their regulator.
This data is shown in Table 3.
The analysis was complicated slightly by the fact that some of the top 20 firms had registered with more than one regulator.
This appeared to be based on the geographical location of their offices, although the structure of the firm may also have been a factor.
The top eight firms all had registrations with the ICAEW and the ICAI, four top 20 firms had registered their Scottish offices with the ICAS and one firm (BDO Binder Hamlyn) had a Channel Islands registration with the ACCA.
In all, we identified 34 registrations for the top 20 firms, nine with the ICAEW alone and a further 11 with the ICAEW in various combinations with the other regulatory bodies.
We did not identify any of the firms below the top 20 which had multiple registrations.
Table 3 shows the number of audit firm registrations with each regulator and the percentage of firms regulated by them.
(As a result of recent audit firm mergers, we were unable to trace three firms on the audit register.)
It is quite clear that the ICAEW, with 85% of the total registrations, has an overwhelming dominance as the regulator of firms auditing listed companies, with the ICAS and ICAI each regulating about 7% of the total registrations and the ACCA regulating just over 1%.
Having established the ICAEW's dominance as a regulator, we investigated whether this pattern was repeated with reference to the corresponding number of listed companies audited.
We therefore allocated the listed companies to the regulators responsible for the supervision of the auditors.
In the case of multiple registrations among the larger firms, the allocation was made by matching the geographical location of the regulatory body with that of the audit firm offices (as given in the Hambro Company Guide ).
This approach appears reasonable, although we recognise that actual numbers may vary slightly from those stated.
Table 4 (see next column) reinforces the overwhelming dominance of the ICAEW, which regulates the auditors of 95% of the listed companies in our population.
The ICAI is next with 3%, arising mainly from the Irish registrations of the major firms, with both the ICAS and ACCA regulating less than 1%.
In the case of the ACCA, we have been able to identify only one listed company whose auditors are regulated by this body, while the ICAS regulates the auditors of 15 listed companies.
Tables 3 and 4 clearly identify the ICAEW as the principal regulator in arguably the most important audit market — certainly in terms of the public interest.
This is perhaps not surprising given other measures of the relative size of these bodies.
Of 11,200 audit firms listed on the audit register, almost 9,200 (82%) are registered with the ICAEW.
In addition, at the end of 1991, membership of the ICAEW was 98,000, compared with 13,000 for the ICAS, 7,500 for the ICAI and 38,000 for the ACCA.
The ICAEW therefore captures 63% of the total membership of 156,000.
Nevertheless, Tables 3 and 4 indicate a more extreme concentration than these other measures would suggest.
Unlisted companies
Having established the ICAEW's position in the listed market, we decided to extend our work to look at which of the bodies regulated the auditors of large unlisted organisations.
Our source for this analysis was Crawfords' City Connections , which covers large private companies (turnover greater than £15m and profits of more than £500,000) and certain public sector organisations.
Information concerning a further 1,300 such organisations was extracted from the 1992 edition.
An additional 115 audit firms active in this market were identified.
The analysis of the pattern of regulation was repeated for these organisations and confirmed the dominance of the ICAEW in this market as well(see Table 5 below).
Conclusion
The results reported in this article confirm the widely held belief that ICAEW member firms are responsible for the audit of the vast majority of major companies and institutions in the UK.
The introduction of audit regulation has meant that ICAEW is therefore responsible for the regulation of the auditors of most of the country's major organisations.
The other bodies' market share is minimal.
Furthermore, out of a total number of firms on the audit register of 11,200, only 164 were identified as acting for listed companies and a further 115 for other large organisations.
This combined number of fewer than 300 audit firms represents less than 3% of the total number registered.
While we accept that the public interest is not restricted to these markets, the results of our survey have led us to question whether the present regulatory structure, which makes little distinction between identifiable public interest markets, is the most appropriate.
Cadbury: precedence of substance over form Does the Cadbury Committee's final report offer sufficient protection against the corporate governance debacles of the recent past?
Thomas Clarke Leeds Business School
A chorus of approval greeted the publication of the Cadbury Report early in December (see ACCOUNTANCY, January, p 10).
Deftly, the Committee responded to criticisms of the draft report published six months earlier, and without disengaging the central thrust of the proposals, won over many interested bodies, including the Institute of Directors and the Confederation of British Industry, both of which had harboured serious reservations.
However, the question still remains: will Cadbury effect the sea change in attitudes and practices necessary to restore standards of corporate governance in the UK?
The Committee on the Financial Aspects of Corporate Governance was formed early in 1991 because of widespread concern at the perceived low level of confidence in financial reporting, and the ability of auditors to provide adequate safeguards.
Investors did not believe what they read in annual company reports.
As the deliberations of the Committee proceeded, a series of highly-publicised corporate collapses, including BCCI and Maxwell, revealed the absence of an effective framework in some major companies for ensuring that directors kept financial controls in their businesses under review.
As the recession intensified, weaknesses were also exposed in the accounting practices of many other companies.
All this invested the work of the Committee with far greater significance than its members might have anticipated.
The central dilemma the Committee faced was how to achieve a balance in company boards between strong direction and accountability.
Many of the structures and practices that foster the one tend to undermine the other.
Thus the Committee's aim was to reinforce good corporate governance without stifling entrepreneurial initiative.
‘They must be free to drive their companies forward, but exercise that freedom within a framework of effective accountability,’ the Committee stressed in its final report.
The proposals were not radical inventions, but ‘drawn from the experience of successful and respected companies’.
The recommendations
The principal recommendation is that all listed companies registered in the UK should comply with a code of best practice for corporate governance.
The London Stock Exchange should require all UK registrants, as a continuing obligation of listing, to state in their annual report whether they comply with the code, and give reasons for any areas of non-compliance.
Inclusion of statements of compliance would be required for years ended after 30 June 1993.
The central elements of the code of practice include the division of responsibilities at the head of the company; sufficient non-executive directors to carry significant weight in the board's decisions; a schedule of key matters reserved for full board decision; full disclosure of directors' total emoluments, with separate figures for salary and performance-related pay; audit committees composed solely of non-executives to scrutinise figures and appoint auditors; the board should report on the effectiveness of the company's system of internal controls; the directors should report that the business is a going concern, and auditors report on this statement.
This last requirement is likely to prove one of the most controversial in practice.
Under existing company law, accounts are prepared on the assumption that the company is a going concern, but there is no explicit requirement for directors to satisfy themselves that this is a reasonable assumption to make, by, for example, preparing a cash flow forecast.
This explains the unsettling experience of companies collapsing shortly after their auditors have approved the accounts.
The Cadbury Committee suggests auditors should test going concern assumptions, and give an opinion on the directors' report.
Concerns
A concern is that in identifying a company's financial vulnerability, a collapse that might otherwise have been avoided will be precipitated.
In any case, ‘going concern’ is interpreted in present auditing guidelines as meaning that the company will still be operating six months after the date of the audit report or one year after the date of the balance sheet, when that may be further ahead than company directors can see in the middle of a recession.
Not wishing to jeopardise businesses, the Committee suggests that directors must satisfy themselves on the basis that they have a reasonable expectation that it will continue in operation for the period specified in the guide-lines.
This is part of an insistence on greater transparency in company dealings.
Defending the report, Committee chairman Sir Adrian Cadbury argued: ‘The planks on which the code is based are the need for disclosure and for checks and balances.
Disclosure ensures that all those with a legitimate interest in a company have the information which they need to exercise their rights and responsibilities towards it.
In addition, openness by companies is the basis of public confidence in the corporate system.
Checks and balances guard against undue concentrations of power and make certain that all the interests which boards have a duty to consider are properly taken into account.’
The detailed changes from the draft report related mostly to the view that the Committee's original proposals on non-executive directors would undermine the unitary nature of the company board system in this country.
The final report emphasised support for the principle of collective responsibility of all directors for the governance of the company, and in particular extended the recommendation that there should be a procedure by which non-executives might obtain independent external professional advice to all directors, and made clear all directors should have the right to attend audit committee meetings.
The continued reliance throughout on independent directors as the cornerstone of good corporate governance, as the Financial Times notes, is an indication of institutional investors' reluctance to play a fuller role in the direction of the companies they have shares in.
Yet the report looks to the institutional investors to exercise the leverage necessary to persuade companies to comply with the code.
The report calls on boards to ‘give precedence to substance over form', in applying and interpreting the code, but it is doubtful whether companies realise that this could be the last chance for self-regulation.
The Committee will remain in being to monitor the progress of compliance until 1995, when a new body will be launched, perhaps with a much wider brief.
This will be necessary because Cadbury had limited terms of reference, and there are many other serious questions of company direction to tackle, such as how to widen the definition of company stakeholders from merely shareholders, how to ensure longer-term financial commitments, and company planning horizons.
Some of these questions are now being addressed in the Royal Society of Arts' Tomorrow's Company inquiry into company purpose in a changing world, which was launched at the end of January.
Is the Government serious about deregulation?
It is about time that Government departments sorted themselves out and adopted the same approach to business taxation
Tony Foreman Pannell Kerr Forster
Even if your job does not require you to specialise in tax, if you are running a business you should obtain a copy of the guidance note recently issued by the Faculty of Taxation on National Insurance contributions (TAX 21/92, available free from the Publications Department at the Institute — send sae).
This guidance note has brought into the open a range of contentious issues that have been debated in correspondence and at meetings between the Faculty and the Department of Social Security's Policy Division over the last 12 months.
There are a number of interesting statements, some of which have disturbing implications.
PAYE v NIC
First, some of our clients have been caught out by the different definitions for Pay As You Earn and National Insurance Contributions purposes.
The definition of ‘earnings’ for NIC purposes is quite different from the definition which applies for PAYE income tax.
The DSS seems to recognise that something needs to be done about this.
One of the appendices to the guidance note is a DSS paper on possible ways to harmonise the NIC and PAYE treatment of items such as: reasonable travel/subsistence payments made by an employer when public transport is disrupted; payment for an employee's late night journeys from work to home (subject to certain conditions); home leave expenses for employees and their families where the employee is employed abroad; telephone expenses; motor mileage allowances; and incentive award schemes.
It is crazy that (to take the second example) the Inland Revenue is prepared to treat such a payment as exempt whereas the DSS claims that NICs are due.
It is equally indefensible that the Revenue is prepared to accept an employee's estimate of his business use of his home telephone whereas the DSS requires a log of calls to be maintained.
The amounts involved are often relatively small, but they add up.
A company that paid the telephone bills of 250 service engineers might easily face a sizeable demand for employer's and employees' NIC, especially if back years have not been dealt with according to the letter of the law.
To be fair, this is not all the DSS's fault.
The Policy Division is trying to address these problems.
However, the rate of progress is far too slow and the relevant minister needs to get involved.
Audit visits
Audit visits are another sore subject for businessmen.
It emerges from the guidance note that the DSS does not consider itself to be bound by settlements negotiated with Inland Revenue PAYE officers.
It reserves the right to re-visit a company and claim further sums in respect of NICs where the Revenue officers have applied the wrong tests from an NIC point of view.
This is totally unsatisfactory.
It would not even occur to most businessmen that the criteria the Revenue employs can be more favourable than those the DSS uses.
The Tax Faculty believes that an employer should be able to negotiate a settlement that is binding on both departments.
Personally, I would go further: employers who took it for granted that this was exactly what they were doing should not be open to fresh claims from the DSS.
Revenue settlements
Finally, the guidance note contains an intriguing exchange of views on what should happen for NIC purposes where an employer reaches an informal or ‘voluntary’ agreement with the Revenue to settle income tax on employees' benefits in kind and expenses.
The DSS believes that NICs are due on such payments (the Faculty has set out the reasons why it does not agree), but comments that it is possible to deal with matters rather differently by the so-called ‘statutory method’.
The catch is that the statutory method involves a lot more work all round, is bound to damage staff relations and can involve the Revenue charging penalties.
Once again, something should be done to remove the ugly spectacle of a Government department negotiating a compromise settlement that saves work all round, but which may lead to a claim by another department.
We need to know as a matter of urgency what (if anything) is wrong with the Faculty's arguments against the DSS view.
If there is definitely a problem here, the relevant minister ought to consult with the Chancellor, as this is a clear case for deregulation.
Most PAYE settlements involve minor technical errors and misunderstandings rather than deliberate disregard for the P11D and other reporting regulations.
Businessmen should be allowed to put the position straight so far as the Revenue is concerned and with the minimum of fuss, not ‘taken to the cleaners’ by a second Government department.
readers ask
Payment for lunch
I would like to pay my audit staff a lunch allowance of £2 a day when they are working at client premises.
I am aware that canteen services at 15p a day and luncheon vouchers would not attract income tax, but I am not sure about the £2.
Is it true that accountants have a special dispensation?
If the Inland Revenue were to assess this payment, is there any other way I could cover my staff's lunch expenses without making them liable for tax?
Such payments need to be entered on form P11D as a round sum allowance.
Equally, each member of staff may make a claim under s 198(1), ICTA 1988 that an equivalent amount should be allowed as an expense in his or her Sch E assessment.
For such a claim to succeed, the amount claimed must satisfy three tests:
1.
The employee must be ‘necessarily obliged’ to incur it;
2.
It must have occurred ‘in the performance of the duties of the employment'; and
3.
It must have been ‘wholly, exclusively and necessarily incurred’.
Passing such a stringent test is not easy; each audit staff member would need to retain evidence of amounts spent on lunch each day.
Only that amount which exceeds what would be spent on lunch if the employee was working at the office can even be considered.
In other words, if the employee normally spends £2 a day but has to spend £4 a day when out on audit, a claim might be considered.
Pocketing the £2 and taking sandwiches will not work!
There is some precedent for allowing the extra costs of subsistence when working away from home, by virtue of Statement of Practice SP16/80, which specifically applies to lorry drivers.
A similar concession was given to construction industry employees by Inland Revenue Press Release dated 13 February 1981.
Some comfort may also be taken from Inland Revenue booklet 480, Institute Technical Release TR 760 and the Employer's Guide to PAYE .
There is no special dispensation for accountants, but if the firm could obtain its own individual dispensation, this would be by far the best solution.
There is no other ‘cash payment’ method that would not be taxable.
Arranging for the employees to eat in the staff restaurant (if any) at the client's premises might work, as might arrangements to supply lunches to staff all, however, somewhat cumbersome and complicated.
Thankfully, by virtue of Reg 19(4) (b) Contributions Regulation, National Insurance contributions will not be charged on any subsistence payments of the kind described.
Training expenses
The Inland Revenue is still rejecting my claim for a deduction in respect of the training expenses of a driving instructor with the British School of Motoring incurred prior to his beginning his trade (see ACCOUNTANCY , November 1992, p 81).
The inspector says ss 588 and 589 ICTA 1988 are irrelevant as they relate to training courses for employees.
He has sent me a copy of Tax Bulletin No 1 , which covers the Revenue's official line for treating such expenditure.
The Inland Revenue's Tax Bulletin is helpful in that it gives the Revenue's view on how it interprets the law and relates it to practical points.
However, the bulletin is not the law itself.
In addition, while referring in his letter to his interpretation of s 74(a), ICTA 1988, the inspector of taxes completely ignores the provisions of s 401, ICTA 1988.
Initially, he should be asked to consider this section specifically, and state why he thinks it does not apply to the facts of this case and the expenditure concerned.
Having said that, fighting a solo case further where tax relief on £1,000 is concerned is not something we could recommend.
The costs of even preparing a case for the Commissioners, let alone taking it, would more than nullify any tax relief gained.
The long-term answer lies in a case decision favourable to the taxpayer on this very point.
Unfortunately, Commissioners' decisions are not published.
If the client's business is a BSM franchise, it is possible that BSM may have some information on this point.
This issue must have been raised before and BSM would presumably be gratified to see the situation successfully resolved, once and for all.
The trade association for driving instructors might also be able to supply details of the experience of other new driving instructors.
We are passing on a letter we have received from a firm of accountants that is acting for the BSM, asking you to contact them.
Distribution of cash
I have a query that seems to straddle tax and company law and I should be grateful if you could help me.
A company, which is about to be struck off the Company Register under s 562 CA 1985, has share capital and distributable reserves balanced by cash.
ESC C16 is often applied so that any distribution before dissolution is treated as capital on the recipients for tax purposes.
What about company law?
If cash is distributed, is it not replaced by debt, which would be bona vacantia on dissolution?
If so, ESC C16 only solves the tax problem; in which case how useful is it?
Finally, would any distribution up to the value of the share capital ‘represent a repayment of share capital’ and be exempt from ACT anyway (s 209 (1)(b), ICTA 1988)?
Assuming that the company concerned is owner-controlled, the intention would presumably be to distribute any cash in excess of the nominal share capital to the owner shareholders.
If this occurs before striking off under s 652, Companies Act 1985, the bona vacantia provisions of s 654 would surely not apply.
Distribution of the cash before striking off does not absolve the directors and members of the company from any liability.
Any member or creditor aggrieved by the dissolution can apply within the following 20 years for restoration of the company name on the grounds that the company was in fact continuing to operate, or that it would otherwise be just to do so (s 653, Companies Act 1985).
Extra-Statutory Concession C16 provides that the total cash distribution prior to striking off will be treated as capital in the hands of the shareholders, in accordance with s 209(1), ICTA 1988, so that the provisions of that sub-section apply.
To the extent that the payment represents nominal share capital, it would also be exempted from being a distribution by s 209(2) (b), ICTA 1988.
Receipt of that capital by the shareholders will be taxed under the CGT provisions, with possible reference to rebasing to 31 March 1982 under s 35(2), TGCA 1992 and by reference to s 272(1), TCGA 1992.
Taking into account the annual exemption, indexation and rebasing, the shareholders ought to be in a better tax position than if the amounts distributed had been classified as a company distribution.
Director's benefit in kind
Further to your item about a director's benefit in kind,(see ACCOUNTANCY , October 1992, p 79) my client is a director of a private family company that some years ago purchased a villa on a complex in Portugal.
The inspector of taxes is seeking to tax his assessment to benefit in kind on the annual value under s 145(2) ICTA 1988.
In the event that the annual value figure cannot be agreed between the parties under s 837(3), it is to be determined by the General Commissioners.
Would this be the local General Commissioners, or those responsible for the area in which the property is situated?
S 44(1), TMA 1970 prescribes that the place of the appeal shall be that set out in Schedule 3 to the Act.
The ‘normal’ tax district for the director of the company will be that dealing with the company's directors and employees, their PAYE affairs and tax returns.
It is also the tax district to which the company submits forms P11D.
Item 3 of Schedule 3 to the TMA 1970 specifies that an appeal against any part of a Schedule E assessment should take place in the Commissioner's division relating to the place of employment.
Item 4 of the same Schedule specifies the ‘place where the property is situated’ for an appeal where there is a dispute over a valuation, but this statement is only intended to apply to property within the UK — the authorities cannot be compelled to travel to Portugal to hear the appeal!
The division dealing with the directors' Schedule E affairs is therefore the relevant division for the appeal — with one very important proviso.
Many PAYE districts, particularly LP Districts for London-based companies, are hundreds of miles from both the place of employment and the taxpayer's residence.
S 44(1A) (B) and (2), TMA 1970 make provision for this by allowing the taxpayer to elect to have the appeal heard in the Commissioner's division nearest to his place of residence (or place of business).
However, notice of this election must be given to the Inland Revenue not later than the time of the appeal made against the Schedule E assessment containing the disputed benefit figure.
There are two other possibilities.
One is that the Inspector may direct that the appeal be heard in a certain division.
S 44(1A) and (1B) makes provision for an appeal against such a direction, and in particular that the taxpayer has the right to elect for the appeal to be heard in the division relevant to his private residence.
The other possibility, as recognised by s 44(2), is that the taxpayer and the inspector come to an agreement themselves about the division in which the appeal should be heard.
Potential profit for a church
Our church has decided to erect a new building so that worship may continue on the present site.
Adjacent to the site is land without any planning permission.
The local authority would be willing to sell the land to the church and would look favourably on any application to develop the land for housing.
Presumably a substantial profit could be made if the church bought the land and subsequently sold it.
Would that profit be subject to income tax/corporation tax and/or capital gains tax?
Would charity exemptions apply?
The question is somewhat ambiguous.
For the avoidance of doubt it is assumed that a church building presently exists on land owned by the church and that adjacent to that site is land that could be developed.
The church wishes to acquire the adjacent land (a new site), apply for planning permission and subsequently sell the new site, realising a profit that may be applied in building a new church on the existing land.
The church would be regarded as a charity, and whereas charities are granted exemption from income tax and CGT under the provisions of s 505 Taxes Act 1988, it does not extend to any profits the charity earns as a result of its undertaking any activities that may be considered ‘an adventure in the nature of a trade’.
Notwithstanding the intention to apply the profit from the venture for ‘charitable purposes,’ it is almost certain that the Revenue would seek to charge that profit to tax.
The church council may very well wish to contend that the acquisition and disposal of the new site is a non-trading transaction, and that any resultant surplus should be regarded as a capital gain which, if applied for charitable purposes, would be exempt from CGT.
The facts do not support that contention, however.
No doubt the church council would be seeking to maximise (exploit) the land's full potential to achieve the greatest possible sale proceeds.
Such action is totally consistent with property trading and possible development activities, and consequently there appears to be little alternative conclusion as regards the nature of those activities from a taxation point of view.
The church may however avoid tax by a relatively straightforward — and well tried — method, which involves establishing a trading company (Tradeco) in which the church holds all the issued share capital.
The transaction in the new site will be undertaken by Tradeco, which will be regarded as carrying on a trade.
However, Tradeco will enter into a Deed of Covenant with the church providing for a payment to be made equivalent to Tradeco's total profits as computed for corporation tax purposes.
It should be noted that the payment under Deed of Covenant will be regarded as a charge on income and will be deducted from the trading profits for corporation tax purposes.
It is of paramount importance to ensure that Tradeco makes the payment under the Deed of Covenant before the end of the accounting year in which the profits arise.
Consequently, in the last month of its financial year an estimate of its trading profit can be made, and an appropriate payment made under the Deed.
When making that payment, Tradeco must deduct income tax at the basic rate and pay that to the Revenue.
Tradeco will provide the church with a certificate of deduction of tax (Form R185) and the church will be entitled to recover that tax from the Revenue.
As an alternative to payment under Deed of Covenant, Tradeco could make payments under the Gift Aid provisions of the Taxes Act.
Provided that the receipt under the Deed of Covenant is applied wholly for the church's charitable purposes, then the total amount of tax Tradeco deducts will be refundable to the church.
Care should be taken in ensuring that any funds not immediately required for either the building of a new church or other charitable purposes are invested in what are known as qualifying investments as prescribed in Sch 20 Taxes Act 1988.
The above will ensure that the profits derived from the  transactions involving the new site are wholly relieved from tax in the hands of the church.
Moreover, the use of Tradeco in relation to the property transactions would afford a degree of personal protection to the members of the church council as regards limited liability, which is an important factor in the context of land transactions.
law
JUST ONE WILL DO Many private companies are currently harbouring an ‘artificial’ member.
They need do so no longer 
Denis Keenan
A company with just one member is now possible, thanks to the Companies (Single Member Private Limited Companies) Regulations 1992 (SI 1992/1699).
They came into force on 15 July last year.
The Regulations permit single-member companies and implement Council Directive No 89/667/EEC on single-member private limited liability companies.
They also amend relevant parts of company legislation to accommodate one-member companies.
The Regulations do away with the necessity for the ‘artificial’ member who exists in many private companies.
Such companies often, in fact, have a sole proprietor, but a spouse or partner holds a nominee share to fulfil the previous two-member requirement.
The same is true of subsidiaries, whether trading or dormant.
Up to now someone, such as a group company secretary or a separate nominee company, has had to hold a share or shares in the subsidiary, normally under a declaration of trust, plus a transfer form held by the holding company, with the transferee section left blank.
The Regulations apply to private companies limited by shares or guarantee.
They do not apply to plcs and unlimited companies; of necessity, the latter are private companies.
Section references below are to the Companies Act 1985 unless otherwise indicated.
Registration
The documents that are sent to the Companies Registration Office for the registration of a single-member company are the same as those required for multi-member companies.
One subscriber to the memorandum is required, and must take at least one share where there is a share capital so that the company's minimum share capital is £1 and not £2 as in the case of multi-member companies.
Other members can be added in future if so desired.
The necessary amendments to company legislation are considered below, but it should be noted at this stage that there is no amendment to s 283 so that, although the sole member can be the sole director under s 282, he or she cannot also act as the company secretary.
Therefore the single-member company must have two officers: a director and a secretary.
Conversion to single-member status
There are no re-registration requirements.
Conversion is achieved by transferring the nominee holding to the beneficial owner.
No company resolutions are required and there are no Companies Registration Office filing requirements.
However, the Regulations add a new s 352A to the Act, under which, when the number of members falls to one, a statement that this is the case must be entered on the Register of Members at the side of the name and address of the sole member.
If the membership increases to two or more, a statement that the company has ceased to have only one member must be entered in the Register of Members alongside the name and address of the person who was formerly the sole member.
A default fine is imposed on the company and officers if this is not done, but since there are no filing requirements it will be difficult to ascertain when there has been default.
Meetings
The Regulations add a new s 370A to the Act.
This provides that notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in the articles (so that no changes in the company's constitution are required), one member present in person or by proxy shall be a quorum.
A new s 382B is also added; this provides that, if the sole member takes any decision that could have been taken in general meeting, that member shall (unless it is a written resolution) provide the company with a written record of it.
The Regulations do not deal with the form of this record and although it would seem desirable for the sole member to sign it, in case of dispute, there is no requirement of signature in the Regulations.
It will be seen that the new s 370A is not a significant change, since all the formalities of calling and holding a meeting would have to be gone through.
However, s 382B is significant in that it allows the sole member to conduct members' business informally without notice or minutes.
Filing requirements still apply when, say, the articles are altered informally, and an agm must still be held unless the company has opted out by elective resolution.
Where this has been done and the company has also dispensed by elective resolution with the requirement to lay its accounts and reports before a general meeting, it will mean that in the single-member company no member meetings will be required.
Board meetings, along with resolutions and minutes, are still required, though even here, subject to the articles, the written resolution procedure provided for by Regulation 93 of Table A may be used.
Single-member companies may conduct member business by written resolution provided they follow the formalities of s 381A.
These include sending a copy of the intended written resolution to the auditors for confirmation that the resolution does not concern them as auditors, or if it does, that a general meeting need not be held.
Written resolutions cannot be used to remove directors and auditors, but the s 382B procedure would seem to be available, so that removal of a non-member director or the auditor without a meeting or without director or auditor representation could be achieved in that way.
However, although the Regulations are silent on this, there is case law that suggests that an informal decision of members will not always suffice where company legislation requires special procedures.
(See re Barry Artist [1985]1 WLR 1305, where the court stated that it would not in future accept an informal decision to reduce share capital.)
Contracts
The Regulations add a new s 322B to the Act.
This provides that the terms of a contract with a sole member/director must either be set out in a written memorandum or be made the subject of a report to the next available board meeting and recorded in the board minutes.
This provision does not apply if the contract is in writing or if it is entered into in the ordinary course of business, as where the company purchases raw materials from the sole member/director.
Section 24 provides that where the membership of a company falls to one the sole member may, in certain circumstances, become liable for its debts.
It is also a ground for compulsory winding up under s 122(1) (e) of the Insolvency Act 1986.
The Regulations make clear that these sections do not apply to any private companies, whether limited by shares or guarantee.
Although the sole member can be the sole director, he or she cannot also act as the company secretary
Denis Keenan LLB FCIS is a barrister, author and lecturer
taxation
THE COMPLICATED VAT LIFE OF A LEASE Traders often lease premises, but there are many occasions during a lease's life when VAT liabilities can arise
Stanley Dencher
Significant VAT liabilities for both a landlord and tenant can arise on many occasions during the life of a commercial building's lease.
Furthermore, the current state of the property market encourages landowners and both existing and prospective tenants to strike complex deals.
Complications also arise because both the landlord and tenant have rights and obligations throughout the currency of a lease.
All references to sections and schedules are to the VAT Act 1983 unless otherwise indicated.
Commencement.
Unless the landlord has opted to tax at the standard rate, there is generally an exempt supply for VAT purposes on the grant of any interest in, right over, or licence to occupy land in the UK (for example, the grant or assignment of a lease, except an assignment to the landlord; Sch 6, Group 1, item 1, Note (1) and Sch 6A, para 2-4).
The lease's length is irrelevant.
A prospective tenant, who may be unable to recover all input tax, needs a clause in the lease to stop the landlord opting to tax and thus increasing the rent (s 42).
Such increases are a real cost to the tenant.
Such tenants should try to persuade the landlord to refrain from opting, for example, by pointing out that the option is irrevocable and often cuts the capital value of the site by restricting the potential group of tenants.
Any charge by the landlord is standard-rated if it is for agreeing not to opt or that the rent is VAT-inclusive.
If the landlord opts before the date of the lease, the rent includes VAT, unless otherwise stated (s 10(2)).
Leases granted before around 1989 are often silent on options.
The landlord can opt at any time without consulting the tenant.
Opting only applies to exempt supplies and to ‘commercal’ or ‘industrial’buildings (not dwellings or relevant residential or charitable buildings; Sch 6A, para 2(2)).
If the landlord starts charging VAT, the tenant should ask the landlord to provide evidence that he validly notified the option to Customs.
If the landlord incorrectly charges VAT, the tenant, strictly, cannot recover it.
Customs will usually take the point if the landlord has failed to account for it to them.
If the land has been let on an exempt basis after 31 July 1989, the landlord needs Customs' written permission to opt (Sch 6A, para 3(6) (a) and (10); Notice 742B, part V).
This helps landlords who let without opting and later realise that opting is advisable.
Before opting, the landlord should know that it covers the whole land and buildings within its curtilage, buildings linked internally or by covered walkways, parades, precincts and other complexes divided into separate units (Sch 6A, para 3(3) and (5)).
If the landlord opts and it is a landlord repairing lease, he can reclaim any input tax on the repairs as they are attributed to a taxable supply.
The tax point for rents on leases of over 21 years (being a supply of goods; Sch 2, para 4) is the earlier of the receipt of payment and the issue of a tax invoice.
If an annual composite invoice is issued, the tax point is the earlier of receipt of payment and the due date of payment (SI 1985/886, Reg 19).
If the lease is for 21 years or less, the supply is of services and the tax point rules are broadly the same (Reg 23).
Usually, the landlord must provide a taxable tenant with a VAT invoice (Reg 12(1)).
Premium v rent.
Any premium and rent paid to the landlord are part of the consideration for the grant of the lease and generally have the same treatment.
The distinction between capital and revenue is generally irrelevant for VAT purposes.
Some tenants pay a basic rent plus a percentage of any excess of their gross turnover over a given amount (a turnover rent).
Both elements of the total rent have the same VAT treatment.
Reimbursement to obtain a lease.
If, in order to obtain a new lease, a tenant reimburses the landlord's professional fees (for example legal costs), this is part of the consideration for the landlord's grant of the lease to the tenant (Rockeagle Ltd (1990) 5 BVC 1,370).
This applies even if it is described as a ‘reimbursement’.
The reimbursement is standard-rated if the landlord has opted, and he must account for output tax on the reimbursement (net of any VAT which he can reclaim).
He must usually issue a VAT-only invoice to the tenant in respect of the output tax (7/47 of the VAT-exclusive amount of the costs).
If the landlord has not opted and the sum is exempt, the tenant reimburses the landlord for the fees including VAT, because the landlord cannot recover the VAT on the fees.
In the case of a lease of a dwelling, the grant may be zero-rated, in which case the reimbursement is also zero-rated.
The supply of professional services, for example by the solicitor, is to the landlord, not to the tenant, and only the landlord can reclaim any VAT chargeable on that supply.
A landlord, who is not fully taxable, may grant to a fully-taxable tenant a tenant's repairing lease with a clause giving the landlord the right to any indemnity from the tenant for necessary repairs.
Customs may argue that this amounts to a landlord's repairing lease.
Reimbursement /indemnity /payment for existing right.
If a tenant exercises an existing right, for example to assign the lease or grant a sublease or alter the building, he usually must reimburse the landlord's incidental costs, for example the legal or survey fees.
Customs apparently now regard this as a supply by the landlord under the lease, and the reimbursement has the same treatment as the lease, ie generally exempt but standard-rated if the option applies.
At one time Customs regarded the reimbursement as outside the scope of VAT (Notice 742B, para 15; former Leaflet 10/74/VMF).
Reimbursement for additional right.
If the tenant's reimbursement is for the landlord's grant of a new right, ie one which was not in the original lease, arguably the landlord makes a standard-rated supply of services, unless the right is an exempt (or possibly zero-rated) interest in land.
A new right may be a right to make alterations to the building or sub-let it or (perhaps on payment of a penalty) to terminate the lease.
Registration fee.
Customs seem to accept that fees for the registration of a notice of assignment are generally treated differently from reimbursements for other costs.
No VAT arises on the reimbursement of such fees to the landlord as it is outside the scope of VAT (Law Society's Gazette (11 July 1990) p 14).
Fixture.
Any fixtures supplied under a grant of a lease and attached to the building are usually part of the single grant and have the same VAT treatment as the lease (Notice 742A, para 6(b)).
Managing agent.
A VAT-registered landlord may have a managing agent to collect standard-rated rents.
These agents may be unaware of the need for accurate and timely VAT returns.
The landlord should include in the terms of engagement that the agent is liable to reimburse him for any penalty or interest arising from the agent's error or late submission of information.
VAT group.
A lease to a fellow member of a VAT group is outside the scope of VAT (s 29(1)).
Reversionary lease.
A reversionary lease has effect from a future date (for example, after an existing lease expires) and has effect no more than 21 years from the date of the instrument that created it.
Such a lease is also an ‘interest in land’ and exempt, subject to the option.
Reverse premium.
A landlord may pay a reverse premium to a tenant to (a) induce him to accept an onerous lease, or (b) to do work on the building.
Similarly, an existing tenant may pay a person to take an assignment of all of his interest in the lease.
These are supplies of services and standard-rated because something is done for a consideration and it is outside the zero rate and exempt groups, not being an interest in land (Neville Russell (1987) 3 BVC 611 at p 615; Notice 742B, para 14).
Sometimes, the payment is called a ‘contribution to the tenant's fitting-out costs', but this does not alter the treatment.
Rent-free period.
Many landlords are desperate to let their buildings and to make market rents look high.
Often they offer rent-free or rent-reduced periods (also known as ‘notional reverse premiums', ‘rent holidays’ or ‘nominal rent periods').
In Hansard (17 December 1991, vol 201, No 25, col 119) Gillian Shephard (then Minister of State at the Treasury) stated that Customs' long-standing policy is that ‘rent-free periods are outside the scope of VAT unless services are performed by the tenant for the landlord’.
So no VAT liability arises if, following normal negotiations, the tenant receives a rent-free period that is not linked to a supply by the tenant.
The tenant's mere act of signing a lease agreement is not a supply by him for which the landlord provided the rent-free period as consideration.
The wording of the agreement will be vital.
Often a rent-free period is not an inducement but just a rearrangement of the overall rent, or reflects the fact that the tenant cannot put the building into use until he has carried out certain work.
However, in return for a rent-free period a tenant may agree, for example(a) to surrender another lease,(b) not to receive a reverse premium, or (c) to carry work that would usually be the landlord's responsibility.
Here, the rent-free period is probably consideration for the tenant's supply of surrendering the lease or the building work (Notice 742B (1990), para 14;Port Erin Hotels Ltd v The Treasury (1990) 5 BVC 772);Ridgeons Bulk Ltd (LON/90/1702) No 7655).
There are two supplies: one standard-rated supply by the tenant to the landlord and one exempt supply (subject to the option to tax) by the landlord to the tenant.
In Gleneagles Hotel plc (1986) VATTR 196, the landlord paid the tenant £1.4m under the terms of the lease so the tenant could repair the building.
The tribunal decided that the payment related to a standard-rated supply of services by the tenant in the course of his business because (a) the landlord provided consideration, and (b) that consideration was for the tenant doing something (signing the lease with the repair clause).
In Neville Russell (1987) 3 BVC 611, the first year's rent was cut by £240,000 because two floors of the building were not needed by Neville Russell, and it would take about a year to find a suitable person to take a sub-lease for those two floors.
The tribunal decided that Neville Russell made no supply to the landlord because the rent-reduction was not ‘consideration’ for something done by the tenant.
The Sixth Directive, art 11A.3, states that the taxable amount excludes price discounts.
Arguably, a rent-free period is a price discount; but art 11A.1 states that the taxable amount includes everything the supplier obtains, including subsidies.
To be concluded next month.
Stanley Dencher FCA FTII is a tax editor with CCH Editions
VAT
VAT…and a happy new year
Since this article was published in the December 1992 issue (p 109), Customs & Excise have announced certain changes.
1.
Register for goods moved
Customs state, in their official publication,Single Market Report (Special Edition, Christmas 1992), that amendments to the draft regulations make it clear that the register refers only to temporary movements, ie for a period not longer than two years.
2.
Member states' alpha codes
Following a recent Customs' seminar, it has been announced that in respect of the following member states additional codes will also be allowed:
Greece — EL can be used as an alternative to GR.
Belgium and Luxembourg — for statistical reporting purposes these two countries are combined into the code BL.
INSTITUTE LIBRARY
Directory discount
The Institute Librarian has negotiated a 15% discount with Executive Grapevine.
This is offered only to Institute members for any of the titles published by Executive Grapevine.
These titles are of particular value for recruitment, job searching and career management.
Titles include:The Directory of Career Management, Outplacement and Assessment; The Directory of Interim Management and Non-executive Directors; The Directory of Executive Recruitment Consultants; The International Directory of Executive Recruitment Consultants;and Executive Moves.
All of these are available for reference in the Institute Library, but members may wish to acquire copies for themselves.
To take advantage of the special discount, please send your orders directly to    
students
HOW TO ACCOUNT FOR SUBSIDIARIES' ASSOCIATES Can you keep your balance in a vertical group?
Guy Loveday
If you are sitting the new Intermediate examination in May 1993, you will already be aware that group financial statements attract a 35% weighting in the Financial Reporting syllabus.
In the 1992 syllabus review it was clarified that vertical groups including associates held by subsidiaries were examinable in this paper.
This particular group structure was not examined under the old syllabus in the written test section of the PE1 Financial Accounting 1 paper, although it featured in various objective test questions.
SSAP 1,Accounting for Associated Companies certainly covers this situation.
Para 41 states: ‘Where the investment in an associated company is held by a subsidiary in which there are minority interests, the minority interests shown in the consolidated financial statements of the group should include the minority share of the subsidiary's interest in the results and net assets of the associated company.’
Do you understand para 41?
Much emphasis is placed these days on understanding and applying standard practice rather than simply learning it by rote.
The question featured this month concerns a vertical group including an associate, Harris plc, held by a subsidiary, Shaw plc, in which there are minority interests.
You will have to apply para 41 if you are to equity account for the associate in accordance with standard practice.
You will find that there are a number of other problems in this question that test your knowledge and understanding of standard accounting practice in a group context.
See how you get on!
How did you do?
The major problems you will have encountered in preparing the consolidated profit and loss account are likely to have been the calculation of the unrealised profit provisions and the minority interest.
The profit and loss account should bear only the net movement in the provisions for unrealised profit.
You should appreciate that while the stock provision becomes realised on sale to third parties, the fixed asset provision becomes realised as the fixed asset is depreciated (see workings 1 and 2).
The minority interest figure is based on Shaw plc's profit after tax less the dividend receivable from Harris plc and the net movement in the provision for unrealised profit in stock (since Shaw plc is the selling company), plus 30% of Harris plc's profit after tax.
It would be wrong to add back the extra depreciation charge that Shaw plc has borne.
This is a valid expense of Shaw plc and it is the charging of this extra depreciation that has caused an equivalent amount of Wilde plc's provision for unrealised profits to become realised (see working 3).
A calculation of the profit and loss account balance brought forward might then be performed and added to the retained profit to arrive at the carried forward balance.
Alternatively the retained profit could be deducted from a calculation of the profit and loss account balance carried forward so as to arrive at the profit and loss account brought forward.
However, such a calculation should not even be attempted if the consequence is failure to complete the easier parts of the question.
Note, in particular, that only the group's share of the goodwill arising on the acquisition of Harris plc is deducted in this calculation.
It would be wrong to bring in the goodwill arising on the full 30% acquisition (see working 4).
The only difficult figure in the balance sheet, apart from the profit and loss account balance, is the minority interest.
It will be based on Shaw plc's net assets less the cost of the investment in Harris plc and the closing provision for unrealised profit in stock, plus the equity accounting value of Harris plc.
The resultant figure is a net liability and so the minority interest is a debit balance.
This is acceptable under FRS 2,Accounting for subsidiary undertakings,but was generally unacceptable under SSAP 14,Group accounts .
Since FRS 2 is not fully examinable in May 1993, an alternative answer would be to eliminate the minority interest debit balance from the balance sheet and to correspondingly reduce the profit and loss account reserve.
There would then be no minority interest figure in the profit and loss account for the current year, since the minority interest will also have been a debit balance last year end.
Allocating your time
This was an extremely difficult question to get completely right.
The best approach would have been to do the more straightforward bits first and to spend only the allocated time — 36 minutes — and no longer.
I wonder how many of you battled on for much longer than the allocated time or got demoralised and gave up?
I am sorry to say that all you were demonstrating was stubbornness and/or poor examination technique.
The examiner is not looking for technical perfection and certainly would not find it in many candidates' answers to this question.
Allocating your time properly entails more than multiplying the marks by 1.8.
It involves setting priorities, planning your approach and tailoring your answer to the time available.
Think on!
Robson Rhodes
BIRTH OF A BUSINESS COUNSELLOR Chartered accountants are not usually motivated to be competitors, salesmen or traders.
But every firm of accountants needs people who are
David Oates
If Robson Rhodes had not decided to make fundamental changes in its operating style five years ago, the chances are that it would have long since been swallowed up by one of its rivals.
The change of strategy to ensure the firm's survival has meant some hard decisions for managing partner Hugh Aldous.
Around half of the firm's original 80 partners have left since 1987.
The departing partners either decided for themselves that they were uncomfortable with the new management style or were gently helped on their way.
Robson Rhodes has been equally uncompromising with some of its former clients.
Those that wanted little more than routine audits have been redirected to other firms, allowing Robson Rhodes to concentrate on those with which it felt it could build a long-term relationship as ‘a business counsellor’.
The firm abandoned the idea that it could be all things to all people and decided to focus on identified areas of expertise examples are the legal profession, building societies and the construction industry — and build a reputation for quality of service by becoming pre-eminent in those fields.
It has closed offices in non-strategic regions of the country and opened four new ones, concentrating on established areas of economic growth.
Perhaps most significantly of all, Robson Rhodes resolved to become what Mr Aldous calls ‘a managed firm', as opposed to a loose knit group of partners with little apparent accountability.
To achieve this it separated operational and functional responsibilities within the practice and brought in outside professional managers who were non-accountants: principally Ray Pierce ex-chief executive of the Mortgage Corporation and a former general manager of American Express — as chief executive, and Mel Smaje, a quietly determined former rugby player with experience in the pharmaceutical and computer industries, as director of human resources.
Mr Smaje's main role has been to mastermind the changes of behaviour that are a necessary requisite of the new operating style.
He has introduced training programmes in conjunction with such august management institutions as Ashridge Management College to broaden the scope of partners' understanding of the outside business world.
Anyone nominated for a partnership now has to go through a two-day assessment and take part in simulated exercises that test the ability to display initiative in seeking new business.
The exercises are often based on potential clients that Robson Rhodes has within its sights.
Mr Aldous recalls that the building of the managed firm was tackled with ‘huge gusto and enthusiasm’.
A management board was set up that comprised ‘everybody who ran a little bit of the firm’.
The board itself then proved its own determination — it abolished itself in favour of a proper functional board.
‘The original board was a bit like a meeting of medieval barons,’ recalls Mr Aldous with some amusement.
The answer was to form a more tight-knit operations board consisting of the partners running the regional offices and a separate functional board to deal with broader issues.
Out of this new structure evolved the idea that Robson Rhodes needed a chief executive to come in from outside and run the company on the same lines as a plc.
Ray Pierce — chief executive since January 1992 — has settled in well and Mr Aldous is relieved that he has not suffered the rebuff that some non-accountancy managers experience when they join professional firms.
‘I have met a couple of chief executives of professional firms who have found it utterly demoralising,’ says Mr Aldous.
‘Their firms brought in somebody from outside who they treated as a glorified office manager and the culture refused to change.
They just spat each other out.’
Mr Aldous and his senior partners have been at pains to ensure that this danger has been minimised at Robson Rhodes.
Partners who have stood in the way of the culture change have not stayed long.
‘It is absolutely necessary that if somebody is gumming up the system or cannot keep pace with what you are trying to do that they should go,’ he declares uncompromisingly.
Jeremy Hakim, a former audit partner in Robson Rhodes' Crawley office, left the firm in April 1992 to set up his own practice in Epsom.
He was joined by Anthony Fry, corporate finance partner in the Crawley office.
Mr Hakim's main reason for leaving was that he felt Robson Rhodes' drive to concentrate on upmarket accounts meant that he was losing personal contact with many of his smaller clients.
‘What we were beginning to miss was that quality of life that we should have had,’ he says.
‘The recession got in the way.
The Robson Rhodes changes got in the way.
We could have held out for another three years and got over all the changes and benefited financially, but I don't believe finance is the be-all and end-all of everything.
You've got to live with yourself and you've got to live with your clients.’
Of Hugh Aldous Mr Hakim says: ‘Hugh has great vision.
I don't think he's a very good people manager, but he admits to that, which is half the battle.’
Mr Aldous insists that Robson Rhodes demonstrates compassion by making every effort to ensure people obliged to leave the firm have somewhere else to go.
He points out that when, in 1990, the recession forced Robson Rhodes to let go 12 students who were under contract, all of them were placed in another firm of chartered accountants.
In line with all the structural changes, some very fundamental behavioural changes were called for.
‘The challenge on the people side of the business was to change behaviour,’ says Mel Smaje, ‘because most people enter the profession of chartered accountancy either to get the qualification and go out or, if they are going to stay in, to tackle intellectual challenges in the field of accountancy, which often makes them deskbound.
They don't enter it because they are motivated to sell, to understand industry, market and develop client relationships.’
He stresses the ability to market as one of the key competencies.
Partners are also being taught coaching skills to help them become less autocratic.
‘It's a major shift in the partnership because, traditionally, once you made partner you became omnipotent and omniscient,’ suggests Mr Smaje.
Key competencies are an important part of Robson Rhodes' performance management system, which sets targets and outlines the skills needed to achieve them.
One target might be, for example, £100,000 worth of new business.
The competencies needed to achieve that might be to understand the key issues of an industry and learn to see how Robson Rhodes' products match that industry's needs, to learn to become more persuasive, a better negotiator, and so on.
Robson Rhodes has been assisted in the change programme by Adrian Savage, who runs training organisation Assessment Design Services.
One of the techniques he uses is The Brain Map, which categorises managers according to distinct behaviour patterns.
They are loosely termed I-Control, I-Pursue, I-Explore and I-Preserve.
The technique originates from the Dolphin Programme devised by Brain Technologies in the US.
Mr Savage sees most accountants falling into the two categories I-Control and I-Explore.
‘They are either I-Control, who like systems, data and accuracy, things like that; or they are I-Explore and like ideas and experimentation.
If you have an organisation that is made up mostly of these two, they're very good at planning and having ideas; they have wonderful intellectual and logical discussions.
What's missing is the I-Pursues who actually do something.
‘These are competitors, salesmen, traders — they go out and make things happen.
In most accountancy practices you have very few of those — and you don't have any I-Preserves either, who are good at relationships and making people feel warm and wanted, so you end up with a very cool, intellectual kind of set-up’.
Mr Savage believes accountancy firms need to go back to basics and examine the kind of partner they need today.
‘One of the things that struck me as an outsider, coming into the firm two and a half years ago, was that there was no accountability,’ recalls Mel Smaje.
‘If you asked a partner who he was accountable to, he would say all the other partners.
If you asked for the evidence of accountability, there were no measures.
We've now put in place a performance measurement system that sets out what the job is that people are there to do, what they're accountable for, what we expect them to achieve and what they are measured on.
This is not the usual stuff — chargeable hours and so on— it is a higher level of objectives.’
The system feeds into a performance-related pay scheme.
Partners are now expected to know a lot more about the broader picture of how businesses operate, not simply those areas relating to accountancy.
‘We are working very heavily with them to convert them and give them the business skills they may not have acquired to date,’ says Mr Smaje.
‘So far they have been taught to become very good technical accountants.
They don't know a great deal at the moment about competitive strategies, marketing strategies, organisational analysis and all the other issues that keep chief executives awake at night.’
Ashridge Management College has designed a programme aimed at equipping Robson Rhodes partners with business counselling skills.
‘We see ourselves as professional advisers to businessmen,’ explains Mr Smaje.
‘The businessman doesn't want to go to different people to talk about things on the marketing front and someone else on the financial front.’
The impact of behavioural change is notoriously difficult to quantify, but Hugh Aldous is convinced that steadily-rising profits and improvements in practically every financial indicator show that Robson Rhodes is on the right track.
Fee income grew by 4.9% last year — faster than the other medium-sized firms — and profits per partner were higher at £574,000.
Above all, Mr Aldous is happy that Robson Rhodes has avoided the fate that can so easily befall small and medium-sized accountancy practices in the current harsh economic climate — having to merge with a rival.
He finds that idea unthinkable.
‘What's the point?’ he asks.
‘All it means is you can't sort yourself out and you are asking somebody else to do it for you.’
It is absolutely necessary that if somebody is gumming up the system or cannot keep pace with what you are trying to do that they should go
All change at City Road
Accountancy firms need to go back to basics and examine the kind of partner they need today.
Partners are now expected to know a lot more about the broader picture of how businesses operate
Hugh Aldous: Managing the managed firm
individual voluntary arrangements
A VALUABLE BREATHING SPACE Applying for an individual voluntary arrangement can banish the spectre of personal bankruptcy
Peter Busby
Voluntary arrangements under the terms of Part VIII of the Insolvency Act 1986 provide for individuals a procedure akin to that which administration provides for companies.
The protections and incentives offered by a successful individual voluntary arrangement (IVA), can lead to a larger dividend for creditors and avoid or cancel bankruptcy for a debtor.
IVA provisions are contained in ss 252 to 263 of the Insolvency Act 1986 and Rule 5 of the Insolvency Rules 1986 (SI 1986 No 1925).
Application for an IVA may be made by an undischarged bankrupt or, more likely, by a person who, being insolvent, would be able to petition for his or her own bankruptcy.
The debtor begins the procedure by asking a licensed insolvency practitioner to put together an IVA proposal.
The proposal is made to the creditors through the court (usually the County Court).
It must provide for a nominee to act as the IVA's trustee or supervisor.
The nominee must be a licensed insolvency practitioner, and will often, but not necessarily, be the person who puts together the proposal.
The proposal must explain why an IVA is desirable and why creditors may be expected to support it.
Various reasons could be put forward.
For example:
A bankruptcy could lead to a ‘fire sale’ with creditors receiving a smaller dividend than would be the case in a controlled realisation through an IVA.
Under the IVA, the debtor intends to continue to work in his or her business, so income would continue to be generated and made available to creditors.
The making of a bankruptcy order may effectively lead to a professional no longer being able to practise in his or her profession, and therefore all possibility of income generation would be lost.
An IVA could avoid this.
The proposal must also contain details of the debtor's assets and liabilities; the duration of the arrangement; and when distributions are to be made to creditors, with estimates of amounts.
The full list of required information is set out in Insolvency Rule 5.3.
The effect of applying for an IVA can be dramatic; the individual is given a breathing space.
Under s 254(1) of the Insolvency Act, the court can exercise its discretion to halt any action, execution or other legal process against the debtor or the debtor's property pending the consideration of the interim order.
If an order is made by the court, then, while it is in force, no bankruptcy petition may be presented or proceeded with, and no other proceeding, execution or legal process can be commenced or continued except with leave of the court.
An interim order (and thus its freezing effect) lasts until 28 days after the court is told of the report of the creditors' meeting referred to below.
If an interim order is made, what happens during the breathing space?
First, the nominee must advise the court if a creditors' meeting should be summoned; if so, then the period of the interim order is extended to give time for the meeting to take place.
The nominee summons the meeting, giving notice to every creditor.
The creditors' meeting decides whether or not to approve the IVA, with or without amendments to the proposal, although any amendments must be approved by the debtor.
Secured creditors are given some protection: no proposal or modification that affects their rights to enforce security can be approved unless they concur.
Preferential creditors are similarly protected.
Approval of the IVA requires a majority of more than 75%, and voting rights are based on the value of the debts.
Unliquidated debts are not counted, and neither are secured debts to the extent of the security.
This is a problem for secured creditors who may wish to vote.
If they place a value on their security to establish an unsecured debt and so vote, they will be stuck with that value.
If the asset then realises a higher value, the surplus is then brought into the general ‘pot’.
If the IVA proposal is accepted, the arrangement binds all creditors who had notice of and could vote at the meeting, whether or not they were present or represented.
It is therefore very important for creditors who have notice of such meetings, and who may be prejudiced by the arrangement, to attend or arrange for proxy representation.
If a creditor fails to attend its interests will not be upheld and the consequences could be expensive.
There are two grounds for challenging a meeting's decision: first, if the arrangement unfairly prejudices the interest of a particular creditor; second, if there was some procedural irregularity.
Such challenge must be made within 28 days after the meeting's decision is reported to the court.
The court then has wide powers to revoke or suspend the approval, or give directions as to further meetings.
If, however, the decision is not challenged, the supervisor takes over the running of the IVA.
The assets are placed in his or her hands under Insolvency Rule 5.21.
The supervisor is required to keep accounts and records and file an abstract of them with the court at least once a year, giving copies to the debtor and to all creditors.
The supervisor finalises the administration of the IVA within 28 days of final conclusion by sending a notice of completion and a report and set of accounts to the debtor and to all creditors.
The supervisor's fees are dealt with in the IVA itself.
For sole traders, as well as individuals in financial difficulties, an IVA can be a successful conclusion to financial embarrassment.
Sole practitioners in the professions can also take advantage of the provisions.
So can the individuals in a partnership, although partnerships as such cannot, and the complex provisions of the Insolvent Partnerships Order must be considered instead.
Proposals for simplifying these are currently under discussion with the DTI.
Clearly, the scope for IVAs will increase as the recession lengthens.
THE IVA ALTERNATIVE
A successful voluntary arrangement can lead to a larger dividend for creditors and avoid or cancel bankruptcy for a debtor.
The proposal must explain why an IVA is desirable and why creditors may be expected to support it.
The effect of applying for an IVA can be dramatic; the individual is given a breathing space.
Failure to attend the creditors' meeting can have expensive consequences.
accounting issues
Are your report and accounts user friendly?
The annual report and accounts are crucial in communicating a company's image.
So get them right.
The main season for preparing annual reports and accounts will soon be with us — the year end of 83 of the FTSE Top 100 companies falls between 31 December and 31 March — so now seems a good time for finance directors to assess whether their annual tome is user friendly.
The box below contains a list of salient points to check against your own company's report and accounts.
The preferred answers and details of how to assess your company's score appear on p 89.
1
Is the report larger than A4?
2
Does the front cover show the period being reported on, for example 16 months ended 31 March 1993, or year ended 31 December 1992?
3
If your report is bound with a spine, is the name of the company and the year shown on it?
4
Are the contents shown on the inside front cover, or on the front page?
5
Does the report have a translucent blank page between the front cover and the first page, or a separate ‘dust jacket'?
6
Does each page of the accounts show the company's name?
7
Is the notice of the agm included as a separate insert?
8
Is there a picture of the chairman and/or chief executive — either full page, a portrait by Snowdon or painted in oils?
9
Are all the photographs relevant and captioned?
10
Are your accounting policies shown at the beginning of the notes to the accounts?
11
Is the paper so glossy that it is difficult to write on with a highlighting pen?
12
Is a large version of the company logo overprinted on the pages of the accounts?
13
Where members of staff appear in ‘action’ photographs — and there are fewer than six people in the photograph are they named?
14
Does the report show the names of your financial advisers, your stockbrokers, head office address, phone and fax number?
15
Do you include short biographies of your executive directors as well as the required ones for non-executive directors?
16
Do the biographies include the age of each director?
17
Do you include a proper historical record (usually a five-year summary)?
18
Does your interim statement include a balance sheet and a cash flow statement?
19
Do the accounts (and the notes) take up less than 30% of the overall number of pages?
20
If you use an agency to help with the production of your report and accounts, does its fee amount to more than 50% of the cost of printing and postage?
HOW DID YOU SCORE?
1
Yes: deduct 20 points
2
Yes: score 10 points.
No: If it only shows the year and your year end is 31 December: score 5 points
3
No: deduct 5 points if the year is not shown, and 5 points if the name is not shown
4
Inside front cover: score 10 points; front page: score 5 points
5
Deduct 10 points for each ‘yes’ answer
6
Yes: score 10 points
7
Yes: deduct 5 points
8
Yes: full page, deduct 15 points.
Deduct 25 points for a portrait by Snowdon or in oils
9
Deduct 5 points for each irrelevant photo, and another 5 points for each uncaptioned one
10
Yes: score 10 points
11
Yes: deduct 20 points
12
Yes: deduct 10 points
13
No: deduct 2 points for each one not named.
(If you don't know whether or not the people pictured are employees, count them as employees)
14
Score 2 for each yes, and deduct 2 for each no
15
Yes: score 15 points.
If biographies of non-executive directors are not shown, deduct 15 points
16
Yes: score 10 points
17
Yes: score 10 points.
A few coloured illustrations in ‘financial highlights’ don't count
18
Yes: score 10 points.
Also score 5 points if it is dated
19
Yes: deduct 15 points
20
Yes: deduct 1 point for each percentage point over 50%
75 points or over: very good.
50-75: quite good.
0-50: could do better.
A minus score: should you change your agency?
Debt, equity or something else?
The Accounting Standards Board's latest FRED tackles capital instruments
FRED 3,Accounting for Capital Instruments (see this issue, p 109), contains the Accounting Standards Board's proposals for accounting for all kinds of shares and debts.
This is an area that has come to prominence in recent years as new kinds of instruments such as auction market preferred shares (AMPS), convertible debt with premium put options and convertible capital bonds have appeared.
There has been some confusion concerning the status of such instruments, the accounting treatment for which has varied and sometimes been controversial.
The first formal step towards an accounting standard was the ASB's discussion paper, which appeared in December 1991.
Respondents to that paper were generally supportive of its main framework, so this has been retained in the FRED.
However, as we shall see later, there have been some changes in the more detailed areas.
The FRED proposes a number of general principles for accounting for capital instruments.
However, the implications of the principles for more than a dozen particular instruments are set out in the ‘Notes on Application’.
These have been included in the FRED because respondents stated they found similar material in the discussion paper helpful.
The starting point for the approach taken in the FRED is the definition of liabilities in the Board's draft Statement of Principles: ‘Liabilities are an entity's obligations to transfer economic benefits as a result of past transactions or events’.
The FRED therefore proposes that capital instruments should be classified as liabilities if they contain an obligation to transfer economic benefits.
The most common example of such an obligation is a requirement to make a cash payment: for the purpose of the FRED it is not material how such an obligation is described (for instance, as interest or capital) nor whether the obligation is contingent on future events.
The result of this approach is that most capital instruments are reported as liabilities.
A standard based on the FRED would prohibit anticipating the conversion of convertible debt, with the result that such debt must be reported within liabilities.
A requirement for separate disclosure on the balance sheet is proposed.
Shareholders' funds are to be analysed between amounts attributable to equity interests and non-equity interests.
The amount attributed to non-equity interests is not to be confined to the nominal value of the shares, but should reflect the full consideration received, together with any accrued premium for redemption.
For this purpose, shares should be regarded as non-equity if they have a restricted right to dividends or capital, or are redeemable.
Minority interests are to be analysed in the same way as shareholders' funds.
However, sometimes there are arrangements connected with an issue of shares, such as a guarantee given by the parent company of amounts payable in respect of the shares, which can affect the accounting.
If such an arrangement has the result that the group, taken as a whole, cannot avoid payments, the FRED would require that in the consolidated accounts the instrument be reported as a liability.
The FRED proposes that debt and non-equity instruments should initially be recognised at the amount of the net proceeds, that is, after deduction of costs incurred directly in connection with the issue.
Finance costs should be recognised at a constant rate on the carrying amount, and that amount will be increased by the finance costs in respect of the period and reduced by payments made.
These proposals will result in a systematic charge to the p&l account for instruments such as deep discount bonds, and will ensure that the premium on convertible bonds incorporating a premium put option is recognised over the period from issue to the exercise date — as is, in fact, already required by UITF Abstract 1.
On all the above points, the FRED is consistent with the discussion paper.
But, as mentioned above, some changes have been made in the light of comments received on the discussion paper.
One topic addressed by many commentators was the assessment of the maturity of debt: that is, how it should be determined whether debt is short-term or long-term.
Here the discussion paper proposed a very strict rule: the assessment was to be made by reference to the contractual maturity of the debt, and no consideration was to be given to facilities which would permit it to be re-financed.
However, respondents pointed to situations in which such a rule would seem to give anomalous results.
And so FRED 3 proposes that where facilities are held which permit the borrower, in effect, to extend a loan, the maturity of the loan should be assessed by reference to the longest such refinancing permitted.
But this does not extend to cases where the loan may be replaced by another.
Issuers of commercial paper frequently have back-up facilities to ensure that if further commercial paper cannot be issued to finance the redemption of existing debt, the funds may be obtained from elsewhere.
As such a facility only permits the replacement of the commercial paper with new indebtedness rather than its extension, the FRED would require the paper to be shown as a short-term liability.
FRED 3 proposes that an analysis of total shareholders' funds between amounts attributable to equity and non-equity interest be disclosed on the face of the balance sheet.
This is a change from the discussion paper, which envisaged that the components of shareholders' funds (such as the share premium account) would be allocated between equity and non-equity.
Many respondents found the discussion paper's proposals in this area confusing or illogical, which caused the Board to re-examine it and to propose requiring disclosure only of the total amounts of the respective kinds of interest in shareholders' funds.
A further requirement has been added, however.
The amount of the non-equity interest in shareholders' funds should now be analysed between the amounts attributable to different classes of non-equity shares.
The paper also proposed that an accounting standard restrict the uses of the share premium account.
However, it appeared that the other proposals would provide a comprehensive framework for accounting for shares, debts and the costs relating thereto, and so there seemed no need to proceed with this proposal.
Finally, a possible change from the discussion paper which has not been made should also be recorded here.
The paper addressed at some length methods of accounting for convertible debt that seek to address the hybrid nature of such debt by accounting separately for its debt and equity components, although it did not propose that such methods be required.
Respondents who favoured such methods expressed their support strongly.
However, an even larger number agreed with the discussion paper that the conventional accounting for convertible debt should be retained, especially in view of the complexity and subjectivity of the other methods.
One topic addressed by many commentators was the assessment of the maturity of debt
Should we go the Kiwi way?
Should the British Government follow New Zealand and produce accruals-based financial statements
In his report (see ACCOUNTANCY , September 1992, p 100) on the proposed framework for financial reporting published by the New Zealand Society of Accountants (NZSA) last year, Bob Beale mentions the NZ government's audited financial statements for the six months to 31 December 1991.
On 30 September 1992 the Controller and Auditor General signed his unqualified opinion on that government's first full-year accrual-based financial statements, for the year to 30 June 1992.
What do they show?
The operating statement for the year shows a deficit of NZ$5.149bn on revenues (mostly tax) of NZ$27.3bn (roughly, NZ$3 = £1).
The main item of expenditure was NZ$10.6bn on social services, about half for pensions.
The statement of financial position shows a cumulative year-end deficiency on the Crown Balance Account of NZ$15.1bn (equivalent to about £1,500 per capita).
Against total assets of NZ$42.2bn, it has borrowings of NZ$46.7bn, pension liabilities of NZ$5.3bn, and payables of NZ$3.4bn.
NZ$20.3bn of debt was denominated in foreign currencies, mostly US dollars and Japanese yen; only NZ$1.7bn was in sterling.
Nearly half of the total asset valuation (NZ$20.1bn) is for ‘physical assets’.
Most of the rest is investments and receivables.
The main categories of physical asset are state (not municipal) highways, land and buildings, specialist military equipment, national parks/forest parks/conservation areas, commercial forests, national archives, national library collections, and plant and equipment.
None of these mostly infrastructural items is easy to value.
The state highways are valued at NZ$8.8bn gross, less NZ$1.8bn straight-line depreciation, NZ$7bn net.
They comprise the land, formation works, road structure, drainage works and the road's traffic facilities, plus bridges, culverts, tunnels, animal/pedestrian underpasses, and river protection works.
Consultants undertook the highways valuation on a depreciated replacement cost basis.
The valuation reflects estimates of the costs of the most appropriate modern method of new construction of the network.
It was based on information from RAMM (the Road Assessment and Management database), and the bridge inventory held by Transit NZ, supplemented by the valuers' local knowledge and expertise, particularly in respect of depreciation.
In theory, and (with due allowance for the uncertainties involved) in practice too, this approach clearly generates accounts of far more economic use than the historical cost mumbo-jumbo that still appears in so many corporate accounts.
It was used in other valuations (for example specialist military equipment — mostly frigates, aircraft, and helicopters).
Other physical assets were valued by reference to evidence of recent selling-prices of similar items.
Only plant and equipment (NZ$0.9bn) was given the archaic historical cost treatment.
Investments were valued at NZ$13bn, two-thirds relating to the government's equity investment in wholly or partly state-owned enterprises.
Much the biggest is the Electricity Corporation (NZ$3.3bn), followed by the Earthquake and War Damage Commission (NZ$1.5bn), right down to the very capable NZ Symphony Orchestra (NZ$0.002bn — about £600,000).
The investments are reported at the lower of cost and net current value, the latter based on the enterprises' most recent accounts.
The marketable investments held for trading purposes (nearly NZ$5bn) are recorded at net current value.
Most are foreign currency deposits (NZ$4.6bn).
How do these results compare with the government's conventional cash-based accounts?
The cash flow deficiency from operations was NZ$2.021bn.
This increased by NZ$0.507bn in respect of net payments for physical assets and the exclusion of realised forex gains, giving a deficit of NZ$2.528bn on the government's budget account.
This was increased by a further NZ$3.049bn for non-cash costs, mostly unrealised losses on forex liabilities and depreciation; and reduced by NZ$0.428bn in respect of net capital expenditures.
Lo and behold, this gives the accrual accounts deficit of NZ$5.149bn!
The NZ accounting reforms were part of wider changes in public sector management, introduced by the market-orientated and subsequently deposed Labour government in the 1988 State Sector Act and the 1989 Public Finance Act.
The broader reforms sought to decentralise managerial responsibility and ‘to enhance accountability for the use of public resources’.
The rationale of the accounting reform is to use accrual accounting to provide a more complete picture of the management of public resources, particularly where the financial implications of actions extend beyond a year.
In her foreword, Ruth Richardson, the Minister of Finance (and not the most popular Kiwi politician), expresses it thus: ‘The special advantages of accrual accounting are that it distinguishes between capital and current spending, and that it takes better account of the cost of current policies for future generations…
The decline in net worth underlines the burden government deficits place on future taxpayers.’
The NZ statements are produced in accordance with GAAP, and will be subject to the public sector reporting requirements that emerge from the NZSA's Financial Reporting Framework proposals.
The introduction to the governmental statements makes an important reservation in this context, however: ‘Although the format and presentation resemble a company's financial statements, those of the Crown should be analysed in a different context.
This is because the government's objectives relate to the welfare of New Zealanders rather than making a profit.
Further, the Crown has the power to tax which, while not included on the balance sheet (sic ), ensures that the Crown remains solvent even with a negative balance.’
Should the UK Government follow NZ's lead and publish accrual-based financial statements?
It merits consideration, even though there is still keen advocacy for cash flow accounting, and even though there are inevitably additional costs and a long lead-time to production (probably rather more than the two years in NZ) as departments switch to accrual accounting.
The approach would not be novel here.
Already the Next Steps agencies are responsible for half of the staff undertaking the work of government ministries.
Their accounts are prepared using accrual-type concepts.
The Treasury is looking at ‘resource accounting', an accruals-type system, and is moving towards a system of valuation for fixed assets based on replacement cost.
The NHS is into an era of capital charging, which is likely to be extended to other public sector bodies, including some (such as universities) which are formally autonomous.
And CIPFA has a Statement of Recommended Practice in preparation.
Questions, such as the valuation of infrastructure, heritage, and community assets, have been recognised.
Perhaps the Auditor General should conduct a thorough study of the potential costs and benefits of carrying through such reforms in this country, up to and including accrual accounts for UK Inc.
As Miles Kington might put it in Franglais: ‘Plus ca change, plus c'est not quite la meme chose’.
This approach clearly generates accounts of far more economic use than the historical cost mumbo-jumbo that still appears in many corporate accounts
accounting solutions
Provision for redundancies
A company is in the process of making compulsory redundancies.
The decision was taken earlier in the year and the employees were identified and told about the decision before the year end.
The redundancies will take place next year.
Is a provision required in the accounts for this year and if so, how much should be provided?
Would the response differ if the employees had been identified but not informed prior to the year end?
Making compulsory redundancies would usually involve the following stages:
(a)
the decision to make employees redundant;
(b)
identifying the number of employees involved;
(c)
identifying the individuals;
(d)
informing unions and employees;
(e)
making the redundancy payments.
Where all these steps have been taken by the balance sheet date, the cost of the redundancy programme will be reflected in the accounts for the year.
This is because the liability has been incurred and settled.
Although all the steps (a) to (d) were completed by the balance sheet date, some would argue that as the redundancy costs are to be incurred in the next year, they are not liabilities that should be recognised in the current year's accounts.
An objection to this argument is that a legal obligation is not a necessary condition for a liability.
The ASB's discussion draft Statement of Principles Chapter 3 defines liabilities as ‘an entity's obligations to transfer economic benefits as a result of past transactions or events’.
It is clear that the company has an obligation to specific employees to incur the redundancy costs in question and retains no discretion to avoid the outflow of resources associated with the costs.
Another argument for its being a liability of the current year is that employees are normally entitled to redundancy pay under the law.
Companies do not normally recognise this as a liability, because it is usually a remote contingency where accounts are prepared on a going concern basis.
However, where a decision has been made to make redundancies and employees have been informed, the contingency crystallises into an actual liability.
Having decided that the redundancy costs fall to be treated as a liability, it is probable that there will be an outflow of resources and the cost can be measured with reliability.
Hence, it should be recognised in the current year's accounts.
In general, where the company is obliged to pay ex gratia amounts in excess of the legal minimum, the full cost of the redundancy payments including the legal minimum should normally be provided.
This would be so particularly if the employees had terms in their contracts that provided for such extra amounts, or if the employees included directors who were entitled to such extra amounts under their service contracts.
If employees have been identified but not informed prior to the year end, the above arguments for making the provision would still apply.
Tax on sale of revalued assets
A company will adopt FRS 3 for its accounting period ending on 31 March 1993.
A property it acquired many years ago is carried at a valuation.
No deferred tax was provided on the revaluation surplus.
The company has sold the property during the current accounting period at the carrying amount, and tax is payable on the gain realised.
How should the tax be shown in its accounts to 31 March 1993?
Under FRS 3, the profit or loss on the disposal of an asset should be shown in the p&l account as the difference between the proceeds and the carrying amount, whether carried at a valuation or cost (para 21).
This means that the previous revaluation surplus relating to the property sold should not be passed through the p&l account.
(Under FRS 3, revaluation surpluses go to the statement of total recognised gains and losses as they arise.)
Instead, the surplus should be transferred directly to the p&l account reserve.
As the property was sold at the carrying amount, no profit or loss will be recognised in the p&l account.
Should, however, the tax on the gain be recognised in the p&l account or in the statement of total recognised gains and losses?
Had the company decided to provide tax on the revaluation surplus, the provision would have been made out of the revaluation surplus, ie the tax would have followed the surplus (SSAP 15, para 39).
Therefore, the tax payable on the gain should be similarly recognised in the statement of total recognised gains and losses for the year, and not in the p&l account.
However, if sales proceeds are greater than the carrying value, any balance of the tax payable on the gain in excess of the carrying amount would be charged to the p&l account.
Revenue recognition
A company sells a property to a friendly third party at market value for cash.
There is a call and put option in place that requires the seller to repurchase the property.
Can it recognise the gain as a realised profit for distribution purposes?
At first sight, the sale of the property to a friendly third party for cash would indicate that the gain is realised.
But the question is whether the gain has been earned.
In order to answer this question it is necessary to consider how the repurchase agreement affects the transaction.
If the repurchase price is equal to the sale price of the property, or the sale price plus the interest, then the seller, having the call option, is likely to exercise the option if the market value of the property is above the repurchase price.
In this case, the seller has kept the rewards.
If, on the other hand, the market value is lower than the repurchase price and the terms are the same, then the buyer is likely to exercise the put option.
In this case, the seller has kept the risks.
In both these situations, the buyer is assured of a return of the original price plus interest and is not taking any significantly greater risk than if it made a loan secured on the property concerned.
The agreement is therefore likely to be in substance a secured borrowing.
However, if the repurchase price contained in the options is the market value at the date of exercise, it is probable that the buyer acquires both the opportunity to benefit from any increase in the value of the asset and the risk of loss due to an adverse change in its value.
In that case, the seller has transferred the risks and rewards of ownership to the buyer, and a sale has taken place.
In practice, the terms of the sale and repurchase agreement would need to be analysed carefully to reveal its true commercial effect.
The ASB is expected to issue an FRS on off balance sheet finance that will provide further guidance on transactions of this type.
reports & accounts
ROYAL BANK OF SCOTLAND
Comprehensive changes
Royal Bank of Scotland has changed its accounting policies on insurance business, provisions for bad and doubtful debts, and premises and equipment for the year ended 30 September 1992.
On insurance business the bank now makes provision where necessary for the estimated amount required over and above unearned premiums to meet future claims and related expenses.
It calculates this by class of business on the basis of a separate carry-forward of deferred acquisition expenses after making allowance for investment income.
In previous years, the group limited acquisition expenses deferment to commission paid to the agent introducing creditor business and to transaction charges paid on the collection of motor and household premiums over the terms of the policies.
Royal Bank of Scotland has decided from 1 October 1991, and in line with market practice and the Association of British Insurers' SORP, to defer acquisition expenses relating to new and renewed motor and household policies over the period during which the premiums are earned, generally 12 months.
The main acquisition charges so deferred are direct advertising expenditure and costs associated with the telesales and underwriting staff.
The effect of this change on prior years is a credit of £9.1m, which has been treated as an exceptional item in the 1991/92 p&l account; accordingly, prior years' figures have not been restated.
Direct Line, the insurance business, is highly successful and contributed £15.1m (v £10.1m) to the group operating profit of £47.4m (v £69.1m) before the exceptional credit.
Royal Bank of Scotland now brings interest earned on doubtful advances into the p&l account as it accrues, provided that its collectability is not subject to significant doubt.
In previous years, the bank credited interest on certain doubtful advances to the p&l account, and also charged full provision for such interest to the p&l account.
The group's new policy is in accordance with the British Bankers' Association SORP on advances.
The prior year figures for interest receivable and provisions for bad and doubtful debts have been reduced by £28m to reflect the more rigorous recognition of interest which is now in force.
These adjustments do not affect the prior year figures in the group p&l account or balance sheet.
The group now separately identifies the costs of adapting buildings for its use and depreciates these costs on a straight-line basis over 15 years.
The effect of this change is to increase the group's revaluation reserves and the book value of freehold and long leasehold premises by £18.4m.
The effect on the prior year p&l accounts is insignificant.
Prior year figures have not been restated.
Royal Bank of Scotland does not depreciate freehold and long leasehold buildings, as any such charge is considered to be insignificant in view of their useful economic lives and estimated residual values.
TATE & LYLE
Accounting for post-retirement healthcare
Tate & Lyle (the international sugar, cereal sweetener and starch processing group) has anticipated the mandatory implementation of a change in accounting standards by adopting an accounting policy of recognising the liabilities arising from the provision of post-retirement healthcare and life assurance benefits for US employees on an actuarially-determined basis.
In the 52 weeks ended 26 September 1992, the group charged £8.2m (£8m restated) in respect of other post-retirement benefits.
Group pre-tax profits for 1991/92 amounted to £189.5m (v £230.8m).
The change has been adopted as a prior year adjustment, so pre-tax profits for 1991/92 are £4.3m lower and for 1990/91, on a restated basis, £3.8m lower.
A note to the accounts says that ‘in anticipation of a proposed amendment to the accounting standard governing deferred tax, deferred tax of £35m (v £31m) is recognised in full on the liability’.
Following the date Tate & Lyle's accounts were signed, the ASB issued in mid-December last year an amendment to SSAP 15 that allows preparers to take into account, at the time that provisions for pensions and other post-retirement benefits are set up, the tax relief that will be received when the benefits are actually paid.
Tate & Lyle's main actuarial assumptions for the provision of healthcare and life assurance benefits to its US employees are that medical inflation will increase by 15% in 1992 reducing to 7% by 1996; a discount rate of 8.5% was used.
The revised accounting policy for these benefits is to accrue the cost over the service lives of employees on the basis of a constant percentage of earnings.
Variations from the regular cost are spread over the expected remaining service lives of employees currently in the scheme.
BERISFORD INTERNATIONAL
Investment revalued
Berisford International (food, agribusinesses and property) has revalued the holding company's investments in subsidiary entities at the year end to their underlying net asset values of £386.9m (v £599.2m) in its accounts for the year ended 30 September 1992.
The directors have considered the value of the remaining fixed assets and are satisfied that they are worth, in total, not less than the aggregate amount at which they are stated in the company's accounts.
Accordingly, continues a note to the accounts, in accordance with s 275, CA 1985, the aggregate provision does not fall to be classified as a realised loss and therefore distributable reserves of the company are £12m (v £81.5m).
This is made up as follows:
In his statement, chairman John Slater says that the major problems relating to the group's past have now been dealt with, but that the directors are not yet in a position to recommend the payment of a dividend.
BURTON GROUP
Funding property development
Burton Group (retailing, clothing and home furnishing) has decided to include the gross funding costs of holding the development property portfolio as part of the interest charges in the p&l account with effect from 1 March 1992.
In the year ended 29 August 1992, the effect is to include £7.1m gross funding costs in respect of the property development portfolio in the net interest charge of £27.3m.
Previously these costs were charged to the provision set up in prior years for the write-down on the withdrawal from property development.
The note to the accounts on assets held for sale explains that the marked and continuing downturn in the property market since 1990, as reflected in the latest valuation reports, has made it increasingly difficult to forecast the dates on which Burton will have completed the letting and sale of its development properties.
GRAND METROPOLITAN
Two sets of figures
Journalists and investment analysts attending the preliminary results meetings of Grand Metropolitan (the international food, drinks and retailing group) on 3 December 1992 were provided with a plethora of figures.
The group plans to publish its annual report and accounts for the year ended 30 September 1992 on 19 January 1993 using the FRS 3 basis, which of course was only published at the end of October last year.
As finance director David Nash stated: ‘In view of the short time since the standard was issued, and the fact that most forecasts have been prepared on the existing basis, we were concerned that it might be confusing if this presentation was based on the new format.
‘Therefore, the preliminary announcement and this presentation use the existing accounting format.
However, the press release includes an appendix showing the group p&l account on the FRS basis, and there is additional information in the supplementary schedules.’
Grand Met's group p&l account on the old basis shows profit before tax of £902m (v £950m), while on the FRS 3 basis the pre-tax figure is £925m (v £448m).
An appendix reconciles the previous basis with the new FRS figures.
Chairman and chief executive Allen Sheppard welcomed the tightening up of accounting requirements.
Mr Nash added that the whole basis of ASB chairman David Tweedie's approach was to stop people looking at special figures and make them examine various factors.
Grand Met was going directly to the new format, but analysts were still working on the old style p&l accounts.
In a research note commenting on Grand Met's final results, Kleinwort Benson Securities said: ‘Greater accounting transparency resulting from reporting under FRS 3 will steadily diminish concerns among some investors that the group's past accounting had become overcreative.’
The Kleinwort analysts believe that the group's accelerating cash generation will attract increased market attention now that all companies' earnings have become so volatile under FRS 3 reporting.
TUNSTALL GROUP
UITF 3 wrongly applied
Tunstall Group (community alarm systems and hospital communications) has not satisfactorily applied UITF 3,Treatment of Goodwill on Disposal of a Business , in its p&l account for the year ended 30 September 1992
The extraordinary debits of £2.55m charged in the group p&l account, analysed in a note to the accounts, include a £57,000 surplus on disposal of assets of Churchill Safes & Security Products Ltd, a £1.098m loss on disposal of assets of Churchill Safes & Security Products Ltd and Tann Synchronome Ltd, and on a separate line £2.999m purchased goodwill in respect of businesses sold.
The Urgent Issues Task Force issued a statement on 17 December 1992 about the unsatisfactory way that a small minority of companies have applied UITF 3 (see also ACCOUNTANCY , January, p 9).
In particular, the UITF disliked the way the goodwill debit in the p&l account was being presented separately from the profit or loss on disposal.
The statement went on to say that UITF 3 ‘clearly indicates that the goodwill component should be included as part of the profit or loss on disposal, and not distanced from it as a separate item.
Where the item is presented as two components there should be, in addition, a single sub-total showing the profit or loss on disposal’.
Tunstall recredits the £2.999m transfer of goodwill to extraordinary items to the retained profits at the foot of the consolidated p&l account.
Since this is, in effect, a full appropriation account, this treatment is allowed by UITF 3.
In fairness to Tunstall, it should be noted that the 1991/92 accounts were signed on 7 December 1992, well over a week before the UITF statement on the application of abstracts was published.
BETTERWARE
Interim results reviewed
Betterware, which describes itself as ‘UK's leading housewares retailer in direct home shopping', has included an accountant's review report from Robson Rhodes in its interim report for the 28 weeks ended 12 September 1992.
In his report, group chief executive Andrew Cohen declares: ‘In the interest of providing improved information to our shareholders, and in view of the group's managed growth plans, we include balance sheet and cash flow statements with this interim report.
We support the Cadbury proposals and the recent moves by the Accounting Standards Board in promoting improved shareholder information.’
Pre-tax profits for the half year rose by 123% to £6.296m (v £2.814m).
RECENT RESULTS
Philips.
The Dutch electronics group, which for so long supported current cost accounting, has decided to move to the historical basis with effect from 1 January 1992.
The group apparently wants to bring its accounting policies into line with those of other large international groups.
Dudley Eustace, formerly finance director of British Aerospace, has recently become finance director of Philips.
EFM Dragon Trust.
In its accounts for the year ended 30 September 1992, the investment trust, which specialises in Far East markets, has allocated 50% of its management fee, net of tax relief, to capital reserve.
The proportion allocated, it says, reflects an assessment of the activities undertaken by the manager in pursuit of the company's investment objectives.
Cosalt.
In accordance with the exemptions provided for by CA 1985 and SSAP 25,Segmental Reporting , the fibres, safety and protection, workwear and holiday homes group does not provide a further analysis of turnover originating overseas, and information required by SSAP 25 is not disclosed.
The directors consider that such disclosures would be seriously prejudicial to the interests of the group.
Cosalt does publish turnover split between UK and overseas, and analyses turnover and trading profit over its main activities.
Wolverhampton and Dudley Breweries.
The directors' report for the 52 weeks ended 27 September 1992 states that the directors have reviewed the 1992 property valuation and, in the light of falling values for hotels and for smaller pubs, have been advised that the current estimated value is some £13.5m below book value.
‘It is considered that this is not a permanent diminution in value and consequently no revaluation has been reflected in the accounts.’
Tamaris.
The homecare-for-the-elderly group had its accounts to 31 March 1992 qualified on the going concern basis by auditors Bleasdale & Chandler.
‘This basis may not be appropriate because the group incurred a loss after taxation and extraordinary items of £1,616,249 during the year ended 31 March 1992 and at that date its current liabilities exceeded its current assets by £6,870,214 and the net deficit was £679,853.’
professional briefing
STANDARDS
Audit Bureau letter warning
The Institute has warned auditors who carry out circulation audits that the specimen letter of engagement the Audit Bureau of Circulations issued to its members in November last year is not in a form agreed by the Institute.
An amended version — the correct one to use — was issued in December.
Auditors who wish to confirm that they have the right version should check that the wording in para 2 of the letter accords with Rule 1.5(b) of the ABC's audit rules.
IFAC documents published
The International Federation of Accountants' International Auditing Practices Committee has issued exposure drafts of ISAs 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 12, 14, 23, 26 and 28, under its ongoing codification and improvements project.
It proposes certain amendments as part of that codification process and is looking for comments on the format of the codified documents, and on various changes in principle or emphasis in ISAs4, 10, 23 and 26.
Copies are available from International Affairs at the Institute, and the deadline for comments is 1 April.
IFAC has also published an international guideline on education,Professional Ethics for Accountants: the Educational Challenge and Practical Application.
This gives guidance for IFAC member bodies on ways to ensure that their members have an adequate continuing understanding of professional values and ethics, so that they can operate effectively and with integrity in a constantly changing environment.
CITY REGULATION
EC credit institutions
Now that the EC Second Banking Coordination Directive is in force (from 1 January 1993), EC credit institutions which are authorised in their home state can provide a range of banking and investment services in all other member states on the basis of that authorisation.
A consultative paper, No 68,EC Second Banking Coordination Directive Implementation: Principles, Core Rules and SIB Rules , from the Securities and Investments Board, contains proposed amendments to the core rules and principles.
Under the Directive, European institutions will not need to be authorised by a UK FSA regulator for investment business in the UK.
However, they will have to comply with other UK rules including conduct of business, so European institutions will have to join the appropriate SRO.
If these European institutions wish to conduct investment business in the UK outside the scope of their passport under the Directive, they will have to obtain authorisation.
The FSA regulatory regime for UK-based credit institutions does not change.
Copies of the paper, price £10, are available from the SIB, Gavrelle House, 2-14 Bunhill Row, London EC1Y 8RA.
Closure of USM
After an extensive review, the London Stock Exchange has recommended the closure of the Unlisted Securities Market at the end of 1995.
The USM, which opened in 1980, was very successful in the 1980s in attracting young growth companies, but its advantages have been eroded.
In 1990, in line with EC directives, a company only required a three-year, instead of a five-year, trading record to obtain a full listing.
The cost of joining the Official List and the USM have become similar.
In addition, The Stock Exchange's proposed revised listing rules include a chapter outlining requirements for new companies that do not have a three-year trading record.
Change to SFA compensation scheme
A consultative paper,Investors Compensation Scheme: Proposed Changes to SFA Levy Allocation Basis , published by the Securities and Investments Board, is intended to come into effect on 1 April 1993.
The Securities and Futures Authority proposes that the first £5m of any levy on its members would continue to be raised on a weighted, registered persons basis, taking account of the amount of business conducted with private clients.
The balance in excess of £5m would be raised in proportion to members' subscriptions.
The proposals would also allow SFA members to categorise registered persons dealing with overseas private clients who are unable to claim compensation under the scheme, in the same way as they categorise registered persons dealing with other clients (eg business or professional) not able to claim under the scheme.
Copies of the paper, price £5, are available from the SIB at the above address.
Long-term care insurance
The Association of British Insurers has published a draft code of practice for long-term care insurance.
The code, which took effect from the start of 1993, requires insurance companies to provide the consumer with the main features of the product at the time a quotation is made.
There is a minimum 14 days' cancellation period from receipt of the policy document.
Copies are available from the ABI, 51 Gresham Street, London EC2N 7HQ.
WESTMINSTER UPDATE
Institute calls for Pensions Act
The Institute has called for new pensions legislation to be introduced, with limitations on the use of pension fund surpluses, and new accounting and auditing requirements.
A regulatory body to investigate complaints should also be established.
Existing legislation, it says in its response to the Pension Law Review Committee's consultative document issued last September, is inadequate to meet current needs.
‘We are moving into an economic environment where the number of scheme members, the increasing number of pensioners, and the high level of holdings in the equity of public companies by pension funds mean that a situation of uncertainty is undesirable.
In addition, pension scheme trusts have characteristics which are materially different from those of conventional trusts.
We therefore feel that a Pensions Act is now necessary in order to consolidate existing legislation, clarify the major areas of uncertainty which currently exist in trust law, and to introduce new safeguards which we believe to be necessary.’
The Act, it envisages, would contain provisions dealing with employees' contractual rights; the use of surpluses; the necessity to maintain proper accounting records, file annual accounts and establish effective internal controls; and an employer's legal responsibility to fund a deficit and, in the event of the employer's winding-up, for any deficit to be a priority debt on the company.
It would contain a model ‘Table A’ trust deed clearly specifying the minimum procedures to be followed when a fund is dissolved, and lay down rules on surpluses.
It would also require that specialist pension tribunals and a regulatory body be set up.
The new body would assume the functions the Occupational Pensions Board currently performs, plus certain of the Inland Revenue's supervisory responsibilities.
It would review risky areas and lay down appropriate safeguards, ensure compliance with accounting requirements, act as the filing authority and provide advice for trustees, employers and scheme members.
As far as audit is concerned, the Institute says that it has not found ‘any convincing reasons’ to ban company auditors from auditing the company pension scheme.
‘The power to appoint the auditor currently lies with the trustees and they should be allowed to continue to appoint who they see fit.’
However, it recommends that the auditor should have a duty to report direct to the regulator and should be required to examine and comment on the effectiveness of the internal controls the trustees have established.
The Institute admits that it would be difficult to legislate on the personal integrity of trustees and knowledge of their duties, but suggests that there should be a ‘fit and proper test’ and appropriate training for trustees.
Any trustee who ceases to be one should also be required to inform the regulator about any circumstances the regulator should be aware of in connection with the trustee's stepping-down.
Copies of the memorandum are available free (send sae) from the Publications Department at the Institute.
Report urges small audit replacement
The Scottish Institute has made an urgent plea to Government to reduce the legislative burdens on small businesses by freeing them from the obligation of a statutory audit, and making it easier for them to disincorporate.
In its recent working party discussion document, entitled Freeing Up Small Business Enterprise , the institute points out that the replacement of the present mandatory audit by an annual accountant's report ‘would not only give business better value for money but would also reduce the number of small company failures as more time could be devoted to the survival and growth of small business enterprise’.
In addition, disincorporation should be made easier because the commercial and fiscal environment has changed drastically since the 1960s when companies were ‘well-advised to incorporate to obtain the benefits of limited liability and easier access to new finance’.
Today many are locked into a now inappropriate tax and legal structure.
To change this, a level playing field for the taxation of business profits and gains should be established, which would make it easier for businesses to move between different corporate structures.
Companies House means business
A total of £420,000 has been received by Companies House in fines following the introduction of penalties for the late filing of accounts on 1 July 1992.
Of this, £70,000 came from private companies.
National Lottery Bill
The Government has published the National Lottery Bill.
It paves the way for the first national lottery in the UK since 1826.
The lottery is expected to generate substantial additional funds for charities, the arts, sport, heritage and for a millennium fund to celebrate the year 2000 and the beginning of the third millennium.
Nearly 100 MPs have signed an early day motion demanding concessions for the pools companies and will vote against the Bill if these are not included.
More liability for officers of companies
Under s 21 of the Road Traffic Act 1991, which has now been brought into force, it is an offence for an officer such as a company's director or secretary to fail to give the name of a driver of one of the company's vehicles where an offence in connection with that vehicle has taken place.
It is no defence for the officer to say he does not know and cannot with reasonable diligence find out who the driver was.
There is an exception where there are no records and this is deemed reasonable in the circumstances.
The fines are up to £1,000 and the provision arises as a result of the introduction of police cameras on roads which provide evidence of offences such as speeding or jumping traffic lights where the police are in possession of the vehicle number but not the name of the driver.
The police do, of course, have access through records to the company as the keeper.
So, keep detailed records of drivers of all company vehicles: otherwise this personal criminal liability may arise.
Childcare at last The Government is to spend £45m over the next three years to address the lack of child-care facilities for school children.
The scheme will help fund many organisations that would like to provide care but have been hampered by the set-up costs of training staff and making the premises safe.
The money will be available for both Training and Enterprise Councils and Local Enterprise Companies in Scotland, so they can work with employers, schools, parents, local authorities and others who want to set up out-of-school care.
Over the next year, 30 to 40 areas will take part in developing the scheme and all TECs and LECs will be able to take part from April 1994 onwards.
Copies of Taking the Initiative on Out-Of-School Childcare are available free from Trish Greenhalgh, Department of Employment, Sex Equality Branch, Caxton House, London SW1H 9NF.
NI Contributions via APM
The Alternative Payment Method (APM) for class 1A National Insurance contributions is to be made available for the next tax year under the same terms as before.
Employers who supply 10 or more cars to employees for their private use will be able to pay the tax direct to the Contributions Agency as an alternative to the deductions being made on a Pay As You Earn basis by the Inland Revenue.
Employers who took advantage of the APM last year will be contacted individually and need not reapply.
New applicants should submit applications by 5 April to: Class 1A Group, Room 107B, DSS, Newcastle-upon-Tyne NE98 1YX.
Data protection Directive a disaster
Implementation of the proposed EC Directive on personal data protection, as it currently stands, will not only further complicate an already extremely complicated situation in Europe, but could also inhibit the transaction of international business and adversely influence the choice of location for business operations.
The Directive's provisions are also so flexible, because of the difficulty in reaching a consensus among the member states and commentators, that there are grave doubts about whether there is any point in adopting them at all.
These criticisms appear in a letter to the Home Office from the Faculty of Information Technology's Technical Committee, in response to a request for comments on proposed revisions to the Directive.
The Directive had to be revised in the light of major reservations commentators expressed during a previous consultation period early in 1991.
The Committee says that the draft Directive has missed the opportunity to lay down ‘a simple, well-defined framework for the protection of personal data and the regulation of personal data processing, applied on a consistent basis' throughout the EC.
‘One possible advantage of a Directive,’ the Committee writes, ‘would be the greater harmonisation and coordination of the detailed requirements for the administration of data protection in the various countries affected.
Unfortunately, this is unlikely to occur.
The present position is that various countries have enacted data protection laws which have similar patterns but significant differences of detail.
The adoption of the proposed Directive in various ways in the various member states is likely to do little to improve this situation (except that data protection laws will be enacted in all the EC states, rather than only some of them).’
Copies of the letter are available free (send sae) from the IT Faculty at the Institute.
Fraud rife in the EC
There is strong evidence that fraud and irregularity against the Community budget continue on a large scale and that controls within the system are not sufficiently effective throughout the Community.
A House of Lords' Select Committee has found that detected fraud is only the tip of the iceberg, and that steps taken to support the fight against it are not enough.
‘A great deal more needs to be done if fraud and irregularity are to be contained within tolerable limits,’ it adds.
In its report,The Fight Against Fraud (HL Paper 44, HMSO, £6.60), the Committee calls on the Commission to draw up a specific action programme for the Council of Ministers to consider, setting out the times by which each element is to be completed and requiring that progress reports, accompanied by a report from the Court of Auditors, should be submitted to the European and national Parliaments.
Administrative procedures must be tightened up, and effective publicity should emphasise prompt and vigorous action in the courts.
The report also criticises the Court of Auditors' ability to carry out its work.
‘The audit coverage throughout the member states is often disjointed or wholly absent', the Report says.
‘The audit function should be carried out by the Court of Auditors in a similar way to that adopted by the principal auditor of a multinational group of companies which has a number of foreign subsidiary companies.
Where the national audit offices are not in a position to meet the Court of Auditors' requirements, private professional firms should be asked to do so.’
If all else fails and the European Court finds that a state beneficiary of grants has failed to correct its administrative deficiencies, the report concludes, the relevant grants should be withdrawn.
LAW Edited by Denis Keenan
Statutory instruments
Dormant companies SI 1992/3003 (65p).
These Regulations,which came into force on 31 December 1992 , allow dormant companies that do not want to appoint auditors to use the written resolution procedure instead of having to pass the necessary special resolution in general meeting.
This is achieved by an amendment to s 250 of the 1985 Companies Act.
The scope of s 251 relating to summary financial statements is also extended.
LAW CASE REVIEW Edited by Denis Keenan
Cheque guarantee cards
A County Court has decided that a paying bank is under no obligation to pay a forged cheque even though it is supported by the bank's guarantee card (see First Sport v Barclays Bank, Current Law,September 1992, para 20).
A person in possession of someone else's cheque book and guarantee card forged the owner's signature and gave the cheque to the plaintiffs, supporting it by the guarantee card.
The defendant bank, which became aware of the circumstances, refused to honour the cheque.
The Peterborough County Court held that it was entitled to do so.
Under s 24 of the Bills of Exchange Act 1882, a cheque bearing the forged signature of the drawer, however skilful, is wholly inoperative.
The fact that such a cheque is supported by a cheque guarantee card makes no difference.
The bank was entitled to refuse payment.
Comment.
His Honour Judge Morrell did not rule on the bank's main contention, which was that since a guarantee card guarantees cheques and a forged cheque is not in fact a cheque, the card is of no significance at all in a transaction if the signature on the cheque is forged, though this is obviously an alternative approach.
Net Book Agreement not enforceable in EC
The Net Book Agreement regulates the uniform system of resale price maintenance in the book trade.
The agreement extends to the sale, in the European Community and elsewhere, of books published by UK publishers.
In particular, it extends to Ireland, where imports from the UK account for over 50% of book sales.
Art 85(1) of the EC Treaty prohibits all agreements between undertakings that may affect trade between member states and which have as their object, or effect, the prevention, restriction or distortion of competition within the Common Market.
Under Art 85(3), the Commission may exempt a restrictive agreement, provided it promotes technical or economic progress while allowing the consumer a fair share of the benefits.
In 1988, the Commission found that the Net Book Agreement infringed Art 85(1), and rejected an application for exemption under Art 85(3).
The Publishers Association, which had promoted the agreement, then applied to the European Court of Justice for annulment of the Commission's decision (see Publishers Association v Commission of the European Communities, The Times , 7 November 1992).
The Court first rejected the Association's argument that the agreement did not infringe Art 85(1) at all.
It then considered whether the agreement ought properly to be exempted under Art 85(3).
The Association sought to show that the restrictions in the agreement were indeed indispensable to the promotion of technical or economic progress.
It argued that without them: it would not be possible, in practice, to operate a system of resale price maintenance because it would be impracticable for each publisher to specify his own conditions of sale; booksellers would find it impossible to comply with all the varied terms imposed by different publishers; booksellers would lose their assurance that they were not being undercut; and the Association itself could not effectively monitor individual resale agreements.
The Court concluded that the Association's arguments were directed largely to the benefits the agreement gave the UK market.
However, an agreement did not qualify for exemption if its beneficial effects were only indispensable within a national market.
The Association had failed to demonstrate, as required by Art 85, that the agreement was indispensable to the promotion of technical or economic progress within the EC.
The Court further concluded that the drafting of individual conditions of sale by each publisher would not impose an undue commercial burden, and that the Association had not advanced any arguments to show the impracticability of monitoring such individual agreements.
Accordingly, the Court declined to annul the Commission's finding that the Net Book Agreement was in breach of Art 85(1).
Comment.
The Court's decision will have a direct effect only on book sales outside the UK: it leaves untouched the operation of the Net Book Agreement in the domestic market.
Its indirect effect remains to be seen.
In 1962, the UK Restrictive Practices Court upheld the agreement, on the ground that its restrictions were not contrary to the public interest.
Would another referral to the Restrictive Practices Court now be possible, on the basis of the changes produced by a further 30 years of publishing, UK entry into the European Community, and this recent decision of the European Court of Justice?
Underwriting company was not a constructive trustee
On October 14 1987, Eagle Trust plc made a takeover offer for the shares of Samuelson Group plc.
The offer was of six new Eagle shares for each Samuelson share or a cash alternative and a rights issue to Eagle shareholders.
SBC Securities Ltd, known at the time as SBCI Savory Milln Ltd agreed to underwrite the cash alternative and rights issue, a potential liability of £56m.
Savory Milln then arranged to sub-underwrite its liability using a list of sub-underwriters introduced by Eagle's chief executive, John Ferriday, and including Mr Ferriday himself.
In December 1987, Savory Milln made payments in discharge of its obligations in the underwriting agreement: £13.5m of the payments were funded by monies received by Savory Milln from a Panamanian company (Anser) administered from Jersey and controlled by Mr Ferriday.
It was later claimed by Eagle that, in fact, the monies received from Anser were monies belonging to Eagle itself and misappropriated by Mr Ferriday.
Eagle brought an action against Savory Milln claiming that Savory Milln should account to Eagle for the £13.5m which had only been made available to Savory Milln to use by reason of fraud by Mr Ferriday, Eagle's then chief executive.
Eagle argued that Mr Ferriday had arranged for its money to be used to satisfy his obligations under the sub-underwriting arrangements that Savory Milln had entered into in circumstances in which Savory Milln ought to have known or been put on inquiry that the money had been misappropriated from Eagle.
Savory Milln should have been aware that Mr Ferriday would try and cover his liabilities from whatever funds he had access to, yet it had made no inquiries as to the source of the £13.5m or how Mr Ferriday had managed to meet his own underwriting obligations.
Savory Milln applied to strike out the action on the grounds that there was no basis for the claim (see Eagle Trust plc v SBC Securities Ltd [1992]4 All ER 488).
Savory argued that a stranger to whom money had been paid in breach of trust could only be held liable as a constructive trustee to account for the money after he had parted with it, if it could be shown that he knew the money misapplied was trust money.
In this case, Savory alleged that the doctrine of constructive notice was not relevant to this type of commercial transaction and on the facts it would not be regarded as having known that the £13.5m was trust money belonging to Eagle.
The application that was heard in the Chancery Division was merely a preliminary issue to see if Eagle was entitled to pursue its claim.
The question of law raised by the application was whether Savory Milln could be made personally liable as constructive trustees to repay the £13.5m (no longer traceable) which had been applied in discharge of Mr Ferriday's and other sub-underwriters' liabilities to Savory Milln.
The answer to this question turned on the matter of knowledge.
A person would only be liable as a constructive trustee of money he had received in payment of a commercial liability, and which had already passed through his hands, if it was possible to show that he knew that the money was misapplied trust money because he had actual knowledge of the breach of trust or he had wilfully shut his eyes to the obvious or had wilfully or recklessly failed to make inquiries that an honest and reasonable man would have made.
The courts in the past have been very reluctant to extend the doctrine of constructive notice and knowledge to cases where monies are paid in the ordinary course of business to someone in discharge of a liability.
Applying these principles to the facts of this case, the central allegations were that Savory Milln knew that £23m of the sub-underwriting was being arranged through Mr Ferriday, knew that he was personally responsible for £7.5m and that it did not believe he had sufficient funds to cover his obligations.
It should therefore have been aware of the danger that he would try to cover his liabilities from whatever funds he had access to (Eagle's funds), but that it made no inquiries about the source of the monies or how he had met his obligations.
The sub-underwriting arrangements took place before Black Monday (19 October 1987), after which Mr Ferriday's resources became insufficient to meet his needs.
The Court said that Savory Milln may have felt some anxiety and even suspicion as to how Mr Ferriday had arranged for the £13.5m to be paid on his behalf, but it was going too far to say that any honest and reasonable man would have inferred that Mr Ferriday had misappropriated Eagle's money in gross breach of his duty as a director or that any honest and reasonable man would not have applied the money, as Savory Milln did, in discharge of sub-underwriting liabilities until he had been satisfied that the monies were properly paid.
The Court said that it was not easy to see in the circumstances what other inquiries Savory Milln could have made.
There was no basis for finding that Savory was liable as a constructive trustee for the £13.5m and Eagle's claim was struck out.
Comment.
The courts have sometimes appeared to embrace a rule that a person can become a constructive trustee not only because he personally receives trust property knowing it is transferred in breach of trust, but also where he knowingly assists in the breach.
A worrying doctrine for accountants and other professionals!
This case makes clear that normally there cannot be liability as a constructive trustee merely for ‘knowing assistance’ in a fraudulent design if there was no dishonesty or lack of probity on the part of the alleged trustee, and if knowledge would not have been inferred in the circumstances by an honest and reasonable person.
The right to silence
The liquidators of an insolvent company applied to the High Court for an order enabling them to examine Muhammed Naviede under s 236 of the Insolvency Act 1986.
A transcript was made of the examination.
The Serious Fraud Office (the SFO) called for a copy of the transcript under its powers to require the production of specified documents under s 2(3) of the Criminal Justice Act 1987.
The liquidators applied to the High Court for directions, and Mr Naviede was represented when the matter came before Vinelott J (see In re Arrows Ltd (No 4), The Times , 11 November 1992).
Vinelott J rejected the SFO's argument that it had an untrammelled right to require the production and use of the evidence in the transcript; that argument had been advanced and rejected when the liquidators applied for an order to examination (In re Arrows Ltd [1992]2 WLR 923).
He also rejected arguments that the transcript did not fall within the term ‘documents’ in s 2(3) of the 1987 Act and that it was protected from disclosure by legal professional privilege.
The real issue in the proceedings was the principle of public interest immunity.
If a person is faced with prosecution, he is entitled to remain silent and to avoid cross-examination.
Although that right had been curtailed by s 2(2) of the 1987 Act, which requires a person under investigation to answer questions from the SFO (or otherwise furnish information) with respect to any matter relevant to the investigation, the effect of the immunity had been preserved by s 2(8), which provided that a statement made in accordance with s 2 could only be used in evidence against the person who made it either on a prosecution for knowingly making a false statement (or recklessly making such), or on a prosecution for some other offence where, in giving evidence, that person made a statement which was inconsistent with it.
However, s 2(8) did not apply to information provided under s 236 of the Insolvency Act 1986, and it was argued on Mr Naviede's behalf that disclosure of the transcript to the SFO should only be made on condition that it was not used in evidence.
This the SFO opposed.
Vinelott J noted that the issue was not the admissibility of the transcript (see s 433 of the Insolvency Act 1986 which makes admissible in evidence statements made under a requirement imposed by the 1986 Act) but whether the SFO should be allowed to use it as evidence otherwise than in accordance with s 2(8) of the 1987 Act.
Further, he was not satisfied that the application of s 2(8) to the use to be made of the transcript would fetter the SFO's investigative powers, as (once the existence of facts disclosed by the transcript became known) these could be proved by other means.
He was, however, concerned that information obtained by the SFO might be disclosed to other authorities, and might be used by them for a prosecution; this concern did not lead him to believe that it would be proper to order the disclosure of the transcript to the SFO without any conditions.
He regarded s 2(8) as applying to the use by any authority of any statement made in accordance with s 2 of the 1987 Act.
Although a trial judge might exclude evidence on the ground of fairness under s 78 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, the fact that Parliament had incorporated the provisions of s 2(8) into the 1987 Act suggested that it had not felt that the power under the 1984 Act was sufficient to protect a person from being compelled to give evidence.
He concluded that the liquidators ought not to make the transcript available to the SFO unless it undertook not to use the statements in the transcript in any prosecution against Mr Naviede (otherwise than in accordance with s 2(8)), and that it would not pass the transcript on to any other authority without first securing a corresponding undertaking.
The SFO was given leave to appeal.
EMPLOYMENT
Transfer of undertakings
A major decision of the European Court of Justice in the case of Dr Sophie Redmond Stichting v Bartol and Others [1992]IRLR 366 suggests that the UK Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations 1981 do not accord with Community Law, ie the EC Business Transfers Directive (Directive 77/187).
In the case, the Dutch local authority terminated its funding to the Dr Sophie Redmond Foundation, which was principally concerned with providing assistance to drug addicts, and transferred the funding along with the building in which the Foundation worked, to the Sigma Foundation.
Not all the Redmond employees were taken on by Sigma.
The question before the Court was whether they had been automatically transferred in any case under the Business Transfers Directive and had the rights that the Directive confers — including rights for any recognised union to be informed and consulted; the right of continued recognition of the union; the automatic transfer of the employees' terms and conditions of employment; and protection against unfair dismissal in relation to the transfer.
The European Court decided that on its wording the Directive was not limited to transfers that involve undertakings of a commercial nature, but applied also to transfers involving non-commercial ventures and was capable of applying to employees in that context also.
Comment.
It follows from the above case that Reg 2(1) of the UK Regulations does not comply with Community law, since the UK Regulations currently state that ‘undertaking’ includes any trade or business but does not include any undertaking or part of an undertaking that is not in the nature of a commercial venture.
Under the European Court ruling, it is now open to those employed in non-commercial ventures to rely on their rights under the Directive, and this has particular importance in the context of the increasing trend towards the ‘contracting-out’ of public services.
Indeed, the Government has already agreed that the Directive applies, in a High Court action brought by college lecturers who were held to have been automatically transferred with their rights from the employment of local authorities to the new Further Education Corporations.
Details of this case are set out in a briefing paper available from NATFHE, at 27 Britannia Street, London WC1X 9JP.
However, there will be statutory rights once the Trade Union Reform and Employment Rights Bill becomes law — it amends Reg 2(1) of the Regulations to expressly cover non-commercial ventures.
Uprating of SSP and SMP
Secretary of State for Social Security Peter Lilley has announced new rates of Statutory Sick Pay and Statutory Maternity Pay.
These will apply from 1 April 1993.
The lower rate of SSP is to increase from £45.30 to £46.95 a week with the lower earnings threshold (below which SSP is not payable) increasing from £54 to £56 a week.
The standard rate of SSP is frozen for the second successive year at £52.50 a week.
However, the threshold at which this figure becomes payable is to increase to £195 a week from the current £190.
The lower rate of SMP is to go up from £46.30 to £47.95 a week, and the weekly earnings threshold is increased from £54 to £56.
Free to campaign
A short report in the Financial Times for 19/20 December 1992 states that women who were sacked from a mushroom farm after refusing new contracts that they alleged had made cuts in their pay, had been given permission by the Court of Appeal on 18 December 1992 to carry out a leaflet campaign to persuade shoppers not to buy the farm's produce.
All three judges allowed an appeal by the Transport and General Workers' Union, which represented the 89 women sacked by Middlebrook Mushroom, and lifted an injunction which had blocked the campaign.
Middlebrook said that the campaign amounted to a direct and therefore unlawful interference with its contracts of supply with supermarkets, but the Court of Appeal seems to have thought that this was overridden by the right of freedom of speech.
Statutory Instruments
Health and safety at work
— SI 1992/3004 (£3.10).
These Regulations,The Workplace (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations , are part of a series stemming from EC directives.
They apply to most places of work and are of particular importance in regard to health and safety in the office.
They replace 35 pieces of the old law, including part of the Factories Act 1961 and the Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act 1963.
The Regulations cover working environment, such as temperature and ventilation; safety, such as condition of floors and escalators; facilities, such as toilets and washing facilities — there are new provisions here regarding rest areas with arrangements for non-smokers and rest facilities for pregnant women and nursing mothers; and house-keeping, such as maintenance of the work-place, equipment and facilities.
New workplaces opened for the first time on or after 1 January 1993 or those that are modified or extended or converted should comply with the Regulations immediately.
Existing workplaces will have until 1 January 1996 to comply.
In the meantime, existing legislation applies.
The Regulations are supported by an approved Code of Practice,Workplace (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations.
Approved Code of Practice.
This is available from HMSO (£5).
— SI 1992/2932 (£3.10).
These Regulations,The Provision and Use of Work Equipment Regulations 1992, came into force on 1 January 1993.
Work equipment is broadly defined to include everything from a handtool through machinery of all kinds to a complete plant, such as a refinery.
Employers' duties under the Regulations include assessment of suitable equipment, maintenance information, instruction and training.
A guide,Work Equipment: Guidance on Regulations (Ref L 22),is available from HMSO (£5).
It should be noted that existing equipment, in use before 1 January 1993, will not, in general, have to meet the requirements until 1 January 1997.
— SI 1992/2966 (£2.70).
These Regulations,The Personal Protective Equipment at Work Regulations 1992, came fully into force on 1 January 1993.
Personal protective equipment is defined as all equipment designed to be worn or held to protect against a hazard.
It will include most types of protective clothing and equipment such as eye, foot, and head protection, safety harnesses, life jackets and high visibility clothing.
The duties under the Regulations include assessment of suitable equipment, maintenance information, instruction training and ensuring use of safety equipment.
Personal Protective Equipment at Work; Guidance on Regulations (Ref L 25),is also available from HMSO (£5).
tax briefing
TAX Compiled by Chris Greene and Christina Maddalena of Clark Whitehill
Changes to PEPs
New rules governing the definition of a ‘non-qualifying’ unit or investment trust have been announced.
People can subscribe £1,500 a year to such a trust through a general personal equity plan (PEP).
Non-qualifying trusts are those that hold more than 50% of their investments in holdings outside the UK or EC.
Under the amended Regulations, PEP investment can only be made in a ‘non-qualifying’ trust if at least 50% of its investments are held in shares.
These changes have been made because, when the original Regulations were drafted, they failed to require non-qualifying trusts to hold any shares at all.
This meant that a trust investing solely in, say, gilts or bonds could qualify for the £1,500 limit, which was not the original intention.
The new Regulations will be effective from 6 April 1993 to enable plan managers and investors to arrange for holdings in ineligible trusts to be sold or transferred outside the plan.
Life assurance companies
Implementation of the charge to capital gains on an annual deemed disposal of life offices' holdings in authorised unit trusts, and interests in certain offshore funds, has been postponed for a year.
The charge, which was introduced in FA 1990, will apply to accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 1993, rather than 1 January 1992.
Financial Secretary to the Treasury Stephen Dorrell announced that the Finance Bill 1993 would introduce provisions to this effect.
In addition, amending legislation will be introduced to counter the unintended higher tax charge that results from the existing measures.
The deemed annual charge applies only to those holdings referable to basic life and general annuity business.
However, as most life assurance companies have undivided funds, the application of the usual part disposal rules to calculate the deemed gain has the effect, where values have risen, of reducing the subsequent base cost of the chargeable element of the holding.
The amendments propose to compute the gain on the deemed disposal of all holdings that support more than one class of business.
The gain so computed will then be apportioned to determine the gain attributable to basic life assurance and general annuity business.
A similar amendment is to be made in connection with the transitional provisions aimed at excluding units that support contracts in force at 1 April 1990 from the new charge.
The transitional or ‘replacement’ relief is to be restricted to periods before the first deemed disposal.
The relief enables assets to be exchanged without a charge to corporation tax on the capital gain, the ‘new asset’ inheriting the cost and capital gains tax history of the holding it replaces.
The existing relief applies to exchanges both before and after the first deemed disposal.
However, it is anticipated that the majority of companies will take advantage of the relief before the first deemed disposal.
Thus, given the complexity of the legislation required to give effect to the other proposed amendments, the relief is to be restricted to this situation only.
Employee share schemes concession
Companies under the control of a jointly owned company (JOC) will be able to join in approved share schemes run by either of the JOC's parent companies under the newly revised extra-statutory concession.
The concession relates to profit sharing schemes, savings related share option schemes and other share option schemes approved under Sch 9, TA 1988.
Under the old concession, the Inland Revenue would give its approval to a group scheme which included a JOC provided certain conditions were met: the JOC was controlled by two people neither of whom controlled the company and one of whom was the grantor of the relevant scheme; and the relevant scheme was extended to the JOC by only one of its two joint owners.
The new concession is now extended to companies controlled by the JOC provided the control conditions are also met by these companies and only one of the ultimate owners extends its schemes to the JOC and the companies it controls.
Consent to the application of the concession will only be given if an undertaking is given by the grantor of the schemes to notify the Revenue of any changes of ownership or control of: the grantor, the other company which jointly controls the companies concerned with the grantor, the JOC, and any other company to which the group scheme is extended by the concession.
In view of the decision in CIR v Eurocopy plc [1991]STC 707, the Revenue takes the view that in practice alterations to the terms of approved employee share schemes that effect a change in the rights of existing option holders are unlikely to be approved.
The concession will not therefore normally apply to rights already granted under an approved employee share scheme.
Futures and options IHT relief
Proposed new inheritance tax rules for market makers on the new London International Financial Futures and Options Exchange have been announced.
Currently, only market makers on The Stock Exchange qualify for business property relief and the option to pay inheritance tax by interest-free instalments.
Business property relief reduces the value of business assets for inheritance tax purposes by either 100% or 50% depending on the type of asset or the beneficial interest, and any tax payable can usually be paid by annual interest-free instalments over 10 years while the assets remain unsold.
Businesses that qualify for the relief include those of market makers on The Stock Exchange, but no other businesses dealing in securities, stocks or shares.
The proposed new Regulations will extend the relief to include traders performing similar functions in relation to financial futures and options on the London International Financial Futures and Options Exchange.
LIFFOE was formed on 23 March 1992 by the merger of the London International Financial Futures Exchange and the London Traded Options Market.
The proposed new Regulations will be made under the powers in ss 106(4) and 107(4), Finance Act 1986, and will take effect from 23 March 1992.
Stamp duty and VAT
The Institute's Tax Faculty has issued guidance notes on the interaction of stamp duty and VAT.
The notes cover the Stamp Office's response to a number of questions on which the Faculty sought clarification following the publication of Statement of Practice SP 11/91 in September 1991.
The Stamp Office confirmed that stamp duty will be assessed on the VAT-exclusive amount of any premium and rent reserved where a lease is granted between companies in the same VAT group.
This will apply whether or not an election to waive the exemption from charging VAT is in place on the property at the date the lease is granted.
Similarly, transfer of a lease as part of the transfer of a business as a going concern is not a supply for VAT purposes so that ad valorem duty will be charged on the VAT exclusive amounts.
Clarification was also given in relation to sub-sale arrangements where A sells land to B who in turn sells it to C with the transfer of title being completed by a single conveyance from A to C. The Stamp Office confirmed that where s 58(4), Stamp Act 1891 applies, such that duty is payable only on the consideration paid by C, only that amount will be VAT-inclusive.
The VAT element in the initial transaction between A and B will be liable to duty only if s 58(4), SA 1891 does not apply.
The basis for charging stamp duty on VAT-inclusive rent where the lease is silent on the ability to charge VAT, or a lease specifically states that VAT is not recoverable by the landlord, is explained in some detail by the Stamp Office.
It contends that VAT on rent forms part of the consideration for the enjoyment of the premises in the same way that the payment of VAT on a sale forms part of the consideration for the thing sold.
As the lessor can elect to waive the exemption from VAT at any time during the term granted, the contingency principle is in point.
However, if, when the lease is granted, there is a binding agreement between the parties not to waive the exemption, stamp duty will be charged on the VAT-exclusive amount.
As regards agreements to lease, the contingency principle will be applied to any rents reserved and duty charged on the VAT-inclusive rent.
If a binding agreement not to waive the VAT exemption is then executed before the lease is granted, the lease will be denoted with duty paid on the agreement.
There is no legislative basis for refunding the excess duty paid on the VAT element of the agreement in these circumstances.
VAT on equality monies paid when properties are exchanged is also capable of being treated as consideration on which stamp duty is payable.
However, each case will depend on its particular circumstances, and equality monies are not always liable to ad valorem duty.
The second part of the guidance notes provides general clarification on the stamp duty and VAT implications of property exchanges.
Copies of the guidance notes (TAX 19/92) are available free (send sae) from the Publications Department at the Institute.
Life insurance UK branches — legislation to be introduced
The Finance Bill 1993 will contain provisions concerning the taxation of overseas life insurance companies' UK branches.
Many such branch operations currently have most of their taxable investment income determined according to apportionment rules that have changed little since the First World War and have become increasingly inappropriate.
Discrepancies with the tax treatment of UK resident life offices arise in a number of respects.
The proposed changes follow consultations between the Inland Revenue and insurance industry representatives and the aim has been, as far as possible, to ensure that UK life offices and foreign life offices' UK branch operations are able to compete on terms that are not distorted by tax considerations.
The taxation basis of overseas life companies presently differs according to whether the UK double tax agreement with the country where the life company is resident allows special rules for taxing these companies to apply.
Where these special rules apply, as they do in the majority of cases, the taxable investment income of the basic life assurance business is calculated by apportioning the worldwide investment income of the life fund by reference to the ratio of liabilities to UK resident policy-holders to liabilities to all policyholders.
The income is charged to tax under Sch D, Case III.
Under the new proposals, worldwide income apportionment will be replaced by a single rule that will apply to all foreign life companies with UK branches.
This rule will be modelled on general UK tax principles and on those in double taxation agreements.
In addition, the capital gains charge over assets backing UK long-term business liabilities will be extended to assets located outside the UK.
A number of detailed technical changes are also proposed, including those necessary to adapt the 1989/1992 reforms of life assurance taxation to enable them to be applied more easily to the UK branches of foreign life offices.
The new rules will apply for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 1993.
Copies of the draft clauses may be obtained by writing to Inland Revenue, Financial Institutions Division, Room 130, New Wing, Somerset House, London WC2R 1LB.
Representations on the draft clauses should be sent to that address by 28 February.
Non-resident settlements
The Institute's Tax Faculty has issued a guidance note setting out its correspondence with the Inland Revenue about Statement of Practice SP 5/92,Non-resident Trusts , in both its draft and final forms.
The guidance note is confined to matters that have not been clarified in the Statement or extra-statutory concessions D 40 and D 41.
The Revenue indicated that a settlor's failure to exercise the right to reimbursement, under para 6, Sch 5, TCGA 1992, of tax paid on capital gains accruing to the settlement could result in an inheritance tax charge under s 3(3), IHTA 1984.
This would occur when the right expired.
The right to reimbursement is subject to the Limitation Act and thus lasts for six years from the date of payment.
The right expires at the end of that period or when the settlor indicates that he does not intend to exercise the right, if that is earlier, giving rise to the inheritance tax charge.
The Revenue has clarified how it will apply the tests in para 2, Sch 5, TCGA 1992 of whether the settlor has an interest in the non-resident trust.
Where the terms of a settlement are so framed that a clearly defined person can benefit (for example if the class of beneficiaries includes ‘any spouse of the settlor’ or ‘spouse of the settlor's children') or such persons could be added to the class of beneficiaries, then the settlor will be treated as having an ‘interest’in the trust.
However, where there is no prima facie possibility of a defined person's benefiting, the Revenue will not treat the settlor as having an ‘interest', unless the terms of the settlement and the circumstances of the case indicate an intention to benefit a person who is likely to become a defined person in the future, for example if there was a settlement in favour of the settlor's fiance or child.
A separated spouse would be regarded as a spouse for the purpose of these provisions unless, in accordance with existing practice on other provisions having a bearing on ‘settlor interest’ trusts, the separation is permanent.
Concern was expressed that where trustees, particularly professional trustees, seek to limit the warranties and indemnities that may be required when they sell shares in a private company, an indirect provision of funds is made to the non-resident settlement.
It is usual for trustees to seek counter indemnities from other shareholders, or the beneficiaries, or to limit the liability of the trust to the trust assets, in these circumstances.
The Revenue stated that a decision on this issue could only be made in the light of all the facts of a particular case.
The general approach, however, would be that if the warranty or indemnity was in all other respects identical to that of other vendors, the para 9(3) (a), Sch 5, TCGA 1992 exception would be regarded as satisfied.
But this would not be the case where the trust assets were not exposed to the same risk that the other vendors accept.
A number of points were raised in connection with meeting expenses on capital account out of trust income.
Such payments will not be regarded as a provision of income by the beneficiary provided the trust deed permits such payments and interest is paid on the amount effectively loaned to the capital account.
The Revenue has confirmed that interest credited to the income account will constitute taxable income in the beneficiary's hands (either when it is credited in the case of a life tenant, or when it is paid or applied for the benefit of a discretionary beneficiary).
It would also be treated as ‘relevant income’ for s 740, TA 1988 purposes.
Furthermore, if the trust deed contains a power to pay capital expenses out of income, exercise of this power will not cause the trust to lose its interest in possession status for inheritance tax purposes.
An income beneficiary will also only be taxable on the net amount of income available after deduction of any income which has been applied to meet trust expenses on capital account, and, when the income account is made good, that income will become taxable as income of the beneficiary.
The amount used to restore the income account is, however, no longer the same item as the income originally borrowed.
It would not, therefore, retain the tax credit attached to the original income.
Copies of TAX 20/92 are available free (send sae) from the Publications Department at the Institute.
Start of Pay and File
‘Pay and File', the new system for assessing and collecting corporation tax, will come into effect for accounting periods ending on or after 1 October 1993, as announced by a Treasury Order of 7 December 1992.
Other Pay and File provisions will also apply to accounting periods ending after 1 October 1993.
Where a loan or advance is made to a participator in a close company, the tax charged will be due without assessment 14 days after the end of the accounting period.
When a company leaves a group, any tax on the capital gain arising from the deemed disposal and reacquisition of an asset acquired intra-group in the past six years will accrue at that time rather than when the asset was acquired.
Similarly, unremittable income that has been left out of account will be brought into charge in the year in which it is received.
The design of the new return form has also been finalised.
Copies may be obtained by writing to: National System and Procedures, Room 438, South West Wing, Bush House, London EC2B 4RD.
Substitute forms must be approved before the Inland Revenue can accept them.
Application for the approval of such substitutes should be sent to Corporate Communications Office, 9th Floor, North West Wing, Bush House, Aldwych, London WC2B 4PP.
‘V & A’ list procedures improved
Measures have been announced to increase the benefit to the public from works of art and other objects that have been granted conditional exemption from inheritance tax.
The move follows criticism that the register of such items, the V & A list, is not widely publicised or readily available.
Exemption may be granted for any works of art, pictures, prints, books, manuscripts and scientific collections of national, scientific or artistic interest.
The item must be of sufficient quality to be displayed in a public collection whether national, local authority or university, and the owner has to agree to keep the object in the UK, preserve it and allow reasonable public access to it.
To fulfil the last of these conditions, the owner may allow viewing by appointment and lend it on request to public collections on short-term loan, in which case the item is entered on the register of conditionally exempt objects, known as the ‘V & A list', which is available to the public.
Unless there is a physical risk to the object, it may be borrowed by curators or directors of public collections for special exhibitions that are properly organised and meet adequate security standards.
No object need normally be loaned for more than six months in any two-year period.
Members of the public have a right to a reasonable level of access to items on the V & A list.
Where the object is on loan to a public collection, the Inland Revenue considers that the owner or his or her agent should provide the curator's address or telephone number.
In all other cases, if the owner or agent is unable to allow viewing on any of the requested dates, the owner or agent must offer the choice of at least three weekdays and two Saturdays or Sundays in the following four-week period.
The new changes will involve computerising the V & A list in the first half of 1993, meeting criticisms that the list is not properly indexed.
This list will be given to the existing four places of reference: the Victoria & Albert Museum (London), the National Library of Scotland (Edinburgh), the National Museum of Wales (Cardiff), and Ulster Museum (Belfast).
Further copies will also be provided, at reasonable cost, to any other institution or member of the public who requests a copy.
After computerisation, there will be quarterly press releases about recent additions, and articles about the list for publication in expert journals will be encouraged.
The quality of information about the 8,500 items already on the V & A list will also be improved.
There will be an annual audit of objects on the list to confirm that undertakings on public access and preservation of the objects in the UK are being observed.
Any breach of these undertakings that cannot be put right will lead to a deferred inheritance tax charge based on the current market value of the item concerned.
Official rate reduced
From 6 January 1993, the ‘official rate of interest’ has been reduced to 8.25% from 9%, bringing it more into line with mortgage rates.
The rate is used to calculate the value of certain benefits in kind, such as low interest or interest free loans, assessed on directors and employees earning £8,500 a year or more, including gross expenses payments and the value of benefits in kind.
TAX CASE REVIEW Compiled by Chris Greene and Christina Maddalena of Clark Whitehill
Appeal agreement rectified
An agreement to settle an appeal made under s 54, TMA 1970 was subject to the ordinary laws of contract.
It was therefore subject to rectification where, because of a mistake, the agreement was not in accordance with the parties' intentions.
This was decided by the Queen's Bench Division of the High Court in R v Inspector of Taxes, ex parte Bass Holdings Ltd; R v Inspector of Taxes, ex parte Bass Holdings Ltd ; and Richart v Bass Holdings Ltd [1992]STI 1064.
The taxpayer company appealed against a corporation tax assessment in November 1983, which represented an estimate of profits in the accounting period ending 25 September 1982.
A computation was agreed in correspondence with the inspector showing chargeable profits of £62,480,893, which formed the basis of a settlement of the open appeal by agreement under s 54, TMA 1970.
However, the computation contained an error in that a deduction for group relief of £3,549,923 had been allowed twice.
This mistake had been innocently made and was not noticed by either party until November 1989, whereupon the Crown asserted that the agreement was ineffective and started proceedings before the General Commissioners with a view to transferring the matter to the Special Commissioners.
The company sought judicial review of the proceedings, contending that the assessment had been effectively determined by the agreement under s 54, which was binding on both parties.
The Crown claimed a declaration that on the true construction of the agreement the company's chargeable profits for the period were agreed at £66,030,816, and the company's appeal against the assessment was determined accordingly.
Alternatively, the agreement should be subject to rectification; or the agreement should be declared void ab initio ; and as a final option, the agreement should, in equity, be rescinded.
Dismissing the judicial review applications, Mr Justice Popplewell said that although by tracing the matter through the documents it was plain to see how the mistake had occurred, it was not an obvious clerical mistake (as the Crown contended) that the Court could correct as a matter of construction without recourse to rectification.
There was no reason why the ordinary law of contract should not apply to an agreement under s 54 as to any other agreement.
The Court was entitled to see whether all the conditions necessary to the formation of a proper contract had been satisfied.
For rectification to be applicable, there needed to be some prior agreement between the parties, the agreement still needed to be effective when the instrument (ie the s 54 agreement) was effected, and the instrument should have failed because of a mistake.
It had been agreed implicitly that group relief should be deducted from profits only once.
This common intention, which was not to agree a figure of £62,480,893 but to deduct group relief at whatever sum was agreed, held until the agreement was made.
All the elements necessary for rectification were therefore present; if the Crown was at fault because of the delay in discovering the mistake, rectification was still possible.
As regards the argument that there was a mistake in equity that entitled the Crown to rescind the contract, this was rejected because the Crown was at fault.
However, nothing happened during the period from the time the mistake was made until it was discovered to affect the company's position, nor was there any unfairness or abuse of power.
The Crown was therefore entitled to a declaration and rectification of the agreement.
Case stated struck out
The High Court upheld in Petch v Gurney; Gurney v Petch [1992]STI 943 earlier decisions that an appeal was not within its jurisdiction if it was not transmitted to the High Court within 30 days of its receipt by the appellant.
The High Court also refused the taxpayer's application to strike out the Crown's appeal against the Special Commissioner's decision by using its discretion under RSC Ord 18, r 19; there was no plain and obvious case for so doing.
Both the taxpayer and the Crown expressed dissatisfaction with the Special Commissioner's determination of an assessment for 1985/86 in a reduced amount.
Both parties requested that a case be stated for the opinion of the High Court.
On 6 December 1990, the case stated was signed by the Special Commissioner and sent to the taxpayer.
The taxpayer received it on 8 December and it was lodged in the High Court on 15 January 1991.
The Crown sought an order for the taxpayer's appeal to be struck out under s 56(4), TMA 1970, as it had not been submitted to the High Court within 30 days of receipt.
The High Court thus had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal.
The taxpayer sought, by notice of motion dated 2 November 1992, an order that the Crown's appeal against the Special Commissioner's decision be struck out under RSC Ord 18, r 19.
It disclosed no reasonable cause of action and was frivolous and vexatious.
An order was also sought to strike out the Crown's application to strike out the taxpayer's appeal because, in addition, it had delayed a fair trial of the action and was otherwise an abuse of process.
Refusing both the taxpayer's applications, Mr Justice Harman said in respect of the first that the 30 day time limit prescribed by s 56(4), TMA 1970 was mandatory.
The taxpayer transmitted the case stated to the High Court out of time and the Court was thus deprived of its jurisdiction to hear the appeal.
As regards the taxpayer's second application, the Court's inherent jurisdiction to strike out pleadings at any stage of the proceedings under RSC Ord 18, r 19 could be exercised only in plain and obvious cases.
The Court had no knowledge of the case stated that had been struck out and the Crown's case stated had duly proceeded.
The taxpayer's motion to strike out the Crown's appeal therefore failed.
Challenge to Revenue powers
The Court had jurisdiction to hear an originating summons on the question of the Inland Revenue's right to demand information in a situation where the taxpayer had no statutory right of appeal against the demand, and a failure to comply with the demand would result in a penalty.
So held Chancery Division of the High Court in Beecham Group plc v IRC [1992]STI 980.
The plaintiff was assessed to corporation tax for accounting periods covering the years 1977 to 1985.
Appeals against these assessments had reached the Special Commissioners, but none had been concluded.
On 2 October 1990 the inspector requested accounts of and details of transactions with one of the plaintiff's subsidiaries, B (Pte) Ltd (a Singapore company), as it was possible that this information would lead to the amendment of existing assessments.
The Revenue wished to consider whether adjustments needed to be made by virtue of s 485, TA 1970, whereby transactions carried out between buyers and sellers under common control are deemed to take place at market value.
The Board of Inland Revenue had the power to serve a notice on any body corporate, requiring particulars that appeared to them to be relevant to a transaction to which s 485 might apply.
However, no notice requiring the information had been served.
On 6 January 1991, the inspector swore an affidavit indicating that he would be submitting papers to the Board with a view to issuing a notice.
It was common ground that making new or further assessments was time barred for accounting periods ending before 1 April 1984.
The plaintiff argued that it was not therefore open to the Revenue to seek an alteration of the existing assessments, because any information supplied in compliance with a s 17, FA 1975 notice had to be made the subject of a new or further assessment.
The plaintiff claimed that if an effective s 485(3) direction could not be made, then compliance with the s 17 notice would be burdensome, oppressive and a waste of time.
The plaintiff applied by way of an originating summons for the Court to determine whether or not the Revenue could invoke s 485.
The Crown applied to strike out the originating summons on the grounds that the point at issue was within the Special Commissioners' exclusive jurisdiction.
It would be an abuse of process to proceed by action when there were open appeals against the relevant assessments.
The Special Commissioners had exclusive jurisdiction to determine the appeals, and to do so in relation to the facts as found before them.
When an appeal was proceeding in accordance with ss 31, 50, 52 and 54, TMA 1970, the taxpayer could not litigate a point of law that had arisen in the appeal.
If the Court did in fact have jurisdiction over whether s 485 could be invoked, it ought to exercise its discretion to refuse to hear the summons.
Dismissing the Crown's application to strike out the summons, Mr Justice Mervyn Davies said that the question the plaintiff posed was whether the Revenue could invoke s 485, TA 1970 in the course of the appeals.
Whether the Court could consider such a newly introduced element depended on the Court's jurisdiction in respect of disputes between the Revenue and a taxpayer.
The plaintiff did not seek to question the correctness of an assessment or to have any underlying issue of fact adjudicated, but disputed the Revenue's right to seek to vary the existing assessments by bringing s 485 into operation.
In Re Vandervell's Trusts , 46 TC 341, the House of Lords concluded that the Court had no jurisdiction ‘to adjudicate between the taxpayer and the Crown on the correctness of the assessment or upon any underlying issue of fact on which the correctness of the assessment depends’.
However, in Balen v IRC [1979]STC 148, there was notification by the Revenue of an intention to make use of a ‘tax altering’ provision, and it was found in the High Court that the court had jurisdiction to entertain a claim for declaration relief.
In the instant case it might be said that there was a stronger case for allowing the court's jurisdiction because there was no provision for any appeal if the Revenue was allowed to invoke s 485.
Balen indicated that when a question about the propriety of a determination was raised, the Court was a proper forum for resolving it.
The situation was the same with regard to the Revenue's right to demand information where the taxpayer had no statutory right of appeal, and a failure to comply with the demand would entail a penalty.
Accordingly, the Court had jurisdiction to hear the originating summons.
An answer to the originating summons in favour of the plaintiff would mean that the appeals could continue before the Special Commissioners without the plaintiffs’ first having to undertake the long and expensive task of compiling the information for the Revenue.
The Revenue had indicated that it would seek to use s 17(3), FA 1975.
The Court did not see why the plaintiff should be excluded from testing the validity of this approach because the matters in question were liable to attack under other information-gathering powers in the Taxes Act.
Indeed, the plaintiff contended that the other avenues were not open to the Revenue because the matter had been concluded by agreement between the parties.
The Court's opinion was that the summons should go forward.
The Revenue's right to demand information could therefore be decided as soon as a date for the hearing of the originating summons was fixed.
Accordingly, the Court declined to make any order on the originating summons and the Revenue's application to strike out the summons would be dismissed.
VAT Compiled by John Brown and Tony McLaughlin of Ernst & Young
Triangulation — single market simplification
Triangulation is a chain of supplies of goods among three or more parties where the goods are delivered from the first party direct to the last party in the chain.
Where the supplies in the chain involve the movement of goods between member states, there is a potential requirement for suppliers in the chain to register for VAT in the country of destination of the goods.
For example, if a UK company acquires goods from a Belgian supplier to fulfil an order from a German customer and the goods are sent direct from Belgium to Germany, the UK company would be required to register for German VAT and would account for tax on the acquisition in Germany and onward domestic supply of goods to the German customer.
The need for the intermediary UK company to register in such circumstances flies in the face of Customs' contention that the single market should not add to the burdens on business.
EC finance ministers have now agreed that an intermediary can opt to have its customer in the country of destination account for VAT on the intermediary's behalf.
Where this option is taken up, the intermediary (the UK company in the example above) is not required to account for the acquisition tax in the member states of arrival; but it must: include the supply on its UK EC sales listing, quoting the VAT number of the customer in the member state of delivery; and issue a tax invoice containing all the information required for an intra-EC supply endorsed ‘VAT: Art 28c(E) (3) applies’.
In order to allow EC member states to agree how triangulation supplies should be separately identified on EC sales listings, businesses using the simplification option need not disclose details of their triangulation supplies during the quarter ending 31 March 1993 until they complete the statement for the quarter ending 30 June 1993.
Readers should note that the simplification measure was agreed after the publication of Public Notice 725,The Single Market .
For overseas businesses registered in other EC member states which are making supplies in the UK, the simplification option allows them to avoid UK VAT registration, but requires the UK customer to account for VAT due on the supply.
Overseas businesses intending to adopt the simplification arrangements must send written notification to LVO 050, Customs House, 28 Guild Street, Aberdeen, AB9 2DY, confirming: the overseas supplier's name, address and VAT number; brief details of the supplies to be made in the UK and when they are to start; and the name, address and VAT number of the UK customer(s) who will account for the tax.
The simplification rules can also be used by an overseas supplier sending goods from another EC member state to be installed or assembled in the UK, provided the above notification is sent to Customs.
New VAT return form
To meet the single market statistics requirements, two new boxes appear on VAT returns from 1 January 1993, one for the VAT due on acquisitions from other EC states, and one for the total VAT due.
The new boxes, box 2 and box 3 respectively, will appear directly below box 1, and the other boxes will be renumbered accordingly.
The final return (VAT 193), and the Welsh language versions of the VAT return and the final return (VAT 110 and VAT 197), will also be amended.
VAT administrative work moves to Northern Ireland
A new VAT registration unit has opened at Newry in Northern Ireland.
This will process all applications for VAT registrations and de-registrations previously dealt with by London and Southend offices from the following dates: 11 January 1993 — Romford and Southend VAT offices; 25 January 1993 — Hammersmith, Wembley and Uxbridge offices; 8 February — Finchley office; 15 February — City office; 1 March — Balham, Kennington, West End and Westminster offices, and from 15 March 1993 — Enfield and Stratford VAT offices.
The Croydon and Orpington VAT office transfers took place on 7 December 1992.
Applications for registering or deregistering should be addressed to the new unit as follows: HM Customs & Excise, VAT Registration Unit, PO Box 40, Carnbane Way, Damolly, Newry BT35 6PJ.
Phone 0693 112114.
Dover Customs Yacht Team
Customs have set up the Dover Customs Yacht Team to deal with queries on yachts under temporary importation arrangements in an EC country on 31 December 1992.
Yachts under the temporary importation arrangements on that date may continue to use the arrangements until the end of their authorised period (typically six months).
At the end of that period, or earlier on request, the arrangements are terminated and the vessel imported into the EC country.
At that stage VAT will be due on importation, unless the vessel is then exported to a non-EC country.
But where VAT has already been paid in the EC, no additional VAT will be payable.
VAT will not be due if the vessel is a pleasure craft over eight years old on 1 January 1993, or when the VAT due is negligible (for UK purposes it will not be due where the vessel is worth less than £4,000).
Where VAT is due, Customs may accept payment by instalments.
The Yacht Leaflet 1993 is available from: Dover Customs Yacht Team, PO Box 1993, Dover, Kent CT16 1AQ.
Consultative and intellectual services
Before 1 January 1993 certain services, of an intellectual or consultative nature, were zero-rated when supplied to recipients based outside the EC, or to EC recipients who receive the services in a business capacity.
The UK VAT position did not fully implement the underlying EC legislation.
But the UK Government has introduced legislation (Art 16 of The VAT (Place of Supply of Services) Order 1992)to fully implement the EC Sixth Directive place of supply provisions for services, to coincide with the creation of the single market.
Since 1 January 1993, those services described in Sch 3, VATA 1983, supplied to non-EC recipients, are supplied in the country where the recipient belongs, and fall outside the scope of UK VAT; supplies to EC recipients for the purpose of the recipient's VAT registered business are supplied in the member state where the recipient belongs, and are outside the scope of UK VAT; and supplies to EC recipients for other purposes are supplied in the UK and are subject to standard-rated VAT.
The services affected, described in Sch 3, VATA 1983 are: transfers and assignments of copyright, patents, licences, trademarks and similar rights; advertising services; services of consultants, engineers, consulting bureaux, lawyers, accountants and other similar services; data processing and provision of information (but excluding from this head any services relating to land); acceptance of any obligation to refrain from pursuing or exercising, in whole or part, any business activity; banking, financial and insurance services (including reinsurance, but not including the provision of safe deposit facilities); the supply of staff; the letting on hire of goods other than means of transport; and the services rendered by one person to another in procuring for the other any of the above services.
Where such supplies are made to recipients in other EC states, UK suppliers must charge standard-rated VAT unless the overseas customer discloses his VAT number.
But Customs have agreed that the requirement to obtain overseas customers' VAT numbers need not be implemented until 1 July 1993.
Suppliers should use this breathing space to obtain EC customers' VAT numbers, and amend accounting systems to record the information on VAT invoices.
Until 30 June 1993, UK suppliers must continue to obtain commercial evidence that supplies treated as outside the scope of UK VAT (previously zero-rated) were received by their EC customers for business purposes.
The EC customers to whom VAT-free charges are made will have to account for VAT under the reverse charge mechanism in their member states.
Partly exempt businesses outside-the-scope supplies
The implementation of the single market legislation has meant that many supplies that were previously exempt or zero-rated now fall outside the scope of UK VAT.
Partly-exempt businesses, which previously used the value of taxable (including zero-rated) and exempt supplies to determine input tax recovery, are allowed to continue using those calculations by including the value of outside-the-scope supplies with the right to input tax recovery in the value of taxable supplies, and including the value of outside-the-scope supplies without the right to input tax recovery in the value of exempt supplies.
Businesses using the standard method which had included zero-rated supplies that are now outside the scope, will use a special method to be approved by Customs, subject to their usual reviews, during the next VAT inspection.
Supplies made to non-UK branches
A partly-exempt business with branches outside the UK has not been allowed to include the value of overseas branch supplies when calculating its proportion of recoverable input tax.
It should be noted that where a business's UK branch makes supplies that were previously zero-rated but which now fall outside the scope of VAT, Customs have confirmed that these supplies can be included in proportional calculations for input tax recovery.
Property lease indemnities and VAT recovery
Where a tenant exercises rights granted under a lease, the landlord may incur legal and other professional costs.
A tenant may, for example, assign the lease, sub-let or make alterations, as a result of which the landlord may incur professional fees.
In such circumstances, the lease may require the tenant to make good the costs the landlord incurred.
Because the professional services will have been supplied to the landlord, only the landlord may recover as his input tax the VAT on those costs, even though they may have been borne by the tenant: because the expense is not on a supply to the tenant, the tenant cannot deduct the VAT as input tax.
The payment by a tenant of a landlord's costs incurred in respect of the grant of a lease or licence is regarded as part of the consideration for the supply by the landlord to the tenant.
If the landlord has not opted to tax, he will be unable to recover the VAT on his costs, and the tenant will have to reimburse the VAT-inclusive cost.
The landlord will not have made a taxable supply to the tenant and so cannot issue a tax invoice, preventing the tenant from claiming input relief.
If, however, the landlord has opted to tax and can recover the VAT on his costs, the tenant will reimburse the VAT-exclusive costs; however, because the reimbursement is the consideration for a taxable supply made by the landlord, the landlord will issue a tax invoice to the tenant, adding a VAT charge to the reimbursement.
The tenant ends up paying the same amount, but because he will have received a tax invoice he can claim input relief, subject to the normal rules.
Since 1 December 1992 (an implementation date agreed between Customs and the Law Society), Customs also see the payment of a landlord's costs where a tenant exercises an existing right under a lease or licence as consideration for the supply by the landlord to the tenant.
The supply is exempt or taxable depending on whether the landlord has opted to tax.
An existing right is one where the landlord cannot unreasonably withhold consent to the tenant's exercise of the right, or where the tenant does not need consent but must meet the landlord's costs.
If, however, the landlord has absolute discretion to grant consent to the tenant's exercise of a right, the reimbursement of the landlord's costs is not part of the consideration for the landlord's supply under the lease or licence to the tenant.
It is the consideration for a separate supply which is taxable — unless the right to be exercised by the tenant is the making of an exempt supply, in which case the reimbursement will be exempt.
Life in the single market
UK publishers sending publications to overseas subscribers in EC states will be making either a ‘supply for acquisition’ where the subscriber is a VAT-registered person in another member state, or a ‘distance sale’where the subscriber is not VAT-registered.
Where the publications are a supply for acquisition, the recipient subscriber will account for VAT in its member state although such publications are zero-rated in the UK, in other member states they are taxed at a reduced rate, and in Denmark they are taxed at 25%!
Where distance sales of publications are made, the value of sales in each member state needs to be monitored to ensure that the distance selling registration threshold in each state is not breached (the limit is approximately £24,500 for Belgium, Denmark, Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Spain, and approximately £70,000 for France, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg and the Netherlands).
An overseas individual subscriber not registered for VAT, who may previously have incurred VAT through the member state's post office collection system, will now benefit from a VAT-free magazine, simply because the UK legislation specifically zero-rates those goods — at least for the time being!
TAX POINTS Compiled by Tony Foreman of Pannell Kerr Forster and Angela Lazda of Clark Whitehill
The January 1993 issue of TAXline , the Faculty of Taxation's bi-monthly newsletter, includes a number of items of interest to the general practitioner:
Brought forward trading losses
By concession and/or practice, under certain circumstances interest and rent received can be relieved by losses brought forward.
By concession, rental income from surplus business accommodation is taxed under Sch D, Case I rather than Sch A. The Inland Revenue has commented that it normally accepts that current account and trade interest qualify for relief under s 393(8), ICTA 1988, as, under certain circumstances, will interest from the temporary lodgement of part of the current working capital in a bank deposit account.
Capital gains tax
March 1982 values can be increased where a husband and wife both held shares in a family company on 31 March 1982.
If, for example, prior to a sale, the wife transfers all her shares to her husband, he should subsequently have his shareholding valued on the assumption that he held all the shares on 31 March 1982.
Where, for example, two minority shareholdings are merged into one majority holding, the value of the whole will be greater than its two constituent parts.
Care needs to be taken to ensure that there is no loss of retirement relief.
Personal pension plans and occupational pension schemes
Generally, an individual cannot be a member of an occupational pension scheme and make contributions to a personal pension scheme or retirement annuity policy in respect of the same source of income.
However, on entering pensionable employment, an individual should consider making contributions in respect of prior periods of earnings or employment.
This can be achieved by making contributions in the year of change and in the following two years, in the latter case by relating premiums back to the year of change.
Contributions are restricted to relevant earnings of the year to which the contributions are related.
Technical Advisory Committee
TAC SPELLS TRANSPARENCY IN ACTION An old-style committee has proved to be particularly good at meeting the requirements of openness and accountability
Peter Ainsworth
I occasionally hear it said that the Institute's technical policies are determined by the Secretariat in concert with the big London firms, and that the district societies no longer have any say in the matter.
As chairman of probably the oldest and certainly the noisiest of the Institute's technical committees, I am able to reassure such doubters; indeed, the Technical Advisory Committee's advice is still the foundation of most Institute responses on accounting and auditing matters.
And so it should be, for the TAC's history is a tribute to the enthusiasts and activists who consistently seek to change matters for the better.
Set up in 1942 under the unpromising name of the Taxation and Financial Relations Committee, the TAC was designed to provide a forum (and perhaps a safety valve) for the growing number of business members who at that time were excluded from Council membership, but who wished to contribute their business experience to the consideration of taxation and financial issues.
The new committee found an immediate ally in the district societies, which saw it as a potent means of influencing the Institute's technical effort.
After quickly dispatching such topical issues as the accounting treatment for war damage contributions and claims, it proceeded to issue a series of accounting recommendations, many of which were subsequently enacted in the Companies Act of 1948.
Changing its name in 1949 to the Taxation and Research Committee, the committee continued to make its influence felt in Institute publications, and in 1954 issued notes that explained to a still somewhat conservative profession the nature and purpose of management accounting!
The success of such operations may be judged by Council's decision in 1950 to allocate five of the 45 Council seats to business members.
In 1964 the Committee adopted its current name and remains the most broadly based and constitutionally ‘democratic’ of the Institute's technical committees.
Operating as a standing committee of Council, its membership comprises:
Two members nominated from each of the 22 district societies.
One of these members must be in practice and the other in business or academia.
The only exception to this rule is the London Society which, because of its large size, nominates five members, at least two of whom should be business members.
District nominees should have a business address within the district they represent.
These requirements ensure that the TAC membership is as representative as possible.
Five members of Council, including the chairman and vice chairman, who are nominated by the president's advisory committee and approved by Council.
Once appointed, members operate as individuals rather than delegates and serve for an initial term of two years, which their district may then extend by two additional terms to six years in all.
The TAC's main responsibility is to comment on exposure drafts issued by the Accounting Standards Board or the Auditing Practices Board, and on documents prepared by Institute faculties such as the Faculty of Finance and Management and the Faculty of Information Technology.
Its broad base also makes it useful as a sounding board for other proposals, for example those recently issued by the Cadbury Committee on the Financial Aspects of Corporate Governance.
The TAC consultation is supported by a network of 22 district technical advisory committees (DTACs).
Together, these DTACs involve approximately 500 active members and cover the whole of England and Wales.
They represent a typical cross-section of the Institute's most active members, meeting on a regular basis to discuss technical matters and fairly reflecting the interests of national and smaller practising firms, finance, commerce and industry.
As the diagram illustrates, the TAC begins the Institute's technical consultation process when a standard setting body such as the ASB or the APB issues a consultative document for comment.
Sufficient copies of the draft are distributed to DTACs for them to notify all their activists.
Implementation of the Dearing Committee reforms has meant a halving of the old exposure period.
This, and the other Institute committees' need to obtain the TAC's view as early as possible, puts considerable pressure on DTACs, which may have as little as six weeks to arrange meetings, discuss the issues raised and submit their written responses to the TAC at Moorgate Place.
The committee secretary summarises all comments from DTACs and prepares a draft response for inclusion in the TAC agenda.
This draft response indicates which DTAC responses he has taken into account, and any member whose DTAC's response has arrived late or has been omitted for some other reason can ensure that relevant points are not missed.
At TAC meetings, each paper is presented by a member with a personal interest in or experience of the subject.
Representatives of the working party responsible for the original document also often attend the meeting as guests and to provide background information.
Chairmen of other Institute technical committees may also attend to get an early impression of the way the wind is blowing on contentious issues.
Because of the members' diversity of experience, TAC debates generate lively argument among people with very different opinions; this, together with the TAC's reputation for preferring the practical to the conceptual, is the committee's greatest contribution to the consultation process.
It is interesting but true that such a harsh review normally reduces initial differences to an extent that allows a firm TAC view to come through.
Following on from the debate, the TAC secretary and chairman prepare a final response in the form of a memorandum of comment.
In the case of ASB documents, the TAC's response is made to the Financial Reporting Committee, which is delegated to respond to the document in the name of the Institute.
A similar procedure operates in the case of APB drafts and the Auditing Committee.
Far from overruling the TAC's views, these much smaller committees are concerned to work closely with a committee that provides a broad base for their own more limited discussions.
Members of the TAC are represented on both committees, and other TAC members are coopted on to many of their working parties.
The TAC secretary attends all meetings at which a TAC response is to be discussed.
If a fundamental disagreement on matters of principle were to occur between the TAC and either the Financial Reporting Committee or the Auditing Committee, then the TAC has the right to challenge the draft Institute response at a meeting where the chairmen of all the Institute's technical committees sit together with certain coopted volunteers.
Understandably, the decision of such a meeting would be final.
TAC members receive a copy of the formal Institute response.
In my view the TAC is a working example of how an old-style committee meets the requirements of openness and accountability.
It has always drawn its strength from volunteer activists who provide the enthusiasm, expertise and time necessary for the close examination and constructive criticism of technical documents.
Its network offers members, especially those outside London, a unique opportunity to influence the Institute's technical programme and to broaden their own interests.
Reading the old files, it is interesting to note how many well-known Institute figures have served at one time or another on the TAC.
They have clearly enjoyed the experience.
I enjoy it too.
Because of the members' diversity of experience, TAC debates generate lively argument
Technical Advisory Committe /interim reporting
A QUESTION OF SCOPE AND TIMING Cadbury has recommended the addition of balance sheet and cash flow information in interim reports, but current practice is moving towards full statements.
What should the ASB and the Stock Exchange consider when establishing future guidance?
Matthew Patient and Richard Elwell
‘The lifeblood of markets is information and barriers to the flow of relevant information represent imperfections in the market.
The need to sift and correct the information put out by companies adds cost and uncertainty to the market's pricing function.
The more the activities of companies are transparent, the more accurately will their securities be valued.’
The Cadbury Report
Interim reporting has been attracting a great deal of attention over the past year.
The release of the draft Cadbury Report in May 1992, and the final one in December, have focused attention on interim reports and auditor involvement.
Cadbury recommended that companies should include balance sheet information, that the inclusion of cash flow information should be considered and that the auditor should review the interim report.
Many companies have already included additional financial information in their interim reports, and some top UK companies have engaged their auditors to perform and report on reviews of interim information.
Clearly, the face of UK interim reporting is changing.
However, there is still some way to go.
While Cadbury recommended that the Accounting Standards Board (ASB) and the Auditing Practices Board (APB) should issue standards for interim presentation and review, the jury is still out on what these standards should contain.
To contribute to this debate, Coopers & Lybrand formed a working party to survey and examine interim reporting.
Two of the areas we considered were the scope of interim financial information and the period to publication of interim reports.
Scope: current practice
We conducted a survey of published interim reports from 168 companies in the UK top 500.
These included all of the top 100 and 68 other companies selected at random.
The results are shown in the panel.
The largest companies appear to be leading the way.
Twice as many top 100 companies provide balance sheets, 10 times as many provide cash flow statements.
Similar discrepancies exist for segmental reporting and financial statement notes.
It is interesting to compare these figures with the results of a survey of interim reporting carried out 10 years ago for the Institute publication The role of interim accounts and preliminary profit announcements in financial reporting in the UK (1982).
This survey found that of a sample of ‘large industrial companies', 8% provided a balance sheet and 2% provided a source and application of funds statement.
Current figures for the top 100 suggest a six-fold increase in the inclusion of the balance sheet and a 10-fold increase in the inclusion of a cash flow/funds statement.
How much information?
While analysts appreciate more information — because they have the ability to separate the price sensitive information from the padding — shareholders may require only a good summary of performance to date.
They do not, generally, have the time or the inclination to take financial statements apart.
Is it possible to meet the needs of both sets of users?
Some (often analysts) would argue that if more information is included there is at least the potential to meet everyone's needs; if information is restricted it is certain that some people will not have what they want.
Others argue that it is possible to meet everyone's needs with less — if the interim report has a good explanatory statement, segmental reporting and other relevant information, then a balance sheet and cash flow statement may be superfluous.
Another point of view sees the market taking the lead.
Those 48 companies in the top 100 that provide balance sheets must do so for a reason.
Perhaps the balance sheet is a key indicator for their business, as it would be, for example, for property investment companies.
Perhaps they have a particularly strong balance sheet and wish to ‘show it off’.
The problem is that the companies that are most inclined to present full financial statements with good disclosure at the interim date are likely to be those with a history of full disclosure and/or those that are strong and performing well.
Some of the companies that would prefer not to do so may have something to hide.
It is with regard to these latter companies that additional disclosure requirements must be considered.
However, it might be said that to require additional disclosure from all companies as a means of addressing the lack of it from a few is to force rules on the majority for the sake of the minority.
This may be true — it is already true of a great many regulations with which companies must comply — but it may also reflect the fundamental nature of financial regulation.
If we accept, however, that additional disclosure in interim financial reports is a good thing — and the current trend and commentary indicate that many believe that it is — then the question becomes: What additional disclosure?
The opposite positions may be identified as the status quo(p&l account only) and the equivalent of annual financial statements (p&l account, balance sheet, cash flow statement and full notes).
The status quo position will often result in less relevant, less complete statements in favour of timeliness; full financial statements favour relevance, completeness and possibly understandability at a cost both in terms of timeliness and actual expense.
As with anything that cannot be easily quantified, it is difficult to determine the point where the benefits of additional information exceed the costs.
Full financial statements or additional information?
In the US and Canada, companies may present selected interim balance sheet information — highlighting key indicators of their financial health — rather than full balance sheets.
Such information may actually be more understandable to financial statement readers and, therefore, more relevant to their needs.
Although some companies may only choose to disclose the ‘good’ information, a requirement to disclose significant changes in key balance sheet figures may lead to expected industry disclosure norms — it would be difficult for any company not to follow an accepted industry reporting practice.
In a similar vein, it would be possible for companies to disclose selected cash flow information, rather than full cash flow statements.
Many companies manage their cash on bases different from that required by the FRS 1 cash flow statement and, as cash management information would be readily available to most companies, it may be more efficient and cost effective to present this information rather than a full statement.
As with the balance sheet, the presentation of an interim cash flow statement is encouraged, but not required, by both the US and Canada.
Note disclosure
It is unlikely that there would be strong support for interim note disclosure equivalent to that in annual accounts.
However, our survey indicated that the majority of current interim reports provide less note disclosure than is necessary for a proper understanding of the financial statement figures.
For example, it is surprising that as many as 19% of the top 100 companies provided no notes whatsoever.
Although the Stock Exchange does not specifically require notes to the interim financial information, it does require an explanatory statement that will enable investors to make an informed assessment of a company's activities and profit and loss during the period.
Usually such a statement will be in the form of a chairman's report, but the requirement might be interpreted to include notes in support of the financial figures as well.
Only 17% of the top 100 companies provided accounting policy information (13% overall).
Such disclosure is considered to be important in achieving the financial reporting characteristics of understandability and comparability.
For instance, an accounting policy note might include an assurance that the interim statements reflect the same policies applied to the previous annual accounts and that, where appropriate, certain policies necessary to interim account preparation have been adopted (for example , accounting for foreign exchange and taxation).
There were, however, rays of light at the end of the disclosure tunnel.
The inclusion of segmental information was very high among top 100 companies: 74% disclosed business segments and 37% disclosed geographical segments.
Such disclosure might now be seen as ‘best practice’.
Over to you, ASB
Our research into current interim reporting practices demonstrates a move towards the inclusion of more information in interim reports, including balance sheets and cash flow statements.
The ASB should consider, however, when developing a standard on interim financial information, whether interim report users would be best served by full balance sheets and cash flow statements, or whether selected balance sheet and cash flow information, as suggested by Cadbury, would be equally acceptable.
Either method would go some way towards increasing ‘transparency’ and the accuracy of the valuation of securities.
Period to publication
A survey of 35 countries with interim reporting regulations indicated that of those requiring only semi-annual interim reports, the average maximum period permitted from the interim date to publication of the interim report was 108 days.
The most common period was 90 days, occurring seven times (32%).
Of those countries requiring quarterly reports, the average maximum period to publication was 42 days.
The most common period was 30 days, occurring three times (33%).
Of large industrial countries, the UK permits one of the longest periods at four months.
Australia is 90 days (semi-annual), Japan is 90 days (semi-annual), Canada 60 days (quarterly), and the US 45 days (quarterly).
France, at 120 days, is the same as the UK.
When reporting semi-annually, and certainly when reporting quarterly, four months is a significant period of time.
For most companies, the practice in the UK is to report much sooner than the publication period permits.
A survey by the working party of the top 100 UK companies indicated that the average period of time from the interim date to the release of the interim results was 53 days.
Indeed, 68 companies reported in 60 days or less.
It would be possible therefore, with little aggravation, for the Stock Exchange to reduce the publication period in line with current practice in the UK and other countries.
A maximum of two to three months would be reasonable.
Accounting Standards Board
FRED3 ACCOUNTING FOR CAPITAL INSTRUMENTS DECEMBER 1992
Comments should be addressed to: Andrew Lennard, Assistant Technical Director, Accounting Standards Board, Holborn Hall, 100 Gray's Inn Road, London WC1X 8AL and should be dispatched so as to be received not later than 15 March 1993.
All replies will be regarded as on the public record unless confidentiality is requested by the commentator.
Preface
This financial reporting exposure draft (FRED) is concerned with accounting for transactions and obligations relating to the raising of finance.
It is based on the proposals contained in the Board's Discussion Paper ‘Accounting for capital instruments’ which was published in December 1991.
The principal proposals of the Discussion Paper were received favourably by the majority of respondents: these proposals have therefore been retained in this FRED.
The arguments which the Board found persuasive in framing the proposals in the Discussion Paper and the FRED are summarised in the section entitled ‘The development of the FRED’.
This Preface summarises the main respects in which the proposals of the FRED differ from those of the Discussion Paper, and explains why certain proposals were retained although some commentators pointed out difficulties or expressed objections.
Analysis of shareholders' funds
The Discussion Paper proposed that shareholders' funds be analysed between the amounts attributable to equity and non-equity shares, and envisaged that this would be provided by analysing its component parts (called up share capital, share premium account and other reserves) between equity and non-equity interests (Discussion Paper, paragraphs 3.50-3.56).
Many respondents, although supporting the analysis of total shareholders’ funds, considered that an analysis of its component parts could be misleading.
They pointed out that the information provided by such an analysis of the components of shareholders' funds did not seem to be useful and was difficult to interpret.
For this reason, the FRED does not require that the component parts of shareholders' funds be analysed.
However, the proposal to analyse aggregate shareholders' funds between equity and non-equity interests is retained.
It is proposed that this analysis be given on the face of the balance sheet.
Share premium account
The FRED does not retain the proposal made in the Discussion Paper that the uses of the share premium account be restricted (Discussion Paper, paragraph 5.9).
The FRED includes proposals for accounting for the treatment of issue costs associated with capital instruments.
These requirements will suffice to ensure that issue costs in respect of instruments other than shares will not be charged directly to the share premium account but will be charged against profits over the term of the capital instrument.
Maturity of liabilities
The Discussion Paper proposed that the maturity of liabilities be assessed by reference to the earliest date on which the lender could demand repayment and that no regard should be paid in this respect to facilities which might permit the debt to be refinanced (Discussion Paper, paragraphs 3.40-3.42).
Respondents gave examples of situations where this would not reflect the substance of the arrangement between the borrower and the lender.
The FRED proposes that, where certain conditions are met, the maturity of liabilities should be assessed by reference to borrowings which a lender is committed to provide under related facilities which will permit the refinancing of the debt.
Scrip dividends
The FRED contains proposals in respect of the accounting for the payment of scrip dividends, a topic not addressed in the Discussion Paper.
companies as defined in companies legislation to account for finance costs which do not relate to revenue in the statement of total recognised gains and losses.
The Discussion Paper did not address such companies.
capital instruments are similar to those of the Discussion Paper, that is that they be deducted from the proceeds of the instrument and accordingly reduce the amount at which the instrument is initially recorded.
As a result of the requirements of the FRED the issue costs are effectively charged against profits over the term of the instrument.
Investment companies
Issue costs
Some respondents to the Discussion Paper suggested that these methods for accounting for issue costs were in conflict with the requirements of the companies legislation* in the case of issues of debt instruments because the legislation prohibits setting off assets and liabilities.
However, the FRED reflects the view (which is consistent with the Board's draft Statement of Principles) that issue costs are not an asset.
They may, however, be taken into account in the initial measurement of the liability in respect of debt to which they directly relate since by this means the financial effect on the issuer of the transaction as a whole is properly reflected.
If this is done, the obligation of the issuer to make payments in respect of the debt must be reflected in the accounting by a method which ensures the liability is fairly stated at each balance sheet date: the proposals of the FRED ensure that this is the case.
Companies legislation** also prohibits treating as an asset the expenses of and commission on any issue of shares and debentures.
As explained above, the proposal of the FRED is not that such expenses be treated as an asset, but rather that they be taken into account in measuring a liability.
Disclosure requirements
The disclosure requirements proposed by the FRED are similar to those proposed in the Discussion Paper.
Two additional disclosure requirements are proposed.
One is an analysis of the amount of shareholders' funds attributable to non-equity interests between classes of shares.
In most cases this will not be an onerous requirement.
Where there is more than one class of non-equity share in issue, it will provide information that will enable users to assess the characteristics of each class and to understand the accounting for each.
Secondly, the FRED proposes that the rights attaching to each class of share be disclosed in summary form.
Respondents requested this information, and pointed out that it is not always readily accessible.
There are exemptions from the proposed requirement in this connection, which are intended to obviate the need to provide details of ordinary shares, the characteristics of which are well understood.
Some respondents to the Discussion Paper expressed concern that its disclosure requirements could impose unacceptable burdens on preparers and result in financial statements including information that was not relevant to users and difficult to interpret.
Most such respondents did not identify specific disclosure requirements that they considered excessive.
One proposal that has not been retained is that of the total finance costs for non-equity shares.
This is because this information will be easily obtained by adding the dividends and any other amount of profit appropriated in respect of non-equity shares.
The actual burden on most preparers will be rather less than may appear from the disclosure requirements of the FRED, given that it is unusual for a company to have many different kinds of capital instruments in issue and, therefore, in many cases few of the specific disclosures will apply.
In framing the proposals, care has been taken to emphasise that information may frequently be given in summarised form.
One particular disclosure that was objected to by many respondents to the Discussion Paper was that of the market value of capital instruments (other than equity shares).
The proposal has been retained as the Board believes that information on the market value of liabilities is relevant to an assessment of the economic position of the company (Discussion Paper, paragraphs 3.31-3.35).
As this disclosure is only required where the market value can be readily obtained, the costs to preparers should be small.
Transitional provisions
The Board has considered the implementation of the FRS proposed in this exposure draft.
It considers that early implementation-would not add greatly to the costs of preparation of financial statements and that it is probable that such costs would be exceeded by the benefits to users.
The Board proposes that there should be no exemption to the requirements of the FRS for transactions entered into before a specified date.
The Board's general policy on transitional provisions for accounting standards is described in a separate statement.
Particular issues on which comments are invited
Whilst the FRED reflects comments on the Discussion Paper, further responses on any of its proposals would be welcome.
Comments are especially sought on the following:
i)
Disclosure requirements:
Preparers of financial statements are encouraged to comment on the disclosure requirements proposed in the FRED and to indicate with which specific requirements it might be particularly costly or difficult to comply.
Users of financial statements are encouraged to identify which of the disclosure requirements proposed in the FRED they consider especially useful or unnecessary and to state their reasons, and also to state any further disclosure requirements which they believe would be useful.
ii)
Warrants:
The FRED proposes that warrants are credited to shareholders' funds and that a gain is recognised in the statement of total recognised gains and losses when a warrant lapses unexercised.
The Board's reasons for adopting this approach are explained in paragraphs ix-xiv of ‘The Development of the FRED’.
Respondents are asked to state whether they concur with the proposal of the FRED or to indicate, with reasons, their preference for another method.
iii)
Convertible debt:
The FRED retains the proposal made in the Discussion Paper, which was supported by the majority of respondents, that convertible debt should be accounted for entirely as a liability until such time as it is actually converted, in preference to methods which seek to reflect the dual nature of convertible debt as part liability and part equity.
The International Accounting Standards Committee have released an exposure draft which proposes that ‘split accounting’ be adopted.
The Board's reasons for its proposal and the IASC's proposal are explained in ‘The Development of the FRED’ at paragraphs xv-xix.
Respondents are asked to indicate the method of accounting for convertible debt which they consider should be required.
It would be helpful if responses could indicate the extent to which their views are influenced by conceptual issues, practicality or the desirability of international harmonisation of accounting requirements.
iv)
Issue costs and the statement of total recognised gains and losses:
Under the proposals of the FRED, issue costs on capital instruments which have a finite term will, effectively, be charged to the profit and loss account over that term.
In contrast, the issue costs of equity shares are charged against share premium account and reported in the statement of total recognised gains and losses, in accordance with FRS 3.
Some consider that it is inconsistent to show issue costs of one kind of capital instrument in the profit and loss account and those relating to another kind in the statement of total recognised gains and losses.
On the other hand, taking the issue costs of equity shares to the statement of total recognised gains and losses may be considered right as it reflects the nature of these costs as a permanent loss of capital.
Respondents' views on this question would be welcome.
a)
[Draft]Financial Reporting Standard No
‘Accounting for Capital Instruments’(the [draft]FRS requires that capital instruments are presented in financial statements as separate classes according to their legal status and the issuer's obligations in respect of them.
It prescribes methods to be used to determine the amounts to be ascribed to capital instruments and their associated costs and requires certain disclosures relating to capital instruments.
b)
Shares of the reporting entity are to be classified as equity or non-equity and an analysis is to be presented of shareholders' funds between the amounts attributable to equity and non-equity shares.
In consolidated financial statements a similar analysis is to be presented of the amounts of minority interest attributable to equity and non-equity shares issued by subsidiaries.
If any other kind of capital instrument contains an obligation to transfer economic benefits, it is to be classified as a liability.
Convertible debt is to be displayed separately from other liabilities.
The key distinctions may be summarised as follows:
c)
The direct costs incurred in connection with the issue of capital instruments should be deducted from the proceeds of the issue in arriving at the net amount.
This treatment applies only to those costs which can be demonstrated to relate directly to the instrument in question.
Other costs will be charged as expenses when incurred.
d)
The finance costs associated with liabilities and shares other than equity shares are to be allocated to periods at a constant rate on the carrying amount.
Initially these instruments are to be recorded at the net amount of the issue proceeds.
The finance cost for a period is added to the carrying amount and payments deducted from it.
In the case of a redeemable instrument this will result in the carrying amount at the time it is redeemed being equal to the amount payable at that time.
e)
The [draft]FRS applies to all reporting entities whose financial statements are intended to give a true and fair view irrespective of size or ownership.
Investment companies need only charge in the profit and loss account those finance costs which relate to revenue: those which relate to capital will be charged in the statement of total recognised gains and losses.
f)
The requirements of the [draft]FRS apply to all transactions and instruments irrespective of the date at which they are issued.
1.
The objective of the [draft]FRS is to ensure that financial statements provide a clear, coherent and consistent treatment of capital instruments, in particular as regards the classification of instruments either as debt or as equity; that costs associated with capital instruments are allocated to accounting periods on a fair basis over the period the instrument is in issue; and that financial statements provide relevant information concerning the nature and amount of the entity's sources of finance and the associated costs, commitments and potential commitments.
Summary
Objective
Definitions
The following definitions apply for the purposes of the [draft]FRS and in particular the statement of standard accounting practice set out in paragraphs 16 to 61.
2.
Capital instruments:
All instruments issued by reporting entities which are a means of raising finance, including shares, debentures, loans and debt instruments, options and warrants which give the holder the right to subscribe for or obtain capital instruments.
In the case of consolidated financial statements the term includes capital instruments issued by subsidiaries except those which are held by another member of the group that is included in the consolidation.
3.
Companies Act 1985:
Companies Act 1985 as amended by the Companies Act 1989.
4.
Companies (Northern Ireland) Order 1986:
The Companies (Northern Ireland) Order 1986 as amended by the Companies (Northern Ireland) Order 1990 and the Companies (No 2)(Northern Ireland) Order 1990.
5.
Companies (Amendment) Act 1986:
The Republic of Ireland Companies Acts 1963-1990 and the European Communities (Companies: Group Accounts) Regulations 1992.
6.
Debt:
Capital instruments which are classified as liabilities.
7.
Equity shares:
Shares other than non-equity shares.
8.
Finance costs:
The difference between the net proceeds of an instrument and the total amount of the payments (or other transfers of economic benefits) which the issuer may be required to make in respect of the instrument.
9.
Issue costs:
The costs which are incurred directly in connection with the issue of a capital instrument and which would not have been incurred had the instrument not been issued.
10.
Net proceeds:
The fair value of the consideration received on the issue of a capital instrument after deduction of issue costs.
11.
Non-equity shares:
Shares possessing any of the following characteristics:
a)
any of the rights of the shares to receive payments (whether in respect of dividends, in respect of redemption or otherwise) are for a limited amount which is not calculated by reference to the company's assets or profits or the dividends on any class of equity share.
b)
any of their rights to participate in a surplus in a winding up are limited to a specific amount which is not calculated by reference to the company's assets or profits and such limitation had a commercial effect in practice at the time the shares were issued or, if later, at the time the limitation was introduced.
c)
the shares are redeemable according to their terms or the holdcr, or any party other than the issuer, can require their redemption, irrespective of the means by which the amount payable on redemption is calculated.
12.
Share:
The aggregate of called up share capital and all reserves, excluding minority interests.
13.
Shareholders' funds:
The aggregate of called up share capital and all reserves, excluding minority interests.
14.
Term (of a capital instrument):
The period from the date of issue of the capital instrument to the date at which it will expire, be redeemed, or be cancelled.
If either party has the option to require the instrument to be redeemed or cancelled and, under the terms of the instrument, it is uncertain as to whether such an option will be exercised, the term should be taken to end on the earliest date at which the instrument would be redeemed or cancelled on exercise of such an option.
If either party has the right to extend the period of an instrument, the term should not include the period of the extension if there is a genuine commercial possibility that the period will not be extended.
15.
Warrant:
An instrument which requires the issuer to issue shares (whether contingently or not) and contains no obligation for the issuer to transfer economic benefits.
STATEMENT OF STANDARD ACCOUNTING PRACTICE
The statement of standard accounting practice set out in paragraphs 16 to 61 of the [draft]FRS should be read in the context of the Objective of the [draft]FRS as stated in paragraph 1, the definitions set out in paragraphs 2 to 15 and also of the Foreword to Accounting Standards and the Statement of Principles for Financial Reporting currently in issue.
The Explanation section of the [draft]FRS, set out in paragraphs 64 to 95, and the Notes on Application shall be regarded as part of the statement of standard accounting practice insofar as they assist in interpreting that statement.
16.
The [draft]FRS applies to all financial statements intended to give a true and fair view of a reporting entity's financial position and profit or loss (or income and expenditure) for a period.
The terminology used in this statement will be appropriate for those reporting entities which are companies.
Entities other than companies may adapt the terminology as appropriate.
17.
The [draft]FRS applies to accounting for capital instruments by those who issue them.
It does not address accounting for investments in capital instruments issued by other entities.
18.
The requirements of the [draft]FRS apply to all capital instruments with the following exceptions:
a)
warrants issued to employees under employee share schemes;
b)
leases, which should be accounted for in accordance with SSAP 21;
c)
equity shares issued as part of a business combination which is accounted for as a merger.
19.
In applying the requirements of the [draft]FRS capital instruments which are issued at the same time in a composite transaction should be considered together.
They should be accounted for separately only if the instruments are capable of being cancelled or redeemed independently of each other; otherwise they should be accounted for as a single instrument.
20.
All capital instruments should be accounted for in the balance sheet within one of the following categories:
liabilities,
shareholders' funds,
in the case of consolidated financial statements, minority interest.
21.
Capital instruments should be classified as liabilities if they contain an obligation to transfer economic benefits (including a contingent obligation to transfer economic benefits).
Capital instruments which do not contain an obligation to transfer economic benefits should be reported within shareholders' funds.
Shares and warrants should be accounted for as required by paragraphs 33-42.
Scope
Classification of capital instruments
Debt
Convertible debt 
22.
Conversion of debt should not be anticipated.
Convertible debt should be reported within liabilities and the finance cost should be calculated on the assumption that the debt will never be converted.
The amount attributable to convertible debt should be stated on the face of the balance sheet separately from that of other liabilities.
23.
When convertible debt is converted, the amount recognised in respect of the shares issued should be the amount of the liability for the debt as at the date of conversion.
Carrying amount and allocation of finance costs
24.
Immediately after issue, debt should be stated at the amount of the net proceeds.
25.
The finance costs of debt should be allocated to periods over the term of the debt at a constant rate on the carrying amount.
All finance costs should be charged in the profit and loss account, except in the case of investment companies, which are addressed in paragraph 46.
26.
The carrying amount of debt should be increased by the finance cost in respect of the reporting period and reduced by payments made in respect of the debt in that period.
27.
Where the amount of payments required by a debt instrument is contingent on uncertain future events, for example changes in an index, finance costs should initially be based on the circumstances at the date of issue.
The carrying amount should be recalculated to take account of circumstances prevailing at each balance sheet date, and any change in the carrying amount should be accounted for as an increase or decrease in the finance cost for the period.
The maturity of debt
28.
Debt should be analysed on the face of the balance sheet between amounts falling due within one year of the balance sheet date and amounts falling due after more than one year.
29.
Financial statements, or the notes thereto, should contain an analysis of the maturity of debt showing amounts falling due:
a)
in one year or less, or on demand;
b)
between one and two years;
c)
between two and five years; and
d)
in five years or more.
30.
For the purposes of paragraphs 28 and 29 the maturity of debt should be determined by reference to the earliest date on which the lender can demand repayment.
31.
Where committed facilities are in existence at the balance sheet date which permit the refinancing of debt for a period beyond its maturity, the earliest date at which the lender has the right to demand repayment should be taken to be the maturity date of the longest refinancing permitted by a facility in respect of which all the following conditions are met:
a)
The debt and the facility are under a single agreement or course of dealing with the same lender or group of lenders.
b)
The finance costs for the new debt are not at a level which is greater than that of the existing debt.
c)
The obligations of the lender (or group of lenders) are firm: it is not able legally to avoid its obligation except where conditions are breached and the breach of conditions is objectively ascertainable.
d)
There are no conditions existing or likely which would permit the lender to refrain from providing funds under the facility.
e)
The lender (or group of lenders) is expected to be able to fulfil its obligations under the facility.
32.
Where the maturity of debt is assessed by reference to that of refinancing permitted by facilities in accordance with paragraph 31, the amounts of the debt so treated, analysed by the earliest date on which the lender could demand repayment in the absence of the facilities, should be disclosed.
Shares and warrants
The analysis of shareholders' funds 
33.
Shares and warrants should be reported as part of shareholders' funds.
34.
The balance sheet should show the total amount of shareholders' funds and an analysis of shareholders' funds between the amount attributable to equity interests and the amount attributable to non-equity interests.
The amount of shareholders' funds attributable to equity interests is the difference between total shareholders' funds and the total amount attributable to non-equity interests.
The amount attributable to non-equity interests is the aggregate of amounts relating to all classes of non-equity shares and warrants for non-equity shares.
The amount attributable to non-equity shares and the allocation of finance costs
35.
Immediately after issue the amount attributable to an instrument within non-equity shareholders' funds should be the net proceeds of the issue.
This amount should be increased by the finance cost in respect of the period and reduced by dividends or other payments made in respect of the instrument in that period.
36.
The finance costs for non-equity shares should be calculated on the same basis as the finance costs for debt set out in paragraphs 24 to 27 above.
37.
Where the entitlement to dividends in respect of non-equity shares is calculated by reference to time, the dividends should be accounted for on an accruals basis.
All dividends should be reported as appropriations of profit.
38.
Where the finance cost for non-equity shares is not equal to the dividends the difference should be accounted for in the profit and loss account as an appropriation of profits.
Equity shares and warrants
39.
The net proceeds from the issue of equity shares and warrants for equity shares should be credited directly to shareholders' funds.
The amount attributed to equity shares or warrants should not be subsequently adjusted to reflect changes in the value of the shares or warrants.
40.
When a warrant is exercised, the amount previously recognised in respect of the warrant should be included in the net proceeds of the shares issued.
41.
When a warrant lapses unexercised, the amount previously recognised in respect of the warrant should be reported in the statement of total recognised gains and losses.
Scrip dividends
42.
Where shares are issued by way of or in substitution for dividends, and the value of the shares issued is calculated by reference to the value of the dividend payable on any class of shares, the value calculated for this purpose should be reflected in the profit and loss account as an appropriation of profit.
43.
Shares issued by subsidiaries other than those held by companies within the group should be accounted for in consolidated financial statements as liabilities if any member of the group has an obligation to transfer economic benefits in connection with the shares, for example under a guarantee of payments to be made in respect of the shares.
In all other cases they should be reported as minority interests.
44.
Minority interests in the balance sheet should be analysed on the face of the balance sheet between the aggregate amount attributable to equity interests and amounts attributable to non-equity interests.
45.
The amount attributed to non-equity minority interests and their associated finance cost should be calculated in the same manner as that for non-equity shares.
The finance cost associated with such interests should be included in minority interests in the profit and loss account.
46.
Investment companies as defined in companies legislation may include the finance cost in respect of capital instruments in the statement of total recognised gains and losses to the extent it relates to capital.
The amount so treated should be disclosed within the statement, and the accounting policy for determining the allocation of finance costs between revenue and capital.
47.
The disclosures required by the following paragraphs should be made in addition to those required by paragraphs 22, 28, 29, 32, 34, 44 and 46 above.
48.
Where convertible debt, non-equity interests in shareholders' funds or non-equity interests in minority interests, are disclosed in the notes to the financial statements rather than on the face of the balance sheet (as required by paragraphs 22, 34 or 44) on the grounds that they are not material, the relevant caption on the face of the balance sheet should state that convertible debt or non-equity interests (as the case may be) are included.
49.
The accounting policies in respect of capital instruments should be stated.
Disclosures relating to shares
Shares issued by subsidiaries
Investment companies
Disclosures
50.
An analysis should be given of the total amount of non-equity interests in shareholders' funds relating to each class of non-equity shares and series of warrants for non-equity shares.
51.
A brief summary of the rights of each class of shares should be given.
This should include the following:
a)
the rights to dividends;
b)
date at which redeemable and amounts payable in respect of redemption;
c)
priority and amount receivable on a winding up;
d)
voting rights.
This information will usually make it clear why a class of share has been classified as equity or non-equity, but if necessary additional information should be given to explain the classification.
Where rights vary according to circumstances, these circumstances and the variation should be described.
52.
The disclosure required by paragraph 51 need not be given for equity shares which have the following features:
a)
no right to dividends other than those which may be recommended by the directors;
b)
no redemption rights;
c)
unlimited right to share in the surplus remaining on a winding up after all liabilities and participation rights of other classes of shares have been satisfied;
d)
one vote per share.
53.
Where warrants or convertible debt are in issue which may require the company to issue shares of a class which is not currently in issue the information set out in paragraph 51 should be given in respect of that class.
54.
The following should be disclosed on the face of the profit and loss account:
a)
the aggregate dividends relating to each of equity and non-equity shares; and
b)
the amount of profit appropriated in respect of non-equity shares.
Disclosures relating to minority interests
55.
An analysis of the amount of the minority interest charge in the profit and loss account between equity and non-equity minority interest should be given.
56.
Where there are non-equity minority interests a description should be given of any rights of holders of the shares against other group companies, for example in respect of guarantees.
Disclosures relating to debt
57.
In respect of convertible debt, details of the date of redemption and the amount payable on redemption should be disclosed.
The number and class of shares into which the debt may be converted and the date at or period within which the conversion may take place should be stated.
It should also be stated whether conversion is at the option of the issuer or the holder.
58.
Where amounts are included in debt representing instruments other than unsubordinated, unconditional contractual obligations of the company a brief description of the legal nature should be given.
Where amounts are included in debt representing instruments in respect of which the claim that would arise on a winding up is significantly different from that at which the instrument is stated in the financial  statements , the amount of the claim that would arise on a winding up should be stated.
This information may be summarised and need not be given for each individual instrument.
59.
Where the market value of a class of debt security or non-equity shares can be readily obtained, the value at the balance sheet date and the carrying value should be disclosed.
Date from which effective
60.
The accounting practices set out in the [draft]FRS should be adopted as soon as possible and regarded as standard in respect of financial statements relating to accounting periods ending on or after [date to be inserted after exposure.]
61.
The [draft]FRS supersedes UITF Abstract 1.
Financial Reporting Exposure Draft No. 3 —‘Accounting for capital instruments’ was approved for issue by the members of the Accounting Standards Board.
UITF Abstract 1
62.
The requirements of the [draft]FRS are consistent with existing International Accounting Standards.
However, The International Accounting Standards Committee (‘IASC') has issued an exposure draft (E40) which is a draft of a proposed standard on Financial Instruments.
63.
The principal areas where the proposals of the IASC exposure draft and the [draft]FRS are at variance* are:
a)
The IASC exposure draft proposes that certain preferred shares, for example those where the holder has the right to require redemption, be accounted for as liabilities.
The [draft]FRS requires that all shares are reported within shareholders' funds.
b)
The IASC exposure draft proposes that the proceeds of instruments which have both liability and equity rights should be allocated between the component parts.
The [draft]FRS requires such instruments to be accounted for wholly as a liability.
!!!!!!!!!
Capital instruments
Compliance with International Accounting Standards
Explanation
64.
The definition of capital instruments, given in paragraph 2, includes all kinds of shares, debt instruments and options and warrants to obtain such instruments.
It characterises capital instruments as a means of raising finance: an instrument may be within the definition whether or not the consideration given for its issue takes the form of cash.
Capital instruments may take the form of contracts between two parties (for example a borrower and his bank) as well as an issue of transferable securities.
65.
In order to apply the requirements of the [draft]FRS it is necessary to determine whether instruments issued at the same time should be accounted for individually or not.
Accounting for the individual instruments is required by paragraph 19 if (and only if) the instruments are capable of being cancelled or redeemed independently of each other.
66.
For example, a warrant will usually not be a liability as it does not contain an obligation to transfer economic benefits.
But, if at the same time as the warrant is issued the issuer undertakes to redeem it, the agreement to redeem the warrant should be considered together with that for the issue of the warrant itself.
Therefore, the instrument will be accounted for as a liability.
67.
On the other hand, if debt and warrants are issued simultaneously and the warrants can be cancelled or redeemed independently of the debt, the two components should be accounted for separately.
It would be necessary in such a case to apportion the proceeds of the issue to each component.
68.
The [draft]FRS contains requirements for determining whether capital instruments should be accounted for as liabilities.
Special considerations, discussed at paragraphs 79-83 below, arise in connection with shares of the entity and these requirements accordingly do not apply to them.
69.
The determination of whether a capital instrument represents a liability is based on whether it contains an obligation for the issuer to transfer economic benefits (paragraph 21).
The most common example of an obligation to transfer economic benefits is the requirement to make cash payments to the holder of the instrument, although an obligation to transfer other kinds of property would also cause the instrument to be classified as a liability.
The payments may be described in various ways, for example as interest, or as an amount payable on redemption: the manner in which the obligation is described is not relevant to the classification of the instrument.
70.
If a capital instrument contains an obligation for the issuer to transfer economic benefits to another party it should be classified as debt even if the obligation is contingent.
For example an instrument which gives the holder the right to require either the transfer of cash or the issue of an equity share imposes an obligation on the issuer and should therefore be classified as a liability.
The only obligations to transfer economic benefits which should not be taken into account are those which would not be considered in accordance with the going concern concept, that is, those which would only arise on the insolvency of the issuer and, where the issuer is expected to be able to comply with covenants on loan and similar agreements, those which would follow a breach of those covenants.
71.
If a capital instrument contains an obligation to transfer economic benefits the entire instrument should be accounted for as a liability.
No attempt should be made to allocate the proceeds of the instrument between that which relates to the liability and any other element.
72.
The [draft]FRS requires that debt and non-equity interests are accounted for by allocating finance costs over the term of the loan at a constant rate.
The term of the instrument is usually self evident but where either party has the option to extend the term, or to require the instrument to be redeemed early, such options should be carefully evaluated.
If there is an option for early redemption, the term should be taken to end when it would end on exercise of the option, unless there is no genuine commercial possibility that the option will be exercised.
The term should not include any period for which the instrument might be extended unless such an extension is certain at the time the instrument is issued: that is, there is no genuine commercial possibility that the period will not be extended.
In evaluating the commercial possibilities of options, it should be assumed that the parties will act in accordance with their economic interests, but account should not be taken of courses of action which the parties would take only in the event of a severe deterioration in the creditworthiness of the issuer.
73.
For example, in the case of a zero coupon bond, the return to the lender consists entirely of the amount received at maturity.
If the lender under such an instrument had the right to require early redemption, but on exercise of that right he would receive only the original issue price, it would be unrealistic to assume that he would exercise it unless the issuer's creditworthiness deteriorated to a significant extent.
The term of such a bond would therefore extend to its final maturity.
74.
The [draft]FRS requires that the maturity of debt should be assessed according to the earliest date on which the lender could demand repayment, taking account of facilities granted by the same lender which may permit the refinancing of the debt.
For example, a bank loan may fall due three months after the balance sheet date but the borrower may have obtained a commitment from the bank to provide a further loan for the same amount for a further three years.
In such a case, providing the conditions required by the [draft]FRS are met, the debt would be included in the analysis of the maturity of debt as falling due between two and five years.
75.
The restriction to facilities provided by the same lender or group of lenders ensures that the facility and the borrowings in question are related.
It is also consistent with the requirements of companies legislation**.
For this purpose lenders should be considered to be part of the same group if they are parties to the same agreement or course of dealing, even if it is not always the same members of the group who participate in individual financings entered into under that agreement or course of dealing.
This may be the case for some Multi-Option Facilities.
76.
An increase in the price of debt is as significant as its refinancing: for this reason the [draft]FRS requires that the maturity of borrowings be assessed by reference to borrowings under related facilities only where the finance costs for the new debt are not at a level which is greater than that of the existing debt.
Where the cost of finance under a facility is determined by reference to a base rate (such as LIBOR) a change in the base rate should not be regarded as an increase in the level of finance costs for this purpose.
77.
It would only be right to have regard to facilities if there are objective grounds for believing that the lender will fulfil his commitment.
The [draft]FRS therefore requires that the facilities must be committed and that there must be no reasons expected or likely which would either permit the lender to avoid his obligation to provide new borrowings or prevent him from providing them.
The expectation that the new borrowings will be available, if required, must have existed at the balance sheet date and this expectation should be reviewed in the light of any post balance sheet events to ensure it remains reasonable on the date the financial statements are approved by the directors.
78.
Particular care should be taken in considering provisions which would enable the lender to avoid his obligation to enter into new borrowings.
If such a provision may be interpreted subjectively — for example if further finance may be withheld if the borrower's financial condition suffers an ‘adverse change’ and that term is not further defined — it will be unsafe to rely on borrowings under the facility being available.
For that reason, the [draft]FRS proposes that the breach of any conditions contained in the facility must be objectively ascertainable if the facility is to be taken into account.
79.
Certain kinds of shares have features which make them economically similar to debt.
Nonetheless, the requirement to classify capital instruments according to whether they contain an obligation to transfer economic benefits does not apply to shares issued by the reporting company.
The legal status of shares is well established and understood and there are specific conditions which have to be satisfied if any payment is made in respect of them.
In addition, the balance sheet formats prescribed by companies legislation require that called up share capital is stated separately from liabilities.
The [draft]FRS therefore requires all shares to be reported within shareholders' funds.
Warrants are also required to be reported within shareholders' funds, provided they do not contain an obligation to transfer economic benefits (in which case they would not be within the definition of warrants contained in the [draft]FRS).
80.
The [draft]FRS requires that shareholders' funds are analysed to show the amount relating to equity and non-equity interests.
The definition of non-equity shares is widely drawn, so that any right to a dividend or to a redemption payment which is for a limited amount will have the effect that the shares will be considered non-equity shares, irrespective of the other rights they may enjoy.
81.
It is possible that in rare circumstances shares will be classified as non-equity shares in accordance with the requirements of the [draft]FRS although they fall within the definition of equity share capital contained in companies legislation.
If this situation arises any possibility that users of the financial statements will be misled or confused can be mitigated by further explanation.
82.
Rights to participate on a winding up are not usually taken into account, as financial statements are generally prepared on a going concern basis and, accordingly, such rights are not usually relevant to accounting.
But if winding up is foreseeable when shares are issued, the limitation of rights has a commercial effect.
Such a circumstance could arise, for example, where a group raises finance by way of an issue of shares of a special purpose subsidiary with a pre-determined life.
For this reason the definition requires that rights to participate on a winding up are taken into account only where, at the date the limitation is introduced, it was likely that it would have a commercial effect in practice.
83.
Shares which the holder may or will be required to redeem are also not equity shares, since they do not form part of the residual interest in the company.
Furthermore, since the amount payable in respect of redemption must be fixed prior to redemption, their rights in respect of redemption will be restricted.
84.
Usually, where subsidiaries have shares in issue which are not held by another company in the group they are reported in the consolidated financial statements within minority interests but in some cases they are required by the [draft]FRS to be reported within liabilities, that is, as debt.
85.
Consolidated financial statements are prepared on the basis that the undertakings included in the consolidation form a single entity (‘the group').
Therefore, where a subsidiary has shares in issue it is necessary to look at the effect on the group as a whole in preparing the consolidated financial statements and by considering the rights attaching to the shares in conjunction with any agreements to which other group companies are a party.
For example, if another company in the group has provided guarantees in respect of dividends or redemption, or has undertaken to purchase the shares, the issue will constitute a liability of the group and should be reported as such.
This will also be the case where the shares are issued by a subsidiary incorporated in a jurisdiction where it cannot avoid paying dividends or amounts in respect of redemption even if there are insufficient distributable profits, in which case funds would have to be provided by other group companies.
86.
Particular care is necessary in assessing the effect of subordinated guarantees given by group companies in respect of shares issued by subsidiaries as the degree of subordination varies widely.
The intent of some such guarantees is that the rights of the holder of the shares against the group are the same as those of the holder of preference shares of the parent.
All the rights and remedies of the holders of the subsidiary undertaking's shares against group companies should be considered and the shares should be reported as liabilities unless it is clear that the intended equivalence of the rights to those attaching to preference shares of the parent is actually attained.
If it is, the shares should be reported as non-equity minority interests.
*
87.
Where it is determined that it is appropriate to report shares issued by subsidiaries in consolidated financial statements within minority interests rather than as a liability, it is necessary to determine whether they represent an equity or a non-equity interest.
Companies legislation** requires that the balance sheet shows as minority interests the amount of capital and reserves attributable to shares in subsidiary undertakings included in the consolidation held by or on behalf of persons other than the parent company and its subsidiary undertakings.
Where the shares are equity shares the relevant amount of minority interests will be the proportionate share of net identifiable assets.
If the shares are non-equity shares the amount of capital and reserves attributable to the shares will correspond to the amount determined by the requirements of the [draft]FRS: that is the net proceeds plus recognised finance costs and less payments made.
88.
In determining the issue costs of a capital instrument prudence should be exercised to ensure that only those costs which can be demonstrated to relate directly to the issue of the instrument are deducted from the proceeds.
Such costs would not include any allocation of costs which would have been incurred had the instrument not been issued: for example management remuneration.
Nor should costs of researching and negotiating alternative sources of finance be included.
Costs which do not qualify as issue costs should be written off to the profit and loss account as incurred.
89.
The [draft]FRS requires that issue costs, as defined, are accounted for as a reduction in the proceeds of a capital instrument.
Such costs are not assets as defined in the Board's draft Statement of Principles because they do not provide access to any future economic benefits.
The issuer has the use of funds during the life of the instrument, and in return pays interest.
Any benefit obtained from the issue costs is reflected in the interest expense and hence issue costs are appropriately accounted for as an adjustment to the amount of the liability, which effectively results in their being charged over the life of the instrument.
If it became clear that the instrument would be redeemed early, then the amortisation would have to be accelerated.
90.
The requirement of the [draft]FRS that issue costs are reflected in the amounts charged to the profit and loss account over the term of a capital instrument is not intended to prohibit the subsequent charging of issue costs to the share premium account by means of a transfer between reserves.
The amounts which may be charged to share premium account are determined by the requirements of companies legislation.
91.
Although the [draft]FRS requires appropriations of profit over and above the dividends payable to be made in some circumstances in respect of non-equity shares it does not affect the total amount of distributable profits.
92.
The [draft]FRS also requires appropriations of profit to be shown in the profit and loss account equivalent to the value of shares issued in respect of scrip dividends.
To the extent that such shares are not paid up by capitalisation of the profit and loss account or other free reserves, distributable profits are not reduced by the amount of such dividends.
93.
The disclosure requirements of the [draft]FRS address many of the circumstances which arise frequently.
However, as the features of capital instruments may vary widely, it should not be presumed that the disclosures required by the [draft]FRS will in all circumstances be sufficient for the financial statements to give a true and fair view.
94.
The [draft]FRS requires that non-equity interests in shareholders' funds, non-equity interests in minority interests, and convertible debt are disclosed on the face of the balance sheet rather than in the notes to the financial statements.
In some cases, however, on grounds of materiality, these may be disclosed in the notes to the financial statements instead.
In assessing materiality in connection with convertible securities, consideration should be given not only to their carrying amount but also to the implications of conversion.
Where information is presented in the notes to the financial statements rather than on the face of the balance sheet, it would be necessary to ensure that the caption on the face of the balance sheet indicates that the balance sheet total includes non-equity interests or convertible debt.
This is required by paragraph 48.
95.
There is a presumption that amounts included in debt represent unconditional contractual obligations of the reporting entity and would give rise to a claim on a winding up for an amount similar to that at which they are stated in the financial statements.
As this may not always be the case, paragraph 58 requires a brief description of the obligations and legal arrangements relating to any debt which are different from those usually associated with debt.
This would apply, for example, to subordinated debt, to non-recourse debt and to those shares issued by subsidiary undertakings which are classified as debt in accordance with the [draft]FRS.
Identification of distinct capital instruments
The classification of capital instruments
Accounting for debt and non-equity interests
The maturity of debt
Shares and warrants
Shares issued by subsidiaries
Issue costs
Distributable profits
Disclosure requirements
Notes on Application of the [draft]FRS
The following describes the application of the requirements of the [draft]FRS to instruments which have certain features.
Capital instruments may have a combination of features and accordingly more than one section of the following may be relevant to a single capital instrument.
The calculations and specimen disclosures shown as illustrations [….]are for general guidance only and do not form part of the [draft]FRS.
Auction Market Preferred Shares (‘AMPS')
Features
AMPS are preference shares which are entitled to dividends determined in accordance with an auction process in which a panel of investors participate, the shares being transferred at a fixed price to the investor who will accept the lowest dividend.
If the auction process fails — for example because no bids are received — the shares remain in the ownership of the former holder and the dividend is increased to a rate, known as the default rate, which is calculated in accordance with a prescribed formula.
(This default rate may change if there is any change in the credit rating of the issuer.)
In some cases dividends may be passed at the option of the issuer and in any event will not be paid if there are insufficient distributable profits.
If the dividend is not paid the holders of the AMPS do not obtain any additional rights, for example to demand redemption.
AMPS are redeemable at the option of the issuer, usually at the issue price.
Analysis and required accounting
As AMPS are shares, dividends cannot be paid in respect of them except out of distributable profits, nor can they be redeemed unless the redemption is financed out of distributable profits or by a fresh issue of shares.
Because they are redeemable at a fixed amount, and because the dividend rights are limited, AMPS constitute non-equity shares.
In accordance with the requirements of the [draft]FRS, AMPS should be reported within shareholders' funds as non-equity shares and included in the amount attributable to non-equity shares which is shown on the face of the balance sheet (paragraph 34).
The finance cost for each period should be the dividend rights accruing in respect of the period.
Convertible capital bonds
Features
The detailed provisions of convertible capital bonds vary but the following is typical.
Convertible capital bonds are debt instruments on which interest is paid periodically, issued by a special purpose subsidiary incorporated outside the UK.
Prior to maturity they may be exchanged for shares of the subsidiary which, at the option of the bondholder, are either immediately redeemed or immediately exchanged for ordinary shares of the parent.
The bonds and payments in respect of the shares of the subsidiary are guaranteed by the parent.
The parent has the right to issue convertible redeemable preference shares of its own in substitution for the bonds should it wish to do so.
Analysis and required accounting
From the standpoint of the subsidiary, convertible capital bonds are clearly debt since the obligation to pay interest is an obligation to transfer economic benefits.
In addition, paragraph 22 of the [draft]FRS requires that conversion of debt should not be anticipated.
In the subsidiary's financial statements the bonds should therefore be accounted for as debt.
From the standpoint of the group they are also liabilities.
Even though the parent has the option to issue convertible preference shares in substitution for the bonds, the requirements of paragraph 22 of the [draft]FRS again entail that such conversion should not be anticipated.
Whilst non-equity shares have a particular legal status which justifies their inclusion in shareholders' funds, this does not justify reporting within shareholders' funds an instrument which does not have that status and may never be converted into one that does.
Since the liabilities are convertible, the amount attributable to convertible capital bonds should be included in the amount of convertible debt which should be stated on the face of the balance sheet separately from other liabilities.
Convertible debt with a premium put option
Features
Convertible debt with a premium put option contains an option for the holder to demand redemption (either at the maturity of the debt or at some earlier date) for an amount which is in excess of the amount originally received for the debt.
At the time the debt is issued, it is uncertain whether the debt will be converted prior to the time at which the redemption option may be exercised, and hence whether the premium on redemption will be paid.
Analysis and required accounting
The premium put option provides a higher guaranteed return to the holder of the debt than would be received on identical debt without such a put option.
Often this higher return corresponds to that which the holder would have expected to receive on non-convertible debt.
The holder's decision as to whether to exercise the option will depend on the relative values of the shares to which he would be entitled on conversion and the cash receivable, including the premium, on exercise of the option.
In accordance with paragraph 14 of the [draft]FRS, the term of convertible debt with a premium put option should be considered to end on the earliest date at which the holder has the option to require redemption.
The premium payable on exercise of the premium put option falls to be included in the calculation of the finance cost for the debt.
On conversion, in accordance with paragraph 23 of the [draft]FRS, the proceeds of the shares issued should be deemed to be the carrying amount of the debt, including accrued premium, immediately prior to conversion.
Convertible debt with enhanced interest
Features
As an alternative to the premium put structure discussed above, convertible debt may contain an undertaking that the interest will be increased at a date in the future.
At the time the debt is issued, it is uncertain whether the debt will be converted prior to the time at which the enhanced interest will be payable.
Analysis and required accounting
The enhanced rate of interest increases the guaranteed return to the holder.
Often this higher return corresponds to that which the holder would have expected to receive on non-convertible debt.
The holders' decision as to whether to convert the debt will take into account the interest forgone by such a decision.
In accordance with the definitions set out in paragraphs 8 and 14 of the [draft]FRS, the interest for the full term of the convertible debt should be taken into account in the allocation of finance costs, which should be allocated at a constant rate in accordance with paragraph 25.[
Illustration on p 116.]
Debt issued with warrants
Features
Debt is sometimes issued with warrants.
The issue is often made for the par value of the debt and the debt will be redeemed at the same amount.
The warrants and the debt are capable of being cancelled or redeemed separately.
Analysis and required accounting
In accordance with paragraph 19 of the [draft]FRS, the proceeds of the issue should be allocated between the debt and the warrants.
As a result, the amount of the proceeds deemed to relate to the debt will be less than par value.
The discount on issue should be treated as a finance cost and apportioned to accounting periods so that the total finance cost on the debt will have a constant relationship to the outstanding obligation.
Accounting for warrants is specified at paragraphs 39-41 of the [draft]FRS.
Deep discount bonds
Features
Deep discount bonds are bonds which carry a low nominal rate of interest and accordingly are issued at a discount to the value at which they will be redeemed.
In the extreme case where no interest at all is payable they are sometimes referred to as zero coupon bonds.
Analysis and required accounting
The cost to the borrower of issuing a deep discount bond comprises the discount on issue as well as any interest payments.
It is clear that deep discount bonds represent liabilities of the issuer since they contain an obligation to make cash payments.
In accordance with the definition of ‘finance cost’ in paragraph 8 of the [draft]FRS the finance cost will constitute the difference between the net proceeds and the total payments which the issuer may be required to make in respect of the instrument.
In accordance with paragraph 25 of the [draft]FRS the finance costs will be allocated to periods at a constant rate on the carrying amount, with the result that the carrying amount of the bond immediately prior to redemption will equate to the amount at which it is to be redeemed.
The discount should not be treated as an asset.
Income bonds
Features
The distinctive feature of income bonds is that interest is payable only in the event that the issuer has sufficient reported profits (after allowing for interest on other kinds of debt) to make the payment.
If profits are insufficient the issuer is not in default and no additional rights accrue to the holder of the bond, although interest payments may be cumulative.
Income bonds must be redeemed by the issuer at a fixed amount on a specific date.
Analysis and required accounting
The requirement to redeem the bonds is an obligation to transfer economic benefits.
The bonds must therefore be accounted for as a liability as required by paragraph 21 of the [draft]FRS.
Even if the issuer were not required to redeem the bonds, they would still be classed as a liability, because of the obligation to pay interest.
The fact that the obligation to pay is dependent on the existence of profits makes the obligation contingent, but it does not remove the obligation.
Index linked loans
Features
Sometimes loan agreements do not state a specific amount for the payments: instead they include a formula to be used for their calculation.
For example, in the case of floating rate loans, the amount of periodic payments of interest will be calculated by reference to a base rate — eg LIBOR + 2%.
Another example is that of index linked loans which may be redeemable at the principal amount multiplied by an index.
Analysis and required accounting
Paragraph 27 of the [draft]FRS requires that the initial accounting for the loan should be based on the circumstances prevailing at the time the loan is entered into and so, for example, changes in a relevant index subsequent to issue should not be anticipated.
Any difference between the amounts on which the accounting was originally based and the recalculated amount based on the index at the end of the period should be reflected as part of the finance charge for the period.
Limited recourse debt
Features
Sometimes debt is raised on terms that the lender's recourse is limited.
Although the borrower is expected to meet the obligations of the debt out of his general resources, in the event of default the lender can only obtain repayment by enforcing his rights against the particular security which is identified in the loan agreement.
If the proceeds of the security are insufficient to repay the loan, the lender must bear the loss and has no further rights against the borrower.
Analysis and required accounting
Limited recourse debt constitutes an obligation on the part of the borrower to repay, and hence should be accounted for as a liability.
The borrower will normally have all the benefits of the security (including the right to receive the sale proceeds) and will have to meet the obligation to repay the debt in order to preserve these rights.
Although if the security declines in value the borrower may possibly be able to elect to hand it over to the lender and thus avoid any further liability in respect of the debt, such an eventuality would be unusual, and therefore should not be reflected in the accounting until such time as the asset is transferred.
Limited recourse debt is one of the kinds of debt envisaged in paragraph 58 of the [draft]FRS in that its legal nature differs from that usually associated with debt.
A brief description of its nature should be given.
An illustration of such disclosure is set out below.
Participating preference shares
Features
Participating preference shares are similar to other familiar kinds of preference shares except that they are entitled, in addition to a fixed dividend for each accounting period, to a percentage of the dividends paid on the ordinary shares.
Analysis and required accounting
Because participating preference shares contain an entitlement to share in profits which is of a restricted amount and has priority over the other classes of shares, they are non-equity shares in accordance with the definition in paragraph 11 of the [draft]FRS and their interest in shareholders' funds should be presented within the aggregate amount attributable to non-equity shares as required by paragraph 34.
It would also be necessary for their dividend entitlements to be fully explained so as not to give a misleading impression of the amount of profits which may be distributed to equity shareholders.
Perpetual debt
Features
Perpetual debt is debt in respect of which the issuer has neither the right nor the obligation to repay the principal amount of the debt.
Usually, interest is paid at a constant rate, or at a fixed margin over a benchmark rate such as LIBOR.
Analysis and required accounting
Sometimes it is suggested that as the principal amount will never be repaid there is no need for the balance sheet to reflect a liability in respect of the debt.
However, the obligation to pay interest is an obligation to transfer economic benefits and hence the instrument is a liability.
As there are no payments of principal the burden of this liability never diminishes.
The [draft]FRS is based on the principle that debt should be accounted for having regard to all the payments required by the debt, irrespective of their legal description, in determining the appropriate finance charge and capital repayment for each accounting period.
In the case of perpetual debt where interest is paid at a constant rate, or at a fixed margin over a benchmark the correct finance charge will be equal to the coupon payable for each period.
Hence no part of the repayments will reduce the carrying amount and the debt will be shown at its original issue price.
Repackaged perpetual debt
Features
Sometimes perpetual debt is issued which carries interest at a relatively high rate for a number of years (‘the primary period'), and then bears no further interest, or only a nominal amount.
As the debt cannot be required to be redeemed, its value after the primary period has expired is negligible and, in practice, there will usually be arrangements to transfer it to a party friendly to the issuer or to enable the issuer to elect effectively to redeem the debt for a token amount.
Analysis and required accounting
The substance of such an arrangement is that the debt is repaid over the primary period and the payments required by the debt should be apportioned between a finance charge for each accounting period and the effective reduction of the principal amount.
It would be necessary to make full disclosure of the arrangement in the financial statements.
The finance cost of the debt (as defined in paragraph 8 of the [draft]FRS) will be the difference between the net proceeds and the payments which the issuer is required to make.
This will be allocated to periods over the primary period at a constant rate on the carrying amount, as required by paragraph 25 of the [draft]FRS.
Illustration of disclosures
‘The limited recourse debt of £xxx is secured on the company's investment in an industrial warehouse at Allington Industrial Estate, Barsetshire which has a market and book value of £yyy.
In the event of non-payment of the interest or principal on this debt, the lenders have the right to require the sale of the property and will be paid all the sale proceeds up to the amount of the debt but have no other rights against the company.’
Stepped interest bonds
Features
The stated rate of interest payable in respect of stepped interest bonds increases progressively over the period of issue.
Analysis and required accounting
In the case of stepped interest bonds, the stated rate of interest for each accounting period does not reflect the true economic cost of borrowing in any period during the time the bond is outstanding, since low rates of interest in one period are compensated by higher rates in another.
Under the requirements of paragraph 25 of the [draft]FRS the pattern of the interest payments does not affect the allocation of finance costs.
The payments required by the debt should be apportioned between a finance charge for each accounting period at a constant rate on the outstanding obligation and a reduction of the carrying amount.
The effect of this accounting on a stepped interest bond is that the overall effective interest cost will be charged in each accounting period: an accrual will be made in addition to the cash payments in earlier periods and will reverse, partially offsetting the higher cash payments, in later periods.
It would be necessary to make full disclosure of the arrangement in the financial statements.
Subordinated debt
Features
Subordinated debt is debt under which the rights of the lender are not as great as those of other creditors of the issuer.
The methods of subordination vary widely.
For example, one method is that subordinated debt may be repaid only when certain conditions are met, which are intended to ensure that the interests of other creditors are not impaired by the repayment.
Another method of subordination is a prohibition on repayment of the debt whilst other creditors remain unpaid.
Analysis and required accounting
Irrespective of the means of subordination which is used, the lender on subordinated terms does not forgo the right to be repaid: he simply accepts that under certain conditions repayment will be postponed.
It follows that, despite the subordination, the company has an obligation to repay (that is, an obligation to transfer economic benefits) and therefore subordinated debt should be accounted for as a liability.
Subordinated debt is one of the kinds of debt envisaged in paragraph 58 of the [draft]FRS in that its legal nature differs from that usually associated with debt.
A brief description of its nature should be given.
An illustration of such disclosure is set out below.
i)
As noted in the Preface, the contents of the FRED are based on the Board's Discussion Paper ‘Accounting for capital instruments’.
The following summarises the arguments which the Board found persuasive in framing the principal proposals in the Discussion Paper and the FRED.
ii)
The Board decided to undertake a project on accounting for capital instruments in view of the increasing number and variety of capital instruments which have been introduced in recent years.
Accounting for some of the new instruments has not always been uniform, and a variety of arguments have been advanced to justify differing treatments.
Some of these arguments have called into question methods of accounting for capital instruments used for many years which had previously appeared uncontroversial.
iii)
The central issues which require resolution are the criteria to be used to determine whether a capital instrument represents debt or equity and the treatment of instruments like convertible debt which will or may be exchanged for other instruments.
iv)
The Board's draft Statement of Principles defines a liability as follows:
Liabilities are an entity's obligations to transfer economic benefits as a result of past transactions or events.
Illustration of disclosures
‘The only event of default in relation to the subordinated debt is non-payment of principal or interest.
The only remedy available to the holders of the subordinated debt in the event of default is to petition for the winding up of the company.
In a winding up no amount will be paid in respect of the subordinated debt until all other creditors have been paid in full.’
The development of the FRED
Reason for the FRED
The distinction between debt and equity
v)
Thus the criterion proposed in the Discussion Paper and the FRED to determine whether a capital instrument represents a liability is whether it contains an obligation to transfer economic benefits.
vi)
This criterion is not, however, used to determine the accounting for a company's shares.
Shares have a distinct legal status reflected (inter alia) in the limitations imposed by companies legislation on the circumstances in which payments may be made in respect of them.
It is also impossible to classify shares as liabilities within the constraints of the statutory formats for the balance sheet.
vii)
Although there are practical and legal difficulties in classifying shares as liabilities, another distinction — that between equity and non-equity shares — is practicable and is of great significance in assessing the financial position of the company.
Equity shares represent the residual interest in a company.
They have no claim on the company's assets which ranks prior to any other claim, but obtain the exclusive right to any increase in the net assets.
Therefore the FRED proposes that the interests of equity shareholders in the company be stated prominently, clearly distinguished from those of shares which have any element of priority.
Priority requires some limitation in the amount to which priority attaches, and so the definition of ‘non-equity shares’ focuses on limitation of rights.
viii)
As explained in paragraphs 84-87, it is sometimes the case that shares issued by subsidiaries, when considered in the context of the group, are liabilities of the group.
Where this is the case, the FRED proposes that they be accounted for as liabilities.
In other cases, the FRED proposes that an analysis be presented of minority interests between the amount attributable to equity and non-equity interests.
This analysis is similar to that of shareholders' funds and is required for the same reasons.
ix)
When a company issues warrants its only obligation is to issue shares at a fixed price, if so required by the holder.
x)
The price paid for a warrant can be thought of as part of the subscription price for a share which may (or may not) be issued at a future date.
For this reason, the FRED proposes that warrants be reported within shareholders' funds.
xi)
Once the warrant expires unexercised the amount paid for the warrant accrues to the benefit of the shareholders.
For this reason, the FRED proposes that on the expiry of a warrant the amount previously recognised in shareholders' funds be recognised in the statement of total recognised gains and losses.
xii)
The Board acknowledges that the subject of warrants raises wider issues than are dealt with in the FRED.
In particular, it is sometimes argued that, when the amount paid on exercise of warrants is lower than the fair value of the shares issued, there is an additional, implicit consideration that needs to be reflected in the financial statements.
If this view is accepted, the question arises whether the estimate of fair value for this purpose should be made as at the issue date of the warrants or as at the exercise date.
xiii)
Another view of warrants is that, in substance, they are transactions with owners.
Those who subscribe to this view would disagree with the proposal of the FRED that where a warrant lapses unexercised the amount previously recognised should be reported in the statement of total recognised gains and losses, since they do not consider that it represents a gain to the company.
The Board rejected this view as it considers that only shareholders are owners of a company and hence the issue of warrants which are not subsequently exercised represents a gain.
xiv)
The problem involves conceptual and practical issues requiring research and consultation that the Board believes would be better conducted as a separate project.
The FRED, therefore, excludes from its scope warrants and share options issued under employee share schemes, which are the most common example of warrants giving rise to these wider issues.
If and when the Board addresses these issues the definition and treatment of warrants specified in this FRED would also be reviewed.
xv)
There are a number of possible approaches to the accounting for convertible debt.
Under present practice convertible debt is usually reported as a liability.
Although this is uncontroversial where conversion is uncertain or unlikely, it is sometimes argued that where conversion is probable convertible debt should be reported outside liabilities.
xvi)
The FRED proposes, however, that convertible debt be reported within liabilities irrespective of the probability of future conversion.
This is because the balance sheet is a record of the financial position of the company at a point in time, rather than a forecast of future events.
(This is not, of course, to deny that financial statements may be useful in forming an assessment of future events.)
There are difficulties with the idea that convertible debt should be classified according to the probability of conversion, notably in specifying how the probability of conversion should be judged, whether convertible debt should be reclassified if the probability of conversion changes, and whether the interest on convertible debt which is not reported as a liability should be deducted in arriving at profit before taxation.
xvii)
One of the criticisms of reporting convertible debt as a liability is that it ignores the equity rights which are inherent in an issue of convertible debt.
Two methods of accounting which attempt to address this are ‘split accounting’ and ‘the imputed interest method’.
xviii)
The IASC's exposure draft E40 proposes that split accounting be required for convertible debt.
Under this method the proceeds of an issue of convertible debt are allocated between two components: the equity rights, and the liability.
Because the amount at which the liability is initially recognised is reduced, compared with more conventional accounting, the finance charges over the term of the debt are increased, and would normally be similar to those which would arise on an issue of non-convertible debt.
The overall accounting effect is similar to that of an issue of debt issued with warrants as illustrated in the section ‘Notes on Application of the [draft]FRS’.
xix)
The Discussion Paper illustrated ‘split accounting’ and ‘the imputed interest method’and sought respondents' views on them, although it did not propose that these methods be required.
The majority of the respondents who addressed the issue agreed that such methods should not be required, giving as their reasons complexity and subjectivity.
xx)
The FRED requires that finance costs be allocated to periods at a constant rate of interest on the outstanding amount.
This method reflects the fact that finance costs are a function of the amount outstanding and the passage of time.
It is also a familiar method because it is already required by SSAP 21 to be used by lessees to account for their obligations under finance leases.
xxi)
The Discussion Paper discussed other methods of allocating finance costs.
The straight line method was rejected as it does not reflect the relationship between finance costs and the amount outstanding.
Methods which expressly reflect the term structure of interest rates or the market value of liabilities were rejected mainly on grounds of complexity.
xxii)
Although the FRED applies to the majority of capital instruments, certain exclusions have been made.
xxiii)
The FRED does not deal with accounting for warrants and options issued to employees under employee share schemes for the reasons explained at paragraphs ix xiv above.
xxiv)
Equity shares issued as part of a business combination which is accounted for as a merger, and leases have been excluded from the scope of the FRED as the Board did not wish to reconsider accounting for business combinations or for leases at this time.
It is possible that proposals for revisions to accounting standards on these subjects will be made in the future.
Warrants
Convertible instruments
Accounting for debt and non-equity interests
Scope of the standard
INSTITUTE
Don't lose your membership
Once again, we come round to the payment of the annual subscription.
It is due and payable on 1 January under the terms of Bye-law 39.
In 1992 1,050 members lost the right to call themselves chartered accountants because they did not pay by 30 June.
This year, under Bye-law 40, subscriptions must be paid by 31 March, and the registration department will strike off those members who have not paid by then.
This year the department has carried out around 30,000 changes of address to some of the 102,000 member records and around 43,000 changes of data to the 45,000 firm and office records.
It is inevitable that, once again, we have lost contact with some members — about 1% of the membership.
There are currently some 25,000 members who pay their annual subscription by direct debit.
More than 6,000 members have their subscription paid by direct debit from their firm's account.
The Institute collects the money on the first banking day in January each year.
If a member or firm changes bank branch, the mandate, on request to the bank, will be transferred to the new branch.
If a change of bank is involved then a new mandate must be set up with the Institute and the bank.
Under current banking rules, we, the collecting agents, must inform the person whose bank account is being debited at least 14 days prior to the event, stating the amount and the account number to be debited.
If the amount notified is wrong, a simple call to the bank asking it to suspend collection is all that is required to ensure that no money is transferred.
Once the mistake is corrected the money can be collected at a later date.
Where the money collected is wrong and the fault is not yours, an indemnity comes into operation which ensures that, at your request, the money is immediately refunded to the account it came from.
So fill out the direct debit mandate in your subscription package today!
If you need a further mandate, contact the Members' Registration Department,().
AMENDMENT TO SSAP 15 — ACCOUNTING FOR DEFERRED TAX DECEMBER 1992
‘Amendment to SSAP 15’ Accounting for deferred tax’— December 1992’is issued by the Accounting Standards Board in respect of its application in the United Kingdom and by the Institute of Chartered Accountants in Ireland in respect of its application in the Republic of Ireland.
Preface
This amendment to Statement of Standard Accounting Practice No. 15 ‘Accounting for deferred tax’(SSAP 15) arises from the interaction between, on the one hand, SSAP 15 and, on the other hand, SSAP 24 ‘Accounting for pension costs', together with UITF Abstract No. 6 ‘Accounting for post-retirement benefits other than pensions' (UITF 6).
When SSAP 15 was originally issued in 1978 (and indeed when it was revised in 1985) the normal practice in accounting for pensions and other post-retirement benefits was to adopt a cash basis, and consequently there were few significant deferred tax implications.
Subsequently, SSAP 24 (issued in 1988) introduced, and UITF 6 is in the process of introducing, major changes in the way these long term and somewhat uncertain obligations are treated in financial statements, with very significant deferred tax implications.
Under SSAP 24 and UITF 6 these long-term obligations are accounted for on a full provision basis, even though in many cases it is likely that they will continually roll over (ie as one obligation is settled another will arise) and it has been argued that it is difficult to justify a prohibition, as SSAP 15 would otherwise require, on the related deferred tax being treated on a similar basis if it, too, continually rolls over.
This amendment permits preparers of financial statements, where they consider it appropriate in their particular circumstances, to use the same recognition criteria for the tax implications of pensions and other post-retirement benefits as in accounting for the obligations to provide those benefits.
This option would not have been available previously under SSAP 15.
The inconsistencies in the approaches adopted by SSAPs 15 and 24 have been pointed out in papers published by the Pensions Research Accountants Group in 1989 and the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales (TR794) in 1990.
Attention is drawn to the statement in TR794 that ‘the tax consequences of pensions cannot be accounted for in isolation from potential deferred tax effects from other sources', as, for example, ‘deferred tax arising from sources other than pensions may enhance the prospective recoverability of tax arising in respect of pension payments’.
The Urgent Issues Task Force recommended that an amendment be made to SSAP 15.
The Accounting Standards Board (the Board) accepted the recommendation and on 9 November 1992 issued Financial Reporting Exposure Draft No. 2 ‘Amendment to SSAP 15’ Accounting for deferred tax’’(FRED 2) as part of the normal process of consultation.
The consultations that the Board has conducted over the last year have indicated that both SSAP 15 and SSAP 24 are high on the list of standards that should be subject to a comprehensive review in the medium term and at that time the inconsistencies in the approaches adopted, as noted above, can be considered more fully.
The Board considers that until resources and the allocation of priorities permit these reviews of existing standards to be undertaken, this amendment will remove an inconsistency between two standards that could inhibit proper accounting for long term post-retirement obligations and allow preparers of financial statements to adopt the most appropriate accounting treatment in their particular circumstances of the often complex matters dealt with by these standards.
Statement of Standard Accounting Practice
1.
SSAP 15 is amended by the insertion of an additional paragraph after paragraph 32 and before paragraph 33 as follows: ‘32A Not withstanding the other requirements of this Statement of Standard Accounting Practice, either the full provision basis or the partial provision basis may be used in accounting for the deferred tax implications of pensions and other post-retirement benefits accounted for in accordance with SSAP 24’ Accounting for pension costs’and UITF 6’Accounting for post-retirement benefits other than pensions’.
The policy adopted should be disclosed.’
2.
SSAP 15 is also amended by the insertion of an additional heading and paragraphs after paragraph 12 and before paragraph 13 as follows:
12A.
Paragraph 32A permits preparers of financial statements, where they consider it appropriate in their particular circumstances, to use the same recognition criteria for the deferred tax implications of pensions and other post-retirement benefits as in accounting for the obligations to provide those benefits.
‘Pensions and other post-retirement benefits
12B.
Where an enterprise is contemplating the recognition of a deferred tax asset that is permitted by paragraph 32A in respect of a provision for pensions or other post-retirement obligations it should be noted that the normal rules regarding the recoverability of assets are applicable.’
3.
If an enterprise changes its accounting policy in respect of certain deferred tax items, the normal rules regarding such changes, set out in FRS 3 ‘Reporting financial performance', are applicable.
4.
As this amendment is a relaxation of the existing requirements of SSAP 15 it is effective immediately.
‘Amendment to SSAP 15’ Accounting for deferred tax’December 1992’was adopted by the unanimous vote of the eight members of the Accounting Standards Board.
Members of the Accounting Standards Board
URGENT ISSUES TASK FORCE ABSTRACT 7 TRUE AND FAIR VIEW OVERRIDE DISCLOSURES 17 DECEMBER 1992
The issue
1.
The Companies Act 1985, as amended (‘the Act') provides, both for individual company accounts and for group accounts, that if in special circumstances compliance with any of the provisions of the Act as to the matters to be included in a company's accounts (or notes thereto) is inconsistent with the requirement to give a true and fair view of the state of affairs and profit or loss, the directors shall depart from that provision to the extent necessary to give a true and fair view.
Where this true and fair view override is used the Act requires that ‘particulars of any such departure, the reasons for it and its effect shall be given in a note to the accounts.’
The Act gives no further elaboration of this requirement.
2.
The objectives of this disclosure requirement are to highlight instances where there are departures from specific rules in the Act and to provide the reader of the accounts with information on the position had the normal rules in the Act been applied.
This is necessary in order to assist in achieving the equivalence of information available in respect of companies not only in the UK and Ireland but throughout the European Community.
3.
The interpretation of the requirement in practice has varied and there has been a tendency for some companies to understate rather than emphasise the significance of what they have done.
In some cases it has not been clear from the notes to the accounts whether the directors consider that they have departed from a specific statutory rule and that the true and fair view override is being invoked.
4.
The Task Force reached a consensus that in cases where the true and fair view override is being invoked this should be stated clearly and unambiguously.
To this end the statutory disclosure requirement should be interpreted as follows:—
a)
‘Particulars of any such departure’— a statement of the treatment which the Act would normally require in the circumstances and a description of the treatment actually adopted;
b)
‘the reasons for it’— a statement as to why the treatment prescribed would not give a true and fair view;
c)
‘its effect’— a description of how the position shown in the accounts is different as a result of the departure, normally with quantification, except (
i)
where quantification is already evident in the accounts themselves (an example of which might be a presentation rather than a measurement matter, such as an adaptation of the headings in the Act's format requirements not covered by paragraph 3(3) of Schedule 4), or (
ii)
whenever the effect cannot reasonably be quantified, in which case the directors should explain the circumstances.
5.
Where a departure continues in subsequent financial statements, the disclosures should be made in all such subsequent statements, and should include corresponding amounts for the previous year.
6.
Where a departure affects only the corresponding amounts, the disclosures required by this abstract should be given for those corresponding amounts.
7.
The disclosures required by this abstract should either be included, or cross-referenced, in the note required under paragraph 36A of Schedule 4 (re compliance with accounting standards and particulars of any material departure from those standards and the reasons for it.)
8.
The expression ‘particulars of any such departure, the reasons for it and its effect’ is also used in paragraph 15 of Schedule 4 and paragraph 22 of Schedule 9 (both relating to departure from the specified statutory accounting principles) and paragraph 3(2) of Schedule 4A (use of inconsistent accounting rules for an undertaking included in group accounts).
The interpretation of the expression given in this abstract is also applicable to these cases.
9.
The interpretation required by this abstract should be adopted in financial statements relating to accounting periods ending on or after 23 December 1992.
References
Companies Act 1985, sections 226(5) and 227(6), Schedule 4 paragraphs 15 and 36A, Schedule 4A paragraph 3(2) and Schedule 9 paragraph 22.
Northern Ireland — Companies (Northern Ireland) Order 1986 articles 234(5) and 235(6), Schedule 4 paragraphs 15 and 36A and Schedule 4A paragraph 3(2), and Companies (1986 Order)(Bank Accounts) Regulations (NI) 1992 (SR 1992/258), Schedule 1 paragraph 22.
Republic of Ireland — Companies (Amendment) Act 1986 sections 3(1) (d) -(e), and 6, European Communities (Companies: Group Accounts) Regulations 1992 regulations 14(3)-(4) and 29 (2) -(3), and European Communities (Credit Institutions: Accounts) Regulations 1992 (SI No. 294 of 1992), the Schedule, Chapter 2, paragraph 22.
There is no equivalent reference to paragraph 36A of Schedule 4 to the Act.
UITF consensus
Date from which effective
GUIDELINES ON CONTINUING PROFESSIONAL EDUCATION (CPE) DECEMBER 1992
What is CPE?
The ever-changing technical and professional environment of the Chartered Accountant demands that members must constantly be up-dating their knowledge and skills in order to maintain their professional competence.
It is not possible to achieve this purely through work experience, and effective CPE is one way in which members can ensure that they are maintaining, deepening and extending their professional and technical expertise.
Time spent by a member in assimilating knowledge on professional, technical and managerial subjects relevant to his or her own work, is considered to be an indication of CPE achievement.
Who Should Undertake CPE?
All members owe it to themselves, and their fellow professionals, to ensure that they are professionally up-to-date and that the reputation and value of their qualification is safe-guarded.
In order to offer a proper service to employers and clients, particularly in areas affecting the public interest, it is important that members demonstrate their commitment to high standards of professional and technical competence.
The Institute expects that all members will demonstrate such a commitment to CPE based on these guidelines.
There are however, specific groups of members for whom meeting the guidelines is compulsory.
All members need to be aware that they could be required to submit CPE records to the Investigation Committee.
The compulsory categories are as follows:
1.
Those seeking entitlement to practise
Members admitted on or after 1 July 1978 are required to submit, with their application for entitlement to practise, a detailed record of the CPE undertaken during their 24 months of Approved Practical Experience.
Where an application is made more than 24 months after starting Approved Practical Experience, they are also required to confirm that they have satisfied these guidelines in the period to date.
2.
Those applying for fellowship
On application members will be required to confirm that they have complied with these guidelines on an annual basis.
3.
Those supervising training in training offices and post qualification training offices authorised by the Institute.
4.
Those members working in the reserved areas of audit, investment business and insolvency.
Members in categories 3 and 4 will be required to keep their own records which they may be required to submit to the Institute.
NB.
The details in 1, 2 and 3 above should be read in conjunction with the full requirements set out in the Members' Handbook.
Achieving CPE
Because of the wide range of professional activities of its membership, the Institute relies on members and their firms to decide the relevance and usefulness of any CPE programme to their own circumstances.
Normally, CPE should be the assimilation of technical knowledge.
It is recognised, however, that it may be appropriate to include as an element of the CPE programme, time spent on the development of interpersonal or management skills.
A distinction can be made between ‘unstructured’ and ‘structured’CPE.
Structured CPE can be achieved through interaction with other individuals (not necessarily other members).
For example, attendance at technical meetings, seminars, lectures, courses (including pre-course/meeting preparation) could constitute structured CPE.
It may also be achieved through distance learning, where the course is assessed and/or leads to a further qualification.
Unstructured CPE will normally be achieved through private reading and study.
Detailed examples of structured and unstructured CPE can be found in the examples at the end of these guidelines.
It is for individual members and their firms to decide what subject matter is useful and relevant to their needs.
To help in judging and assessing CPE achievement a points system is recommended.
A reasonable target can be expressed as an average of 150 points year on year — with three points being recorded for each hour of structured CPE and one point for each hour of unstructured activity.
Although there is no minimum requirement for structured CPE, it is recommended that members for whom CPE is compulsory should aim to achieve at least 40% of their CPE (60 points) through structured activities (ie three days).
Recording and Reporting CPE
Members for whom CPE is compulsory, will be required to maintain their own annual record of CPE undertaken and be able, when required, to confirm to the Institute they have complied annually with the CPE guidelines.
If this has not been the case, it will be up to the individuals to explain the reasons behind this.
In addition, members should be prepared to explain the relevance of their CPE to their personal professional development.
Members who undertake CPE, even though for them it is not compulsory, will still be expected to record their compliance with the CPE guidelines on an annual basis and, if necessary, be able to provide details of CPE undertaken and explain the relevance of that CPE to their professional development.
The Institute will continue to issue pro-forma records on an annual basis.
Obviously members are quite at liberty to use their own forms, should they wish.
Additional records will be available on request from the Post Qualification Section, Education and Training Department.
Examples of CPE
These examples are designed to provide members with a guide to what may and may not constitute structured and unstructured CPE.
The examples are by no means exhaustive.
Members should always be aware that the purpose of CPE is to maintain, deepen and extend their own professional competence and that CPE should be relevant to their own specific needs.
Unstructured CPE
Individual Home Study
Examples include the general viewing of videos and television programmes, the use of audio tapes, participation in computer based learning programmes, distance learning, and any alternative form of learning where there is no interaction with other individuals, and no assessment (in the form of a further qualification) is provided.
Providers: Independent companies Subject matter: Essential and specialist technical knowledge.
May be accountancy related or appropriate to members' current employment
Reading
In order to be given full credit as CPE, reading should be technical rather than general.
It is accepted that general reading of the financial press is important but should not constitute a major part of the CPE undertaken.
Credit will only be given for technical articles and credit for this type of reading is unlikely to account for more than 25% of total unstructured CPE.
It should be recognised that professional journals and magazines etcetera comprise a mix of both general and technical items.
It is for the individual to decide to what extent particular items constitute CPE, and to record on their CPE return those specific items.
Mere subscription to a publication does not constitute CPE.
Sources: Technical digests; Technical bulletins and updates; Professional briefings in professional journals; Technical manuals Subject matter: Essential and specialist technical knowledge; Accounting or job related; Interpersonal skills
Examples of Structured CPE
Courses, Conferences, Seminars and Structured Discussion Meetings
Where these are controlled by a competent individual.
Providers: Likely to be Institute, District Societies, in-house within firms or companies, although independent providers may offer similar services.
These could include internal technical meetings of partners and directors.
Where members find it difficult to access courses, seminars, etcetera there is scope for them to organise their own structured discussion groups within their work-place or locality, perhaps using television programmes or videos to provide the structure Subject matter: Technical and regulatory aspects (knowledge and application); and development of interpersonal and management skills.
Pre-Course Reading
Material provided in advance of a structured discussion, seminar or course is an example of this.
Providers: Institute, District Societies, firms or companies and independent providers Subject matter: Essential and specialist technical knowledge; Management and business skills
Attendance at Technical Committee Meetings
The committees should be recognised for their technical development within the profession.
(Including taxation, accounting, auditing, law, insolvency, investment business and IT).
Providers: Likely to be Institute technical committees, government committees, District Societies' technical committees and those of practising firms Subject matter: Technical knowledge (rather than application) in the above areas
Research and Lecture Preparation
This may include lecture preparation, presentation, research for a publication or article in the members' own name or research for a new piece of work to be undertaken.
Provider: The individual member in resonse to a demand from their employer or from the market eg publications, conference organiser Subject matter: This covers ‘specialist’ knowledge and possibly the application.
It is the depth of knowledge that is most pertinent to attaining CPE points.
In all cases the depth of knowledge required should be more advanced than that required for Professional Examinations.
Only the first presentation of a lecture is worthy of credit.
Additional Qualifications
This may be through private study, distance learning or attendance at formal courses.
Providers: Institute or independent of the Institute Subject matter: Specialisation in particular accounting related field eg insolvency, taxation.
Higher management qualification (members would need to assess the technical content of such courses to determine what could be considered relevant CPE)
Activities NOT Considered to be Structured or Unstructured CPE Examples
General reading of the financial press — In excess of 25% of unstructured CPE in any one year
Social activities — Eg Annual dinners (even if they have prominent Institute members or office holders as guest speaker)
Internal meetings — Held specifically for partners/managers and staff ie where the purpose is to acquaint participants with the mechanics and administration of the organisation — Career development discussions
Discussions — Board/Partners' meetings, AGMs, EGMs and similar (where the subject matter is not technical)— Discussions with the JMU/Institute Secretariat/Brokers or anybody selling products — even if the product is of a technical nature — Of a promotional nature for the business, practice or service concerned — Audit closing meetings
Activities carried on outside office hours which are accountancy related and therefore similar to daily work — Preparation of club and charity accounts — Providing accountancy or taxation services etc.
Subscription to journals or CPE programmes — Relevant reading and appropriate attendance/viewing must accompany this to achieve credit
These guidelines apply from 1 January 1993.
Report of the Professional Conduct Committees
Disciplinary Committee 20 October 1992
1.
Brian Groom FCA of The Shrubbery, Burghfield Bridge, Reading, Berks having been found liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (iii) in that he at Reading between 24 January 1992 and 30 July 1992 failed to satisfy a judgment of the County Court was reprimanded, fined £500 to be paid by 20 January 1993 and ordered to pay £500 by way of costs.
2.
Frederick Stebbing FCA of 30 Aldridge Rise, New Malden, Surrey having been found guilty of misconduct within the meaning of Bye-Law 76(a) in force at the material time and liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (i) in that he in the Crown Court on 24 July 1991 pleaded guilty to an offence of dealing in securities of a company as a prohibited person contrary to Section 1(2) of the Company Securities (Insider Dealing) Act 1985 was censured and ordered to pay £350 by way of costs.
3.
Annachamy Ganesh Aiyer FCA of 9 Cardiff Road, Luton, Beds having been found guilty of misconduct within the meaning of Bye-law 76(a) in force at the material time and liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (i) in that he at Luton between 8 January 1991 and 21 June 1991 passed clients' monies through his firm's office account was reprimanded, fined £750 and ordered to pay £500 by way of costs.
4.
Roger William Peters FCA of 433-437 Great West Road, Hounslow, Middx having been found to be in breach of Bye-law 76(d) in force at the material time and liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (iii) in that at Slough on or about 23 April 1991 an Interim Order was made in respect of his affairs under Section 252 of the Insolvency Act 1986 was reprimanded, had his Practising Certificate withdrawn and ordered to pay £1,000 by way of costs.
5.
Krishna Kumar Rawal ACA of 74A High Street, Wanstead, London having been found guilty of misconduct within the meaning of Bye-law 76(a) in force at the material time and liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (i) in that he at Ilford and Wanstead between 18 November 1987 and 1 April 1990 failed to account properly and promptly for monies held on behalf of a client and in that he at Wanstead between 18 November 1987 and 6 January 1992 failed to account properly and promptly to a client for interest received in respect of monies held on behalf of the said client and having been in breach of Bye-law 76(a) (iv) in that he at Wanstead between 3 December 1991 and 18 June 1992 failed to provide information required of him by the Investigation Committee in exercise of its powers under Bye-law 80(a) was reprimanded, fined £1,000, ordered to take advice from the Professional Referrals Service and to pay £1,000 by way of costs.
6.
Philip James Cattlin (ACA ) of 97 Judd Street, London having been found liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (i) in that he in London between 17 March 1992 and 15 September 1992 being sole proprietor of a firm of Chartered Accountants, failed to cause that firm to comply with an order of the Disciplinary Committee made on 17 March 1992 that it pay costs in the sum of £500 and having been found liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (iv) in that he in London between 14 August 1992 and 15 September 1992 failed to provide information required of him by the Investigation Committee on 14 August 1992 in exercise of its powers under Bye-law 80(a) and in that he in London between 19 May 1992 and 4 August 1992 failed to satisfy a judgment of the County Court that he pay a sum of £5,634 and having been found liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (iv) in that he in London between 7 January 1992 and 4 August 1992 failed to provide information required of him by the Investigation Committee in exercise of its powers under Bye-law 80(a) concerning a judgment of the County Court was excluded from membership of the Institute and ordered to pay £1,000 by way of costs.
7.
Peter Adrian Clark (FCA ) of 62 Grosvenor Road, Aldershot, Hants having been found liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (ii) in that he in Aldershot between 5 November 1990 and 27 January 1992 failed to deal properly and promptly with the affairs of an estate and in that he in Aldershot between 28 January 1992 and 30 June 1992 failed to deal properly and promptly with professional enquiries from Solicitors in respect of an estate and having been found liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (iv) in that he in Aldershot between 5 May 1992 and 30 June 1992 failed to provide information required of him by the Investigation Committee on 5 May 1992 in exercise of its powers under Bye-law 80(a) concerning an estate and having been found liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (ii) in that he in Aldershot between 20 March 1992 and 1 September 1992 failed to deal properly with enquiries from a bank and having been found liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (iv) in that he in Aldershot between 25 June 1992 and 1 September 1992 failed to provide information required of him by the Investigation Committee on 25 June 1992 in exercise of its powers under Bye-law 80(a) was excluded from membership of the Institute and ordered to pay £1,000 by way of costs.
8.
John Anthony Lane FCA of Far Hills, Grove Road, Tring, Herts having been found liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (ii) in that he in Leighton Buzzard between 13 July 1990 and 20 August 1992 failed to deal properly and promptly with professional enquiries from Chartered Accountants and having been found to be in breach of Bye-law 76(c) in force at the material time and liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (iv) in that he in Leighton Buzzard between 17 October 1991 and 7 November 1991 failed to provide information required of him by the Investigation Committee on 17 October 1991 in exercise of its powers under Bye-law 80(a) concerning professional enquiries from Chartered Accountants was reprimanded, fined £500 and ordered to pay £1,000 by way of costs.
9.
Michael William Beecheno (ACA ) of 2 Tummons Gardens, South Norwood Hill, London having been found guilty of misconduct within the meaning of Bye-law 76(a) in force at the material time and liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (i) in that in London between 11 March 1991 and 14 March 1991 he improperly suggested that charges to his employers for temporary staff be increased and the additional sums be paid to him under the guise of consultancy fees was excluded from membership of the Institute and ordered to pay £500 by way of costs.
10.
Colin James Rendell FCA of Queen Elizabeth Cottage, Broadtown, Swindon, Wilts having been found liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (i)(a) in that he in Swindon between 19 December 1991 and 18 August 1992 failed to deal properly and promptly with enquiries made of him by solicitors in respect of the taxation affairs of a deceased client (b) and in that he in Swindon between 6 July 1992 and 22 July 1992 failed to honour an undertaking to contact solicitors and having been found liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (iv)(c) in that he in Swindon between 19 December 1991 and 5 May 1992 failed to comply with a direction of the Disciplinary Committee made under Bye-law 83(c) that he obtain advice from the Practice Referrals Service.
The Committee ordered that the member's Practising Certificate be withdrawn with effect from 1 February 1993.
11.
Richard Anthony Ainscough FCA , Michael George Battersby FCA , David Peter Bradley ACA , Ralph Burton Holden FCA , Donald Malcolm Lyon ACA , Brian Christopher Marsden FCA , Michael Harvey Townend FCA and Jeremy Newsom Stirrup FCA , all of Oakmount, 6 East Park Road, Blackburn who were found guilty of misconduct within the meaning of Bye-law 76(a) in force at the material time and liable to disciplinary action under Bye-law 76(a) (i) in that they in Blackburn between 20 April 1991 and 7 September 1991 passed clients' monies through the firm's office account were each reprimanded and jointly and severally fined £750 and ordered to pay £250 by way of costs.
Disciplinary Committee 28 October 1992
Investigation Committee Consent Orders 3 November 1992
Post-Qualification Review — Extended Period of Consultation
When the Consultative Report was issued in November,(reproduced in ACCOUNTANCY , December 1992, p 147) a tight deadline of 31 January 1993 was imposed on members in order that the Institute would be able to respond promptly to members' current needs.
The introduction of specialist qualifications would be a major strategic development for the Institute and it is therefore vital that any action we take on this front, reflects the views of as many members as possible.
While we do not wish to appear unresponsive by delaying any decision on this front, there does seem to be considerable merit in extending the Consultation period.
We have therefore decided to give members until 31 March 1993 to get back to us with their comments in the hope of achieving the most desirable end result.
It is hoped that this extension will provide members with the opportunity to consider/ discuss this matter more fully.
For those members who have already submitted their views, we would like to thank them and would welcome any additional comments they may have.
(Contact:)