

Self-regulation under siege
It's difficult to hold a sensible discussion about self-regulation.
To start with, it's not at all clear these days what people mean by it, or even whether it exists any longer.
Take audit regulation as an example.
Both critics and defenders of the present regime describe it as a system of self-regulation.
But it is governed in some detail by statutory requirements, and so is undeniably a system of statutory regulation.
And the Department of Trade and Industry supervises the whole scheme by approving the bodies that operate it, which effectively means approving their rules and mode of operation as well; so it's under government control even if the government is not involved on a day-to-day basis.
Financial services regulation is similar in structure, but with an added layer for the Securities and Investments Board.
People call it a self-regulatory system, but it's governed by statute, the Treasury presides over it all and the members of the SIB are not appointed by those whom they supervise.
With such ambiguous structures, characterising any debate on how to improve them as a struggle between the principles of self-regulation and statutory regulation is unlikely to add to anybody's understanding of the issues.
When, however, the chairman of the SIB, supposedly at the apex of a system of self-regulation, calls for a ‘clear shift to a less self-regulatory basis’, when the chairman of Prudential Corporation says that the government should ‘organise investor protection on a fully statutory basis under direct government control’, and when the chairman of BAT Industries (which owns Eagle Star and Allied Dunbar) adds that ‘self-regulation has not really worked’, it would be futile to start quizzing them about whether ‘self-regulation’ is really an accurate description of the present system.
What matters is this: there is a growing consensus that the current regime for financial services has failed, and its critics think that this failure is a failure of self-regulation.
Given the similarities between the financial services and audit regimes, it would be foolish to imagine that a revolution in the former would not, at the very least, reopen the debate about audit regulation.
At such times, it may be useful to recall that the current financial services regime was set up to remedy the regulatory failures of the previous system, which was one of regulation under statute by a government department.
More recently, the inquiries into the supervision of Barlow Clowes and BCCI have provided fresh evidence on the merits of external regulation.
Anyone who imagines that any regulatory system can invariably guarantee success is naive.
Equally, dogmatic insistence that self-regulation as such is either wholly admirable or wholly obnoxious ignores the complexity of existing regulatory systems, which defy simply classification.
But the long-term trend in those areas in which the public interest in regulation (or possibly politicians' exposure to public criticism) is perceived to be greatest, seems to be for both the volume of regulation and the role of government in it to increase.
Current criticisms of ‘self-regulation’ in the financial services sector can only reinforce this tendency.
technical summary
Reporting financial performance
The Accounting Standards Board has issued Financial Reporting Standard 3,Reporting Financial Performance (p 135).
The standard's requirements include:
The profit and loss account should disclose the results of continuing operations (including the results of acquisitions); the results of discontinued operations; profits or losses on the sale or termination of an operation; costs of a fundamental reorganisation or restructuring; profits or losses on the disposal of fixed assets; extraordinary items.
Other exceptional items should be disclosed in the notes, except where disclosure in the profit and loss account is necessary to give a true and fair view.
Extraordinary items are material items possessing a high degree of abnormality which arise from events or transactions that fall outside the ordinary activities of the reporting entity and which are not expected to recur.
The profit or loss on the disposal of an asset should be accounted for in the profit and loss account of the period in which the disposal occurs as the difference between the net sale proceeds and the net carrying amount.
Earnings per share should be calculated after accounting for minority interests, extraordinary items, preference dividends and other appropriations in respect of preference shares.
A primary statement should be presented, with the same prominence as the other primary statements, showing the total of recognised gains and losses and its components.
(The immediate write-off to reserves of purchased goodwill is not a recognised loss.)
Where there is a material difference between the result as disclosed in the profit and loss account and the result on an unmodified historical cost basis, a note of the historical cost profit or loss for the period should be presented.
A note should be presented reconciling the opening and closing totals of shareholders' funds of the period.
The standard supersedes SSAP 6,Extraordinary Items and Prior Year Adjustments , and amends SSAP 3,Earnings per Share .
There are consequential amendments to SSAPs 1, 4, 8, 12, 15, 19 and 24.
UITF Abstract 2,Restructuring Costs , is withdrawn.
There are consequential amendments to UITF Abstracts 1 and 5.
The accounting practices set out in the standard should be adopted as soon as possible and regarded as standard in respect of financial statements relating to accounting periods ending on or after 22 June 1993.
Securitisation
The Accounting Standards Board has issued new proposals for the accounting treatment of securitisation and other similar forms of non-recourse finance that are to be repaid from the asset they finance.
They will be incorporated into an exposure draft on off balance sheet finance, which the ASB plans to issue in the near future.
Under the new approach, termed a ‘linked presentation’, the finance raised through the securitisation is shown on the face of the balance sheet deducted from the related gross asset within a single asset caption.
A linked presentation should only be used where:
the potential recourse of the provider of finance is clearly limited solely to the funds generated by the asset it finances, with no right of recourse whatsoever to other assets of the entity; and
the finance is to be repaid out of the specific asset it has financed and not from the general resources of the entity.
There must be no provision for the entity to keep the asset on repayment of the finance, or to reacquire it at any time.
Copies of the proposals are available from the ASB, Holborn Hall, 100 Gray's Inn Road, London WC1X 8AL: phone .
Accounting for post-retirement benefits
The Accounting Standards Board's Urgent Issues Task Force has issued Abstract 6 on accounting for post-retirement benefits other than pensions, and the ASB has issued FRED 2,Amendment to SSAP 15 Accounting for Deferred Tax .
The abstract states that post-retirement benefits other than pensions are liabilities and requires that the principles of SSAP 24,Accounting for Pension Costs , should be applied to their measurement and disclosure in financial statements relating to accounting periods ending on or after 23 December 1994.
Measurement in accordance with FAS 106 will be deemed to satisfy SSAP 24 principles.
Where employers have not yet applied SSAP 24 to post-retirement benefits other than pensions, the abstract prescribes disclosures to be included in their financial statements relating to accounting periods ending on or after 23 December 1992, where the cost of meeting such benefits is expected to be material.
Earlier adoption is encouraged in both cases.
The exposure draft proposes an amendment to SSAP 15 to allow companies to use the same basis of accounting for the tax implications of pensions and other post-retirement benefits as for the obligations themselves.
Comments on the exposure draft are requested by 30 November 1992.
Copies of the abstract are available from the ASB.
Copies of the exposure draft are available, price £1.50, from Accountancy Books, PO Box 620, Central Milton Keynes MK9 2JX: phone 0908 668833, ext 3227 or 3228.
Both documents will be printed in full in the next issue of ACCOUNTANCY .
Ethics proposals
The Chartered Accountants Joint Committee on Ethics has published three consultation papers:(1)Former Partner or Senior Employee Joining an Audit Client Company ,(2)Rotation of Audit Partners and (3)Changes in a Professional Appointment .
The first of these proposes that where partners or senior employees of a firm intend to join an audit client company, they should immediately inform their firm of their employment plans and take no part in the audit of their future employer, and that connections with the firm should be severed.
The second proposes that firms should be required to change audit partners at least every seven years for listed and other public interest companies.
The third proposes new guidance to consolidate and update existing guidance.
Comments on the three papers are requested by 31 December 1992.
Copies are available from Mr J Maurice, Secretary, CAJEC, 399 Silbury Boulevard, Central Milton Keynes MK9 2HL; please send an A4 stamped addressed envelope.
Public practice: end to fee income limits
From 1 January 1993, it is intended that all members engaging in public practice, whether retired, semi-retired or in full-time employment, will be subject to the requirement to hold a practising certificate and consequently to comply with the PII Regulations (p 151).
Tax incentives
In his Autumn Statement (p 124), the Chancellor of the Exchequer raised the first year capital allowance for plant and machinery (excluding cars) to 40% for 12 months from 1 November 1992 and introduced an initial allowance of 20% for industrial and agricultural buildings where contracts are placed before 31 October 1993 and they are brought into use before the end of 1994.
Car sales tax has been abolished from 13 November 1992.
Holdover relief
It is no longer necessary to agree the market value of assets for which capital gains tax holdover relief is claimed (p 129).
Personal tax
The Inland Revenue has published a consultative document,A Simpler System for Assessing Personal Tax (p 129).
6
letters
Healthy competition
Sir,— Ian Luder's letter in your November issue (p 6) does not consider the advantages of two bodies running similar examinations.
Although on occasions I have criticised the ICAEW's examination system, it has never sunk to the levels of the Institute of Taxation.
At the May 1992 sitting of the IoT examinations, referred candidates in Paper 1 had a 14% pass rate.
Indeed, none of the candidates sitting their referral for the first time passed.
With the ICAEW examinations the tutors would be up in arms if any referral subject had a pass rate less than the rate for students sitting all papers.
In addition, the pass rates go up and down like a yo-yo.
In November 1988 the pass rate was 15%.
One year later it rose to 47%.
Obviously they blamed the poor performance of students for the 15% and their ability to get the best out of the students for the 47%.
In my view the competition between ACCA, CIMA and ICAEW has led to much better accounting examination systems.
I think the competition between the IoT and the Tax Faculty will lead to a better examination system for the IoT.
Course costs and benefits
Sir,— During the current recession we are all forced to carefully review costs.
Those of us in smaller accountancy practices have to be particularly careful as to the level of costs incurred whilst trying to ensure that we maintain a high quality service.
This problem is currently being aggravated by the level of charges made by the Institute for conferences and publications.
The current average cost of an afternoon course organised by the Institute is approximately £80 plus VAT.
I have recently attended local seminars organised by a private company on a similar afternoon basis where the cost is £25 plus VAT.
The content and presentation of these courses is very relevant and very good.
How can the Institute justify charging its members in excess of three times the cost of comparable courses?
During the past three months I have purchased from the Institute two publications.
Profit from Quality is published by the Institute in a paperback leaflet type format and has approximately 36 pages of text.
This includes 18 pages of appendices.
The cost of this publication was £12.95.
The JMU Visit — Are You Ready?is produced by Accountancy Books and costs £15.
This is also a paperback leaflet type format.
This publication has only 30 pages of text, including 12 pages of appendices.
I have no criticism of the content of either publication, which is excellent.
My reaction to both these problems is to consider whether it is better to concentrate on using private organisations both for training and for publications.
If I and many members of the Institute do this because Institute courses and publications do not offer value for money, this can only cause the Institute's already poor financial situation to deteriorate.
A better bet to be a turf accountant
Sir,— I suppose, being somewhat cynical, in keeping with, I suspect, many other subscribers to your magazine, one always reviews the report of the Disciplinary Committee (now, it would appear, known as Professional Conduct Committees), if only to see if there is anyone there that one knows!
It is rather sad to note that the main objective of these Committees these days seems to be enforcing petty rules and regulations whereby, possibly by accident, a secretary may have incorrectly banked a cheque in the office account rather than the client's account.
If no loss has been suffered by the client, and the matter resolved as soon as spotted, why should this be a disciplinary matter, reported to all and sundry?
The Institute has lost direction.
Surely it has better things to do than worry about such matters, and Professional Conduct Committees and indeed, the Joint Monitoring Unit, should be concentrating on cases of misbehaviour or improper conduct by its members.
Perhaps one is safer being a turf accountant than a chartered accountant in this day and age.
We both seem to be held in much the same esteem.
When the taxman is a good sport
Sir,— This correspondence (‘Call for fresh air, not tea…answered by the taxman’, p 7) reminds me of an occasion some years ago when I was playing hockey for Ilford against Old Loughtonians.
A dense fog descended on the field and I found myself isolated at left-half marking the right winger — yes, it was some years ago!
He turned out to be an inspector of taxes with whom I had been conducting a mini back-duty enquiry and which was in the concluding stages.
As the game appeared to be continuing quite happily without our help we discussed the case and agreed a settlement subject to the client's approval, which was quickly obtained.
I recall that I generously made no charge for the time involved in this interview!
Out with the brown paper bags
Sir,— I read with interest the letter in the November issue (p 7) in respect of audit standards and remote control audits.
My experiences are very similar to the writer in that standards for smaller audits in particular appeared to be very poor in a firm that I left some two years ago.
The ‘brown paper bags’ were dumped on to a table and the accounts prepared, sent to the client and signed off, very often without even meeting the client.
A particular case that I remember was the client's stock calculations geared to achieving the required gross profit percentage.
I live in hope that the Institute will be clamping down on such practices, although I fear that this will increase the cost of an audit for the smaller business.
To preserve the value of our qualification, however, I feel that it is imperative that standards are maintained throughout the profession.
president's page
The FRC and its impact
A great deal has happened since the Financial Reporting Council and its three attendant bodies came into being only a short time ago.
It would not be too much of an exaggeration to say that the face of financial reporting in this country has already been transformed.
First, the Accounting Standards Board.
Although the quantity of its output so far may not satisfy some observers, there is every reason to believe that, over the next year, preparers, auditors and users will be suffering from indigestion as a result of the material about to emerge from the pipeline.
Indeed, some form of rationing of output may be necessary.
To date, drafts of several chapters of the Statement of Principles, the cornerstone of the ASB's work, have been issued and some important standards published in addition.
During this period the Board has also had to find its feet, build up its staff resources to the planned level and concern itself with the production of some weighty discussion documents.
It is, moreover, absolutely essential that the Board's work is of the highest quality, even if this should mean that at one point or another in time the quantity of production may seem spasmodic.
The Financial Reporting Review Panel is also fully into its stride.
1992 has seen some important rulings from the Panel affecting major companies.
The consequences of this activity will be far-reaching and are being watched by other countries with interest, since the Panel is the first creation of its kind in the world.
All the rulings have been accepted by the companies concerned, not always without some hard pounding en route, and the adverse publicity arising must have acted as a powerful deterrent to other companies contemplating the use of accounting treatments on a basis of doubtful motivation and justification.
A cultural change is in progress; whereas deviant accounting practices had previously attracted muted adverse comment — even perhaps a degree of respect for the ingenuity sometimes shown — the standard demanded by the Panel has been seen to be exacting, requiring the spirit of the standards to be followed in addition to the detailed rules.
At last we have a structure with real teeth!
The third element of the new regime is the Urgent Issues Task Force.
Its consensus rulings have received widespread acceptance, establishing the body as an authoritative source of interpretation.
Where existing standards fall short of complete clarity, allowing abuses to develop, or where there seems to be misunderstanding of the law, the Task Force has stepped in to bring about correction.
What of the future and of the role that the profession can play in supporting the reforming nature of these bodies' work?
The ASB will, before long, be producing proposals on some of the most difficult subjects that it will ever have to face.
Acquisition accounting, the use of valuations in accounts and off-balance sheet finance are matters which are almost bound to contain highly controversial elements.
The profession, in whatever capacity its members act, has a powerful responsibility to ensure that the best quality responses to the ASB's proposals are made in a spirit of constructive criticism.
Due process is a vital safeguard for the durability of the ASB's work and full advantage must be taken of it.
The profession probably now needs no reminding of the watching presence of the Review Panel.
But an interesting analogy with the US can be drawn when it comes to the Urgent Issues Task Force.
Its parallel body, the Emerging Issues Task Force, is notable for the way in which it has taken anticipatory action in time to head off expected abuses.
Unfortunately in this country, we have yet to reach the same stage.
Companies and auditors are not discussing with the UITF, before finalising their accounts, proposed accounting treatments that could set a precedent for other companies.
Accordingly, companies could find themselves in front of the Review Panel when an early discussion with the UITF might have saved an embarrassing discussion.
Ideally, companies should come to the UITF with their proposed treatment.
If they do not, it will be for their auditors to discuss the matter with the Task Force, on a no-names basis, if they have misgivings about the acceptability of a treatment proposed by a client which hovers in the often grey border area between good and bad practice, and which might set a precedent for other companies.
How much better in the long run for companies, auditors and regulation generally if auditors would have the courage to make timely representations aimed at a general ruling, in these circumstances, assuming that they have failed to persuade the client not to proceed and that the grounds for an audit qualification are uncertain.
The work of the Review Panel might be that much less, as a result!
news
PROFESSIONAL QUALIFICATIONS
Specialists to get Institute recognition
The Institute of the future could be made up of groups of chartered accountants, with their own specialist designatory letters, if proposals unanimously endorsed by the Institute's Council, are approved.
The proposals, in a consultative document currently being circulated (for the full text, see this issue, p 146) would introduce a voluntary framework for specialist qualifications, which would build on the foundation of the existing ACA generalist qualification.
The designatory letters would be awarded only on reaching a benchmark standard common to all the specialisms.
Criteria would include: work experience requirements based on length of service, level of responsibility and the quality and quantity of assignments; assessment of technical knowledge and competence through written or oral exams, continuous assessment and/or dissertations on an approved subject; and continuing professional education.
Members who had achieved the specialist status would retain their ACA or FCA designatory letters but could add others to them.
For example, a fellow of the Institute with a masters degree who had demonstrated his or her skills in financial management could become an MA FCA FFFM.
The move to introduce specialist designations stems from the belief that the Institute has a responsibility to its members to formally recognise and award qualifications for specialist knowledge and skills, so that they do not have to look to outside bodies.
It also follows on from the steps already taken within the Institute to cater for specialisms, with the establishment of the Tax, Financial Management and Information Technology Faculties.
A specialist examination for insolvency practitioners is already in place and both the Tax and IT faculties are in various stages of consultation about setting their own exams.
The working party, which drafted the consultative document, believes that the proposed framework will prevent the potential fragmentation of the Institute's membership: ‘The vision of an integrated range of post-qualification, professional development, leading in some cases to voluntary specialised qualifications, could be a powerful unifying force, bringing together all members, whatever their jobs and interests, behind a programme of high quality financially oriented specialist training that is relevant throughout their careers.’
But, as working party chairman John Collier is well aware, that vision could be seen to undermine the existing generalist qualification.
‘We are treading very cautiously because it is a very vexed question, and people tend to react from the gut, rather than the head,’ he said.
‘This is a consultation exercise, so we are asking all these questions like what the relationship is of the existing FCA qualification to specialisms.
We are aware of the concern over undermining the basic generalist qualification and I would stress that there is no question of imposing the need to specialise on members.’
‘It is only further consideration,’ added head of Education & Training David Hunt, ‘which reveals the rewards of specialisation, for example the added value to members of the qualifications and the services they are able to offer, and the unifying force of specialist qualifications for members in business and in practice.’
The deadline for comments is 31 January 1993.
John Collier: No question of imposing the need to specialise
ETHICS
Independence rules tightened
Tough new rules governing the relationship between audit firms and their clients have been proposed by the Joint Ethics Committee of the English, Irish and Scottish Institutes.
In the first of three consultative papers issued last month, CAJEC proposes that partners involved in the audit of listed and other public interest companies should be rotated at least once every seven years.
This is in line with a recommendation in the Cadbury report.
Involvement with the same client over a long period of time, the paper says, could result in a lack of objectivity and ‘detraction from the regular and robust consideration’ of issues associated with the audit.
Rotation of the audit partner, on the other hand, gives the client a fresh, objective scrutiny and new ideas without losing the benefit of the knowledge of the business that the firm has already acquired.
It also means continuing impartiality and helps to avoid situations which could lead outsiders to question the auditor's objectivity.
To maintain continuity, the paper suggests that firms should establish transitional arrangements for the handover: these could include arranging for the new partner to work on the audit team beforehand, and ensuring that other senior staff do not change in the same year.
It also requires firms to implement quality controls to ensure that independence and objectivity are maintained.
The second paper brings UK ethical rules into line with international guidance where a former partner or senior member of staff is headhunted to work for an audit client.
To prevent the firm's objectivity being compromised, they must immediately notify the firm of their intention to go, they must leave the audit team, and the firm must undertake a review and consultation in relation to any significant audit judgments they have made.
In addition, the firm must ensure that payment dates and amounts to be paid out as retirement or other benefits to the former partner are fixed, and the former partner must not participate in the practice's professional activities — even using office accommodation or secretarial and IT support is banned.
The third paper, which consolidates and updates existing technical guidance, extends the requirement for outgoing auditors to provide the incoming auditors with full information on matters they should be aware of, to advisers involved in other forms of recurring work such as tax and accounting.
Firms will be expected to provide accounting information to their successors even when a fee dispute is still outstanding, and firms undertaking additional work will normally be expected to notify the incumbent.
Copies of the papers are available from Jack Maurice at the Institute.
The deadline for all comments is 31 December.
ACCOUNTING STANDARDS BOARD
FRS 3 will be ‘confusing’
As companies get to grips with FRS 3, the standard that will radically alter their next p&l account, analysts are having similar problems with a system that will effectively destroy their favourite tool, the earnings per share figure.
FRS 3,Reporting Financial Performance , has been called a ‘landmark standard’ by the ASB.
It introduces several key changes to the way companies' results are reported: the p&l account has an entirely new format; extraordinary items become virtually extinct; earnings per share will be calculated after any extraordinary items; any gain or loss on disposal of revalued assets will be calculated with reference to the carrying value, and realised revaluation surpluses will therefore be excluded from the p&l account.
The standard was published complete with a dissenting view from one ASB member, as its chairman David Tweedie promised to do if such a situation ever arose.
Bob Bradfield, head of equity investment research at Cazenove & Co, says that the standard ‘could frequently produce misleading measures of performance’.
He feels it is imperative that users should ‘clearly see the effects of tax and minorities on trading results attributable to shareholders’.
Mr Bradfield suggests some alternatives for the standard, including splitting ‘profit before tax’, ‘profit after tax and minorities’ and ‘earnings per share’into two parts, one from trading and one from disposals (see this issue, p 24).
Other analysts are apprehensive too.
Warburg Securities points out that the post-extraordinary eps figure ‘will make the eps series extremely volatile for companies with major one-off items’.
It adds that it expects to quote eps on both a pre-exceptional and a post-extraordinary basis.
By far the most controversial view comes from County NatWest which thinks that ‘confusion will arise, particularly in the eyes of uninformed investors’, due to the ‘plethora of different performance numbers’ that will emerge for each company.
County says that it foresees ‘two particular earnings concepts gaining prominence within the professional investment community: normalised earnings and maintainable earnings’.
Pure FRS 3 earnings, it adds, will be volatile and could be misleading, although they will help to highlight ‘accident prone’ companies.
‘Normalised earnings’ are defined as FRS 3 earnings stripped of those exceptional items that the user thinks should be below the line, while ‘maintainable earnings’are the earnings attributable to the ongoing business.
The Institute for Investment Management and Research has already set up a committee, chaired by David Damant, to consider the principles under which maintainable earnings per share could be calculated.
‘User groups were always likely to want to do their own calculations,’ Allan Cook, the ASB's technical director, told ACCOUNTANCY .
‘What is important is judgment in application.
We would never have produced such alternatives because experience has shown that enormous pressure would be placed on the auditor to move something in or out of normalised earnings.’
POLLY PECK
Appeal ruled out
The two accountants fined £1,000 each by the Institute's Disciplinary Committee over conflicts of interest in the administration of Polly Peck International, will not appeal against the ruling.
Michael Jordan, senior partner of Cork Gully, and Richard Stone, head of corporate finance at Coopers & Lybrand, were found guilty of breaching Institute bye-laws in accepting the appointment of administrators to Polly Peck in spite of a continuing professional relationship between C&L and Asil Nadir, PPI's chairman (see ACCOUNTANCY , November, p 10).
They were both fined the maximum £1,000.
Now the question of an appeal has been resolved, the way is clear for the Institute's Insolvency Licensing Committee to review the pair's insolvency licences.
A decision is expected later this month.
FEE INCOME
AA defies recession
Arthur Andersen Worldwide has posted another impressive set of fee income figures for the year to 31 August 1992.
The worldwide firm increased its revenues by 13% to $5.57bn in 1992, up from $4.95bn in 1991.
The increase shows a slight slowdown from last year's 19% growth rate.
The UK firm reported a 17% increase in revenue from £309m to £362m.
The firm was the fastest growing in the Top 50 league table (see ACCOUNTANCY , July, p 16).
Much of the growth achieved in the UK over the past year can be attributed to the consultancy division, but worldwide, Andersen Consulting's growth has slowed.
The division reported a 15% increase in revenue to $2.58bn, while the auditing and accounting side showed a 11% increase to $2.99bn.
The fastest growing geographical area was Asia and the Pacific with 22% (to $469m).
Revenue in the Americas grew 9% to $2.96bn.
Sparkling wits wanted.
Yes, it's Christmas time and once again ACCOUNTANCYis looking for the wits among you to come up with this year's Christmas cartoon caption.
There's a magnum of champagne on offer, along with the original of the cartoon supplied, as ever, by ACCOUNTANCY's cartoonist Tony Holland.
Entries should be sent to Kim Taylor at ACCOUNTANCY, 40 Bernard Street, London WC1N 1LD, by Monday, 14 December.
THE PROFESSION
Small firms stop training
The Institute is so concerned about the smaller firms that are giving up training chartered accountant students that it has set up two working parties to explore ways to make the training system more attractive.
A combination of factors — including cost and disruption to office life, together with the recession and an inability to provide the right balance of work experience — means that either smaller firms are not training at all or they are opting to train certified accountants and accounting technicians.
The problem is widespread: the number of small practices training chartered accountants in the Warwickshire area, for example, is down to three, and there are similar reports throughout England and Wales.
The first of the two working parties, from the Education & Training Directorate, is reporting back later this month.
The two most common factors it has encountered in its investigations are costs and the training format, according to E&T director Phil Armitage (see also p 25).
‘The pattern of study leave block release — doesn't lend itself to the smaller offices or indeed to business organisations.
We need to look at whether the minimum study leave requirement is a reasonable one, particularly given the calibre of students we are attracting.
We also need to talk to the tutors and say to them they're your clients, are you meeting their needs?
And if they don't meet their needs, then we are going to see small firms finding trainee chartered accountants less attractive.’
The second working party, set up by the General Practitioner Board, is also looking at training but within the wider context of what the future holds for small accountancy practices.
It is not scheduled to report back until March.
MINISCRIBE
Coopers pays $95m
Coopers & Lybrand has paid $95m in an out-of-court settlement over its work as auditor to Miniscribe, the bankrupt hard disk manufacturer.
The settlement comes months after the firm paid between $40m and $50m in a separate settlement over the affair.
Colorado-based Miniscribe filed for bankruptcy protection in January 1990 when it emerged that its senior management had carried out a massive fraud.
A six-month investigation by the Securities Exchange Commission revealed that building bricks had been packaged and sent to distributors, then charged as stock in transit.
Stock values had also been inflated by as much as $1m, apparently after Miniscribe officials broke into locked trunks and altered Coopers' audit paperwork.
Earlier this year, a Texas court ordered Coopers, along with a former Miniscribe chairman and the company's investment bank, to pay almost $600m in compensation and punitive damages to Miniscribe's bondholders (see ACCOUNTANCY , March, p 16).
Coopers' proportion of the award came to £200m, and the firm later paid under a quarter of that amount as settlement.
Now, a Denver bankruptcy court has approved a settlement of $128.1m to Miniscribe's creditors, shareholders and lenders.
Coopers will pay $95m under the arrangement, by far the largest proportion.
Hambrecht & Quist, an investment bank, will pay $21.5m and the former Miniscribe chairman will pay $6.15m.
The remainder will be paid by liability insurers of the company's former directors.
Coopers, which is not accepting or denying liability under the agreement, says that the money will come from ‘various sources’, including its insurers.
It maintains that the amount has already been accounted for and that it remains financially sound.
BARLOW CLOWES
Spicers sued
Spicer and Pegler, now part of Touche Ross, has received a writ over its work as former auditor of Barlow Clowes.
The Government has paid out £150m to former BC investors since the company's collapse, and it first voiced its intention to recover as much of that sum as possible from BC's professional advisers almost three years ago.
An independent inquiry carried out for the DTI by Sir Godfrey le Quesne QC in 1989 emphasised the reliance the DTI had placed on Spicers' opinion in granting BC a licence in 1985.
But a later report by Sir Anthony Barrowclough, Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration, criticised the DTI's handling of the affair (see ACCOUNTANCY , February 1990, p 8).
Spicers gave BC clean audit reports between 1985 and the firm's resignation in 1987.
Touche Ross then took over, but did not sign any audit reports.
Peter Clowes, BC's founder, was jailed for 10 years in February for fraud and theft.
A Committee of Inquiry appointed by the profession's Joint Disciplinary Scheme was set up to investigate the affair in 1989.
The Committee exonerated 46 accountants from the wide ranging inquiry in a preliminary report earlier this year (see ACCOUNTANCY , February, p 10).
The Committee is not expected to release its final findings until next year.
WALKER GREENBANK
E&Y settles
Ernst & Young has paid almost £3m in an out-of-court settlement over Arthur Young's work as auditor of Walker Greenbank.
Walker Greenbank, a wall-coverings group, had claimed £15m from the firm and Alan and William Carr, owners of a shelving company, Alkar, which WG bought in 1987.
WG alleged that Alan Carr overstated Alkar's profits and fraudulently altered documents during an Alkar stocktake, carried out by AY (see ACCOUNTANCY , November, p 16).
The group claimed that AY should have discovered the alleged fraud and should not have given Alkar the clean bill of health it received in its 1987 accounts.
WG's estimates of the claim against AY ranged from £7.1m to £11m.
Although WG and AY had failed to come to an agreement before the trial began, a settlement was reached after more than two weeks of opening arguments.
The trial was expected to last until Christmas.
WG received a total of £4.6m in the settlement; £0.9m amounted to loans to WG by the Carrs which have been written off.
Over a million WG shares, issued to the Carrs in 1988 as part payment for Alkar and subsequently frozen by injunction, have been sold and the proceeds, approximately £600,000, remitted to WG.
Frozen dividend payments have also been returned to WG.
The balance was paid by E&Y.
WG's last interim accounts included an extraordinary charge of just under £0.5m, covering legal costs relating to the case.
The settlement will disappoint in some respects, since it denies the profession another chance to clarify the extent of duty of care.
AY's defence centred around the claim that it only owed a duty of care to Alkar, as its auditor, and not to WG, even though it also audited the WG group accounts.
BCCI
Liquidators' fees
The liquidators and solicitors in charge of winding up the Bank of Credit and Commerce International are costing £1m a week.
According to Economic Secretary to the Treasury Anthony Nelson, their fees and expenses presently stand at £69m.
Speaking at the House of Commons' debate on the Bingham Report, Mr Nelson told MPs that, of this sum, £28m had been incurred by Touche Ross as provisional liquidator prior to the winding up order of 14 January 1992.
The Court had approved the payment of fees up to 15 April and since then, with the authority of the Court and the approval of the creditors' committee, Touche has drawn on account fees that have not yet been formally approved.
He also stressed that it would be ‘quite improper’ to involve the Government in ‘pressurising’the liquidators.
‘I understand the restraints and difficulties that confront them,’ he said.
Earlier on in the debate, Keith Vaz, Labour MP for Leicester East, had requested that the DTI ‘be asked to act on the representations to it by creditors and staff about the way in which the liquidation is proceeding’.
‘The first scandal in BCCI was the fraudsters profiting from the misery of ordinary people because the Bank of England failed in its duty to protect them,’ he said.
‘The second scandal will be the liquidators becoming rich on the victims’ money while the Government stand by and watch…
In a year we shall be here again debating another inquiry into the way in which the liquidation has been conducted.’
As of 15 July, the liquidators' cash book receipts for BCCI SA England stood at just over £325m.
With cash book payments of £124.684m, the balance was £200.318m.
This treaty's not for burning.
Maastricht has become a rude word in Euro-jargon and is being blamed — unfairly — for all the ‘turbulence’ in Europe, according to CBI president Sir Michael Angus.
In fact, he said, since the treaty was negotiated, the outlook for European economies had taken a turn for the worse and national problems now loomed large on the domestic agenda, causing people's perceptions about the treaty to change.
The treaty's economic goals, Sir Michael told his audience of leading businessmen at Chartered Accountants' Hall, remained valid, with or without progress towards monetary union, and he hoped that it would not fall apart.
‘If Britain were seen as the cause of Maastricht's failure, relegation to the second division of influence would be staring us in the face,’ he warned.
‘This would obviously be very bad news for the UK — not only in terms of our leverage, but also in terms of the attraction of the UK as a sound investment plank.
If the strength of our involvement were to diminish then so, inevitably, would our inward investment.
This could have a devastating effect on the British economy.’
BRITISH & COMMONWEALTH
Administrators gain greater access
Administrators have been given greater access to confidential documents, which could facilitate taking legal action against auditors and other advisers.
This is the effect of a recent House of Lords' ruling that Spicer & Oppenheim, the former auditors of Atlantic Computers, must hand over further documentation to the administrators of Atlantic's parent company, British & Commonwealth Holdings plc.
B&C acquired Atlantic for £420m in September 1988, but by April 1990 the company which had been audited by Spicers (now part of Touche Ross) between 1983 and June 1989 went into administration.
Its statement of affairs showed a £279m deficiency.
Ernst & Young were appointed administrators to B&C in June 1990.
Concerned about the way Atlantic had conducted its business, E&Y's solicitors asked Spicers if, under s 236 of the Insolvency Act 1986, they could inspect certain documents.
Spicers refused.
In April 1991 a High Court registrar ordered Spicers to produce records relating to Atlantic's 1987 and 1988 audits and the acquisition itself.
Spicers went to the High Court claiming the request was oppressive: it relied on Cloverbay , an earlier case in which the availability of an order was restricted to enabling an administrator to get ‘sufficient information to reconstitute the state of the knowledge a company should possess’.
The registrar's order was overturned (see ACCOUNTANCY , September 1991, p 41).
E&Y appealed successfully.
According to the Appeal Judges,Cloverbay did not limit the Court's discretion under s 236 it could be used to find facts and documents relating to contemplated claims (see ACCOUNTANCY , February, p 48).
The order to hand over the documents was stayed, pending the outcome of Spicers' appeal to the Lords.
The Law Lords concurred with the Appeal Judges' decision and dismissed Spicers' appeal.
Although the case was ‘exceptional’, due to the size of the financial crash, and a careful balance between the administrators' reasonable needs and the oppression of the addressee was necessary, applications were not necessarily unreasonable because they were inconvenient to the addressee, caused a lot of work or made them vulnerable to future claims.
The Society of Practitioners of Insolvency's technical director, Gerry Weiss, said that recent cases were making it easier for administrators to obtain and exchange information.
However, John Magill, national director of accounting and audit at Touche Ross, said: ‘We have already given the Department of Trade and Industry access to all our papers because, in our view, it is their job to investigate on the investors' behalf, not the liquidators'…
I draw a line between investigators and liquidators who are just out on a fishing expedition.’
SUTER
Seven-year saga spawns writ
Engineering group Suter has issued a writ for negligence against its former solicitors Rakisons.
Suter was forced to drop its seven-year legal action against accountancy firm Morison Stoneham and Lazards, the merchant bank, over its acquisition of Francis Industries in 1984.
The case against the accountants and bankers began after discrepancies emerged at the end of 1984 between the profit forecast for Francis, drawn up during the acquisition, and the company's annual report and accounts audited by Coopers & Lybrand.
However, just six weeks into the trial Suter dropped its claim, blaming time delays when correlating evidence and expert witnesses, and ‘gaps’ in its evidence (see ACCOUNTANCY , April p 19).
The case is believed to have cost the group £2.2m.
At the time, Suter said it was considering taking action against other parties.
A spokesman for Rakisons said: ‘We are aware that a writ has been issued.
If proceedings are served they will be strenuously defended.’
FRAUD
Lewin Atkins partner arrested
The Metropolitan Fraud Squad has arrested chartered accountant Brian Harry Atkins, a partner with Hendon-based firm Lewin Atkins.
Mr Atkins was charged on four specimen counts of theft.
According to a spokeswoman for the Fraud Squad, he is alleged to have stolen more than £130,000 from the Inland Revenue over a four-year period.
He is accused of stealing £22,191 between 12 October 1988 and 22 October 1992; £21,000 between 11 September 1989 and 22 October 1992; £20,003 between 26 January 1991 and 22 October 1992; and £69,000 between 2 May 1991 and 22 October 1992.
Brian Harris, director of the Institute's Professional Conduct Department, confirmed that complaints had been received from clients of the firm, but refused to comment further.
Institute probes Sting allegations
The Institute is investigating an allegation that rock star Sting has suffered a £4m loss.
The former Police front man, whose real name is Gordon Sumner, reported the loss to the Metropolitan Fraud Squad earlier this year.
The Institute is understood to be investigating the activities of Sting's auditors Moore Sloane, which closed down in September.
Keith John Moore, one of the firm's partners, has appeared before the Disciplinary Committee on three previous occasions to answer allegations, two of which related to other rock bands.
All change, almost.Following the untimely death of its international executive chairman Claude Brown, Pannell Kerr Forster Worldwide has restructured its international management team.
Eric Tait (left), the current director of European operations, takes on the newly created role of international executive director reporting to the chairman, while Frank Hughes serves his second interim term as chairman.
He will hand over to Tim Richmond, the UK practice's managing partner and present vice chairman, on 1 July 1993.
Speaking of his plans for the future, Mr Tait, a former secretary to the Scottish Institute, told ACCOUNTANCY: ‘We will be continuing with our international strategic plan.
One high priority is creating an international hospitality and tourism firm.
We have got an excellent reputation in this area and we want to reap the benefits.’
MAXWELL
Robson Rhodes denies litigation plans
Contrary to recent press reports, Neil Cooper of Robson Rhodes and liquidator of Bishopsgate Investment Management Ltd the Maxwell family controlled company which ran most of the pension funds — has no plans to issue a writ for negligence against Bishopsgate's former auditors Coopers & Lybrand by Christmas.
‘On the basis that there are investigations still going ahead, we certainly aren't going to take legal action,’ he told ACCOUNTANCY .
He did not discount the possibility in the future, however.
‘It is obviously one of the things we have to consider,’ he said.
‘Coopers would be very surprised if I said anything else.’
Roger White, head of public relations at Coopers, said: ‘If we did receive a writ we certainly don't think there would be any grounds and we would contest it vigorously.’
INQUIRY INTO THE SUPERVISION OF BCCI
When PW's concerns failed to move the Bank
Auditors Price Waterhouse have been revealed by the long-awaited Bingham report as concerned accountants, who tried desperately to keep BCCI afloat.
Lord Justice Bingham's inquiry into the supervision of the banking group does, however, criticise PW for not shouting loudly enough at a seemingly unconcerned Bank of England in the run-up to BCCI's collapse.
Not surprisingly, PW has welcomed the report, not least because it allows the firm to tell its side of the story without being hindered by the confidentiality rules which have left partners unable to defend themselves in the 16 months since the bank collapsed.
‘The Bingham Report is entirely consistent with the position maintained by PW since July 1991 that, as the facts emerged, our role would be vindicated,’ senior partner Ian Brindle said.
Until 1987, responsibility for BCCI's audit was shared between Ernst & Whinney and Price Waterhouse.
But, in the wake of the discovery of significant treasury losses, then put at $400m, pressure was put on BCCI president Agha Hasan Abedi to appoint sole auditors.
PW accepted the appointment.
Over the next two and a half years, PW made several reports to supervisors, including the Bank of England, detailing increasing concern about BCCI.
PW qualified BCCI's 1988 accounts, which showed a loss of $49m after loan loss provisions of $145m, because of uncertainty about the impact on the group's operations of criminal proceedings against BCCI officials on money-laundering and drug-trafficking charges in Tampa, Florida.
But it wasn't until October 1989 that possible fraud was brought to PW's attention.
A senior official at BCCI raised doubts about the authenticity of certain loans, particularly those made on the security of shares in CCAH, the parent company of First American, and called into question BCCI management information given to the auditors.
As a result of investigations into his allegations, PW became increasingly concerned.
Borrowers were refusing to confirm their indebtedness, unauthorised drawings had taken place and other loans were looking suspicious.
In February 1990 the firm decided to inform the Bank of its concerns and a secret meeting was held between Roger Barnes, the Bank's head of supervision, and PW partners Tim Hoult and Chris Cowan.
For PW it was an exceptional step.
‘I find it surprising,’ says Bingham, ‘that this meeting made so little impression on Barnes…
After years of criticism, and after Tampa, here was a suggestion of dishonesty from an unimpeachable source pointing at the chief executive of the group.
Barnes’ impassivity on receiving this message seems to me to show a rooted unwillingness to believe ill of BCCI.’
Four weeks later the partners returned to see Mr Barnes with the news that BCCI chief executive Swaleh Naqvi had admitted that false documentation had been prepared ‘to deceive the auditors’, and that he had given information about loans to BCCI shareholders secured on CCAH shares.
He said he had ‘inherited a bad bank’.
A task force within BCCI was set up to investigate: on the basis of its report, PW told the BCCI directors that it could not sign the 1989 accounts because of a number of uncertainties, including increasing CCAH loans, an exposure of $700m to the Gulf Group, and ‘certain accounting transactions principally booked in Cayman and other offshore centres’ that ‘have been either false or deceitful’.
Messrs Hoult and Cowan also went through the report with Mr Barnes but concentrated on the financial crisis, rather than mentioning fraud and malpractice, a decision which Bingham finds ‘surprising and unfortunate’.
But the Bank had copies and PW ‘accordingly assumed that the inferences to be drawn…would be drawn by the Bank’.
They weren't.
The financial crisis was such that in spring 1990 Mr Naqvi went to Abu Dhabi and appealed to the shareholders to rescue the bank.
He confessed to having misappropriated $2.2bn from the Royal Family's portfolio and disclosed that there were unrecorded deposits of $570m.
This information was not passed on to either PW or the Bank.
Had it been, Bingham says, ‘it seems likely that all concerned would have embarked on a group restructuring programme with a much fuller investigation and understanding of the malpractice which had existed in the past and of the level of support required, or that the bank would have been closed or would have collapsed there and then’.
However, the Abu Dhabi shareholders decided to support BCCI.
Their $400m share subscription allowed PW to give a clean audit opinion, although a note to the accounts drew attention to the fact that the bank was now owned by Abu Dhabi.
The accounts showed a loss of $498m with loan loss provisions of $600m.
Had PW qualified the accounts, it believed, the shareholders would have withdrawn their support and BCCI would have collapsed.
Bingham does not question this opinion but indicates that more explanation about the uncertainty surrounding some of the loans would have been helpful.
‘It seems undesirable that information of this kind should not be available to ordinary readers of the accounts.’
However, he admits, ‘I rather doubt if other auditors, similarly placed, would have acted very differently’.
A report to the audit committee on 3 October 1990 again referred to uncertainties about the recoverability of major accounts and accused former management of ‘collusion with customers to misstate or disguise the underlying purpose of significant transactions’.
This was passed on to the Bank but no action was taken — partly, says Bingham, because PW's report did not convey its concerns ‘in a blunt and unmistakable way’.
A month later, PW made a breakthrough: it gained access to Mr Naqvi's personal filing room where, among 6,000 files, it found the evidence it needed major customers colluding with BCCI in the falsification of accounting through the use of nominee arrangements, hold harmless arrangements and payment of fees to individuals to ensure cooperation, as well as proof of links between BCCI and the International Credit and Investment Corporation group.
At the request of an Abu Dhabi representative, PW drew up a report to help the majority shareholders decide whether to continue to support the bank.
This, PW estimated, would cost them between $4.4bn and $5.6bn.
Shortly afterwards PW held a meeting with the BCCI directors during which it gave them a comprehensive account of the frauds and malpractices.
It did not, however, report this to the Bank.
‘PW felt, rightly, that much of the information had already been given to the Bank…
This was nonetheless an opportunity…for a clear and comprehensive understanding to be reached by the Bank.’
Meanwhile, PW was working flat out on restructuring and re-financing proposals it had managed to persuade the shareholders to agree to.
This increased their potential support to $5.1bn.
The firm had also been asked by the Bank to make a s 41 report and was trying to finalise the 1990 accounts, which had been delayed by the lack of access to ICIC.
On 22 June 1991, when the draft s 41 report — detailing the fraud — was handed to the Bank, PW believed that it was close to final agreement on the refinancing and the accounts and that BCCI would be saved.
The firm had no idea that the report would come as such a ‘devastating surprise’ to the Bank.
‘It should not have done so,’ says Bingham, ‘if the Bank had been more alert in receiving and understanding the messages it was given…
‘The report would not have come to the Bank as such a surprise either if PW…had more plainly and directly, more consistently, more comprehensively and, if they felt their messages were not being received, more vigorously, brought them to the notice of the Bank.’
On 28 June the Bank decided that the restructuring could not go ahead and that BCCI would have to be shut down.
PW was not informed until 3 July and immediately expressed its strong opposition to the plan when a rescue was so close to being finalised.
But its arguments were ignored and on 5 July BCCI was put into liquidation.
Watt moves?
KPMG Peat Marwick partner Ian Watt has become head of the special investigations unit set up at Lord Bingham's suggestion, as part of the Bank of England's supervisory system.
The unit will be responsible for pursuing fraud and malpractice relating to banks.
Mr Watt, who is a specialist in insolvency, investigations and audit work, was an assessor to the Bingham Inquiry and has acted as a Department of Trade and Industry inspector on a number of investigations, including those into Alexander Howden and Guinness.
He was also chairman of the Institute Insolvency Licensing Committee and a member of the Davison working party on fraud.
Statutory backing for duty to report
The Government is to impose a statutory duty on auditors of banks, building societies, financial services and insurance companies to report matters of concern to the regulatory authorities, in the wake of the Bingham Report.
‘BCCI has emphasised how vital it is that auditors should speak plainly and freely to the Bank,’ Chancellor Norman Lamont said.
‘Hitherto, their duties have been laid down in professional guidance.
Lord Justice Bingham has concluded that it would be better for the duty to be a statutory one.
I accept that conclusion.’
He added that a similar approach would be appropriate for the other regulated sectors.
In reaching the conclusion that the duty to report required statutory backing, Lord Bingham went against evidence presented by the Institute during his investigation.
The Institute had argued that there already was a clear professional duty to report under the existing Auditing Guideline,Banks in the UK , and that a statutory duty would not add value.
‘I was initially impressed by this argument,’ Lord Bingham wrote, ‘feeling that a duty imposed by statute would in practice be hard to enforce, that the existence of a professional duty has become very well known and that a professional guideline could more easily be adapted to meet changing circumstance than a duty enshrined in statute.’
However, on reflection, he decided that the question of the relationship between client, auditor and supervisor would be better settled by Parliament than by the Bank of England and the accounting profession.
The statutory duty will be wider than that envisaged in the Auditing Guideline.
Auditors will be required to give the Bank any information or opinion relating to their client's ability to fulfil the criteria for authorisation, and to provide any information reasonably requested by the Bank in its supervisory role.
In practice, the change will not have much impact, as Michael Fowle, KPMG's banking partner, points out.
‘Whether it's a right or a duty to report, you still have a professional judgment to make about the circumstances and, frankly, those will be the same.
‘The move will not make any difference to a good auditor.
It may make the less good auditor concentrate his mind because he will feel that if he's got a duty, he will have to do it, in which case it will be of benefit to the body politic.’
The Institute is concerned, however, that the duty may lead to over-reporting by auditors or to unnecessary formality in preparation of reports, which could cause delay in passing them on to the Bank.
‘The particular circumstances when a legal duty is to be imposed,’ it says, ‘will need to be considered with great care.’
A Treasury consultative document is expected in the New Year.
(See also p 24).
Moscow man.
Sir Brian Fall, the British ambassador to the Russian Federation, gave a talk on ‘Russia in Transition’ at Moorgate Place last month.
He made no attempt to play down Russia's problems, including ‘decades of under-investment and wrongly directed investment…industrial dinosaurs that cannot easily be slimmed down and taught tricks…huge deficiencies in basic infrastructure, and…some horrendous environmental problems.’
Despite all this, Sir Brian came out ‘narrowly, but clearly, on the more optimistic side of the line’ in assessing Russia's future prospects.
No conflict over auditors' roles
Lord Justice Bingham has dismissed criticism of BCCI auditors Price Waterhouse over the potential conflicts of interest engendered by the various roles that the firm played on behalf of the Bank of England in the run-up to the bank's collapse.
In his report, he says that he sees no reason to recommend a change in the Bank's existing practice of appointing accountants on the basis of their knowledge and understanding to investigate banks under ss 39 and 41 of the Banking Act.
‘In most cases the auditor is best placed to conduct a thorough and expeditious investigation and need not be torn between his duties to two masters,’ he adds.
The question over the conflicts of interest was raised by Diane Abbott, Labour MP for Hackney North and Stoke Newington, in the House of Commons debate.
‘It seems that Price Waterhouse had a particular problem in the BCCI affair,’ she said.
‘On the one hand, it was supposed to be BCCI's auditor, while on the other hand, it was earning huge fees from other parts of BCCI as management consultants.’
She asked the Government to ensure that similar situations did not arise again in the future.
Chancellor of the Exchequer Norman Lamont said that he stood by what Lord Bingham had said.
‘There is a criticism of Price Waterhouse in the report,’ he added.
‘However, in fairness to Price Waterhouse, it should also be stressed that on other occasions — for example, in April and October 1990 — when the firm had made its audit report to the directors of BCCI, it ensured that some information was passed on to the Bank of England.
‘Lord Justice Bingham concluded that perhaps that could have been done more fully, but a careful reading of the report discloses that on several occasions that is precisely what Price Waterhouse did.’
Lord Bingham also decided not to recommend that international banks should only have one auditor.
This seems surprising since it has been argued that the existence of joint auditors may have facilitated the BCCI fraud.
However, having considered the arguments, Lord Bingham said that it was not a subject that lent itself to absolute rules.
The object should be to achieve a thorough and reliable audit, he said.
‘Ordinarily, it would seem to me that this object is most likely to be achieved by employing a single well-qualified firm, which would itself deploy staff so as to achieve the optimum blend of continuity and freshness.
But cases vary infinitely and uniformity of practice is not in my view a desirable end.’
NICHELY SUCCESSFUL
In April 1990, three partners and a manager from the newly-merged Big Six firm Ernst & Young took the unusual step of leaving to set up their own practice.
Even more unusually, the team, which named itself DPRS after the four co-founders Roger Davison, Andy Pollock, Simon Rees and Amanda Shingleton, left with staff, clients and E&Y's goodwill.
‘The four of us had developed as a group within Arthur Young's business services group, a department aimed specifically at the entrepreneurial owner-managed private business,’ Andy explains.
‘When the merger between AY and Ernst & Whinney came along in 1989, we welcomed it with open arms because strategically it was very sensible.’
But once the merger took place, the team noticed that, initially, there was a cultural difference between the two organisations.
‘Being young, we thought, well, here's an opportunity for us to set up our own business, and to take a group of staff and clients out of AY.’
Not only did they make the move, but they also managed to negotiate some funding and an arrangement whereby their staff could continue to be trained on E&Y courses.
‘From our point of view we had the opportunity to start a new firm which had a client base already, and with ‘support’ from E&Y,’he explains.
‘We could actually go out and say, here is a small practice, it's new, and it's got Big Six people.’
At the time, however, they took the precaution of taking out a two-year lease on their office space, since they had no idea how fast the firm would grow, whether it would be a success, or if they would work as well together outside E&Y.
In fact, by the time the lease expired, the four had ‘developed in slightly different directions’.
While Simon and Andy were keen to offer a quality service in a limited number of areas essentially as the profession was 20 years ago — Amanda and Roger wanted to opt for a slightly broader service.
They left, taking several members of staff with them, and Simon and Andy retained the ‘main rump’ of the firm which consisted of 19 staff.
‘We just changed the name [to Rees Pollock]and carried on,’ he says.
Convinced that niche marketing was the right approach to follow, they decided to build on their experience in audit, accounting and tax for companies with turnovers of £1m to £30m; investigative work for institutions that have invested, or are thinking of investing, in such companies; and general litigation support.
On the accounting side, the firm specialises in franchising, the media industry and companies dealing with high technology.
‘The majority of private companies have very similar problems,’ he says — they cannot afford a ‘high class’finance director and need an outside accountant to make sure they are making the right strategic decisions.
In the investigation and litigation support fields, Andy found that the large firms have a monopoly.
But after persistently arguing that big ‘named’ firms do not automatically do a better job, he feels that the firm is finally beginning to make headway.
‘People are saying, if you've been in existence for two and a half years, perhaps you've got something about you,’ he says.
It has not been an easy ride, however.
Although the merger gave them the chance to start Andy claims they could ‘never’ have done it without it — the recession has taken clients and exposure has been ‘painful’on occasions.
But he argues, they have survived.
‘After two and a half years, we are still here.
We wouldn't still be doing it if we didn't feel that it was creating enough profit in the meantime, and looked like it could create more as it went along.’
Pollock: Surviving
No free wheeling.
Richard Parkyn, a chartered accountant from Tiverton in Devon who has suffered from diabetes since childhood, has successfully completed a 750-mile bike ride from John O'Groats to the Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital in just 10 days despite having his bike stolen in Kidderminster and suffering from increasingly sore knees.
Together with his son Jonathan, he raised £5,000 for charity.
Two thirds of the money was donated to the Exeter-based Diabetes Research and Education Centre Trust, and the remainder went to CLIC (the Cancer and Leukemia in Childhood Trust).
‘The general feeling of being on cloud nine once I had completed it has lasted,’ he told ACCOUNTANCY, ‘and has provided a very welcome psychological boost.’
Russian into business.Market stalls might not hold that much interest for the average Briton, but for Ekaterina Likhoda from Nizhni Tagil in the Russian Urals,(see below, far right with South Wales Society president Paul Marshall — also pictured on the far left are Ekaterina's interpreter, Olga Lewis, and Michelle Thomson, owner of the fruit stall) it was all part of an unusual business-study trip arranged for her by the Institute's General Practitioner Board.
The enterprising 35-year old mother of three had written to 043The Timesin March asking for advice on starting up trade.
She hopes to open a high class goods shop in the Urals — named after her daughter Anastasia.
The GPB consequently arranged for her to receive instruction from a number of their members' clients, and during her two-week stay, she travelled across the country visiting — among others — a teddy bear factory, saddlery, hospital craft store, and a babies' clothes shop.
IN BRIEF Whip backlash
An extraordinary statistic is revealed in November's issue of Capital Account , the London Society's magazine.
In a bizarre interview, Lindi St Clair, alias Miss Whiplash, lets slip some titillating details about her accountant clients.
Amid much talk of the ‘poxy VAT man’ and ambitions of a parliamentary future as ‘Minister of Brothels under a Lib-Dem government’, the ‘queen of sleaze’reveals that 30% of her professional clients are accountants — that's 12,370 of you by our reckoning.
Not that she is impressed with the profession most accountants are the same, she says, ‘grey, boring men with secret kinks’.
However, she is prepared to relax her views as she is currently looking for an accountant who is willing to do her books in return for, er, payment in kind.
Her number's in the phonebook.
Fantasising again
Becoming a gigolo and selling boats in Fiji were just two of the more inventive careers accountants said they would follow if they could have their professional life all over again.
A Robert Half and Accoun-temps survey found that accountants tended to opt for ‘something more artistic and creative’.
Among financial and personnel managers generally, one in four admitted they would not choose the same career again, 60% were satisfied with their choice, and 15% were unsure.
Less outrageous alternative careers included medicine, law, cooking, running a pub and a life on the buses.
Take the challenge!
Could you kidnap Frank Bruno, make the longest candle or design the world's largest Christmas cracker?
If so, then you should be joining Team Challenge ‘92.
It's a competition organised by the Training Trust, in which teams are given a charitable task to carry out within strict time limits.
The challenge will be set on 7 December and has to be carried out by 22 December.
All you need to do is find four people, nominate a team leader, give your team a name, and register by sending the above information and a £20 cheque to The Training Trust, Financial and Legal Sector, 145 Great Charles Street, Birmingham B3 3JR by 4 December.
Service, please
So much for client care!
A recent survey by law firm Eversheds shows that a quarter of senior executives of medium and large-sized companies are considering changing their accountants, bankers or solicitors because they don't get value for money.
Clients feel that they are being overcharged for an inadequate service: they quote a high incidence of mistakes and insufficient contact with personnel handling their affairs.
This is particularly bad in London and, as a result, dissatisfied clients are looking to the merits of regionally-based firms.
Regional firms provided the best value for money, said 70% of executives, and only 6% endorsed London firms.
Sitting cross-legged
A brief visit to Coopers & Lybrand's brand new Embankment Place offices leaves one burning question hanging in the air.
Have the receptionists been taking lessons from camels?
The public reception area, a strange mixture of green neon and granite, is awash with the sound of running water.
The constant trickling from various ‘water features’— intended to drown the sound of the trains in Charing Cross station below — is having a bladder-bursting effect on visitors, so much so that clients have their own water-free waiting area.
Only the intrepid receptionists seem unaffected.
As one Coopers employee observed, ‘they must have cast-iron kidneys’.
Audit headaches
Small and medium-sized practices around the country are facing problems because audits are increasingly unprofitable, a survey by the Management Information Centre has revealed.
A poll of 492 firms showed that 70% find audit work ‘uneconomic’ as a result of the cost of audit regulation, combined with client pressure on fees: 76.8% said that more partners and staff were spending non-chargeable time on audit regulation matters, while only 31.7% were able to pass these increased costs on to clients.
Clients were also causing headaches, and not just because of fees.
Giving an opinion on going concern was an increasing problem for 79% of firms and 37.8% said that client pressure inhibited their ‘honest assessment’.
For charity's sake.
What do Mozart and chartered accountants have in common?
Quite a lot, as Institute member Sandra Maggs will tell you.
She was the driving force behind last month's Mozart evening at Chartered Accountants' Hall in aid of the Chartered Accountants' Benevolent Association.
The Sorrel Quartet, a young group of musicians who have played all over the world, were joined by violist Roger Bigley, a founder member of the Lindsay Quartet, to play two Mozart String Quintets, No 1 in B flat, K174, and No 4 in G minor, K516.
The concert's aim, Ms Maggs says, was not only to raise desperately needed funds for the CABA, but also to raise Institute members' awareness of the CABA's funding problems.
There is always pressure on its limited resources, but the recession has left many more Institute members in need of help.
Ill health and bereavement are the most common needs for which the charity gives assistance — for example, it has recently helped a member whose career was terminated by multiple sclerosis to buy an electric wheelchair, and given a loan to a member's widow reliant on state benefits to enable her to pay off the disputed partnership settlement debts accrued when her husband died.
If you want to help, please call the CABA on 071–588 2662.
Fraud on the up
By August this year, fraud boosted by the Maxwell affair had already cost the UK £445m, compared with £376m for the whole of 1991.
And, according to KPMG Forensic Accounting's ‘fraud barometer’, the South East and London have been hit heaviest, accounting for 69% of all charged cases worth over £100,000 between January 1987 and August 1992.
While the Midlands had 23 cases where £56m was at risk or defrauded, and the North West 11 cases involving £63m, London and the South East suffered 211 worth £1.25bn.
Since 1987, fraud in the South East has cost £72 per head of population, compared to a minimal £2 per head in East Anglia, the North East and Wales.
Interestingly, the Isle of Man's only recorded fraud was equivalent to £606 for each man, woman and child.
KPMG partner Phil Haberman is not surprised by the rise in fraud discovery.
‘Operations are scrutinised more closely and there is much less cash flow to plug the gaps,’ he said.
Missed opportunity
Accountancy firms have recently been rushing to promote their image as caring equal opportunities employers.
So how come so few of the 141 organisations which have joined Opportunity 2000, the campaign to improve the balance of men and women in the work-force, are accountants?
Only five firms — Arthur Andersen, Coopers & Lybrand, Ernst & Young, KPMG Peat Marwick and Stoy Hayward are members, along with the Institute and CIMA.
They, together with top companies like Shell UK, the Wellcome Foundation, ICI and Marks & Spencer, are already discovering the benefits.
As Kingfisher chairman Geoff Mulcahy puts it: ‘Opportunity 2000 in Kingfisher has helped us unlock rich reserves of talent among our employees, giving women opportunities and allowing us to make better economic use of our total workforce.’
Shame on you, Price Waterhouse, Touche Ross, Grant Thornton, BDO Binder Hamlyn and all.
UK business news
21 OCTOBER — 17 NOVEMBER 1992
Recession.
In the third quarter of 1992 business insolvencies rose by 21% compared with the previous quarter.
Unemployment rose to 2.87m in October: the month's increase of 24,200 was the smallest since June.
Airports.
BAA reported a 46% rise in first half profit before tax to £220m.
Airlines.
British Airways agreed to take over Dan-Air for a nominal £1; the company will also assume Dan-Air's liabilities, estimated at £35m.
The rescue will involve 1,600 redundancies and the closure of the troubled airline's charter operations.
The deal was given the go-ahead by the Department of Trade and Industry in spite of protests to the European Commission and the Office of Fair Trading by BA's competitors.
Aircraft.
GPA Group's bank debts have risen by £1.1bn since 31 March; the increase is due to the purchase of aircraft it contracted to buy from manufacturers.
Defence.
First half profit before tax at VSEL Consortium rose by 15.6% to £25.9m.
Construction.
Peabody Coal, a subsidiary of Hanson, is suing Costain, claiming that it broke the terms of an agreement by accepting a higher offer for its Australian coal mining business from Altus Finance.
Peabody had offered £129m compared to Altus' £162m.
Property.
First half profit before tax at Hammerson fell from £31.1m to £23.3m.
A proposal for the restructuring of Heron International was presented to its banks and bondholders.
If the proposal is accepted, it would mark the end of the Ronson empire, whose 100% stake in Heron would be reduced to 5%.
For the year to 31 March, Control Securities announced a loss before tax of £196m (v £3.3m); the figure was influenced by asset write downs of nearly £250m.
Engineering.
Smiths Industries reported that profit before tax fell by 7% to £102.2m in the year to 1 August.
First half profit before tax at Babcock International fell to £16.6m (v £23.7m).
Building materials.
Wolseley reported a higher than expected profit before tax of £91.3m (v £80m) in the year to 31 July.
Chemicals.
Third quarter profit before tax fell by 52.5% to £93m at Imperial Chemical Industries; 80% of its turnover is now generated outside the UK.
Pharmaceuticals.
Third quarter profit before tax rose by 8% to £272m at SmithKline Beecham.
Profit before tax at Wellcome rose by 25% to £505m in the year to 29 August.
Electricity.
Midlands Electricity is planning to join Eastern Electricity and Southern Electricity's joint venture, E&S Retail, to create the UK's third largest electrical retailing business.
BAT.
In the nine months to 30 September, profit before tax rose by 56% to £1.03bn at BAT Industries.
Wine.
Allied-Lyons has put Chateau Latour up for sale.
The vineyard is valued at £160m.
Water.
First half profit before tax rose by 9% to £100.2m at Anglian Water and by 25% to £39.2m at Northumbrian Water.
Oil.
Third quarter replacement cost profit rose from £129m to £172m at British Petroleum, and rose by 58% to £824m at Royal Dutch/Shell Group.
Shell's figure was boosted by foreign exchange gains after sterling's devaluation.
Insurance.
Losses of £38m resulting from Hurricane Andrew claims left General Accident with losses before tax of £36.7m (v £133m) for the nine months to 30 September.
In the same period, losses before tax fell by 60% to £83m at Royal Insurance.
Frizzell Group is to be bought by Marsh and McLennan, the world's biggest insurance broker, for £107m.
Building societies.
For the year to 30 September, Leeds Permanent Building Society made a bad debt provision of £105.3m, forcing profit before tax down to £152.7m (v £290.2m).
Banks.
National Westminster is to close 35 of its 90 branches in London's West End.
The closures are part of a reorganisation of NatWest's branch banking.
Some 300 jobs are likely to be lost.
First half profit before tax fell by 44% to £51.2m at SG Warburg and by 33.5% to £25m at Hambros.
Banknotes.
De La Rue announced that first half profit before tax rose by 48% to £46m; the figure was helped by a contribution from the Swedish Inter Innovation which De La Rue bought a year ago.
Publishing.
In the nine months to 30 September, profit before tax at The Telegraph group rose from £27.5m to £30.3m; eps fell from 16.5p to 15.7p.
First half profit before tax rose by 10% to £94m at Reed International.
Electronics.
First half profit before tax rose to £27m (v £20.3m) at Electrocomponents.
Retail.
Storehouse sold Habitat to Ikea's holding company, Stichting Ingka Foundation, and sold Richards to Sears.
The deals total £108m.
First half profit before tax rose by 20% to £257.1m at Marks and Spencer, by 15.6% to £187.8m at Boots and by 19% to £391m at J Sainsbury; eps rose by 10.8% to 14.99p.
Food.
Albert Fisher announced that profit before tax fell from £89m to £52.1m in the year to 31 August.
Profit before tax at Associated British Foods fell by 11% to £297m in the year to 12 September.
Grand Metropolitan sold Express Foods for £96m to a management-led buyout team.
Third quarter profit before tax rose by 9% to £571m at Unilever.
Tomkins made an offer of £935m for Ranks Hovis McDougall and Hanson decided not to increase its offer of £790m, thereby withdrawing from the bidding.
Telecommunications.
Cable and Wireless is selling 20% of Mercury Communications to the Canadian BCE for £480m.
First half profit before tax at British Telecom fell by 36% to £1.03bn.
analysis
AUDITING
When a right becomes a duty
When Johnson Matthey Bankers collapsed suddenly and unexpectedly in 1984, there were a lot of thinly veiled accusations flying about between the Bank of England and the company's auditors.
The Bank seemed to be implying that it was all the auditors' fault.
The auditors seemed to be implying that it was all the Bank's fault.
There was no Bingham Report on JMB, so the truth was never established.
As a result, the Bank's view set the agenda for subsequent reforms.
What the Bank wanted was a closer relationship with banks' auditors.
In particular, it wanted to make sure that auditors told it promptly of any concerns they might have about a banking client.
There was an implication that certain auditors (no names mentioned) had not done this in the past.
The auditing profession's reaction was one of modified approval.
Various proposals were agreed for developing a closer relationship between auditors and the Bank, but the question of volunteering information to the Bank proved a difficult one.
There was an intense debate over whether auditors should have a right or a duty to report and, in either event, how one could define what exactly the auditors would be expected to volunteer.
The importance of the debate was heightened by the knowledge that whatever was agreed in one regulated sector would quickly be applied across them all: banking, insurance, building societies and financial services.
It might also at some point be applied to companies generally.
Sceptics argued that there was no real difference between a right and a duty; once it was laid down when auditors would be expected to use their right to report, it effectively became a duty.
The sceptics have been proved right.
When the Bingham Report recommended a statutory duty for auditors ‘to report to the Bank any information or opinion which the auditor knows or should reasonably know to be relevant to a bank's fulfilment of the criteria in Sch 3 of the 1987 [Banking]Act’(ie the criteria for being licensed as a bank), auditors' reactions varied from the totally relaxed to the slightly concerned, but no one positively opposed the change.
The presidents of the Institute, ICAS, ICAI and ACCA put out a joint statement to say that ‘we do not anticipate any major problems’.
The Banks Auditing Guideline, issued by the profession in 1989, already imposes on auditors a professional obligation to report in certain circumstances.
KPMG's Michael Fowle, said: ‘I think it's a non-event.
Good auditors have used the right when they would otherwise have had a duty anyway…
Turning it into a duty doesn't worry me at all.’
But the four presidents also warned that ‘the particular circumstances when a legal duty is to be imposed will need to be considered with great care…
‘. This reflects a concern of some auditors.
Martyn Jones of Touche Ross stressed that there ‘needs to be a practical framework created’ to support the legislative requirements, and that auditors ‘will have to look very carefully at the guidance’that emerges.
Peter Smith of Coopers & Lybrand expressed some doubt about whether the necessary guidance was practicable yet, and therefore whether a statutory duty was appropriate.
‘I think it must be a matter for debate whether the supervisory system is yet clear enough’.
Anyone who wanted to fight a battle to keep a right to report rather than a statutory duty can forget it.
That battle is lost.
But auditors will be looking carefully at the precise wording of the legislation and of the related guidance.
That should provoke plenty of skirmishes as auditors struggle to keep their new duties within realistic bounds.
Fowle: A right is a duty to a good auditor
FRS 3
Which users is the ASB trying to help?
Everybody agrees that accounts ought to be useful.
The problem is that users are not a homogeneous group and their needs may conflict.
Broadly, users can be split into the sophisticated and unsophisticated.
The sophisticated are investment analysts, credit analysts, fund managers (to a degree) and company managements.
The unsophisticated are small investors.
Sophisticated users want as much information as possible.
They don't mind complexity, in fact some of them — the analysts — gain from it, since it puts a premium on their ability to sort it all out.
By contrast, unsophisticated users just want a clear and simple message from the accounts.
FRS 3,Reporting Financial Performance , is definitely a standard for the sophisticated user.
Whereas in the past one could look at earnings per share as a rough guide to both performance trends and what the analysts call ‘maintainable earnings’, from now on eps will be unhelpful in both respects.
This is because, under FRS 3, one-off items that would formerly have been classified as extraordinary will now be treated as ordinary and eps will, in any case, be calculated after extraordinary items.
Items that would previously have been classified as extraordinary will still be disclosed, but the reader will have to do a bit of work to find them.
This is OK for the sophisticated user, but tough on the unsophisticated.
Surprisingly, the outspoken defender of the unsophisticated user on the ASB has been Robert Bradfield, of stockbrokers Cazenove & Co, who, one would have thought, had a vested interest in complexity.
He voted against FRS 3, and the standard contains a ‘dissenting view’ setting out his opinions.
He has enlarged on these in a privately circulated note.
Mr Bradfield's arguments reflect the two reasons why the ASB has moved away from SSAP 6.
First, companies abused the facility for extraordinary items permitted by SSAP 6.
As Mr Bradfield says in his note, SSAP 6's requirements ‘are not being adhered to by companies, nor are they being enforced by auditors.
The main area of abuse has been ‘extraordinary items’, which have become a convenient repository for all unwanted costs'.
But Mr Bradfield also claims that ‘few have chosen to disagree with the general principles behind…
SSAP 6.’
The implication is that what we really need is a properly enforced SSAP 6 approach.
Second, the ASB believes that analysts have concentrated unduly on a single figure in the accounts, earnings per share.
By ensuring that the eps figure is unhelpful, the ASB is forcing analysts to be less simple-minded.
Analysts would dispute the ASB's characterisation of their approach, but it is the unsophisticated user that Mr Bradfield is concerned about: ‘FRS 3 gives the user a selection of information that lacks coherence and produces a number of meaningless headline figures…normally it will require translation.’
Analysts have been quick to start work on converting the complexity of FRS 3 results into simpler indicators of performance trends and maintainable earnings (see p 12).
This may give us the best of both worlds.
While FRS 3 eliminates an existing abuse and also provides sophisticated users with additional information, analysts can then convert that information into simple messages for the unsophisticated.
THE PROFESSION
What future for smaller firms?
‘We wouldn't dream of taking on chartered accountant students,’ says Clive Jones, a sole practitioner from Rugby.
‘And unless the system of training chartered accountants with study leave is changed, that's how it's going to be.’
Mr Jones is not untypical.
Reports nationwide reflect a similar story: smaller firms, and particularly those with one to three partners, are giving up training chartered accountants and, if they are continuing to train at all, employing people who are training for other cheaper and more flexible accountancy qualifications.
Mr Jones, for example, employs two certified trainees.
He points out that most certified trainees come straight from school and so are cheaper to employ in the earlier stages of their qualification when they are of less use.
By the time they reach the age and salary level of a first year graduate chartered accountant trainee, they are already working in ‘semi-senior positions’ and contributing to the firm while still training.
Nor is their training system so disruptive.
Much of the certifieds' training is done by correspondence course and, until the final exams that must be passed in one sitting, they are able to tackle the lower stages over a five-year period, taking one or two at a time.
As far as chartered accountant trainees are concerned, Mr Jones argues, ‘you have all the aggravation of training them on high salaries and the disruption to a small office with their going off for long periods of study leave, and at the end you don't keep them.
I think everybody has become totally disillusioned with it’.
Another sole practitioner, Geoffrey Day, who is currently president of the West of England District Society, sympathises.
‘What people are concerned about is that, if they train certifieds or AATs, they don't have to cope with the bureaucracy, they don't have to be formal training offices and so they don't have to be quite so concerned that they have to provide the right sort of additional courses for people to attend to back up their exams.
‘In other words, they don't have to comply with all the regulations that there would be in a training office.
A lot of smaller firms don't want to be involved in all that.
They don't have the time or the resources, and that may be because they don't have enough people at partner level to cope with the organisation that training involves.’
This strength of feeling has certainly not gone unheard.
The Institute's Education & Training Directorate and the General Practitioner Board have been watching the falling numbers of students training in small firms with deep concern and both have set up working parties to look at the problems.
The first to report back, later this month, will be the E&T team, which has been considering ways of making chartered accountancy training more attractive.
Topping the list of problems, inevitably at a time of deep recession and pressure on practice incomes, is cost.
Training chartered accountants to high standards is not cheap, as E&T director Phil Armitage is first to admit.
‘We do set study leave requirements, we do require them to pay study leave tuition fees for the first attempt, we do require them to pay examination fees and we do expect them to pay a reasonable salary.’
Another costly area of training for firms is the time spent ensuring compliance with training standards.
‘We do have to bear in mind that we need to achieve high standards of training, but we also have to recognise that this does have a cost element,’ Mr Armitage says.
‘It is a very sensitive area which needs careful consideration because we can't afford to say that it's too expensive so we will forget about standards.’
The second major factor which makes chartered accountancy training unattractive to hard pressed small firms is study leave.
As Mr Jones points out, losing a student for 12 weeks at a time is extremely disruptive to a small office and costly to the practice.
Again, it's an area of concern that the working party has been considering.
Is the requirement a reasonable one or, given the calibre of students going into chartered accountancy, could it be reduced?
‘We do need to talk to the tutors and point out that the patterns of study that they are providing are not meeting the demands of the market,’ Mr Armitage stresses.
‘It's in their interests to address the issue and it's for them to decide whether change is cost effective, but it's in our interests too.’
There are, of course, more fundamental issues at stake here than just a falling training rate — which is where the second working party takes over.
Set up by the GPB under the chairmanship of another sole practitioner, Susan Gompels, it is looking beyond the immediate training problems to the longer-term implications.
Although it is early days and the team will not be reporting back until March, what is already becoming clear to it is that, unless small firms are encouraged to continue training chartered accountants, the smaller end of the profession may not have a future at all.
If the smaller firms continue to bow out of training chartered accountants, the number of trainees will be concentrated among fewer and fewer larger organisations.
But these larger firms are already cutting down on the size of their student intake and, if the trend continues, will end up — as Grant Thornton has already done — recruiting and training only staff who are expected to make a career with the firm after qualifying.
Those qualified chartered accountants who fail to make the grade within their own firms and become available on the market will be few and far between and, because of the large firm culture, may be less suited to smaller firms or industry and commerce.
The question is do the smaller firms care?
What is worrying is that the answer seems to be no.
Smaller practitioners are fed up to the back teeth with all forms of regulation, and audit regulation in particular.
As a recent survey by the Management Information Centre showed, 70% of small and medium sized practices around the country find audits increasingly unprofitable as a result of the costs of audit regulation — which they cannot pass on to clients — combined with client pressure on fees.
If the small company audit is abolished, the reason for being authorised will disappear along with a substantial part of their earning capacity which they do not believe they can recoup through selling other services.
In the past, chartered accountants have also been able to charge higher rates because of their qualification, but this premium has been put under increasing pressure at the smaller end of the market because of the recession.
As Mr Day points out: ‘To the small and medium sized company, all accountants are very much the same and, with the increasing competition from certified and unqualified accountants, I don't believe that at the lower end of the market chartered accountants will ever get back on the pedestal in the same way they used to be.
Nor do I think they will be able to charge anything like the premium they used to; in fact, it's debatable whether they'll be able to charge a premium at all.’
So if they can't audit, sell financial services or charge higher rates than other accountants, what is the point of being chartered accountants?
Not much, says Mr Day, and he predicts that smaller firms that don't want to work in regulated areas will break away from the Institute and set up in practice as plain accountants.
Mr Armitage agrees.
‘This is a warning that I flagged at the Council conference two years ago: where is the small firm going to be?
Does this Institute want to forfeit the small end of the market?’
Some people think that it already has.
Training: Too disruptive for small firms
brought to account
MICHAEL LAWRENCE, GROUP FINANCE DIRECTOR, PRUDENTIAL CORPORATION The man from the Pru rings in the changes Last month, Hugh Collum stood down as chairman of the 100 Group after a successful two-year campaign raising its profile.
Liz Fisher talks to his successor about the Group and life at the country's biggest pensions provider
‘What ever you want to be in life, you want to be with Prudential,’ goes the slogan from the country's largest pensions and life assurance provider.
It's more than a little apt for its group finance director, since he could have been just about anything he wanted in life, and what's more, he confesses, he was almost a politician.
To call Michael Lawrence a high flyer would be an understatement.
He left university with a first class honours degree and a PhD in mathematical physics.
Perversely, he then turned to accountancy.
‘Business seemed like an attractive idea and I wanted to learn about finance first,’ he offers as an explanation.
‘At the time I could see myself eventually in some sort of consultancy capacity.’
He qualified with Price Waterhouse in 1972 and rose meteorically, becoming a partner just six years later.
‘He was always very determined, very bright and fairly single minded,’ says a friend and former colleague from PW.
‘He always got things done, but in a very nice way.
He was the sort of guy who would go far in whatever pursuit he chose to follow.’
His spectacular rise in PW thwarted what might otherwise have been an equally meteoric political career.
‘I was very active in politics in the early seventies,’ he says, ‘I was a member of the Bow Group, I wrote pamphlets on things like social responsibility and housing policy, I was a local councillor and became chairman of Hillingdon's finance committee.
I even got to the point where I was an approved parliamentary candidate, but I never applied for a seat so I can't say I was ever rejected!’
Sheer pressure of work at PW, where, among other things, he dealt with the privatisation of the National Bus Company and acted as non-executive director of the London Ports Authority, put paid to his political dabblings.
He was, he says, approached on two occasions by search consultants about public sector work before he entered into discussions with the Prudential in 1987.
‘I'd been a partner for 10 years, I was 43 and could see another 17 years of PW partnership ahead of me.
If I was going to make a change, that was the time to do it.’
On the face of it, it was a strange move to make since, by his own admission, Mr Lawrence's experience of the insurance business was negligible.
A further disincentive — although Mr Lawrence did not see it that way — was that the Prudential had never previously had a finance director, let alone strict internal financial controls.
‘I didn't find it daunting, but maybe I was over-confident.
At least if no-one has done the job before, anything you do will be an improvement!’
The Prudential was first formed in 1848 and has grown to become one of the largest financial services groups in the world.
Today it has more than 8m customers worldwide, employs 26,000 people in the UK, controls 3.5% of all shares listed on the stock market and pays out £10m every day in pensions, savings and life insurance policies.
It is huge and successful, but over the past decade it has undergone a radical change that has seen it transformed from a seemingly crusty, actuary-dominated organisation to one that is prominently business led, competitive and very high profile.
Mr Lawrence's appointment was one of the first major changes to hit the organisation after its new corporate identity was launched in 1986.
‘The Pru did not have a budgetary system before I joined, the accountants produced some numbers every year but they were not comprehensive or in any sense management information.
There was no variance analysis, no discipline and no control in the conventional sense.’
This, he says, was not as unusual as it might seem.
‘The insurance sector, and indeed large areas of the financial sector, had never really focused on modern financial management — everyone working in the industry thinks they know about finance, and maybe they do, but they don't know about financial control.’
Mr Lawrence went into the Pru with ‘a strong idea’ of what he wanted to do.
‘The use of management information had to be developed, it wasn't in the company culture.
In the first two weeks I sat down, worked out the six major things I needed to do and tabled them to the group executive within six weeks.
‘The Pru had an awful lot of cost centres, which diffused any sort of financial responsibility and there were no capital expenditure procedures.
We created profit centres and developed a transfer pricing system.
We developed a structure, a financial and management control regime, and over time let the structure learn and react and improve itself.
It's the only thing you can do with an organisation of this size.
‘We had an advantage in that there had been an effort to devolve management responsibility, the investment operation had been set up separately and there were business divisions.
But it had been decentralised without attacking the big cost structures and without the addition of any procedures, with the result that two functional layers were beginning to develop business managers were starting to grow their own subsidiary boards with their own functional capability while the organisation as a whole retained its own capability.
Potential was developing for second guessing, waste and friction.’
After two and a half years, Mr Lawrence brought in the consultants, McKinsey & Co.
‘They had developed some particularly good methodologies on key performance measurement that they had previously tried to apply to the US insurance industry, and failed because of the lack of diversification into defined activities in the US.
But the Pru was not centralised, so we tried their methodology and we've made it work.
‘It would have been a mistake to bring in consultants immediately.
We had to get the basic structure right, the basic information flows in and then bring the consultants in.
We believe the systems we have constructed here are state of the art.’
Possibly the biggest change at the Pru came with the appointment in 1989 of a new chief executive, Mick Newmarch.
Although he has been with the organisation since his teens, the appointment was revolutionary since Mr Newmarch was from the investment side of the business, rather than an actuary.
‘Under Mick Newmarch, there has been a great refocusing on core activities and values,’ says Mr Lawrence.
‘We are moving away from a very inward looking, functional type of structure.
Now we see management very much as business management, rather than functional management.’
One of Prudential's first moves under its new chief executive was to close down its estate agency business, which began in 1985.
The closure, in 1991, cost the Pru £380m and attracted a huge amount of criticism at the time.
‘At the first sign of the housing collapse, we brought in Coopers & Lybrand and worked with them for about a year.
They did a first class piece of work on where the housing market was likely to go over the next 10 years.
It showed that it was not going to be a profitable venture over time.
The estate agency had a very high fixed cost structure and it wasn't viable.
‘We had triggered the institutional invasion into estate agency when we bought a chain of agencies in East Anglia, and until the day we sold out, that was a very profitable chain.
We certainly bought the best.
It cost us a lot to close it, but we are very pleased we did.
At the time a lot of people felt we were selling out at the bottom, but I haven't heard that accusation recently.’
Mr Newmarch's next task was to tackle the 10,000 salesforce.
The traditional ‘man from the Pru’ approach was proving dated as financial services became more sophisticated, and as a remedy, Mr Newmarch devised ‘Scenario 3’.
The staff were effectively divided into two tiers, with a third of them trained into the advice-giving role of financial consultants while the remainder, ‘customer services representatives’, resumed the agent role of collecting premiums and other basic services.
The move, while logical, proved less than popular with much of the salesforce, but the differences, which resulted in industrial action by the National Union of Insurance Workers, have now been ironed out.
‘We are trying to bring everything up to date,’ says Mr Lawrence, ‘the way we sell, who we sell through, what we sell, the emphasis of core values all the way through to transparency of financial reporting.’
The Pru's ‘transparent’ financial reporting has been dominating the headlines recently since it restated its 1991 life and pensions accounts under the accruals basis.
It is an idea the Pru has been working on for many years, and Mr Lawrence has been at the forefront of the plans.
The basic idea is that profit from long-term business is recognised as it accrues rather than when it emerges as a cash surplus released from a long-term fund, as the current statutory method dictates.
‘It is important to report cash to shareholders, and it is increasingly being recognised, through FRS 1 and so on, that the main financial statement should be cash flow.
The point is that what we have in the life business is a cash flow statement, and no p&l account.
But if you focus on cash you are looking at something that is quite historical.
No-one would judge an overseas subsidiary purely on its cash flow, because if it was doing well and growing it wouldn't be sending much money home, whereas if it was in decline and its working capital requirement was decreasing, it would become cash positive.
These are the same characteristics you get in our long-term business.
You can't judge current financial strength and future performance just by looking at cash flow.’
The accruals method has been in development for over three years, and was triggered by the takeover of Pearl by AMP on a price/ earnings ratio of 9.6 times earnings calculated under an embedded value method.
The price was recognised as much too low and many insurers became worried at the apparent undervaluation of their organisations.
The development of a new method of calculating earnings was overseen by the Association of British Insurers.
Mr Lawrence chaired the steering group set up to look at life profit reporting and there is no doubt that he and the Prudential are the driving force behind the new proposals.
The Pru was the first insurer to restate its accounts under the method as supplementary information, although BAT released accrual information a few days later.
‘We have worked extremely hard in developing this, we have talked to the EC, the Government, the legal profession, and we have looked at all the practices developed in other countries to try to develop a sensible method.
The accruals method has been recommended by the ABI as suitable for a trial period of experimentation to see if there is sufficient support for it, since to some extent ‘true and fair’ is a question of acceptance and convention as well as theoretical concept.
‘We believe we are making our financial statements more understandable, and that they will now be able to be read by people other than actuaries.
A lot of fund managers don't invest in the insurance sector because they don't understand the accounts — our P/E ratio, for instance, is meaningless.
If they feel comfortable with the accounts, they might start investing in us.’
At the time of writing, Prudential's shares were at an all time high, which might serve to back up Mr Lawrence's point.
Certainly, the reaction from analysts has on the whole been favourable — although there are some cynical rumblings in the press over the timing of a restatement that boosted profits in the midst of a recession.
‘We are pleased with the reaction, given that it is a major change,’ says Mr Lawrence.
‘We have spent a lot of time explaining it and we think people are approaching it in an open way.’
He rejects the two main criticisms pointed at the method, that it is too subjective and too flexible.
‘Really, it just follows the principles of long-term contract accounting, but we ought to be able to do it better than SSAP 9 practitioners because, while they apply the theory to a handful of different contracts, we are applying it to 20m policies.
We have decades of experience on mortality rates and so on; we should get it right on the basis of sheer statistics.’
The process of experimentation, he adds, should narrow down flexibilities over time.
The EC Insurance Accounts Directive is due to come into effect in 1995, but, according to Mr Lawrence, the EC is prepared to recognise the accruals method as complying with its format.
Support from other UK insurance companies has been mixed —‘it is a very conservative sector’, he says — and it is too early to say whether the method will be generally accepted.
The Pru plans to keep publishing the restated figures as supplementary information, but Mr Lawrence says that even if the accruals method becomes an accepted format, the Pru will continue to report surpluses released from long-term funds, as it currently does.
With so much going on at the office, it is a wonder that Mr Lawrence has much time left for anything else.
He has, says a friend, a taste for fast driving and also has a private pilot's licence — he has been known to take friends on duty-free trips to the Continent.
But those trips will probably be few and far between over the next two years since his already groaning workload was increased still further last month when he took over from Hugh Collum, finance director of SmithKline Beecham, as chairman of the 100 Group of finance directors.
Mr Collum's two years as chairman saw the 100 Group's profile rise significantly, and Mr Lawrence intends to capitalise on his efforts.
‘It's very important for preparers of accounts to have a voice, and only the top 100 companies really have the resources to cope with the amount of time and effort that takes.
The Group is important, otherwise the views that come across would mainly be those of the large accountancy firms.’
With Cadbury (‘uncontroversial to many big companies’), the APB's proposals on going concern and the ASB's output, there is plenty to keep Mr Lawrence and the 100 Group occupied.
He does have a pet project of his own.
‘I would like to see a greater international understanding and acceptance of the fundamental principles underlying UK financial reporting.
‘We run a very open capital market system here, which is not necessarily so in the rest of Europe.
We should not be converging to the lowest common denominator in Europe.
Open capital markets are the future, so it's important that the UK style of reporting is an essential way forward and not a matter of choice.
I would like to open up more channels with the EC to allow us to articulate better why we do what we do, otherwise issues that are important to the 100 Group's membership, like goodwill accounting, could founder on legal grounds or simply because people don't understand.’
The Pru, it seems, is destined to remain in the headlines — Mr Newmarch's views on self-regulation hit the papers soon after the accruals announcement.
‘It was a position that needed to be articulated,’ says Mr Lawrence, ‘and I agree with him.
I'm sure the consumer will benefit from the debate.’
On the day we met, Mr Lawrence had an appointment with Michael Heseltine, president of the Board of Trade.
It was tempting to ask, in view of his once held political ambitions, whether he had ever regretted staying in business.
But, with the Government in turmoil and the crisis over the arms sales to Iraq adding to its troubles, it wasn't difficult to see that Mr Lawrence was exactly where he wanted to be.
The Pru did not have a budgetary system before I joined.
There was no variance analysis, no discipline and no control in the conventional sense
We believe that our financial statements will now be able to be read by people other than actuaries.
A lot of fund managers don't invest in the insurance sector because they don't understand the accounts
Michael Lawrence: High flyer in a very conservative sector
THE ACCRUALS EFFECT
As a result of the restatement of the Pru's business under the accruals method, pre-tax profit from long-term business increased as shown (long-term business within the group is split into three areas: Prudential Assurance, which operates mainly in the UK, Australia and Canada and accounts for 58% of the total; Jackson National, the US subsidiary; and Mercantile and General, the reinsurance business).
The pre-tax loss from general insurance (£149m in 1991 v £185m in 1990) was not affected, and neither was shareholders' other income (£31m v £62m).
Shareholders' funds increased under the changes from £463m (£503m in 1990) to £2.859bn (£2.601bn in 1990).
ICI demerger
ICI: WILL THE BALL AND CHAIN HAVE TO GO?
Structural changes being contemplated by one of Britain's national institutions would mean that the conglomerate's winners would no longer subsidise its losers
Alan Purkiss
Preparing to split itself into two separate businesses, ICI has belatedly recognised that drastic action is needed to sharpen its focus, quicken management responses and increase shareholder value.
Sir John Harvey-Jones, who led ICI to its first billion-pound profit in 1984, was always going to be a hard act to follow.
Quite how hard, though, could not have been clear to Sir Denys Henderson when he took the chair at Britain's biggest manufacturing company five years ago.
Sir John enjoyed the Thatcher party; Sir Denys has suffered a Major hangover.
ICI's pre-tax profits collapsed from their peak of £1.5bn in 1989 to £843m last year, on sales down from £13.1bn to £12.5bn.
At the end of October, the company reported third-quarter profits of £93m, compared with £196m last year.
Hoare Govett, one of ICI's own stockbrokers, recently down-graded its full-year forecast to £620m.
But the malaise goes deeper than recession.
ICI, for all the apparent successes of the 1980s, has long been perceived as a lumbering, bureaucratic conglomerate, in which winners subsidise losers.
The world's fourth-biggest chemical company, with its 15,000 products and 600 locations worldwide, has not impressed the stock market.
Its share price as we go to press is £10.48 compared with £10.82 at the end of 1987, shortly after the global equity crash.
(In the same period, the FT-SE 100 index rose from 1,713 to 2,715.)
The sudden purchase of a 2.8% stake by Lord Hanson, the archpredator, in May 1991 was the clearest possible signal that the company was in trouble, and vulnerable.
Hanson was fended off, and sold his stake a year later, but the episode had unleashed shock waves.
Last July, ICI announced preliminary plans for the demerger.
ICI Bioscience would comprise pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals and seeds, and most of the specialities business.
The rest — industrial chemicals, explosives, materials and paints would remain under the ICI umbrella.
ICI's pharmaceuticals business is already, in effect, the 15th largest drug company in the world, ahead of such renowned outfits as Wellcome and Germany's Schering.
‘We do not have to search for critical mass,’ Sir Denys points out.
‘ICI pharmaceuticals is bigger than some companies that are regarded as extremely viable.’
It is notoriously the case that little love is lost between the managers in charge of ICI's commodity chemicals operations and those running the pharmaceuticals business.
The latter, based at Alderley Edge, in Cheshire, have operated almost independently of the rest of the group, and also maintain separate development and marketing teams abroad.
It has tended to be seen as a pampered favourite, while regarding the lower-tech and less profitable businesses as a ball and chain.
Apart from anything else, the demerger plan evidently reflected the desire of Sir Denys — who would chair both companies to make his mark on history.
ICI says a final decision on whether to go ahead with the demerger will be made in February (when the full-year results for 1992 are announced) in the light of market conditions.
Until a final decision is made the company is reluctant to talk to the press.
If implemented, the demerger would be the most radical departure in the group's 66-year history, and the biggest shake-up in the world chemical industry since Germany's IG Farben was broken up in 1945.
Behind the screens the company has erected against the outside world it looks as though the demerger plans may be going badly astray.
During a visit to Taiwan in mid-November — to open a £150m terephthalic acid plant — Sir Denys claimed that the merger was still on course, but in recent weeks doubt has been cast on whether the demerger will go ahead, at least in the immediate future.
Last year, the businesses earmarked for ICI Bio accounted for only 34% of group turnover, but generated 69% of trading profits; pharmaceuticals alone were responsible for 12% of sales and 52% of trading profit.
In the third quarter of this year, pharmaceuticals profits fell slightly, specialities broke even and agrochemicals and seeds made a loss; of the rump ICI activities, industrial chemicals and materials made losses, and profits generated by paints and explosives were down.
If current market conditions persist, the ‘rump’ businesses would be unable to cover their dividend in 1993 without support from pharmaceuticals; and, on the other hand, a planned cash call by ICI Bio shortly after demerger might prove less than successful.
Andrew Benson, an analyst at BZW, believes a postponement of the demerger cannot be ruled out.
‘Profitability in the commodity area has collapsed relative to ICI's expectations,’ he says.
‘It is at a level at which the dividend would be uncovered for 1993.
They might not be able to engineer the financial structure to make demerger possible in 1993.’
Martin Glen, at Lehman Brothers, disagrees: ‘In terms of realising value, it would have been nice to pick the top of the market, but in terms of business necessity, the best time to do it is as soon as possible,’ he says.
‘Managerially and operationally, ICI and Bio will be run as two separate businesses from the beginning of next year.’
He expects the demerger to be an accomplished fact by the beginning of next June.
Opinions differ, too, on the planned composition of the two companies.
Mr Glen is unconvinced.
‘The obvious course was to demerge just pharmaceuticals,’ he says.
‘There's some underlying logic to putting agrochemicals with them, though I don't think it's that strong.’
The main link, he believes, is on the research side, with many of the same compounds being used as intermediates.
‘There's also some element of poison pill, in that adding the other things makes it a little less attractive.’
All observers seem agreed that demerger is sensible in principle.
‘It will bring greater capital access to the bio side and greater cost-focus to the commodity side, making it more competitive,’ says BZW's Benson.
Recession has blown ICI off course, and the company has also been unlucky.
The pharmaceuticals business — which was bound to suffer when the US patents expired last year on Tenormin, a beta-blocker and one of the world's most successful drugs has been further hit by the failure of two products in which a lot of money and hope had been invested.
Corwin, another heart drug, has achieved meagre sales and Statil, a diabetes medication, was withdrawn.
The extent to which the company has transformed itself over the past dozen years should not be underestimated.
Throughout the 1980s, it battled to achieve two crucial, strategic shifts: to reduce its dependence on bulk, low-margin, commodity chemicals which tend to swing wildly with the economic cycle — in favour of high value-added, high-margin ‘effect’ chemicals; and to cut the share of sales accounted for by the UK.
When Sir John Harvey-Jones became chairman in 1982, ‘effect’ chemicals were about 34% of turnover; by the end of the decade, their share was 56%.
(Chlorine, though, already one of the main commodity businesses when ICI began in the 1920s, still accounts for a remarkable 12% of total sales; the proportion will be reduced by last month's decision to shut two chlorine plants at Hillhouse, Lancashire.)
A dozen years ago, half ICI's sales were in the UK, tying the company's fortunes to Britain's anaemic manufacturing industry and putting it at a colossal disadvantage to rivals in more robust economies; last year, the proportion was down to 21%, against 31% in the Americas, 25% in continental Europe, 17% in the Asia-Pacific region and 6% elsewhere.
The company is second in exports only to British Aerospace, which were worth £3.1bn last year.
It has become more focused, too, shedding poorly performing businesses and concentrating on those in which it has, or can achieve, ‘critical mass’ and strong global market positions.
It stopped making low-density polyethylene, a basic petro-chemical characterised by massive international over-capacity, a decade ago.
Last year, it got out of compound fertilizers in short order, closing plants at Billingham, on Teesside, and at Edinburgh.
The soda ash business was sold to an Australian-led consortium for £97m.
And in a complex deal that received EC blessing in October, ICI is swapping its nylon fibre activities for the acrylics business of America's Du Pont and £250m in cash.
In two important US acquisitions of the late 1980s, the company bought Glidden paints for $580m, and Stauffer's agrochemicals businesses for $750m.
The outcome of this remodelling is that ICI is now the world's biggest producer of paints, explosives and acrylics; it is number two in terephthalic acid and titanium dioxide.
If the company was hoping to achieve relative immunity from recession, however, it has been disappointed.
The first sign of the impending downturn came in October 1989, when ICI was surprised by unexpectedly subdued third-quarter figures for that year.
The immediate result was that Sir Denys invited Colin Short, former treasurer of Chevron, the US oil company, to become ICI's finance director.
It did not take long for the two of them to agree that cost-cutting and restructuring were required.
In September 1990, two top-level study groups were set up; one was headed by Ronnie Hampel, now chief operating officer, the other by Tom Hutchison, another board member.
(The two men had been Sir Denys's rivals for the top job in 1987, and Mr Hampel will be chief executive of the rump ICI if the demerger goes ahead.)
Mr Hampel's group looked at organisation, Mr Hutchison's at strategy.
It was quickly recognised that the company could not finance all its activities adequately; a narrowing of focus, and the hiving-off of some businesses, would be necessary.
(The nylon-for-acrylics swap with Du Pont, despite the fact that ICI was world number four in nylon, was one result.)
In February last year, the company began a £300m reorganisation into eight divisions — the seven already mentioned, plus regional activities.
So the locomotive of change was already rolling powerfully when Lord Hanson made his unwelcome appearance on the share register the following May.
This turn of events threw the chemical giant's directors into consternation, and not only them.
Politicians, trade union leaders and other assorted worthies leapt to the company's defence, with impassioned declarations that its break-up at Hanson's hands would be a national calamity.
ICI, evidently, was not just a lacklustre chemicals conglomerate, but an industrial symbol, to be preserved at all costs as evidence of Britain's continuing economic virility.
In the event, Lord Hanson sold his stake at a profit after a year, but the episode had been catalytic.
‘It concentrated our minds,’ Sir Denys has admitted.
Little more than two months after Lord Hanson's departure, Sir Denys announced, with his demerger plan, just such an unbundling as the archpredator himself would no doubt have undertaken.
It had been developed by John Mayo, a corporate finance director at SG Warburg, ICI's advisers, together with company planners.
Only 17 months had passed since the launching of the previous reorganisation, and market conditions for the commodities businesses were worsening by the month.
To be sure, its performance has not been notably worse than its main rivals' — similarly sprawling groups such as Germany's BASF, Hoechst and Bayer, Du Pont and Dow Chemical of the US, France's state-owned Rhone-Poulenc and Italy's state-owned EniChem, which has been allowed to bumble along for years without worrying too much about profits.
BASF's pre-tax profit slumped by more than half, from DM4.4bn to DM2.1bn, between 1989 and 1991.
In the same period, Hoechst's fell by 34%, from DM4.1bn to DM2.7bn; Dow's by 57%, from $3.9bn to $1.7bn; and Du Pont's by 35%, from $4.3bn to $2.8bn.
A decision to let ICI's bioscience businesses demerge would mark a sharp break with a tradition that has formed part of the company's culture since it started: the tradition of the cartel.
For the past century, the global chemical industry has shown a tendency to arrange itself as a cosy club, and ICI has fitted the pattern.
It was born as a combine in response to a combine.
The company grew from a merger in 1926 of the four biggest UK chemical companies — Brunner Mond, Nobel Industries, United Alkali and British Dyestuffs.
The previous year, BASF, Bayer, Hoechst, Agfa and a number of smaller German companies had come together in the Interes-sengemeinschaft Farbenindustrie (IG Farben).
The German industry was already outstripping its rivals in innovation, and the British companies combined their strength to avert global German dominance.
The first instinct of ICI was to try to form a cartel with IG Farben.
In this it failed (though in 1929 an agreement was reached with the German group on production quotas for nitrogen).
Instead, it cooked up a market-sharing deal with Du Pont that was to last until 1944, when it was the subject of a celebrated American antitrust suit.
The mentality of the time is captured in the statement by Sir Alfred Mond, ICI's first chairman, when the company set up an agricultural research station: ‘My ideal is to see, in this as in other chemical manufactures, our great organisation controlling the production and sales of the whole chemical manufacture within the Empire.’
There are indications that cartel thinking might have persisted, at least in commodity chemicals, up to the present.
ICI and other big manufacturers are involved in four price-fixing cases currently grinding their way through the elephantine procedures of the European Community.
Fines of Ecu10m imposed by the European Court in 1986 for alleged competition infringements on poly-propylene were reduced on appeal to Ecu9m, but are still being appealed against.
In 1988, fines of Ecu2.5m were handed down on PVC and of Ecu3.5m on low-density polyethylene; the PVC penalties were overturned on appeal and the European Commission is in its turn appealing; an appeal on LDPE awaits decision.
In 1990, ICI, the Belgian company Solvay and others were fined Ecu17m on soda ash; an appeal is expected to be heard next year.
If the cartel mentality has been one striking component of ICI's culture, commitment to research and development, and the fostering of individual scientific brilliance, has undoubtedly been another.
Ludwig Mond and Alfred Nobel, the founders of the company's main constituent parts, were among the 19th century's most prolific scientific innovators.
Mond, in particular, originated a trait that has persisted — an emphasis on the value of ‘blue sky’ research, unrelated to any perceived market need.
‘Bell didn't do a market survey and ask, do you want a telephone?’ remarked Professor Derek Birchall, a senior ICI research executive, a few years back.
‘People would have said, what's a telephone?
Nobody said we must have polythene.
The big discoveries you can't predict.’
ICI discovered polyethylene — sold under the trade name Polythene — as a result of a laboratory accident in 1933.
The 33,000 inventions the company has patented in the course of 60 years also include acrylic plastic, paraquat herbicide and the world's first beta-blocker heart drugs.
In the 1980s, given the immense and ever-rising cost of R&D, Sir John Harvey-Jones pursued a policy of making the group's research effort more business-oriented, one of ‘inventing into the marketplace’.
The new emphasis was not universally approved of, purists objecting to what they saw as a tendency for accountants to look a project over and approve or disapprove of it from the beginning.
David Barnes, group planning director — and the man destined to head ICI Bio after demerger — said recently that scientists ‘have clear guidance on what we regard as commercially important target areas’.
Peter Doyle, director of research and technology, said in a recent interview: ‘Our R&D has to be purposeful, focused, applied and strategic, and it has to succeed, because it will be our salvation.’
R&D expenditure has risen steadily over the past five years, from £461m (4.1% of sales) in 1987 to £692m (5.5% of sales) in 1991.
This is one series of numbers in which recession has caused no blip.
According to some estimates, ICI accounts for more than 20% of civilian R&D in the UK.
In pharmaceuticals, its R&D spending is about 15% of sales, on a par with the industry average.
Innovation role models have always been provided by the German chemical industry, which had a clear lead when ICI was founded.
In the mid-1920s, IG Farben was basing its product development on scientific research, and concentrating on innovative products such as plastics, solvents, insecticides and resins, rather than on bulk chemicals such as chlorine and soda ash, which were ICI's staples at the beginning.
Even in the depths of the depression, IG Farben's R&D spending was not cut back, whereas ICI's slumped.
The demerger plan seems to mark a decisive turning-away by ICI from the idea, tenaciously held by all the chemicals conglomerates in the past, that a vast and variegated collection of chemicals businesses promotes synergy.
Evidence for that seems remarkably thin, though not entirely absent.
Today's jewel in the crown, the pharmaceuticals business, began in the late 1930s as an offshoot of the dyestuffs division — the chemistry of the two areas being closely related — and did not achieve organisational independence until 1957.
But many commentators have long regarded synergy as a will-o'-the-wisp, arguing for the strategy of critical mass in selected global markets that ICI has belatedly adopted.
Nowadays the stars of the chemical business are not giant, diversified groups but pharmaceuticals companies such as Glaxo, SmithKline Beecham and Wellcome, which appear recession proof.
At the other end of the spectrum, oil companies have invested heavily in petrochemicals; Shell is the world's biggest petrochemicals producer.
If ICI's self-dismemberment goes ahead, it is unlikely to stop at that.
The attractions of gems such as the world-beating paints business, embedded in the rump ICI, will not be lost on predators.
On the other hand, the unshackled bioscience business would certainly seek strength by acquisition.
The national institution of the past 60-odd years could soon be a distant memory.
Little more than two months after Lord Hanson's departure, Sir Denys announced just such an unbundling as the archpredator himself would no doubt have undertaken
Sir Denys Henderson: Are his demerger plans going astray?
Pharmaceuticals production: ICI is the 15th largest drug company in the world
Bell didn't do a market survey and ask, do you want a telephone?
People would have said, what's a telephone?
Nobody said we must have polythene
Lord Hanson: Catalyst for ICI
Dye mixture analysis: The pharmaceuticals business grew out of dyestuffs
The attractions of gems such as the world-beating paints business will not be lost on predators
Fungicide spraying: ICI's Bio grouping generates 69% of trading profits
empowerment
POWER TO THE PEOPLE WHO WANT IT The basis of empowerment is an attempt to reproduce the commitment of the Japanese worker by adapting elements of eastern culture to the western way of life.
But it won't work unless your employees want to be empowered in the first place
David Oates
When Alistair Wright became human resource director at Digital Equipment Co six years ago, he vowed he would set an example to the rest of the organisation by passing authority down the line and totally empowering his staff.
But it was easier said than done.
Mr Wright discovered that you can't hand out authority like luncheon vouchers.
The motivation for taking personal initiatives has to come from the employees themselves.
‘It took me a long time to learn a fundamental truth about empowerment.
You can't give it; people have to take it.’
Mr Wright's experience underscores many companies' concerns about empowerment, which is rapidly becoming a buzz-word in enlightened management circles.
If you empower frontline employees to take personal initiatives beyond the boundaries of their routine tasks, first you need to know that they are willing and able to do so.
Second, how do they know how far they can go?
Empowerment enthusiasts say it is all to do with company culture and ensuring that employees are all fully conversant with the corporate goals and mission.
But is that realistic?
Can a cleaner on the shopfloor really be expected to know and understand the complex set of aims that a major corporation sets itself?
Certainly, a growing number of organisations are trying hard to achieve just that.
A British management researcher visiting the US recently listened enthralled as the chauffeur driving him to Kennedy Airport ran through the detailed mission statement of the leading American hospital that employed him.
The British visitor had just heard the exact same overview from the hospital's top administrator.
The chauffeur said that everyone at the hospital was regularly updated on any changes to the hospital's corporate goals.
Empowerment, which has its roots in the US, has taken on new significance recently as American corporations try to find a way to compete more effectively with the Japanese.
They have taken a long hard look at the way Japanese firms operate and tried to understand what it is that makes them so much more productive and successful.
The overriding conclusion was that the Japanese have made a much better job of winning the commitment of their employees at all levels.
The problem for the west, however, is that Japanese culture is alien to our way of life.
American culture is epitomised by the archetypal lone hero, but in eastern culture the individual is subordinated to the collective effort.
Teamwork and unselfish dedication owe more to oriental culture than to any particular management technique.
Tony Knight, director of the strategic management programme at Henley Management College, points out that Japanese workers can afford to be more altruistic than western employees because they generally operate under a policy of life-long employment with one company.
‘In this country it would be very difficult to persuade workers that they should work harder for the good of the company.
They would be looking to gain some practical advantage — promotion or extra pay.’
It might be unpractical to replicate eastern culture in the west, but there is much to be gained from extracting certain elements of that culture and adapting them to the western way of life.
In their search for the key ingredients of the Japanese model, the Americans concluded that empowerment is an important aspect of achieving greater productivity from their workforce.
As Jim Durcan, director of the leadership development programme at Ashridge Management College, observes: ‘They looked at the way US auto factories, for example, were run compared to Japanese auto factories.
The US factories had evolved into organisations that set out tightly circumscribed jobs, fixed procedures, absolutely nothing in terms of flexible working, multi-skilling, employee responsiveness — any of those sorts of things — and they took a look at Japanese cost patterns and thought that American industry was just going down the plug.’
But not everyone is convinced that empowerment is the key instrument for putting the west on a more competitive footing with the east.
There are those like Bernard Taylor, professor of business policy at Henley Management College, who raise serious doubts about it: ‘When I hear the word empowerment, I reach for my gun, because it's one of those cosy words.
It's like new bottles for old wine.
I like the idea of delegation because it's a clean word.
Empowerment is rather a dirty word and I am suspicious of it.’
Jim Durcan is dubious about whether organisations are capable of empowering employees: ‘I know that organisations can disempower people.
You can create an organisation culture that says never take chances, always cover your back, always put it in writing, always make sure you've got authority.
All those things are disem-powering people.
With empowerment you can create organisational cultures which make it easier to delegate, but to some extent it must come from the subordinates as well.’
Such scepticism has done nothing to dampen the enthusiasm of the growing band of organisations that are embracing empowerment whole-heartedly.
Companies such as Rank Xerox are so dedicated to the idea that they are inverting their organisation structures to ensure that the front-line troops — those who interface most closely with the customer become the focus of attention.
Senior managers at Digital and other companies, such as BP and Sherwood Computing Services, are being turned into coaches.
Their job is no longer to control and command; it is to act as counsellors to the newly-empowered front-line employees.
Costly training programmes have been introduced to help top executives make this often traumatic transition.
Even more radically, a number of trail-blazing organisations are setting up self-managed work groups, some of them leaderless.
Senior managers (or coaches) only intervene when the work groups come unstuck or threaten to break away from the main organisation like rebellious satellites.
Rank Xerox UK has converted its entire customer service division into 250 self-managed work groups.
Shaun Pantling, director of customer service, believes ‘the opportunity for empowerment is practically limitless.
We are now looking at the idea of team appraisals instead of appraising individuals.
We are also looking at ways the team could actually carve up its own salary increases.
Already most of the teams are responsible for things like reward and recognition’.
Digital Equipment's UK organisation, based in Reading, has introduced self-management to around 40 teams, covering such areas as finance, personnel, engineering and customer accounts.
‘We have given our account teams as much authority as we possibly can,’ says Chris Lever, Digital's group effectiveness portfolio manager.
‘We now call our account managers entrepreneurs because they are responsible for their own budgets and for how they spend and allocate their funds.’
Digital Equipment has set aside £1m to hand out next year as cash rewards for outstanding performance.
In the true spirit of empowerment, the company is asking its employees to nominate the recipients.
Some companies are embracing the new credo with more caution.
At W H Smith, where attempts are being made to disperse authority to the outer reaches of the organisation, the company is hedging its bets by devising a guide to decision-making, which gives managers and employees some indication of the limits of their newfound freedom of action.
Empowerment enthusiasts are being spurred on by stories of remarkable productivity gains.
Research by Professor Quinn Mills, a US management expert at Harvard Business School, shows that organisations that unleash the creativity of their workforce can routinely achieve productivity gains of between 30% and 50% a year.
Examples abound of empowerment's potency for productive change.
British Airways' engineering division, for example, set some cost-saving targets to reduce overheads.
Normally, this would have been achieved by mandatory budget cuts.
But by seeking suggestions from front-line staff maintenance and overhaul engineers — the company came up with savings that were three times greater than those targeted.
There is ample evidence that many employees would welcome the opportunity to expand the narrow scope of their routine work, and that employees in mundane jobs are capable of being stretched.
Management guru Tom Peters cites the example of an American sausage factory.
Ten workers performing the most menial tasks imaginable were picked at random from the processing line.
All but two of them were found to be leading personal lives that were full of achievement.
Two of them had built their own homes.
Another was a leading light opera singer in the local community.
Another ran a youth group.
Mr Peters asks the highly relevant question: why do so many workers leave their talents at the factory gate?
Part of the problem is that employees have grown used to the idea that they are not supposed to take initiatives.
They have learned to play their part in the hierarchy, to receive instructions and carry them out according to strict rules and regulations.
Management consultancy Kinsley Lord, which has made a study of empowerment, recognises that a major effort is required to bring about a fundamental change of attitude.
Stephen Taylor, the consultancy's chairman, says: ‘The problem with building the empowered organisation is that it cannot be done by the methods of the command organisation.
There is no continuous evolution towards it; it requires, somewhere along the line, an act of faith on the part of management.
It is a profound challenge to those who have built their careers by rising through the ranks of the command organisation.’
The empowered organisation, emphasises Kinsley Lord, is held together by forces different from those that bind the command organisation: ‘If the conventional metaphor for the command organisation is a dinosaur, with the brain at the top issuing instructions to the ponderous body, then that for the empowered organisation might be a shoal of fish, moving rapidly and constantly adjusting its shape through signals that are instantly understood.’
But it is far from certain that all the fish in every corporate shoal want to swim in the same direction.
Some management theorists maintain that in every organisation there is a hard core of mavericks who are reluctant to take on more responsibility.
Work to them is merely a way to earn a living.
They get their kicks from their social life.
It is also questionable whether all types of organisations lend themselves to empowerment.
Empowerment mainly seems to be taking hold in modern engineering and computer firms where dealing with state-of-the-art technology is a way of life and the job content is reasonably high.
In such organisations the emphasis is on skilling up.
There is little evidence to suggest, however, that the concept of empowerment is being embraced by professional organisations such as accountancy practices, where entrenched working methods are less amenable to flexibility.
When I hear the word empowerment, I reach for my gun, because it's one of those cosy words.
It's like new bottles for old wine
Mr Peters asks the highly relevant question: why do so many workers leave their talents at the factory gate?
Mazda auto factory: Will empowerment make the west more competitive?
employee remuneration
LOWER PAYROLLS, HIGHER PAY Making people redundant isn't the only way to reduce staffing costs
Brian Singleton-Green
You can cut your payroll without cutting your staff and without cutting their pay.
And if you do it properly, you should improve staff motivation at the same time.
It may sound like magic, but the trick is, first, to reduce the amount of money that you pay to the government and, second, to reduce real payroll costs while raising employees' perceived income.
Your basic payroll splits three ways.
Most of it goes to your employees, some of it goes to the pension fund and a large slice goes to the government in tax and National Insurance.
If you cut pay or pension contributions, you will certainly reduce your costs, but you are equally certainly not going to raise morale.
That leaves the government's share.
Fortunately, the government is generous and allows employers various ways to reduce tax and national insurance payments.
Most of these schemes are designed to improve employee motivation at the same time, either through relating pay to profits or encouraging the acquisition of shares by employees.
Profit-related pay (Chapter III, Part V, Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988) offers employers the most spectacular savings.
It allows employees to earn up to 20% of total pay or £4,000 a year (whichever is the lower) tax free.
The maximum tax saving for a basic-rate taxpayer is therefore £1,000 a year (£4,000 * 25%).
The tax saving to the employee means that he or she can in theory receive a maintained net-of-tax income, while gross salary is reduced.
So in principle if the employer pockets the whole of the saving for, say, 1,000 employees, the payroll has been cut by £1m a year, while the employees are no worse off.
But if PRP substitutes for existing pay, it is rarely going to be practicable for the employer to pocket the whole of the saving, since this would imply not only a reduction in the employees' gross pay, but also an element of risk in remuneration that had previously been assured.
Neither aspect is likely to help sell the scheme to employees.
Realistically, the saving in income tax has to be shared between employer and employees.
In this way, PRP works as a carrot rather than a stick.
If PRP is used as a substitute for future pay increases, it is more realistic for the employer to regard any tax savings as his own.
Increasingly, this is what is happening.
Victor Levy, a tax partner at Arthur Andersen, has noticed that employers, instead of awarding their staff a 4% increase for inflation, may tell them: ‘There is no pay rise this year, but I will give you PRP instead’.
Times are hard, and from the employees' point of view the possibility of something is better than the certainty of nothing.
Between 1991 and 1992, the numbers of both PRP schemes and employees covered by them have doubled.
This reflects the doubling of the tax relief for PRP in the 1991 Budget, but there is no doubt that the need to cut costs is also driving employers to look at PRP.
Although there are now more than 700,000 employees in PRP schemes, one may well ask why the figure isn't higher.
Part of the answer must be that the element of risk in a PRP scheme reduces its attractiveness to employees, hence the advantages of introducing it at a time when the alternative (no pay rise) is even worse.
Also, before the 1991 Budget, the tax benefit was simply not a big enough incentive, and it has taken time for companies to respond to the new, more generous tax environment.
But there are other problems.
Sean O'Hare, a managing consultant in Price Waterhouse's executive and benefit services group, describes the scheme rules as ‘very complex’ and believes that this has put employers off.
The unit to be covered by a scheme does not have to be a company, which in itself is an advantage, but it has to have Companies Act-style accounts and have them audited, which could be expensive.
The operation of the scheme in terms of making (or not making) PRP payments to employees is an additional burden.
Victor Levy attributes the low take-up to a mixture of ‘lack of understanding’ and ‘administrative hassle’.
There are some ways in which the element of risk in a PRP scheme can be reduced.
There are two basic kinds of scheme.
In a Method A scheme, the amount paid out as PRP is a fixed percentage of profit.
In Method B, the amount to be paid out is a predetermined pool of money adjusted up or down in line with the year's change in profits.
Under Method B, it is possible to limit the proportionate change in the pool by a fraction, which must not exceed one half.
For example, a 20% fall in profits can be translated into a fall of only 10% in the PRP pool.
This is one way of reducing the risks in the scheme.
There are others.
Companies can choose whether the figure of profit that will determine the PRP is to be taken before or after tax, goodwill, interest receivable, interest payable, research and development, and other items.
Depending on the company, excluding any one or more of these items could have a dramatic effect on the volatility of its results, and so on the element of risk in its PRP scheme.
Indeed, both the limiting fraction under Method B and the use of the adjusting items make it possible for a company to report a loss, but still make payments under its PRP scheme.
Until recently, some schemes contained self-cancelling formulas that removed the element of risk from the scheme and made it, effectively, independent of variations in the company's profitability.
The Inland Revenue eventually decided that this practice was contrary to the legislation on PRP schemes, and put an end to it in a Statement of Practice (SP7/92, see ACCOUNTANCY , October, p 103).
Some fear that the statement could catch ‘innocent’ schemes as well as any that clearly defeat the purpose of the legislation, and discussions are reported to be taking place between the Revenue and the profession as to how exactly the statement will be implemented.
Another area of uncertainty is the treatment of exceptional items.
At present, PRP profits can be adjusted for extraordinary items, but not for exceptional items.
With the introduction of FRS 3, virtually all extraordinary items will become merely exceptional.
According to Mr O'Hare, ‘the Revenue are still thinking about how they are going to deal with that one’.
How effective is PRP as a motivator?
Ian Luder, head of Arthur Andersen's executive and personal taxation services group, says that ‘the more that I have been working on employee schemes, the more convinced I am that there is an impact’.
In fact, AA has its own scheme and Mr Luder says that, as a result, ‘there is a greater enthusiasm [among staff]to enhance efficiency’.
PRP's great advantage is that it can be implemented at the level of the individual operating unit where employees feel that their efforts can have an impact.
This contrasts with schemes that involve shares for employees.
The disadvantage of share schemes is, Mr Luder says, that ‘it is all very well my being an employee of a subsidiary five tiers down of some major plc, and their saying ‘Here is a dollar for a share option and you will be motivated if the share price rises’, but there is no direct link between cause and effect'.
Another problem with share schemes is that the employees must recognise the value of the benefits that they are receiving, otherwise the tax or National Insurance saving will be wasted.
They will not necessarily do so, and they may positively dislike having shares rather than cash.
Sean O'Hare says that: ‘It depends on how sophisticated the employees are.
With City-based firms, there's no problem because their employees realise a share is just a commodity and they can go and sell it and realise some cash.
If you move outside City firms, it is far more difficult unless there has been a history of share schemes so that employees understand their value.’
Nevertheless, there are several schemes involving shares that can be applied across the workforce to achieve savings.
In a profit sharing scheme (s 186, ICTA 1988), the company sets up a trust to buy shares on behalf of employees.
There is no National Insurance on the company's contributions to the fund, and the employee pays no income tax on the shares allocated to him or her provided they are held for at least five years.
Mr O'Hare suspects that ‘not that many [profit sharing schemes]have been put in place over the last couple of years’ because of the cash flow drain represented by the company's contributions to the fund.
He also draws attention to the problem of not being able to realise the shares for at least five years: ‘Is that going to motivate people in the current recession?’
With a savings-related share option scheme (s 186, ICTA 1988), the company grants its employees an option to subscribe for its shares at an amount not less than 80% of their market value at that time.
The employee subscribes to a Save As You Earn scheme for at least five years to pay for the shares.
There is no National Insurance on the value of the option and the employee pays no income tax on it.
Whether the employee makes a profit, or even decides to exercise the option, obviously depends on how the company's share price performs.
Mr Levy says that this kind of scheme is ‘good for a strong public company.
I wouldn't put it into a company where the profit record was likely to be poor, because the last thing you want is for the share price to be lower than the option exercise price’.
Under an employee share ownership plan or ESOP (ss 67 to 74, Finance Act 1989), the company sets up a trust to buy shares for distribution to employees.
The company can fund the trust by contributions or loans or the trust can borrow from third parties.
There is no National Insurance on any contributions to the ESOP.
If a company issues shares to its employees in lieu of a bonus, no National Insurance is payable on the value of the shares.
If a company issues non-cash vouchers to its employees in lieu of a bonus, no National Insurance is payable on their value.
The employees can then exchange the vouchers for goods or services.
Whether shares, commodities or vouchers are used, with any bonus scheme designed to avoid National Insurance contributions, it is essential that the payment to the employees is discretionary and not a contractual obligation.
It is easy to make a mistake and some schemes are unreliable.
Michael Eldridge, a managing consultant in Price Waterhouse's executive and benefit services group, warns that ‘You have to be very, very careful in structuring the schemes’; this is particularly true of ‘gold’ schemes, for example, where, as the name suggests, the employees are ‘paid’in gold.
Several companies provide voucher schemes for employers, but Mr Eldridge points out that ‘the commissions charged are quite high’, which may have a significant effect on any potential cost savings.
Many employers are now cutting back on company cars.
So far as this is no more than a cost-cutting exercise it falls outside the scope of this article.
But it is possible to reduce company car costs while increasing the employee's perceived remuneration.
This is because the cost of providing the car may exceed the perceived benefit to the employee.
If the car costs the employer £6,000 a year while the perceived benefit to the employee is only half that, the employer and employee can split the difference by substituting an appropriate salary increase (or other benefit) for the car.
Both parties are better off.
The logic of exploiting the perception gap between the real cost of benefits and their perceived value to the employee can obviously be applied to other benefits.
Take group health care schemes, for example.
If you are a middle-aged, overweight smoker with a husband or wife and three kids also covered by the scheme, the value to you of scheme membership is probably considerable.
If you are single, healthy and in your 20s, then it is probably worth very little to you, and you might prefer to take a cash alternative if one were on offer.
Employers are increasingly taking a ‘cafeteria’ approach to employee benefits, where employees pick the benefits they want or take a cash alternative if that is what they prefer.
The employer cuts costs and the employee feels better off.
PRP, share schemes, non-cash vouchers, and the cafeteria approach to benefits all offer ways of cutting payroll costs while improving employee motivation.
But you need to be careful that you set up a scheme that actually works, and it would be sensible to take professional advice to avoid making a mistake in its tax or National Insurance implications.
Profit-related pay
Profit sharing scheme
Savings-related share option scheme
Employee share ownership plan
Shares in lieu of bonus
Vouchers in lieu of bonus
Benefits cafeteria
Employers may say ‘There is no pay rise this year, but I will give you PRP instead’
Company cars: Costs can go down, perceived remuneration up
As a result of AA's PRP scheme ‘there is a greater enthusiasm to enhance efficiency’
REMUNERATION OPTIONS
health products
VITAMINS, FISH OILS AND A TONIC FOR PROFITS Vitamins, dietary supplements and fish oils are on many shopping lists these days.
Worth £230m in the UK, the market shows no signs of slowing down
Jim Levi
As winter draws on, many people's thoughts turn to stocking up on vitamin supplements as a way of avoiding colds and flu viruses.
But as the burgeoning health food stores testify, there is a lot more to the dietary supplements market than this.
Even in the midst of deep recession, dietary supplements, such as minerals, vitamins and aids to healthy living such as ginseng and selenium, now represent a £230m market in the UK with a marked rapid growth over the past 10 years.
A third of all women in Britain now take some form of dietary supplement according to one estimate, and chemicals giant Fisons believes that as many as 40% of the adult population have tried these products at some time.
At present the market is broken down into three broad sectors: vitamins, worth £90m; dietary supplements such as evening primrose oil and ginseng, worth £96m; and fish oils, worth £47m.
Key player Reckitt & Colman predicts that the market will be worth £750m by the end of the decade.
Growth in demand for supplements appears to be a worldwide phenomenon.
In France and Italy, demand is at similar levels to the UK.
But per capita consumption in Germany is two-and-a-half times greater than in Britain.
The range of products available in the UK is now enormous — some 80 companies with over 1,000 different brands.
Not only are they increasing their share of the shelf space at chains such as Boots and Superdrug, but sales are now building up rapidly in supermarkets as well.
Reckitt & Colman, for example, reveals that sales of its long established Haliborange vitamins at supermarkets have risen an astonishing 70% over the past year.
Reckitt is one of the major companies that dominate the market.
The market leader, Seven Seas, has an estimated 31% share.
It is part of the Hanson tobacco to mining giant, and founder chairman Lord Hanson is said to regularly pop Seven Seas fish oil pills.
Boots is another major player, both as a retailer and manufacturer, and its own brand holds the number two position with 20% of the market.
Fisons' Sanatogen brand is number three with an estimated 10% of the market.
Its consumer health division, which markets the Sanatogen range, is now up for sale and could well go to a foreign buyer.
Continental companies are trying to muscle into the UK market where Hoffman La Roche, the leading Swiss pharmaceuticals group and the world's biggest vitamin manufacturer, is already well established with its Redoxin range of vitamins.
Last year, the Booker foods group sold its Healthcrafts range to a Danish company called Ferrosan.
A much larger Danish pharmaceutical company Pharma Nord, with an estimated 80% of the Scandinavian market in food supplements, has been quietly test-marketing its products in the north of England for the past two years.
Now its UK managing director Bent Henriksen has begun a nationwide marketing drive in an effort to replicate its Scandinavian success in the UK's already over-crowded market-place.
‘The market is indeed very fragmented,’ admits Healthcrafts' marketing manager Paul Latimer, whose company in many ways pioneered the market through health food shops in the sixties.
‘A further complication is that some products are doing exceptionally well while others are in decline.’
He points out that once fashionable products like royal jelly are now declining at the rate of 40% a year.
‘But this is more than offset by growth in sales of products like fish oil and evening primrose oil, where sales increases are of the order of 20%.’
Alan Clements, European sales and marketing director for Seven Seas, believes the market has grown rapidly over the past decade because ‘people's perception of health has changed.
They are simply more interested in staying well.
They are exercising more, eating more carefully and cutting down on smoking and alcohol’.
He sees the growth in sales of his products ‘as just part of that change of attitude.
It might cost 3p a day to take one of our products as a form of protection against heart disease or as a way of helping relieve the symptoms of rheumatism or arthritis.
People see that as good value for money and keep coming back for more’.
Research shows that women mostly use products to combat depression and lethargy, whereas garlic is used by both men and women in equal numbers to prevent colds and to improve circulation.
Controversy in the medical profession still rages about the benefits of vitamins and dietary supplements and manufacturers are closely restricted in any claims they can make about what their various products can do.
Claims about the beneficial effects of its products on children's intelligence recently landed a company called Larkhall Natural Health in trouble.
The issue is further complicated by European Community proposals for uniformity and tougher regulation of sales of these products.
Dr David Horrobin, whose Efamol company specialises in evening primrose oil, says this natural product is approved by the National Health Service for the treatment of breast pain and certain forms of eczema and may soon be used as a way of preventing diabetics going blind or suffering from kidney disorders.
Dr Horrobin, himself a former professor of medicine in Montreal, has built up a company with sales of £16m and profits of the order of £6.5m and has plans to bring Efamol to the stockmarket.
‘What distinguishes us from the rest of the industry is that we do research to prove the claims we make,’ he says.
‘We spend 30% of sales on research and development.’
He believes that this compares very favourably with the rest of the industry.
Medicines made from natural products, he points out, are not necessarily going to be cheaper than drugs made synthetically.
‘The benefit is in the very low risk of side effects,’ he says.
Evening primrose oil: For a variety of ailments
charities
FUND MANAGERS IN THE WINGS Almost every fund manager is convinced that the Charities Act 1992 has completely changed the charities' investment world.
But it is easy both to exaggerate the changes and to miss their significance
Mihir Bose
If you think fund management is all about finding new wheezes, then the present focus on charities provides an apt illustration.
Almost every fund manager is convinced that the Charities Act 1992 has completely changed the charities' investment world.
Starting next year the Official Custodian for Charities, who has been in charge of investments on behalf of 40,000 charities, will be giving back the investments to the individual charities.
They, in turn, will have the task of finding fund managers to manage and administer those investments.
Even before this, says John Harrison, charities director of Lazards, charities were attracted to the City by the models set up to measure pension fund performance.
‘The impetus for change has been driven by the charities rather than the City, but the City recognised this and has sought to make the most of it.’
He got involved in 1983 when the idea of using professional fund managers was in its infancy.
The legislative changes have given this a further momentum at a time when, says Mr Harrison, ‘there is a greater awareness among fund managers that this is a growing sector’.
Fund managers are increasingly appreciative of the immense cash flow implications of charities' activities.
John Thornton of fund managers Murray Johnstone sees the Charities Act as a godsend: ‘We are seeing apathy starting to break down as a result of the Charities Act’.
An indication of the expectations the Act has aroused among fund managers can be gauged from the fact that, just over a year ago, merchant bankers Kleinwort Benson decided to bring together previously dispersed skills and set up a specialised division, headed by Rupert Marlow, to look after their charities fund management.
‘Charities’ trustees are more aware of the investment issues because of the recession,’Mr Marlow says.
‘This is putting a bit of pressure on the income side.
The Charities Act is making them more aware; we find an increasingly professional attitude.’
This means that like pension fund trustees, charity fund managers are being selected on the basis of beauty parades, although this is not ‘quite as standardised as in the pensions fund area.
But we are looking at charities from the institutional end of the business, not the private client end’.
But is this a case of all hype and no substance?
Pesh Framjee of Binder Hamlyn's Charities Unit agrees that fund managers are making a song and dance about the changes, ‘but let us say there is no smoke without fire and a lot of wet leaves going round’.
However, in the euphoric atmosphere fund managers have created, it can be easy both to exaggerate the changes and to miss their real significance.
For a start, the introduction of the changes enshrined in the new Charities Act will be a slow process.
On 1 September, as Mr Harrison says, ‘only the so-called uncontroversial bits came in which don't require any consultation.
S 29 has come in and the programme of divestment [by the Official Custodian]is legally capable of starting’.
But even this programme of divestment will take four years: it is being done on a stock by stock basis.
‘It is,’ says Mr Harrison, ‘a very slow process’, and he warns fund managers not to get ‘too excited’.
Then there is the question of how much the divestment will release for fund managers to manage.
Indeed there is no certainty about how much money there is waiting to find managers.
The common talk is that the Official Custodian manages £125bn of charity money and as she winds up her role the error is to assume that this should fall into the fund managers' laps.
This seems a gross overstatement, as it includes assets such as National Trust land which can hardly later be sold — even in theory — like shares in ICI.
And in any case, the winding down of the Official Custodian's powers will mean divestment of stockmarket investments but not land, which will stay with her.
The Custodian probably manages no more than £1.2bn of actual stockmarket investments.
When other tradeable assets are taken into account the total of charity money that might be available for fund management could be between £15bn and £20bn.
‘The vast majority of funds available for management will be quite small,’ John Harrison says.
‘Within the 40,000 charities managed by the Official Custodian, the bulk are small charities.’
Whatever the figure, the thought of divestment certainly drives a lot of fund managers forward.
John Thornton echoes the views of many when he says: ‘The charities sector moves very slowly.
Managers have been chosen by the old boy network, recommendations from people who were on the boards of charities.
They have not been under the same review process as pension funds where every three years or so managers are changing.
Pension funds have been subject to close scrutiny and performance measurement.
Charities are not.’
But is divestment quite such a big deal?
Pesh Framjee takes issue with the way in which fund managers are portraying divestment from the Official Custodian.
‘This has really been overplayed completely.
People are suddenly saying investment managers will come into charities which were previously managed by the Official Custodian.
The Official Custodian never managed charities; the Official Custodian only held the physical security of the funds.
The duty to manage has, under trust law, always been with the trustees.
All the Official Custodian was doing was receiving the income and paying it over to the charities.
It was a custodian's job, not an investment manager's.
If the investment managers had to come in they could have come in at any time.
But with the Official Custodian sending back these investments, the trustees will have to think of what they should have been thinking about years ago: management of their trust funds.’
The change has meant that fund managers have, as John Harrison says, ‘begun to realise that charities with their gross funds are rather like pension funds: they have an institutional nature with trustees involved and this makes them a fund management proposition’.
However, the comparison with pension fund management should not be overstated.
The pension fund market is mature and well-defined, the charity market much more fragmented and much more difficult to reach.
In that sense it is very much a virgin field.
Many of the charities have never had any contact with professional fund managers.
There is also the working of the Charities Act.
Although it is law, parts of it will only come into force when the Home Secretary issues the necessary regulations.
These will determine, for instance, whether the present 50–50 split between the narrower range investments (only in fixed interest) and wider range investments (fixed interest plus shares and unit trusts) will be altered so that more money can be made available for fund mangers to invest.
Regulations implementing this part of the Act are not expected until next year.
Mr Harrison doubts if the ‘divestment process is in itself a huge opportunity for fund managers, except for those who have common investment funds, which are ideal vehicles for relatively small charitable funds, in place’.
Not surprisingly, fund managers are busy setting up common investment funds.
These are unit trusts that have unique characteristics with special appeal for charities.
The funds can reclaim tax and pay income gross, saving charities the trouble of reclaiming the tax.
Until the mid-80s, such funds were discouraged by both the Charity Commissioners and the Inland Revenue, but now, as the rules are changed, the industry expects a flood of them with managers aggressively promoting them.
That this is seen as the market's battlefield is demonstrated by the higher marketing profile of Church Charity and Local Authority Fund Managers Ltd (CCLA).
It is eager to scotch rumours that the withdrawal of the Official Custodian will mean that its COIF (Charities Official Investment Funds) common investment funds will also disappear, and for the first time it has issued a brochure to advertise its products.
This may not seem much, but it indicates that it clearly sees the dangers of the competition.
CCLA runs three common investment funds, and can claim to be the leader of the pack.
Viscount Churchill, CCLA's investment manager, agrees that fund managers are making a little too much of the opportunities available, but presents a strong case for the common investment funds: ‘They have one great advantage — they can declare dividends gross.
We provide a portfolio management service for charities with portfolios of £1m and above.
We have three common investment funds: equity, fixed interest and deposit.
It is like buying a unit trust, you buy units in the fund.
The Inland Revenue permits us to reclaim tax and pay dividends gross.
For many charities it would mean moving from having your own portfolio to having a unit in a managed portfolio.
While it may not be suitable for all charities, it makes sense for small charities to go into a common investment fund.’
The CCLA's Charity Equity Fund, which has income and accumulated shares worth £340m, has some 28,000 unit holders in it.
The case for the common investment funds is also being made by the Official Custodian as she puts the divestment machinery in place.
In letters to charities she is warning them about the extra administration time that trustees will spend making tax claims and notifying changes of registered particulars, and advising them that much of it could be saved by selling existing investments and contributing the proceeds of sale to a common investment fund.
The same letter informs them that the Official Custodian can provide a leaflet giving a list of common investment funds.
But such promotion of the common investment fund is not met by universal approval.
John Thornton is not sure that common investment funds are such a good idea.
He says that Murray Johnstone looked at the idea but concluded that: ‘There didn't seem to be much sense in launching a common investment fund.
The benefit is that all the tax reclaimed is dealt with by somebody other than the charity.
But as an investment house we can do that.
The other problem is that common investment funds cannot be tailored to suit your requirements.
If you use unit trusts there is a lot of variety.
They provide a better range, so why reinvent the wheel?’
Kleinworts looked at setting up a common investment fund, and while, says Rupert Marlow, it has ‘not eliminated the idea and may come in with something in due course’, it prefers to rely on authorised unit trusts and exempt unit trusts to manage its £250m of charity money.
This covers about 90 charities.
A number of them are small, with the largest being about £15m and the smallest under £1m.
That emphasises how different from pension fund management charity fund management still is.
One argument for common investment funds is that at the moment they provide a way of getting round the narrow and wider investment bands that dictate charity investment.
But if, instead of the present 50–50 split, this is soon loosened to 75%-25% in favour of the wider bands, or even 100%, then, asks John Thornton, why use common investment funds?
Important as arguments about the common investment funds are, more important questions are perhaps posed by the accounting changes the Charities Act is ushering in.
These changes, in the piecemeal fashion in which the Act is being implemented, will come into force in September 1993 and have already led to what Adrian Randall, finance director of the Cancer Research Campaign, calls, ‘some howlers’.
The Charities Act 1960, which the 1992 Act is replacing, only required charities to produce accounts every 15 months.
It had no requirements for audit, no requirements to submit accounts to the Charity Commissioners and no requirements to issue accounts to the public.
Under the new Act, all charities will have to produce accounts, unless income is less than £1,000.
If gross income is below £25,000, receipts and payments accounts and a statements of assets and liabilities will do.
Above £25,000, full accounts will be required.
Only charities with turnover over £100,000 will have to have their accounts audited.
Charities with turnover below £100,000 can choose to have their accounts examined by an ‘independent examiner’, somebody the trustees consider competent, who could, for example, be their bank manager.
The charities will have to send their accounts, together with a report, to the Charity Commissioners within 10 months of the financial year end.
Accounts must follow a format that will be laid down in regulations due to come into force in September 1993.
All that is fine, but in the process howlers have been made and hang-ups remain.
The major one is that the Act's accountancy regulations will not relate to charities that are limited companies.
In such cases, the Companies Act will take precedence.
‘Effectively,’ says Mr Randall, ‘this means charities that are companies limited by guarantee will be able to avoid regulations if they wish to.
The unscrupulous could set up a charity and then get company status, producing a set of accounts which are totally meaningless from a charity point of view.’
Under the Charities Act, there is a requirement to show expenditure on publicity, fund raising and administration.
Under the Companies Act you do not have to show this.
Adrian Randall classifies this as: ‘A problem area, a howler.
A number of charities will be able to show one lump sum figure as turnover, which other charities which are not incorporated will have to show in greater detail.’
The Cancer Research Campaign — both a charity and a company limited by guarantee — could get away with showing just turnover.
The Imperial Cancer Research Fund, which is not a company limited by guarantee, would have to comply with the Charities Act.
Mr Randall says: ‘We will show the greater detail required by the Charities Act, but there is nothing under law to force us to.
If there is conflict the Companies Act takes precedence.
The DTI says you are a company first and a charity next, but we say we are a charity first.
There is a further howler.
Since what we are trying to achieve under the Charities Act is a greater responsibility, a greater public awareness, then to allow charities which are companies limited by guarantee to disclose less does not serve the purpose.’
In addition to this Mr Randall identifies other smaller howlers.
If gross income is less then £25,000, then along with a receipts and payments statement there must be a statement of assets and liabilities.
‘But if you produce no accruals,’ says Adrian Randall, ‘then how do you know what your liabilities are?
And you will not know what your assets are.’
If income is over £100,000 accounts will be fully audited, but for many charities income tends to fluctuate around the £100,000 mark.
They may potter round at about £70,000 or £80,000, then a sudden large donation takes the income up to £140,000.
If this happens, then for each of the next two years the charity's accounts will have to be audited.
It will only be the fourth year before the accounts go back to independent examination.
Pesh Framjee would like to see ‘incorporated charities taken out of the Companies Act and only reporting under the Charities Act, or if that is not possible have them report under both.
It happens with charities which are housing associations; they have to comply with the Housing Associations Act and, if they are incorporated, also with the Companies Act’.
The Department of Trade and Industry has promised to examine whether charities may be able to get round this by using a clause, such as s 257 of the Companies Act, that contains special regulations for banks and insurance companies, allowing them different formats.
But before a settlement is reached, this accounting controversy will rumble on through the winter and early spring.
How will accountants be affected by all this?
Pesh Framjee has detected a change in mood among accountants.
‘Previously, charities were treated as poor relations in a portfolio.
In an accountancy firm one charity would be dumped with one partner, another with another.
Now it is being recognised as a specialist area.’
His own firm, Binder Hamlyn, has a specialised charity unit.
But while it is potentially a big market, it is not one that will arrive tomorrow.
‘The Charities Act will make no difference to my business.
Most charities with over £100,000 income are already having an audit.
It will make a difference to the smaller charities.’
But how much this will produce in fee income is debatable.
John Thornton of fund managers Murray Johnstone sees the Act as a godsend: ‘We are seeing apathy starting to break down as a result of the Charities Act’
Mr Harrison doubts if the ‘divestment process is in itself a huge opportunity for fund managers, except for those who have common investment funds’
Extra duties: And clients ask for more
Mr Randall says: ‘We will show the greater detail required by the Charities Act, but there is nothing under law to force us to.
If there is conflict the Companies Act takes precedence’
WINNERS' EVER RISING STANDARDS Charities' desire to raise standards is still as strong as ever
Stephanie Bidmead
Charities give varying reasons for entering the Annual Report and Accounts Award, from wanting to know if their report's overall structure is moving in the right direction, to learning from specific judges' criticisms, but in the end, they all boil down to a desire to improve the standard of their accounts.
John Tame, chief accountant for the Cancer Relief Macmillan Fund, which was awarded first prize in Category 1 (best report and accounts from a charity with income over £1m), explains: ‘We've entered for many years.
It's to participate and support anything that encourages charities to strive for the highest standards.
I came here eight years ago from Unilever, and the standards I respected there are the ones I would try to uphold at Cancer Relief.
We try very hard to encourage public confidence in our work and accountability.’
Taking such a determined view is, however, just one — albeit very important — pre-requisite to winning.
In addition to preparing their accounts in accordance with the technical requirements relevant to their status under the Companies Acts and Statements of Standard Accounting Practice, this year's entrants also had to contend with SORP 2,Accounting by Charities .
Now compulsory for entrants, it requires charities to disclose and explain special funds, to analyse expenditure in relation to various objectives and administration, and to disclose sponsorship or receipt of goods in kind (and services) as far as practicable.
The judges noted, however, that more attention is still required by charities to showing how money is spent.
While obvious omissions and errors led to a large number of entrants' disqualification at an early stage, the judges found that, on the whole, standards of compliance with best practice had improved.
Another new feature this year was the more detailed application form telling prospective entrants exactly what the judges look for and highlighting errors and omissions encountered last year.
The number of entrants has dropped by 27% compared to 1991 and the judges were hopeful that the new application form — combined with SORP 2 — was not the cause.
‘The regulations which flow from the Charities Act will undoubtedly mean that charities will have to improve their accounts in any case,’ said Sir Christopher Collett, chairman of the judges.
Eye-catching covers; good print size; a clear statement of aims, objectives and achievements early on in the report; and positive stimuli to attract potential donors, were all features that appealed strongly to the judges.
Good design work, effective use of colour and readability also stood out.
The judges noted that some enticing covers were let down by their contents, and vice versa, but that ‘accountability and imagination do not demand a high budget’.
The judges were also keen to stress that charities still need to balance readers' requirements.
They need to focus on whether a report is addressed to funders, potential funders or someone else.
Some charities failed to make clear who the report was aimed at and ran too many pages of tightly packed detail.
The 1992 winners overcame most, if not all, of these pitfalls.
For taking first place in Category 1, the Cancer Relief Macmillan Fund received a prize of £1,000.
Founded to help improve both the physiological and mental problems of cancer-sufferers, it is presently in the midst of a £20m fundraising campaign.
The Fund's 1992 annual review was praised for maintaining an ‘upbeat, cheerful’ approach with a readable, well-illustrated, commonsense format.
The judges were also impressed by a striking cover portraying a woman and her daughter with the logo ‘Fighting cancer with more than medicine’.
It also offered well set out objectives on the first page and a good page-by-page summary of activities.
The 1991 report and accounts, which included good chairman's and treasurer's reports and useful statistical charts, were tucked in a flap at the end of the review.
The charity was criticised, however, for failing to refer to the attached accounts on the ‘financial picture’ page.
‘We went to some trouble to explain the administrative, advertising and fundraising costs,’ says John Tame.
‘It is important to tell people that there is a cost in administering this sort of thing well.
It's a mistake to hide that and gloss over it.
People are not fools — you don't run a £20m business on fresh air!’
Other shortlisted entries in Category 1 came from the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds and Help the Aged.
The RSPB's report was particularly popular because of its colourful cover, the use of ‘splendid’ pictures next to relevant subject matter, and excellent coloured pie-charts relating to the society's various conservation projects.
It also reflected the society's work effectively and gave a helpful analysis of expenditure in the summary accounts.
The accounts were easily readable with an interesting trustees' report.
Help the Aged, which assists frail, poor and isolated elderly people in the UK and overseas, was congratulated for covering such a large field concisely.
It made good use of two colours and presented a clear financial summary showing how each pound of income was used.
Despite a reference to the full accounts and their availability it did not, however, explicitly indicate that they had received an unqualified audit report.
In the second category,(for charities with income between £100,000 and £1m), first place and a prize of £1,000 was awarded to the Acorns Children's Hospice.
Launched by the Princess of Wales in 1988, the hospice entered the Awards for the first time using its 1990 accounts which covered its first operational year with a full complement of staff.
‘When the report was produced we were very happy with how it appeared, and it was well received,’ says Acorns' commercial director, John Overton.
‘Being a charity, we had obtained sponsorship and we wanted to see how the professionals regarded it.
Therefore we submitted it as a candidate.
It was really to see what people thought of the presentation rather than the prize.’
And, he adds, reports and accounts are a useful publicity tool.
‘I feel our reports and accounts and annual review are a very good vehicle.
Publicity that doesn't cost a lot of money is very, very useful and the lifeblood of any charity.’
Running to a very concise eight pages (plus a pull-out accounts booklet), the report was praised for conservation of resources, good structure and excellent use of pictures, pie-charts and colour.
But it was criticised for not making a formal reference to the link between the review and accounts and to the availability of the audited accounts.
The other shortlisted entries in Category 2 came from Shaftesbury Homes — which aims to help and educate children and young people suffering from social, family or educational disadvantages — and the St Katharine & Shadwell Trust — a local benefit charity jointly created by News International and Wapping Council in 1990.
Shaftesbury Homes' report was praised for a good treasurer's report, accounts and cash flow statement.
But it was criticised for failing to provide a contents index, and its pictures were said to lack consistency and style.
St Katharine's report gave a good opening statement of objectives, an excellent description of community involvement, and made effective use of two colours.
An impression of the River Thames ran through the report.
Although the accounts were concise, the print was too small, and because of some confusion over the treatment of the initial endowment under covenant, the judges later decided that its turnover was over the £1m maximum for the category.
The final category (for charities with income below £100,000), was described as ‘somewhat disappointing’.
First prize, again worth £1,000, was awarded to The Manic Depression Fellowship, the largest self-help organisation for manic-depressives in the UK.
Praised for being economical and concise while offering a clear definition of mental illness and its own activities, its second ever entry also made effective use of colour and included a prioritised, strategic plan.
A tear-off contribution form and group start-up strip on the back page were also popular.
Runners-up were the Community Network — a telephone conferencing facility for various charities and social groups — and The Rainbow Centre — a small, national charity working with families where a child has either died or suffers from a life-threatening illness.
Community Network's novel triangular report was described as ‘original and effective’ and praised for its ‘imaginative’layout, but was faulted on two technical points — one relating to a trading subsidiary, the other to the breakdown of administrative expenses.
The Rainbow Centre's two-colour report was praised for being imaginative on a low budget.
Despite making good use of quotations and explaining its objectives clearly and quickly, the accounts lacked notes, and it also failed to explain one of its funds sufficiently.
A report from last year's Category 3 winner, The National Stepfamily Association, was highly commended for its ‘striking’ green and white cartoon cover.
Finally, the £500 judges' discretionary prize was divided between WaterAid which was commended for a coordinating cover and back-page tear off donation slip and telephone counsellors The Samaritans whose report was praised for spot colouring vital statistics and a single telephone conversation which ran through the right-hand pages of the report, thereby encouraging readers to finish it.
With such constructive criticism, and the possibility of a separate prize for quasi-official organisations dependent on government grants, it is worth every charity's while to enter next year's awards.
‘It is important to tell people that there is a cost in administering this sort of thing well.
It's a mistake to hide that and gloss over it — you don't run a £20m business on fresh air!’
Cancer Relief Macmillan Fund RSPB: ‘Splendid’ pictures
The Samaritans' report was praised for a single telephone conversation which ran through the right-hand pages of the report, thereby encouraging readers to finish it
careers
A CAREER IN VENTURE CAPITAL Is your armour crack-free?
Have you never made a mistake?
This may seem an extraordinary employee profile, but the rewards can be extraordinary too
Flavia Hawksley
During the 1980s, as the economy boomed, banks dished out substantial loans to all and sundry and enthusiastic entrepreneurs launched an endless stream of new companies, the venture capital industry became firmly established.
The stereotype of those behind it — the successful 80s yuppie who earned vast sums of money — soon earned the title ‘vulture capitalist’.
Making investments was undoubtedly easier then, with potential customers filling the streets and high risk start-ups portrayed as brilliant opportunities for investors, with little thought of the potential losses.
Since then the situation has changed considerably.
But even now, after a lengthy recession, with thousands of new ventures bankrupt and confidence badly shaken, there is still plenty of scope for the venture capitalist, particularly since banks have drastically curtailed their own lending.
However, suffering from badly-burned fingers, the venture capital industry has moved away from the riskier entrepreneurial start-ups to investing more in developing companies and MBOs.
It is also trying to change its image, become more responsible and to start asking for realistic returns.
In addition to providing equity for new or growing companies, venture capitalists are taking a far greater interest in the management of the companies they back, sometimes joining the board.
The approach of the 113 members of the British Venture Capital Association varies considerably.
While some will be far more involved in ‘hands on’ work, ie taking a close interest in their investee companies and providing management expertise as and when required, others will provide financial backing but little else.
Many companies refuse to invest less than £500,000 in any one company, partly because the smaller companies are regarded as higher risk.
At 3i, the largest venture capital institution, the minimum for new business is around £100,000, and for existing customers, considerably less.
Most companies will provide one-off initial sums expecting to realise the investment within three to seven years.
Again, 3i differs here in that 35% of all the money it invests goes to its existing customer base.
Because of its size it is able to keep companies on its books for 20 years or more, providing top-ups when necessary.
Because the industry is highly competitive, candidates for employment must have immaculate academic records.
‘They can't risk people who've got cracks in the armour,’ says Tony Barnes, manager of the banking division at Robert Walter Associates.
This means people with As at A-level, first class or good 2.1 honours degree, first time passes in chartered accountancy, or graduates who've held down a managerial post in industry and done an MBA.
It is also essential to be ‘personable’ and tactful.
‘The key thing in any business we back is to get on with people and be able to judge people's strengths and weaknesses,’ says Michael Queen, who is a local director with 3i.
It requires a high level of stamina, a thick skin and a flexible mind.
Transactions are often completed in the middle of the night.
Accountants who've worked in their firm's corporate finance department will be familiar with this.
‘We're looking for people with enthusiasm that see it as an exciting career and really want to do the job,’ enthuses Mr Queen.
‘Those sorts of people don't tend to notice the long hours!’
If you fit the bill you could earn a lot of money.
While salaries for newly qualifieds may be around £28,000 to £35,000 with a car, a director with five or six years' experience in the industry may get £75,000 plus.
It is however very much a meritocracy, and people with similar experience and at an equivalent level may be paid widely differing amounts.
A high proportion of the rewards package is linked to performance, via a share in the profits on successful investments.
If you perform extraordinarily well you could be extraordinarily well rewarded.
Transactions are often completed in the middle of the night.
Accountants who've worked in their firm's corporate finance department will be familiar with this
WE WILL LOSE MONEY AS WELL AS MAKE IT
At 31 Michael Queen admits he is young to be a local director with 3i.
But his route there has been clear and straightforward.
Thinking he would like to work in business, he studied industrial economics at Nottingham University, where he gained a 2.1.
He then joined Coopers & Lybrand in Leeds.
After qualifying in 1986 he decided to spend a couple of years working outside the profession to gain experience in merchant banking or venture capital.
Given its regional network, 3i seemed a ‘sensible’ choice and he spent his first year in Leeds.
‘I soon realised that I had a very limited view of what venture capital was all about,’ he recalls.
‘Since then I've never looked back.
My initial thought of spending just two years rapidly changed.’
After one year he was asked to open a new office in Hull which was, he says, ‘a great challenge and very exciting’, and two years later, in 1990, he moved to London as a local director responsible for one of the investment teams in Greater London.
He has a team of five executives who manage a portfolio of 200 investments between them.
In addition to normal responsibilities, which include making new investments, approaching new potential customers and keeping existing customers happy, Mr Queen says that they have been trying to educate the professional community to recognise when a company is going to need more working capital.
‘As the economy moves out of recession, companies will require more working capital and there may be a shortage,’ he says.
‘Quite often in the current climate you get a large group wanting to sell part of the non-core activities.
The management team is a very sensible purchaser for that business, and quite often the only purchaser with any finance.’
Mr Queen does admit to backing some losers.
‘It's the nature of our business that we will lose money as well as make it.
If a number of investments didn't go wrong we wouldn't be taking sufficient risks.
All we can do is try and make sure we've assessed the risks correctly.’
He says this is where newcomers to the business can have difficulties, and that one needs to be fairly robust to cope with the pressure.
‘It's very easy to make no decision because you can always find problems with a company.
Quite often we have to encourage our younger executives to take more risks because their natural reaction, particularly if they qualified as accountants, is to be conservative.’
Once they have developed that sound commercial judgment, he says, the rewards in terms of job satisfaction are outstanding.
‘There is nothing to beat backing a company or a group of individuals which succeeds.’
Conversely that can be a disadvantage too, according to Mr Queen.
‘When you see people you've backed become very successful, you wonder whether you can do that too.
There's a great deal of latent entrepreneurialism with 3i executives.’
But while many venture capitalists do move on to run their own company, Michael Queen has no such plans as yet.
‘The way 3i is structured means that when you get to local director level you're meant to feel: ‘This is your own business.
Run it.’
Clearly, for the time being, he does.
IT'S NOT THE SORT OF JOB YOU CAN SWITCH OFF FROM
Robert Wilson is an executive director of Baronsmead Associates, a smallish venture capital company based near the City of London in Clerkenwell.
His move to Baronsmead followed a fairly typical career progression.
He started out with a 2.1 in politics and economics from Keele University, and, wanting to keep his options open, decided to train as a chartered accountant.
He qualified with Spicer and Pegler in Birmingham in 1980, having concentrated on local industry, smaller companies and private, family-owned businesses.
This, he says, gave him a good overview, knowledge of accounts as well as auditing, and a chance to get to know the management teams.
Before he joined Baronsmead he spent several years with a much larger organisation.
He joined County Bank (now County NatWest), still in Birmingham, shortly after qualifying, to do corporate advisory work.
Mr Wilson says this gave him a different approach as well as a wider experience of business.
‘Accountancy was bottom up, County was top down.
It's a great grounding for doing your own thing.’
But after a time, as County Bank went for larger and larger transactions, Mr Wilson, who has a penchant for smaller companies, wanted to get involved in small development capital transactions and smaller management buy-outs.
He moved to Baronsmead.
‘I believe small companies are the future big companies of this country.
My personal philosophy is that by backing them — although a number will fall — some will grow, develop, float and become world class.’
While he agrees that it involves more risk, it does not deter him.
‘It also has more potential and requires more involvement on our part.’
And while the rewards in terms of job satisfaction have not reached the dizzy heights of the 1980s, Mr Wilson stresses: ‘You have to have a thick skin and be prepared to stick with it through the bad times as well as the good.’
On a daily basis the objectives are to ‘make sure that the investments or companies are progressing according to plan and are well placed to survive a prolonged recession’ and, he adds, ‘dare I say it, to benefit from the upturn when it comes’.
Accordingly, with 15 or so investments on his books, he stresses: ‘It's not the sort of job you can switch off from.
It really is 365 days a year because there are issues to be addressed all the time.’
But despite this he still finds time for his family and to play squash at weekends.
The only disadvantage of the job that he could come up with was the ‘vulture capitalist’ image with which he is clearly uncomfortable.
But he thinks even that could be changing.
‘I think the 90s have already brought their own different set of issues and approach.
The industry is trying to be seen to be more responsible, take a longer-term view and structure transactions more prudently.
‘We have to get back to a position where investors want to invest in unquoted companies and believe they're still getting a good return, but I don't think that will be the 30% they might have been promised.’
And while Robert Wilson admits that the appeal of managing his own company could become a reality one day, he does not envisage it in the near future.
asset leasing and finance
BIG TICKET TO RIDE OUT RECESSION Behind every grim news report on the state of British business is the knock-on effect to the leasing industry.
But the sector has been rescued by the water and electricity privatisations
Nigel Cope
Scan the business pages of a national newspaper and the reports are grim: slashed investment, cutbacks in new plant and equipment, high debts, squeezed cash flow, the list goes on.
Every tale — depressing as it is in its own right represents another body blow to the leasing industry.
It may not be the sexiest of sectors, but it is significant.
Leasing finances over 30% of British investment.
The figures announced in March by the industry body, the Finance & Leasing Association, told their own story.
Worst hit was business lending (excluding leasing) which fell by 26% during 1991 to £4.3bn.
Leasing actually held up well, shading down 1% to £10.2bn.
Sectoral performance varied.
Plant and machinery, for example, was up 12% to £3bn and computers and other office equipment was up 11% to £2.5bn.
Others had a harder time.
Leasing of commercial vehicles slumped by 32% to £0.7bn and car leasing fell by 14% to £2.4bn.
While smaller ticket (or lease deal value) items suffered, some major big ticket deals helped ease the blow of what would have been an even more difficult year.
Bright points for big ticket deals included leasing to the recently privatised energy and water industries, jumping 37% to nearly £1bn.
Commenting on the figures, joint chairman Brian Hassell did not mince his words: ‘Last year was the worst in many members’ memories.
As well as the drop in demand there was an escalation in bad debt in all sectors except big ticket and an increasing number of business failures among customers, particularly in the small business sector.’
However, Mr Hassell did end on a positive note — at least for leasing, if not for other forms of business finance.
He said: ‘In a dismal year the leasing performance was significantly better than other forms of finance and this indicates that leasing remains the most attractive form of medium-term finance for equipment.’
The last few years have seen quite a shake up in the leasing market.
Traditionally, the market has been dominated by the big four clearing banks and their leasing subsidiaries: Lombard North Central (owned by NatWest), National Westminster itself, Lloyds Leasing and Lloyds Bowmaker, Barclays Mercantile and Forward Asset Finance (part of Midland Bank).
But recently some new players have arrived while some older, more established names have either pulled out or are in the process of winding down their portfolios.
Landhurst went into receivership earlier this year.
One of the American companies, US Leasing, stopped writing new business in the summer and 3i, the venture capital group, joint owned by the four big banks, is reducing the scale of its leasing operations.
Sweeping into the market with some force has been Abbey National, the building society that turned itself into a bank in 1989.
Abbey National wrote its first major piece of leasing business in December 1990 and has since become the fastest-growing company in the field.
It now has commitments of over £2.5bn, concentrating mainly on big ticket items of more than £50m (though facilities of £10m and above are considered).
Major deals over the past two years have included leasing for the new ethylene cracker (a type of refinery) for BP at Grangemouth, at that time thought to be the largest leasing deal in Britain, a £180m long-term facility to North West Water to finance major infrastructure projects, and a £75m deal with Fujitsu Microelectronics to fund investment in semiconductor equipment at its factory at Newton Aycliffe, County Durham.
‘It has been a good time to come into the market,’ said Steve Leroux, leasing manager.
‘Not just for us, but for lessees, many of whom might have found it difficult to get finance  elsewhere .’
Abbey National might be feeling perky at the moment but few others of the major players share its rosy view.
‘It is no surprise to anyone that at a time of severe recession, investment in fixed assets, cars etc, will be weak,’ said Geoff Evans, managing director of Forward Asset Finance.
‘Anyone who is budgeting for anything other than a flat position is being optimistic.
I don't see the confidence there.’
Like many of his counterparts in the industry, Mr Evans sees some parts of the market performing slightly better.
Small ticket has, he said, been badly affected, while medium size deals have held up and big ticket deals have been rescued by the big utilities.
‘The privatisation of water and electricity has been a saving grace.’
Roy Fullelove, chief manager at Lloyds Leasing, shares a similar view.
‘Activity in the leasing market is restricted by low levels of investment in industry and by a shortage of tax capacity among lessor companies,’ he said.
‘Business of suitable quality and at an adequate margin is scarce.’
Like Geoff Evans at Forward Asset Finance, Mr Fullelove sees leasing on big ticket items as the stronger sector.
‘While we are not directly involved in the small end of the leasing market, we believe lessors operating in that field have suffered more than those concentrating on big ticket transactions.
We also believe that bad debts are a major issue for those leasing to the small and medium-sized customers.’
One thing most leasing companies agree on is that asset collateral is no longer sufficient to lend against.
‘The fundamental thing is that we have come away from true asset finance,’ said Tony Foley, director of Leaseplan, which has a portfolio of £60m in asset finance plus a further £150m in vehicle leasing.
‘It is now moving towards balance sheet entirely.
No longer will we look at a Heidelberg printer and say it will be worth 70% of its value in five years time, because it won't.’
One key reason why leasing remains popular with companies is that it enables them to expand through investment without damaging cash flow.
This was a major factor in the decision by Fowler Welch, an expanding road haulage company in Spalding, Lincolnshire, to lease its trailers and lorries rather than purchase them outright.
‘It's been a matter of trying to provide the equipment to match the increase,’ said Tom Salway, the company's financial director.
Fowler Welch was only founded in 1987 and has already achieved a turnover of more than £5m.
It specialises in refrigerated (chilled, not frozen) haulage of fruit and produce to many of the major supermarket chains.
In five years it has built up a fleet of 65 lorries and 85 trailers, all of them leased.
‘When we first started we favoured hire purchase,’ said Mr Salway.
This was when there were good levels of capital allowances.
‘Now we lease rather than buy on hire purchase so we can match the payments on equipment to its lifetime and its earnings.
It is very much a cash-flow decision.’
Buying the lorries outright is not really an option for Fowler Welch.
The company is currently spending around £1m on lorries and trailers every year.
Fowler Welch makes a point of spreading its business around, using a number of leasing companies.
‘We sit down and negotiate lines of credit with leasing companies, which enables us to make quick purchasing decisions knowing that the credit is there,’ said Mr Salway.
Shopping around also enables the company to strike competitive deals.
‘We're looking for deals all the time.
It's a buyers’ market.’
The company also leases its document processing system and computers, all from NCR.
Here, Fowler Welch leaves the arrangements up to the computer supplier.
‘We stay with the same one,’ said Mr Salway.
NatWest Leasing has tied up several major deals in the past 12 months with clients in industries as varied as motor manufacturing and power stations.
In the last three months of 1991, NatWest concluded a deal with Toyota, the Japanese car giant, to finance the purchase of machinery and other equipment for its 580 acre plant at Burnaston in Derbyshire, which will start producing the Carina E model later this year.
The deal, though its precise value is closely guarded, is rumoured to rank as the largest leasing transaction of 1991.
Another big NatWest deal was a £225m leasing agreement with Teesside Power.
The deal was to finance the power station's gas and steam turbines which will become operational in early 1993.
Fulcrum Communications, a joint venture between Fujitsu (75%) and British Telecom (25%), is using leasing to fund a variety of projects.
The company was founded as a joint venture in 1991, having previously been wholly owned by BT.
Since April last year, the company, which designs, manufactures and installs telecom equipment, has achieved sales of £27m and has 500 staff.
Fulcrum leases much of its hi-tech computer testing equipment and computer-aided design systems.
‘The main reason we go for the leasing option is because it frees up working capital,’ says John Preen, treasury manager.
‘The tax issue is really a side issue with us.’
The company is also planning a major investment programme that includes moving to a new £24m building in Wythall, on the outskirts of Birmingham in 1994.
Fulcrum plans to lease the building.
Fulcrum chose Midland-owned Forward Asset Finance as its leasing company because the Midland is also the company's main bank.
‘We get offers from other finance houses but the prices are similar, so we think it's better to stick to the devil you know,’ said John Preen.
Hitachi Data Systems, joint owned by Hitachi (80%) and General Motors subsidiary EDS (20%) prefers to tie up leasing deals with a number of third parties.
Based in Stoke Poges, the company specialises in the distribution of Hitachi mainframe and storage systems.
The deals can be sizeable anything from £100,000 to £10m — and so many of Hitachi's customers opt to finance the investment via leasing.
HDS either arranges finance through its own leasing arm, Hitachi Credit, or uses other companies such as Forward Asset Finance or Standard Chartered.
‘We like to have close working relationships with the leasing companies,’ said Simon Diegan, finance director at HDS.
‘We choose companies that understand our products and who will work with us to provide a financial marketing solution.
After the demise of Atlantic in 1990 people are a lot more sensitive.
They need to know that their interests are being looked after.’
Leasing obviously still has its dedicated followers, but like many other sectors the boom years of the mid-1980s now look a very long way away.
‘Prospects for the immediate future can't be good,’ reflected Andy Thompson, secretary of the Finance & Leasing Association.
‘There are hopeful signs but you have to look very hard.
There is still so much high gearing from the borrowing boom.’
But, the view is that the good times have not gone away for ever.
As Mr Thompson put it: ‘Leasing is too well established.’
We lease rather than buy on hire purchase so we can match the payments on equipment to its lifetime and its earnings.
It is a cash-flow decision
Plant and machinery: Leasing was hauled up 12% to £3bn
LEASE OR BUY?
Many of the UK's quoted companies are using inappropriate techniques to evaluate leases.
It's time to go back to basics
Chee-Seong Tan
Between 1984 and 1991, the volume of leasing in the UK grew from £3.9bn to £12.6bn, at an average rate of 18% a year.
Over the same period, investment financed through leasing increased from 15.4% to 32.9% of total UK investment.
This impressive growth took place despite a significant reduction in capital allowances — which took away some of the benefits of leasing, the introduction of an accounting standard (SSAP 21) requiring lessees to capitalise finance leases and, of course, the longest recession in post-war history.
However, the growth has not been matched by an increase in lessees' sophistication.
Research on UK quoted companies indicates that over half use either a wrong or an inappropriate technique for evaluating leases (‘The Leasing Decision: A Comparison of Theory and Practice’ by Colin Drury and Steven Braund,Accounting and Business Research , Vol 20 No 79, Summer 1990, pp 179–191).
The research found, for example, that of the firms surveyed, 22% incorrectly used the before tax rate as the discount rate, while 14% used the weighted average cost of capital as the discount rate.
It is therefore worth returning to basics.
I shall explain here the lease evaluation techniques that finance directors should normally use when deciding whether to lease or buy.
Financing decisions
Fixed asset investment can be funded from several sources: equity, surplus cash, loans or leasing.
Equity funding tends to be expensive because shareholders bear a relatively high risk that is reflected in the return they expect on their investment.
The availability of surplus cash for financing fixed asset investments tends to be limited, since it is often used to meet working capital requirements.
Therefore, fixed asset investment is normally financed through loans or leasing.
Whether a company acquires an asset through loan or leasing, it is committed to making future cash payments.
Lease evaluation techniques apply discounted cash flow (DCF) principles to compare the economic cost and the benefits of different streams of future cash flow.
The two most commonly used methods are internal rate of return (IRR) and net present value (NPV).
Net present value method
The NPV method compares the net present value cost of leasing with the net present value cost of buying.
The net present values are calculated by discounting streams of future cash flow.
The discount rate differs for taxpaying and non-taxpaying companies.
Non-taxpaying companies.
In the case of non-taxpayers, such as local authorities or companies with current or brought-forward tax losses, the discount rate is simply the rate for a loan with the same maturity period.
So, for example, a five-year lease is discounted using the interest rate for a five-year loan.
Consider the following case:
As the interest rate on the loan is the same as the discount rate, the net present value cost of buying the asset through borrowing is £10,000.
Capital allowances are irrelevant since the company is a non-taxpaying entity.
The net present value cost of leasing is calculated as follows:
In this example, leasing results in cost savings with a present value of £143 (£10,000 — £9,857).
Taxpaying companies .
A taxpayer making a lease or buy decision needs to determine the after-tax cash flow of each option and evaluate the cash flow using the after-tax discount rate.
The tax deductibility of interest expense reduces the cost of borrowing, and the after-tax discount rate is therefore less than the gross discount rate.
After-tax discount rates also take account of the delay before the cash flow benefit arising from tax deductions occurs.
The complex relationship between the gross discount rate (D g ) and after-tax discount rate (D at ) may be approximated as: Where: T = corporate tax rate, y = delay (in years) before the cash flow benefit arising from tax deductions occurs.
If the year end, loan interest rate and start date are the same as in the previous example, and assuming that the rate is 33% and the cash flow benefit arising from tax deductions occurs 21 months after interest payment, D at is 9.712%.
D at may be estimated by substituting D at on the right-hand side of the expression with (D g * T).
For finance leases entered into after 11 April 1991, the Inland Revenue's statement of practice SP3/91 grants lessees tax deductions on the finance charges in the lease (calculated in accordance with SSAP 21) and on the accounting depreciation charge on the asset (calculated using generally accepted principles).
For the example above, the tax deduction is calculated as follows:
For finance leases entered into on or before 11 April 1991 and all operating leases, lessees are entitled to tax deductions on rentals calculated on the normal accrual basis.
A portion of rentals on leased cars costing in excess of £12,000 is disallowed for tax purposes.
Using the NPV method a taxpaying company would evaluate the two alternative methods of financing as shown in the panel.
The present value cost of the loan is calculated by discounting the cash flow, which consists of capital repayments, gross interest costs and the tax benefits available on interest expense.
The cash flow is discounted using the after-tax discount rate, and the present value cost of the loan is therefore £10,000.
So, in the example in the panel, the present value cost of leasing is £113 less than that of buying with a loan (£7,653 — £7,540).
For simplicity, the example assumes that the company scraps the asset in 1996 and receives a balancing allowance equal to the tax written-down value.
In reality, the asset would form part of the ‘general pool’ of plant and machinery and the tax benefit of the balancing allowance would not be realised as early as in the example.
In reality, then, the PV cost of buying would be even higher.
Some of the parameters of the NPV technique cannot be determined with certainty.
These include future interest rates, variable lease payments, the company's tax position and so on.
Consequently, the effect of changes in the parameters on the NPV calculation should be determined before a decision on financing is made.
Before addressing the question of lease or buy, the NPV method can also be used to evaluate and rank alternative lease proposals.
Internal rate of return method
The IRR of a stream of future cash flow is the discount rate which, when applied to the cash flow, results in a net present value of zero.
Using the above example of a non-taxpaying lessee, the IRR is calculated as follows:
The IRR of leasing is 12.57%, while the cost of borrowing is 13.5%.
Leasing is therefore the more cost-effective financing option.
The IRR is expressed as an interest rate and is therefore easier to understand than the NPV.
However, it suffers from several disadvantages.
Certain cash flows may give rise to multiple IRRs or no solution at all.
More seriously, its calculation assumes that surplus cash can be invested to yield a return equal to the IRR, which may not be realistic.
The IRR method cannot therefore be relied on for ranking different lease proposals.
Qualitative considerations
Qualitative as well as quantitative factors come into play in the lease or buy decision.
Important qualitative considerations include:
Interest rate differentials.
The interest rates offered to large lessors seeking funding for assets may be less than those offered to small companies.
If the lower cost of funding is reflected in lease payments, leasing can be more attractive for small companies.
Operating leases.
There is a general perception that operating leases, where leased assets are not capitalised by the lessee, reduce borrowing capacity to a lesser extent than bank borrowing.
It is also worth noting that an operating lease transfers the risk of obsolescence from the lessee to the lessor.
So lessees can generally expect the rental on operating leases to be higher than finance leases.
Timing of tax cash flow.
Capital allowances reduce a company's tax liability and thus improve its after-tax cash flow.
To achieve a lower after-tax cash flow as early as possible, lessors normally set up leasing subsidiaries with different year ends.
Using these structures, lessors can take advantage of the timing benefit, which may then be shared with the lessee through lower rentals.
For this reason, lease rates may be more attractive than loan rates.
Services and discounts.
Lessees may benefit from other services provided by lessors, particularly from ‘captive’ lessors (ie leasing subsidiaries of manufacturers).
These might include residual value insurance, up-grade options and so on.
Additionally, economies of scale allow lessors to acquire assets from manufacturers at discounts that are more favourable than those negotiated by individual companies.
This discount is shared with the lessee through lower rentals.
Ease and flexibility.
Leasing provides 100% asset finance, which can be arranged with greater ease than term loans, which require security, loan covenants or guarantees.
Ownership and grants.
A lessee does not have legal title to a leased asset.
If an asset is repossessed by the lessor in the event of a default on the lease payments, the lessee is not entitled to any equity in the leased asset.
More seriously, leasing may lead to the lessee's loss of entitlement to grants and incentives.
This can be a significant amount, which may offset many of the advantages of leasing.
Any capital expenditure decision must begin with an appraisal of the investment benefits.
This is followed by an assessment of the alternative means of funding.
For choosing between leasing and buying, the NPV and IRR methods can be used to evaluate cost-effectiveness.
And the quantitative differences between means of funding are just as important as the qualitative differences.
personal finance: investing in the EC
OVER THERE AND OVERPRICED?
The boom in buying second homes in Europe has ended for the time being— the buyers won't be back until the UK economy recovers
Robin Dunham
In the prosperous 1980s many individuals found they were able to consider buying a second home in Europe, perhaps at first for holidays but later with retirement in view.
The aim was to enjoy a favourite part of the world — often with a better climate — and also, eventually, to make a capital profit.
The prolonged UK recession has reduced the numbers able to contemplate buying a home overseas; indeed, some of those with properties in Europe are now trying to sell, to reduce their borrowings.
On top of this the economies of the most popular European destinations — France, Italy, Portugal and Spain — have also become depressed.
Another factor adding to the uncertainty is the UK's suspension from the ERM, which has awakened fears of further currency upheavals and made many European properties more expensive in sterling terms.
For readers still able to afford a second home in Europe the most sensible advice is: don't rush; carefully study the conditions in the area chosen; and obtain proper advice.
‘It is easy to have the wool pulled over your eyes if you don't know the ropes or don't have someone reliable to operate for you,’ a contented owner of property in Portugal told me.
Also, you need to be sure that your second home is reasonably accessible and that the cost does not overburden you.
Martin Scannell of De Pinna, Scorers & John Venn (071–409 3188) said that in the late 1980s it was fashionable for UK citizens to buy property in France.
But activity is now greatly reduced, especially as the local market is in a poor state, although not quite as dire as in the UK.
In the north of France a number of UK owners are trying to get rid of homes, but this is not easy; they are often the type of property not popular with the French.
Fortunately for owners of French homes, the pound's devaluation has added some 10% to 15% to their value in sterling terms.
According to Mr Scannell, there always have been people in the UK interested in buying property in France; some existing owners, including accountants, commute to work in the UK every week.
France can offer a wide range of possibilities: skiing in the Alps, the glamour of the south of France for the wealthy, or the appeal of the Dordogne to writers, actors and others.
Mr Scannell warns that if you own French property you must plan ahead for inheritance — under French law your children will have first crack at the property.
On a more optimistic note,French Property News (081–942 0301) reports that the economic gloom failed to prevent nearly 7,000 visitors attending its exhibition held in London in September.
The fifth French Property News exhibition will be held at the Novotel, Hammersmith on 29 to 31 January 1993 — admission is free.
According to Miles Barber of Barbers Estate Agents (071–381 0112), the level of enquiries about French property remains relatively high, although the number of transactions has fallen sharply since the peak of 1989.
However, Mr Barber reports that the number of people planning to retire to a home in France now accounts for some 50% of enquiries.
Often, their problem is selling their UK homes.
The prices of French properties have dropped by 20% to 30% from their peak, but the appreciation of the franc against the pound has added 10% plus to French prices in sterling terms.
If the seller of the French property is from the UK, then the buyer can arrange for the transaction to be in sterling, says Mr Barber.
The only proviso is that the French notaire's fees must be paid in francs.
‘France is definitely the most popular country for those who want to buy,’ adds Mr Barber, ‘but the exchange rate is a danger.’
The Italian market (Tuscany is the most popular region) is much quieter, as it is difficult to obtain permission to build new properties or to alter old ones.
Prices have not fallen back much and can be as much as three times an equivalent property in France.
‘A cottage that costs £50,000 in the Dordogne will sell for £150,000 in Tuscany,’ says Mr Barber.
Housman Overseas (0702 206281) says that UK buyers are absent both in Portugal and Spain because of the harsh UK economic climate and the imposition of high UK interest rates four years ago.
In Portugal the main buyers of second homes were the British and Germans, who are both now suffering from recessions.
Housmans considers that building a property in Portugal is in many cases cheaper than buying one.
In Spain, Housman Overseas is no longer active in the Costa del Sol, although it is still dealing with the Costa Blanca.
SunWest (0454 418888), which specialises in properties at Nerja, west of Malaga, says demand is still firm.
Because some owners are selling properties, there are bargains to be had for those with cash.
SunWest's latest lists contain details of attractive offers: ‘A detached villa in Tropicana, which was originally £72,000, is now slashed from £67,500 to £55,000.’
Most of the properties SunWest is offering are priced in sterling, so the currency fluctuations have not had an impact.
But new developments will be priced in pesetas.
The leading UK daily newspapers regularly include details of overseas properties for sale.
For example, an advertisement by Trafalgar House Europe (0483 771203) featured villas with pools at the exclusive cliff-top location of Rocha Brava in the Algarve; a four-day inspection trip for £125 a person can be arranged.
Bovis Abroad (0800 252235) is offering studios from £75,000 and villas from £185,000 at Quinta do Lago, Algarve —‘Portugal's top golfing and leisure resort’.
Here, three-day inspection visits cost £200 a person.
Useful guides are Your Home in France, Your Home in Italy, Your Home in Portugal and Your Home in Spain published by Longman as part of the Allied Dunbar Money Guides series.
Marbella: UK buyers are now notably absent from Spain
YOUR MONEY IN EUROPEAN BONDS Currency uncertainties have made it harder to invest in European bonds
Robin Dunham
When all 12 EC countries were ostensibly progressing towards European monetary and political union, investors bought the higher yield bonds issued by countries such as Portugal, Spain and Italy on the assumption that eventually these yields would narrow to equal those obtainable from German government bonds.
Turbulence in the Exchange Rate Mechanism led to the suspension of sterling, a 7% devaluation in the Italian lira — also still suspended — a 5% devaluation of the Spanish peseta, and pressure on the French franc, Spanish peseta, Irish punt and Portuguese escudo.
These dramatic events have had an impact on European bond markets.
German bonds and those of countries closely allied to the Deutschmark, such as the Netherlands and Belgium, have strengthened.
The bond markets of countries with weaker currencies, such as Spain and Italy, have shown substantial falls.
A key question is the position of France.
Economically, because of its low annual rate of inflation — 2.9% — and good trade figures, the franc fort policy should succeed in resisting the currency speculators.
If so, French bond yields will deservedly move closer to Germany's.
But the speculators have tasted blood and could yet force a devaluation of the franc.
A key reason for the upheavals in the foreign exchange markets is the disparity between the short-term interest rates ruling in the US and the much higher ones obtainable in Germany, where the Bundesbank is battling to slow the growth of money supply and curb inflation following the higher than expected costs of reunification.
At a time of few exchange controls, vast sums of money can be freely moved around by companies, investment managers and individuals to obtain the best return and seek the safest protection of capital.
The high interest rates ruling in Europe, and the generally low rates of inflation, make bonds attractive, especially if the Bundesbank decides to cut interest rates further.
Nevertheless, because of the greater uncertainties in the foreign exchange markets, more attention needs to be paid to currency risk.
Kleinwort Benson Securities, in considering an international bond asset allocation, weights Europe as neutral.
‘Sentiment seems to be swinging in favour of these markets, but we remain cautious.
We believe that German unification will prove more troublesome than anyone has been expecting, keeping interest and exchange rates higher than expected.
The Bundesbank will be very reluctant to sound the all-clear on inflation if that proves to be the case.’
Midland Montagu sees nervous investors exhibiting a preference for their home markets because of the current uncertainty.
‘Non-German bond yields are unlikely to be able to undercut their DM counterpart, and with plenty of supply on the way, the floor will not come down too quickly.’
Guinness Flight thinks that the enforced realignments within the ERM will accelerate a fall in interest rates and a rise in bond markets in Europe.
Germany faces the greatest economic, financial and political problems, according to this fund manager.
‘We therefore feel it prudent to hold a spread of European bonds, including the higher yielding bonds, where after the Danish rejection of Maastricht, most of the interest rate convergence of the last two years had already been reversed and the fall in bond prices this year discounted part of the currency high which has crystallised.’
For many personal investors the direct purchase of European government bonds will be too daunting a task because of the complexities of the individual markets, the costs of dealing and settlement and the high minimum sums necessary to make such investment worthwhile.
There are a number of international fixed interest unit trusts available, although they do not necessarily specialise entirely in European bonds.
Money Management lists the best performers over one year, with £1,000 invested, as: MGM International Bond (phone 0903 204631) £1,043; Mercury Global Bond (071–280 2060) £1,037; Britannia Life Global Bond (041–332 3132) £1,036; Invesco International Bond (071–626 3434) £1,035; City Financial Beckman International Capital (071–407 5966) £1,029; Gartmore International Fixed Interest (071–782 2000) £1,029; and Guinness Flight Emu Trust (071–522 2129) £1,027.
At 1 October 1992, Baring Global Trust had 20% of its portfolio in European bonds, 7% in UK bonds and 63% in US bonds.
Mercury Global Bond Fund had an initial portfolio of 50% European bonds.
One criticism of the bond funds is the relatively high level of charges; Guinness Flight has cut its charges on all bond unit trusts.
Stockbrokers Henderson Crosthwaite recommend as bond funds Baring Global Bond, Mercury Global Bond and Schroder European Bond (offshore).
Besides the UK bond funds there are a number of offshore funds available including funds, such as Schroder European Bond (071–382 6000), that specialise in European bonds.
At 30 June 1992 this fund had, by currency, 21.3% of the portfolio in Danish krone, 18% French franc, 11% Ecu, 10% Belgian franc, 8% Dutch florin, 8% Spanish peseta, 7% Swedish krona, 6% Finnish markka, 5% Italian lira, 2% Norwegian krone and 2% Portuguese escudo.
Charges are 3% initial and 0.5% annual; minimum investment is $2,000.
Over one year Money Management lists best performing bond funds, with £1,000 invested, as GAM Bond Interest (071–493 9990) £1,198; Mercury Select DM Global Bond (071–280 2060) £1,188; Rorento (010 3110 2241 224) £1,161; Fidelity European Bond (0800 414161) £1,151; Fleming Flagship International Bond (071–382 8015) £1,145; and Hypo F & C Reserve Asset DM Bond (071–628 8000) £1,135.
EUROWIDE EQUITIES As Europe inches towards monetary union and trading barriers are lifted, the European stockmarkets are becoming increasingly significant for UK investors
Flavia Hawksley
Before the crash of October 1987, the total market capitalisation of UK listed equities exceeded that of all the other European markets put together.
Now it stands at around 40%.
In the past two or three years investing in Europe has grown significantly, and there are moves to make dealing on European exchanges easier.
The European Federation of Stock Exchanges is currently working on a project called Eurolist, which aims to have the biggest companies (those with market capitalisation of over Ecu 1bn and annual market turnover of Ecu 250m annually) listed on a minimum of six European stock exchanges.
All listed companies will be subject to identical financial reporting requirements and other listing conditions.
While the criteria apply to around 260 companies throughout Europe, Jeffrey Knight, special adviser to the Federation, says that it hopes to start the Eurolist early next year with a few major companies and then expand it rapidly.
This will not necessarily, however, make investing in Europe any cheaper.
At present it is expensive for most private investors.
As a general guideline it would not be worthwhile for people with less than an absolute minimum of £5,000 to invest per stock.
And then, unless they had sufficient funds to buy several stocks, they might not be spreading their investment sufficiently.
The cost is considerable, as stockbrokers generally charge higher commissions on deals in European equities.
In addition, individual investors face the extra paperwork of dealing in such shares and the cost of banks etc converting the dividends into sterling and holding the certificates.
So the best way in for most private individuals is through insurance funds, investment trusts or unit trusts.
There are an increasing number of trusts concentrating either solely or mainly on European equities.
And since the Budget revision of PEP rules, investors can now place their full £6,000 PEP contribution in a trust which has at least half the portfolio in UK and EC equities, and so benefit from the tax concessions.
Furthermore, many trusts now enable people to invest regularly either through savings schemes or lump sums.
Some trusts, such as the Invesco French Growth, specialise in one country alone.
Others have a spread of European countries, including Eastern Europe.
They appeal more to those who want to spread their investments over several EC countries.
They are also more flexible, as the trust managers can switch investments to the better performing markets.
To find out which to go for, independent financial advisers and stockbrokers are able to advise on trusts specialising and succeeding in particular areas.
Alternatively,Money Management lists all the investment and unit trusts and gives details of the top performers in each category.
The top performing European unit trusts (£1,000 invested) over the past five years, according to Money Management , are Fidelity European £1,427, Baring European Growth £1,411, Merlin Jupiter European £1,318, Scottish Widows Europe £1,305, Lazard European Growth £1,280, Henderson European Income £1,265.
However, many trusts have been running for less than five years.
Invesco French Growth which, as the name suggests, invests solely in France, was the top performer over one year and has clearly benefited from more favourable market conditions in France compared with most of the other European countries.
According to Rory Powe, fund manager for Invesco (071–626 3434), France has a lot of plus points despite economic difficulties throughout Europe.
‘France has done well with reasonable earnings growth, improved productivity, rationalisation, better management, low inflation, low wage awards and strong export performance.’
But he adds: ‘We would expect the French economy to remain relatively weak for at least the next year because its main trading partner, Germany, is itself entering what is likely to be quite a painful economic slowdown, brought about by the very high interest rates.’
Because of the uncertainties ahead, which are likely to cause more difficulties for smaller companies, the bulk of the trust's portfolio is, at present, mainly in the larger blue chip companies.
Most of the general European unit trusts spread their investments over several countries with the largest slice usually in France, Germany, Switzerland and the Netherlands.
Eastern Europe does not yet feature strongly in the trusts' portfolios and according to Amanda Davidson, a partner in independent financial advisers Holden Meehan (071–354 2020), it must only be viewed as a very long-term investment.
‘Anyone investing in eastern Europe should realise that it's going to be very long-term, 10, 15 or even 20 years,’ she says.
There are a number of specialist vehicles concentrating on eastern Europe, but they are mainly of interest to institutions.
While unit trusts traditionally have higher costs than investment trusts, they can be more stable in a turbulent market as the selling price is related to the net asset value.
In defence of the charges, David Moffat, fund manager of Eagle Star European (071–929 1111), agrees that unit trusts are more expensive to buy but argues that with investment trusts there are dealing charges on purchase and sale, and that it is better to pay a percentage at the beginning when the fund is worth less than on redemption when, hopefully, it should be worth substantially more!
For those who prefer the idea of an investment trust there is, again, considerable choice.
The top European performers over the past year (£1,000 invested) are: ECU Trust £1,126, Paribas French Investment Trust £1,006, Second Market Investment £1,087, European Project £974, Jupiter Europe £943, Hungarian Investment £926, Gartmore European £909, Foreign & Colonial Eurotrust £902.
Again, many European trusts have only short performance records.
While there is little sign of recovery from recession in Europe, investors may wish to be cautious.
But for longer-term investors there could be considerable growth.
‘The 90s are potentially very exciting for Europe,’ says David Curling, head of investment management for stockbrokers Williams de Broe (071–588 7511).
If investors get in now while the markets are low they could do well.
Since the Budget revision of PEP rules, investors can now place their full £6,000 PEP contribution in a trust which has at least half the portfolio in UK and EC equities
health
NEVER TOO LATE TO STOP SMOKING The average cigarette shortens life by seven minutes, and smoking takes six years off the average life.
But some of the risks start to disappear just three days after giving up
Dr Trisha Greenhalgh
It was like telling someone they had just lost at Russian roulette.
She was 41, professional, with a two year old son.
The tests showed that she had inoperable lung cancer.
She had known the risks that the average cigarette shortens life by seven minutes, and smoking takes six years off the average life.
She had decided that six years was a price worth paying.
She had not considered, or had chosen to ignore, the possibility that her luck would be worse than average.
Between half and two-thirds of smokers die of something other than smoking.
Half the remainder die in old age, losing about eight years of life.
But smoking kills a fifth of all smokers in middle age, 25 years before the end of their expected lifespan.
Death in old age is usually due to heart disease; smoking is one of a dozen or more interacting risk factors that accelerate the age-related decay in the heart and arteries.
Premature death from heart disease outweighs all other causes of smoking-related death put together.
But in terms of years of potential life lost, the biggest killer is lung cancer, which usually strikes in middle age.
Various components of tobacco smoke (tar, benzene, benzopyrene, formaldehyde, hydrogen cyanide, and some 60 other known or suspected carcinogens) act as cancer initiators.
An initiator transforms a normal cell into the seed of a growing cancer; it is a necessary but not sufficient factor for malignant change.
The development of overt lung cancer depends on a second chemical insult (the promoter), a chance event that may occur 20 to 40 years later, or not at all.
My granddad, who smoked like a chimney and lived to 97, was lucky enough never to encounter a promoter.
He also managed to avoid asthma, bronchitis, emphysema, thrombosis, and cancer of the bladder, kidneys, mouth, throat, and oesophagus.
But then he also once dodged a bolt of lightning.
There is no doubt that smoking injures others apart from the smoker.
Women smokers have a higher incidence of miscarriage and premature labour; their infants have higher perinatal mortality, slower physical and mental development and twice the risk of cot death after other factors (such as social class) have been accounted for.
An Australian woman recently won substantial compensation from her employer for irreversible lung damage brought on by her colleagues' cigarette smoke at work.
Soon after the verdict, lawyers confident of a similar outcome in the British courts advertised for people willing to be test cases here.
A recent scientific review states that: ‘On the basis of a large body of research, it can now be stated that passive smoking causes lung cancer in non-smokers and serious respiratory illness in babies…
The risks of passive smoking are greater than those posed by any other indoor man-made pollutant…‘
An overwhelming majority, 90%, of non-smokers want smoke-free zones at work and in public places, and the majority of smokers support the notion in principle.
From January 1993, an EC directive will require all new workplaces to have separate rest rooms for smokers and non-smokers (or, alternatively, a total ban on smoking).
Existing workplaces will have three years to implement the changes.
The Institute of Personnel Management has produced guidelines for introducing a smoking policy at work.
These include open discussion with all staff before drawing up the policy, three months’ advance warning of proposed changes, and a working party made up of both smokers and non-smokers to seek out and respond to the staff's views.
In general, smokers do not want to be patronised with compulsory anti-smoking meetings during working hours, or ‘ghettoised’ in cramped and dirty ‘sin bins’at the ends of disused corridors.
The smoking minority should be entitled to choose whether and when they will give up smoking and to take short smoking breaks during work time.
If you've smoked 30 a day for 20 years, is it worth giving up?
Yes.
The increased risk of thrombosis disappears only 72 hours after the last cigarette.
The risk of heart disease halves after one year, and that of lung cancer falls gradually over 10 years.
Cigarettes are as addictive as heroin.
The addictive agent is nicotine, which calms the nerves, relaxes the muscles and attenuates the appetite.
Withdrawal from nicotine brings back with a vengeance the symptoms that the cigarettes were probably introduced to tackle: bad temper, poor concentration, and craving for sweet foods.
If you use cigarettes to help you cope with pressure or to stay slim, you are probably particularly dependent on nicotine.
Surprisingly, nicotine itself is not very harmful.
It does not cause cancer, heart disease, asthma or bronchitis, but until recently it could only be ingested along with several hundred non-addictive, non-soothing but highly toxic chemicals.
Alternative vehicles for getting nicotine into the bloodstream skin patches, chewing gum and a recently-developed nasal spray — triple your chances of successfully kicking the smoking habit.
Relaxation classes, acupuncture and hypnosis are other ways of emulating the nicotine high; statistically, they are less likely to work than the real thing.
In its white paper,The Health of the Nation , the Government identified smoking as a priority target for disease prevention.
But health policy is often prostituted to the demands of industry and commerce.
The Government's opposition to the proposed EC ban on tobacco advertising, and the common agricultural policy (in which heavily-subsidised high-tar tobacco is produced for export to the Third World), are nonsensical in health terms.
Governments, it seems, have yet to learn a fact that most smokers readily acknowledge: the tobacco industry has got them precisely where it wants them.
Lighting up: As addictive as heroin
consolidation
CONSOLIDATION: THE SOFT OPTION Collecting and consolidating financial information from diverse and geographically remote subsidiaries has never been easy.
But it has never been easier than it is now
Lesley Meall
In the dim and distant past consolidating multicompany accounts meant shuffling and shifting a great many pieces of paper.
For many companies, it still does.
In a survey of 450 top UK companies last year, Touche Ross discovered that although the efficiency of financial consolidation is of key importance to senior management, few finance departments have any objective measure of their performance and know whether they are using the right tools.
The survey (Survey of Financial Consolidation Systems 1991 ) revealed that organisations can speed up the collection of financial data from their subsidiaries by up to 44% using automatic data capture techniques.
Of course, many companies have already discovered the advantages.
The spreadsheet has long offered a flexible and relatively speedy means of handling consolidation.
Although it remains a popular option, for many organisations it is not without problems.
But there are alternative approaches and these are gaining popularity.
Consolidation needs can be met within an increasing number of ledger systems (see suppliers panel), or when a variety of ledger systems are in use, with the aid of dedicated consolidation packages or EIS-type products.
Mark Warner Travel offers holidays to destinations throughout the Mediterranean ‘club’ type packages including elements as diverse as accommodation, food and the cost of participating in organised sports.
The organisation is about to move away from the combined paper-based and spreadsheet systems it has been using to produce its statutory and management accounts.
‘Although we consolidate using spreadsheets at the moment, we find that it is quite a lot of hard work,’ says finance director Mark Nabakov.
With the exception of France, where Mark Warner Travel has a French subsidiary, the clubs are really branches.
So there aren't a great many local statutory reporting requirements to meet.
But the organisation does have fairly complex cross-company consolidation requirements.
‘Each club is treated as a profit centre,’ Mr Nabakov explains.
‘We pull certain costs from one separate legal entity and merge them with separate costs from another legal entity.
Some of the costs are met by head office — it gets all of the revenue because we sell in this country — but in the case of France where we have a separate legal entity, what we're after is contribution statements by unit of accommodation for the UK revenues, and one or two other costs with those French locally incurred expenses.
We do this for every club that we have.
These comprise about 30 units of accommodation, and we have to regard each of these as a profit centre.’
At the moment the local offices are maintaining ‘glorified Kalamazoo’ systems.
Manual returns are sent to head office, and data for consolidation entered into Microsoft Excel to produce management accounts.
It's not the most efficient of systems, so Mr Nabakov has been considering a move over to a suitable ledger system for quite some time, and is in the process of introducing Platinum, a US package recently released in Britain (see suppliers panel).
During the holiday season the head office reports on the clubs on a weekly basis, which means it needs 52 reporting periods.
And it was a problem finding a ledger system which could meet this need as well as Excel, as Mr Nabakov explains: ‘Typically, many of the accounting systems are unable to handle this, and only offer 12 or 13 reporting periods.
Platinum was one of the few I came across that allowed you to have any more.’
At the moment the organisation's French accounting is done through a bureau, and as Mr Nabakov observes, ‘there is some duplication.
We have to have returns to us at head office and to our French computer bureau, then we have to do the reconciliation between our bureau result and our Excel result.
The bureau cannot operate quickly enough to give us anything approaching a real-time set of accounts.
Platinum will enable us to eliminate the use of the bureau, and get all of the information at head office on line as we go along, saving a lot of time and money’.
Mark Warner Travel is currently running the spreadsheet and ledger systems in parallel, but Mr Nabakov expects Platinum to go live some time this month.
‘We want to prototype the use of Platinum for consolidation etc, during the forthcoming winter season.
We'll iron out any problems we have, and ideally aim to implement the summer clubs with their own computer systems around about late May.’
It's not uncommon for ledgers boasting multicompany features to provide only for the consolidation of different company accounts when they all use a common chart of accounts.
A business consisting of a group of diverse subsidiary companies may not find this adequate, where one or more subsidiaries demand a different chart of accounts.
And although this could have been a problem with Platinum, Mr Nabakov feels he has found an acceptable way around it.
‘There is just one chart of accounts, but I cheat.
With the report writer you are totally free to use your own narrative for the row description — sales, gas, electricity, whatever.
Within that you can then write what may be a third party account number.
For example, in France, we have to comply with the French plan comptable , so within a particular row you state the origin of the information, that is , which nominal ledger account you want to get it from — we have a fairly simple account code structure with cost centre account codes — then you say the club name and its account number.
You don't have to declare the storage account in use, you can make it anything you want it to be, and you can mix and match your own rows to present them in any order.’
Mr Nabakov felt that the ledger system had to be flexible enough to meet both present and future needs.
And although Platinum has, like the spreadsheet solution that preceded it, some limitations, he sees it as a good basis for future developments.
Other methods of meeting the organisation's needs were considered, but Mr Nabakov knew what he was looking for: ‘I wanted a nuts and bolts accounting system, like Platinum, and it is also highly flexible.
You can add the EIS-type product Forest and Trees on top of it.
I think it's on a par with EIS systems like Pilot (see panel), and we will use it, in due course, to handle exception reporting and that sort of thing.
So, whichever way we bob and weave, I'll be able to re-jig the data or reporting structures to come up with a new geographical analysis or responsibility centre, whatever way we want to report.’
Although the ledger solution, where available, is fine, for many small to medium-sized businesses it's obviously not the best option within an organisation that is already using a variety of ledgers.
Spreadsheets and general ledger systems alone cannot accommodate the information needs of all managers and executives.
There are a number of dedicated packages on the market such as Micro Control from IMRS.
This was a pioneering product when it first hit the market back in 1982.
It provided corporates with a fast and easy-to-use PC network-based solution to the problem of obtaining and reporting on financial information from their domestic and international subsidiaries.
It has come a long way in the last decade.
Its integrated database maintains all of a company's reporting data, financial and statistical, and although 95% of IMRS customers have electronic data transfer, Micro Control features a familiar spreadsheet-type user interface as a catch-all.
It's the sort of solution popular within large organisations, where there's a need to consolidate information from a wide range of sources; Andersens, BP, Compaq and Microsoft are examples.
‘There are probably very few general ledgers in the world that aren't accessing Micro Control,’ claims sales manager Ian Henderson.
‘We have 950 customers around the world, and even within one individual customer a variety of ledger systems are in use; BP for example.
We are offering an enterprise-wide solution, so the product needs to be able to access a variety of ledgers.
‘Well over half of the clients that approach IMRS for consolidation software are currently using spreadsheets, and have discovered that there are all sorts of horrendous problems associated with using them for consolidation.
Which is why they're having to look again.
That's almost exactly the scenario Lotus found itself in.’
The Lotus Corporation uses Micro Control for consolidation, worldwide.
‘Its view was, that while Lotus 1-2-3 is the business when it comes to reporting, it preferred to use Micro Control for its consolidation,’ says Mr Henderson.
Midland Bank, another Micro Control user, is only now migrating away from mainframe applications.
Until recently, the Midland had a very large IBM mainframe-based modelling application for consolidation.
Earlier this year the bank replaced this system with Micro Control in a lightning changeover: ‘The mainframe was inflexible, so the bank already had a PC database set up for all its rules.’
Because of this, as Mr Henderson explains: ‘It was able to use the output from that to build its Micro Control application in two days and completely circumvent the need for the mainframe.’
And the Midland system now has users in the UK, Hong Kong and Shanghai.
Esselte Dymo also decided to replace its spreadsheet-based consolidation system with a dedicated product.
The division supplies office equipment in about 20 countries, and with sales in excess of 4bn Swedish krona, is the largest division of the Swedish multinational.
Until recently, the division used Lotus 1-2-3 to handle its consolidation: ‘It was extremely flexible and reasonably quick, but it was very difficult to maintain and highly reliant on one person.’
That person is Paul Johnson, divisional controller at Esselte Dymo: ‘The spreadsheet approach tends to result in the development of different spreadsheets for different things.
And if you change one spreadsheet you have to change everything because it isn't automatically changed throughout.
Eventually, you reach a point where it actually becomes unwieldy.’
Dymo decided to change its approach before this became a serious issue.
‘We hadn't quite reached that point,’ says Mr Johnson, ‘but we could see it on the horizon.’
The responsibility for meeting national statutory reporting requirements rests with Dymo's local offices, where reports are prepared with a variety of general ledgers.
So Dymo wanted a product that would enable it to consolidate the ledger output.
The company considered a number of products, eventually opting for Commander FDC from Comshare, a company better known for its Commander EIS product.
FDC was designed to be installed and used by finance people, with little or no support from systems professionals.
Other FDC users include British Aerospace and Meyer International.
Dymo uses FDC for both statutory and management accounts in about 20 countries.
The division hasn't taken a completely structured approach to its use of FDC, and much of the necessary data is still input manually.
All of the sites have FDC in addition to their various ledger packages, but there is no local software link between the two.
So hard copy reports are produced out of the ledgers and then the results are taken and keyed into FDC.
‘It is input twice,’ admits Mr Johnson, ‘in the sense that sales would be at the invoicing stage and then put into FDC at the total stage with the two systems running side by side.
‘There is a facility to download information directly from the general ledger, but because we have a variety of different general ledgers and structures, it is left to the unit to sort it out.’
The divisional head office has offered to help the local offices if they want to take that route.
But to date there have been no takers.
Mr Johnson says: ‘I think they like a little bit of human intervention at the final stage, rather than making it too automated.’
Having been manually entered into FDC locally, the data is transferred to the head office over the telephone line, via a dedicated BT line and Mercury dial-up lines.
So Dymo effectively uses FDC as a data collection device, collecting the data locally, validating it, and putting it in an electronic format for automatic transfer to the head office for consolidation.
In contrast, British Aerospace is using FDC as more of a strategic tool.
In response to defence cutbacks, British Aerospace is stepping up its programme of cost containment, and is trying to align output more closely with what it sees as ‘key’ market needs.
As part of this strategy, senior managers are using FDC to improve and speed up the production of monthly reports.
And reducing the amount of time spent on figures enables them to concentrate on reviewing and forecasting for the group.
The system has also proved valuable in the production of the company's statutory accounts, an area where security was a serious concern.
Because of the risk, many of the figures were previously handwritten in the version signed by the board.
Now, according to group financial controller David Phillipps: ‘All of the statutory accounts can be produced directly from the FDC system without taking risks with confidentiality.’
And, as Mr Phillipps explains, the business benefits are equally impressive: ‘With Commander FDC we can track the performance of our businesses, identify those which are not performing and enquire why.’
Since Comshare is better known for its well-established Commander EIS product, it would be no  surprise to find that many of its corporate FDC users began, like British Aerospace, as EIS users.
But the reverse is true of Esselte Dymo.
‘FDC was the first step’, says Mr Johnson, ‘and now we're using it to feed into the EIS Commander.’
Information Resources, another organisation better known for its EIS-type products, has similarly developed FCRS, another system devoted to consolidation.
Users of Information Resources' FCRS product include Laura Ashley, Reed International and the BOC Group, the 1991 winner of the Stock Exchange and Chartered Accountants award for published accounts.
BOC activities cover a diverse range of industries worldwide: they include electronics, environmental clean-up, food distribution and pharmaceuticals.
The group has a turnover of around £3bn, and with a presence in about 60 countries has fairly complex financial consolidation and reporting requirements.
The group started its search for a consolidation package in early 1991.
‘We needed to find a product that could meet all our current needs with the capability to meet future, unforeseen, developments,’ says group reporting manager Ken Hassan.
‘As we looked at the range of products available, we saw that FCRS offered us the most flexible route as the basic packaged solution that could be easily maintained.’
And although BOC was not an existing pcEXPRESS user, the organisation saw the potential for tailoring and developing, using the underlying pcEXPRESS language.
‘We have about 150 active reporting units, in around 50 locations,’ says Mr Hassan, who is naturally keen to avoid the need for re-keying financial information once captured at source.
All BOC's major operating businesses are now using FCRS, and most of the other sites will be reached soon.
The results are keyed in and validated locally using a ‘cut-down’ version of the reporter module.
BOC has chosen to take away a lot of the available functionality and choices available within FCRS to provide local operators with a completely menu-driven system for quick and simple data input.
All the users then need to do is attach the  relevant file to an electronic cover note before forwarding it to BOC's worldwide HQ in Windlesham, Surrey.
And all inward transmission of data and outward transmission of systems are handled this way.
Naturally, the FCRS system interfaces to BOC's EIS system for on-screen presentation of information to executives.
It is also linked to Lotus, so that information needs can be addressed in different formats.
Although organisations like Comshare and Information Resources have developed software dedicated to handling organisations' consolidation needs, consolidation is an integral part of some of the well known EIS systems, such as EPiC, from Planning Sciences, as Sandy Skinner explains: ‘It's possible to call information in from a variety of diverse sources, and then use the advanced modelling facilities of the system to manipulate information in virtually any way you choose.
And, most importantly, it's very easy to do.’
In fact, however complex a group's structure, and however far-flung its subsidiaries, putting the consolidation together gets easier all the time.
Consolidation is an integral part of some of the well known EIS systems BOC Gases supplies hydrogen, which is a component of the controlled atmosphere in which silicon crystals are grown for microchip manufacture
Spreadsheets and general ledger systems alone cannot accommodate the information needs of all managers and executives
It's not uncommon for ledgers boasting multicompany features to provide only for the consolidation of different company accounts when they all use a common chart of accounts
Istanbul's covered bazaar: Mark Warner Travel has to account for clubs in Turkey and in other resorts throughout the Mediterranean
computer crime
PERSONNEL POWER THE FIGHT AGAINST FRAUD Ensuring that employees do not compromise computer security can be a matter of putting appropriate personnel procedures in place
Barry Spaul, Paul Collier and Emma Grundy
Until recently the issue of human resources in information systems security has been a neglected area.
Even now, most publications on computer abuse, audit and security emphasise the importance of input, output, access, software and processing controls (see ACCOUNTANCY , November, p 56).
However, several authors have suggested that such an approach ignores the facts that people commit fraud, not computers, and that computer security is therefore about controlling people rather than machines.
Personnel security
If the human element is crucial to the execution of computer abuse, it follows that a strong, constructive personnel management policy can provide a very powerful internal control and deterrent.
This policy should include a structured management philosophy covering rules of conduct relating to the employment life cycle from recruitment, through continued education, performance evaluation and promotion, to employment termination.
All employees should be covered.
The most important personnel practices and procedures include the following.
Recruitment procedures
The objective is to identify honest and competent applicants.
To achieve this, appropriate information must be collected about the applicant and then verified.
The method for collecting such information is pre-employment screening, the most important aspects of which are:
The complete job description —to inform potential employees about their duties, and their employment's terms and limitations.
The employment application —when applicants should be questioned in an appropriate way and warned that thorough background and reference checks will be made.
Matching applicants to available jobs —both under- and overqualified employees represent significant risks by being a negative influence on morale (both their own and their co-workers').
Interviews —paying attention to reasons for leaving previous jobs, frequent changes of residence, and job-related medical history.
The applicant should be encouraged to ask questions and express any reservations he or she may have; these may indicate potential future problems.
Verification —if an applicant has successfully completed all the previous stages, now is the time to verify all the information.
Testing —numerous tests to assess basic intelligence, aptitude, attitude, and personality, and to predict delinquent behaviour, exist and are used today as an integral part of pre-employment screening.
Probationary period —applicants hired should work a suitable probationary period, typically between one and six months.
Confidential information
Every company has confidential information and trade secrets.
A written policy should therefore be established that recognises the potential for the abuse and fraudulent use of computerised data, and the appropriate actions to be taken in the event of an employee's breaching the trust placed in him or her.
At a minimum the policy should cover the requirements of the Data Protection Act 1984, but most organisations will want to extend the policy to meet specific situations.
All computer personnel should read, understand and comply with the policy as a condition of employment.
Prompt disciplinary action should follow non-compliance.
Employees should be reminded explicitly of their responsibilities regarding confidential information and, if necessary, printouts of sensitive information should be automatically stamped ‘confidential’ to reinforce this.
Vacation and job rotation policies
These are very important and can be particularly effective in deterring fraud on two counts.
First, they both prevent any one employee from exercising exclusive control over specific functions or applications.
Second, they deter the potential perpetrator.
It is therefore recommended that all employees, particularly those in a data-processing capacity, be required to take at least two consecutive weeks' holiday, ideally including a month-end or quarter-end.
During their absence, any discrepancies must be followed up and accounted for by the replacement or supervisor.
Segregation of duties
Traditionally, the data processing department has been an organisational entity — independent of all the user departments for which it processes information.
Employees within the department should be banned from having authority, responsibilities and duties in any other department.
In addition, for control purposes, the following are examples of functions which should be performed by different individuals: input control, data conversion/entry, job scheduling, applications design, systems programming and program testing.
This then ensures that fraud cannot be committed without the collusion of at least two individuals.
As the number of people involved increases, so does the likelihood of the fraud's detection.
The advent of user-centred computing, automatic transaction generation and distributed networks in many organisations has removed much of the natural segregation of duties which occurred in traditional accounting systems environments.
There is now a need for alternative control mechanisms in this new computing environment, one of which is proper personnel controls.
Channels for addressing grievances
These will arise, whether justified or not, and may lead to resentment on the part of employees if managements fail to deal with the problems quickly.
Procedures should define how employees should voice their grievances, in such a way that they do not jeopardise their position.
How and when management will respond must also be defined.
Common sources of grievances and dissatisfaction are performance evaluations, promotions, extra duties, boredom, personality clashes and poor working conditions.
However, the mere existence of procedures for addressing grievances in no way guarantees that they will be resolved in a manner acceptable to employees.
What must be certain is that their problems will be heard and evaluated.
Personnel review procedures
Some undesirable employees will always slip through the net; and some employees will change over time.
Thus, for personnel practices to be truly effective, employees should be continually observed and periodically rechecked, especially those in sensitive positions such as systems programming.
Supervisors should be trained to be observant and sensitive to the needs, morale and problems of employees subordinate to them, and must be aware of the proper channels through which specific problems may be detected and dealt with.
If they are not handled carefully, dismissal and redundancy are potential security risks.
Management should effect redundancies at one point in time rather than spreading them over a long period.
Whenever possible provision should be made for relocating or retraining dismissed staff, not only because of the personal benefits to those involved, but also because of the effects on the remaining staff's morale.
If the employee is leaving of his or her own accord, the personnel department should be informed and a final performance evaluation prepared.
As a final check the personnel department should hold an exit interview to establish why the employee is leaving.
spreadsheets
SPREADSHEET MODELLING IN PRACTICE Accountants — among the most sophisticated users of spreadsheet models — are also finding new ways to optimise how their organisations manage their use
Alison Classe
Spreadsheet vendors can't be accused of not having their fingers on the pulse of their market.
Networking, output quality, graphical user interfaces and the management of increasingly complex models are issues that preoccupy both vendors and users; the way the product is sold and licensed is also a shared concern.
And although there are large numbers of people happily and effectively working with the same standalone, two-dimensional, text-based products that came free with their PCs several years ago, in the world of corporate computing a little more is needed.
Accountants are among the most sophisticated users of spreadsheet models, so it's no surprise to find them pioneering new products.
Along the way they're also finding new ways to optimise the way their organisations manage the use of spreadsheets.
With spreadsheet products not always well-differentiated in terms of the basic calculations that they can do, considerations such as the quality of printed output carry some weight when one is choosing from the array of packages on offer.
Barry Wise, technical development manager in the office systems group at Stoy Hayward, considers that Lotus 1-2-3 has the edge when it comes to producing professional-looking documentation.
This edge is largely due to its WYSIWYG (what you see is what you get) output capabilities, which ensure that what is sent to the printer corresponds exactly with what is displayed on the screen.
Until recently, the firm was also using SuperCalc 4 and SuperCalc 5.
‘We have had a change of image,’ Mr Wise says, ‘and we now have quality standards for documentation in place.
The image you project in print is important.
When you've got documents that are printed in Times Roman and very nicely formatted in WordPerfect, a spreadsheet printed out in Courier shatters the illusion.
We need reports to use the same font throughout.
‘The fact that you've got ease of highlighting of particular points also makes the spreadsheet much more readable,’ he adds.
‘You can get more information on the page, without making it hard to take in.’
Lotus 1-2-3 is being run on a large local area network at Stoy Hayward's Baker Street offices.
The software resides on four network servers, in two versions, 3.1+ for three dimensional modelling and 2.3 for older PCs which don't have enough power to run the 3D version.
‘Most people will opt by default for version 3.1,’ Mr Wise explains.
‘We're encouraging the type of spreadsheet design where instead of having your profit and loss, cash flow and so on all together on one page, you have page one as an index, page two as the balance sheet, page three as the p&l and so forth.’
Recently, Stoy Hayward merged with Finnie & Co.
The combined forces of the two firms' IT departments boast a strong mixture of computer experience and accounting knowledge, and they're planning to provide standard spreadsheets for use throughout the company.
‘Before, we used to give people the tools and let them get on with the modelling,’ Mr Wise explains.
‘They'd just come back to us to ask how to do this formula or that formula.
Now we have the opportunity to be more proactive, we'll act as a clearing house for standard models from various parts of the company, and will develop our own standard models.
‘A 3D approach is much better for doing that.
With all the macros together on one page, someone doing accounts where they only want some of the standard sheets, can just choose those that are relevant.’
Mr Wise expects that the use of standard templates will save a lot of headaches.
‘We used to find that people picking up a 2D spreadsheet from another audit would spend ages trying to print it out and find out what was in there before they could start work.’
‘Packaged’, ie pre-written, spreadsheet models in use in various parts of Stoy Hayward include one for use in auditing hotel and related businesses, and another for evaluating the savings made by having a company car as opposed to running a private car (see ACCOUNTANCY March, pp 112 and 113).
Besides templates and packaged models, Mr Wise expects to see his section providing users with libraries of standard macros for incorporation into models.
‘We've got five general business groups as well as a number of consultancy areas,’ he says.
‘If they each do their own thing they will repeat things, but if we can bring that all together and have a centralised repository for the work that people have done, it will save having to reinvent the wheel each time.
Even if we can't provide exactly what they want, we can provide ideas they can adjust for their particular model.’
Although Stoy Hayward uses DOS versions of 1-2-3, Mr Wise reports some interest in Windows: ‘It's mainly for ease of use, and for the increased ease of transferring a section of spreadsheet and pasting it into the middle of a document.’
Although Mr Wise regards Windows as being in its fairly early days, he says that the firm is devising a standard configuration for Windows users on the network.
One reservation about Windows concerns licensing problems.
‘With DOS, you have one application open at a time,’ he says.
‘But with Windows you could have Lotus, WordPerfect and Harvard Graphics, for instance, all open at the same time.
This can mean, in effect, that you've got to be licensed for as many copies as you have machines.
I haven't seen a wholly satisfactory solution to that problem yet.’
This problem of licensing network users for more or less constant use of a package like a spreadsheet is one of the factors that has attracted chartered accountants BDO Binder Hamlyn to Borland's Quattro Pro for Windows.
The company has been Beta testing the product for several months and, now that it's launched, is hoping to implement it in the new year.
Borland offers a range of licensing deals, including a corporate licence, enabling the purchaser to license every PC on a WAN relatively cheaply, with no obligation to take more manuals or boxes of diskettes than are required.
Borland's competitors have often tended to adopt a less flexible approach to licensing, making corporate licences available only to those with many thousands of users, as opposed to Binder's 1,000 to 1,500 population.
Site, as opposed to corporate-wide, licences are sometimes available, but might not be as economical for a nationwide-firm with some large and some small offices.
However, the main arguments for Quattro Pro for Windows relate to the functions it offers.
Binder's national information systems director Ian Searle says: ‘Certain features really make the product stand out, in particular the concept of filing spreadsheets together in notebooks.’
Other spreadsheets have 3D, of course, but the notebook concept is the most elegant that Mr Searle has seen.
He adds that the graphics capabilities allow the operation of a slideshow without the need to buy a specialist presentation graphics package.
This straightforward facility means that you can revise, or indeed build, your presentation at the last minute — particularly if you opt for on-screen presentations, rather than foils produced by colour plotters — yet still get professional results.
Mr Searle also likes Quattro Pro for Windows' object inspectors: dialogue boxes appear at the click of a mouse button to lead you step by step through all the options available in a particular context; you don't have to select umpteen menu options.
Another argument for Quattro Pro is that it offers products in both the DOS and Windows worlds.
The fact that the two products are being marketed together in one box gives extra flexibility from the point of view of a company like BDO Binder Hamlyn, not all of whose PCs are currently powerful enough to run Windows.
Spreadsheet models are so useful that they have a tendency to outgrow the capabilities of the software that has been used to implement them.
When Carello Lighting ran into this problem, it looked to Ambit Research's Ark modelling package to reduce the size of the data and increase the function of the model at one fell swoop, while retaining the ability to produce spreadsheet-like outputs.
Carello Lighting manufactures and sells lamps for the automotive industry, such as headlamps, rear lamps and indicators.
There are around 200 types of lamp subdivided into an average of 15 models.
Forecasts for sales and overheads previously ran on Lotus 1-2-3, explains general accounting manager Andy Round.
‘We have to output the data in three different ways: by customer, by lamp type and by group, such as Ford or Rover.
For the sales model, for instance, we used to have three 3-megabyte files, each one giving us one type of output.
We'd have to put the data into the customer model, run those calculations, then rearrange the data for lamp type, and then for group.
That meant we had treble the amount of data we really needed.’
The sales forecasts amounted to 9 megabytes on Lotus, but now under Ark the amount of data has been reduced to 6 megabytes, and the number of presentation styles has increased by a factor of about four to between 10 and 12.
Ark holds each data item only once, on a database from which spreadsheet-like screens or printed outputs are generated.
So there is less data to store, less work involved in producing the different presentations of it, and of course less scope for error.
Another plus-point of Ark is that you don't have to duplicate formulae on each row of data.
With a traditional spreadsheet, if you've got 5,000 product types, and you want to perform the same calculation on each — for instance subtract the costs from the sale price — you have to duplicate the formula 5,000 times.
With Ark, explains Mr Round, you only have to hold it once.
‘And when you change the formula you know you've changed it for every single product.’
Putting data into a spreadsheet is simplicity itself, but remembering where that data came from is another matter.
Ark offers the ability to ‘drill down’ to where a particular item of data came from.
‘If you're just going to print a final output, and you see a number on it that looks odd, you can just hit F7 and go back to where it's generated, even if you have got to go through several worksheets.
On the way back you can see if something's gone wrong.’
Lotus 1-2-3 continues in use at Carello alongside Ark.
‘Most of the people around the business know how to use Lotus, so we use it for the majority of our day-to-day work, the smaller and the one-off jobs.
But for large data manipulation exercises we have to use Ark,’ says Mr Round.
Lotus is also used for creating quality printed output; its WYSIWYG capabilities enable it to produce better prints than the current version of Ark, so Carello exports the data to Lotus prior to printing.
Improvements to Ark printing are in the offing, Mr Round believes, as are facilities for transferring data into Ark, which will allow data to be loaded automatically from the firm's AS/400 database without rekeying.
What with the addition of new capabilities to spreadsheets, and the advent of products which push back the frontiers of the electronic spreadsheet concept, it's becoming a little difficult to draw a line between spreadsheet products and more elaborate financial modelling environments.
In a few years' time, it may no longer be meaningful to do so, though it's a safe bet that the spreadsheet will always be with us as a presentation style.
It's becoming difficult to draw a line between spreadsheet products and more elaborate financial modelling environments
Carello Lighting supplies lamps for the automotive industry
Spreadsheet models are so useful that they have a tendency to outgrow the capabilities of the software that has been used to implement them
Multi-dimensional products may hold data in as many as 12 dimensions
what's new in accounting systems
Have you lost interest?
Despite much publicity, and the introduction of a number of computer programs to check banking charges (see ACCOUNTANCY , June, p 108), the banks are still overcharging.
Intercal is another Windows-based product which checks interest calculations in any situation where the business user or private individual lends or borrows money — whether from a bank, building society, company etc.
It is available in two versions, Standard (£99) and Professional (£199).
The Standard version licenses users for bank balances up to £999,999.
The Professional version handles amounts up to £99,999,999, and accounts can be grouped together under client names if a number of businesses are being handled.
It also has the facility to produce compound reports.
For further details phone Speedsoft Products on 0296 614839.
Bank-Chequer also checks bank interest charges.
It provides detailed monthly reports and annual summaries itemising the amount overcharged, or if appropriate, undercharged.
The package costs £440 including VAT for the professional version and £149 including VAT for the single-user version.
It runs on all IBM compatible PCs.
A bureau service is available.
For further details phone Ashwood Finance Ltd on (Halesowen) 021–585 6066.
Omega: package or bespoke?
Omega producer TTI Ltd believes that the package can be tailored to produce a computerised accounting solution which is an ‘exact copy’ of an existing manual system, offering some of the advantages of a ‘bespoke’solution at a fraction of the cost.
Omega offers full multi-currency facilities in all its ledgers.
The package will run on Unix, DOS and Novell networks and costs from £3,500.
For further details phone TTI Ltd on 071–793 0005.
Leased tax savings
The Britannia leased asset management system presents the results of different methods of calculating interest repayments for finance leases, providing users with the information needed to evaluate the differing effects on their organisation's tax bill.
Their system interfaces with Britannia's fixed asset management system and with standard accounting packages.
It runs on a range of platforms, including PCs, Unix, DEC VAX, IBM AS/400 and ICL DRS families.
Details of the various pricing levels can be obtained from Britannia Software plc on 081–694 9494.
Managing waste
CamHealth for the Environment features a number of facilities to help companies meet their obligations to the ‘duty of care’ and ‘duty of aftercare’expressed and implied in the Environmental Protection Act 1990.
It identifies all waste streams, their content, origin, routing, approved disposal methods and costs.
Authorised conditions of disposal can be recorded together with any associated risk assessments.
Contact CamAxys on (Cambridge) 0480 497739.
Insider software
Over two and a half years of research and development have gone into Aldercare Ltd's Abacus Practice Management package, and chartered  accountants have been involved at every step.
This user friendly package is designed to meet the needs of all sized chartered accountancy practices.
The developers claim the system can improve cash flow, first by deferring VAT on debtors and second by the optional allocation of a monthly service charge on aged debts.
The ‘inside knowledge’ used to help develop the package was provided by Morris & Co, which formed Chester-based Aldercare in 1989.
Drawing on the experience and needs of the practices in the group already using other software, the Abacus project was begun.
The software is menu-driven and is split into three main elements: client database; fee/client ledger; and time ledger.
Abacus Practice Management runs on Novell and DOS, on an IBM compatible PC and can be configured for stand alone or for a network.
For any chartered accountant interested in the package, Aldercare is offering the package free of charge for a 30-day trial.
For more details phone Ian Tomlinson on 0244 322782.
Tax research aid
At the touch of a button users of Articles, a PC-based package, can find published materials on the subject they are researching.
In such a complex area as taxation, this could be a very useful tool for all levels of staff.
An example price is £150.40 including VAT.
Contact Compucraft on 0902 342154.
INSTITUTE
Ringing in the changes: plans for direct dialling
The Institute is in the process of renewing its telephone system.
One of the main reasons for this is the need to maintain the quality of the front-line services to the membership in the face of much higher volumes of telephone and fax traffic.
Like many other organisations, the Institute has decided to introduce Direct Dialling Inwards (DDI) to provide its customers with a direct access to services and staff.
DDI will allow staff and services to be contacted quickly and efficiently, without the call having to be routed through a central switchboard.
All staff who have a telephone extension will in effect have their own direct telephone line.
Of course, if you are calling the Institute for the first time, or do not know who you need to speak to, then the switchboard staff will still be there to help you.
When the switchboard is not staffed (ie outside normal office hours) telephone calls can still be made by using the DDI numbers.
DDI will be introduced when the new telephone system is brought into service in February 1993.
At that time, the new DDI telephone numbers will be brought into use, together with a new main telephone switchboard number for the Institute.
Further details of these changes, together with the new numbers, will be published shortly.
Meanwhile, please make a note in your diaries that the Institute will be ringing in the changes during the New Year with some new telephone numbers.
women in accountancy
ALISON SARGENT
A question of balance
If Alison Sargent hadn't become a chartered accountant, it may well have been her, and not Michael Fish, that we see reading the weather forecast every evening.
Alison had a great interest in meteorology and was offered three MSc places to study the subject after graduating in maths and geography at Kings College, London.
But in 1976 the recruitment market was dire and she was advised to take any job offered.
Which she did — three years' articles at Gerald Edelman & Co in London.
‘I always thought that I might get into meteorology later, but of course you never do,’ says Alison without too much regret.
For now, 16 years later, and with two children aged seven and nine, she is running, from her Croydon home, a thriving sole practice that fits in with the demands of a young family.
What makes her set-up different is that husband Roland is also an accountant with his own practice, and they have developed a symbiotic business relationship that allows both to work and share in organising the family.
‘We used to share the same office and we can work together in the same environment, but not when we are actually working for the same clients,’ she says.
A tremendous amount of self-discipline and organisation is involved in keeping both practices and family life ticking over.
‘We always try to know each other 's appointments,’ says Roland, ‘particularly the early morning and late afternoon ones.
Life revolves around the family calendar.’
Up to 18 months ago both worked at least three evenings a week, but now the children are older, their way of life has changed.
They now both work about 35–40 chargeable hours a week, with Roland notching this up in five days and Alison four —‘Fridays are sacrosanct,’ she says.
‘I play tennis in the morning, and all my clients are aware that I'm unavailable on that day.
‘Clients have to be — and are — aware that I've got a young family and that if they ring me after 5pm there are likely to be children screaming for their tea in the background.’
After qualifying in 1979, Alison made up her mind to stay in accountancy.
She specialised in tax and spent time as a manager at Edelman's Croydon office.
After James was born in 1983 she intended to return after maternity leave fairly quickly, but at the time Edelman's was in the process of changing — two senior partners had died, and two others had gone into industry.
These two, along with three other directors, in fact set up their own property group with Moorfield Estates Ltd as the parent company, which was then floated on the USM.
‘When I was on maternity leave one of these former partners asked me if I wanted some work, mainly dealing with the directors’ personal tax affairs.
I then got involved with the company itself, preparing the end of year accounts for the audit and dealing with statutory matters for the group.
‘I realised that I was in a good position, I had a little bit of work, which fitted in with my family life.
About once a week or fortnight I had to attend some quite high-powered meetings in London to which James came too, as I was feeding him at the time.
He used to be in the board meeting with us, and was referred to as the ‘sleeping partner’ by the directors!’
Work for Moorfield culminated in her appointment as company secretary in 1985, still on a working-from-home basis.
As a result, when Steven was born that same year, she took just two weeks off.
She was also very involved in the company's flotation in 1988.
This year the company, which had an £8.6m turnover in 1991, was sold off, but she still works for the old directors.
Meanwile, Roland had become self-employed in 1978, and while sub-contracting during the day, he built up a small nucleus of clients in the evenings with Alison's help.
When the children were born and Alison began to establish her sole practice, she could fit her hours round her children and work in the evenings when Roland was there to look after them.
More recently, Alison has found her work portfolio changing.
She now does less tax work and more audit, and for a range of clients, from a group of Alexander relaxation teachers, for example, up to a £2m turnover company.
And if anyone believes that such flexible working arrangements limit the appeal of the practitioner, then they are mistaken.
On personal recommendation, Alison has recently been approached by Sir David Brooke of Brooke Bond fame and Sir Howard Guinness.
She also deals with tax affairs for some of the younger generation Guinnesses.
There are drawbacks to being a sole practitioner, however.
Until last year Alison prepared the interim and annual accounts of Stratagem Group plc, which originally had a large investment portfolio.
This company's activities changed and it ultimately grew too big for a sole practitioner to handle on a part-time basis.
‘That's the down-side,’ she says.
Alison and Roland's different backgrounds in accountancy complement each other.
Roland, with his ‘paperbag syndrome’(incomplete records) background, does the ‘A to Z’ for many small traders.
Alison also has the benefit of his longer experience in accountancy.
Alison, on the other hand, has expertise in audits and in specific accountancy and tax areas.
She can give him chapter and verse on Finance Acts and other current legislation, and is rigorous in keeping up to date.
They don't agree on everything, however.
Alison would be in favour of legislation abolishing or substantially reducing the requirements of the small company audit.
‘I think it would help relations between client and accountant, since the small company client often sees the audit as a waste of money and finds it hard to appreciate the amount of time involved in vouching and verifying figures for audit.
Often they just want to know the figures.
There are times when a more detailed review is necessary, but substantially reducing the legal requirement for small company audits would make life easier and it would take away some of the pressures.’
Roland, on the other hand, believes things should be kept as they are.
‘Clients would be in disarray without the strictures of legislation,’ he believes.
But, despite the odd disagreement, both Alison and Roland believe that in their working and family lives they have got just about as perfect a balance as they are likely to get.
Alison, Roland and son Steven: Balancing work and family life
CORRECTION Shelley Saxon can be reached on 0392 494394 (see ACCOUNTANCY, November, p 65).
finance & investment
COUTTS & CO
Banking on high performance
Coutts & Co prides itself on offering comprehensive national and international banking and financial services with ‘an unwavering commitment to courteous and individual service’.
Each customer is looked after by a manager who will act as a personal adviser.
Coutts' present chairman Sir David Money-Coutts KCVO is the great great great great grandson of Thomas Coutts, who presided over the bank from 1775 to 1822.
Coutts was founded in 1692.
The bank makes full banking facilities available to both personal and commercial customers through its own branches and its membership of National Westminster Group.
A feature of the bank's statements is the narrative, designed to give a clear indication of all the movements on the account: it shows the names of payees and of those from whom payments have been received.
At the request of the customer, surplus funds can be regularly transferred to or from Coutts' savings account of your choice.
Alternatively, there is the cash management option, a current account paying high interest rates when the balance exceeds £5,000.
Charges for personal sterling current accounts where the average balance is less than £3,000 are £30 a quarter plus 75p per entry.
There are no charges if the average balance is £3,000 or more.
As the adverts claim, ‘Our high-performance service costs a little more than average.
But haven't you earned it?’.
For details of the full range of services contact Coutts on 071–753 1234.
Under Royal Bank of Scotland's Balanced Banking, if you keep a minimum of £5,000 in your high interest savings account, you can also have an interest paying current account plus the ability to transfer money automatically between accounts.
Each customer decides how much to maintain in the current account and then Balanced Banking sweeps any surplus into a high interest savings account.
Similarly, checks are made to see you have enough in the current account to meet expenditure.
As long as you stay in credit or within the free £100 overdraft facility, there will be no charges for normal transactions on your account.
Phone 0800 121121 for further information.
MBOs AND MBIs
Value of buyouts and buy-ins rises
The total number of buyout and buy-in transactions in the first half of 1992, at 301 completions, was virtually identical to that in the same period in 1991, although the total value of transactions rose by 40% to £1.65bn.
UK Management Buyouts 1992 , the annual review for The Centre for Management Buyout Research at the University of Nottingham, notes that in the first half of 1992, buyouts and buy-ins accounted for 29.6% of the value of all transfers of ownership in the UK and nearly 60% of the total number.
This is the highest recorded share.
The equity proportion of financing has risen to 43% for deals below £10m in the last 18 months and to over 40% for deals above £10m.
The Centre for Management Buyout Research continues to receive financial support from its founders, Barclays Development Capital and Touche Ross.
Copies of the report, price £85, are available from Touche Ross on 071–936 3000.
BUILDING SOCIETIES
High yield PIBS take off
As UK interest rates continue to fall, some investors are examining the Permanent Interest Bearing Shares (PIBS) of building societies where yields are still high.
PIBS, which are a form of security specially created for building societies to help them raise funds, are irredeemable and subordinated to all other creditors and shareholders of the building society.
They bear a fixed rate of interest, but a society must waive interest payments if they would bring its capital adequacy below the required level.
Any interest so missed is non-cumulative.
PIBS are quoted on the London Stock Exchange.
So far, some 10 societies have issued them: Halifax, Leeds Permanent, Bristol & West, Britannia, Bradford & Bingley, North of England, Coventry, Leeds & Holbeck, Skipton and Cheltenham & Gloucester.
Dealings have to be in specified multiples: in the case of the 12% Halifax PIBS and 13.625% Leeds Permanent the dealing multiple is £50,000; Bradford & Bingley's 11.625% and 13% PIBS have £10,000 as the multiple, while for a number — such as Britannia 13%, North of England 12.625% and Coventry 12.125% — the multiple is only £1,000.
Dealings take place at the price quoted plus or minus days' accrued interest.
Settlement is after seven days.
Brokers normally charge the same commission as on gilts.
For CGT purposes PIBS count as qualifying corporate bonds and are therefore exempt.
As this issue goes to press, gross yields on the PIBS range from about 10.5% to 11.5%.
Stockbrokers caution that PIBS are not without risk and advise care in selection.
In particular, they draw attention to the total assets and pre-tax profit of each society in relation to the cost of PIBS interest.
Investors should be aware that these securities are irredeemable and therefore the real return in future years is vulnerable if the UK inflation rate rises again.
Exeter Fund Managers has launched Exeter Balanced Fund, an unauthorised unit trust that invests in PIBS supplemented by zero dividend preference shares of investment trusts.
The aim is to provide security of capital with an attractive and rising level of income.
At the start the portfolio will probably consist of two thirds PIBS and one third zeros.
The expected gross initial yield is 6.5%.
Ring 0800 807807 for fuller details.
The Johnson Fry Portfolio enables investors with a minimum of £20,000 to spread their investment across a number of PIBS.
The size of the portfolio can be raised in £5,000 units.
Johnson Fry pays holders a pre-set quarterly income.
Charges are an upfront fee of 4% and no further management or disposal charges for four years.
Then an administration fee of £20 will be charged quarterly in arrears.
For more information, ring 071–437 4828.
EUROPEAN BONDS
Lock into high yield
It is still not too late to invest in European bonds and enjoy a high return plus scope for capital appreciation as interest rates are cut, according to Thornton Unit Managers.
The Thornton Dresdner European Bond unit trust (price 45.03p, gross yield 6.86%) invests only in the sovereign debt of European countries.
The proposed geographical weighting is Germany 29%, France 27%, Netherlands 19%, UK 16%, Denmark 7% and liquidity 2%.
The fund is managed by Dresdner Bank, Thornton's parent company.
Dresdner manages over DM28bn in European fixed interest securities and enjoys a good reputation for skilful investing in international bonds.
In the managers' view, now is a good time to invest in European bonds as returns remain high, inflation is low, and the Bundesbank and other central banks are expected to continue to lower interest rates.
For UK investors, the fund has the additional attraction of being mainly invested in European hard currency countries, so they will benefit from any further weakness in sterling.
The charges are initial 5% and annual 1%.
For further information phone Thornton Unit Managers on 071–493 7262.
INVESTMENT TRUSTS
Mixed outlook for dividends
Many investment trusts will finally begin to feel the impact of an estimated 1% fall in dividends in 1992.
At present the trusts are paying out dividends earned in 1991 and early 1992 when dividends were still growing.
County NatWest's 1992 investment trust annual,Doomsday for Dividends?, examines the effects of falling dividend revenues on 76 UK investment trusts.
The brokers are concerned about those trusts that seek high yields from their portfolios, as this could affect capital performance.
However all is not gloom as in many cases the revenue reserves remain strong.
‘For instance all the Big 10 trusts could (if they so chose) fund a 5% dividend increase from reserves for three years assuming maintained earnings,’ the brokers write.
More directors of trusts are indicating a willingness to draw on these reserves to maintain dividends or meet commitments.
But out of the 76 trusts, 35 had invested portfolio yields of 6% or over (22 having 7% or over).
In County NatWest's view, this indicates that many trusts will have a job to increase portfolio yields without lowering portfolio quality.
Two accounting changes could help trusts improve their revenue positions.
More trusts now account for dividend income on an xd basis rather than when the cash is received.
Also, there is scope to charge a proportion of the management expenses to capital.
‘These changes are not panaceas but can give a one-year useful boost to earnings,’ said investment trust expert Robin Angus.
County NatWest is concerned about the lowish revenue reserves of Investors Capital and Securities Trust of Scotland, among the income growth trusts.
In the high income sector, the brokers consider that City Merchants High Yield, Fleming High Income, Geared Income, and TR High Income have less flexibility than average.
Derby, M & G Dual, M & G Second Dual and Save & Prosper Linked are vulnerable in the income shares category because of their lack of any revenue reserves.
Among the quasi-splits, County NatWest says that the worrying problems relate to capital rather than income.
In conclusion, Mr Angus pointed out that trusts had a life after the next dividend declaration.
‘Don't mortgage tomorrow; don't push up portfolio yields,’ he said.
For shareholders, Mr Angus thought the 1990s might be uncertain but would bring opportunities.
‘Flexibility is the key; look at portfolio yields, look at revenue reserves, and if worried tell the managers.’
County NatWest's annual includes details of the 76 trusts' accounting policies for revenue and income, details of trusts with scope to increase dividends, and their dividend history from 1987 to 1992.
OIL AND GAS
Tax relief from collective scheme
Investment in The Melrose Partnerships, which are active in the acquisition of productive US oil and gas wells, can bring valuable income tax and CGT reliefs.
The Melrose Partnerships are an unregulated collective investment scheme arranged by Neill Clerk, the Scottish solicitors, and issued by MM & K Ltd.
They are only available through authorised intermediaries.
Melrose Petroleum is the general partner and manages the business.
Some 93% of the investment will be available as tax reliefs: 78% in 1992/93 and 15% in 1993/94.
This is because of the limited partnerships' tax losses while drilling, and the availability of capital allowances.
The relief can be set against the investor's other income in that tax year or carried back three years or carried forward.
Excess relief may be used against CGT in the same tax year.
The minimum investment is £10,000; loans are available from Royal Bank of Scotland.
For further details, contact Neill Clerk (041–332 2055) or MM & K Ltd (071–283 7200).
WOMEN
Menopause a neglected topic, says PPP
Many women in business are being held back by difficulties encountered during the menopause, and, according to a survey from medical insurance group PPP, over 90% of companies have no formal policy on the subject.
In addition, 67% of the companies surveyed had never arranged free counselling for women experiencing problems with the menopause; 71% had never reduced the workload for menopausal women; and 69% of personnel departments said they ‘would not be aware’ if employees were experiencing menopausal problems.
Although two thirds of companies had not previously used outside advice and counselling, 35% did say that they would consider it.
Jacqueline Langford, general manager of PPP's medical centres, which offer a series of health screening services including a London-based menopause clinic, said: ‘The survey clearly indicates that for women in business in Britain the menopause can be the missing rung on the career ladder.
Far too many companies appear to ignore this phase in a woman's life.’
As well as increasing anxiety, irritability and mood changes, the menopause saps memory and concentration, causes physical pain in the joints and muscles, and, if improperly treated, is believed to be a significant factor in the incidence of osteoporosis or ‘brittle bone’ disease in later life.
However, the use of oestrogens can relieve many of the troublesome symptoms.
For further information on the medical centres and the Menopause Clinic, which offers women the opportunity to consult confidentially with a specialist gynaecologist, contact PPP on 071–637 8941.
WHAT'S AROUND
Bond fund.
Schroders has launched a Global Bond Fund that will only invest in high quality bonds worldwide, usually government-backed.
At the initial offer price for the unit trust of 50p, the estimated gross yield is 6.25%.
Charges are 3% initial and 1% annual.
For further details call 071–382 6000.
Business bank account.
The Robert Fleming Corporate Account carries a competitive rate of interest, no bank charges provided there are not more than 200 transactions a month, immediate cheque book access, and standing orders/ direct debits.
It is not suitable where overdraft facilities are needed or where large amounts of cash are likely to be deposited.
For full details call 071–588 1717.
Home insurance.
Eagle Star (0242 221311) has introduced a no claim discount of up to 20% for policyholders with three or more claim free years.
On Homestar and Homestar Ideal, there is a 5% security alarm discount.
Personal equity plan.
Murray Johnstone offers a new unit trust PEP with no extra charges beyond those of the underlying unit trust.
They have an initial charge of only 1% and an annual charge of 1.5%.
There is a wide range of trusts to choose from, a regular savings scheme and low cost transfer and share exchange facilities.
Phone 0800 289978 for more information.
Term assurance.
Albany Life's Executive Term Assurance (0707 669000) is designed for individuals or companies wanting key man cover of over £500,000 at low cost.
The term is flexible, and there are conversion and extension options and opportunities to increase the cover.
Mortgages.
Alliance & Leicester Building Society is offering a loan at 7.5% (APR 10.1%) for up to 80% of the property value and a loan of 7.75% (APR 10.2%) for up to 95% of valuation.
Both are fixed for two years.
For full details ring 0273 775454 or call in at any branch.
economic trends
From cheap and cheerful to expensive and depressing The cheaper pound may seem good news for industry in the short term, but companies could find it more expensive in the long run
Sterling's devaluation should make a positive difference to industry's competitiveness and profitability; but the impact on exports may not be very strong while growth in continental Europe continues to slow.
Further out, a higher inflation trend threatens, eroding these competitive gains.
The more significant benefits for UK companies will stem from the translation of the high proportion of overseas earnings that accrue from subsidiaries owned in the US.
The UK stockmarket is the most dollar-sensitive in earnings terms in Europe.
Devaluation benefits will coincide with a recovery in the US economy and provide UK companies' most tangible benefits from sterling's devaluation.
The pound has recently traded at DM2.40 to 2.45, 12% to 15% down on its former ERM floor and 15% to 18% down on the old DM2.95 central rate.
If that were to be fully reflected in a lower real exchange rate (the nominal rate adjusted to take account of changes in UK output prices relative to those elsewhere), competitiveness would improve significantly and could give a boost to growth.
That would certainly make a welcome change, since the weakness of trade over the last year or so has clearly deepened the recession.
However, with the main continental European economies unlikely to grow any faster than the UK over the next year or so, exports are not going to be a powerful recovery force for the economy or corporate earnings through 1993.
There is little doubt that the UK corporate sector is highly competitive at present.
There was little evidence that UK companies had a competitiveness problem at DM2.95.
However, the fall-off in output has blunted the competitive edge that UK companies have been delivered from devaluation.
Over-capacity in some sectors is still driving down selling prices.
The classic case is steel, where sterling's fall has only compensated for the 20% fall in steel prices so far this year.
The degree of cost-cutting UK companies have undergone during the recession suggests that a European recovery will ultimately deliver substantial operational gearing benefits for exporters.
But this will probably be more of a 1994 story than one for 1993.
The importance of sterling movement for the equity market extends, of course, well beyond export considerations to include the translation of foreign subsidiaries' overseas earnings.
The acquisitions made by UK companies through the 1980s, particularly within the US, raised the total overseas exposure at the corporate earnings level to around 50%.
Within this total, around 25% of earnings come from North America, 15% from continental Europe and 10% from the Far East/ Australia.
Much of the Far East exposure can be viewed as dollar-priced.
The industrial sectors in the market with the greatest overseas exposure are engineering (82% overseas content), motors (75%), other industrial materials (75%), pharmaceuticals (82%), packaging (75%), chemicals (63%), food manufacturing (62%) and conglomerates (60%).
Foreign currency sensitivity can of course be unaffected by geographical exposure; it can be down to commodity prices.
To that extent, the oil sector, that makes up around 8% of the stockmarket's capitalisation, could be said to be 100% dollar sensitive.
All things being equal, the fall in sterling we have seen ought to add 6%-7% to quoted company earnings in a year.
Given the comments above, we would have our doubts over the likely benefits for sectors that are heavily exposed to Europe.
Motors, packaging and some areas of engineering fall into this category.
The most likely beneficiaries are those stocks with a US bias.
While recovery in the US economy has been slow, it has been a recovery nonetheless.
We expect Clinton's election victory to consolidate this and deliver 2.5% GNP growth next year.
Further strength in the dollar (we look for $1.35 v sterling) will enhance these benefits for UK companies.
Not all good news
While we have seen the stockmarket react to these macro themes, specific company considerations have to be borne in mind.
These temper some of the positives.
First, the sensitivity at the company level is complicated by the many and varied hedging policies UK companies will have employed.
For example, the aerospace sector — one of the most dollar-sensitive industries — has forward cover on its transactions out beyond 1994 and will thus feel little or no benefit from sterling's fall against the dollar for some time to come.
It is not possible to generalise about the hedging policies that UK companies adopt such is the wide range of experience.
The nature of the financing of overseas subsidiaries is also a key factor, given the large number of UK companies that have maintained substantial foreign currency borrowings (particularly dollar) and sterling cash deposits.
The benefits in earnings terms from devaluation have to be set against the increase in these liabilities.
It is very common to find companies with a high proportion of overseas earnings maintaining higher than average levels of balance sheet gearing than the rest of the corporate sector.
Having focused on the considerations for multinationals, we must also bear in mind the domestic inflationary consequences for UK companies.
We expect inflation to be higher as a result of the pound's fall, which threatens to erode the initial competitiveness benefit as UK prices rise faster than those elsewhere and the real exchange rate rises again.
The process is all too familiar to students of the UK economy — first, higher prices for many imported final goods raise the retail price index directly.
The RPI weights for food, drink and tobacco, household goods and clothing and footwear add up to around 40% of the index.
If imports account for close to 50% of UK sales in those sectors, a 10% devaluation would directly raise the RPI by around 2% over a period of, say, one to two years.
Second, higher prices for imported fuel and material inputs raise domestic costs and then get passed on in higher output prices.
These effects are starting to show up already in survey responses (the October CIPS purchasing managers' survey indicated a sharp rise in input prices, which was subsequently confirmed in the official data — October's producer input prices rose by 2%).
Higher import prices reduce the competitive pressure on prices in home markets, giving a temporary boost to domestic ‘pricing power’ in some sectors.
Exporters can raise prices in sterling terms (so maintaining them in foreign currency terms) without losing competitiveness.
Higher prices from any of the above sources put upward pressure on pay; higher pay deals then lead to a further round of prices rises and so it goes on.
Some argue that these effects may be weak or delayed because domestic activity is so weak.
Two considerations point the other way.
First, the length of the recession means many domestic companies' margins are already compressed and cost increases are now more likely to be passed on.
Second, the pound was not hopelessly overvalued within the ERM, so importers' margins have less room to adjust than in the past.
We now see underlying inflation moving above 4% (and outside the Government's new 1% to 4% target range) through 1993 as the impact of the lower pound feeds through.
Our inflation view may be more bearish than most, but was supported by the Chancellor at Mansion House, when he said: ‘Some people insist that movements in the exchange rate are just a change in relative prices which need not affect the rate of inflation.
Others argue that disinflationary forces are currently so strong that such pressures pose no threat.
I am not persuaded by either of these arguments.’
If our inflation fears are right, industry may pay for the cheaper pound through a tighter money policy and higher interest rates in years to come.
Even if we are being too pessimistic, the loss of policy credibility implied by the pound's departure from the ERM is likely to see longer rates raised in line with increased currency and inflation risk premia.
That may be a ‘price worth paying’ to relieve recession, but if economics tells us anything it is that there is no such thing as a free lunch.
Offshore financial centres A special report
NO CRIME PLEASE, WE'RE IOFCs It has been estimated that half the world's financial transactions by value involve an offshore centre directly or indirectly.
So why do their activities arouse deep suspicion among tax authorities and police forces?
Peter Gartland
There are now more than 30 international offshore financial centres dotted around the world.
They are also known as tax havens, a term that the centres themselves do not readily answer to for fear of exciting too much emotive attention.
Offshore centres, even the landlocked ones like Luxembourg and coastal ones like Dublin and Gibraltar, are, like the elephant, difficult to define but easy to recognise.
They display three main characteristics.
First, they operate nil or low-tax regimes; second, they are lightly though not necessarily negligently regulated; and third, they specialise in doing business with non-resident clients.
Their numbers have increased dramatically in recent years, with newcomers such as Labuan (Malaysia), Malta and Mauritius trying to capture a slice of the business traditionally dominated by the likes of Bermuda and Jersey.
Not only are they much more numerous now, they also represent big business.
No one is quite sure just how significant they are because, generally, they prefer to maintain a low profile and reveal as little information as they can.
That said, Anthony Ginsberg of Salomon Brothers in New York estimates that half the world's financial transactions by value involve an offshore centre either directly or indirectly.
The attractions are not difficult to discern: confidentiality (sometimes bordering on paranoid secrecy), tax efficiency and, in the case of longer-established centres, a professional infrastructure of accountants, lawyers and administrators, equal in quality and experience to their peers in mainland financial centres.
Nevertheless, their activities arouse deep suspicion among tax authorities and police forces.
There is some justification for this.
It is highly doubtful that any offshore centre could claim that it has never been tainted by drugs money.
Although it is probable that the same applies to established onshore centres, the fact is that it is the offshore centres, especially those in the Caribbean, that are most at risk from drugs money.
The Caribbean islands are at the cross-roads between the large drug-producing nations of South America and their customers in North America.
Turks and Caicos and the Bahamas have the additional problem of being contained in an archipelago of sparsely populated islands, with literally dozens of remote airstrips and hundreds of miles of expensive-to-patrol coastline, situated directly on the Colombia to Florida flight path and shipping channels.
The poor image of Caribbean offshore centres has not been improved by a series of major banking scandals in Montserrat and serious allegations of money laundering in the Bahamas and the Cayman Islands.
There has also been a failure to update regulations in some jurisdictions, in line with modern requirements.
In response to these problems, the British Government is currently in the process of setting up a Dependent Territories Board to help strengthen the economies of the British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Anguilla, Turks and Caicos Islands and Montserrat.
The Board's aim is to ensure that offshore financial activities are run properly so that the islands can avoid becoming potential breeding grounds for illegal activities.
However, there is nothing to suggest that offshore centres are declining in importance.
Individual centres may go in and out of fashion, but overall they still represent a growth sector.
This is so despite falling tax rates in many industrialised countries and bank secrecy legislation designed to curtail their attractions.
Earlier this year a report commissioned by Christiane Scrivener, the European Commissioner responsible for taxation, proposed a 30% withholding tax in all member states regardless of whether profits are retained or distributed as dividends.
In practice, this is unlikely to become a reality.
It would require the unanimous approval of all member states, and Ireland and Luxembourg would be fiercely opposed.
Offshore centres still have a big role to play.
At a corporate level, centres such as Bermuda, Cayman, the Isle of Man and Guernsey are popular as locations for captive insurance operations.
These same islands — plus Jersey, Turks and Caicos and the British Virgin Islands — are used as the domicile of so-called exempt or international business companies.
At the private investor level, the use of offshore centres is almost limitless.
Uses include private banking, mutual fund investment (especially for expatriates and internationally mobile people), trust planning — in an attempt to avoid forced heirship laws — and asset protection trusts, particularly for the medical profession.
Even private investors of modest means can use offshore centres for tax referral.
Needless to say, the use of offshore centres is never far from being a controversial matter.
Conservative MP David Shaw is trying to put a stop to their transactions with UK residents.
He claims that major fiascos such as BCCI, Barlow Clowes and the Maxwell pension fraud would not have been possible without the connivance of offshore centres.
On the other side of the Atlantic, the Securities and Exchange Commission is becoming ever more aggressive in extending its own powers of investigation into offshore transactions with US citizens.
Moreover, the North American Securities Administration Association has gone so far as to accuse the South Pacific micro-states of Nauru, Vanuatu, Tonga and the Marshall and Northern Mariana Islands of being ‘international centres of prostitute banking’.
On top of all this, the increasingly influential International Organisation of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) is developing a role as the main forum for regulators of securities markets worldwide, in line with the regulatory challenges of global trading.
IOSCO's goal is to achieve the widest possible international consensus in regulatory matters relating to the integrity of markets, efficiency of cross-border capital formation and protection from fraudulent market activity.
The regulatory spotlight is unlikely to deter financial institutions from setting up in offshore centres if they perceive an advantage in doing so.
Indeed, the case in favour is overwhelming for those that aspire to offer a global service.
But multinational financial services companies have reputations to protect.
What is likely to happen is that they will shun those centres that have a bad name or are lacking in professional infrastructure (the two usually go together) in favour of well-regulated, stable ones.
A HAVEN FOR THE CORPORATE CLIENT Which options are open to UK multinationals seeking a tax haven, and which offshore centres might they choose?
John Fairley and Stephanie White
From the days of exchange control, UK multinational companies have always had a use for the traditional island tax havens, and even the explosion of anti-avoidance legislation in the 1980s has not prevented the use of havens where there is a definite benefit for the company.
The choice of haven will be ruled by various factors: existing links, geographical/time zone convenience, language, legal system, special regimes and incentives, and, possibly, changes in competitors' regimes as well.
Most UK multinationals today are engaged in more subtle and complex tax planning structures, in which the most widely used ‘offshore’ territories are in fact the haven equivalents, special regimes existing in a number of EC member states: Belgium, Ireland, Luxembourg and the Netherlands.
Holding companies
This is the crux of planning for any UK multinational.
A properly sited overseas holding company will allow the averaging of double tax relief on dividends from underlying subsidiaries, and it may also minimise withholding taxes on those dividends.
By far the most popular location in recent years has been the Netherlands, for the very good reason that it has for some time offered by far the best deal.
Income received from qualifying holdings is exempt from tax in the Netherlands, and capital gains from the disposal of such holdings are not taxed either.
A Dutch holding company can use the Dutch treaty network.
In response to the general assumption that the Netherlands is the best location for a holding company, Luxembourg has recently introduced a very similar regime.
The third European holding company location that springs to mind is Switzerland, but this is a much less popular choice, mainly on grounds of cost and flexibility.
Holding companies in Switzerland pay tax to a greater or lesser degree, depending on the canton in which they are established, and the Swiss tax treaty network is not as wide as the Netherlands'.
In addition, domestic anti-abuse rules limit their use for accumulating tax-free funds.
Other holding company locations may be suitable in special circumstances.
The obvious examples are Cyprus and Austria, which both have particularly useful links with Eastern European countries.
Cyprus is also traditionally used for holding interests in the Middle East, partly as a security measure, and partly in conjunction with a Dutch holding company, to ensure that dividends from nil tax countries have a small amount of tax levied in Cyprus (thereby ensuring qualification for exemption from Dutch tax).
Finance companies
The aim for multinationals is to maximise the value of interest deductions in high tax operating companies, by exposing the interest paid to minimal tax, often in offshore, or offshore-equivalent locations.
Where in the past this tended to be a self-contained exercise — and perhaps more obviously artificial because of it — the pattern nowadays is for the group treasury function to be moved offshore en bloc.
This not only deflects any queries about the substance of the offshore company, it also minimises the risk that the company will be found to be UK resident (since it is in fact staffed by personnel who are capable of carrying out their nominated duties).
Given the illogical UK tax treatment of forex gains and losses, an offshore group treasury function may be better placed to hedge and match exposures.
In Europe the three current structures that are probably most used are the Dutch company with a Swiss branch, the Belgian co-ordination centre and — a relative newcomer — the Irish Dublin Docks company.
Although occasionally Dutch finance companies with Antillean parents (taxed at a turn on the interest in the Netherlands) are still seen, for the past few years the perceived wisdom has been that the Swiss finance branch structure is superior.
This structure rests on the Dutch/Swiss treaty, under which income arising in the branch is basically 90% exempted from tax in the Netherlands.
Simultaneously, the Swiss cantonal authorities treat a large proportion of the branch capital as a loan from head office and give a deemed deduction for interest thus greatly reducing the actual Swiss taxable profit without affecting the treaty allocation mentioned above.
The result is an effective rate of tax usually under 5%.
The Belgian coordination centre is extremely well known, and is designed to attract very large groups.
The BCC cannot function as a holding company, but can carry out auxiliary service activities for the group, which would include treasury functions.
Tax is charged on a cost-plus basis.
Costs for this purpose exclude financial expenses, debt related expenses and foreign exchange losses.
BCCs are often set up as branches of Dutch companies to obtain the benefit of the Dutch tax treaty network, the income being effectively exempt from Dutch tax under domestic rules.
Dublin Docks companies operating in the International Financial Services Centre are similar to BCCs, but without the onerous turnover requirements, so they may be suitable for smaller multinationals.
Again, these cannot be holding companies, but may carry out financing, factoring, treasury management and similar activities.
The income arising is taxed at 10%.
They must be licensed, but if necessary an arrangement may be made to operate as a subsidiary within the terms of a licence held by an Irish bank.
In other parts of the world, the same needs arise but they are met by different structures.
Singapore has made significant efforts to corner the market in this type of specialised service company, as well as offering special incentives to the financial services sector.
There is a 10% regime for offshore headquarters functions, including treasury management.
Barbados, in contrast, offers a straightforward haven structure but is favoured by Canadian investors income arising in Barbados is not caught by Canada's equivalent of the Controlled Foreign Company (CFC) legislation.
Intellectual property
This area of planning has grown tremendously over the past few years, fuelled by the accounting discussion over brand valuation.
For many UK multinationals, the question has been whether intangibles have been properly exploited to produce UK taxable income (and thereby mop up ACT).
Planning has aimed at justifying charges in other jurisdictions, particularly Germany and the US.
Where creating UK income is not an immediate concern, the usual response has been to put the intangible into a tax haven and charge royalties from there.
Since royalties are usually subject to withholding taxes, and payments to related parties in tax havens are generally suspect, the normal structure for most of the 1980s was to use a Dutch company which would hold a head licence from a Netherlands Antilles company holding the intangible, and which would then sublicense the operating companies.
A small turn would be taxable in the Netherlands under a ruling, and the rest would be taxed at low rates in the Antilles.
Occasionally one also saw Swiss companies used to hold intangibles.
The problem with this type of structure is that the Antillean or Swiss company would be a CFC; thus UK tax on the income was merely deferred.
The latest variants on royalty structures use branches of a Dutch company, which operate in much the same way as finance branches, and rely on exemptions to avoid tax at full rates in the Netherlands.
This has the advantage that, with careful structuring, the income can escape distribution to the UK.
If this is not possible, action can be taken to reduce the accounting profit in the Netherlands, and thus the amount of the dividend required under the CFC legislation.
Distribution/reinvoicing centres
In contrast with some of the other areas discussed, these are much less tax-driven than a matter of commercial advantage.
The benefits of a centralised distribution system may include a small rate of tax on the centre's activities, but since these are unlikely to include much added value to the products being distributed, the scope for manipulating transfer prices is limited.
For obvious reasons, the traditional tax haven is not usually in the market for this type of work.
Belgium and the Netherlands both offer a tax charge based on an uplift (usually between 5% and 10%) of costs.
Belgium's regime is more restrictive, since it does not allow the centre to take on any commercial risks.
The Netherlands allows the centre to carry on supporting, preparatory or auxiliary activities, which is more flexible, at least in principle, and the centre can take on commercial risks so long as an increased mark-up is agreed.
The agreement on the centre's tax status runs for five years.
There is no fixed agreement period for Belgium.
Reinvoicing activity is rather different, providing a stopping off point that holds itself out as the origin in communication with the customer (or possibly the tax authorities of the customer's territory).
In the context of this article, the need for a multi-national to engage in this sort of activity is likely to be limited to those occasions when the customer demands it for his own reasons, or where trading relationships have been established that would be threatened if one customer knew of the other's existence.
Captive insurance companies
These are insurance subsidiaries set up to insure some or all of the risks of a group of companies.
Again, this may well be a commercial decision for the group.
Use of a captive can produce cost savings and cash flow advantages for groups.
Different minimum capital levels and controls over insurance operations apply in different territories.
The creation of a captive insurance company may enable the group to save on premiums and to cover risks that their normal insurers do not (eg excess claims).
This is an area in which traditional offshore centres are still paramount.
Bermuda, and to a lesser extent, Guernsey, the Isle of Man, Barbados and Luxembourg, all offer captive facilities.
All are regulated, though they offer more flexibility than, say, the UK, and the presence of regulation is, ironically, a crucial feature of their attraction.
Since a captive insurance company is not economic if the group cannot obtain a tax deduction for premiums paid to it, the group must be able to show that the captive has substance and is in a position to meet its obligations under insurance policies.
Capital gains avoidance and asset protection
Perhaps the most widely used location, though groups may not think of it precisely within this context, is the Netherlands.
A Dutch holding company is not taxed on disposals of its subsidiaries, and the Dutch treaty network often protects it from tax on the disposal in the subsidiary's country.
Where a tax treaty is irrelevant or non-existent, tax havens in the wider sense are often used to hold shares in operating companies.
If the operating company is to be sold, the disposal can take place at the holding company level.
Gibraltar, for instance, is often used to hold Spanish assets, although the Spanish tax authorities are aware of the situation and attempting to limit it at least as far as the holding of real property is concerned.
In some circumstances there may be a need to demonstrate offshore ownership, but not necessarily ultimate ownership.
This can be particularly important in family-held groups, where holdings are often complicated by the workings of trusts and the family may be resident in several countries.
The pre-eminent location for this type of holding used to be Panama, but its political tribulations have damaged confidence.
Other offshore financial centres have very similar flexibility and secrecy: the Cayman Islands and the British Virgin Islands are often mentioned.
The latter, in particular, has an extremely modest set of regulations and gives BVI-incorporated companies the freedom to switch their domicile to any other country if necessary.
A change in style
The growth of anti-avoidance measures means that many tax havens have had to change their legislation to allow companies to have a genuine presence in the territory.
This change of style ties in with the special regimes offered by EC member states, which again focus on the attraction of specific types of activity in return for low tax rates.
The mood is one of what might be called creative compliance rather than avoidance as such.
But although styles and structures may change, the basic market is still there.
Luxembourg: Enticing holding companies
Many tax havens have had to change their legislation to allow companies to have a genuine presence in the territory
Bermuda: Offers captive facilities
THE BATTLE FOR MARKET SHARE To attract new investment, tax havens old and new are increasingly aiming to offer users specific tailored benefits
Peter Cussons
Tax havens, or international offshore financial centres (IOFCs), are popular with taxpayers and attract considerable amounts of investment.
This has led to competition among existing havens to attract a larger share of the market, and to a steady influx of new locations offering investors an attractive environment.
Tax havens traditionally offer four potential advantages to users:
no taxes, or low taxes on specified income or capital gains;
absence of exchange controls on permitted activities;
a high level of banking and commercial secrecy;
an attractive regulatory environment.
Some tax havens combine these advantages with an extensive tax treaty network.
However, tax havens are understandably unpopular among tax authorities in ‘normal’ tax rate countries, many of which have introduced measures to counter perceived tax avoidance.
New developments
In order to attract new investment, tax havens increasingly aim to provide specific tailored benefits for users.
New measures tend to focus on attracting specific activities such as holding companies, insurance or international trading companies, and/or users from targeted countries.
Examples of the most recent developments for corporate users of tax havens are detailed below.
Holding companies.
A strategically located offshore intermediate holding company may enable transnational groups to reinvest earnings without suffering a tax charge in the ultimate parent company location.
The Netherlands, Switzerland and Luxembourg have traditionally been popular locations for holding companies in Europe.
Each is now competing to attract new investment.
For example, Luxembourg has offered a favourable regime for a number of years under its 1929 Holding Company Act.
However, ‘1929 holding companies’ cannot benefit from the lower dividend withholding tax rates provided in tax treaties or the European Community parent/subsidiary directive.
As a result, they suffer the full rate of withholding tax on dividends from foreign subsidiaries.
To attract new investment, Luxembourg has therefore developed its so-called ‘1990 holding companies’.
These benefit from Luxembourg's tax treaties and the EC directives.
They are not taxed on dividends or except as a recapture of related deductible expenses, such as interest — capital gains derived from foreign affiliates under a participation exemption.
With careful planning, groups that include ‘1929 holding companies’ may be restructured so they obtain the benefits available to ‘1990 holding companies’.
This may offer significant tax savings.
These companies are being heavily promoted by Luxembourg advisers, but it still remains to be seen whether they will gain business at the expense of the Netherlands.
A number of new locations are also seeking to attract holding companies in Europe.
The Isle of Man currently does not tax non-resident holding companies.
Proposed new legislation will extend the range of exempt companies to include Manx-registered public companies.
These may then be able to pay a minimum tax charge, equivalent to the current annual licence fee, or may elect to pay tax at a rate of up to 20%.
Gibraltar has also entered the market (with its Gibraltar 1992 company rules) as a potential location for holding companies with EC investments.
A Gibraltar 1992 company combines the benefits of:
no withholding tax on dividends received from EC subsidiaries under the terms of the EC parent/subsidiary directive (the UK and Denmark have agreed that Gibraltar companies qualify for the benefits of the directive; other countries still have to indicate their stance);
no tax in Gibraltar on the receipt of dividends from EC subsidiaries; and
withholding tax on dividend payments to non-EC parent companies of only 1%.
No withholding tax on payments to EC parent companies.
A Gibraltar 1992 company may therefore be a tax-efficient vehicle for holding EC subsidiaries for non-EC parent companies.
International trading.
There is still scope for conducting trading operations through an IOFC.
The objective here is to take a turn on a transaction that is subject only to a low rate of taxation.
The key to effective planning in this area is to ensure the offshore vehicle is trading ‘with’ and not ‘within' high-tax countries.
To do this it is important to avoid creating a taxable presence in the high tax territory and to ensure arm's length pricing for transactions.
The Bahamas introduced its International Business Companies (IBC) Act in 1990 in order to permit business through a versatile Bahamian entity.
The basic rules are relaxed, although IBCs may not engage in banking, trust, insurance or reinsurance business.
An IBC is exempt from licence fees, income, corporation and capital gains taxes for 20 years.
They are also exempt from exchange controls.
To attract international investment, the Cook Islands have recently obtained permission from the Hong Kong stock exchange to allow offshore companies incorporated there to be listed on the exchange in Hong Kong.
Domestic legislation in the Cook Islands is now being amended to comply exactly with the Hong Kong market's requirements.
Vanuatu has recently announced a review of its finance centre laws to make it more competitive.
The proposed new legislation will provide a statutory basis for the establishment of international business companies, and will guarantee exemption from taxes and exchange controls for 20 years.
Legislation is also in the pipeline to allow companies limited by guarantee, and hybrid companies, to be formed.
Captive insurance companies.
There are new opportunities to use captives.
A number of IOFCs, including Malta, Madeira and the British Virgin Islands, have recently introduced exempt company legislation covering insurance companies.
Captives may also operate through the Irish International Financial Services Centre, although a 10% tax rate is applicable here.
Intangible asset management.
In practice most research and development is carried out in high-tax jurisdictions because it is difficult to attract skilled employees to tax haven locations, and in order to take advantage of local tax deductions.
However, when the technology has been developed, the R&D may be transferred to an IOFC location so that the income is subject only to a low rate of tax.
Where the value of the intangible asset is at an all-time low, it may be possible to sell it to an IOFC operation and realise a capital loss in the selling location.
Alternatively, the cost of the development work could be charged to an offshore company on a cost plus basis.
The IOFC may then license the technology wherever it is required, at a commercial rate.
An increasingly popular solution is to use a branch (perhaps located in the Isle of Man) of a group company located in, say, the Netherlands.
With careful planning it may be possible to achieve a tax deduction for the cost of the intangible property, combined with a low rate of tax on royalty income from the intangible asset.
This may produce valuable tax savings for sophisticated groups.
Conduit companies.
Tax havens have traditionally had an important role to play in inbound investment to territories with high withholding tax rates.
Barbados has benefited for a number of years from a wide treaty network, including treaties with the UK, the US and Canada.
In order to attract new investment, the government has initiated a programme to update and extend its treaty network.
New treaties have recently been signed with Sweden, Norway and Finland.
They significantly reduce withholding taxes on investment income from Scandinavian investments.
They also provide tax-sparing relief for dividends from manufacturing companies and hotels granted tax concessions in Barbados.
Thus, relief is given in, for example, Sweden as if tax had been paid in Barbados.
This form of relief is designed to preserve the benefits of the Barbadian tax incentives.
Treaty negotiations have been initiated with Germany, and preliminary negotiations are expected to start with Brazil and Venezuela in the near future.
By establishing an attractive treaty network, Barbados hopes to act as a base for significant investments between its treaty partners.
New tax havens
New locations are continually being attracted to the role of tax haven.
In order to attract foreign investment, the Malaysian government introduced legislation in 1990, abolishing withholding tax and providing for a basic tax rate of 3% on net profits for certain activities undertaken in Labuan.
As an alternative, a company may elect to pay a tax ‘fee’ of M$20,000 irrespective of profits.
This legislation covers offshore trading activities, banking and insurance.
Banks carrying on offshore banking business in Labuan are not subject to exchange controls.
Investors could use a Labuan offshore source of loan finance, where the interest is free of withholding tax, for Malaysian investments.
They may also take advantage of the tax-sparing provisions in some Malaysian treaties to reduce the cost of investment in Malaysia.
Another tax haven to emerge recently is Western Samoa.
Legislation was enacted in 1987 to attract international companies, trustee companies, offshore banking and international insurance activities.
Registered companies are exempted from all taxes on approved activities, and no currency or exchange restrictions are imposed.
European tax havens
Europe has offered tax havens such as Switzerland, Liechtenstein and the Channel Islands for a number of years.
Havens now being established also offer the advantage of membership of the European Community.
These include the Republic of Ireland, Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg (see above), Gibraltar (see above), Madeira and Malta.
Ireland has become a recent entrant in this market with its International Financial Services Centre legislation.
As at September 1992 there were 137 companies listed by the Industrial Development Authority as approved to carry out activities in IFSC.
The most popular activities include fund management, asset financing, captive insurance and treasury management.
Belgium has its Coordination Centre regime and has recently extended its participation exemption to gains and so is becoming a rival to locations such as the Netherlands, Luxembourg and Gibraltar for holding companies.
The Netherlands continues to be a popular location for holding, finance and licensing companies.
Madeira was transformed into an offshore centre by virtue of legislation enacted in 1986.
This legislation exempts international trading companies from withholding, income, capital gains and share transfer taxes.
Madeira also offers access to Portugal's network of tax treaties.
This may be of particular value to investors from Germany and Switzerland, where the tax-sparing provisions in the Portuguese double tax treaties may be used in conjunction with a Madeira tax-exempt company to reduce the financing costs in multinational groups.
Malta introduced legislation in 1988 to attract offshore companies, trusts and foreign individuals.
Offshore companies are exempt from exchange controls and withholding tax.
Offshore non-trading companies are exempt from corporation tax, but may waive their exemption and pay tax at an agreed rate.
This may be beneficial if it enables them to take advantage of the participation exemption available in countries such as the Netherlands or France.
Offshore trading companies are liable to pay tax at a rate of 5%.
Malta has a network of some 18 tax treaties, including treaties with the US, many European countries and Australia.
Malta has also applied for membership of the European Community.
Pressures on use
Tax havens are coming under increasing pressure in high tax rate countries.
Tax authorities tend to subject tax haven operations to close scrutiny.
Their typical approach can be divided into two lines of attack: a challenge to the deductibility of payments to the tax haven, and/or an attempt to bring the haven's profits within the tax net in the high-tax jurisdiction.
A number of jurisdictions may also apply the concept of abuse of law.
This gives the authorities the ability to disregard any part of a transaction that serves no commercial purpose, but which has been inserted purely for the purpose of avoiding tax.
Recent financial scandals involving the use of tax havens have also led to calls for anti-tax haven legislation.
A recent Private Member's Bill in the UK seeks to introduce sanctions against persons or organisations who engage in financial dealings with tax havens.
It is, however, thought unlikely that it will become law.
Opportunities remain
Tax haven operations offer a wide range of legitimate benefits to potential investors.
It is important to monitor the changing environment and ensure that arrangements produce the most favourable result for the investor.
It is also important that tax haven operations are carefully planned and controlled in order to minimise the scope of any possible challenge.
In principle, a decision to establish a tax haven operation should be an integral part of a group's overall commercial plans, and not merely be tax driven.
Significant global tax benefits can accrue to investors provided careful attention is paid to operating requirements.
However, the market is highly specialised and it is important to operate only on the basis of sound advice.
Hong Kong: Links with the Cook Islands
LET YOUR MONEY DO THE WALKING The number of new residents a tax haven can accommodate is limited, but it can hold any amount of companies, trusts and offshore funds
Russ Stanfield
The popular image of the tax exile is still the successful entrepreneur lazing by his or her pool and enjoying an early and prosperous retirement courtesy of a well-timed exit from the UK.
In truth, the number of individuals who have emigrated solely or mainly to save tax is small.
Far more have stayed in the UK and simply sent their money into tax exile.
Many civilised countries now include in their domestic legislation a battery of measures intended to prevent the accumulation of money in tax havens, but with the reduction in exchange controls worldwide this is rarely successful.
The UK imposes no exchange controls, but does have an onerous tax system in terms of the restrictions on the tax-efficient use of tax havens.
So how can tax havens now be used by the wealthy individual who lives in the UK?
Still going strong
There is likely to be plenty of activity in one particular area of tax haven planning.
This is the use of such havens by UK resident individuals who are not UK domiciled.
Such individuals are in a particularly favourable position.
They are liable to UK income and capital gains tax generally only on UK sources, and on foreign income and gains only to the extent that these are remitted to the UK.
Liability to inheritance tax is on UK situated assets only.
If such individuals use tax haven-based structures, these advantages can be enhanced.
The use of an offshore trust will eliminate capital gains tax liabilities on most UK source gains, as well as on foreign gains remitted to the UK.
The use of a foreign incorporated holding company will eliminate inheritance tax on UK assets, although particular care is needed with residential properties.
It is relatively easy, therefore, to arrange the financial affairs of a non-UK domiciled resident so that little or no UK tax is suffered.
This has been so for decades and there is little on the horizon that threatens to curtail it.
A chapter closed?
Without doubt, the most important use of tax havens over the past 10 years has been to save (or defer) capital gains tax.
The vehicle was an offshore trust in Jersey, Switzerland or other low-tax jurisdiction, designed to take advantage of the generous treatment afforded by the Finance Act 1981 for gains realised by offshore trusts.
Such gains were effectively only taxed as and when a UK resident enjoyed a benefit; hence arose the opportunity for a gross roll-up of gains, followed by the eventual distribution of all gains to a beneficiary on a tax holiday.
Transferring assets into such a trust without a tax charge could be a problem, but the route usually chosen to minimise this was relatively straightforward; transfer into a UK resident trust when the asset's value was low, followed by later export to a tax haven.
All this changed following the Finance Act 1991 (effective 19 March 1991).
This clamps down in three ways.
First, a charge to capital gains tax is imposed on export of a UK resident trust.
Second, a charge to capital gains tax arises on the settlors in respect of gains of new trusts if their close relatives can benefit.
Third, with effect from 6 April 1992, a supplementary charge to tax is imposed on the capital benefits UK residents enjoy.
New rules and old trusts
These new rules will probably prove to be highly effective in preventing most UK residents from using new offshore trusts to shelter gains.
But what of existing trusts?
These are favoured, in that the charge on the settlor will not apply provided, inter alia, nothing is added to the trust.
The provisions determining exactly whether or not anything has been added have, predictably, already proved so unclear that a Revenue statement of practice (SP5/92) has been issued to resolve some of the more obvious difficulties of interpretation.
It should not be assumed that there will never be circumstances when, notwithstanding the new CGT rules, someone domiciled and resident in the UK should set up an offshore trust.
In this context, the following should be kept in mind:
Some of the new capital gains tax rules do not apply to offshore trusts for grandchildren.
Even the Revenue cannot tax dead settlors on the gains of their trusts.
Many employee trusts will not be caught.
There are still income tax advantages for the wealthy to set up offshore trusts for their children or certain other relatives.
Losing UK resident status
What does becoming a tax exile involve?
In the case of a company you can alter its residence status simply by ensuring that it is now centrally managed and controlled outside the UK.
A trust migrates through the resignation of the UK trustees and their replacement by non-UK resident trustees who also take over the trust's administration.
There is, however, a mass of tax rules concerning the emigration of companies and trusts — including the imposition of emigration charges to tax.
The individual, by comparison, has many more criteria to consider, namely the number of days present in the UK in any fiscal year; the availability of accommodation; the frequency and regularity of return visits.
Having successfully applied the rules, and stuck to them, then the individual is not generally subject to exit charges and can fully use the tax advantages presented.
Of course, what this ignores are the often huge emotional sacrifices that the individual who becomes a tax exile must make.
Good professional advisers will remind their clients that one of the usual reasons people want money in the first place is to gain the freedom to live where they like.
It is not therefore always appropriate to allow one's life to be dictated by the differing fiscal policies in force around the world.
Altering domicile
The individual who becomes a tax exile and wishes to make a thorough job of it will not only cease to be UK resident; he or she will wish to lose a UK domicile of origin.
A domicile of origin is notoriously adhesive, but it is only if it is replaced with a foreign domicile of choice, and three further years elapse, that the individual will escape the UK inheritance tax net.
Some relief may be at hand.
The Government has made it clear it will — when practical — implement the Law Commission's proposals for the reform of the law of domicile.
These will in most cases make it easier for tax exiles to acquire a foreign domicile.
The corollary is that if they eventually return to the UK, their foreign domicile will be retained until it can be ascertained that they intend to remain for an indefinite period.
At the moment, in contrast, a domicile of choice is lost once an individual ceases to be present in the host country and the domicile of origin revives.
But what will everyone think?
There has been one important non-technical change over the past few years.
There is an increasing tendency on the part of regulatory authorities worldwide (and not just revenue authorities) to infer from the existence of tax haven-based structures that something shady is going on — and the greater the degree of secrecy built into the structure, the stronger the inference.
Of course, the vast majority of those who make use of tax havens do so in an open way with which the authorities have no problem.
But it is as well for high-profile entrepreneurs to remember that they are always at some risk of being damned by association if they use structures that appear, or can with journalistic licence be made to appear, too close to those behind which fraudsters have hidden.
These factors, while nothing to do with technical tax rules, must nevertheless figure clearly in any individual's or company's considerations when weighing up whether or not haven-based tax planning is really appropriate.
Selecting a tax haven
When selecting a tax haven, consider:
Reputation of the jurisdiction generally.
Sophistication of the local laws affecting trusts and companies, and of the judicial system.
Political stability.
Geographical location and thus ease of access.
Availability of reliable local legal and accountancy advice.
Availability of reliable trustees, custodians, and registrars.
Sophistication of regulatory authorities.
Reliability of the local banking systems.
Fluency in the requisite languages.
Costs.
Clearly, the degree to which each of these factors will influence the final decision will depend on the particular structure or investment involved.
Selection of offshore trustees
Selecting an appropriate trustee presents special difficulties.
These arise because most tax haven-based trusts incorporate extremely flexible provisions that confer very wide-ranging discretionary powers on the trustees; it is therefore imperative that the settlors feel able to place confidence in their trustees totally.
But they must also be wary of allowing the costs of their trusts and their administration to outweigh the tax advantages sought.
At the end of the day, it is simply necessary to strike a balance.
As with the selection of an appropriate tax haven, it is possible to list the major factors behind a well-informed decision:
Jurisdictions available in which the trustee operates.
Reliability, integrity and reputation.
Arrangements to deal with crisis situations, eg political instability.
Permanence, eg banks vis-a-vis small professional firms.
Will there be flexibility, or bureaucracy?
Investing in tax havens
It should never be forgotten that it is not only by using trusts or companies in tax havens that fiscal advantages may be obtained.
There are a considerable number of straightforward investments available in reputable havens that have no direct equivalent in mainland UK.
Major banks and building societies have found that establishing offshore branches gives them far greater scope to offer accounts that pay interest gross; within the UK the circumstances in which they may do this are very limited.
This is clearly advantageous when they are dealing with customers who value the cash flow and timing advantages that gross interest can bring.
Some investment houses have gone further and actively marketed cash-based roll-up funds.
Strictly, these are offshore funds without distributor status.
They can play a most useful role in tax planning for individuals, trustees and companies.
In essence, investors buy shares in companies, which in turn invest this cash and accumulate the interest generated.
The profit the investors/ shareholders make on eventual encashment looks like a capital gain but, by statute, is not taxed as such.
Instead, it is taxed as income.
But in the meantime the investors have had the benefit of a gross roll-up of interest and the flexibility of deferring their tax charge until it suits them which, of course, may be at a time when the tax charge is lower or after they have emigrated.
Offshore funds are also sometimes used as vehicles for investment in equities and currencies, but their greatest interest for most UK resident individuals and companies lies in their use as flexible, sterling, cash-based investments.
If, however, you are cynical enough to believe that the shelf-life of a tax efficient investment is inversely proportional to the number of national press articles highlighting its advantages, then you will not expect these rules to remain as generous as this forever.
Good advisers will remind clients that one of the reasons people want money in the first place is to gain the freedom to live where they like
Switzerland: Capital gains savings
MAKING YOUR MONEY WORK ABROAD Investing in offshore tax havens is not just for expatriates — there are certain tax advantages that will appeal to UK residents as well Robin Dunham
Tax havens attract considerable sums of money into funds and products, mainly from non-UK residents, because of their generally nil or very low tax rates.
They also provide tax planning opportunities for UK residents.
All investors must look carefully at the safety of any offshore investment as protection arrangements may be less rigorous than in the UK.
Outside the UK, the Isle of Man has similar compensation arrangements to the UK to protect bank depositors.
Under the Building Societies Act 1986 UK building societies are responsible for the liabilities of their offshore subsidiaries.
A number of havens such as Bermuda, Guernsey, Jersey and the Isle of Man have investor compensation schemes similar to those in the UK.
For UK residents, the reason for considering offshore funds, other than if they have some special appeal — such as currency funds because they are not widely available in the UK — will be possible tax advantages.
If an offshore fund does not acquire distributor status from the Inland Revenue then any gain will be taxed as income when realised.
Thus if someone is planning to move offshore or can realise such a gain in a year when their income is low such investments are worth looking at.
The interest on offshore cash funds, building society and bank accounts is received gross, which will provide cash flow advantages for taxpayers and be of interest to low taxpayers as well as to certain non-taxpayers who are unable to obtain interest gross in the UK.
Before the Finance Act 1989, switches within offshore umbrella funds did not count as realisations for either capital gains tax or income tax purposes, but they are now regarded as disposals and so chargeable to CGT and income tax.
Building societies
A number of well-known UK building societies have established subsidiaries offshore with a range of deposit accounts, usually in sterling.
Broadly speaking, the rates on offer are similar to those quoted on the mainland.
Abbey National, of course, is now classified as a bank in the UK, but its wholly owned subsidiary in Jersey, Abbey National (Overseas)(phone 0534 58815), has the benefit of a legally binding guarantee from the parent providing for full repayment of all deposits if the subsidiary should fail.
Available from Abbey National (Overseas) are Offshore Plus, an instant access sterling account; Offshore 90 also in sterling but requiring 90 days' notice of withdrawal; and Offshore Double Eagle, a US dollar deposit account where withdrawals are subject to 30 days' notice.
At Halifax International (Jersey)(0534 59840) you can choose between fixed and variable rate sterling deposit accounts.
Alliance & Leicester (Isle of Man)(0624 663566) provides Manximum Instant Access, which has a minimum investment of £10 and interest from 4% gross; Manximum 90 day account which has a minimum investment of £1,000 and interest beginning at 6%; and Manximum Investment Bond, a 12 month gross interest account with a monthly income option paying 8.5% a year on a minimum of £10,000.
Among other offshore building society accounts are Bradford & Bingley (Douglas)(0624 662883); Nationwide Overseas (Isle of Man)(0624 663494); Portman Channel Islands (Guernsey)(0481 822747); C & G Channel Islands (Guernsey)(0481 715422); National & Provincial Offshore Reserve (Isle of Man)(0624 662244); Britannia (Isle of Man)(0624 628512); Leeds Permanent Overseas (Isle of Man)(0624 661488); Woolwich Guernsey (0481 715735).
Money market funds
Offshore investors can find plenty of high interest sterling money market accounts.
From Robert Fleming (Isle of Man)(0624 661880) comes the Fleming Offshore Reserve Account, which offers a gross CAR of 6.7% provided the balance exceeds £2,500.
Manx Money Market Cheque Account run by Bank of Scotland (Isle of Man)(0624 623074) has a minimum initial deposit of £1,000.
Interest is paid on a tiered basis but balances of £3,000 or more receive the full rate, currently 6.88% a year.
Interest is paid gross and calculated daily on a cleared balance basis.
Also available in sterling or US dollars is the Tyndall High Interest Money Account (Isle of Man)(0624 629201) which pays the top rate of interest on balances of £1,000 to £100,000 (US$2,000 to 200,000); over this level the customer earns an extra bonus of 1/4 %.
There is no minimum withdrawal and any number of cheques can be drawn.
Cooperative Bank's branch in Guernsey (0481 710527) has a Top Tier Account (minimum deposit £500).
This pays a higher rate of interest for £50,000+ investors.
Currency funds
The volatility of currency movements in the foreign exchange markets in recent months has heightened the attractions of offshore currency funds.
A major player in this area is Rothschild Asset Management (0481 713713) based in Guernsey, whose roll-up fund Old Court International Reserves and distributor fund Old Court Currency Fund each offer wholesale rates of interest in 18 currencies.
There is no minimum investment and switching is available at no dealing cost.
The management fee is 0.75% a year.
Fidelity Money Funds (0800 414161), based in Bermuda, offers 15 currencies: interest can be either paid out or accumulated.
There are no initial charges, only an annual management fee of 1%.
The initial investment can be of any size.
Other currency funds include Lloyds International Money Market Fund (0481 724983), a roll-up fund based in Guernsey with 14 individual currency classes; Hill Samuel International Currency Fund (0534 604604) with six individual currency classes that accumulate income, based in Jersey; Prudential Money Funds (Guernsey)(0800 244444) which has distributor status and five individual currency classes.
In the managed fund category come distributor and roll-up funds from Guinness Flight (071–522 2109); managed classes in roll-up form in sterling, US dollars and Deutschmarks from Rothschilds; and two managed roll-up classes in sterling and US dollars from Lloyds International.
Foreign currency accounts
In view of the relatively large number of banks operating in offshore tax havens, individuals enjoy a wide selection of currency accounts and international banking services.
At Midland Bank in Jersey (0534 606606) your choice is of current, deposit and cheque deposit accounts in US dollars, Australian dollars, Austrian schillings, Belgian francs, Canadian dollars, Danish krone, Deutschmarks, Dutch florins, Ecus, Hong Kong dollars, Italian lire, Japanese yen, Norwegian krone, Spanish pesetas, Swedish krona, and Swiss francs.
Coutts & Co (IOM) International (0624 632222), a subsidiary of National Westminster, says money market deposit accounts can be opened in any major currency for fixed periods from one week to one year.
Barclays Bank's Guernsey office (0481 723176) holds foreign currency accounts in current, two day call deposit and fixed term deposit form.
They are available in all major and minor currencies.
Standard Bank Investment Corporation (Jersey)(0534 67557) caters for all types of intermediaries with its Professional Demand Account, which carries a rate of interest at a flat rate of base minus 1 percentage point.
This enables the intermediary to run a number of sub-accounts.
A foreign currency version is available.
The Tyndall Multi Currency Account (0624 629201) brings you a choice of 10 major currencies, interest linked to money market rates, simple currency switching, no maximum deposits or minimum withdrawals and, for the professional adviser, multiple client accounts.
Offshore equity and bond funds
A glance at the Financial Times or Money Management will reveal the large number and variety of offshore funds in existence.
Umbrella funds, where easy switching can take place between different classes to adapt to different investment conditions, have become popular.
As Gartmore explains about its Jersey umbrella fund, Capital Strategy Fund (0534 27301), ‘it gives you access to every major market in the world.
It covers the most important asset classes (equities, bonds and cash deposits).
It enables you or your adviser to create a personal portfolio which matches your circumstances’.
Capital Strategy has 26 different funds (10 equity funds, five bond funds, four currency funds and seven deposit funds).
Minimum investment is US$25,000 or currency equivalent; there is no minimum per fund.
Hypo Foreign & Colonial (071–628 8000) has three umbrella funds: Hypo Foreign & Colonial Reserve Asset Fund based in Jersey is a roll-up fund with two cash funds, five bond funds, 12 equity funds and free switching; Hypo Foreign & Colonial Portfolios Fund has distributor status, is based in Luxembourg and complies with the UCITS Directive: HCM Luxembourg Funds are Luxembourg-registered Fonds Communs de Placement .
Fleming's Flagship Fund (071–638 5858) is another Luxembourg-based umbrella fund.
It has 14 individual funds and allows up to four switches without charge in any calendar year.
Minimum investment is US$2,500 or equivalent in a major currency.
Hambros' Eurobond & Money Market Fund (EMMA)(071–480 5000), which is managed in Guernsey, consists of four money market funds, five Eurobond funds and two managed funds.
Money Management and similar journals give details of funds' performance.
Life policies and other insurance funds
Standard Chartered International Pension Plan — Jersey Investment Plan —(0534 74001), in association with Norwich Union, caters for British expatriates and foreign nationals.
CMI Insurance Co in the Isle of Man (0624 625599), a member of the Clerical Medical Investment Group, offers four risk-graded investment funds, 13 equity funds, five bond funds; two currency reserve funds and three index trading funds.
Minimum sum for each fund is £1,000 (US$1,500).
The CMI gross annuity is available to anyone other than permanent residents of the UK, Isle of Man, Channel Islands and US nationals.
Maximum age allowed at entry is 80 and the minimum investment is £3,000 (US$10,000).
Eagle Star International Financial Services in the Isle of Man (0624 662266) has designed Vista, a retirement benefits scheme for key employees of companies that operate internationally.
Contributions are flexible, may be paid in any freely-convertible currency and may be salary related.
There is a wide range of investment options.
Sun Alliance International Life in Guernsey (0481 714108) also specialises in meeting the needs of international and expatriate investors.
Products available include: Select Portfolio, an efficient way to build up a portfolio from a choice of more than 40 offshore funds covering equity, bond, cash, managed and regionally specialist; Capital Choice, a single premium bond; Flexi Saver, a tax efficient savings plan; Maxi Saver, particularly suitable for British expatriates; Professional Portfolio, an individual portfolio; Wealth Protector, which combines a discretionary trust with a choice of investment plans; Keyholder, a scheme designed to ease international property purchase; and Pension Plus, a flexible retirement plan that has important potential tax advantages for the returning UK expatriate.
Equitable Life Assurance Society in Guernsey (0481 716021) has designed International Investment Plan written under Guernsey life law and which can be on joint lives; while International Personal Pension Plan written under Guernsey pensions legislation can only be written on a single life.
Both are for non-residents of the UK and the Channel Islands.
Features are the flexibility — you can vary contributions and take benefits at any time.
Investment can be in the with-profits fund or unit-linked.
Among the other insurance companies active offshore and based in the Isle of Man are Royal Life International (0624 821212), Albany International Assurance (0624 823262) and Royal Skandia Life Assurance (0624 611611).
C&G: Offshore building society accounts
Currency movements in the foreign exchange markets in recent months have heightened the attractions of offshore currency funds
Fleming's Flagship: Luxembourg fund
commentary
Cutting auditors' noses off to spite clients' faces There are no cogent arguments for radically extending the regulation of auditors' independence
David Darbyshire Arthur Andersen
The auditor's function requires independence in fact and a perception by all that independence really exists.
Both aspects are essential to success in the role.
If auditors are referees, they cannot also be players.
What does this mean in practice?
For over a century the accountancy profession has built its reputation on three foundation stones: objectivity, integrity and competence.
It is these qualities that have made our audit and advisory roles valuable to our clients and to the public interest.
Objectivity and integrity include within them all that is required for independence.
We start with the belief that we have these qualities and think that they must be recognised both by government and our clients.
Thus there should be no problem.
Nonetheless, the issue is being debated.
Why?
And is the debate addressing a real issue?
Anyone opening the debate should understand the realities.
There are very real sanctions against the professional who falls short in the three fundamental qualities.
Reputation is destroyed for the individual and his firm.
Careers are ruined — for the individuals and, maybe, for some of their colleagues.
Financial liability is serious.
If there are real sanctions, firms take real safeguards.
We aim to recruit the best people, give them the best training, set the best standards, establish quality assurance and maintain a system of peer review within our firms and through our national institutes.
It is difficult to be conclusive in a subjective area.
However, investigations have been made into corporate crashes that have occurred during the past two decades.
These show that, in those relatively few cases where the auditor's role has been challenged, in virtually no cases at all has lack of independence been demonstrated — or even alleged.
There have been three prestigious governmental investigations on this point — two in the US and one in Canada.
These were the Cohen, Treadway and MacDonald Commissions.
Each concluded that there was no demonstrable basis for concern about independence and therefore they recommended no special action.
There has also been considerable academic research.
Recently, a study of the causes of corporate failure in the UK reached the same conclusion.
The most current research is being conducted by Professor Arnold Schindler of the Accounting Research Centre at Maastricht.
I understand that his preliminary conclusion is that independence does exist in fact, but that the perception of independence is an issue.
If independence exists in fact, then it implies that the perception ought to be brought into line by a clear public understanding of the facts.
Once again, we would not expect the perception to be a problem.
However, this is a highly subjective area in which the rules themselves can only be guiding principles.
Each case is individual and depends on the people, entities and issues involved.
I would like to test the perception question by looking at two ideas that are often debated: the rotation of auditors and the provision of non-audit services by auditors.
The suggestion is that, after a number of years, auditors become too cosy with clients, too stale and fail to pick up problems.
Would a fresh look protect the public?
The premise itself is probably false.
Any businessman knows that a company's management team changes fairly continuously and so does the audit team.
In fact, the longest continuing presence is often the audit partner.
For this reason, the suggestion is made, and it has received some sympathy within the profession, that the audit partner, but not the firm, should rotate.
What evidence is there?
Again, it is limited but it shows that an audit failure is three times as likely to occur in the first two years after a change in auditor as in subsequent years.
This is very striking, but not at all surprising.
Common sense suggests that the real risk of audit failure has nothing to do with independence.
It has to do with not knowing what is going on.
Perhaps for this reason, the Italian stock exchange regulator concluded in 1990 that the impending first rotation of auditors of Italian listed companies would be unhelpful.
The rotation took place because it was easier to make than to undo law.
In Spain, we have a further nine years to wait before we see whether similar views are expressed.
There is a high cost in time and money for audit firms in competing in a change in auditors.
Probably there is a similar cost, at least in management time, for the company.
These costs should not be incurred unless they are needed.
A better solution may well be to pick up the idea of rotating the audit partner every five to 10 years.
However, the real point seems to be that the risk of an uninformed auditor's being misled after a change imposes a greater cost than the benefit (unquantified and intangible) that a compulsory change would provide.
If I am unconvinced about compulsory changes in auditors, I am equally unsure about regulating non-audit services by auditors.
It is evident that auditors should be separate from their client's management.
Is it necessary to go further?
The US and Canadian commissions concluded that there was no reason to suppose that independence was affected by the provision of non-audit services.
The matter was debated across Europe when the Eighth Directive was being drafted and the same conclusion was reached.
Most recently, the Cadbury Committee said that it was not persuaded by those who called for such a limitation.
My own personal experience leads to the same conclusion as on the rotation issue.
I am sure that I perform a better audit for those clients where I and others know that others among my colleagues are advising my client on regulation, taxation and organisation issues.
There is an issue of confidentiality here, but awareness of major audit issues through discussion with colleagues is very valuable to an auditor.
Once again, being informed is a tangible benefit.
The benefit of making other services incompatible is speculative.
I can see case by case judgments arising based on the precise nature of the services or their scale as a whole, but those are judgments on the facts rather than the framework for general rule-making.
Application by the firm of the principles of objectivity and integrity ought to suffice.
Common sense suggests that the real risk of audit failure has nothing to do with independence.
It has to do with not knowing what is going on
The audit liability crisis: they protest too much!
In seeking to change the laws on professional liability in the US, the Big Six are acting in their own, rather than the public's, interest
Professor Tom Lee University of Alabama
In August 1992, the chief executive officers of the Big Six audit firms in the US issued an unprecedented document on The Liability Crisis in the US (see ACCOUNTANCY , October, p 11).
Its content is a public statement of the Big Six's concern about the impact of law suits on their financial viability and the US economy, and the need to reform the US legal system.
The villain of the piece is stated by the CEOs to be an out-of-control tort system.
In this system, joint and several liability, and an inability to recover the legal costs of successful court defences, are stated to have led to unwarranted law suits, settlements out of court, and to audit firms' being perceived as deep pockets capable of paying what amounts to a tort tax.
The size of this problem is evidenced in 1991 Big Six data: the average claim was $85m; the average out-of-court settlement $2.7m; and the average legal cost of defending a claim $3.5m.
Not surprisingly, say the CEOs, economics dictate settlements to avoid legal costs.
The result in 1991 was that approximately 9% of the Big Six audit and accounting fee revenue was expended on settlements and defences.
Insurance premiums and deductibles have also risen significantly.
The CEOs argue that, as a result of potential and actual litigation, their firms are under threat of failure.
They link this possible failure to its potential impact on the US economy by highlighting their audit role in the economy.
According to their figures, they audit 99% of the Fortune 500 industrials; 97% of the 100 fastest-growing corporations; 99% of the largest commercial banks; 92% of defence contractors; 98% of the largest insurance companies; and 90% of publicly-traded corporations with turnover in excess of £1m.
Auditors, the CEOs say, are practising risk reduction to combat the legal assault.
They are screening out risky clients or moving out of audit into less litigious areas of service.
They are also facing a recruitment and morale problem.
Auditors held to ransom
The CEOs' answer is a reform of the US tort system — with particular emphasis on the need for proportionate liability a regulatory curb on unwarranted litigation, and a need to permit the incorporation of audit firms with limited liability.
In other words, the document is a statement of a problem from which the writers clearly regard themselves as the innocent sufferers.
The argument is explicit — audit firms in the US are being held to ransom by an unfair legal system.
Lawyers are extorting money from audit firms on the principle that auditors are economically rational and settlements are cheaper than defences.
And there may be much truth in this — all professions in the US face the same problem, because a small group of lawyers are using the tort system to benefit not only their client but themselves, often operating on a contingency fee basis with no cost to the client.
As such, no one would deny the unfairness and the imbalance in the system, and the need to reintroduce to it the fundamental legal precept of justice.
But, in pointing out the inequities in the situation, the CEOs have raised a dust storm that seems to obscure other important issues relating to corporate auditing and accounting.
First, the Big Six document ignores the very real presence of an audit crisis involving huge corporate failures and frauds, particularly in the banking and insurance industries.
Given the nature of these failures, and their reasonably clear association with audited accounting information, it is not surprising that auditors become legally implicated.
It is corporate failures and the auditor's role in them which should be of fundamental concern to professionals charged with protecting the public interest — not with their economic self-interest, which is a secondary issue in professionalised activity.
Second, there are numerous examples in recent years of audit failures which have resulted in public comment, action and professional disciplining.
For example, it is not just private organisations and individuals who take legal action against auditors.
Regulators can also be seen to be indicting firms.
And auditors are found guilty in court, censored by regulatory investigators, and have even had their practising licences suspended in certain US states.
The failures in the Savings and Loans industry are something that is of global significance in terms of public interest.
Auditors have been implicated in these failures, and that needs debating.
Third, the Big Six appear to be operating within a form of audit oligopoly in which the market and price for audit services are controlled by their presence.
Such firms earn substantial revenues, and publicly available data reveals that, despite the so-called liability crisis, their income continues to rise dramatically — particularly on a global basis.
The Big Six in the US have publicly signalled their powerful economic position and their determination to protect their economic self-interest.
But the public interest duty is singularly missing.
Fourth, research suggests that the profession consistently operates as a form of economic monopoly in the sense that it adopts a strategy of doing ‘nothing’ in the face of criticism, and that changes take place only under the severest threat of government intervention.
This protection of the status quo is a matter for considerable public concern.
Putting a pistol to the public's head
And finally, there is plenty of evidence to indicate that the Big Six and other audit firms are not afraid of assuming new responsibilities.
For example, the expansion of tax and management advisory services has created an impression that these firms are willing to enter any area of service in which the economic rewards are advantageous.
Indeed, the Big Six document admits as much — risk management by only accepting tasks in which the legal risks are acceptable.
Again, this is another sign of self-interest seeming to dominate the professional public interest covenant.
What my analysis suggests is that the denials of professional responsibility, and the attempts to limit the economic consequences of being professionals, are not very convincing to a public that can observe auditors in a position of power dominated by economic self-interest.
Indeed, the Big Six statement is further evidence that, to these entities, rather than being a professional service, auditing is a business product whose economic viability is now in question.
Put more bluntly, the Big Six in the US appear to be putting a pistol to the public's head and saying: if you want continuation of the audit services we provide, then change the legal system so that we can maximise our economic return on our investment on auditing.
This seems light years away from noblesse oblige and needs widespread public debate.
What goes on in the US today has a habit of repeating itself in the UK tomorrow.
The Big Six and other large firms need to face up to the question of whether they want to be professionals or commercial profit-maximising organisations.
They cannot be both.
Abolition of the small audit: in the public interest?
The problem of conflicts of interest is highlighted by the small company audit debate
Don Hughes Company director and and property adviser
A great deal has been written, in the last few months, about the Institute's ability to straddle two horses at the same time: can it serve the public interest while serving members' interests?
Moorgate Place and its presidential spokesmen claim the high ground: either there is no potential for conflict or, if there is, the two interests are convergent and so will never cause problems.
Indeed, in its Manifesto to Members , the Institute omits any mention of members' interests.
As a member in business, I look on the Institute's failure to address the problem of conflicts between the two roles with concern.
To my mind, evidence of conflict already exists: the deafening silence from Moorgate Place on Caparo is an example where self-interest has been allowed to be paramount: the decision suits the practising firms (as their legal liability is narrowly defined), notwithstanding that in the public interest, would-be investors, existing individual shareholders and creditors who lose because they have relied on audited accounts which subsequently turn out to be defective, should, on any basis of equity, have recourse to those parties who are responsible, whether management or auditors.
In truth, it is not quite correct to refer to talk of the Institute's ‘deafening silence’ on this matter, as, in its evidence to the Cadbury Committee, the Institute's Financial Reporting and Auditing Group was actually supportive of the Caparo position!
This demonstrates a further problem: that when self-interest is being pursued by the Institute, it is the self-interest of the larger firms that dominate Council and FRAG.
Industrial members, who constitute over half the Institute's membership, are effectively in the same position as the public as far as the Caparo decision is concerned, since they are involved with other companies' audited accounts in their capacity of investor or creditor, but their voice is rarely heard and, even then, is ignored.
Where is the public interest?
A recent example of the conflict between public interest and self-interest arises with the well-orchestrated movement for abolition of the statutory small audit.
The Institute's Council has been in favour of abolishing the small audit since 1985, which, in effect, means that the larger firms are in favour of abolition.
Why is this?
The cynic in me says it is because the larger firms do not do small audits and because abolition would cause problems for the ACCA, which would have more difficulty maintaining an audit regulatory presence as fewer of their members would be auditing.
However, there are also genuine grounds for the move towards abolition: the fact that some companies are virtually unauditable, especially those cash businesses under the control of a powerful sole proprietor; the withdrawal of the Example 6 audit certificate, which gave the auditor some protection; problems with PII cover where the level of small company audits was considered dis-proportionate; clients' complaints at the cost and disruption caused by the audit; examples of overseas jurisdictions where audit is not mandatory; and the general feeling among auditing firms that the small company audit risk/reward factors are out of balance.
Quite an impressive list, but marked by a complete absence of public interest considerations.
Obviously, any saving of the non-productive cost of audit is in the public interest: however, the extent to which the compulsory audit is built into our business fabric should not be minimised; its removal could cause considerable damage.
A most important factor is the growth of limited liability in the UK.
Between 1947 and 1992 the number of companies grew fivefold to 1.1m.
This is a much greater incidence of penetration of limited liability than has occurred elsewhere in western Europe.
Also, the concept of limited liability in the UK is much more protective of proprietors than it is in the Code Napoleon countries, where, for example, net worth deficiencies have to be made good immediately, otherwise the company must cease trading.
Despite the tightening of the law by the Insolvency Act 1986, personal liability actions against manager/shareholders in the UK are still rare.
Limited liability, therefore, still provides effective protection, and there is an obligation to ensure that this benefit to the proprietor is matched by the maintenance of the same minimum standards of fair play towards the users of accounts, whether lenders, creditors, the Inland Revenue, Customs & Excise or minority shareholders — generically ‘The Public Interest’.
Nobody would claim that an audit is a perfect process: it is a snapshot at a moment in time, with the client often deciding how much light is to be let into the exposure.
Nevertheless, its significance as a deterrent and to ensure the maintenance of proper records and operating systems should not be under-rated.
It is these aspects, of control and conformity, which are provided by the auditing of accounts, and which would not be available from a compilation report.
What protection for industrial members?
As regards industrial members, to the extent that they are fee-paying clients, their interests and those of the practising members are likely to converge: they can, if they wish, elect for a voluntary audit, if this is needed for shareholders, lenders or creditors.
The interests diverge where the industrial members are, or represent, lenders or creditors, as their reliance on audit as a safeguard would be removed.
While it is conceivable that, for example, mortgagees would be able to insert an audit requirement in the lending document, this remedy is not available to creditors or other accounts users.
It is surprising that the Institute did not address the needs of accounts users in more depth.
In my view what is needed is not abolition of the audit but a simplified format, less compliance reporting and an audit certificate which enables auditors to explain in greater detail what they have done and to spell out those areas they are not satisfied with, and why.
Manager/proprietors enjoy considerable advantages from limited liability status: it is not unreasonable that, in return, lenders and creditors should receive a minimum level of protection through an audit.
What is unreasonable is for the self-interest of the large practising firms to ride roughshod over the interests of other members and the public interest.
Not only was the Institute's working party on small company audits unrepresentative (seven of its eight members were in practice), but the subsequent circulation of and debate on the consultation paper has been concentrated mainly on practising members.
Given the composition of Council, it is likely that only the DTI stands in the way of adoption of this proposal: if it is adopted, I hope we will be spared further sanctimonious claims to the high ground by the Institute, and that it concedes it is operating predominantly in the interests of (some of) its members.
Blueprint for an effective audit committee Only an audit committee which is properly constituted and which has the board's wholehearted backing will realise its full potential
David Lindsell Ernst & Young
The accountability of business and of boards of directors is a much-discussed aspect of corporate life.
Financial collapses, major frauds, litigation, environmental responsibility, all have understandably given rise to demands for companies to strengthen their control over their business and their public accountability.
Moreover, as these demands have grown, so have the commercial pressures on companies to present their results and state of affairs in the best light, and this in turn has sometimes led to difficulties for auditors in standing up to directors who fix their remuneration and who, in practice, have the power to dismiss them.
As a result, confidence in financial reporting has been undermined.
In a recent survey, finance directors were asked what change they would most like to see in corporate governance.
By far the most common response was that increased power of non-executive directors and audit committees is fundamental in protecting shareholders from board malpractices.
Many companies wishing to demonstrate greater accountability and a commitment to high standards of corporate governance have in fact taken steps to increase the number and calibre of their NEDs and to set up audit committees.
As a result, there has been a steady growth in the number of companies that have an audit committee — around two-thirds of the top 150 UK listed industrial companies and the great majority of UK listed financial institutions now have audit committees, and in more than half these cases, the committees were established within the past five years.
There is no doubt that audit committees can play a major part in bringing about greater accountability by companies and in restoring confidence in financial reporting.
Indeed, the Cadbury Committee reported that it ‘places great emphasis on the importance of properly constituted audit committees in raising standards of corporate governance’, and recommends that all listed companies which have not already done so should establish effective audit committees by 1994.
The precise authority and structure of an audit committee will vary depending on the company's circumstances.
Nevertheless, there are a number of attributes that, in my view, are essential for a truly effective audit committee.
For a start, it will be necessary to invest it with sufficient authority to act with independence and integrity as a basis for effective oversight of the financial reporting process.
The audit committee should be formally established as a sub-committee accountable to the board, and the board should appoint its members.
Confusion and lack of focus
The committee's terms of reference should be set out in writing and should detail clearly its authority and responsibilities.
Many existing audit committees' terms of reference are expressed in very general terms only.
This often results in confusion about the committee's precise remit and a lack of focus in its operations.
The terms should also make it clear that the committee has the power to investigate matters within its brief and that it has full access to information.
Audit committees are only as good as their members: they will help to enhance standards of corporate governance only if they are made up of truly independent non-executive directors with the experience, the skill and the commitment to: challenge knowledgeably, incisively and fearlessly the actions and judgments of management as they relate to the financial reporting process; monitor actively management's commitment to the maintenance of an effective system of internal control; support the auditors by encouraging them to discuss their findings and views freely; and act independently and objectively in helping to resolve differences of view between auditors and management.
The committee needs to be large enough to provide a mix of skills and experience and to permit fruitful discussion encompassing different viewpoints, but small enough to take effective decisions with reasonable speed.
It should have no fewer than three and no more than five members.
The committee's oversight role is enhanced significantly if all its members are free to exercise independent judgment, unhindered by any direct involvement in the company's day-to-day management.
Conversely, objectivity is likely to be impaired if an audit committee includes those whose performance is reflected in the accounts.
Membership should therefore be confined to non-executive directors.
Among the qualities required in audit committee members are basic soundness of judgment, independence of mind and a healthy degree of scepticism.
It is important to select individuals who can be selective in identifying the areas that warrant their attention and who then persevere until satisfied.
A broad business background and experience is invaluable serving or recently retired chief executives (of other companies) are frequently very effective members of audit committees.
An in-depth knowledge of accounting or the law is not necessary, but members must have sufficient understanding to deal adequately with the accounting and auditing matters the committee will face.
Moreover, audit committees function most effectively when their members understand clearly the financial reporting process, the types of issue that can affect that process, and the relationships between management, auditors and regulators.
Radical action
Many companies already identify audit committee members in the annual reports.
Some (although at present very few) companies also explain the responsibilities and work of their audit committees.
Such reports can help to demonstrate publicly the company's commitment to high standards of corporate governance.
The Cadbury Committee recommends that the chairman of the audit committee should be responsible for answering questions about its work at the agm.
This rarely happens at present and it is difficult to see how it will become more common without active encouragement by company chairmen.
As is often the case in matters of corporate governance, the lead is likely to be taken by the chairmen of companies in which standards of governance are already high, rather than by those who head companies with the greatest scope for strengthening their public accountability.
In conclusion, it seems that the increasing incidence of audit committees has not yet brought about any significant improvement in perceptions of corporate accountability and has not restored confidence in financial reporting.
While the newness of many audit committees may help to explain this, it may be that their effectiveness will not increase simply through the passage of time.
More radical action by companies may be required if audit committees are to be the agent of real improvement in standards of corporate governance.
readers ask
Unregistered charity
I am the treasurer of an organisation devoted to writing to prisoners under sentence of death in the Caribbean.
We have raised donation money from members and hope to use these funds to provide legal assistance to prisoners and to provide basic  amenities in an effort to alleviate very severe living conditions.
We understand that we do not satisfy stringent criteria laid down by the Charity Commission for formal registration, and in the event we would prefer to avoid the substantial cost of registration and the administrative burden that would accompany it.
However, to all intents and purposes, the organisation is most definitely a charity.
Is there any obligation for an external audit to be carried out on the books and records of the organisation, or is this a matter to be decided according to an internally agreed constitution?
Were the organisation to make a profit for any particular period of accounts, would it be liable to pay income tax, or would this be a matter for negotiation with the Inland Revenue?
Would the lack of charitable registration impair non-taxable status totally, or would only investment income be taxable as in the case of non-profit making social clubs?
Please advise me.
It is not essential for an organisation to be registered with the Charity Commission to qualify as a charity for tax purposes.
For a start, charities in Scotland and Northern Ireland are outside the jurisdiction of the Charity Commission.
Within England and Wales certain charities are exempt from registration, such as the British Museum and universities.
Many others have, over the years, been excepted by statutory instrument from having to register with the Charity Commission; they include churches, voluntary schools, the branches of the Boy Scouts and other organisations.
The point, however, that the inquirer should bear in mind is that these exemptions and exceptions have been granted because the organisations concerned have demonstrated that either they are already regulated by other statutes or are subject to a reporting  procedure through branch returns to a central body which itself reports to the Charity Commission.
Assuming that the  organisation that is established to give help to prisoners in the Caribbean is based in England or Wales and is unconnected with any other charity, it will find it difficult to persuade the Inland Revenue that its activities are wholly charitable unless it is registered with the Charity Commission.
The Revenue nowadays liaises closely with the Commission on such matters and, in the absence of any other information, is likely to conclude that the organisation carries on other activities which are not strictly defined as charitable, eg political lobbying and campaigning etc.
If this is the case then the inquirer may be best advised to negotiate directly with the Revenue in the manner that he suggests, namely to establish that the donations are non-taxable receipts and that the only taxable income should be in respect of investment income and any trading profits.
Depending on the size of the operations I would however recommend that the treasurer consider applying for registration as a charity.
The advantages are significant.
Net donations from UK taxpayers can be increased through covenants or Gift Aid by one third at no cost to the donor, and no tax is payable on any income or gains from any source.
Legacies can also be sought more easily if the organisation can show that it has charitable status.
The cost of registration is not onerous, the legal cost being the only significant item.
It may be necessary to have two organisations to separate the charitable activities from the non-charitable, but even this need not be costly.
I am sure you could get some free advice from Amnesty International or International PEN on how to arrange this.
Finally, the need for an audit should not deter you from considering an application for registration with the Charity Commission.
Under the Charities Act 1992 an audit is obligatory only for charities with incomes in excess of £100,000.
Those with incomes below £100,000 need only submit their accounts for ‘independent examination’.
Although regulations concerning the duties of an independent examiner have yet to be issued, there is an implication that such a person would charge little or nothing for their services.
Income support
My widowed mother aged 68 draws the state pension and is having trouble making ends meet.
She lives in rented accommodation.
I believe she may be eligible for income support.
Can you tell me what is the maximum level of capital she is allowed to be eligible for this benefit?
Savings of over £3,000 will limit the amount of income support.
For more information see leaflet IS 20,A Guide to Income Support , from a Social Security office.
Registration of trade name
Further to your item on trade name registration (see ACCOUNTANCY , November, p 79) I understood that if the trade name consisted of common or garden words then another company using the same name could not object.
Your comments on this would be appreciated.
Since we compiled the answer relating to company names and trade marks, our attention has been drawn to the case of Mothercare UK Ltd v Penguin (1987) which appears to have been reported only in the Times on 8 July 1987.
It is a Court of Appeal decision in which it was held that the use of the words ‘mother’ and ‘care’in the title of a book Mother Care/Other Care published by Penguin Books — a serious sociological study of problems faced by working mothers who delegated the care of their children to others — was not a trade mark infringement nor a passing off, and Mothercare UK Ltd were not entitled to an injunction restraining Penguin from publishing, advertising or selling the book.
In his judgment, Lord Justice Dillon rejected Mothercare's claim for passing off because in particular the book taken as a whole, not merely its title, did not begin to suggest that it had been issued by or sponsored by or was in any way associated with Mothercare.
In dealing with the allegation of infringement of a trade mark, Lord Justice Dillon said that there could only be such an infringement if the words were used by an offender in the trade mark sense.
Where the words were, as in this case, descriptive words and were used in a descriptive sense, a trade mark was not affected.
The words were merely describing what the book was about.
Since in the pizza query the last two words in the name are descriptive of the business, the Mothercare case is well in point and helpful to the reader and his client.
Resignation as auditor
I am a sole practitioner and have been asked to stand down and make way as auditor of a limited company for a larger outfit, following a JMU visit.
I cannot find any specimen letters of formal resignation nor indeed any articles on the matter setting out considerations to be borne in mind.
I have waded through copies of ACCOUNTANCY since 1985.
Any guidance you can give would be appreciated.
S 390 CA 1985 mentions an auditor's notice of resignation.
The statutory recognition of auditors' resignation occurred for the first time in the Companies Act 1976, prior to which resignation would have constituted a de facto breach of contract.
The stipulations included in that Act have, of course, now been consolidated in ss 392 to 394 of the Companies Act 1985.
S 392 states that the resignation may be effected by depositing written notice to that effect at the company's registered office, and that the date of resignation will be that on which the notice is deposited, or as otherwise specified in the notice.
Within 14 days of receipt of the notice the company has a duty to send a copy of it to the Registrar.
The notice will be ineffective, however, unless (as per s 394) it includes a statement of any circumstances connected with the resignation that the auditor considers should be brought to members' or creditors' attention.
If there are no such circumstances, the notice of resignation must include a statement to that effect.
Assuming the latter to be the case, a specimen letter of resignation might read as follows: The Directors XYZ Limited (Registered Office)
Notice of Resignation
We hereby give notice or our resignation as auditors of your company with effect from…
There are no circumstances connected with our resignation which we consider should be brought to the notice of the members or creditors of the company.
(Signed) ABC & Co
In the event that there are circumstances that members or creditors of the company should know about, the auditor has the power to require the directors to call an extraordinary general meeting to discuss the resignation circumstances.
In drafting the statement of circumstances it should be borne in mind that the auditor enjoys the protection of qualified privilege, ie he will be immune from any action against him in respect of his statement provided it is given in good faith, without malice and does not infringe the general criteria stated in s 394.
The Act requires the resignation notice and statement to be delivered to the company's registered office — which in many cases may well be the address of its resigning auditor!
A pragmatic approach should be adopted and a copy sent immediately to the company's headquarters.
No doubt the auditor would, at the same time, wish to advise the company that a new registered office should be found, although reasonable notice may have to be given.
Late filing of company accounts
What a strange statement has come from Companies House confirming that the periods allowed for filing of company accounts actually expire at midnight on the date in the last month for filing which corresponds to the last day of the company's accounting reference period (see ACCOUNTANCY , October, p 98).
The example quoted was if the accounting period ended on 30 September accounts had to be filed by 30 July and not 31 July.
How pedantic!
What I would like to know is whether a private company, whose accounting period ends on 30 April, is exempt from prosecution for failing to file accounts by 30 February?
If this is the case then I would suggest that all private companies have an accounting period ending on 30 April and all plcs an accounting period ending on 30 June.
Yes, it does seem pedantic, but we cannot altogether blame Companies House.
The fault, if it is a fault, lies in the Interpretation Act 1978 Sch 1, which states that for legal purposes a ‘month’ means a calendar month, and this applies to legislation since 1850.
Now, in Dodds v Walker [1981]2 All ER 609, the House of Lords, no less, decided that in calculating the period of a month or a specified number of months that had elapsed after the occurrence of a specified event such as the giving of a notice or suchlike, the general rule was that the period ended on the corresponding date in the appropriate subsequent month, irrespective of whether some months were longer than others.
Thus, on the facts of the Dodds case, where a landlord gave notice of termination of a tenancy of business premises under the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954 on the 30 September 1978, the ‘four month’ period during which the tenant had a right to apply for a new tenancy expired at midnight on 30 January, and so his application made on 31 January 1979 was invalid as being out of time.
Hence the ruling on filing accounts.
However, the second paragraph of the reader's letter about filing on 30 February will not work.
In the Dodds case the House of Lords stated that if the month in which the period expires has no corresponding date because it is too short, the period given by the notice ends on the last day of that month, ie 28 February or 29 February in a leap year.
As we see it there are also potential problems in terms of the date on which accounts must be made up.
Suppose our company is incorporated on 30 April 1992.
S 224(4) of the CA1985 states that a company's first accounting reference period is a period of more than six months but not more than 18 months beginning with the date of its incorporation.
So our company cannot have 31 October 1993 as its accounting reference date, which is what we would like.
What are we supposed to do?
Perhaps:
1.
We could prepare accounts to 31 October 1992 (a period of more than six months) and then to 31 October 1993 and so on.
2.
Or we could comply with the 30 October 1993 rule but amend the accounting reference date within the first nine months of incorporation, as we may, and draw up accounts to 31 October 1993, which is within the seven day period allowed by s 223(2).
Similar problems may also be experienced when an accounting reference period is changed, since s 225(6) of the CA1985 provides that: ‘An accounting reference period may not in any case (exception if administration order is in force) be extended so as to exceed 18 months and a notice under this section is ineffective if the current or previous accounting reference period as extended in accordance with the notice would exceed that limit.’
Perhaps CRO would kindly advise on this, since there appears to be nothing in CRO's Notes for Guidance NG10 and NG17 which would be relevant.
books
ABC Activity Based Costing for Small and Medium Sized Businesses: An Implementation Guide Douglas Hicks John Wiley & Sons Ltd, Baffins Lane, Chichester, West Sussex PO19 1UD. 312pp £47.50 h/b
Kaplan asked the question ‘Is one costing system good enough?’ and in the years that have followed we have witnessed the response.
Consultants and academics alike saw an opportunity to change the recognised rules of cost management.
Conferences, books, articles and software have proliferated, but where is the evidence of alternative cost management techniques in practice?
It is recognised that the multi-million dollar high technology companies have dabbled in throughput, life cycle and activity-based costing techniques, some have even tested Japanese target costing.
But has the heart of British industry been influenced by the hype and pressure to change?
In Douglas Hicks' book, the gauntlet is laid down.
Mr Hicks bravely pronounces that an activity based costing approach to cost management is not an option for an organisation hoping to compete in the 1990s — it is a requirement.
So does his book convince the reader, and will it remove the barriers to change?
Mr Hicks differentiates the needs of the smaller company by renewing the much publicised ‘ABC’ as ‘abc’.
His ‘abc’ is based on the same foundations of activity based principles — but he offers an approach that is less complex, easier and cheaper to implement.
He estimates that his consultant-free approach should be implemented within 80–500 hours.
The benefits established does the book provide the blueprint solution?
Mr Hicks presents his abc in three sections.
The first forcibly draws the reader's attention to the changing costing scene that has placed traditional costing systems in the dock.
His case for the prosecution is not new;Relevance Lost opened the debate, and in the subsequent years many authors have followed to offer similar evidence.
Section two takes the reader into the abc implementation; a course that only the most dedicated of accountants will work through.
This is not a book for the general manager or lay reader — it is certainly not a book for the commuter or a late night read.
This section requires the cost accountant's commitment to detail to track the cascading cost model of ‘Cost Manufacturing’, Mr Hicks' rational hybrid company born from his real life consulting experience.
The venturer who successfully completes this abc journey will have experienced a logical but unexciting event.
Mr Hicks' framework is well presented but much travelled by many companies, set on improving the quality of cost information based on sound and robust examples.
Does the ‘abc’ badge provide any more comfort for the decision maker?
To arrive at section three will, for most casual readers, be as a result of by-passing section two.
This final section allows Mr Hicks to justify the implementation of abc as a better foundation to the decision making process; but is the argument being made to the right audience?
The sound implementation of realistic costing systems demands the commitment of operational and financial management alike.
This book will not provide the convincing argument for change.
It will be found on the cost accountant's bookshelf but the operational manager will not be convinced that the cost gymnastics of Mr Hicks' cost accumulation model are any more accurate or relevant to his operation than the existing confusion of standard rates, production norm etc.
But if you are the one with the remit to make ‘abc’ happen, this book may well be a useful aid to guide you.
INVESTMENT ANALYSTS
Citigate/Price Waterhouse Who's Who of Analysts 1992/3 Citigate Communications, 7 Birchin Lane, London EC3V 9BY 118pp £100 p/b
Analysts are a highly mobile group, so a directory of them quickly becomes out-of-date.
Even so, this is a useful work, listing 1,158 analysts from 43 firms and providing biographical details for 658 of them.
Some of the more interesting biographical details were apparently censored by departmental heads when they were sent back to be checked, but a few curiosities remain under the heading of leisure/interests, such as‘Three miniature smooth haired dachshund bitches’ for County NatWest's Angus Phaure, ‘The later philosophy of Wittgenstein’for Merrill Lynch's Ian McEwen (sounds like fun) and ‘My wife’for BZW's Colin Davies.
Altogether, they sound like a formidably intellectual bunch.
Their publications would do credit to any university:Libertarian Conflicts in Social Choice , by UBS Phillips & Drew's John Wriglesworth,The Role of Crack Resistance Parameters in Polymer Wear , by Williams de Broe's Mustapha Omar and Stellar Winds (which might conceivably be a volume of poetry) by Robert Fleming's Martin Murch are just a few of the titles that leap off the page.
This is the book's third edition, but the first to be sponsored by Price Waterhouse, which seems appropriate, as a disproportionate number of the analysts recorded in it turn out to be chartered accountants.
PW's senior partner Ian Brindle looks out inscrutably from the foreword to tell us that the work provides ‘a unique point of reference for company executives, investors and investment commentators’, which just about sums it up.
ACCOUNTING
Accountancy's Faulty Sums Keron Bhattacharya The Macmillan Press Ltd, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire RG21 2XS 223pp £25 h/b
Few books on accounting can have such intriguing acknowledgements.
In ‘A Word of Thanks’ the author reveals that writing the book took 10 months' ‘hard slog’at his ‘hide-out in Praia da Luz, Algarve’.
He adds that ‘Robin and Barbara Crossland and also Angela Goncalves of the Ocean Club attended to my every need during my stay there.
Tony and Ann of the International Cafe and June, Jane and Paul of The Duke of Holland kept me suitably fed.
And of course the maid, Celeste, who brought some order to my chaotic existence.’
It's tough being an author.
Suitably fed etc, Mr Bhattacharya has some serious things to say about financial reporting.
His book belongs to the swelling body of works devoted to revealing the limitations and subjectivity of accounting and the ways in which choices of accounting policy can affect the published figures.
He tackles familiar areas such as goodwill and intangibles, depreciation and extraordinary items.
But he also looks at topics such as costing, budgeting, overhead allocation and investment decisions, which give his work a broader scope than most.
Mr Bhattacharya's style is argumentative and lively, but his tone is relentlessly negative.
One gets the impression that accountants are always foolish or dishonest and accountancy itself a waste of time.
His conclusions are stark: ‘…a basic profit statement or balance sheet of any company conveys meaningless information…some [accountants]are definitely doing conjuring tricks and manipulating figures and the rest hopelessly losing their balance in utter confusion…we must ask ourselves whether we should be constrained by our accounting numbers and take a negative stance which dampens all entrepreneurial spirit.’
In arguing the case for these conclusions, Mr Bhattacharya may not be totally convincing, but he is always challenging.
taxation
VAT…
AND A HAPPY NEW YEAR Even businesses that are fully prepared for the collapse of EC frontiers might need some help with the details
Keith Warner
Surely, as we move towards the end of 1992, there are few if any businesses involved in trading with other European Community countries that are not aware of the fundamental changes that will take place from 1 January 1993 after internal frontiers are removed?
There has been a campaign by Customs & Excise, intensifying as the year has gone on, with valuable assistance from the accountancy profession, Sitpro (Simpler Trade Procedures Board) and similar bodies, to ensure that businesses buying or selling goods within the European market know what the changes to the collection of VAT and related statistics will entail.
A detailed article in the August issue of ACCOUNTANCY (see p 93) provided an outline of those changes.
I do not intend to run through the general principles involved again, but rather to look at some of the details involved.
In the main, the changes create two new areas of responsibility for business:
the accounting for VAT by the taxpayer on his VAT return rather than by collection at the frontier;
the submission of statistics direct to Customs on a period basis rather than by individual movement.
In reality this has meant:
a new VAT return;
a new document to detail the despatch of goods by UK businesses to other EC countries, known as the EC sales listing (ESL);
a new statistical document, known as the intrastat, for the larger trader involved in the acquisition and despatch of goods within the EC.
Within that framework — and what would the EC be without its exceptions?— there are special rules for new means of transport, distance selling, and sales of goods subject to excise duty.
Businesses involved with these goods must be aware of the special requirements, but for other traders, the following general principles will apply.
Accounting for VAT
The main and practical effect will be the absence of controls at frontiers, heralding an end to the days of entering and clearing goods from other member states.
VAT due on the importation of goods from other EC countries, now termed acquisitions, will be done by the reintroduction of a self supply, recognised by older hands as very similar to the postponed accounting system, abolished in late 1984.
Acquirers of standard rated EC goods in the UK will charge themselves VAT at 17 1/2 % based on the acquisition value of the goods.
This VAT will then be shown separately in box 2 of the new VAT return and will be aggregated with any VAT due on domestic sales from box 1, including any VAT due on sales to non-registered VAT persons in the EC, to arrive at the total VAT due in the period (box 3).
VAT on acquisitions can be recovered as input VAT in the normal way by including it within box 4 on the VAT return, subject of course to any partial exemption or non-business restriction, but acquisition VAT should be shown as a separate item on the trader's own VAT account.
All that needs to be included then is the value of these transactions, which become the statistical figures required for boxes 8 and 9 on the VAT return.
The first return to be affected by these changes will be the one for the period ending 31 January 1993: the taxpayer will have to apply the existing system for the first two months, and the new procedures for the final month.
This will also apply to the return ending 28 February 1993, where the final two months will be covered by the new system.
One major benefit immediately arising from these changes is that, as VAT will no longer need to be accounted for at UK sea or airports, EC deferment guarantees can be cancelled, creating an immediate cash flow improvement.
The customer's VAT number
For a business to buy or sell goods within the Community without incurring EC VAT, the seller must obtain his customer's VAT number.
This, combined with evidence that the goods have actually been supplied to the other EC state, becomes the cornerstone of the new regulations.
The number quoted must be supported by written evidence from the EC customer.
This evidence should then be filed so that if it is challenged or its validity is questioned, the company can show that it has acted not only in good faith but with due care and prudence.
This is very important if a UK business is to ensure that it is not charged VAT at the standard rate on the supply of these goods where the customer's VAT number subsequently proves to be false or otherwise incorrect.
Customs have indicated that they will treat errors sympathetically, certainly in the early days, but this will only be where they are satisfied that the taxpayer has been both careful and reasonable.
Where goods move between EC VAT registered traders, a tax invoice has to be raised.
This tax invoice now assumes many of the characteristics we have come to associate with an internal VAT invoice, for not only will it show the customer's VAT number, it will also be used by the UK acquirer of goods from within the EC as evidence to recover acquisition tax.
The draft legislation appears to indicate that acquisition tax cannot be recovered unless the taxpayer is in possession of a valid tax invoice from his EC supplier.
For a UK despatcher, in addition to the normal requirements, the UK VAT registration number has to be prefixed with GB and the customer's VAT number with the alpha code of his member state (see Panel 1).
And something new
An examination of the draft legislation also reveals that both acquirers and despatchers of goods are required to set up a new register of these movements.
This is to be known as the register for goods moved to and from other member states.
It thus applies equally to both acquisitions and despatches.
It is to include the date of removal of goods or of their arrival, a description of the goods sufficient to identify them, the value or consideration involved and, if the goods are subject to a process, then a description and value of the process.
There has been little mention of this aspect so far, but it appears that Customs will be empowered to vary the terms by publishing a notice; that indicates that it will be quite strictly enforced.
It is interesting to remember at this point that the EC excludes the Canary Islands, the Channel Islands and the French Overseas Departments, but includes Monaco and the Isle of Man.
At the time of writing, the status of Andorra and San Marino remains uncertain, but the latest indications are that Andorra will be excluded while San Marino will be included.
EC sales listing
From 1 January any UK business that sells goods to another VAT registered person in another country within the EC will have to complete one of these statements on a period basis.
Normally this will be within six weeks of the end of the calendar quarter, but smaller businesses whose sales to other EC countries in a year do not exceed £10,500 out of a total turnover of £59,500, need only submit a list of their customers' registration numbers on an annual basis.
In addition to the UK trader's own details and other header information, the ESL is a record of sales to EC customers, distinguished by their own VAT numbers and total value of sales made to them during the calendar quarter.
There is a further box on the form marked indicator; this is to be used where goods are sent for processing, in which case 1 will be inserted, or where goods are being returned after processing, then 2 will be inserted.
Regrettably, but all too familiarly these days, there is a penalty for non-compliance.
Where a statement is found to be incorrect, Customs will issue a warning.
If within two years of that warning there is a second inaccuracy in the return, Customs will issue a penalty notice.
If within two years of the notice there is a further inaccuracy, then it appears that Customs will issue a penalty.
This penalty, according to the legislation, will be £100, and the penalty period will extend for a further two years.
It appears that these penalties have been based very much on the default surcharge, but thankfully the level of penalty does appear to be significantly lower, though the period of penalty is much longer.
A regulatory penalty can also be imposed where an ESL is late, and that is based on the number of days late.
It is hoped that Customs will keep to their original pledge of applying the rules sympathetically at least within the first year, and waive any penalties where it is clear that the taxpayer has done his best to comply.
Intrastat: a European requirement
One form about which there has been plenty of discussion is the Supplementary Statistical Document, known as the intrastat.
This is very much the brainchild of the European Commission.
Despite the introduction of the ESL, the EC was concerned about how it would collect its statistics relating to the movement of goods among member states when internal frontiers came down.
The result of these discussions is the intrastat.
It is the form to be used by larger traders from which the EC will compile its detailed statistics.
Within the UK the threshold has been set at a level of £135,000, above which any business supplying or acquiring goods will have to complete this form on a monthly basis.
It is estimated that it will affect about 24% of EC traders within the UK, but will account for about 97% of all the trade.
It is to be submitted monthly or in accordance with special accounting periods, subject to approval from the local VAT office.
In either event it should arrive within 10 working days after the period end, so the amount of time for collecting this information is very short.
Another surprising feature is that as an EC requirement the intrastat carries a criminal as opposed to a civil penalty for non-compliance.
At the time of writing the details of the criminal penalty have not been revealed.
In addition to the usual header information, it requires seven mandatory statistical data elements and one optional element, the country of origin in respect of acquisitions only.
Customs accept that where the optional details are not known, this box can be left blank (see panel 2).
…and a Happy New Year
At this late stage, with the time before 1 January as easy to count in days as in weeks, businesses should now be obtaining the last elements of these details.
The main areas where a business is likely to be affected should now be known, and the changes communicated fully within the organisation.
With such fundamental changes involved, a business can only be as strong as its weakest link.
Systems should by now have been analysed to ensure that the correct information is provided, and within the time scales allowed.
One final point to remember is that goods despatched before 31 December will be treated as exports within the existing system even if they are to arrive on 1 January or later.
Agents and exporters should therefore treat them as within the existing system, and include T2 documents where appropriate.
Only goods physically sent on 1 January or afterwards are counted as despatches within the new harmonised system.
Eight digit commodity code.
Value.
Terms of trade.
Nature of transaction.
Quantity.
Member state, goods despatched to or arrived from.
Mode of transport.
Country of origin (optional, acquisitions only).
Obtain customer's EC VAT registration number in writing.
Set up a register of goods moved to or from other member states.
Ensure tax invoices from EC suppliers are received and filed.
Obtain details for ESL.
Confirm whether likely to be affected by the intrastat limit of £135,000.
Cancel EC deferment guarantees with effect from 1 January 1993.
2: INTRASTAT INFORMATION
EC trading: Looking forward to an end to frontier controls
A SIX POINT GUIDE TO THE CHANGES
students
LIGHT ON THE MINORITY INTERESTS BLACKOUT Establishing why minority interests change calls for thinking in broad financial accounting terms.
Are you prepared?
Guy Loveday
Take any consolidated balance sheet and you will most likely find cross references to notes for all items except cash and minority interests.
The Accounting Standards Board's new cash flow statement gives a splendid analysis of the movements in cash of course, but there is a total information blackout on minority interests.
Neither the Companies Act nor standard accounting practice requires any information whatsoever about the make-up of the figure or the movements for the year, and yet a great many events and transactions can cause the minority interests to change.
Establishing what events and transactions have caused the minority interests to change in a particular situation would entail thinking in broad financial accounting terms (something that the current PE 2 Financial Accounting 2 examiner believes many candidates are reluctant to do).
Some candidates still seem to be anticipating an examination paper that exclusively tests discrete technical topics (for example, leasing, deferred tax, disposals, pensions and foreign currency translation).
While some such questions have featured in this examiner's papers, many of the questions set attempt to test a breadth of knowledge and understanding across the whole financial accounting syllabus.
Such questions are usually not technically complex and require more of a commonsense approach — more in the nature of applying basic principles and appreciating commercial implications.
I have prepared a question (see Figure 1) that aims to test your overall appreciation of consolidated accounts.
While acquisitions, disposals and foreign subsidiaries all feature, I do not believe that it is particularly difficult — if you have a basic understanding and are willing to think in broad financial accounting terms.
Try answering the question — and then look at my answer (see Figure 2).
How did you do?
To do well you will need to have remembered the principles of consolidation and equity accounting from PE 1 and have studied disposals, foreign currency translation and purchase of own shares at PE 2.
However, this would not be sufficient.
It is one thing to study these topics and to then be able as a result to answer conventional questions.
It is something else altogether to understand these topics as well, and therefore to appreciate the consequences of the events and transactions affecting the Farringdon group.
The examiner is aiming to test your understanding and the best way to do this is to use rather more unstructured questions, such as this one, that do not favour the rote-learning of pro forma techniques.
The end result is a more practical, more realistic examination and, hopefully, a more useful, more commercially aware accountant.
Finally, bear in mind what the examiner said after a recent PE 2 Financial Accounting 2 examination — that an appreciation of the fact that the questions are not highly complex in a technical accounting sense should enable candidates to approach the examination with optimism and even, perhaps, enthusiasm!
1: FARRINGDON GROUP — QUESTION
As at 1 December 1991, the Farringdon group comprised the parent company Farringdon plc, a 75% owned UK-based subsidiary Clerkenwell Ltd, an 80% owned US-based subsidiary Soundoff Inc, and a 45% owned UK-based associate KP Ltd.
During the year ended 30 November 1992, the following significant events and transactions occurred:
1.
In January 1992, a new 60% owned UK-based subsidiary Ronsnade Ltd was acquired at a cost of £376,000.
At that time Ronsnade Ltd's separable net assets had a fair value of £160,000.
2.
In March 1992, the group's holding in Clerkenwell Ltd was reduced to 55% by the sale of shares to the local management.
A loss on sale of £54,000 was recognised in the consolidated accounts, made up as follows:
3.
On 1 June 1992, Clerkenwell Ltd allotted 200,000 £1 10% preference shares at par to the Friendly Bank plc so as to raise finance for expansion.
4.
In August 1992, Clerkenwell Ltd revalued certain of its recently-acquired freehold properties and debited a deficit of £240,000 to its revaluation reserve.
5.
During the year, Clerkenwell Ltd paid the following dividends:
6.
An exchange gain of £288,000 on the translation of Soundoff Inc's financial statements using the net investment method was credited to the consolidated profit and loss account reserves.
7.
On 1 October 1992, KP Ltd purchased 15,000 of its own £1 shares (representing 15% of the share capital) for £65,000.
The shares were previously held by the company's founder.
Just prior to the purchase Farringdon plc's share of the net assets of KP Ltd amounted to £144,000.
8.
The minority interest charge in the consolidated profit and loss account was £184,000.
The consolidated balance sheet showed minority interests of £762,000 as at 30 November 1991 and £1,328,500 as at 30 November 1992.
Requirement: Explain the increase in the minority interests in the consolidated balance sheet.
(15 marks)
1.
What are the minority interest implications of this event?
Certainly a substantial premium has been paid to acquire the shares — but will this affect the minority interest?
No!
We never attribute any goodwill to the minority interest (since they are not a party to the transaction) nor attempt to extrapolate the group's goodwill to establish a theoretical goodwill attributable to the minority interest.
The minority interest arising on acquisition is simply their share (40%) of the fair value of the separable net assets (£160,000).
2.
A part disposal is occurring here — the effect is to increase the stake of the minority shareholders from 20% to 45%.
Once again the goodwill is irrelevant to the minority interest.
The minority shareholders have simply acquired additional shares and the value of the separable net assets attributable to those shares is £85,000.
3.
By causing a subsidiary to issue preference shares to a bank, the group could be said to be ‘window dressing’.
In substance they are borrowing money, but such borrowings will be included within the minority interests and hence will not be identifiable unless separate disclosure is made.
4.
A post-acquisition devaluation has occurred.
Of this, 55% will be debited to the consolidated revaluation reserve and 45% of it will be debited to the minority interests.
5.
This should be an easy one.
The minority interests figure is reduced as soon as the subsidiary proposes to pay a dividend.
Consequently, the minority interest figure will have fallen by their share of the dividends charged in the subsidiary's profit and loss account this year.
6.
SSAP 20,Foreign Currency Translation , requires that the group's share of an exchange gain on translation using the net investment method is credited directly to reserves.
Therefore, £288,000 must represent the group's share (80%) of the exchange gain.
The minority's share (20%) is credited directly to the minority interests.
7.
This is an unusual event in that the consequence of the purchase by KP Ltd of its own shares from its founder is that Farringdon plc's shareholding now exceeds 50% (45,000 out of 85,000 shares) and KP Ltd has become a subsidiary.
The net assets of the company before the purchase amounted to £320,000 (£144,000/0.45) and the purchase caused the net assets to fall by £65,000 to £255,000.
The minority's proportion of these net assets amounts to £120,000 (£255,000 x 0.40/0.85).
8.
Another easy one — the minority interest charge in the consolidated profit and loss account is credited to the minority interests in the consolidated balance sheet.
2: FARRINGDON GROUP — ANSWER
ACCOUNTANCY BOOKS
Two new titles for students
Accountancy Books has recently published two brand new books that will be of particular help to students.
Student Financial Reporting 1991/92 — A Guide to UK Reporting Practice for Accountancy Students Editors: Professor L Skerratt and Dr D Tonkin Price £12.95
This book takes the practical issues of the day and relates them to students' training needs.
Each controversial issue is examined by leading experts and illustrated by extracts from major UK companies' recent accounts.
The experts describe the problems that arise, outlining the main areas of choice, and go on to make specific proposals for improvement in reporting practice.
Applying GAAP 1992/93 — A Practical Guide to Financial Reporting D Chopping, Moore Stephens Price £29.95
Applying GAAP (generally accepted accounting practice) provides clear, practical and concise help on the application of accounting standards.
The book is up to date with the Companies Act 1989 and all accounting and financial reporting standards and exposure drafts issued by the Accounting Standards Board up to August 1992, including FRS2.
Applying GAAP is a very practical guide that provides worked examples, draft layouts, extracts from annual reports, highlights of problem areas and recommendations on interpretation and application, plus advice on best practice.
It forms a complete reference source ideally suited to students.
Both titles are available from Accountancy Books, PO Box 620, Central Milton Keynes MK9 2JX.
The prices given here include postage and packing.
Please send cheques with orders.
Credit card orders can be placed by calling 0908 668833.
For a copy of Accountancy Books' latest publications catalogue, call Leanne Ryan on 071–833 3291, ext 4606.
accounting issues
Goodbye to single performance indicators The Accounting Standards Board's third standard will change the p&l account beyond recognition
It has been clear for some time that there are a number of significant practical problems with the interpretation of SSAP 6,Extraordinary Items and Prior Year Adjustments , particularly in respect of the variety of treatments of apparently similar events as sometimes ordinary and sometimes extraordinary items in the p&l account.
The Accounting Standards Board responded to the increasing demands for improvement in the way in which financial performance is reported and in April 1991 published a discussion draft putting forward its proposals.
This was followed by FRED 1,The Structure of Financial Statements — Reporting of Financial Performance,in December 1991 (see ACCOUNTANCY , January, p 86).
The proposals involved a major change to the presentation of financial performance both in the p&l account itself and for items passing through reserves.
FRS 3,Reporting Financial Performance,the first FRS to be based on the ASB's own proposals rather than those ‘inherited’ from the Accounting Standards Committee, is based on FRED 1 and the comments received on the exposure draft.
The key feature of FRED 1 was the attempt to shift the emphasis in the p&l account from concentration on a single performance indicator to highlighting a range of important components of financial performance.
It was argued that users of financial statements should be aware that the performance of complex organisations cannot be summarised in a single number and that to obtain a proper understanding of such performance, knowledge of a range of important aspects is required.
The fundamental aspects of FRED 1 have generally not altered in the process of conversion from exposure draft to standard.
In summary these are the introduction of: changes to the format of the p&l account, including an analysis of the results of continuing operations, acquisitions (as a component of continuing operations) and discontinued operations; changes to the calculation of, and disclosure requirements regarding, earnings per share; a note of historical cost profits and losses; and a statement of total recognised gains and losses.
The principal changes to the proposals in FRED 1 are summarised below.
FRED 1 did not address the making of provisions in respect of operations that are to be discontinued in future periods.
In response to comments received, this issue has been addressed in the FRS.
If a decision has been taken to sell or terminate an operation and the reporting entity is demonstrably committed to the sale or termination, then provisions should be made only for the direct costs of the sale or termination and any operating losses of the operation up to the date of sale or termination; provisions for future operating losses may not be made in other circumstances.
Unless the operation qualifies as a discontinued operation in the period under review, any write down of assets or the establishment of any provisions appear in the continuing operations category.
In the subsequent period when the operation does qualify as discontinued, the provisions should be used to offset the results of the operation in the discontinued category.
The related disclosure in that subsequent period, however, should show the results of the discontinued operation under each of the statutory format headings, with the utilisation of the provision analysed as necessary between the operating loss and the loss on sale or termination of the discontinued operation and disclosed on the face of the p&l account immediately below the relevant items.
Some respondents to FRED 1 were concerned about exceptional items and the prominence they were to be given.
In summary, the view was that exceptional items should not be transferred to a single heading of ‘exceptional’, because profit before exceptional items could then become the focus of financial statement presentation and as a result operating profit would be likely to become more blurred, rather than clarified.
To meet this concern, FRS 3 requires all exceptional items (other than three specific types of item) to be included in the income or expense heading to which they relate.
These three specific types of item that should be shown separately on the face of the p&l account after operating profit and before interest are: profits or losses on the sale or termination of an operation; costs of a fundamental reorganisation or restructuring having a material effect on the nature and focus of the reporting entity's operations; and profits or losses on the disposal of fixed assets (although not those profits or losses that are in effect no more than marginal adjustments to depreciation previously charged).
FRED 1's proposals in respect of extraordinary items were generally well received, although several commentators wanted to see them taken one stage further and recommended banning the use of the category of extraordinary items.
This option was considered during the development of FRED 1, but was not pursued as legal advice indicated that, because the Companies Act envisaged extraordinary items, the possibility of using the statutory heading had to remain.
However, the same legal advice stated that there was considerable scope for severely restricting the use of the statutory heading.
FRED 1 developed the concept of discretionary expenditure introduced in the earlier discussion draft and in the process ‘discretionary expenditure’ was changed to ‘revenue investment’.
More detailed guidance was given about what should be included under this heading, and a minimum disclosure requirement proposed.
This was for the disclosure, where material, of the charges to the p&l account of the period in respect of research and development, training, advertising and major maintenance and refurbishment.
A requirement for an explanation of all material changes between the current and prior period in the level of revenue investment was also proposed.
These revenue investment proposals failed to attract support in the context of the proposed accounting standard, and the ASB therefore concluded that they should not be pursued by that means.
The ASB still takes the view that appropriate disclosures of this kind can assist users of financial statements, but in the light of the responses to FRED 1 concluded that the concept can best be developed within the ASB's proposals for an Operating and Financial Review to support a company's annual report — ie as part of a wider discussion of a company's performance.
This decision on the FRED 1 proposal on revenue investment does not in any way affect the existing requirements of SSAP 13,Accounting for Research and Development,and of the Companies Act regarding the disclosure of research and development activities.
Several respondents to FRED 1, in commenting on the statement of total recognised gains and losses, suggested that it should be extended to provide a complete reconciliation of the movements in shareholders' funds.
The ASB agreed that changes in shareholders' funds other than those included in the statement of total recognised gains and losses can also be important in understanding the change in a reporting entity's financial position, and concluded that this additional information should be required in a reconciliation of movements in shareholders' funds.
In order not to divert attention from the components of performance of the total of recognised gains and losses for the period, if included as a primary statement, the reconciliation should be shown separately from the statement of total recognised gains and losses.
Finally, the accounting practices set out in FRS 3 should be adopted as soon as possible and regarded as standard in respect of financial statements relating to accounting periods ending on or after 22 June 1993.
FRED 1's proposals on extraordinary items were well received, although several commentators recommended banning the use of the category
Fear stalks the world of financial reporting So far, the Review Panel's tough attitude to wayward accounting seems to be working
The Financial Reporting Review Panel has enjoyed excellent PR.
Ever since the 1989 Companies Act was passed, the press has, if anything, exaggerated the Panel's powers.
An as yet untested right to apply to the court to seek rectification of Companies Act breaches has consistently been portrayed as a formidable power to enforce accounting standards.
If this made companies tremble, David Tweedie's pronouncements will have done nothing to calm their fears.
As chairman of the ASB, he is not in fact involved in the Review Panel's work.
But he is perceived as the spokesman of the new regime, and he has always said that he wanted the Panel to ‘find a company to hang’.
So expectations have been high, and companies would have felt some concern about the possible consequences of crossing the panel.
Public opinion has been solidly behind the Review Panel.
‘Public opinion’ in this context means the press and the stock market.
The press has for some years played up the problems of UK financial reporting and has exaggerated the extent to which those problems derived from weak enforcement of standards rather than defects in the standards themselves.
To the press, the Review Panel has been a knight on a white charger and its potential victims the blackest of villains.
By contrast with the press, the stock market is, as always, utterly amoral.
Its business is not to right wrongs, but to make money.
It has dawned on the stock market that accounts are not as reliable as they ought to be and that dubious accounting practices may reflect underlying difficulties or at least lead to some distortion in the market's valuation of a company's shares.
Company directors are now uneasily aware, therefore, that a rebuke from the Panel could lead both to some unpleasant press coverage and a dip in the share price.
The Review Panel has been tough.
Its excellent PR and the enthusiasm of the press might simply have set it up for a great fall if the use of its powers had proved to be weak or ineffective.
Much of its success in this respect must depend on the skills and personality of the people who run it, particularly the chairman.
If it went about accusing companies of doing terrible things with their accounts and could not then sustain the accusation, its credibility would quickly collapse.
Equally, if it decided to push ahead against a company, but withdrew in the face of firm resistance from the directors, word would soon get about that it was a pushover.
Both these weaknesses have been avoided.
In its recent cases, in fact, the Review Panel has been tough to the point of pushing its luck.
Trafalgar House, for example(see ACCOUNTANCY , November, p 10), does not appear to have breached any of the detailed requirements of the Companies Act or of accounting standards when it avoided putting £102.7m of write-downs through the p&l.
But the Panel seems to have concluded that it failed to give a true and fair view.
This is daring stuff.
In the absence of detailed requirements, the question of what gives a true and fair view is notoriously subjective.
What is more, Trafalgar's treatment was supported by its auditors, Touche Ross.
If the case had gone to court, it's anyone's guess what would have happened.
But Trafalgar caved in, and its chief executive is leaving the company earlier than might have been expected.
In the GPG case (see this issue, p 13), the Panel went even further.
GPG was rebuked for complying with FRED 1 before it had become FRS 3.
This would have made a fascinating court case.
Again, the company did not breach any of the detailed requirements of the Companies Act.
The Review Panel would have had to try to persuade the court that complying with FRED 1 failed to give a true and fair view, and it would have been presenting this argument at the same time that companies generally were being compelled to comply with FRS 3 (a not fundamentally revised version of FRED 1) in order to give a true and fair view.
The defence rests, m'lud.
But again, GPG accepted the Panel's ruling, and a court case was avoided.
The Review Panel now inspires real fear in company directors.
They do not want to adopt accounting policies that are liable to land them in front of it.
If they do get hauled up, they are liable to pin the blame on the auditors and, in the last resort, they do not want the trauma, the bad press and the possibility of public humiliation of a court case.
The Panel's luck may not last.
New standards from the ASB may not command general support.
If a case ever goes to court, the outcome may be unfavourable.
How disastrous that will be will depend, of course, on the features of the case.
But if it's fatal to the Panel, the result will not be a free for all, but an even tougher enforcement mechanism to replace it.
There is one criticism to be made of the Review Panel.
It gives insufficient information about the reasons for its decisions.
When it looked at Forte's accounts earlier this year (see ACCOUNTANCY , March, pp 11 and 22), it accepted Forte's non-depreciation of properties, but more recently it did not accept the same accounting treatment from SEP (see this issue, p 13).
The reasons for the distinction were not given in the Panel's official statements, but appeared in a newspaper article, which explained that ‘the difference was that Forte had conducted valuations to ensure that the value of its property had been maintained or increased…
SEP had simply assumed that expenditure on upkeep would more than compensate for any deterioration of its warehouses’.
The Panel's decisions are creating a kind of accounting case law, and the reasons for them should be given formally and more fully.
The Panel's luck may not last.
But if a case proves fatal, the result will not be a free for all but an even tougher enforcement mechanism to replace it
accounting solutions
Directors' emoluments
A director of a parent company is also a director of the company's two major subsidiaries, S1 and S2.
His full emoluments for services rendered to the three companies are paid by S1.
S1 makes a management charge covering a variety of commonly incurred expenditure (including his services) to S2: however, no analysis of this recharge is available.
S1 makes no recharge to the parent company.
What disclosure should be made in the respective companies' financial statements?
There is no problem in the parent company's consolidated financial statements, because his full remuneration should be disclosed in accordance with CA 1985 Sch 6 para 1(2).
The fact that he is paid by S1 is irrelevant because of the application of Sch 6 para 10(2), which states that emoluments include all relevant sums paid by or receivable from the company's subsidiary undertakings and any other person.
Note that this aggregation applies whether or not the parent prepares consolidated financial statements.
Under Sch 6 para 1(2), outlined above, S1 need only show the amounts paid or payable to the director in respect of the services performed for S1 and should exclude amounts payable in respect of services to the parent and S2.
In a similar way, under para 10(2), S2 must disclose all amounts paid or payable by ‘any other person’ in respect of services performed for S2.
This will therefore include a proportion of the amount paid to the director by S1, whether or not it is actually included in the management charge.
However, a problem arises because the amount of the remuneration included in the management charge is unknown.
But it should be remembered that S 232(3) CA85 places an obligation on the director ‘to give notice to the company of such matters relating to himself as may be necessary for the purposes of Part 1 of Sch 6’.
The director must therefore confirm, to each company, the amounts received or receivable by him in respect of the services he performed for that particular company.
Under Sch 6 para 12, the directors may apportion the remuneration ‘in such manner as they think appropriate’.
The director's emoluments must also be included in the bandings in the note to the accounts unless all the directors' aggregate emoluments do not exceed £60,000 (Sch 6 para 1 and para 4, CA 85).
This answer is based on applying the legal rules strictly.
However, in practice, depending on the circumstances, it may sometimes be possible to overcome such disclosure problems by giving additional narrative explanations in the notes to the accounts.
Distribution of merger reserve
A few years ago, company A acquired 100% of the equity shares of company B by issuing 1m equity shares, nominal value £1 a share at £2.10 a share.
The fair value of the assets acquired was £1. 8m.
Company A took merger relief and recorded its investment in B at the nominal value of the shares issued.
On consolidation, the company adopted acquisition accounting, set up a merger reserve and wrote off the goodwill of £0.3m (£2.1m — £1.8m) arising on the acquisition to the merger reserve.
This year the company is disposing of the subsidiary at a consideration of £2.1m when its net assets are also £1.8m.
How should the transaction be recorded in company A's books, and on consolidation?
In company A, the investment in B would have been recorded at £1m.
This implies that A has made a gain of £1.1m — the difference between the proceeds of £2.1m (which is also the fair value of the shares issued) and the recorded cost of the investment (£1m).
Because the parent company will not be producing its own p&l account for publication (having taken the exemption in the Companies Act 1985 (s 230) where consolidated accounts are produced), the notes to the parent company's individual balance sheet will show the company's profit for the financial year, which includes the gain of £1.1m.
Had the company recorded its investment in B at the fair value of £2.1m and set up a merger reserve in its own books rather than on consolidation, no gain would arise in the parent company's profit and loss account, but the merger reserve would become realised and available for distribution.
In the consolidated p&l account, the gain is nil — the difference between the proceeds of £2.1m less the fair value of the assets of £1.8m plus the goodwill of £0.3m, previously written off to the merger reserve.
The merger reserve, which has been reinstated as a result of transferring the goodwill to the consolidated p&l account, may be transferred to the consolidated p&l account reserve.
Cash flows
A company has set up fair value provisions for the reorganisation costs of a subsidiary it acquired last year.
This year there has been a cash outflow in respect of the amounts provided.
How should these be disclosed in the cash flow statement:(a) as part of operating cash flows or (b) as part of investing activities?
There is no clear-cut answer to this question.
We have seen many examples of each disclosure.
FRS 1 states that the ‘net cash from operating activities represents the net increase or decrease in cash and cash equivalents resulting from operations shown in the p&l account in arriving at operating profit’(para 15).
Because fair value provisions for reorganisation costs are not included in the consolidated p&l account in arriving at operating profit, it should follow that the cash outflows should similarly be excluded from operating activities in the consolidated cash flow statement.
The alternative would be to show the cash outflows under investing activities on the grounds that the provisions relate to the acquisition of a subsidiary.
This treatment would appear to be in accordance with FRS 1, which states that ‘the cash flows included in investing activities are those related [our italics]to the acquisition and disposal of any asset held as a fixed asset or a current asset investment’(para 24).
It can be argued that the cash outflow in respect of the reorganisation costs relates to the acquisition of a subsidiary, and should be shown under investing activities.
However, reorganisation provisions necessarily include provisions for operating costs, such as redundancy costs and administrative expenses.
If there is any doubt about the particular standard heading to which a specific cash flow should be allocated, then ‘it should be shown under the most appropriate standard heading’(para 14).
The nature of the redundancy provisions should therefore be examined in order to select the most appropriate standard heading.
Consequently, we believe that either presentation may be acceptable, provided adequate disclosures are given.
reports & accounts
COMMUNITY HOSPITALS
Corporate emphasis
Community Hospitals, which provides independent health care services through 10 hospitals and eight nursing homes, devotes over half a page of its annual report and accounts for the year ended 30 June 1992 to corporate governance.
As chairman Sir Peter Thompson explains in his statement, ‘With the spotlight on corporate governance following the report of the Cadbury Committee, we have felt it right to make a statement on how the group complies with best practice in this area.’
The board of directors consists of four independent directors and five executive directors.
The roles of chairman and chief executive are segregated and have been so for nine years.
The independent directors are satisfied that the thoroughness and quality of information provided to them by management enables them to participate fully in all key policy, development and management issues.
The audit committee, which is comprised solely of independent directors, reviews the group's internal controls and financial results with the external auditors, agrees the scope of the auditors' work and monitors implementation of the auditors' recommendations.
The remuneration committee, consisting of all the independent directors, determines the employment terms and total remuneration of the executive directors and the amounts to be appropriated to employees through the profit sharing scheme.
‘I believe that Community Hospitals Group provides effective safeguards to protect the interest of its shareholders through a motivated and strong team of independent directors and a committee structure through which their objectivity can be brought to bear on executive decisions,’ declares Sir Peter.
BUILDING SOCIETIES
Peats' model accounts
KPMG Peat Marwick has published Example Building Society,a model set of reports and accounts which reflect the new accounts Regulations issued by the Building Societies Commission to implement the EC Bank Accounts Directive for building societies.
The new Regulations, which apply for financial years ending on or after 31 December 1993, aim to create comparability between the accounts of UK building societies and banks and similar institutions in other EC member states.
In the model, KPMG gives in footnotes its view of best practice, explains alternative treatments and provides further guidance on specific items.
Copies are available from Building Societies Unit, KPMG, 1 The Embankment, Neville Street, Leeds LS1 4DW (phone 0532 313000).
BOWTHORPE
Interim report's audit input
Bowthorpe (the electronic components and electrical equipment group) includes in its half year statement to 30 June 1992 a report from auditors Ernst & Young.
In doing so, it follows the pattern set by Guardian Royal Exchange (see ACCOUNTANCY , October, p 17) and Guinness (see ACCOUNTANCY , November, p 49) which both incorporated reviews by auditors Price Waterhouse in their interim reports.
The Price Waterhouse reviews, however, were addressed to the directors, while the Ernst & Young report is to Bowthorpe's members.
Ernst & Young stress, as did Price Waterhouse, that ‘it should be recognised that our review did not constitute an audit and may not have revealed all material facts’.
They conclude: ‘On the basis of our review, we are not aware of any material modifications that should be made to the interim financial information as presented, and in our opinion it has been prepared using accounting policies consistent with those adopted by the group in its statutory accounts for the year ended 31 December 1991.’
Bowthorpe's interim report also contains a group balance sheet and a segmental analysis of the results.
Whatever the Cadbury Report achieves in the wider field of corporate governance, it is certainly encouraging much fuller disclosure in interim reports.
MANCHESTER UNITED
Attributing value to the first team squad
Manchester United, the Premier League soccer club, has commissioned an independent report on the aggregate value of its first team squad of players.
The value covers the 22 first team squad members and 15 young professionals.
The club's accounting policy is to deal with expenditure and receipts for player transfers through the p&l account.
No value is attributed to the playing squad in the group balance sheet.
United has no intention of changing its policy.
However, the directors' report for the 12 months ended 31 July 1992 reveals that in Touche Ross's opinion, the aggregate of the individual amounts attributed to the players comprising the first team playing squad (together with first and second year professional players) as at the year end, was £24m.
Robin Launders, Manchester United's finance director, told ACCOUNTANCY that the company thought it appropriate to disclose the value attributed to players in the directors' report in a similar way to the publication of information when properties were worth more than the balance sheet value.
Touche Ross has drawn attention to the fact that the amounts attributable to individual players can fluctuate rapidly as a result of selection policy, personal form/injury, international representation and other matters.
Touche Ross does not audit United, but was chosen because the club's directors viewed the firm ‘as independent of the auditors’.
They had also discussed the Survey of Significant Accounting Policies of Football Clubs (see ACCOUNTANCY , September, p 104) with Touche.
According to Mr Launders, the Touche football industry team is well versed in the specialised subject of accounting for players of football clubs.
Mr Launders is pleased with the responsible reaction of shareholders and press to the valuation.
Whether it will become an annual event is yet to be decided.
‘The value per share of the players comes to £2 — a useful figure for shareholders given our fully prudent accounting policy.’
Manchester United last year appropriated a further £250,000 to transfer fee reserve to bring the total up to £2.25m.
‘This reserve, which is net after tax, is available to fall back on for dividends should player expenditure greatly exceed cup income in any year,’ Mr Launders explained.
‘We look to the league season to provide a stable basis of earnings with cup income and sales and purchases of player registrations being more volatile.
Last year Manchester United reported profits before transfer fees of £7.681m (v £6.176m).’
Manchester United charged £2.625m (v £801,000) as net transfer fees in 1991/92.
‘We spent £1.75m on defender Paul Parker and hope this will increase future earnings.
We look at investment in players carefully and keep the squad strong.
We take it on the nose through earnings.’
One of the other stock-market listed football clubs, Tottenham Hotspur, capitalises the cost of its players' registrations and, after allowing for estimated residual values, amortises them over the period of the respective players' contracts.
At 31 May 1992 the Tottenham group balance sheet showed cost of players' registrations at net book value of £9.803m (v £8.697m) under intangible assets.
EUROTUNNEL
Auditors' attestation
The interim report to 30 June 1992 of Eurotunnel, the Anglo French group responsible for constructing and running the Channel Tunnel, contains an auditors' attestation in accordance with French reporting regulations.
No audit opinion is required at the interim stage and the commissaires aux comptes and the auditors have neither carried out an audit nor given an audit opinion.
The English translation of the attestation, reproduced in the interim statement, explains that the commissaires aux comptes and auditors have performed a limited review of the financial information.
They comment: ‘As referred to in the interim report, including the letter to shareholders, the validity of the going concern basis is dependent upon the terms of the resolution of the group's disputes with its contractors, the continued availability of the finance arranged with its bankers and the raising of additional funding to enable the trading operations of the Channel Tunnel system to progress to a point at which the group becomes cash generative net of funding costs.’
It is signed by KPMG Peat Marwick, BEFEC-Mulquin et Associes, Membre de Price Waterhouse, and KPMG Audit, Departement de Fiduciare de France.
PRUDENTIAL
Largest life company adopts accruals method
Prudential, the UK's largest life company, has announced restated 1991 results for its life and pensions business using the accruals method.
This method is designed to recognise profits as they accrue rather than only when they emerge as cash surpluses released from the life funds, as happens now.
The accruals method has been endorsed by the Association of British Insurance.
Under the new method, the Pru's group pre-tax profits in 1991 amounted to £620m to give earnings per share of 20.3p.
The figures actually declared under the old method were £267m pre-tax profit and earnings per share of 7.5p.
Profits from long-term business under the accruals method totalled £738m, compared with £385m as previously reported.
The shareholders' accrued interest in profits retained within the life funds comes to £2.4bn.
Total shareholders' funds under the accruals method are £2.8bn (v £463m previously declared).
The Pru is sending a detailed explanation of the accruals method and the full accruals figures for 1991 and 1990 to shareholders.
It believes the figures on this basis give a much fairer picture of business performance and underlying financial strength.
The insurance company hopes other companies will follow this approach.
The accruals figures will not replace the cash accounting basis but supplement it (see also Brought To Account , featuring Michael Lawrence, Prudential's finance director, on p 26).
BAT Industries (tobacco and financial services) has restated life assurance profits on the accruals method in its report for the nine months ended 30 September 1992.
This would have increased after-tax profits of £193m for 1991 to £310m for the group's life companies.
PRIOR
Liabilities exceed assets
Prior (property trading and the retailing and wholesaling of architectural ironmongery) has received a seriously qualified audit report on its accounts for the year ended 31 March 1992 from joint auditors Wilson Wright & Co and Coopers & Lybrand.
Because of the significance of the matters referred to in the auditors' report, the two firms are unable to form an opinion as to whether the financial statements give a true and fair view.
The auditors draw shareholders' attention to notes to the accounts which state that they incorporate amounts derived from four subsidiaries placed into administrative receivership after the year end.
‘The accounts of these companies have been subjected to audit procedures, but as a consequence of the receivership have not been approved and signed by the directors,’ say the auditors.
Note 24 contains a summary of the combined assets and liabilities at 31 March 1992 of the four subsidiaries in receivership; the combined net liabilities totalled £2.999m.
At the year end the group had an excess of liabilities over assets of £2.987m and was in breach of its main banking facilities.
In preparing the financial statements, the directors have assumed that their negotiations with the banks and third parties to restructure and release certain debts and to stabilise the position will be successful.
‘Should the negotiations be unsuccessful, it is unlikely that the group would be able to continue to trade and the going concern basis would cease to be appropriate,’ comment the auditors.
‘In these circumstances further adjustment may be required as explained in note 1(a) to the accounts, to reduce assets to their recoverable amount, to provide for trading losses since the year end and any further liabilities which may arise.’
According to the consolidated p&l account, Prior made a loss before tax for the year of £5.182m (v loss £1.118m) after net interest payable of £2.361m (v £2.341m).
RECENT RESULTS
Photo-Me International.
In the year ended 30 April 1992, the operator of automatic photographic studios, identification systems, copiers and express print services, has included sales by the company's manufacturing divisions to group undertakings in group turnover.
Most of the sales are of equipment which is then capitalised within the accounts of the group undertakings.
The accounting policy note on turnover adds: ‘It is the opinion of the directors that excluding such sales from turnover would understate the group's activities and as such would fail to give a true and fair view.’
Inter-company profit arising on such sales is excluded from the group's profit.
CarnaudMetalbox.
In its interim report for the first half of 1992, the European packaging manufacturer has included the gross preference share dividends on the UK redeemable preference shares in finance charges, rather than as a distribution out of the net profits after tax and minority interests.
The previous half-year figures have been adjusted for this change in presentation.
A note to the interim financial statements explains that this format is adopted in view of the redeemable nature of the UK preference shares in 1997, which is guaranteed by CarnaudMetalbox SA, the parent company.
‘The inclusion of the gross dividends in financial charges better reflects the substance of the transaction at the consolidated accounts level,’ continues the note.
It also gives the figures in the group p&l account as if the preference shares were to be treated on the UK basis as equity and the net dividend as a distribution of earnings.
The interim financial statements have been reviewed by auditors Price Waterhouse and the statutory auditors, whose report is available on request from CarnaudMetalbox in Paris.
professional briefing
INSTITUTE
Final exam — pilot papers
The Institute's Education and Training Directorate has issued pilot papers for the new final examination that will eventually replace PE2.
The pilot papers cover the exam's four components: auditing and financial reporting; business planning and evaluation; advanced taxation; and a multidisciplinary case study.
Copies are available free from the Examinations Officer at the Institute.
STANDARDS
Institute responds to ASB
The Institute has published its response to the Accounting Standards Board's discussion drafts covering two chapters of its Statement of Principles,The Elements of Financial Statements and The Recognition of Items in Financial Statements .
The Institute supports the ASB's development of a statement of principles, but maintains that the statement should not anticipate points of debate that will appear in future standards.
As it stands, the statement, it says, ‘tends to be too superficial in its arguments in support of principle and too detailed concerning specific application’.
The Institute also criticises the document's length and the use of jargon.
Copies of the release (FRAG 32/92) are available free (send sae) from the Publications Department at the Institute.
Solicitors' accounts
The Institute has called for more stringent vetting of solicitors' accounting arrangements, and has particularly questioned whether the existing system of annual checks is adequate.
The suggestions come in a memorandum published in response to the Law Society's consultative paper,The Cost of Default.
The paper was prompted by the Law Society's concern over the increasing cost of defaults — it estimates that claims against its compensation fund will reach £20m annually, mainly attributed to defaults of sole practitioners (defaults within partnerships usually fall on the solicitors' indemnity fund).
The Institute said that its main concern was ‘whether the existing reporting system itself is performing satisfactorily and, if not, what further assistance the accountancy profession can provide’.
Law Society rules provide for the way client money held by a solicitor should be accounted for, and the rules currently require solicitors to submit an annual accountant's report.
The Institute believes that sole practice should continue to be permitted, but with extra safeguards.
It suggests an initial vetting of proposed accounting arrangements by an accountant, six-monthly checks of client accounts and a requirement for solicitors to send each five-weekly account reconciliation statement to an accountant as soon as it is produced.
It does, however, recognise the extra costs these proposals will entail.
Copies of the memorandum (FRAG 30/92) are available free (send sae) from the Publications Department at the Institute.
Insurance accounts
The Government is right to make maximum use of the flexibility permitted under the EC Insurance Accounts Directive.
According to the Institute in its response to the DTI's consultative document on implementation of the Directive, this will allow for future developments in insurance accounts and, in particular, in life assurance accounting.
It will also make implementation of the Directive's detailed provisions into UK law relatively straightforward.
What will not be so simple to resolve, however, is the question of what accounting treatments will be necessary in order for life insurers' financial statements to give a true and fair view of a company's assets, liabilities, financial position and profit or loss.
The Institute is opposed to specific legislation on this point since it considers it to be a ‘practical problem’ which does not impinge on implementation of the Directive itself.
‘For this reason, we consider that agreement is not required as to what is true and fair within the same timescale as the drafting of the regulations and, consequently, that the debate should be allowed to continue.’
‘We do not accept the argument,’ it continues, ‘that true and fair ‘is given content by the detailed provisions of the law'’.
Our understanding is that, as far as the UK is concerned, generally accepted accounting principles have precedence over statutory requirements.’
This is a fundamental point, it says, since acceptance of the argument would have widespread implications for all companies.
The Institute's memorandum, FRAG 33/92, is available free (send sae) from the Publications Department at the Institute.
SSAP 15 reform proposed
SSAP 15,Accounting for Deferred Tax , should be reformed, according to a Scottish Institute research report.
A review and analysis of SSAP 15 was carried out by a working party of the institute's research committee following a request from the Accounting Standards Board.
The institute has now published an abridged version, edited by Pauline Weetman of the University of Stirling, of the detailed report that was sent to the ASB in June.
The working party decided that users would be better served by a requirement for companies to adopt flow-through accounting for taxation changes, but also suggested some short-term improvements for the meantime.
CITY REGULATIONS
Smaller companies' shares
The Stock Exchange Alternative Trading Service (SEATS), which began on 16 November 1992, allows a single market-maker to register in the securities of many smaller listed and USM companies.
This ensures a continuous two-way price in such securities.
Trading in these securities has been sparse since the crash in October 1987, and the recent withdrawals of marketmakers such as Warburg Securities, UBS Phillips & Drew and County NatWest from dealing in the securities of many smaller companies has left them without the mandatory two marketmakers for inclusion in the SEAQ system of continuously updated two-way prices.
Initially, SEATS will replace the Company Bulletin Board service introduced in April 1992 to permit investors to display their buying and selling orders in securities which ceased to be traded on SEAQ because they did not have two marketmakers (see ACCOUNTANCY , June, p 44).
Towards a stronger SIB?
Andrew Large, chairman of the Securities and Investments Board, is expected to ask the Government for stronger powers to prosecute fraud when he completes his review in March 1993 of the regulatory body's responsibilities.
This may herald a move to a less self-regulatory approach to supervision of the financial services industry.
A key question is whether firms should be able to decide which regulatory body to join.
Separately, Mick Newmarch, chief executive of Prudential, has advocated a move to a more statutory-based regulatory system with a new investor compensation scheme.
The SIB is also considering whether the London Stock Exchange's regulatory responsibilities for listing shares and monitoring suspected insider dealing should be transferred to the SIB.
Lloyd's delays writs
Lloyd's has suspended the issuing of writs for the recovery of money owned by Names.
On 7 October, Lloyd's sent letters to 3,500 members establishing a legal debt to Lloyd's and giving them 28 days to pay.
Writs will now be delayed, in cases where members have failed to pay, until the end of April 1993.
The aim is to give Names time to meet their obligations.
Further action is being taken to implement the task force's recommendations.
From 1 January 1994 underwriting agents will only be permitted to act as combined agents with Council consent if the agent has not more than 100 members, or it appears that the members' agency function is sufficiently autonomous, or in the case of a combined agent whose members' agency function is limited to run-off, it appears to be in members' interests.
The Council of Lloyd's has also approved guidelines for best practice in preparing business plans and budgets, and established a panel of three members' agents to review syndicate expenses and managing agents' fees.
More international cooperation
The 17th annual conference of the International Organisation of Securities Commissions, held in London in October, endorsed the use of international standards on auditing for cross-border offerings and continuous reporting by foreign issuers.
Also agreed was a resolution recommending members to study measures to combat money laundering, and a set of principles for the supervision of financial conglomerates.
In addition, IOSCO issued a blueprint for the establishment of effective clearing and settlement systems in emerging markets.
At the conference, Andrew Large, chairman of the Securities and Investments Board, and Anthony Nelson, Economic Secretary to the Treasury, signed undertakings on international cooperation with the Australian Securities Commission and the Securities and Futures Commission of Hong Kong.
These seek to enhance investor protection and promote the integrity of the securities, futures and options markets.
Marketing in the US
UK futures and options firms granted a US exemption from registration under part 30 of the US Commodity Exchange Act, undertake marketing activities in the US.
Initially, however, such marketing can only be targeted at sophisticated investors and only on 30 business days each year.
This change has been announced by the SIB and the SFA; it will also affect firms regulated by IMRO.
WESTMINSTER UPDATE
Autumn Statement
Embattled Chancellor of the Exchequer Norman Lamont devoted his Autumn Statement to ‘a strategy for growth’.
For the first time, the Treasury's Economic Prospects includes independent forecasters' views in addition to Treasury forecasts.
The Treasury now expects a fall of 1% in non-oil GDP in 1992, followed by growth of 1% in 1993: the average GDP growth in 1993 forecast by independents is 1 1/2 %.
The Chancellor's aim is to keep inflation within the range 1%-4%.
For the second half of 1992/1993 the target range for growth in M4, the measure of broad money, will be 4%-8%.
The PSBR in the current year is now forecast to rise to £37bn (v Budget estimate of £28bn).
Contrary to expectations Mr Lamont did not change the rates for NIC, although the upper and lower earnings limits and thresholds of the bands for the employers' contribution will again be indexed for 1993/94.
On public spending the Government is sticking to its £244.5bn target, a real increase of 4 1/2 %.
Pensions and other social security benefits are indexed, but defence and legal aid spending will be cut.
Increases in public sector pay settlements in the coming year will be restricted to a maximum of 1 1/2 %.
Spending on education and the NHS is projected to rise.
As regards capital spending the Chancellor announced a significant increase in the volume of road building, some spending by British Rail and London Transport and a record £2.1bn health capital spending in England alone.
The Government will make it easier for private financing of projects and will allow more use of leasing.
A supplementary package of time-limited fiscal measures aims to help get the economy moving.
An extra £750m will be used before the end of 1992/93 to buy up some empty properties in the owner-occupied housing sector.
Local authorities will be permitted to spend all their capital receipts realised from 13 November to the end of 1993.
A further £700m of ECGD cover will give comfort to exports.
The first year capital allowance for investment in plant and machinery (excluding cars) is raised to 40% (v 25%) for a period of 12 months from 1 November 1992.
An initial allowance of 20% will apply for expenditure on new industrial and agricultural buildings where contracts are placed before 31 October 1993 and they are brought into use before the end of 1994.
The Chancellor has abolished car sales tax altogether from 13 November 1992, although this will have to be paid for by higher motoring taxes after 1992/93.
After the two point cut in interest rates since the UK's departure from the ERM, minimum lending rate was cut a further one point to 7% from 13 November 1992, the lowest level for nearly 15 years.
Criminal Justice Bill
The new Criminal Justice Bill (HMSO £7.75) contains clauses on drug trafficking, money laundering, insider dealing and fraud.
The provisions on drug trafficking streamline the confiscation procedure.
On money laundering, the Bill creates a new offence of failing to report knowledge or suspicion of drug money laundering, acquired in the course of a trade or profession.
It extends the scope of existing money laundering offences to cover the proceeds of other crimes.
The Bill aims to close gaps in existing law on fraud and allow courts in England and Wales to try cases of fraud and similar offences, where much of the criminal activity may have occurred in this country but where the final act happened overseas.
The proposals on insider dealing define insiders as anyone who obtains inside information as a result of their employment or position.
Under current law there has to be a connection between an insider and the company whose shares he deals in.
The legislation covers all debt securities including gilts.
It takes in off-market deals involving a professional intermediary as well as on-market transactions.
The Treasury, which is responsible for the new insider dealing legislation, has promised to issue guidance notes on how it will be interpreted.
Both the City and the CBI are still unhappy with the clauses in spite of some changes from the original draft, as they feel the legislation will make it harder for companies to communicate with analysts, fund managers and other City representatives.
Anthony Nelson, Economic Secretary to the Treasury, has promised that the clauses could be amended to take account of legitimate concerns.
The Bill also implements penalties introduced for offences under the Second Banking Coordination Directive and the Supervision of Credit Institutions Directive.
Cancellation rights extended
Customers signing new life policies will have a longer cooling-off period of 14 days (instead of 10) in which to cancel.
This is among the proposals contained in a consultative document issued by the Department of Trade and Industry to implement the cancellation provisions of the Second Life Assurance Directive and proposed Third Life Assurance Directive.
New regulations will amend the Insurance Companies Act 1982 and come into force by 21 May 1993.
LAW Edited by Denis Keenan
Lawyers' monopoly broken
Ss 54 and 55 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 are due to be brought into force before the end of 1992, along with supporting Regulations, thus breaking the lawyers' monopoly in the preparation for payment of papers relating to probate and letters of administration.
Under s 54, banks, building societies and insurance companies can go ahead and offer probate services provided they are members of a probate complaints scheme.
Any complaints will be dealt with by the ombudsmen of the respective industries.
S 55 applies to members of bodies which are approved by the Lord Chancellor for probate services.
The members must satisfy the approved body that they and people employed by them are fully trained in the provision of probate services and that there are satisfactory insurance arrangements and a complaints scheme.
The Council of Licensed Conveyancers and the Institute are likely to go for approval at an early date; it is unlikely, however, that any approvals will be given before the second half of 1993.
LAW CASE REVIEW Edited by Denis Keenan
With all my worldly debts I thee endow…
A man was a shareholder in a manufacturing company for which he wished to increase the overdraft facility.
A bank agreed to increase this to £135,000, reducing to £120,000 after three weeks, but it required the security of a second charge on the shareholder's matrimonial home, which was jointly owned by himself and his wife.
The bank undertook to arrange for the necessary documents to be drawn up and the manager gave instructions that both the husband and the wife were to be made aware of the nature and effect of the documents they would sign, and that the wife should be advised to take legal advice if she had any doubts about them.
Unfortunately, the bank manager's instructions were not carried out.
The wife signed the necessary documents at the bank without reading them and without the benefit of any explanation.
In due course the bank sought to enforce its security.
The wife stated that she had succumbed to undue pressure from her husband to sign the documents and that he had misrepresented their effect, in that she had believed that the security was limited to £60,000 and would last for only three weeks.
A County Court judge found in favour of the bank and the wife appealed to the Court of Appeal (see Barclays Bank plc v O'Brien [1992]142 New Law Journal 1040).
Scott LJ (with whom Butler-Sloss and Purchas LJJ agreed) said that the appeal raised a question that had been before the court on a number of occasions in the past 10 years.
He reviewed the authorities on the subject (which went back almost to the turn of the century).
Until a few years ago it had been clear that the courts would be prepared in such situations to exhibit a marked degree of ‘tenderness’ towards wives in such cases, greater tenderness in fact than would be applied to any other third party surety.
The courts' attitude did not depend on endowing the husband in such cases with the role of agent for the lender, but they demonstrated an equitable intervention in favour of married women where the lender knew of the husband/wife relationship, had done nothing to ensure that the wife understood the transaction, and she had received no independent advice.
However, since about 1985 there had been a divergence of judicial thinking on the subject and the law was at a cross-roads.
In BCCI v Aboody [1990]1 QB 923 (following in the path of some earlier but recent decisions) it had been suggested that any surety would have to look after his (or her) own interests; the creditor should not need to ensure that the surety properly understood the transaction.
Nevertheless, the transaction might be upset if the debtor had acted as agent for the lender and had been guilty of misrepresentation or undue influence.
Scott LJ stated, however, that the lending institutions did not appoint debtors as their agents for the purposes of procuring additional security.
The other ‘road’ had been developed when in Avon Finance v Bridger [1985]2 A11 ER 281 the court envisaged the extension of the protection previously given to wives to elderly parents, and in the present case Scott LJ saw no reason why the ‘protection’should not extend to all cases where the relationship between the surety and debtor was one in which influence by the debtor over the surety and reliance by the surety on the debtor were natural and probable.
Even in the present day when a wife may own part of the matrimonial home and may have a separate job, Scott LJ felt that the tendency was for business decisions to be left to the husband and the main domestic responsibilities to the wife.
In our culturally and ethnically mixed society the degree of emancipation of women was uneven.
The likelihood of influence by a husband over his wife and reliance of a wife on her husband to make business decisions justified the ‘tenderness’ extended by equity toward married women who acted as sureties for their husbands.
The latter approach was the proper one for the law to adopt.
The Court allowed the appeal to the extent that the security would only be enforceable to the amount of the husband's interest, £60,000.
It is clear that each case in this area will depend on its own facts.
But lending institutions would be well advised to make a recommendation in writing to any surety (who falls within the ‘protected’ class) to take independent legal advice before signing a security; this should accompany the security document when it is sent for signature (a lender should not simply entrust the security to the debtor to obtain the surety's signature).
If the security is signed at the lender's office, the lender should explain the nature and effect of the security to the surety before signature.
Lack of unfair prejudice does not preclude winding-up
In a recent case, the Second Division of the Inner House of the Court of Session has decided, in an appeal on the basis of law equally applicable in England and Wales, that a minority shareholder is entitled to an order to wind up the company on the just and equitable ground under s 122(1) (g) of the Insolvency Act 1986, even though he is not entitled to a share purchase order because of unfair prejudice in terms of s 459, CA 1985 (see Jesner v Jarrad Properties Ltd, The Times , 26 October 1992).
It appeared that Jarrad, in which the pursuers (plaintiffs) were minority shareholders, had granted a security in favour of a creditor of Jesner & Sons Ltd and had also made interest free loans to Jesner in which all of the parties were shareholders.
The granting of the security was not permitted by Jarrad's memorandum or articles.
The directors had been advised that a special resolution was necessary to permit the transaction.
Jarrad's directors produced a copy of a special resolution, said to have been passed at an egm held by Jarrad on 20 October 1980, which gave Jarrad power to grant the security.
No such meeting of the Jarrad shareholders had ever taken place.
As regards the loans, prior to 1979 Jesner had lent money interest free to Jarrad, but in 1979 the position was reversed, with Jarrad lending interest-free to Jesner.
In effect, the two companies were operated as one family business, the family being the shareholders in both of them.
There had been no formal meetings and accounts had not been issued to members.
Inter-company loans had been made as the exigencies of the business required.
Neither company had operated within the terms of its constitution and the loans of both companies to each other had been in breach of their respective constitutions.
The point was that the plaintiffs' interest in Jarrad exceeded their interest in Jesner, and they contended that the object of Jarrad had been to provide money for the family and not to have its assets syphoned off to prop up Jesner.
In view of their greater interest in Jarrad, the plaintiffs contended that they had been unfairly prejudiced.
If this could be shown to be the case they would have been entitled to a share purchase order from the Court.
It was also alleged that in January 1989 Isaac Jesner, a Jarrad director, had indicated to David Jesner that Jarrad's capital would be used to pay off Jesner's debts.
The plaintiffs submitted that, although that had not been done, it was evidence of an intention to act against the interest of Jarrad's shareholders.
The Court of first instance decided that there had not been unfairly prejudicial conduct.
It looked at the whole history of dealings between the two companies.
From the beginning Jarrad had been run by the same directors as Jesner and run in good faith in what the directors perceived to be in the family's interest.
The Court accepted that the two companies should really be regarded as a single family business.
The Court of first instance therefore decided that there had been no unfair prejudice and that a share purchase order could not be made.
However, the plaintiffs had also asked for a winding up order under s 122(1) (g) of the Insolvency Act 1986.
The Court took the view that because unfair prejudice had not been found, it would be inappropriate to make an order for the company's winding up.
The Court of Session agreed on the issue of unfair prejudice but did not accept that, because unfair prejudice had not been found, it would be inappropriate to make an order for the winding up of the company.
All the elements of a quasi-partnership were present and since there had been a loss of mutual confidence, on the basis of Ebrahimi v Westbourne Galleries Ltd [1973]AC 360, it was just and equitable that the company should be wound up.
Comment.
Since the enactment of s 459 1985, it has been regarded as a better remedy for a minority affected by prejudice in a company to ask for a share purchase order under s 461 rather than to seek a return of share capital through a winding-up petition which results in the liquidation of a solvent company (a member cannot petition under s 122(1) (g) if the company is insolvent because he has no interest).
However, the courts have made it clear that the two avenues of approach are still available and this case shows that a failure to establish unfair prejudice does not preclude the winding-up approach.
Ex-wife loses husband's share
Mr and Mrs Flint jointly owned their matrimonial home.
They were divorced in March 1990.
In May 1990 a bankruptcy petition was presented against Mr Flint.
During the divorce proceedings Mrs Flint applied for ancillary relief and in July 1990 an order was made under s 24 of the Matrimonial Causes Act 1973, transferring the matrimonial home to her.
A week after the s 24 order was made, Mr Flint was adjudicated bankrupt.
The trustee in bankruptcy claimed that the transfer of Mr Flint's share in the home was void, by reason of s 284 of the Insolvency Act 1986 because the order was made between the presentation of the bankruptcy petition and the bankruptcy order.
S 284 states that where a person is adjudged bankrupt, any disposition of property made by that person, between the presentation of the petition and the vesting of the bankrupt's estate in his trustee in bankruptcy, is void unless it was made with the consent of the court or was subsequently ratified by the court.
The County Court judge agreed with the trustee and ordered that the matrimonial home should be held on trust for the trustee in bankruptcy and Mrs Flint in equal shares.
Mrs Flint appealed (see in re Flint (a Bankrupt), The Times,16 July 1992).
It was argued on Mrs Flint's behalf that the transfer of property order was not a disposition by Mr Flint but a disposition by the Court and therefore s 284 did not apply.
Further, if s 284 did apply, then the judge should have exercised his discretion to ratify the transaction, as the section permits.
The Chancery Court held that as soon as the Court made the s 24 order, it was treated as a disposition by Mr Flint, and since he was bankrupt, the disposition of his interest was void unless ratified.
There were no clear guidelines for the exercise of the discretionary jurisdiction under s 284, but the Court held that there was no evidence to suggest that the County Court judge had exercised his discretion improperly.
The appeal was dismissed.
EMPLOYMENT
Refusal to accept new terms
The Employment Appeal Tribunal has recently held that employees may be fairly dismissed because they refuse to accept an offer of new terms and conditions of employment (see St John of God (Care Services) Ltd v Brooks and Others [1992]458 Industrial Relations Legal Information Bulletin 12).
St John of God (Care Services) Ltd is owned by a charity that operates a hospital.
A reduction in its funding forced the company to make savings.
It therefore decided to change its staff's terms and conditions of employment.
Holidays were reduced, overtime rates abolished, there were no salary increases and a generous sick pay scheme was replaced by Statutory Sick Pay.
Mr Brooks, Mrs Andrews, Mr Stephenson, and Mrs Wharton, who were employees, would not accept the changes.
Mrs Wharton left her job and claimed constructive dismissal; the others were dismissed.
They all made a complaint of unfair dismissal.
The crucial test was whether, under s 57(3) of the EP(C)A 1978, the employer had acted reasonably or unreasonably in treating the reason for dismissal as sufficient reason for dismissing the employees.
The Industrial Tribunal seems to have concentrated to perhaps too large a degree on the offer itself, whereas the EAT said that, when applying the test of reasonableness, it was essential to consider the circumstances under which the offer was made.
The EAT said that where there were sound business reasons for reorganisation, then the question of reasonableness had to be looked at in the context of a reorganisation and not solely in the context of the offer of new terms and conditions.
The EAT therefore allowed the employer's appeal against the Industrial Tribunal's finding of unfair dismissal and remitted the case to the Tribunal for a fresh hearing.
Comment.
Looked at in the abstract it would, of course, have been quite unreasonable to have imposed new terms such as these on employees.
The EAT did not look at the offer of new terms in the abstract but in the light of the company's financial difficulties.
In that situation, the new offer was not unreasonable.
There was also the additional point that a large percentage of employees had accepted the new terms, which led to the conclusion that they must have regarded them as reasonable in the circumstances.
Vital to make new rules clear
The Employment Appeal Tribunal has upheld an industrial tribunal's decision that dismissals were unfair where the employees concerned were dismissed for breach of a new management policy of which they were unaware (see Royal Mail Glasgow v Fleming and Another [1992]459 IRLIB 10).
Ms Fleming and Mr Anderson were employed as cleaners in the Royal Mail's letter office in Glasgow.
After clocking on for a night shift they did not start work immediately but went instead to the canteen for a cup of tea.
Their supervisor noted this and investigated the situation.
The investigation resulted in the dismissal of the two cleaners because of their unauthorised absence from point of duty.
The two employees them complained of unfair dismissal to an industrial tribunal.
The employer said it had been attempting to tighten up on the very widespread practice of employees going for tea immediately after clocking on.
The Tribunal found, however, that no employee had ever been told that the practice could result in dismissal and the practice had continued, although management trying to impose the change may not have been aware that it continued.
There had been little real effort to impose a change before the dismissals were made.
The question was whether the employer had acted reasonably in all the circumstances in regarding absence from point of duty as sufficient reason for dismissal.
The Tribunal stated first that the standard of work did not appear to have suffered because of the practice to which the employer objected.
Second, other employees who had gone to the canteen on commencing a shift had not been dismissed and none of them knew that they risked that penalty.
Third, the Tribunal suggested that if the employer intended to introduce a new absolute rule against the practice, it would have been more appropriate to give Ms Fleming and Mr Anderson a final warning.
It had not been reasonable for the Royal Mail to use their dismissals as an example of enforcement of the new rules.
The Tribunal therefore concluded that the dismissals were unfair.
The employer appealed to the EAT but the EAT agreed with the Industrial Tribunal.
The reason was that the employer had taken no effective steps to end the practice and yet suddenly, and without proper warning, had treated it as a sufficient ground for dismissal.
Maternity benefit improved
The European Commission has agreed the directive on maternity benefits.
This proposes that all women should be entitled to maternity leave for 14 weeks regardless of length of service.
At present Statutory Maternity Leave is available in the UK only if a woman has two or more years of continuous service with her employer (see also below).
The rate of maternity pay will be no lower than the Statutory Sick Pay rate.
The Directive also provides for pregnant workers' right not to do night work if they have a doctor's certificate stating that such work would endanger their health.
Employers are also obliged to assess the risks to pregnant women and protect them from those risks and adjust working conditions and hours of work to protect their health and safety.
They will also have the right to paid time off to attend antenatal examinations during working hours.
There are two years in which to implement the Directive, but implementing provisions relating to the entitlement to maternity leave for 14 weeks regardless of length of service are contained in the Trade Union Reform and Employment Rights Bill 1992, which was published on 5 November.
Legislation consolidated
As a result of the consolidation of social security legislation, most of the provisions relating to Statutory Sick Pay, which were contained in the Social Security and Housing Benefits Act 1982 and the Social Security Acts of 1985 and 1986, are now to be found in ss 151–163 and Schs 11 and 12 of the Social Security Contributions and Benefits Act 1992.
Furthermore, the bulk of the provisions on Statutory Maternity Pay, previously contained in the Social Security Act 1986, are now to be found in ss 164–171 and Sch 13 of the 1992 Act.
There is also a separate consolidating statute, the Social Security Administration Act 1992, which deals with the administration of the statutory schemes.
Part I sets out employees' duties in terms of providing proof of entitlement to SSP and SMP.
Part II contains the powers of adjudication officers and provisions on appeals from and reviews of their decisions.
The current Regulations —The Statutory Sick Pay (General) Regulations 1982 and The Statutory Maternity Pay (General) Regulations 1986 — remain in force.
Employment law changes
The Trade Union Reform and Employment Rights Bill 1992 was published on 5 November.
A summary of the main provisions appears below.
Employment rights .
Clause 20 and Sch 2 add to the existing protection of pregnant women by giving those without the requisite length of service, who formerly were not entitled to any maternity leave, a period of 14 weeks' such leave.
At present, the woman must have been continuously employed by the same employer for two years.
Sch 2 provides that an employee who has been continuously employed for a period of not less than two years shall have, as at present, the right to postpone her return to work for up to 29 weeks — with the possibility of an extension of four weeks if there is incapacity and medical evidence.
Where the employee works less than 16 hours, but more than eight hours, a week, her continuous employment must have begun at least five years before the qualifying date.
There is also an entitlement to maternity pay for six weeks at 90% of pay and a further 12 weeks on maternity benefit.
Clause 21 gives strengthened dismissal rights to pregnant women by substituting a new s 60 in the EP(C)A 1978 under which, regardless of their length of service, all women employees have a right not to be dismissed on grounds of pregnancy or childbirth.
Clause 22 and Sch 3 provide for an employee who would otherwise have to be suspended from work for health and safety reasons on maternity grounds, such as pregnancy, recent birth, or where the woman is breast-feeding her child, to be offered suitable alternative work (if available) and for an employee who is suspended to be paid during the suspension.
Employment particulars .
Clause 23 and Sch 4 give every employee who works eight hours or more a week the right, within two months of starting work, to a written statement of the main terms and conditions of the employment, including details of pay, hours of work and holidays.
At present the statement must be given no later than 13 weeks after employment commences, but part-time workers who work less than 16 hours a week need not be given a statement until they have been employed for five years and worked eight hours or more a week.
Miscellaneous .
Clause 24 and Sch 5 provide additional protection for all safety representatives against being dismissed for carrying out their health and safety duties.
Clause 25 allows employees to challenge the terms and conditions of a collective agreement the employer applies to them where the agreement appears to contravene the principles of equal treatment.
Trade union reform .
Under Part 1 of the Bill (Clauses 1–19), trade union members are given the right to decide for themselves which union they will join; the right to a fully postal ballot, independently scrutinised before a strike; protection against fraud and abuse in trade union elections; and protection against the mismanagement of their union's finances.
They are also given the right to decide whether or not their union subscriptions are collected by automatic deduction from their pay.
In addition, Clause 19 gives every individual citizen a new right to seek the protection of the law if he or she is the victim of unlawful industrial action affecting the supply of goods or services to him or her.
Financial assistance for bringing proceedings can be made available.
Wages Councils .
Under Clause 28, Part II of the Wages Act 1980 is repealed.
This has the effect of abolishing Wages Councils and the requirement for employers to pay statutory minimum remuneration in line with wages orders made by them.
The main areas affected will be shops, hotels, restaurants, hairdressers and laundries.
Careers Service .
Part III imposes on the Secretary of State for Employment (rather than on local education authorities) a duty to provide career services for those at or leaving school or further education and power to provide such services for others.
This will enable the Government to contract with a range of different organisations to provide a careers service which is more flexible and more responsive to the needs of local people and local employers.
The new careers service will not be restricted to helping young people — there will also be scope to assist unemployed adults, people faced with redundancy or those seeking a career change.
tax briefing
TAX Compiled by Chris Greene and Christina Maddalena of Clark Whitehill
Valuations not needed for holdover relief
It is no longer necessary to agree the market value of assets for which capital gains tax gifts holdover relief is claimed.
The Inland Revenue has published a Statement of Practice, SP 8/92, in which new voluntary arrangements are set out so that valuations need not be agreed where holdover relief is claimed.
The Statement of Practice applies both to new claims and existing claims in relation to which valuation negotiations may already have started.
The Revenue will admit a claim for holdover relief without requiring a computation of the heldover gain where both the transferor and transferee make a formal application.
The request must be in writing and must provide full details of the asset transferred, its date of acquisition and its allowable expenditure.
The parties must also state that they have satisfied themselves that the value of the asset at the date of transfer was in excess of allowable expenditure plus indexation to date.
Once a claim has been made and accepted by the Revenue, it may not be subsequently withdrawn.
If, after acceptance of such a claim, it emerges that any of the information provided was incorrect or incomplete, the capital gains tax position in relation to the transfer will be computed and assessments made as appropriate.
The acceptance of a claim within the terms of the Statement of Practice is not an acceptance by the Revenue that it is factually correct.
The Revenue will not subsequently be bound by any information or statements given, whether expressly or implicitly in relation to the claim.
The practice will also apply where assets were held by the transferor on 31 March 1982, unless actual consideration is given by the transferee.
If the transferee has paid some consideration, the 31 March 1982 valuation of the assets will have to be agreed, but the Revenue will accept a holdover relief claim, without a valuation, at the date of transfer.
A valuation may on occasions be necessary because of the interaction of holdover relief and other capital gains tax reliefs.
However, even in these cases it will probably not be necessary to establish the market value immediately.
It is more likely that a valuation will not be required before, for instance, a later disposal of the asset by the transferee.
The Statement deals with the most common of these circumstances.
Where retirement relief is also claimed, the agreement of the market value will be deferred, unless requested by the claimants, until it is necessary to determine either the amount of the retirement relief due or the transferee's cost of the asset.
For assets held on 6 April 1965 where time apportionment applies, the Revenue is content to defer the valuation until the transferee disposes of the asset.
Similarly, for assets acquired before 31 March 1982 and transferred before 6 April 1988, the Revenue will defer the valuation needed to determine the heldover gain, for which a 50% reduction under Sch 4, TCGA 1992 is due, until the transferee disposes of the asset.
Taxpayers who wish to take advantage of the new practice for valuations currently being negotiated should write to the inspector to whom they submitted the claim.
Interest on unpaid tax reduced
From 6 November 1992 the rate of interest on unpaid tax and repayment supplement for income tax, capital gains tax, development land tax, corporation tax (including advance corporation tax), petroleum revenue tax (including advance petroleum revenue tax), supplementary petroleum duty, Stamp Duty Reserve Tax, and on tax charged by an assessment for the purpose of making good to the Crown a loss of tax wholly or partly attributable to failure or error by the taxpayer, is reduced from 9.25% to 7.75%.
The rate of interest for tax paid late or repayments of inheritance tax, capital transfer tax, and estate duty is also reduced from 8% to 6% from 6 November 1992.
Revised interest factor tables used as ready reckoners by tax offices to calculate repayment supplement and interest on overdue tax have been published by the Inland Revenue to take the revised interest rate into account.
Official rate reduced
Regulations will come into force on 6 November 1992 setting the ‘official rate’ of interest at 9.75% from that date.
Directors and employees earning £8,500 a year or more (including gross expenses payments and the value of benefits in kind) are taxable on the benefit of a loan made by an employer based on the difference between the interest paid by the employee (if any) and the interest which would have been paid on the loan at the ‘official rate’.
Reform of personal tax assessment
The Inland Revenue has published a consultative document,A Simpler System for Assessing Personal Tax .
The paper follows the consultations that began in August 1991 with the publication of the Revenue's consultation paper,A Simpler System for Taxing the Self-Employed (see ACCOUNTANCY , October 1991, p 48).
The new paper takes the discussion forward by bringing together the main suggestions from the earlier paper which enjoyed general support, and further proposals for a system under which tax-payers could assess their own liabilities.
The new proposals are that individuals should be taxed on all their income on a common current year basis and taxpayers who are sent returns could choose whether to assess themselves.
Taxpayers who chose to assess themselves would compute the tax due on their total income for the year ending 5 April and, having taken into account any tax deducted or paid in instalments, would send this, or a repayment claim, to the Revenue, with their return by 1 January in the following year.
Taxpayers who chose not to assess themselves would send their return by 1 October for the Revenue to compute the tax outstanding, which would be payable by 1 January.
The paper also considers the possibility that the self-employed should prepare tax accounts for the tax year.
Although this was rejected in the previous paper as putting an unacceptable limitation on taxpayers and their accountants, the responses suggest that the perceived balance of advantage may have shifted.
The Revenue believes that the proposals would significantly simplify the personal taxation system, as in most cases returns and payment could be accepted without any further enquiries or correspondence.
There would, however, be a selective audit of returns and self-assessed tax payments and taxpayers would be liable to surcharges if they failed to send in payments, returns or accounts on time.
The large majority of employees whose tax is deducted at source under PAYE and are not sent an income tax return will be unaffected by the changes.
Similarly, those who claim repayment of tax on building society and bank interest and dividends will not be affected.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer comments in the foreword that ‘the proposals in the paper would make the personal tax system simpler and fairer.
They would also have the very welcome effect of reducing the cost of running it, both for taxpayers and the Inland Revenue.
But they would involve considerable changes for taxpayers, tax advisers and the Inland Revenue.
I shall therefore need to weigh up very carefully both the costs and benefits of introducing such a system.
I hope that many people will send their views on the proposals to the Inland Revenue.
I shall then decide whether and how to take this forward’.
Copies of the consultative paper are available, price £2, from the Inland Revenue Reference Room, Room 8, New Wing, Somerset House, London WC2R 1LB.
Responses should be sent to George Rowing, Inland Revenue, Simplification Review, Room 3, New Wing, Somerset House, London WC2R 1LB, by 31 January.
Personal residence tax rules
The Inland Revenue has published a revised edition of booklet, IR 20,Residents and Non-residents — Liability to Tax in the UK .
The rules for deciding an individual's residence status for UK tax purposes can be complex.
As there is only limited guidance in the Taxes Acts, these rules are largely based on Court decisions, and include a number of Revenue practices and extra-statutory concessions.
The booklet provides as detailed a statement of the law as is reasonably possible.
But the guidance is necessarily in fairly general terms, because how the rules apply in a particular case will always depend on the facts of the case.
The previous edition of the booklet appeared in 1986.
The opportunity has been taken in the new version to rewrite the material, to make it clearer and more accessible for the reader.
The text has also been brought up to date where the rules have changed in recent years — for example, in relation to independent taxation.
Future items planned for the ‘International Series’ of Revenue publications include leaflets giving simplified information on certain aspects of personal residence which are covered in more detail than in IR 20, and a new edition of booklet IR 6,Double Taxation .
Copies of the revised IR 20 can be obtained free from any Tax Enquiry Centre, or from the Public Enquiry Room, West Wing, Somerset House, London WC2R 1LB.
Life insurance levies
Relief for levies imposed under the Lautro Indemnity Scheme will be available for life assurance companies as management expenses.
Regulations to this effect have been laid before Parliament.
An extra-statutory concession has also been published to give a similar relief to insurance companies for contributions paid under a levy imposed by The Lautro (Compensation Schemes) No 2 Rules 1991 .
Property exchanges
Proposals are to be announced to allow the security of one property to be exchanged for another against the original mortgage loan without the loss of mortgage interest relief.
Treasury Economic Secretary Anthony Nelson made this statement in response to a Parliamentary Question, adding that the Inland Revenue hopes to give effect to the changes shortly.
Information technology
The Inland Revenue is seeking competitive tenders to assess whether a strategic contract with a major private sector computing supplier would be beneficial.
At present, the Information Technology Office (ITO) provides the Revenue with an in-house computing service.
The Government has authorised this new approach with a view to improving value for money and quality of work.
If this can be demonstrated, parts of the ITO's in-house work would be transferred to the private sector partner at a pace that suits both parties.
The Board of Inland Revenue will remain responsible for preserving the privacy and confidentiality of personal information relevant to the tax affairs of individuals and businesses if information technology services transfer to a private sector organisation.
The relevant contracts will include provisions requiring the private contractors and their employees to adopt the same standards in protecting the privacy of taxpayer information as apply to Revenue employees.
At the same time, any contractors and their employees are subject, in the same way as Revenue employees, to the criminal sanctions — a fine or imprisonment or both provided by s 182, Finance Act 1989 for unauthorised disclosure of taxpayers' personal information.
Inland Revenue Management Board
The membership of the Inland Revenue's new Management Board has been extended to introduce two private sector members, Lady Wilcox, chairman of the National Consumer Council, and Sheila Masters, a partner in KPMG Peat Marwick, who have agreed to join the Management Board on a non-executive basis.
The Management Board was formed in April this year to assist the Board of Inland Revenue's members in managing the department.
The Management Board, in addition to Lady Wilcox and Ms Masters, will comprise the members of the Board and certain other senior Revenue managers.
Tessas and the incapacitated
A curator bonis , an administrator appointed by a court in Scotland to act for an incapacitated person, may open a Tessa on behalf of an incapacitated person provided that person is aged 18 or over.
The Inland Revenue has published this extra-statutory concession to enable incapacitated persons in Scotland to hold Tessas.
The Tessa legislation specifies that the account must not be held on behalf of another person.
In England and Wales someone acting, for example, for an incapacitated relative may simply open an account in the relative's name and legally the account is held by that relative.
However, in Scotland a curator bonis must act in his or her own name only.
Where a Tessa is opened on behalf of an incapacitated person under the terms of this concession, that person's name should also be shown on the application form.
In addition, for the purposes of completing returns of information or transfer forms, the details supplied must be those of the incapacitated person.
Inland Revenue publications
The Inland Revenue has published a new leaflet, IR 115,Tax and Childcare .
The leaflet is in three parts.
The first is for working parents, explaining the tax rules that apply when childcare is organised and paid for either by the parents themselves or their employers.
The second part clarifies when employers may obtain tax relief for the costs of providing childcare assistance for their employees.
The third section deals with the National Insurance implications of child-care allowances.
The leaflet is available free of charge from tax enquiry centres and local tax offices.
Gift aid success
Gift aid is a continuing success.
In the year to June 1992 charities received donations of more than £239m under the scheme and have claimed tax repayments of £80m on them, making a total receipt of £319m.
NICs — payment methods
The Contributions Agency has issued a proposal suggesting that self-employed and non-employed National Insurance contributors pay their fees via bills issued at the end of each quarter.
The present system of paying weekly through sticking stamps on NI cards would be abolished, and depending on the results of consultation, which will continue until the end of the year, the Agency is hopeful that payment via banks, certain building societies, the Post Office and Girobank will be possible.
Advantages would include quicker recording of contributions, more accurate NI records of those involved, and an increase in the prompt payment of contributions, thereby reducing the substantial costs presently incurred when pursuing payments outstanding after the year end.
The Agency would continue to encourage monthly direct debit payments from non-employed and self-employed contributors (excluding share fishermen).
Comments should be sent to the Contributions Agency, Newcastle Central Office, Long Benton, Newcastle-Upon-Tyne.
TAX CASE REVIEW Compiled by Chris Greene and Christina Maddalena of Clark Whitehill
Non-resident landlord
A tenant has no right to deduct tax that should have been deducted from earlier payments of rent to a non-resident landlord from later payments of rent to the same landlord.
The High Court so held in Tenbry Investments Limited v Peugeot Talbot Motor Co Ltd [1992]STI 873.
From 19 March 1990 PT Ltd rented premises under a lease from T Ltd, a company resident in Jersey.
Rent was payable quarterly.
Before realising that the rent should be paid under deduction of tax, PT Ltd made four payments including that for the initial period of occupation without deducting tax.
PT Ltd claimed that it was entitled to set off the tax that should have been deducted against the rent due on 25 March 1991 and failed to pay the rent.
The landlord issued a writ to recover the unpaid rent.
PT Ltd accepted that the voluntary payment of the gross rental resulted from a mistake of law and hence the amounts would not normally be recoverable.
However, PT Ltd argued that s 349(1), TA 1988 should be construed to enable a tenant to deduct tax from later instalments.
The provision should be construed liberally in favour of the rent payer since the deduction was mandatory and he could be assessed on the tax with interest and penalties if the deduction was not made.
PT Ltd also contended that although the annual rental payments were complete in March 1991, the court should be concerned with the tax year.
Tax could then be deducted in respect of the three previous instalments paid in the same tax year (Johnson v Johnson [1946]P 205).
EC Evans-Lombe QC, sitting as a Deputy High Court Judge, referred to the ‘relevant’ part of s 349(1): ‘…the person by or through whom any payment…is made shall, on making the payment, deduct out of it a sum representing the amount of income thereon’.
For the purposes of s 349, once a relevant payment was complete, the right to deduct tax was lost.
The taxpayer's arguments that the rent was an annual payment payable in quarterly instalments did not assist.
Following Taylor v Taylor [1938]KB 320, the year in question was that from the first payment under the lease, and given that four such payments had already been made, the right to deduct tax was lost.
Furthermore, it was plain that the provision contemplated deduction from each instalment as it was paid.
The landlord's action thus succeeded.
Partnership dissolution
A partnership practice that operated from two offices ceased to be carried on when the partnership was dissolved and the two main equity partners continued as sole practitioners from their respective offices.
An election under para 21, Sch 9, FA 1981 to avoid a clawback of stock relief on a deemed cessation was not applicable, since neither the trade carried on nor the stock of that trade were the same before and after the dissolution of the partnership.
So held Chancery Division in C Connelly & Co v Wilbey [1992]STI 889.
B and W were the two main equity partners in the firm of chartered accountants, C Connelly & Co.
The practice consisted of two offices which were run independently by B and W respectively.
On 30 April 1983, the partnership was dissolved following a dispute between B and W that involved litigation.
The partnership's work-in-progress and other assets were divided between B and W, who continued to work as sole practitioners from the same offices as before.
In March 1984, B and W executed an election under para 21, Sch 9, FA 1981 such that, for the purposes of stock relief, there would be no cessation of trade and no clawback of relief.
For the year 1983/84 assessments were raised on the partnership for £7,000 and a further amount of £17,447 relating to stock relief recovery and balancing charges.
The taxpayers appealed against the assessments, contending that the two offices constituted separate trades carried on by B and W. B's trade had continued after the dissolution of the partnership.
The election was therefore to prevent a deemed discontinuance such that stock relief in respect of that trade's goodwill could not be recovered.
Alternatively, if the effect of para 21(1) was that when W left the partnership there was a deemed cessation of trade, the election under para 21(2) prevented any recovery of stock relief.
A further approach argued by the taxpayers was that the disposal of certain assets of the practice by B did not constitute a cessation of trade.
In addition, the legal expenses incurred in the dispute between the partners were incurred to protect and preserve the partnership's assets.
The expenses were thus wholly and exclusively incurred for the purposes of the practice and thus were allowable in computing Sch D, Case II profits.
The Crown argued that there was either one practice that ceased operating or, alternatively, there was a change in the individuals running the practice resulting in a deemed cessation of business.
An election under para 21(2) was not applicable in the latter case, since the work-in-progress within the meaning of that provision was not identical before and after the partnership dissolution.
Furthermore, the legal expenses in issue were not allowable, since these related to B's protecting his interest in the partnership.
The General Commissioners dismissed the taxpayers' appeal, accepting the Crown's arguments that there was one practice and that an election under para 21(2) could not be made where a trade was split into two.
Furthermore, the trading stock was not the same before and after the change.
Also, the legal costs had not been expended wholly and exclusively for the purposes of the profession.
The taxpayers appealed.
His Honour Judge Maddocks, dismissing their appeal, said the practice of the partnership was that of the two offices together because the partnership ran them as a single business.
The partnership practice ceased for the purposes of para 4, Sch 9, FA 1981 since, following the dissolution of the partnership, the two offices were operated separately.
In addition, neither of the conditions of para 21(2), Sch 9 had been met in relation to the combined trade.
The stock immediately before the change included that relating to W's practice, which never became part of B's stock, and following the dissolution B was engaged in only one part of the original practice.
The Crown's arguments in relation to the legal expenses were also accepted, and the taxpayers' appeal was accordingly dismissed.
Uncollectable debt
A statutory demand under s 268, Insolvency Act 1986 could not be made to recover tax payable as determined by the General Commissioner when the notice of that amount had not been served on the taxpayer at his usual or last known place of residence under s 115, TMA 1970, according to Chancery Division in Re a Debtor (No 124/50/91), Ex Parte the Debtor v IRC [1992]STI 888.
The debtor appealed against estimated assessments and sought to postpone tax.
Having attended the first General Commissioners' hearing on 10 April 1991, the debtor and his accountant failed to appear at the adjourned hearing on 19 June 1991.
The assessment was determined by the General Commissioners and a statutory demand subsequently served on the debtor to recover the tax payable.
The debtor stated that he had, mistakenly, understood from the inspector that the hearing on 19 June had been adjourned.
At the time he was engaged in resisting his extradition to the US and would have been unable to attend.
He did nothing to have the assessments determined by the General Commissioners set aside.
In March 1991, a bank as unpaid mortgagee had taken possession of the debtor's business premises and he had not had access to them since that date.
The notice of payment of tax as determined by the General Commissioners had been sent to this address.
Furthermore, as evidenced in correspondence, he had not been in contact with his accountant, who knew of the General Commissioners' decision, between 17 June 1991 and the end of October 1991.
In the course of the hearing, counsel for the Crown accepted that, if notice for the amounts payable as determined by the General Commissioners had not been served on the debtor, the tax had never become payable under s 55(a), TMA 1970 and s 5, TA 1988.
There would thus have been no grounds for a statutory demand under s 268(1) (a) Insolvency Act 1986.
W A Blackburn QC, sitting as deputy judge of the High Court, considered whether notice of the total amount payable had been given to the debtor.
It was clear that the debtor had had no communication with his accountant.
The Crown relied on the postal service for such notices.
Under s 115(2), TMA 1970, this was permissible provided the notice was addressed to the debtor at his usual or last known place of residence.
However, in this instance, the notice had been sent to an address that had ceased to be the debtor's business address and was not his usual or last known place of residence.
The requirements of s 115 had not therefore been complied with and the tax had not become payable under s 55, TMA 1970 and s 5, TA 1988.
The statutory demand would therefore be set aside as there were no grounds for the demand under s 268(1) (a), Insolvency Act 1986.
The debtor's appeal was therefore allowed.
Penalty upheld
The Special Commissioner was entitled to find on the facts whether it was reasonable for an inspector to have formed an opinion that a notice should be raised requiring information from a taxpayer.
There was also a presumption that a notice would not be issued that was wider than necessary or involved excessive compliance costs.
It was also within the Special Commissioner's discretion to exclude opinion evidence that sought to answer the question before him.
Chancery Division so held in Kempton v Special Commissioners and IRC [1992]STI 891, dismissing the taxpayer's appeal and upholding the penalty awarded by the Special Commissioner.
The taxpayer was the widow and executrix of Mr Kempton.
Kempton (Jewellery) Ltd (the company) was owned 50% by the late Mr Kempton and Mr Slade.
Both were directors of the company and received the same salary and benefits.
Their wives were also employed by the company and they each had the use of a company car.
An inspector at the Inland Revenue Enquiry Branch ascertained that Mr Slade had received sums of money from the US.
There were also considerable unexplained amounts being paid into his bank account that the inspector thought might be derived from the company.
In addition, two similar houses had been bought by two companies, one of which, Ivyester Ltd, was wholly owned by Mr and Mrs Kempton.
The company had lent Ivyester Ltd money and Mr and Mrs Kempton had provided the share capital with which to repay the loan.
Given that Mr Slade's and Mr Kempton's salaries were identical, the inspector formed the view that Mr Kempton may also have received undisclosed amounts from the company.
He proceeded to investigate Mr Slade, Mr Kempton and the company.
In a letter dated 26 August 1988 the inspector stated that although he had no specific evidence against Mr Kempton or the company, it would be necessary to examine their tax affairs.
Until Mr Kempton died in May 1989, the inspector made a number of unsuccessful efforts to arrange to interview Mr Kempton and his wife.
In June 1990, with the General Commissioners' leave, a notice was issued requiring details of Mr and Mrs Kempton's assets and liabilities, income and expenditure for the years 1985 to 1989 inclusive.
Mrs Kempton failed to comply with the notice.
In subsequent penalty proceedings, the taxpayer challenged the validity of the notice.
While accepting that this defence was permissible, the Special Commissioner concluded that the notice was valid.
It was reasonable in the circumstance for the inspector to believe the information required might contain details of possible tax liabilities.
The taxpayer appealed, making three specific contentions.
First, by considering whether the facts the taxpayer relied on and the inspector knew about were inconsistent with the inspector's having the requisite reasonable opinion, the Special Commissioner had misdirected himself in law.
Second, in view of the compliance costs estimated at £20,000, the notice was unreasonable.
Finally, it was argued that the Special Commissioner had erred in ruling that the evidence of a former deputy head of the Revenue's Enquiry Branch was inadmissible.
Mr Justice Mummery, dismissing the taxpayer's appeal, considered her arguments separately.
The taxpayer argued that to rely on the substantial omissions from Mr Slade's tax return as grounds for investigating Mr Kempton's tax affairs was to imply guilt by association.
However, it was clear from the Special Commissioner's decision that he had looked at all the evidence and asked himself whether in view of that evidence it had been reasonable for the inspector to form the view he had taken.
Having taken into account the facts known to the inspector, the Special Commissioner was entitled to come to the conclusion that the inspector's opinion was reasonable in the circumstances.
As regards the taxpayer's second contention, it was recognised in R v IRC ex parte TC Coombs & Co [1991]STC 97 that there was a presumption of regularity which applied to both the inspector as the decision maker in issuing a notice and to the Commissioner as the monitor of that decision.
The taxpayer had adduced no evidence that the notice was wider than necessary.
Nor was there any evidence that the inspector had failed to take account of the likely costs of compliance.
The Court agreed with the Special Commissioner over the admissibility of the evidence of the taxpayer's expert witness.
The opinion evidence was not admissible as it sought to answer the very matter that was for the Special Commissioner's decision, a question for which the witness was not qualified as an expert.
The Special Commissioner was therefore entitled to exercise his discretion to exclude the testimony under s 5(3) of the Civil Evidence Act 1972.
The taxpayer's appeal was dismissed and the penalty upheld.
Special Commissioner's permission
An inspector may revise the accounting period to which an extended time limit assessment applies where it is clear that the period in question is a point of contention with the taxpayer.
Furthermore, according to the Chancery Division in Kelsall v Stipplechoice Ltd [1992]STI 910, the Special Commissioner's leave to revise the assessment need not be sought if he was aware of the existence of this point of disagreement when leave was granted to raise the original assessment.
On 31 December 1977, Stipplechoice Ltd, the taxpayer, was acquired by a company controlled by a solicitor specialising in tax law.
Stipplechoice Ltd had previously developed a site called Meadowbank that was sold on 25 October 1977.
Between 26 October 1977 and 31 January 1978 the taxpayer company had entered into certain transactions described as ‘purchases of stock’.
An assessment was raised for the year to 31 January 1978, in the absence of accounts, which was subsequently confirmed by the General Commissioners.
The accounts remained outstanding.
In 1984 the Inland Revenue's Special Investigations Section, led by W, investigated the company's affairs, and it was concluded that Stipplechoice had ceased trading on 25 October 1977 when the Meadowbank development was sold.
The company then prepared accounts for the year to 31 January 1978 which disclosed a profit of £23,000.
The company denied that it had ceased trading on 25 October, and the accounts included purchases, unrelated to the Meadowbank development, which substantially exceeded the value of stock in the period's balance sheet.
On 28 February 1984, with the Special Commissioners' leave, W raised an extended time limit assessment on Stipplechoice for the period 1 February 1977 to 25 October 1977.
The company appealed.
Following evidence produced at the Special Commissioners' hearing, W purported to revise the accounting period by virtue of s 247(8), TA 1970 so that it ran from 1 February 1977 to 31 January 1978, rather than 25 October 1977.
The Special Commissioner, however, determined that this revision was ineffective.
First, when the original assessment had been raised in February 1984, W had not been uncertain within the meaning of s 247(8) about the beginning and end of the period; and second, further leave would be required from the Special Commissioner to revise the accounting period of an extended time limit assessment.
The inspector appealed.
Mr Justice Vinelott, allowing the inspector's appeal, said that the question of uncertainty in relation to s 247(8) could not be determined by reference to the inspector's state of mind at the time when the assessment was made.
The power of revision arose if there were circumstances that would raise doubts in the mind of a reasonable inspector.
In the present case there were clearly grounds for doubts about whether the accounting period ended on 25 October 1977 or 31 January 1978, W believing the former and the company contending the latter.
As regards the question of the need to seek the Special Commissioner's leave to revise the assessment, the Special Commissioner who granted leave was aware that it was open to the company to show that the accounting period was different from that contended by W.
Leave was granted to make the assessment on the basis that on appeal the company could show that the accounting period ended on 31 January 1978.
Similarly, it would be open to the Crown to revise the accounting period before the appeal hearing if persuaded that the true accounting period ended on 31 January 1978.
The appeal was therefore allowed.
VAT Compiled by John Brown and Jane Mitchell of Ernst & Young
VAT default surcharges changes proposed
The English and Scottish Institutes have suggested a number of changes to the VAT default surcharges regime, aimed at improving taxpayer compliance.
Both Institutes were replying to a Customs & Excise consultation paper.
The Institute's Tax Faculty condemned the default surcharge system as ‘fundamentally flawed and in practice counter-productive’.
It suggests that the system should be replaced with an interest-based penalty, possibly rising to a deterrent rate, which would discourage late payment due to neglect and ‘playing the system’, without unduly penalising those who are genuinely unable to pay or small businesses, which are usually less organised and therefore bear the greater brunt of penalties.
Copies of the Tax Faculty's response (TAX 17/92) are available free (send sae) from the Publications Department at the Institute.
The Scottish Institute, however, feels that the system is ‘satisfactory in all but a few cases’.
Like the Institute, it criticises the regime which does not give a taxpayer who has defaulted by one day any incentive to pay quickly.
It recommends that a general power of mitigation be granted to Customs and to the VAT Tribunal, and that the notification procedure be improved, with warning notices sent by recorded delivery on the first default.
On the third default, the Institute says, the trader should have to pay a refundable bond, which would be forfeited if there was a further default within 12 months.
Default interest rate reduced
A Treasury Order which reduces the prescribed rate of default interest from 9.25% to 7.75% came into operation on 6 November.
Default interest for VAT underdeclared on returns is the same as the rate set by the Inland Revenue (see this issue p 129).
Deduction of input VAT by holding companies
HM Customs & Excise have announced a change in policy on the recovery of VAT incurred by holding companies in carrying out their basic functions.
This follows a ruling by the European Court of Justice (ECJ) in Polysar Investment Netherlands BV v Inspecteur der Invoerrechten en Accijnzen te Arnhem case C — 60/90.
At present, Customs' policy is to allow VAT incurred on holding company activities, unless it relates to exempt transactions, to be treated as a general overhead and recoverable according to its overall partial exemption status.
Customs have now used the Polysar decision to review the position and have stated that they will deny recovery of input VAT incurred by a holding company in carrying out its basic functions.
Polysar Investment Netherlands BV is the holding company of the Polysar International Group.
Its only activity is to receive and pay dividends.
The ECJ took the view that the acquisition and holding of shares in other companies, without any involvement (either direct or indirect) in the subsidiaries' management, did not constitute a business activity.
Polysar could not, therefore, be treated as a taxable person for VAT purposes under Art 4 of the EC Sixth Directive.
One of the basic rules of both the UK and EC legislation is that input VAT can only be reclaimed on expenditure if it is incurred by a taxable person in a course of furtherance of his business.
Polysar was, therefore, not entitled to recover input VAT under Art 17 of the EC Sixth Directive.
In announcing the change in policy, Customs have defined a holding company's basic activities as including ‘acquiring subsidiaries, mounting or defending against take-overs etc’.
This was not mentioned in the judgment.
The ECJ made a specific ruling that the holding of shares in its subsidiaries was not a business activity.
The ECJ did not consider the situation where a holding company is, for example, involved in its subsidiaries' decision-making and administration.
It can be argued that a management charge made by the holding company is a business activity, and input VAT incurred is fully recoverable.
It remains to be seen how Customs will react to any challenges to its position.
The policy change will not be implemented immediately, however.
Customs state that they are to give businesses time to adjust, and the effective date of the new policy will not be until 1 March 1993.
Note .
The change in policy means that parts of the leaflet on charities which Customs issued on 1 February 1992 are now incorrect.
For example, para 10(d) on p 12 states that the selling of shares is ‘normally a business activity but exempt from VAT’ and that ‘if a charity becomes actively involved in buying and selling shares…that will be regarded as a business acitivity’.
Customs confirmed that parts of the leaflet could not be relied on in a recent appeal at the London VAT Tribunal by the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children.
New means of transport
In view of the completion of the EC single market on 1 January 1993 and the consequent arrangements for charging VAT and relief from VAT on the supply of new means of transport (NMT) between EC countries, Customs & Excise have published a single market information sheet entitled VAT: the treatment of new means of transport from 1 January 1993 .
The sheet explains what an NMT is; what arrangements apply when supplying an NMT to a person not registered for VAT for removal to another EC country; what happens if a new vehicle is to be used on UK roads before it is removed to another EC country; and what to do if obtaining an NMT in the UK for removal to another EC country.
Copies are available free from The Single Market Unit, New King's Beam House, 22 Upper Ground, London SE1 9PJ.
accountancy firm mergers
IN THE HALL OF THE MERGER KING Growth is crucial, and the recession hasn't affected the accountancy world's appetite for mergers.
So says an insider
Peter Carty
In the news again recently following his role in the mergers of Stoy Hayward and Finnies, and Baker Tilly and Milne Ross, Douglas Llambias is instrumental in arranging around four to six mergers a year, dealing with firms of all sizes from sole practitioner upwards.
The advisory service Mr Llambias offers to firms, which covers areas relevant to running a successful practice such as advice on management structure and profit sharing, led him into dealing with mergers.
‘Mergers and acquisitions have become one of the methods available for improving a firm's position,’ he says.
Mr Llambias is not the only independent adviser on mergers — others include Norman Foulger Associates, RMA, Professional Practice Services, M&A Professional Services, SWAT Ltd, Jobtel Ltd, Michael Page Finance and Fraser Dawson, to name but a few — but on the merger scene his is a name to conjure with.
He leads off by pointing out that merging is only a potential solution to a firm's problems, stressing that sometimes it may be the wrong solution.
In particular, if a firm is in difficulties a merger may not help its partners.
Negotiating advantageously with another firm from a position of weakness is not easy.
It is far from surprising that Mr Llambias stresses the importance of using an intermediary, but his reasons for doing so are cogent.
If two firms arrange a merger on the basis of meetings between their two senior partners, then its success can be heavily dependent on luck.
And going it alone in this kind of way increases the risks as well as limiting choice.
A merger often turns out to have been a bad move for one of the firms involved.
The problem is often with the quality of the other firm's work.
‘You only find out after marriage what a load of rubbish they are,’ as Mr Llambias puts it.
Each firm can, of course, carry out due diligence work on the other, but an experienced intermediary has more experience of exactly what to look for.
A firm going it alone will be restricted in the number of other firms it can approach without the news that it is looking to merge leaking out.
An intermediary can keep its client's name secret, at least in the early stages.
And even before doing this it can examine the firms already registered with it for suitability.
Why is secrecy so important?
Mr Llambias says that if news leaks out the negotiation process can be ruined: ‘You do not announce merger negotiations until after they have been concluded satisfactorily.’
It causes problems with both staff and clients: ‘It's an additional complication of the process that is not desirable.’
Staff and client misgivings will have to be dealt with at a time when the senior partners of both firms already have their hands full with the negotiations proper.
Mr Llambias believes that many potential mergers founder because news of talks gets out, pointing to past examples such as Price Waterhouse and Arthur Andersen, Touche Ross and De-loittes UK and Clark Pixley and Temple Gothard.
Partners, particularly in the smaller of the merging firms, often fear that they will lose out in the merger — even to the extent of having to leave the merged firm.
Mr Llambias points to the available safeguards.
He says that it is important for partners in the smaller firm always to ensure that they will be adequately represented in the combined firm's management structure.
This can be incorporated into the merger agreement, with effect for the first two or three years after the merger.
‘If we're acting for the smaller firm it invariably happens, and if and when we're acting for the larger firm we always identify the key partners in the smaller firm and bring them into the new management team,’ Mr Llambias reveals.
However, he thinks that stories of one firm's partners being forced out are often exaggerated.
‘Good people always float to the top.’
Mr Llambias' services do not come cheap — they are a combination of a retainer ‘sufficient to make them think really seriously’ and a success fee that is a percentage of the fee income of the smaller firm (sometimes 5% or 7.5%)— but he prides himself on the longevity of the mergers he arranges.
A key saving is often the elimination of one firm's head office in London.
But it can be argued that this will not give a quick cash flow fix at present due to the difficulty of disposing of a lease.
‘There are still significant savings to be gained,’ asserts Mr Llambias.
He points to savings on rates — which can obviously be substantial in London — if one of the premises is kept empty, and other immediate gains from the cutting of staff in areas of duplication such as administration, accounts, quality control and training.
‘Even the rates saving can mean a few thousand pounds additional profit per partner,’ he says.
In the late 1980s the popularity of mergers hinged on the dash for growth.
At present the opportunities they provide for cost cutting are more to the fore.
A notable phenomenon is the merging of very small firms to spread the burden of compliance with increasing audit regulation.
‘The one-man, two-man bands are going to have increasing difficulty in maintaining a sufficient time allocation for practice performance and enhancement of standards,’ says Mr Llambias.
But growth is still crucial, and Mr Llambias certainly does not see the recession as affecting the accountancy world's appetite for mergers.
‘Without organic growth how else do you get fee growth?’ he asks.
Douglas Llambias: Merging can sometimes be the wrong solution for a firm